High performance transition metal-based electrocatalysts for green hydrogen production  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC02423C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC02423C
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7874-7889High performance transition metal-based electrocatalysts for green hydrogen production

        
          
            Hee Ryeong 
            Kwon
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hoonkee 
            Park
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sang Eon 
            Jun
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sungkyun 
            Choi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ho Won 
            Jang
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Advanced Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. E-mail: hwjang@snu.ac.kr
bAdvanced Institute of Convergence Technology, Seoul National University, Suwon, 16229, Republic of Korea
Received 
      29th April 2022
    , Accepted 7th June 2022First published on 29th June 2022AbstractHydrogen energy is a promising energy source that is environmentally friendly due to its long-term, large-capacity storage and low greenhouse gas emissions. However, the mass production of hydrogen is still technically difficult due to limitations in efficiency, stability, and cost, even though it can satisfy all of the current energy demands. Water splitting using an electrocatalyst is an efficient method for environmentally friendly hydrogen production, and various catalyst-related studies are being conducted for this purpose. For the last decade, transition metal-based compositions have been at the center of water splitting catalyst research. Despite numerous studies and developments, studies on transition metal-based catalysts so far still have various problems to be solved. Although excellent review papers on transition metal-based catalysts have been reported, the overall scope of transition metal-based catalysts has rarely been covered in the reports. In this review, we present the research about overall transition metal-based electrocatalysts for hydrogen production from four different categories, namely, alloys, transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), layered double hydroxides (LDHs), and single-atom catalysts (SACs). The fundamental roles of metal alloying and unique electrical properties of TMDs, LDHs, and SACs are mainly discussed. Furthermore, we present the recent advances in photovoltaic–electrochemical (PV–EC) systems for sustainable hydrogen production. Finally, perspectives on the issues to be addressed in the research on transition metal-based electrocatalysts are provided.
Hee Ryeong Kwon
Hee Ryeong Kwon is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Seoul National University (SNU). She received her BS degree from Material Science and Engineering, Korea University, in 2021. Her current research focuses on the design of transition metal-based catalysts and its application to photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Hoonkee Park
Hoonkee Park received his PhD from Seoul National University in 2020. He received his BS degree from the Material Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, in 2013. Thereafter, he did postdoctoral research in Prof. Ho Won Jang's group. His current research focuses on the compositional/structure control of transition metal-based multicomponent alloys for high-efficiency electrocatalysts and green hydrogen production using PV–EC systems.
Sang Eon Jun
Sang Eon Jun is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the School of Integrative Engineering, Chung-Ang University, in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis of 2-dimensional materials via chemical vapor deposition and its applications to (photo)electrochemical water splitting.
Sungkyun Choi
Sungkyun Choi is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the Material Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), in 2018. His research interests include the synthesis and characterization of transition metal and single atom catalysts for energy conversion applications.
Ho Won Jang
Ho Won Jang is a professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Seoul National University. He earned his PhD from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Pohang University of Science and Technology in 2004. He worked as a research associate at the University of Madison-Wisconsin from 2006 to 2009. Before he joined Seoul National University in 2012, he worked at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) as a senior research scientist. His research interests include materials synthesis and device fabrication for solar water splitting cells, chemical sensors, memristors, plasmonics, and metal–insulator transition.
1. Introduction
The global concerns about the rapidly depleting fossil fuels and severe environmental issues have forced us to develop alternative high efficiency and non-toxic gas-emitting energy techniques. Representative eco-friendly energy sources such as sunlight, wind, and marine power have attracted attention as a candidate to fulfill the increasing energy demand.1–3 However, energy production via these energy sources varies according to the season, time, and region.4 To overcome these limitations of energy sources, the demand for using hydrogen as a new energy source has increased recently. However, the high cost and scarcity of currently employed noble-metal-based electrocatalysts significantly restrict the industrial application of hydrogen.5,6 Therefore, the development of economical and superior electrocatalysts has been intensively researched in recent decades.7,8 Due to the abundance and specific electronic configuration, transition metal-based composites have been considered promising candidates to substitute noble-metal-based electrocatalysts.9–16 To overcome the intrinsic limitation of the transition metal-based composition, various engineering approaches, such as alloying,17 morphology control,18 defects engineering,19 nanostructuring,20 and doping, have been suggested to further promote the catalytic properties.21 Nevertheless, most of the transition metal-based electrocatalysts reported still suffer from low activity and instability. Some articles have systematically summarized the recent advances of transition metal-based electrocatalysts in various aspects.22–24 Considering the water splitting reaction mechanism, an approach for various aspects is required to develop a superior electrocatalyst, e.g., high intrinsic activity, large active surface area, fast charge transfer, and electrochemical stability. Nevertheless, most of them exclusively focused on specific subjects, such as phosphides25 and carbides,26 or deal with only electrocatalysts for half-reactions.27,28 Therefore, in this paper, we comprehensively summarize the recent advances in transition metal-based electrocatalysts for overall water splitting and hydrogen production techniques. We focused on the electrocatalyst using transition metal-based alloys, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), layered-double hydroxides (LDHs), and single-atom catalysts (SACs), because these catalysts have been attracting attention recently owing to their high activity and functionality. Fig. 1 shows the representative techniques for improving the activity of transition metal-based electrocatalysts. Firstly, we focus on the alloying effect and composition optimization based on transition metals. Then, various compounds for enhancing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) properties are summarized such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), layered-double hydroxides (LDHs), and single-atom catalysts (SACs). After that, photovoltaic–electrochemical (PV–EC) systems using solar cells and transition metal-based electrocatalysts for direct hydrogen production are introduced. In the concluding section, several important insights regarding structural design, composition optimization, and mechanistic investigation will be discussed with an outlook on the future development of these catalysts for energy conversion and storage.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of transition metal-based electrocatalysts. 
2. Fundamental understanding of electrochemical water splitting reactions
2-1. HER mechanism
The HER is one of the half-reactions of electrochemical water splitting with two electron-transfer processes and has a different reaction pathway depending on the pH conditions (Fig. 2). The first step is the formation of hydrogen intermediates (H*) on the electrode surface (M) via proton reduction, called the Volmer step.29
 Fig. 2  HER pathways under acidic and alkaline conditions.28 Copyright 2018, Springer. 
Step 1: electrochemical hydrogen adsorption step (Volmer step)H3O+ + M + e− → H* + H2O under acidic conditionsH2O + M + e− → H* + OH− under alkaline conditions
After the formation of H* on the electrode surface, H2 is generated through the Tafel step or the Heyrovsky step, or both steps. The rate-determining step of the desorption reaction depends on the surface coverage of H*. When the surface coverage of H* is high, it is easy for the adjacent H* intermediates to combine for the generation of H2, and the chemical reaction step is a rate-determining step, called the Tafel step.30 For the low surface coverage of H*, the electrochemical desorption step is rate-determining because the adsorbed H* intermediates react with the proton and electron to generate H2, called the Heyrovsky reaction.31
Step 2: chemical desorption step (Tafel step)H* + H* → H2electrochemical desorption step (Heyrovsky step)H3O+ + e− + H* → H2 + H2O under acidic conditionsH2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH− under alkaline conditionsConsidering the overall HER, an ideal HER catalyst should have an appropriate binding energy in which the binding of the intermediates is not too weak or too strong.32 The optimal binding energy between the intermediate and the electrocatalyst is an important factor because it enables the appropriate hydrogen desorption and rapid charge transfer.33
2-2. OER mechanism
The OER is another half-reaction that requires a relatively high overpotential than the HER due to the involvement of more electron and proton transfers. There are various reports on the mechanism of the OER, but the most accepted reaction path involves an electrochemical oxidation step.34–36 In addition, since oxygen is generally generated on the metal oxide surfaces rather than bare metal, the interpretation of general mechanisms is elusive. Normally, the four-step proton-coupled electron transfer paths are considered for the OER using metal-based electrocatalysts.
The generally accepted reaction mechanism under acidic conditions is expressed as follows:M + H2O → M − OH* + H+ + e−M − OH* → M − O* + H+ + e−M − O* + H2O → M − OOH* + H+ + e−M − OOH* → M + O2 + H+ + e−where * indicates the adsorbed intermediates at the electrocatalyst surface and M denotes the active site of the catalyst surface. Although this reaction mechanism is widely accepted by first-principle calculations from density functional theory (DFT), most transition metal oxides are unstable at oxidation potentials under acidic conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the reaction pathway under alkaline conditions to elucidate the mechanism of the transition metal-based electrode catalyst for the OER.
The accepted mechanism under alkaline conditions isM + OH− → M − OH* + e−M − OH* + OH− → M − O* + H2O + e−M − O* + OH− → M − OOH* + e−M − OOH* + OH− → M + O2 + H2O + e−
The first step of the OER is the formation of M − OH* via the oxidation of hydroxide ions. The formatted M − OH* species at the first step is then transformed into M − O* through the removal of the proton. M − O* combines with the hydroxide ion to form M − OOH* species in the next step. Finally, the M − OOH* species generates O2 and the initial active site, reacting with the hydroxide ion.37,38 The mechanism described above clearly demonstrates that the OER mechanism starts with the adsorption of hydroxide ions and undergoes a continuous cycle of finally evolving the oxygen (Fig. 3). The activity of the catalyst can be evaluated with various parameters, including the onset potential, specific activity, overpotential, turnover frequency (TOF), Tafel slope, Faradaic efficiency, electrochemical surface area (ECSA), or stability. Some of these parameters can only be evaluated in specific systems, and some are potential-dependent. This review employs the overpotential required to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope for consistent evaluation in general water splitting systems.
 Fig. 3  OER mechanism for alkaline (red route) and acidic (green route) conditions. The black line indicates that the OER involves the formation of a peroxide (M–OH) intermediate, while the light blue line indicates the direct reaction of two adjacent oxo (M–O) intermediates to produce oxygen.38 Copyright 2018, American chemical society. 
3. Transition metal-based metal alloy electrocatalysts
3 1. Metal alloy electrocatalysts for the HER
The transition metal-based alloy has been considered a remarkable electrocatalyst that can be utilized in large-scale applications due to their earth-abundant nature.39,40 As one of the representative strategies for developing highly active electrocatalysts, alloying can modify the intrinsic electronic structure of each constituent metal and optimize adequate adsorption of hydrogen atoms, accelerating the reaction kinetics.41 In the HER, alloy electrocatalysts have developed an appropriate composition in which the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) is close to zero. The value of ΔGH* is a reasonable descriptor of the HER activity, which can be expressed as a volcano relationship.42 In order to reduce the amount of high-cost noble metals, Pt-based alloys with transition metals have been developed such as PtNi and PtCo.43,44 This can reduce the total cost of the catalyst and enhance the efficiency more than pure Pt. Furthermore, the addition of transition metals to noble metal-based alloys stabilizes the hydroxyl species to improve the HER, especially in alkaline electrolyte. Despite efforts and improvements in many noble metal-based electrocatalysts, high cost and scarcity still limit their practical use. Recently, transition metal-based alloys have evolved with improved catalytic properties comparable to noble metal-based catalysts with composition control. As mentioned above, alloying enables the catalyst to have optimized hydrogen binding energy through composition control and increased active sites. Generally, a mono-transition metal does not occupy an optimal position for hydrogen binding energy.45 However, alloy electrocatalysts can improve the charge transfer rate and adjust the hydrogen binding energy to balance the adsorption and desorption. Jakšić first revealed in 2001 that the alloying effect of transition metals with opposite tendencies in the volcano relationship was based on the electronic structure. The combination of empty or half-full d-orbitals and paired d-electrons on the opposite side of the volcano plot can obtain optimal d8-electrons.46 Similarly, Q. Lu et al. presented the counterintuitive Cu–Ti bimetallic electrocatalyst through DFT predictions and experimental verification (Fig. 4(a)). As shown in Fig. 4(b), although monometallic Cu and Ti exhibit poor activity, the Cu–Ti alloy has a similar hydrogen binding energy as Pt. The Tafel slope of the Cu–Ti catalyst was also nearly identical to the value of Pt/C, the representative HER catalyst.47 Furthermore, in the Cu5Zr alloy, the inclusion of Zr changed the electronic structure due to the large difference in electronegativity of Cu and Zr. The d band center of the Cu5Zr alloy was shifted up toward the Fermi energy, which led to a more effective free energy path for the HER.48 In addition, the high electrical conductivity of alloys contributes to the fast reaction kinetics, improving charge transfer efficiency through the entire electrode. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of alloy electrocatalysts indicates the smallest semicircle, indicating low charge transfer resistance.49,50 Co3Mo electrocatalysts also displayed a significantly lower charge transfer resistance than single elements, Co and Mo. The support of nanoporous Cu, a conductive substrate without insulative binders, boosted the charge transfer kinetics (Fig. 4(c)). The Co3Mo/Cu electrodes promoted a fast electron-transfer pathway through the integration between an alloy and metal support with high activity and conductivity.51
 Fig. 4  (a) The possible bimetallic sites on a Ti-modified Cu surface and (b) the corresponding HBEs incorporated in a volcano plot.47 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of intermetallic Co3Mo nanoparticles grown on a Cu ligament with a coherent interface structure. Inset: Atomic structure of intermetallic Co3Mo. Scale bar, 1 nm.51 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of the process for producing Ni-based bimetallic alloys by topotactic transformation of Ni-LHS.60 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) HER characteristics of Ni4Mo/NiFe electrocatalysts by linear sweep voltammetry in a 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.62 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Potential-dependent in situ Raman spectra of metal Ni with 0.1 M MoO42−.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) HER characteristics of the binary NiCo and NiCoMo (0, 3, 5, and 7 at% Mo) ternary films by linear sweep voltammetry in 0.1 M KOH.68 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Ni-based alloys are widely known as typical superior catalysts among other transition metal alloys.52 To improve the intrinsic catalytic properties of Ni, the synergistic effect with Ni has been investigated by discovering various combinations with transition metals, such as Co,53,54 Cu,55,56 W,40,57 and Mo,58etc.52,59,60 The optimized composition has a high intrinsic activity, which indicates the high density of the active site. With the DFT-based computational calculations, the relationship between the activity and active site at the atomic scale has been established.61 Along with developing an intrinsic activity of the alloy, nanostructuring also increases the active site. Zhang et al. reported that the electrodeposited Ni–Co alloy demonstrated that morphology is a pivotal factor in electrochemical activity by controlling its morphology from a nanocone to a leaf-like structure.53 The 3D hierarchical nanocone Ni–Co alloy revealed the most outstanding HER characteristics, requiring only an overpotential of 86.7 mV at 10 mA cm−2, corroborated by the large ECSA and improved hydrogen bubble detachment. Xie et al. synthesized Ni-based binary alloys with self-supporting nanosheet morphology, controlling the composition of counter metals Ge, Sn, and Mo (Fig. 4(d)). Based on TOF calculations, the ultrathin layered nanosheets providing excess active sites multiplied the intrinsic activity of the alloy. Among the various Ni-based alloys, Ni–Mo alloys, which have a surface electronic structure like that of Pt, are the most promising non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts. The Ni–Mo alloys outperformed Pt/C catalysts, followed by Ni–Ge and Ni–Sn alloys, and the Ni4Mo alloy with a Ni–Mo ratio of 4:1 was shown to have an optimal Mo content compared to various molar ratios.60 Using these probes, we synthesized a composition of counter metal Ge, Sn, and Mo (Fig. 4(d)). Based on TOF calculations, the ultrathin layered nanosheets providing excess active sites multiplied the intrinsic activity of the alloy. Among the various Ni-based alloys, Ni–Mo alloys, which have a surface electronic structure like that of Pt, are the most promising non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts. The Ni–Mo alloys outperformed Pt/C catalysts, followed by Ni–Ge and Ni–Sn alloys, and the Ni4Mo alloy with a Ni–Mo ratio of 4:1 was shown to have an optimal Mo content compared to various molar ratios.60 Using these probes, we synthesized a Ni4Mo/NiFe alloy with superior catalytic characteristics compared to pure Pt for hydrogen production (Fig. 4(e)). The Tafel slope of the Ni4Mo films was as low as 22.2 mV decade−1 under alkaline conditions, which illustrates that the rate-determining step is the Tafel step, and the previous Volmer step has been accelerated.62 Research on Ni–Mo alloys not only enhanced the catalytic properties but also provided insight into reaction mechanisms and established preconditions for designing efficient catalysts. The mechanisms for enhancing the HER activity of Ni4Mo alloys have been explained by the promotion of the surface-absorbed polymolybdates63 and Mo oxo species (Mo3+) supported on metallic Ni or NixMoy alloy64 based on in situ analysis and DFT calculations. In situ Raman spectroscopy performed by adding MoO42− to Ni confirmed the coexistence of MoO42− and Mo2O72−, which repair the stability and facilitate the HER activity of Ni4Mo alloys (Fig. 4(f)).63 Based on the advantages of Ni-based binary alloys mentioned above, ternary alloy electrocatalysts have been explored (e.g., Ni–Mo–Cu,65 Ni–Mo–Zn,66 Ni–Co–Ti,67 and Ni–Co–Mo68,69). They can be expected to exhibit higher catalytic activity due to the energetically unstable state of mixed metals. For example, Mo incorporation reduced the overpotential of the NiCoMo (5 at% Mo) ternary alloy by more than half compared to the NiCo binary alloy (Fig. 4(g)). Due to moderate Mo doping, the ΔGH* of NiCoMo is closer to zero than that of the NiCo binary alloy, resulting in fast reaction kinetics.68 Besides, the addition of Co atoms to NiMo alloys created the electron-deficient state. The NiMoCo alloy formed an energetically unstable state to improve the HER activity. As a result, it exhibited a low overpotential of 23 mV at 10 mA cm−2.69 As the complexity of the composition increases, understanding the synergistic effect of alloys will serve as a basis for efficient electrocatalyst development.
3-2. Metal alloy electrocatalysts for the OER
Transition metal-based alloy electrocatalysts, especially with leading 3d transition metals such as Ni, Fe, and Co, have also exhibited superior OER performance and stability.70,71 As mentioned above, the optimal binding energy with the reaction intermediate determines the catalytic activity connected to the reaction mechanism. Therefore, to expedite the kinetically sluggish OER, alloy electrocatalysts have been developed to form appropriate adsorption energy of intermediates. Among the various reported transition metal-based alloys, the NiFe alloy is known as a representative catalyst for the OER with high intrinsic activity by optimizing the binding energy of intermediates.72 Additionally, the intrinsic activity in the OER is strongly influenced by surface modification through crystal structure engineering and defect engineering as well as composition optimization. In the past few decades, metal hydroxide and oxyhydroxide as an active site-rich phase have been extensively investigated.73,74 To increase the OER activity of alloys, an approach for converting catalyst surfaces into metal hydroxides and oxyhydroxides has been proposed. The crystalline-amorphous structure engineering, another phase control strategy, also affects the OER catalytic properties. Compared to crystalline catalysts, amorphous structures enhance the active sites due to their short-range order and abundant randomly oriented bonding characteristics.75 Following this, we reported the facile synthesis of NiFe oxyhydroxide through the anodization of bare NiFe foil. The anodized NiFe with a high rate of Ni3+ enhanced the water oxidation activities with a relatively low overpotential of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5(a)).62 The crystalline alloy core-amorphous oxyhydroxide shell structure could also be chemically deposited using the growth mechanism of ferromagnetic metal nanowires under a magnetic field (Fig. 5(b)). The amorphous NiFe oxyhydroxide shell also provided abundant defects to improve the activity. Moreover, the fine geometry facilitated charge transfer and surface re-exposure from the resultant O2 bubbles based on the hierarchical structure.76 To date, the effects of intrinsic defects such as grain boundaries and dislocations on the catalytic activity have been investigated in addition to the phase control.77,78 To further expand on this, we observed that the grain boundary of the Ni60Fe40 electrocatalyst acts as an active site for the OER in real-time. As shown in Fig. 5(c), the in situ electrochemical microscopy results of the Ni60Fe40 alloy with 440 μm sized grain confirmed that oxygen was generated at the grain boundaries, not the grain interior. The large work function of the grain boundary (blue area) and the exposed high index planes of the grain boundary groove supported that the grain boundary is a kinetically and thermodynamically active site (Fig. 5(d) and (e)).78
 Fig. 5  (a) OER characteristics of anodized NiFe electrocatalysts by linear sweep voltammetry in a1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.62 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the synthesis of the NixFe1−x alloy (core)-ultrathin amorphous oxyhydroxide (shell) nanowire arrays and its catalytic function for the OER.76 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) In situ oxygen evolution images of the 440 μm sized grain Ni60Fe40 electrocatalyst during linear scanning from 1 to 2 V versus RHE, scan rates at 5 mV s−1. (d) SKPM image of the 440 μm sized grain Ni60Fe40 electrocatalyst, and (e) high-resolution TEM image of the black region, representing the GB between green and yellow grains.78 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (f) Linearly interpolated heat maps of the average η10, (i.e., OER overpotential for 10 mA cm−2) based on the initial alloy composition.86 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) OER characteristics of HEA/MEAs by linear sweep voltammetry in the 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.92 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (h) Schematic illustration of the proposed overall OER pathway for the electrochemically activated FeCoCrNi (EA-FCCN) catalyst. The black and blue oxygen atoms represent lattice and adsorbed oxygen, respectively.93 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
With the rapid progress of the NiFe alloy for the OER catalysis, various binary and ternary alloys have been developed with composition control.79,80 The precise control of the Fe content determines the OER activities associated with the formation of active sites. In the case of the NiFe alloy described above, Fe inclusion changes the redox potential of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH electrochemical oxidation and the oxidation state of Ni. Louie et al. revealed that the 40 at% Fe–Ni alloyed catalysts, appropriately adjusted the amount of Fe, and maximized the active Ni site.81 In the Fe–Co bimetallic system, the structure-based OER mechanism revealed that oxygen evolution occurs at two reaction sites, Co–Co and Fe–Co sites, through spectroscopic identification. Therefore, the proportion of Fe exposed at the catalyst surface affects the intrinsic activity.82 Zhu et al. reported an amorphous FeCo alloy with a Fe:Co ratio of 1:2 in which each metal center exposed on the surface was balanced.83 Recently, ternary alloy catalysts have been developed superior to binary alloy catalysts while inducing a stronger synergistic effect by alloying three transition metal components.84 Characterization of the Ni–Co–Fe ternary system has been investigated for alloys with precisely controlled compositions by arc melting and photochemical metal–organic deposition (PMOD) methods.85,86 They evaluated the difference in OER behaviour by adjusting the composition variables. It was discovered that the control of Fe content influences the Tafel slope, and the control of Ni and Co contents changes the onset potential. Formal et al. visualized the most active composition of the Ni–Co–Fe ternary alloy using a linearly interpolated heat map (Fig. 5(f)). In addition, the catalyst characteristics were examined in consideration of the change in surface composition caused by the oxidation and reconstruction after the reaction.86 The addition of the transition metals such as Al,87 W,84 Mn,88 and Cu89 can also modify the electron distribution to produce more active sites. For instance, Zhang et al. reported a core–shell Ni–Fe–Cu metal/metal oxide anode with a low overpotential of only 180 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and 9.3-fold higher TOF than NiFe LDH.89 The Cu incorporation of the NiFeCu electrode switched the OER mechanism to non-concerted proton–electron transfer by bulk materials, including metal ion centers and lattice oxygen.90
Over binary and ternary alloys, multinary alloys have emerged as promising electrocatalysts for the OER, especially high entropy alloys (HEAs) and medium entropy alloys (MEAs). In general, an alloy with mixed configuration entropy (ΔSmix) equal to greater than 1.5R (R is a gas constant) is defined as a HEA, and with R ≤ ΔSmix ≤ 1.5R as a MEA. HEAs and MEAs usually exhibit outstanding catalytic properties and enhanced stability due to their cocktail effects accompanied by lattice distortion and diffusion effect.91,92 Based on these studies, we reported the OER characteristics of the MEAs (CoCrNi, Fe57.5(CoNi)32.5Cr10, Fe60(CoNi)30Cr10, and Fe62.5(CoNi)27.5Cr10) and HEAs (CoCrFeMnNi) (Fig. 5(g)). The Fe content of MEAs also played an important role in OER activities, and the optimized Fe ratio significantly lowered the overpotential structure. Further anodization and CV activation processes reduced the overpotential required to achieve 10 mA cm−2 to 187 mV for Fe60(CoNi)30Cr10 with a fine-tune Fe ratio.92 To better understand the multinary alloys’ activity, Zhang et al. identified the catalytic center of the FeCoCrNi alloy. They proposed an overall OER pathway on electrochemically activated FeCoCrNi with spectroscopic investigations and a computed energy barrier model (Fig. 5(h)). The proposed OER pathway is related to the reduction of Ni4+ formation energy by Fe and a Ni–Fe dual-site as a catalytic center.93 The multinary catalysts also exhibit excellent mass activity and turnover frequency, suggesting an important guideline in developing OER electrocatalysts.
4. Transition metal-based dichalcogenide (TMD) electrocatalysts
2-Dimensional (2D) TMDs have attracted lots of attention and become one of the most investigated materials for the HER due to their unique optical and electrical properties, and catalytic activities.94–96
Recently, various strategies have been developed for activating TMDs such as edge engineering, defect engineering, phase engineering, doping, and strain effect.97–99 Still, many kinds of research studies are conducted to enhance the catalytic activity and stability of TMDs for the HER. There are several approaches to synthesizing TMDs such as exfoliation, ball milling, electrospinning, hydrothermal, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), hydrothermal method, and so on.100 Among them, exfoliation by ultrasonication is the simplest production method for the large-scale synthesis of 2D nanosheets. We prepared exfoliated MoS2, WS2, TaS2, and TiS2 by a simple sonication method to obtain nanosheet layers that are approximately a few hundred nanometers in size.101 As shown in Fig. 6(a), various TMDs exhibiting a hexagonal lattice structure with lattice constants of around 0.34 nm are shown. The average size of nanosheets is from 100 to 500 nm. The catalytic activities of MoS2, WS2, TaS2, and TiS2 for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4 were explored and are presented in Fig. 6(b). The low onset potentials of about 100, 150, 175, and 135 mV and the Tafel slopes of 94.91, 120.22, 114.66, and 91 mA dec−1 were shown, respectively. It was revealed that MoS2 nanosheets showed better HER performance than bulk MoS2 due to the excellent charge carrier mobility, surface-to-volume ratio, and abundant active edge sites. Based on these results, we investigated the electrical and energetical properties of the MoS2 thin film.102 We measured the charge transfer resistance according to the thickness of MoS2 and obtained an energy band structure to reveal the reason for the highly enhanced (photo)electrochemical HER performance. The edge site of TMDs has a low ΔGH* close to zero, resulting in favorable hydrogen adsorption and desorption. We also synthesized a 3-dimensional (3D) MoS2 layer with abundant edge sites by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition to utilize the catalytic nature of edge sites, as shown in Fig. 6(c).103 With the high flux of Mo(CO)6 and (C2H5)2S as precursors, vertically aligned MoS2 with 0.660 nm and 0.312 nm of (0001) and (10−10) interplanar distances was synthesized. The calculated ΔGH* of the Mo edge with 0.5 and 0.25 hydrogen coverage was 0.08 and −0.4 eV, respectively. The obtained values validated the HER catalytic activity of 3D MoS2 synthesized by metal organic CVD (MOCVD). Additionally, we revealed that the edge of MoS2 is also favorable for the alkaline HER in which extra free energy is required to break the strong covalent H–O–H bonds.104Fig. 6(d) shows that the edge of the hydrothermally grown MoS2 nanoplates accelerates the water dissociation in the Volmer reaction. Anion engineering of TMDs is also an efficient way to enhance the HER catalytic activity. To introduce a substitutional phosphorus dopant in MoS2, we developed a simple thermolysis method by using (NH4)2MoS4 solution and a mixture of sulfur and phosphorus powder (Fig. 6(e)).105 Due to lots of dangling bonds derived from phosphorus on the surface of P:MoS2, the ΔGH value (∼0.05 eV) of P:MoS2 remarkably decreased compared to those of the basal plane and Mo edge of MoS2. Zheng et al. developed a highly active electrocatalyst by co-confining Se on the surface and Co in the inner layer of MoS2.106 First-principles calculations revealed that Co-doping lowers ΔGH* of both the basal plane S site and Mo-edge site. In addition, Se compensates for the over-strong adsorption on both the Co-doped in-plane and edge sites, resulting in moderate hydrogen adsorption and desorption. Moreover, Se-doping stabilized the Co-doped basal plane and edge sites through Co–Se bonds, leading to the lowered formation energies of the overall atomic structure. Mechanically twisted TMDs are newly suggested to enhance the HER catalytic activity. Xie et al. synthesized twisted WS2 nanobelts by a facile one-step hydrothermal method (Fig. 6(f)).107 It is revealed that the strain induced by twisting promotes the activation of the basal plane by changing the electronic structure and the active sites of the W-edge and S-edge have much lower ΔGH* compared to normal bilayers WS2. Also, the geometric, superaerophobic, and superhydrophilic properties enhance the HER performance, resulting in a low overpotential of 60 mV vs. RHE at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of representative TMD (MoS2, WS2, TaS2, and TiS2) nanosheets prepared by facile sonication. (b) LSVs of various TMDs.101 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and TEM images of 3-dimensional MoS2 nanosheets.103 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic illustration of MoS2 nanoplates having large amounts of edge sites which is favorable for alkaline HER.104 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Schematic illustration of synthesizing sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphide thin-film catalysts by a thermolysis method.105 Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Finite-element calculations for the strain distribution and schematic of moiré superlattices formed by S–W–S layer slipping.107 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
5. Transition metal-based layered double hydroxide (LDH) electrocatalysts
LDHs have been widely investigated as promising candidates for water splitting electrocatalysts in the OER and HER due to their virtues of earth abundance, low cost, and material flexibility.108–112 In particular, LDHs’ lamellar crystal structure consists of multiple ions, including tri, bivalent cations, interlayer anions, and solvent molecules, which endows facile charge transport and a large specific surface area for the electrochemical reactions.113–117 Recently, diverse catalytic engineering strategies have been researched for LDHs to elevate their electrocatalytic performance in electrochemical water splitting. As for the structural control of LDHs, it has been revealed that reducing bulk LDHs into single or few-atomic layers can be a powerful way to drastically improve the surface area and increase the exposure of corner or edge catalytic active sites.118–121 Notably, exfoliation of the bulk structure into ultra-thin nanosheet provides numerous active sites through the increased dangling bonds and the lower coordination number of active sites, accelerating the adsorption of reaction intermediates.122,123 Exfoliation techniques for LDHs such as dry (physical) exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, water-plasma-enabled exfoliation, and Ostwald ripening driven exfoliation have been diversely probed.124,125 Liang et al. reported the effect of chemical exfoliation of NiCo LDH on the electrochemical OER activities.126 At the initial step, they successfully synthesized a highly dense and open 3D hierarchical NiCo LDH structure on carbon paper through a distinct hydrothermal continuous flow reactor (HCFR) method. Then, intercalation and exfoliation of the synthesized NiCo LDH were conducted by immersing it into formamide under a N2 gas atmosphere. The exfoliated NiCo LDH nanostructure showed evident enhancement in OER properties, including overpotential, electrocatalytic current density, and Tafel slope. These results elucidated that the intrinsic catalytic activity of LDH and electronic structure transformed in a way more favourable to the OER properties through chemical exfoliation of the bulk LDH structure.
Tuning the interlayer anions in LDHs is also an intriguing strategy influencing its electrocatalytic characteristics. Not only the types of intercalated anions could determine the natural catalytic properties of LDHs, but the interlayer distance by anions may affect the active areas and diffusion rate of ions during the electrochemical reactions.127–130 Na et al. demonstrated NiFe LDHs intercalated with molybdate ions through the exfoliation-free hydrothermal method.131 The as-synthesized NiFeMo LDHs possess electrochemically active sites 4.3 times larger than NiFe LDHs, resulting in a 2.7-fold increase in electrochemical current density with high durability in the OER. These results indicate the catalytic boosting effect by the intercalation of specific interlayer anions in the LDHs structure. The composition versatility and structural flexibility of LDHs allow the endowment of various element doping in its structure. Appropriate element doping for specific LDHs could bring various synergistic effects for electrochemical water splitting, such as increased electrical conductivity, the exposure of more catalytic active sites, and the transition of the electronic environment.132–134
Chen et al. reported Ru-doped NiFe LDH (NiFeRu-LDH) nano-sheet electrocatalysts, exhibiting notably enhanced electrochemical HER activity in an alkaline electrolyte.135 As shown in Fig. 7(a), the NiFeRu-LDH electrocatalyst was fabricated by a one-pot hydrothermal method on a nickel foam substrate. As a result, multiple vertically aligned nanosheets composed of Ni, Fe, and Ru species could be observed, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Also, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-angle annual-dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) analysis elucidated the morphology of atomically dispersed Ru atoms on the NiFeRu-LDH nanosheets. Consequently, Ru element doping into NiFe LDH gives rise to remarkable advancement in the HER performance, especially in overpotential characteristics. It exhibited a zero onset HER overpotential with a significantly low overpotential of 29 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 current density, which is lower than recently reported superior HER electrocatalysts (Fig. 7(c)). Density functional theory (DFT) investigation could reveal that Ru dopants partially substitute Fe centers of NiFe LDH, and this substitution leads to the effective decrease in the energy barrier of the Volmer step in the HER process. Lv et al. demonstrated cobalt–iron–vanadium tri-metallic LDHs (CoFeV-LDHs), revealing the bifunctional catalytic performance for both the OER and HER.136Fig. 7(d) shows the schematic diagram of the in situ synthesis of CoFeV-LDH nanosheets on a carbon cloth substrate through a one-step hydrothermal method. The in situ growing method can be advantageous for growing directionally self-supported LDHs structures by preventing the agglomeration of 2D nanosheets of LDH. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 7(e) show that densely distributed CoFeV LDHs nanosheets can be observed on the underlying carbon cloth substrate. They also constructed the tri-metallic LDHs (Co8FeV) with elements in appropriate molar ratio for the optimal synergistic effect in electrochemical water splitting. A meaningfully small charge transfer resistance (Rct) value of 2.88 Ω could be obtained in the optimized Co8FeV-LDHs in comparison with bimetallic LDH electrocatalysts (Fig. 7(f)), arising from the construction of an electron transfer channel through the electronic structure regulation of V3+ in CoFeV LDHs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the in situ growth of NiFeRu-LDH on the Ni foam. (b) Typical SEM image of the NiFeRu-LDH. (c) The HER overpotentials of the NiFe-LDH, NiFeRu-LDH, NiFeAl-LDH, NiFeCo-LDH, and NiFeV-LDH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.133 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) The schematic diagram of in situ growing Co8FeV-LDH nanosheets on carbon cloth by a one-step hydrothermal method. (e) The SEM image of Co8FeV@CC and the partial area magnified SEM image. (f) The value of Rct of Co8FeV@CC, Co4V@CC, Co4Fe@CC and RuO2@CC.134 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (g) HR-TEM images of NiFe LDH/n-Si. Stability tests (h) and LSVs (i) of NiFe LDH/activated 5 nm a-TiO2/n-Si in various electrolytes.135 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Lastly, as an efficient strategy to boost the catalytic effect and the stability of LDHs in water oxidation, our team introduced the amorphous TiO2 (a-TiO2) thin layer as the synergistic insertion layer between the NiFe LDH and the silicon substrate. We reported a water splitting photoanode structure of n-Si/a-TiO2/NiFe LDH, which exhibited excellent OER properties in various alkaline electrolytes.137 A thickness around ∼40 nm of thin amorphous NiFe LDH could be deposited through the facile electrodeposition process as shown in the TEM images in Fig. 7(g). A cyclic voltammetry activation process was conducted to the a-TiO2 interlayer, resulting in the largely increased charge conductivity. NiFe LDH with this activated a-TiO2 interlayer revealed considerably enhanced water oxidation characteristics, especially in chronoamperometric stability tests in different electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 7(h) and (i).
6. Transition metal-based single atom catalysts (SACs)
SACs, possessing isolated active centers of metal atoms anchored to supports, are one of the critical electrocatalysts to be studied in depth owing to their specific characteristics originating from the atomic-scale structure.138 Among the different metal types of SACs, transition metal-based SACs would rationally contribute to minimizing the cost of catalyst usage with maximized catalytic efficiency.139,140 Zeng et al. demonstrated rationally designed dual-component SACs named diatomic site catalysts (DASCs), which employ complementary and synergistic interactions of neighbouring metal species.141 As-synthesized DASCs consist of Ni and Fe atoms anchored on N-doped graphene (NG). Morphology investigations through TEM (Fig. 8(a)) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping (Fig. 8(b)) clearly show the dense and uniform distribution of Ni and Fe atoms on the NG substrate. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements are frequently conducted to analyze diverse SACs since it is an elaborate method to investigate the electronic structure and the physicochemical characteristics of SACs. Wavelet transform (WT)-EXAFS (Fig. 8(c) and (d)) and Fourier transformation (FT)-EXAFS (Fig. 8(e)) were carried out in order to identify the coordination environment and the paths of metal–N and metal–metal. Exceptional bonding conditions in DASCs could be manifested through the metal–metal bond length analysis difference between (FT)-EXAFS and (WT)-EXAFS. Fig. 8(f) shows that electrochemical linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves resulting in NiFe-DASCs revealed superior OER properties compared with Ni-SACs and Fe-SACs. Pan et al. reported N-doped porous carbon (NPC) with anchored atomically dispersed Fe–N4 catalytic sites (Fe–N4 SAs/NPC), exhibiting excellent OER and HER performances.142 The innovative synthesis method of polymerization–pyrolysis–evaporation (PPE) was utilized to effectively fabricate Fe–N4 SAs/NPC (Fig. 8(g)). Notably, the PPE strategy has the generality in synthesizing M SAs/NPC (M = Co, Ni, Mn) by adding different metal precursors. HAADF-STEM and EDS results (left side image in Fig. 8(h)) imply the uniform distribution of C, N, and Fe elements on the entire NPC. Separately distributed single atoms could be detected through aberration-corrected (AC) HAADF-STEM (right side image in Fig. 8(h)). Sparkling points in (AC) HAADF-STEM with highly intense resolution indicate the atomically distributed morphology without aggregation. (FT) k3-weighted EXAFS data (Fig. 8(i)) show the existence of the Fe–N first coordination shell through one main peak at 1.4 Å. Since there is no Fe–Fe coordination peak at 2.2 Å, it could be concluded that atomic dispersion Fe was anchored on NPC. Fig. 8(j) shows that Fe–N4 SAs/NPC exhibited great HER activities with a small overpotential and Tafel slope. The free energy diagram earned from density functional calculations (Fig. 8(k)) revealed that high HER electrocatalytic properties of Fe–N4 SAs/NPC originated from the more favourable H* adsorption kinetics on the Fe–N4 site than that of the Fe–C4 and Fe6 cluster.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image and (b) EDS elemental mapping of NiFe-DASC. Wavelet Transform (WT)-EXAFS of k2-weighted k-space spectra of (c) Fe for NiFe-DSAC and (d) Ni for NiFe-DSAC. (e) Fourier transformation (FT)-EXAFS spectra of Ni-SAC and NiFe-DASC. (f) LSV curves for the OER of Fe-SAC, Ni-SAC, and NiFe-DASC in O2-saturated 1.0M KOH at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 1 mV s−1.139 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (g) Synthesis of the Fe–N4 SAs/NPC. (h) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images (C red, N yellow, Fe green) and AC HAADF-STEM of the Fe–N4 SAs/NPC. (i) FT at R space (inset: Fe atomic structure model; C gold, N silver, and Fe orange). (j) LSV curves and (k) free energy diagrams for (1) Fe–N4 and (2) Fe–C4 HER.140 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
7. PV–EC systems for green hydrogen production
To realize highly efficient green hydrogen production, it is necessary to integrate a water electrolysis system with a photovoltaic cell, enabling PV-driven electrolysis. The combined PV–EC configuration is operated when the voltage and current between two components become equal. As a result, not only the high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cell is required, but also the overpotential required in the water splitting system must be reduced to obtain a high solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH). Here, we introduce the research on highly efficient PV–EC water splitting systems using transition metal-based electrocatalysts. Sunlight-driven water splitting based on earth-abundant electrocatalysts was first proposed by Luo et al.143 They applied NiFe LDH into nickel foam for both the anode and cathode in the 1 M NaOH electrolyte. The electrodes required an overpotential of 240 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 for the OER and 210 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 for the HER. The perovskite solar cell using CH3NH3PbI3 with a PCE of 17.3% was connected to the electrochemical cell and the operating current has a value of 10 mA cm−2, corresponding to 12.3% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency. Kim et al. designed a PV–EC system using a hetero-tandem organic photovoltaic cell (OPV), NiMo/Ni cathode, and NiFeOx(OH)y/Ni anode (Fig. 9(a)).144 The OPV consists of the large-bandgap PM6:IT-M as the front and small-bandgap PM6:Y6 as the back cell. As shown in Fig. 9(b), the optimized OPV–EC system with transition metal-based electrocatalysts exhibited an operating current density of 7.1 mA cm−2, corresponding to 8.7% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency. Furthermore, we constructed a highly efficient PV–EC system with earth-abundant transition metal-based electrocatalysts and the monolithic perovskite/Si tandem solar cells.145 The NiFe (oxy)hydroxide obtained by anodization of a NiFe alloy showed remarkably enhanced OER activity with an overpotential of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and electrodeposited NiMo films exhibited a low overpotential of 100 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for the HER. They accomplished 17.52% STH by combining perovskite/Si tandem solar cells showing 23.1% power conversion efficiency (Fig. 9(c) and (d)). We also developed highly active medium-entropy alloys by anodization and cyclic voltammetry activation utilized for PV–EC water splitting.146 The surface-modified Fe60(CoNi)30Cr10 MEA showed the optimal electrical properties and hydrophilicity with a low overpotential of 187 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER. The combined PV–EC architecture with an as-synthesized MEA electrocatalyst and a perovskite/Si tandem solar cell achieved 20.7% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (Fig. 9(e) and (f)).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the organic photovoltaic cell connected with an electrochemical cell. (b) LSV curves of two-electrode water splitting cell and OPV.144 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (c) LSV curves of the Si/perovskite tandem photovoltaic cell and two-electrode water splitting cell with NiFe catalysts. (d) Time-dependent current density curve of the integrated PV–EC device without external bias.145 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of the solar cell and the CV activated MEA. (f) Current density–time curve of the PV–EC device without external bias.146 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
8. Conclusion
In compliance with emerging demands for future alternative energy, the technique of hydrogen production through electrochemical water splitting is the vital energy conversion field to be studied. Investigating highly effective transition metal-based catalysts for electrochemical water splitting can be a straightforward pathway to expedite the commercialization of hydrogen energy in the industrial society. Here, we first described the fundamental understanding and mechanism of the OER and HER in electrochemical water splitting, resulting in the systematic understanding of each reaction kinetics and providing the basis for further research in transition metal-based electrocatalysts.
As the efficient strategies and materials for developing high-performance transition metal-based electrocatalysts, we comprehensively summarized the main sections of transition metal-based metal alloys, TMDs, LDHs, SACs, and concluded the paper with the introduction of the PV–EC system for green hydrogen production. Metal alloying is the representative strategy for developing highly active transition metal-based electrocatalysts. It can tune the intrinsic electronic structure of metal components and maximize the adequate adsorption of hydrogen atoms by using the synergistic effect of constituent metals. 2D TMDs can be effectively utilized in the HER for their virtues of electrical properties and catalytic activities. Edge engineering, defect engineering, and doping methods are widely used to activate TMDs. LDHs, possessing lamellar crystal structures consisting of multiple ions, have advantageous characteristics of facile charge transport and large specific surface areas for electrochemical water splitting. In addition, material flexibility in LDHs allows the wide usage of transition metals. Exfoliation, modifying interlayer anions, and doping strategies are currently being introduced to enhance LDHs in electrochemical reactions. The distinct properties of SACs originated from their atomic-scale and isolated active centers, leading them to be one of the competitive catalyst engineering strategies. Therefore, it could be expected that the effective synthesis of SACs through a transition metal would substantially increase the catalytic efficiency while minimizing the cost of catalysts. Lastly, it is essential to harness sunlight for water electrolysis to produce future-oriented green hydrogen for the energy source. Integrating a water electrolysis system with a photovoltaic cell enables PV-driven electrolysis. Nonetheless significant progress in the transition metal based-electrocatalyst has been achieved through numerous research studies; however, there are still some issues to be addressed for the further enhancement. First, deeper analyzation of the OER and HER process is needed. Going further with the established mechanism, investigating catalytic progress through operando or in situ microscopic and spectroscopic techniques would rationally aid the development of effective catalysts for electrochemical water splitting. Second, the parameters for evaluating the catalytic activity need to be diversified. On behalf of widely used parameters of the Tafel slope or overpotential (η), standardization of catalytic factors like stability, mass loading, and onset potential could give the substantive achievement for the industrial application of the catalyst. Lastly, a ground breaking engineering strategy that can simultaneously improve conductivity, durability, intrinsic activity, and the number of active sites of transition metal-based electrocatalysts needs to be developed. Beyond the strategy that only focuses on specific advances in catalytic activity, research on overall enhancement of catalysts would innovatively increase the usage of transition metal-based electrocatalysts. The ultimate goal of developing electrochemical catalysts is to apply them into the integrated membrane-electrode assembly cell for lowering the applied potential and enhancing the stability of the device. However, studies on transition metal based-electrocatalysts reacting in full cells are still lacking. Also, for replacing noble metal-based catalysts, they must show both high catalytic activity and stability at the same time, but research has not yet been conducted. In particular, it is important to improve the performance of the OER catalysts since a large overpotential is required in the OER. As a result, it is necessary to design high-performance catalysts capable of producing synergistic effects with advanced membranes such as proton-exchange membranes and anion-exchange membranes.
We believe that our inclusive overview of recent advances in transition metal-based electrocatalysts for hydrogen production would inspire people in the sphere of renewable energy, catalytic engineering, and various energy conversion research studies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Nuclear Energy R&D Program (2020M2D8A206983012) and the Future Material Discovery Program (2018M3D1A1058793) through the National Research Foundation of Korea. H. R. Kwon, H. Park, S. E. Jun, and S. Choi contributed equally to this work.
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 43, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Gür, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2696–2767 RSC .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Lee, F. Marques Mota, C. H. Choi, Y. R. Lu, R. Boppella, C. L. Dong, R. S. Liu and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801144 CrossRef .
M. G. Lee, K. Jin, K. C. Kwon, W. Sohn, H. Park, K. S. Choi, Y. K. Go, H. Seo, J. S. Hong, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800727 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Lee, D. H. Kim, W. Sohn, C. W. Moon, H. Park, S. Lee and H. W. Jang, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
F. Marques Mota, C. H. Choi, R. Boppella, J. E. Lee and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 639–646 RSC .
R. Boppella, J. Tan, W. Yang and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807976 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Henzie, J. Kim, Z. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Bando, Y. Sugahara, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807134 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906481 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lv, Z. Yang, K. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803358 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Su, S. Gu, R. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Yan, J. Li and S. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 739–746 RSC .
S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, S. Choi and H. W. Jang, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210012 CrossRef .
M. G. Lee, K. Jin, K. C. Kwon, W. Sohn, H. Park, K. S. Choi, Y. K. Go, H. Seo, J. S. Hong, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800727 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, Y. Tong, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2857–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, N. Guo, Z. Shao, K. Huang, Y. Li, F. He and Q. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1870121 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, L. Peng, Z. Fang, C. Yan, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706347 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, D. Zhou, M. Wang, S. Bak, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Tian, X. Xiong, Y. Li, W. Liu, S. Siahrostami, Y. Kuang, X. Yang, H. Duan, Z. Feng, H. Wang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 9536–9540 CrossRef .
R. R. Raja Sulaiman, W. Y. Wong and K. S. Loh, Int. J. Energy Res., 2022, 46, 2241–2276 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. He and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5320–5363 RSC .
Y. Yan, P. Wang, J. Lin, J. Cao and J. Qi, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 446–462 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. Kong, D. Zhao, H. Wang and C. Selomulya, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 26–55 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J. Ye, H. Wang, L. Ouyang and M. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 883, 160833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang and R. Zou, Small, 2021, 17, 2100129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang and B. J. Ni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14971–15005 RSC .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, X. Lou, F. Xia and J. He, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 244–276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto and E. Sato, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1986, 4, 397–426 CrossRef .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang, X. L. Zhu, B. Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 473–486 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, W. Chen, H. Yu, Y. Zeng, F. Ming, H. Liang and Z. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119326 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, Y. Peng, M. Miao, V. Reddu, W. Zhang, H. Wang, B. Y. Xia and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1228–1235 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. She, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Greeley, J. K. Nørskov, L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz and D. M. Kolb, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1032–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Ren, Y. Luo, L. Wang, G. Cui, F. Xie, H. Wang, Y. Xie and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12302–12307 RSC .
Z. Cao, Q. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Jiang, S. Shen, G. Fu, B. A. Lu, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15131 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
M. M. Jaksic, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 559–578 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, G. S. Hutchings, W. Yu, Y. Zhou, R. v Forest, R. Tao, J. Rosen, B. T. Yonemoto, Z. Cao, H. Zheng, J. Q. Xiao, F. Jiao and J. G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Shi, Y.-T. Zhou, R.-Q. Yao, W.-B. Wan, Q.-H. Zhang, L. Gu, Z. Wen, X.-Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Yu, Y. Wen, Y. Gao, X. Xing, Z. Wei, H. Sun, Y. W. Zhang and W. Song, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5084–5095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Ge, Q. Feng, P. Zhuang, H. Chu, Y. Cao, W. R. Smith, P. Dong, M. Ye and J. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9002–9010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, Y. T. Zhou, R. Q. Yao, W. bin Wan, X. Ge, W. Zhang, Z. Wen, X. Y. Lang, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. Raj, J. Mater. Sci., 1993, 28, 4375–4382 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Guo, A. Hu, M. Li, T. Hang and H. Ling, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 29946–29955 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, J. Cao, J. Dong, H. Du, H. Zhang, J. Chen and L. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6637–6645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, Y. Sun, G. G. Scherer, A. C. Fisher, M. Sherburne, J. W. Ager and Z. J. Xu, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2020, 142, 7765–7775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Negem and H. Nady, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 28386–28396 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hong, S. H. Ahn, J. Choi, J. Y. Kim, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jang, H. Kim and S. K. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mihailov, T. Spassov and M. Bojinov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10499–10506 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Y. Zou, L. Deng and J. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901949 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, I. J. Park, M. G. Lee, K. C. Kwon, S. P. Hong, D. H. Kim, S. A. Lee, T. H. Lee, C. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. Y. Son, G. H. Jung, H. S. Yang, J. R. Lee, J. Lee, N. G. Park, S. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33835–33843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, Y. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bau, S. M. Kozlov, L. M. Azofra, S. Ould-Chikh, A. H. Emwas, H. Idriss, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12858–12866 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xia, T. Lei, N. Lv and N. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4794–4802 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Su, H. Aslan, J. Kibsgaard, S. Wendt, L. Meng, M. Dong, Y. Huang and F. Besenbacher, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ganesan, A. Sivanantham and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12416–12426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, J. Guo, X. Cui, L. Yang, Y. Yang, H. He, P. Xiao and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22420–22431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hu, M. Wu, S. Hinokuma, T. Ohto, M. Wakisaka, J. I. Fujita and Y. Ito, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2156–2164 RSC .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, F. Shaik, K. Liang, K. Guo, X. Ren and B. Jiang, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2021, 17, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 1264–1277 CrossRef .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, F. T. Zhang, J. H. Chen, X. Z. Fu, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1210–1217 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. J. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Liu, C. Xie, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12614–12617 RSC .
H. K. Park, H. Ahn, T. H. Lee, J. Y. Lee, M. G. Lee, S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, S. J. Kim, S. H. Ahn, S. Y. Kim, C. H. Lee, E. S. Park and H. W. Jang, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2000755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nishimoto, S. Kitano, D. Kowalski, Y. Aoki and H. Habazaki, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 9465–9473 CrossRef CAS .
C. Niu, Y. Zhang, J. Dong, R. Yuan, W. Kou and L. Xu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 2484–2488 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, C. Pasquini, S. Loos, P. Chernev, K. Klingan, P. Kubella, M. R. Mohammadi, D. Gonzalez-Flores and H. Dau, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, G. Zhu, C. Yao, H. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhu and W. Liang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 828, 154465 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich, M. García-Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu, L. Zheng, F. Pelayo García De Arquer, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, M. Yuan, E. Yassitepe, N. Chen, T. Regier, P. Liu, Y. Li, P. de Luna, A. Janmohamed, H. L. Xin, H. Yang, A. Vojvodic and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2016, 352, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11580–11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. le Formal, L. Yerly, E. Potapova Mensi, X. Pereira Da Costa, F. Boudoire, N. Guijarro, M. Spodaryk, A. Züttel and K. Sivula, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12139–12147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, R. D. Fagan, R. D. L. Smith, S. A. Moore, C. P. Berlinguette and S. Trudel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 756–761 RSC .
E. Detsi, J. B. Cook, B. K. Lesel, C. L. Turner, Y. L. Liang, S. Robbennolt and S. H. Tolbert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 540–549 RSC .
P. Zhang, L. Li, D. Nordlund, H. Chen, L. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Sheng, Q. Daniel and L. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y. L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Cai and N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, J. W. Bae, T. H. Lee, I. J. Park, C. Kim, M. G. Lee, S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, M. J. Choi, S. H. Hong, S. Y. Kim, S. H. Ahn, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Kim and H. W. Jang, Small, 2022, 18, 2105611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Feng, D. Rao, X. Deng, L. Cai, B. Qiu, R. Long, Y. Xiong, Y. Lu and Y. Chai, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shi, Z. Sun and Y. H. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23932–23977 RSC .
G. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1190–1209 RSC .
Y. Jung, E. Ji, A. Capasso and G.-H. Lee, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2019, 56, 24–36 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Robertson and J. H. Warner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6764–6794 RSC .
S. Tian and Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6040–6050 RSC .
S. H. Noh, J. Hwang, J. Kang, M. H. Seo, D. Choi and B. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20005–20014 RSC .
S. Chandrasekaran, L. Yao, L. Deng, C. Bowen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, F. Peng and P. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4178–4280 RSC .
T. P. Nguyen, S. Choi, J. M. Jeon, K. C. Kwon, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3929–3935 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, Y. S. Shim, D. H. Kim, T. Kim, W. Sohn, J. M. Jeon, C. H. Lee, K. T. Nam, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2240–2248 RSC .
D. M. Andoshe, G. Jin, C. S. Lee, C. Kim, K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, W. Sohn, C. W. Moon, S. H. Lee, J. M. Suh, S. Kang, J. Park, H. Heo, J. K. Kim, S. Han, M. H. Jo and H. W. Jang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700142 CrossRef .
S. E. Jun, S. P. Hong, S. Choi, C. Kim, S. G. Ji, I. J. Park, S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, T. H. Lee, W. Sohn, J. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Small, 2021, 17, 2103457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 RSC .
Z. Zheng, L. Yu, M. Gao, X. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ma, L. Wu, J. Zhu, X. Meng, J. Hu, Y. Tu, S. Wu, J. Mao, Z. Tian and D. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xie, L. Wang, W. Zhao, S. Liu, W. Huang and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1820–1827 RSC .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Q. Lu, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
B. W. Xue, C. H. Zhang, Y. Z. Wang, W. W. Xie, N. W. Li and L. Yu, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 5555–5566 RSC .
B. Zhang, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, E. Stavitski, Y. H. Lui, T. H. Kim, H. Liu, L. Huang, X. Luan, L. Zhou, K. Jiang, W. Huang, S. Hu, H. Wang and J. S. Francisco, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 136–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14120–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O’Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950–5974 RSC .
C. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Catal. Today, 2015, 247, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Zhou, Z. Li, M. Shao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11516–11523 RSC .
R. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16481–16484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, J. F. Yang, B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 172–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Yan, S. El Hankari, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800064 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. xie, S. Feng, D. Liu, M. Shao and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5867–5871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. Lee, W. Kim and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44518–44526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, F. Meng, M. Cabán-Acevedo, L. Li, A. Forticaux, L. Xiu, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, H. Yan, C. Wang, F. Wu, A. Tian, X. Hong, W. Dong and S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125618 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Gao, C. Guan, Y. Hu and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23236–23243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, Z. Cai, C. Wang, Y. Bi, L. Qian, Y. Hao, L. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, X. Lei, Z. Huo, W. Liu, H. Wang, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1732–1739 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Hunter, W. Hieringer, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1734–1743 RSC .
N. Han, F. Zhao and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16348–16353 RSC .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Long, S. Xiao, Z. Wang, X. Zheng and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1120–1123 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, R. Chen, L. Ma, H. Zhu, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Lv, P. Liu, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Zhang, P. Zhou, X. Huang and G. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120587 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, S. A. Lee, H. Yang, T. H. Lee, C. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Shin and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 12298–12307 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, D. Du, C. Zhu, Y. Lin and Q. Shi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1713–1721 CrossRef .
W. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Li, X. Wang, J. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 47, 333–345 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, L. Y. Gan, H. Bin Yang, X. Su, J. Gao, W. Liu, H. Matsumoto, J. Gong, J. Zhang, W. Cai, Z. Zhang, Y. Yan, B. Liu and P. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, A. Han, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, Q. Zhang, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Kim, T. H. Lee, J. Yeop, W. J. Byun, J. H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and J. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 309, 121237 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, I. J. Park, M. G. Lee, K. C. Kwon, S. P. Hong, D. H. Kim, S. A. Lee, T. H. Lee, C. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. Y. Son, G. H. Jung, H. S. Yang, J. R. Lee, J. Lee, N. G. Park, S. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33835–33843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, J. W. Bae, T. H. Lee, I. J. Park, C. Kim, M. G. Lee, S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, M. J. Choi, S. H. Hong, S. Y. Kim, S. H. Ahn, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Kim and H. W. Jang, Small, 2022, 18, 2105611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Hee Ryeong Kwon
	Hee Ryeong Kwon is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Seoul National University (SNU). She received her BS degree from Material Science and Engineering, Korea University, in 2021. Her current research focuses on the design of transition metal-based catalysts and its application to photoelectrochemical water splitting.

Hoonkee Park
	Hoonkee Park received his PhD from Seoul National University in 2020. He received his BS degree from the Material Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, in 2013. Thereafter, he did postdoctoral research in Prof. Ho Won Jang's group. His current research focuses on the compositional/structure control of transition metal-based multicomponent alloys for high-efficiency electrocatalysts and green hydrogen production using PV–EC systems.

Sang Eon Jun
	Sang Eon Jun is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the School of Integrative Engineering, Chung-Ang University, in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis of 2-dimensional materials via chemical vapor deposition and its applications to (photo)electrochemical water splitting.

Sungkyun Choi
	Sungkyun Choi is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Ho Won Jang in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the Material Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), in 2018. His research interests include the synthesis and characterization of transition metal and single atom catalysts for energy conversion applications.

Ho Won Jang
	Ho Won Jang is a professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Seoul National University. He earned his PhD from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Pohang University of Science and Technology in 2004. He worked as a research associate at the University of Madison-Wisconsin from 2006 to 2009. Before he joined Seoul National University in 2012, he worked at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) as a senior research scientist. His research interests include materials synthesis and device fabrication for solar water splitting cells, chemical sensors, memristors, plasmonics, and metal–insulator transition.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of transition metal-based electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  HER pathways under acidic and alkaline conditions.28 Copyright 2018, Springer.	 
H3O+ + M + e− → H* + H2O under acidic conditions
H2O + M + e− → H* + OH− under alkaline conditions
H* + H* → H2
H3O+ + e− + H* → H2 + H2O under acidic conditions
H2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH− under alkaline conditions
M + H2O → M − OH* + H+ + e−
M − OH* → M − O* + H+ + e−
M − O* + H2O → M − OOH* + H+ + e−
M − OOH* → M + O2 + H+ + e−
M + OH− → M − OH* + e−
M − OH* + OH− → M − O* + H2O + e−
M − O* + OH− → M − OOH* + e−
M − OOH* + OH− → M + O2 + H2O + e−

 	Fig. 3  OER mechanism for alkaline (red route) and acidic (green route) conditions. The black line indicates that the OER involves the formation of a peroxide (M–OH) intermediate, while the light blue line indicates the direct reaction of two adjacent oxo (M–O) intermediates to produce oxygen.38 Copyright 2018, American chemical society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The possible bimetallic sites on a Ti-modified Cu surface and (b) the corresponding HBEs incorporated in a volcano plot.47 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of intermetallic Co3Mo nanoparticles grown on a Cu ligament with a coherent interface structure. Inset: Atomic structure of intermetallic Co3Mo. Scale bar, 1 nm.51 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of the process for producing Ni-based bimetallic alloys by topotactic transformation of Ni-LHS.60 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) HER characteristics of Ni4Mo/NiFe electrocatalysts by linear sweep voltammetry in a 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.62 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Potential-dependent in situ Raman spectra of metal Ni with 0.1 M MoO42−.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) HER characteristics of the binary NiCo and NiCoMo (0, 3, 5, and 7 at% Mo) ternary films by linear sweep voltammetry in 0.1 M KOH.68 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) OER characteristics of anodized NiFe electrocatalysts by linear sweep voltammetry in a1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.62 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the synthesis of the NixFe1−x alloy (core)-ultrathin amorphous oxyhydroxide (shell) nanowire arrays and its catalytic function for the OER.76 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) In situ oxygen evolution images of the 440 μm sized grain Ni60Fe40 electrocatalyst during linear scanning from 1 to 2 V versus RHE, scan rates at 5 mV s−1. (d) SKPM image of the 440 μm sized grain Ni60Fe40 electrocatalyst, and (e) high-resolution TEM image of the black region, representing the GB between green and yellow grains.78 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (f) Linearly interpolated heat maps of the average η10, (i.e., OER overpotential for 10 mA cm−2) based on the initial alloy composition.86 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) OER characteristics of HEA/MEAs by linear sweep voltammetry in the 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.92 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (h) Schematic illustration of the proposed overall OER pathway for the electrochemically activated FeCoCrNi (EA-FCCN) catalyst. The black and blue oxygen atoms represent lattice and adsorbed oxygen, respectively.93 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of representative TMD (MoS2, WS2, TaS2, and TiS2) nanosheets prepared by facile sonication. (b) LSVs of various TMDs.101 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and TEM images of 3-dimensional MoS2 nanosheets.103 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic illustration of MoS2 nanoplates having large amounts of edge sites which is favorable for alkaline HER.104 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Schematic illustration of synthesizing sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphide thin-film catalysts by a thermolysis method.105 Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Finite-element calculations for the strain distribution and schematic of moiré superlattices formed by S–W–S layer slipping.107 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the in situ growth of NiFeRu-LDH on the Ni foam. (b) Typical SEM image of the NiFeRu-LDH. (c) The HER overpotentials of the NiFe-LDH, NiFeRu-LDH, NiFeAl-LDH, NiFeCo-LDH, and NiFeV-LDH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.133 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) The schematic diagram of in situ growing Co8FeV-LDH nanosheets on carbon cloth by a one-step hydrothermal method. (e) The SEM image of Co8FeV@CC and the partial area magnified SEM image. (f) The value of Rct of Co8FeV@CC, Co4V@CC, Co4Fe@CC and RuO2@CC.134 Copyright 2021, Elsevier B.V. (g) HR-TEM images of NiFe LDH/n-Si. Stability tests (h) and LSVs (i) of NiFe LDH/activated 5 nm a-TiO2/n-Si in various electrolytes.135 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image and (b) EDS elemental mapping of NiFe-DASC. Wavelet Transform (WT)-EXAFS of k2-weighted k-space spectra of (c) Fe for NiFe-DSAC and (d) Ni for NiFe-DSAC. (e) Fourier transformation (FT)-EXAFS spectra of Ni-SAC and NiFe-DASC. (f) LSV curves for the OER of Fe-SAC, Ni-SAC, and NiFe-DASC in O2-saturated 1.0M KOH at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 1 mV s−1.139 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (g) Synthesis of the Fe–N4 SAs/NPC. (h) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images (C red, N yellow, Fe green) and AC HAADF-STEM of the Fe–N4 SAs/NPC. (i) FT at R space (inset: Fe atomic structure model; C gold, N silver, and Fe orange). (j) LSV curves and (k) free energy diagrams for (1) Fe–N4 and (2) Fe–C4 HER.140 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the organic photovoltaic cell connected with an electrochemical cell. (b) LSV curves of two-electrode water splitting cell and OPV.144 Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (c) LSV curves of the Si/perovskite tandem photovoltaic cell and two-electrode water splitting cell with NiFe catalysts. (d) Time-dependent current density curve of the integrated PV–EC device without external bias.145 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of the solar cell and the CV activated MEA. (f) Current density–time curve of the PV–EC device without external bias.146 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
