Near infrared photothermal conversion materials: mechanism, preparation, and photothermal cancer therapy applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TB01310F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TB01310F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 7909-7926Near infrared photothermal conversion materials: mechanism, preparation, and photothermal cancer therapy applications

        
          
            Jie 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wenhui 
            Ji†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jiqing 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nanxiang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wanxia 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiong 
            Wu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiyan 
            Hou
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Wenbo 
            Hu
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Lin 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE) & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), Nanjing 210009, P. R. China. E-mail: iamqwu@njtech.edu.cn; xyhous@dlnu.edu.cn; iamlli@njtech.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization of Ministry of Education, College of Life Science, Dalian Minzu University (DLMU), Dalian 116600, P. R. China
cFrontiers Science Center for Flexible Electronics, Xi’an Institute of Flexible Electronics (IFE) and Xi’an Institute of Biomedical Materials & Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 127 West Youyi Road, Xi'an 710072, P. R. China
Received 
      11th June 2021
    , Accepted 8th August 2021First published on 12th August 2021AbstractPhotothermal therapy (PTT) has been widely applied in cancer therapy as a result of its non-invasive, localized treatment and good therapeutic effect. In general, the final therapeutic effect of PTT mainly depends on the photothermal materials, which can be further considered to be determined by the photothermal conversion efficiency, biocompatibility, and photothermal stability of photothermal materials. In this review, photothermal materials including inorganic materials, organic materials, and organic–inorganic composite materials in recent years have been summarized in terms of the mechanism, preparation, and cancer therapy applications. In the end, the perspectives and obstacles in their further development are overviewed.
1. Introduction
According to a report from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), it was estimated that 19.3 million people worldwide will suffer from cancer and over 10 million will die from it in 2020, which attracted the attention of top researchers in health sciences. Through continuous efforts, cancer therapy has achieved significant progress and classified the main categories clinically, including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.1 With the development of medical technology and the requirement of therapeutic precision, conventional cancer treatment faces the underlying problems of ineffectiveness and constant recurrence.2 Moreover, side effects and drug resistance are still inevitable and encumber the treatment success rate and prognosis.3 Therefore, precise and efficient therapeutics are still the challenges and primary purpose for cancer treatment.
With non-invasiveness, high controllability and precision, photothermal therapy (PTT) has become a promising method in currently updated therapeutic modes.4–6 The most common laser currently used in PTT is near-infrared (NIR) light, which is the reason for NIR light having less tissue absorption and scattering, resulting in deeper tissue penetration depth. NIR light refers to light with a wavelength of 750–1350 nm. This wavelength range, also known as the biological window, can be divided into the first near-infrared (750–1000 nm, NIR-I) window and the second near-infrared (1000–1350 nm, NIR-II) window. Most PTTs focus on NIR-I but their tissue penetration depth is short. In contrast, NIR-II has a greater advantage in PTT because the light in the NIR-II region can provide deeper tissue penetration and higher maximum allowable exposure.7 Specifically, NIR photothermal materials have the superiority of penetration depth in vivo, achieving less biological interferences and better therapeutics in deep tissues.8 Besides, biological cells and tissues have little absorption in the NIR wavelength region and are therefore not subject to low-intensity NIR laser damage.9 Due to these virtues, NIR phtothermal materials have shown applications in cancer therapeutics, such as in PTT.10 Thus, NIR photothermal materials can also be applied in antibacterial agents,11 imaging,12,13 stimulated drug delivery,14 and cancer treatment.15
When exposed to an NIR laser, photothermal materials are able to transform the absorbed laser energy into heat to trigger the death of cancer cells.16 These photothermal materials are injected into the body intravenously and then accumulated into the tumor region via active or passive targeting strategies. Active targeting is mainly achieved by modifying the targeted ligands on the surface of photothermal materials, which specifically bind to certain receptors of the cancer cells. In general, these ligands include small molecules,17 antibodies,18 peptides,19 or aptamers20 based on ligand-receptor interactions to enhance the targeting of photothermal reagents toward the tumors. In addition, the encapsulation of photothermal reagents by the cell membranes can also be applied to improve tumor targeting due to their homologous recognition and homing properties.21,22 Another active targeting strategy is the exploitation of internal or external stimulation signals to induce photothermal reagents to target tumors, including acidity23 and light.24 Passive targeting relies on the enhanced permeability and retention effect (EPR) effect, which is the most common strategy used to enhance tumor targeting, which leads to the accumulation of photothermal reagents at the tumor sites.25,26 Normally, the targeting process of photothermal materials on tumors can be visualized by various imaging techniques. The light energy absorbed by the photothermal material can also be used to emit fluorescence in parallel with heat generation. The emitted fluorescence can be used for fluorescence imaging to monitor the distribution of photothermal reagents in the organism and tumor foci.27 Nevertheless, some conventional organic dyes can cause fluorescence quenching in the aggregated state, which is unfavorable for fluorescence imaging.28 Fortunately, organic materials with aggregation-induced emission (AIE) properties have been found to significantly enhance the fluorescence.29 In addition to emit fluorescence, the heat generated by NIR light-induced photothermal reagents causes a local temperature increase within the tissue, which then generates acoustic waves through thermal expansion and is converted into photoacoustic (PA) images based on the collected acoustic data.30 Photoacoustic imaging (PAI) can monitor the distribution of photothermal reagents within the tumor and the tumor morphology due to its higher resolution and deeper tissue penetration.31 Since the photoacoustic effect is related to the photothermal conversion process, better PAI effects can be obtained by enhancing the photothermal conversion, which mainly includes increasing the light absorption and enhancing the non-radiative relaxation.32,33 Therefore, photothermal materials based on NIR light can not only achieve the specific targeting of tumor sites but also visualize the distribution and morphology of tumors, thus providing better guidance in the PTT process.
On irradiation by an NIR laser with a certain wavelength locally, photothermal materials can be rapidly switched from the ground state to the excited state and then back to the ground state with energy dissipation in the form of heat; thus, the heated tumor would hence be damaged and ablated.34 Therefore, the high photothermal conversion efficiency will improve the efficacy of such a therapy mode. This cannot be generalized as the photothermal conversion efficiency is merely one of the factors affecting the efficacy of PTT. When the photothermal material is irradiated by excitation light, three processes are triggered, namely, absorption, scattering, and reflection. Among the three processes, only the absorbed light can be used for heat generation. Hence, with the same photothermal conversion efficiency, if a photothermal material absorbs more available light (depending on the extinction coefficient),7 the heat generated by the photothermal conversion process will increase proportionally.35 Therefore, the performance of PTT not only depends on the photothermal conversion efficiency but also on the light absorption capacity of the photothermal material. According to the electromagnetic radiation mechanisms, photothermal materials can be categorized into plasmonic localized heating of metals and non-radiative relaxation of semiconducting molecules, including semiconducting polymers and small molecules.36
Recently developed NIR-absorbed photothermal materials can be categorized into inorganic materials, organic materials, and their composites. Commonly used inorganic photothermal materials, involving nano-structured metal,37 carbon nanomaterials,38 and transition-metal sulfides,39 have been applied in catalysts,40 regenerative medicines,41 and solar cells.42 Inorganic materials have advantages such as convenient preparation, strong NIR absorption, modifiability,9 and photostability.43 On the other hand, the potential cytotoxicity induced by the poor biodegradability hinders their clinical application.44 The organic materials involved in NIR organic small molecules and polymers have been applied in biological imaging45 and sensing.46 Compared with inorganic materials, they exhibited superiority in biocompatibility and biodegradability.30 However, the complicated synthetic procedures and poor photostability are still the challenges for the certain organic molecules, which limit further applications.47 Due to the advantages and disadvantages of the above-mentioned photothermal materials, their composites were developed and complemented each other. As the combination of organic and inorganic nanomaterials, organic–inorganic composite materials were formed via the chemical conjugation or physical affinity, which achieved variations in the functioning mechanism and the photoelectric property. Therefore, certain drawbacks of traditional NIR photothermal materials, such as single-function, low photothermal conversion efficiency, and poor biocompatibility could be settled by the integration. Considering this merit, we can achieve better therapeutic efficacy by material selection for imaging, drug delivery, and high photothermal conversion efficiency. Therefore, multifunctional composite materials shall be promising in functionalized PTT.
For this review, the photothermal conversion mechanisms of photothermal materials were clarified, and a summary of photothermal materials was made from both their chemical structures and biological applications (Fig. 1). Detailed illustration is as follows: (1) the chemical, physical, and biological parameters of the photothermal materials were evaluated in terms of the material feasibility, photothermal conversion efficiency, and biocompatibility; (2) the photothermal conversion mechanism of different types of photothermal materials were classified and certain photothermal conversion efficiency were also listed; (3) the preparation methods and the biological applications of photothermal materials were summarized; (4) current obstacles in photothermal material development and prospects in biological applications were also illustrated.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of photothermal materials with the photothermal conversion mechanism and applications in photothermal therapy (PTT). 
2. Photothermal materials evaluation indexes
2.1 Material feasibility
Although some precious metal nanomaterials such as gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) can be developed through a large number of easy-to-operate synthetic methods, the high cost of such materials and unsatisfactory photothermal conversion efficiency limit their development. However, this is not true for all precious metal nanomaterials. For example, titanium nanomaterials offer many outstanding features, which include cheapness, low toxicity as well as excellent photothermal effects. Therefore, photothermal materials with low cost, simple synthetic steps, and excellent performance have also become a factor in the current evaluation of photothermal materials.
2.2 Photothermal conversion efficiency
In recent years, photothermal materials capable of converting absorbed light energy into localized heat have greatly advanced the development of PTT for cancer. The photothermal material is the most important part of the photothermal conversion process, and the photothermal conversion efficiency is the core of the photothermal material because it directly determines the intensity of the irradiated light in the PTT process. The photothermal conversion efficiency of different materials is also limited by different factors. For example, modulating the morphology and structure of gold nanorods can provide a higher photothermal conversion efficiency by adjusting the position of their spectral absorption peaks. However, most of the current photothermal materials used for PTT still need high irradiation intensities that may cause harm to normal skin or tissues; hence, it is also critical to improve the photothermal conversion efficiency while further reducing the irradiation intensity to ensure the safety of in vivo PTT.48
2.3 Biocompatibility
Based on the characteristics of PTT, the selection and requirements for photothermal materials are particularly important in clinical applications, especially the biocompatibility of photothermal materials. Although many photothermal materials with excellent photothermal conversion efficiency have been developed, they are difficult to directly apply in clinical treatment due to their questionable long-term safety. For example, metal nanoparticles have poor biometabolism and carbon-based materials have been shown to induce many toxic reactions such as oxidative stress and lung inflammation. Therefore, improving the biocompatibility of photothermal materials to provide good biohistocompatibility, biodegradability, and low toxicity is also a key factor. Generally speaking, the biocompatibility of materials is evaluated by analyzing the cell viability or toxicity, mainly including 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay,49 Water-Soluble Tetrazolium-1 (WST-1) assay,17 and Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay.50
3. Photothermal conversion mechanism and efficiency calculation
3.1 Photothermal conversion mechanism
The photothermal conversion effect is a phenomenon in which photothermal materials absorb the energy of irradiated light and then transform it into heat by a series of photophysical effects and diffuse it to the external environment. Therefore, the specific photothermal conversion mechanism will vary with different materials. Nowadays, the widely studied photothermal materials can be mainly summarized into the following categories: inorganic materials and organic materials. In this section, we will introduce the photothermal conversion mechanism of these photothermal materials.
Noble metal nanomaterials can absorb photons and transform them into heat via localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect. The generation of hot electrons occurs when electrons on the surface of metallic nanomaterials absorb the energy of photons. The hot electrons will quickly redistribute their energy among abundant low-energy electrons through the electron–electron scattering process and establish an electron temperature. The absorbed photon energy is not completely left in the electron, and part of the energy will be consumed in the form of light. Then, energy will be transferred to the crystal lattice through electron–phonon interactions, causing the thermalization of the lattice. In the end, energy is transferred from the lattice to the external environment through phonon–phonon interaction.51 Since the LSPR effect is related to the size and structures of plasma nanomaterials, their absorption of NIR light can be enhanced by changing their size or structures.52 In addition, the plasma coupling effect is also an effective method to enhance the LSPR effect.53
The photothermal effect of organic materials is mainly caused by the transition of electrons in molecules. When organic molecules are irradiated with the excitation light, it will undergo three processes including absorption, scattering, and transmission. When a photon interacts with a molecule that has the same energy, the energy of the photon is transferred to the molecule, causing the electron in the molecule to transit from the ground state to the excited state. Subsequently, the molecule is converted to the lowest excited singlet state (S1) via vibrational relaxation and internal conversion. When the molecule relaxes to the lowest vibration level of S1, it will return to the ground state mainly through the following two pathways. The first pathway to return to the ground state is through fluorescence emission and the other pathway is through non-radiative transition (e.g., heat generation). The photothermal effect of organic photothermal rematerials is usually due to the occurrence of non-radiative transitions.54 It is worth noting that carbon-based nanomaterials and organic materials share the same photothermal conversion mechanism instead of LSPR.
As fluorescence emission and non-radiative relaxation are the two main pathways for molecules at the lowest vibrational energy level of S1 to return to the ground state, these two pathways are in competition with each other. Accordingly, fluorescence quenching facilitates the enhancement of non-radiative relaxation.55 Furthermore, the molecular motion of the aggregates was also found to enhance non-radiative relaxation.56
Integrating inorganic materials and organic materials through physical or chemical methods to obtain composite materials with significantly improved physical and chemical properties is an important part of the current nanomaterial research field. Taking the surface plasmon resonance coupling material as an example, this material couples a precious metal nanomaterial with the surface plasmon effect with a non-metallic material. Thanks to the characteristics of the two materials, the obtained resonance coupling material has a significant improvement in the efficiency of light-to-heat conversion, and its application prospects are also broader. The clarification of the photothermal conversion mechanism will provide us with basic rules and insights for designing and adjusting photothermal materials to achieve the best photothermal performance.
3.2 Calculation of photothermal conversion efficiency
Since the photothermal effect is mainly due to the photothermal material absorbing the energy of photons and converting it into heat, the converted heat is an important factor for evaluating the photothermal conversion performance of photothermal materials. The photothermal conversion efficiency (η) is usually used as the evaluation standard. Moreover, the photothermal conversion performance of the material is mainly related to the strength of the material for absorbing external radiation and generating phonons.57 Therefore, the following equation can be used to calculate the photothermal conversion efficiency (η).  
In the equation, the maximum temperature of the solute and the ambient temperature are denoted by Tmax and Tsurr, respectively. The laser intensity and the absorption value of the nanocrystal at wavelength λ are denoted as l and A, respectively. The thermal conductivity, area of quartz sample cell, and heat dissipated from light absorbed by the quartz sample cell itself are denoted as h, S, and Qdis, respectively.
4. Preparation and cancer therapy application of photothermal materials
In this section, three types of photothermal materials are reviewed from the aspects of preparation, photothermal conversion mechanism, and cancer treatment applications. Three parameters in chemical, physical, and biological features are used to evaluate photothermal conversion materials. The photothermal materials discussed in Section 4 are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of PTT performance and preparation method of NIR photothermal materials for photothermal cancer therapy




Material morphology
Laser wavelength (nm)
Photothermal conversion efficiency (%)
Preparation method
Ref.




BAuNSP
808
75.5
Redox reactions

52



Ag2S-NDs
785
35.0
Electrostatic interactions and precipitation reactions

70



TiN-PEG NPs
808
48.0
Silane-coupling chemistry

73



FGO-PEG-FA
808
—
Amidating reactions

82



Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs
808
38.0
Controlled hydrothermal growth and coupling reaction

83



Ppy
808
—
Microemulsion method

98



PPy@BSA-Gd
808
—
“One-pot” method

99



D-PPy@PNAs
808
20.2

In situ oxidative polymerization, electrostatic interactions, and π–π interactions

100



mTiO2@PPy-HNK
808
35.3
Soft-templating method and in situ oxidation polymerization

101



PEDOT:PSS-PEG
808
—
LBL self-assembly approach

102



BSA-PANI
808
37.0
Polymerization and in situ self-assembly

109



Fe–Cu@PANI
808
—
One-pot method

110



ACAT-CD
—
92.2
Host–guest interaction

112



TBDOPV-DT
1064
49.2
One-step emulsion method

116



PBIPDI-TT
980
20.3
Stille polymerization

117



DINPs
808
—
Single-step sonication method

124



ICNPs
808
—
Extrusion

128



DPP-Monothiophene
808
65.0
Nanoprecipitation method

131



DPP-TPA
660
34.5
Reprecipitation method

132



PPor-PEG NPs
630
62.3
Nanoprecipitation approach

35



NIRb14
808
31.2
Nanoprecipitation method

136



PEGylated CuNWs
808
12.5
Heating-up method

142



DOX-HPCF
808
—
Michael addition or the Schiff base reaction

146



AuMSS-TPGS-HA
808
—
Sequential condensation

147



FIP-99mTc
808
32.8
Self-assembling

149



mPEG-PEI-AuNRs
808
27.7
Schiff base reaction

151



Au@MOF
1064
48.5
Complexation

156





4.1 Inorganic materials
To date, abundant inorganic nanomaterials have been exploited for the PTT of cancer, mainly including noble metal nanomaterials, transition metal sulfides, and carbon-based nanomaterials. The nanosized inorganic metallic materials such as Au or Ag nanoparticles (NPs) are widely used photothermal materials since their absorption in the NIR region depends mainly on the morphology and structure and is continuously tunable, which is of great importance in photothermal conversion therapy and drug release.
Among noble metals, Au NPs have important applications, including PTT, drug delivery, and cancer cell imaging because of (1) continuous adjustable absorption; (2) more mature synthetic method and easy surface modification; (3) good biocompatibility. When NIR laser is irradiated on Au NPs, the resulting LSPR effect will facilitate the absorption of light by Au NPs and thus convert the absorbed laser energy into heat. Therefore, Au NPs are expected to become photothermal reagents for PTT. During PTT, the energy of the NIR light absorbed by Au NPs is only partially converted into heat for the ablation of cancer cells in vivo. However, the low photothermal conversion efficiency of Au NPs limits its application, making it difficult to become an excellent photothermal material. In order to achieve ideal PTT effect, researchers transformed Au NPs into complex structures, such as Au nanovesicles (NVs),58 Au nanocages (NCs),59 Au nanoshells (NS),52 and Au nanorods (NRs).60 For instance, Liu et al. developed chain vesicles containing strings of Au NPs through self-assembly.61 Strong plasmon coupling between Au NPs in one-dimensional string allows the chain vesicles to exhibit strong absorption in the NIR region (Fig. 2A). As a result, the photoacoustic (PA) imaging efficiency of this chain vesicle was higher than that of non-chain vesicles. Song et al. reported a branched nanoporous gold nanoshell (BAuNSP) with enhanced PTT effect and PA signal (Fig. 2B).52 The nanopores and branch tips on the surface of the BAuNSP material provided various plasma “hot spots” to generate a strong electromagnetic field around the BAuNSP and increased the light absorption efficiency. Correspondingly, the photothermal effect of BAuNSP was greatly improved and its photothermal conversion efficiency reached as high as 75.5%. Unlike other Au nanostructures, AuNRs have two surface plasmon absorption bands: a long-wavelength and weaker short-wavelength band. In addition, it can achieve better PTT effect by adjusting the aspect ratio of AuNRs to control the long wavelength absorption range.37 Due to its adjustable aspect ratio, large-scale synthesis, easy surface modification, and colloidal stability, AuNRs have become a promising photothermal agent for treating cancer via PTT.62 Although there have been many reports on the application of Au NPs for PTT, some challenges still exist before clinical application. One of the most troublesome challenges is the biodegradability of Au NPs in organisms. In order to reduce the residue of Au NPs in organisms, scientists have proposed a number of schemes to reduce their residues in organisms. For instance, small Au NPs are encapsulated into some larger biodegradable substances, which can be decomposed as harmless side-products to enable the release of gold nanoparticles from the organism.63 Recently, Higbee-Dempsey et al. synthesized ultrasmall gold nanoparticles (1.7 ± 0.5 nm in diameter) with a coating of thiolated dextran as well as covalently modified hydrophobic acetal groups (Fig. 3A).64 The “AcetalDextran-Au NPs” (ADAs) were further encapsulated by the amphiphilic block copolymer poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(ε-caprolactone) (PEG-PCL) to form “AcetalDextran-AuNP-Micelles” (ADAMs). ADAMs were dissolved in a serum with pH 5.0 and pH 7.4, respectively, and centrifuged after 24 hours of incubation. The results showed that ultrasmall water-soluble Au NPs were released from ADAMs and were easily dispersed when exposed to acidic conditions. The results of the in vivo assay of mice treated with ADAMs revealed that 86% of the gold in the liver was cleared over 12 weeks, while 72% of the gold in the spleen was cleared within the same period of time. This design strategy of using environmentally sensitive biodegradable materials to encapsulate nanoparticles will further the clinical application of Au NPs.
 Fig. 2  (A) Chain vesicles and non-chain vesicles of Au nanoparticles (NPs). Adapted with permission from ref. 61 copyright 2015 Wiley Online Library. (B) Schematic diagram for the preparation of branched nanoporous gold nanoshell (BAuNSP) by the “one-step” approach with polymer NPs with reducing activity as the templates and the reducing agent. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  (A) Dissociation of AcetalDextran-Au NPs micelles in acidic lysosomes leading to dispersion of AuNPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 64 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Precise synthesis of Ag2S nanodots with imaging and therapeutic potential in albumin nanocages. Adapted with permission from ref. 70 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Another commonly used noble metal, silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs), is also an optional photothermal material with large surface-to-volume ratio and enhanced optical performance.65 Similar to Au NPs, Ag NPs will generate the LSPR effect, thereby allowing them to be employed in the PTT of cancer.66 Nevertheless, Ag NPs possess non-negligible cytotoxicity related to many factors, such as particle size, shape, dose, and surface coatings.67 Ag2S NPs have shown promising application potential in PTT and fluorescence imaging owing to its good NIR absorbance, photothermal conversion capability, and small size.68,69 Nevertheless, there is still a lack of the rational design of Ag2S nanostructures to satisfy the needs of clinical cancer therapy. Researchers have found that bovine serum albumin (BSA) or ferritin can be used to synthesize hollow inorganic nanoparticles nanocages, showing the advantages of the simple method, reproducibility, good biocompatibility, and good stability. Inspired by this, Chen et al. reported size-dependent Ag2S nanodots (NDs) that provide NIR-II fluorescence/PA imaging and PTT.70 Ag2S-NDs were prepared through simple chemical reactions using clinically accepted materials under mild conditions: mixing human serum albumin (HSA) with AgNO3, followed by the adjustment of the mixed solution to be alkaline (pH = 12.0) so as to produce hollow expansive albumin nanocages. Biodistribution increased in the hollow swollen albumin nanocages through the precipitation reaction (Fig. 3B). It is worth noting that Ag2S-NDs could control the growth rate by controlling the reaction time and initial reactant ratio, which may help to maximize its absorption of NIR light. Ag2S-NDs with the same concentration of different diameters were irradiated with 785 nm NIR laser for 5 minutes; Ag2S-NDs were in possession of the highest photothermal conversion efficiency (35.0%). Interestingly, it was also observed that the NIR-II fluorescence intensity and blood circulation time of Ag2S-NDs were positively correlated with the particle size. In addition, owing to the thermoelastic expansion of Ag2S-NDs, they were also observed to generate PA signals. Consequently, Ag2S-NDs possessed the potential for fluorescence imaging and PA. The biodistribution, retention ability, and in vivo elimination of Ag2S-NDs were assessed via intravenous injection into the mice with 4T1 tumors, good tumor accumulation, relatively long-term retention, and elimination of most Ag2S-NDs from major tissues over 30 days were observed. These characteristics have all confirmed that Ag2S-NDs had good biocompatibility. The intravenous injection of Ag2S-NDs in mice bearing 4T1 tumors at different doses, followed by irradiation (785 nm) 24 hours post-injection, caused concentration-dependent temperature elevations (7.7, 12.5, 19.0 °C).
Although many plasmonic photothermal metallic nanomaterials have been developed in PTT, there are still some obstacles before the clinical application of cancer therapy, including high price, undesirable photothermal efficiency, and severe cytotoxicity. Before being developed into a photothermal reagent, safety and non-polluting permit titanium nitride (TiN) NPs to be employed in medical and food fields.71 TiN NPs was shown to absorb NIR light on account of their LSPR spectral position that occurs in the NIR regions.72 He et al. explored the potential of utilizing TiN NPs as therapeutic reagents for the photothermal treatment of cancer.73 Because of easy aggregation in physiological solutions and easy clarity in vivo, TiN NPs were coated by PEG to enhance their stability and endow them with antifouling activity via the silane-coupling chemistry in aqueous solution. After PEGylation, TiN-PEG NPs obtained better dispersibility and stability in physiological solutions. Owing to the LSPR effect of TiN NP, TiN-PEG NP can effectively absorb NIR light and convert it into heat. For instance, it was observed to have a maximum temperature increase of 29.5 °C when TiN-PEG NPs of various concentrations were under NIR laser irradiation for 10 minutes. Moreover, TiN NPs possessed high photothermal conversion efficiency up to 48% and good photothermal stability. TiN-PEG NPs showed slight cytotoxicity using the standard MTT assay, good blood compatibility using the hemolysis test, and no apparent side effect to the major organs using histology analysis, which suggested that they are suitable for in vivo applications. In the blood circulation assay of TiN-PEG NPs, it was demonstrated that they circulated in the blood for more than 2 hours. Their blood circulation halftime was also calculated to be 1.1 hours, which is likely attributed to the coated PEG. Following that, TiN-PEG NPs were injected into the HeLa-bearing mice to observe the tumors, and the results showed that the progressively enhanced PA signal was observed at the tumor site, confirming that they could effectively accumulate in the tumor site. After 24 hours of intravenous administration, laser irradiation induced a tumor temperature increase up to 52 °C within 10 minutes, which was sufficient to kill the tumors. The H&E staining of the tumor slices also confirmed the above results. Therefore, TiN NPs have been successfully applied to PA and PTT in cancer models, which confirmed their potential for photothermal cancer therapy. Although plasmonic metallic nanoparticles have been widely applied in PTT, the potential toxicity of plasmonic metallic nanoparticles for in vivo applications and optimizing the structural design to improve the photothermal conversion effect still need further exploration.
Other commonly used inorganic photothermal materials are carbon-based nanomaterials, mainly including graphene,74 graphene oxide (GO),75 reduced graphene oxide (rGO),76 and carbon nanotubes.77 These carbon-based nanomaterials exhibit some excellent properties including high surface areas, easy surface functionalization, small size, and excellent electrical and optical properties. Due to carbon-based materials possessing the characteristics of strongly absorbing NIR light, when they are exposed to NIR light, the molecules are excited from the ground state to the lowest excited singlet state. The molecules in the excited state are unstable, and then they will emit fluorescence or non-radiation. The non-radiative relaxation pathway decays back to the ground state in a way that produces the photothermal effect.78 Unlike metallic nanoparticles, carbon-based nanomaterials are independent of their geometry because they show obvious absorption and scattering along the whole biological spectral range.9 Nevertheless, graphene and its derivatives have poor dispersibility and stability in physiological environments, which greatly restricts their biomedical application. Encouragingly, researchers have solved this problem by modifying carbon-based nanomaterials with polyacrylic acid (PAA), polyethylene glycol (PEG), and other hydrophilic groups.79–81 The issues were mainly addressed by covalent functionalization or non-covalent interactions. A multifunctional nanofluorinated graphene oxide (FGO) with a modifiable surface, high photoluminescence emission, high drug loading capacity, and NIR absorption has been produced by Gong et al.82 Although the unique electronic structure of fluorinated graphene (FG) nanosheets makes it higher NIR photothermal absorption, FG is highly hydrophobic and chemically inert owing to the presence of fluorine. As a result, it can not deliver drugs as well as hinder the modification of functional groups. To this end, they adjusted the size of the large FG sheets to nanoscale and modified it with oxygen groups to obtain FGO. Then, NH2-modified polyethylene glycol (H2N-PEG-NH2) was linked with folic acid (FA, a tumor target molecule) through amidation reactions. The synthesized H2N-PEG-FA further reacted with FGO to get FGO-PEG-FA with good solubility in physiological solutions and capability of loading both camptothecin (CPT) and doxorubicin (DOX). After a series of modifications, the prepared FGO-PEG-FA exhibited better photothermal effect; the FGO-PEG-FA solution gave rise to a maximum temperature increase (up to 65 °C) under laser irradiation. Apart from this, FGO-PEG-FA was also endowed with the ability of monitoring the drug loading process by naked eyes, which is attributed to the inner filter effect (IFE). Furthermore, FGO-PEG-FA was observed to possess high drug loading rate with a loading ratio of 350% at a DOX concentration of 2 mg mL−1, and that of CPT was 40%. The interaction between FGO and the drug was also analyzed; the results indicated that fluorine atoms provide more active sites for drug loading and FGO delivers drugs via non-covalent interactions. The combination therapy of FGO-PEG-FA, DOX, CPT, and NIR revealed the best cancer therapeutic effects compared with any other therapeutic group (Fig. 4A), thereby confirming its potential in the PTT of cancer. As the product of oxidation and exfoliation of graphene, GO possesses improved dispersibility and colloidal stability due to the interaction between oxidizing functional groups and water molecules. Furthermore, GO has been employed in multiple biomedical applications including drug delivery, biosensing, antibacterial, PTT, and photodynamic therapy (PDT). Zhang et al. synthesized a multifunctional nanoplatform with good photothermal properties and biocompatibility for the synergetic treatment of lung cancer.83 First, they prepared a core–shell structure of Au-His@a-ZnO that contains a ZnO shell on the surface of gold nanoparticles by the hydrothermal method under the presence of L-histidine (His). Then, Au-His@a-ZnO was integrated into the planar structure of PEGylated graphene oxide (PEG-GO) by the carbodiimide crosslinker chemical method and obtained the GO@Au-His@a-ZnO nanocomposites (NCs). It was encouraging to observe an increase of 33 °C from an initial value of 25 °C when GO@Au-His@a-ZnO NCs was irradiated with a laser for 5 minutes, and its photothermal conversion efficiency was calculated to be 38%. These results revealed that GO@Au-His@a-ZnO NCs can generate excellent photothermal effect under NIR irradiation. In order to improve the cancer therapeutic outcomes, Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO NCs (anti-EGFR Apt (antibody of epidermal growth factor receptor aptamer) conjugated with GO@Au-His@a-ZnO NCs through EDC/NHS coupling method) as a lung cancer cell targeting agent and DOX as an anticancer drugs were simply mixed with Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO NCs to obtain Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs. Then, the drug release behavior and cancer cell targeting behavior of Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs were evaluated in the A549 (lung cancer) cell, A549 cell, and H522 cells (non-small lung cancer). The results suggested that NIR laser irradiation facilitates the release of DOX from Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs in cells and Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO @DOX NCs possess high targeting efficacy toward A549 cells. These evidences provide the possibility of Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs applied in targeted therapy of cancer via PTT and chemotherapy. Almost all cell death was observed under the condition of incubating Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs with A549 cells for 4 hours under irradiation, and this combination therapy was confirmed to represent the best therapeutic effect among all the assayed groups. Since the EPR effects and EGFR receptor increased the retention time and accumulation of Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs in A549-bearing nude tumor mice, they generated more heat than that of GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs under irradiation (Fig. 4B) and improved the delivery efficiency of DOX. Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs with irradiation exhibited significant synergistic effects, and the tumors in A549 tumor-bearing nude mice were almost completely eliminated. Moreover, the synergistic therapy significantly prevented the proliferation of A549 transplanted cancer and resulted in the damage of cancer cells. The toxicity of in vivo therapy had also been evaluated by measuring the body weight, organ indices, biodistribution, and biochemical indicators; these toxicity studies suggested that Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs exhibited good biocompatibility. All in all, the multifunctional Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs present a fascinating prospect for the combined therapy of cancer. Overall, numerous inorganic photothermal nanomaterials have been employed for PTT cancer treatment, and great advancement in the exploration of constructing high-performance multifunctional nanocomposites for cancer treatment has been achieved. However, the long-term toxicity of inorganic photothermal nanomaterials is still unclear, thereby demanding great attention.
 Fig. 4  (A) Viability of HeLa cells treated with various therapeutic patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2018 Elsevier. (B) The variation of the tumor temperature in tumor-bearing mice irradiated with laser within 5 minutes. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Organic materials
Although several inorganic photothermal nanomaterials have been developed, most of them still have inevitable shortcomings. For instance, the existing inorganic photothermal reagents for PTT face issues of high cost, poor stability in physiological environment, and physiological toxicity, which will hinder their clinical translation. Organic photothermal nanomaterials have increasingly drawn attention in PTT owing to their adjustable structure and photophysical properties, large molar extinction coefficient in NIR region, good biocompatibility, and better photostability.84–86 In general, organic photothermal nanomaterials hold independent optical properties and better biocompatibility compared with inorganic photothermal nanomaterials.30 Nevertheless, some organic photothermal reagents such as cyanine dyes have poor photostability, and the photobleaching phenomenon occurs when they are left for a long time or exposed to light.87 Encouragingly, some measures have been undertaken to improve their photostability.88 Organic photothermal materials commonly used in PTT mainly include the following categories: conjugated polymers and small organic molecules.
Conjugated polymers consisting of large π-conjugated backbones have emerged as promising photothermal reagents in PTT due to their tailorable molecular structures, large absorption coefficient, high photothermal conversion efficiency, and good biocompatibility.89–92 Since conjugated polymers possess π-electrons that can easily cause delocalization and transition, they can convert absorbed light energy into heat. Nevertheless, large π-conjugation makes them hydrophobic, thereby causing aggregation in the aqueous solution.93 At present, a number of conjugated polymer materials, such as polypyrrole (PPy), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), polyaniline (PANI), and donor–acceptor (D–A) structured conjugated polymers, have been empolyed as photothermal materials for cancer therapy. In general, most conjugated polymers are synthesized by the oxidative coupling of monocyclic precursors. The common preparation methods of conjugated polymers nanoparticles include mini-emulsion and nano-precipitation.94
PPy has been broadly implemented in organic electronics95 and biomedical applications96 due to its electrical conductivity, strong NIR absorption, and better biocompatibility. Generally, PPy nanoparticles are obtained by the oxidative coupling reaction of monocyclic precursors, i.e., an oxidizing agent (FeCl3) is added to the aqueous solution of the pyrrole monomer for polymerization.97 Appropriate surface modification can improve the stability of PPy nanoparticles in physiological environments. Yang et al. successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using PPy for the PTT of cancer.98 Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as the stabilizer and Fe3+ as the catalyst were mixed to prepare PVA-coated PPy with excellent stability in physiological solution via a microemulsion approach. The studies confirmed that the prepared PPy nanoparticles were able to effectively ablate the cancer cells under laser irradiation with ultra-low power density. The co-incubation of PPy with 4T1 cancer cells and then irradiation with different power intensities of laser light was carried out; the results revealed that the cell death increased with increasing laser power density. However, cells not cultured with PPy survived almost entirely even at the highest power density of irradiation. After intratumorally injecting PPy into the tumors in 4T1 tumor mouse, the temperature of the tumors rose to 55–60 °C within 5 minutes under NIR laser irradiation, which showed that they possess better photothermal conversion capability. Subsequent representative photos (Fig. 5A) of different groups of treated mice and the H&E staining of the tumor slices indicated that the tumors injected with PPy were effectively eliminated after irradiation. After in vivo therapy, blood analysis and histological examinations revealed that no distinct hepatic or kidney disorder, organ damage, or inflammation was observed in the mice. The results mentioned above all suggested that PVA-coated PPy nanoparticles with good biocompatibility could emerge as a potential photothermal reagent for cancer therapy. Besides, BSA can also be used as a stabilizer in the synthetic process. For example, Yang et al. synthesized albumin-gadolinium (Gd) stabilized PPy nanoparticles by one-step aqueous dispersion polymerization.99 Gadolinium chloride solution and PPy were added sequentially to the BSA solution, and then potassium peroxydisulfate (KPS) as the oxidizing agent of PPy was introduced into the mixed solution to prepare PPy@BSA-Gd by biomimetic mineralization under alkaline conditions (Fig. 5B). The prepared PPy@BSA-Gd displayed good physiological stability, biocompatibility, and long blood circulation time. In addition, PPy@BSA-Gd possesses better stability and photothermal property, which could effectively ablate the tumors in 4T1 tumor bearing mice under an NIR laser.
 Fig. 5  (A) Representative photos of mice bearing 4T1 tumors after various treatments. Adapted with permission from ref. 98 copyright 2012 Wiley Online Library. (B) Illustration scheme for the fabrication of polypyrrole@bovine serum albumin-Gd (PPy@BSA-Gd). Adapted with permission from ref. 99 copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Although PPy has been exploited as an PTT material for cancer therapy, the integration of PTT with other therapies will show greater advantages. Recently, Geng et al. constructed polymeric nanogels for precisely synergistic photothermo-chemotherapy.100 Weak base pyrrole as the monomer was added to poly(acrylic acid-b-N-isopropylamide-b-acrylic acid) (PNA) to form pyrrole-solubilized PNA micelles by self-assembly, in which PNA as the template and the stabilizer was exploited for the synthesis of PPy@PNA nanogels by redox polymerization in the pyrrole-solubilized PNA micelles (Fig. 6). The resultant PPy@PNA nanogels displayed desirable photothermal conversion efficiency (20.2%) and better photothermal stability when irradiated with an NIR laser. The carboxyl group of PNA and the PPy conjugated structure are capable of forming ionic bonds as well as π–π interactions with DOX, respectively, which allows the loading of more DOX on the PPy@PNA nanogels (D-PPy@PNAs). It was found that D-PPy@PNAs exhibit both NIR-induced pulse release and specific release in an acidic environment. Moreover, D-PPy@PNAs showed splendid colloidal stability in various biological media within 7 days. When D-PPy@PNAs nanoparticles were co-incubated with HepG2 cells under NIR irradiation, the fluorescence of DOX was available all over the tumor cells, indicating that the NIR laser may induce the in situ release of DOX in the cells. The cytotoxicity of D-PPy@PNAs was researched by incubating them with mouse fibroblast and HepG2 cells; the results of MTT revealed that they have better cytocompatibility. After the in vitro assay, the combination of D-PPy@PNAs and the NIR laser exhibited the best therapeutic effect on the HepG2 cells, which may be contributed to the therapeutic effect, which resulted in complete tumor growth suppression and considerable tumor volume reduction after 14 days of treatment. In contrast, the tumor volume in the other groups showed varying degrees of growth. The above results proved that D-PPy@PNAs with favorable biocompatibility are a promising nanoplatform for synergistic photothermochemotherapy of the tumors. Furthermore, the synergistic mechanism of D-PPy@PNAs concluded that the tumor cells underwent apoptosis through chemotherapeutic sensibilization induced by NIR-PTT. H22-tumor-bearing mice were employed to investigate the in vivo antitumor efficacy of D-PPy@PNAs; an evident temperature increase to 47.9 °C was observed after NIR irradiation at 0.5 hour post-injection, which indicated outstanding in vivo photothermal effect. By observing six mice with different treatments, D-PPy@PNAs with NIR irradiation held the best capability and suitable structure for cancer treatment. In addition to chemotherapy, sonodynamic therapy (SDT) can also be combined with PTT to achieve the efficient treatment of tumors. He et al. fabricated PPy-coated mesoporous TiO2 nanocomposites (mTiO2@PPys) that integrated PTT, chemotherapy, SDT, and imaging for the first time.101 First of all, mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticles (mTiO2) were synthesized by the soft-templating method, and then iron (III) chloride as the oxidant and pyrrole as the monomer were used to prepare mTiO2@PPys through in situ oxidation polymerization. In this study, the use of mTiO2 instead of TiO2 commonly used in sonodynamic therapy is to achieve higher drug delivery effect between PTT and chemotherapy. mTiO2 not only acted as the sonosensitizer capable of generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) in SDT but also acted as the drug carrier in chemotherapy. Irradiated with an NIR laser, mTiO2@PPys exhibited good photothermal effect, which was positively correlated with the concentration, and their photothermal conversion efficiency approximately equaled 35.3%. To verify the feasibility of mTiO2@PPy for SDT, mTiO2@PPy was found to generate ROS effectively under ultrasound (US) irradiation both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, the biocompatibility of mTiO2@PPy was evaluated on HepG2 and 4T1 cells. The MTT assay results showed that after incubating with the cells for 24 hours, most of the cells could still showed high vitality even in the presence of high concentrations of 400 mg mL−1 mTiO2@PPy. In contrast, honokiol (HNK, an antitumor drug)-loaded mTiO2@PPy (mTiO2@PPy-HNK) displayed obvious cytotoxicity under laser and US irradiation, which could be attributed to the synergistic effects of chemotherapy, PTT, and SDT. Therefore, mTiO2@PPy-HNK could effectively kill the tumor cells under the irradiation of laser and US. To further certify the antitumor effect of mTiO2@PPy-HNK, 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were employed as the models. Injecting different materials into 4T1 tumor-bearing mice intravenously and observing the tumor growth in the mice, it was found that mice injected with mTiO2@PPy-HNK and exposed to laser and ultrasound showed great tumor growth inhibition compared with the other groups in the first 10 days. The tumors were observed to gradually ablate in the last 6 days, which indicated that mTiO2@PPY-HNK with laser and ultrasound has the best therapeutic effect among all the groups. Besides, mTiO2@PPy-HNK with laser and ultrasound could also inhibit the spread and metastasis of the tumors. In short, mTiO2@PPy-HNK can effectively the treat tumors through the synergistic effects of chemotherapy, PTT, and SDT.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the preparation of doxorubicin-loaded poly(acrylic acid-b-N-isopropylamide-b-acrylic acid) nanogels (D-PPy@PNA) and photothermochemotherapy application. Adapted with permission from ref. 100 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to PPY, PEDOT:PSS has emerged as a photothermal reagent in the PTT of cancer results due to its strong NIR absorption. Cheng et al. synthesized PEDOT:PSS-PEG nanoparticles by a layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly procedure.102 After conjugating PEDOT:PSS with PEG, the prepared PEDOT:PSS-PEG exhibited improved stability and long half-life of blood circulation in physiological environment. Moreover, the cellular toxicity of PEDOT:PSS-PEG solutions on both the 4T1 cells and 293T cells were assayed via the standard MTT assay; it was found that PEDOT:PSS-PEG solutions did not show a significant decrease in the cell viability while PEDOT:PSS had dose-dependent cytotoxicity. After injecting PEDOT:PSS-PEG into 4T1 tumor-bearing mice for 24 hours and 48 hours, they exhibited high tumor accumulation, which was explained by the EPR effect. Then, the anti-tumor studies of PEDOT:PSS-PEG were investigated on 4T1 tumor-bearing mice. The results showed that the temperature of the tumor increased from the initial 30 °C to 51 °C within 48 hours after the intravenous injection and that the tumor was mostly eliminated within 10 days. During the photothermal treatment of tumors, there was no evident toxic effect and body weight decrease within the mice. In addition, no distinct organ damage and inflammatory lesions were found in the major organs of the mice. The above results strongly proved PEDOT:PSS-PEG with good biocompatibility could effectively ablate the cancer.
Compared with the above several conjugated polymers, PANI is the first conjugated polymer reported to be used in tumor PTT owing to its low cost, good biocompatibility and stability, and strong NIR absorbance.103,104 PANI exists in two oxidation states, namely, emerald base (EB) and emerald salt (ES), which can be interconverted by protonation and deprotonation reactions in different pH environments.105 However, this conversion needs to be carried out in an acidic environment with pH < 4.0, which is much lower than that of the tumor acidic microenvironment (5.4–7.0).106 Encouragingly, in the presence of dopants for protonation (acids and transition metals), the EB state will be converted to the ES state, causing a red shift in the absorption peak of PANI from the visible region to the NIR region, which exhibits a promising potential for PTT.107,108 In spite of this, the protonated PANI still has some urgent problems to be solved. For instance, most of the acid self-doped PANI is only soluble under alkaline conditions and the long-term toxicity of transition metals has not been explored in-depth. Therefore, it is essential to design PANI-based reagents that are more biocompatible and suitable to the acidic microenvironment of tumors. To this end, Tian et al. made use of BSA and PANI to prepare a tumor pH-responsive PANI-based theragnostic material for the PA and PTT of tumors.109 To start with, the hydrophobic PANI was obtained via chemical oxidative polymerization using aniline as the monomer and Fe3+ as the oxidant under acidic conditions. Then, the hydrophobic PANI underwent self-assembly with the amphiphilic protein BSA through hydrophobic interaction to create nanoparticles (BSA-PANI) that are more sustainable, which possess good biocompatibility and hydrophilicity. Moreover, self-doping effect occurs between the carboxyl groups of BSA and the imine moieties of the PANI backbone (Fig. 7), which enables the absorption peak of PANI to redshift from the visible to the NIR region under higher pH conditions (pH < 7.0). In vitro pH-responsive PA and PTT properties test, PA intensity, and PTT performance of BSA-PANI at pH 5.4 and 6.5 were significantly stronger than that at pH 7.4, and the photothermal conversion efficiency of BSA-PANI was calculated to be 37%. The above results indicated that BSA-PANI displayed favorable PAI performance and PTT. Significant changes in the PA intensity were only found at the tumor site while slight changes in other tissues after the intravenous injection of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were observed. The in vivo PTT performance were also performed on the same mice model. Under NIR laser irradiation, the temperature at the tumor site increased by 20.5 °C after 12 hours of intravenous injection of BSA-PANI, while the temperature of mice treated with PBS increased a little under the same irradiation conditions. After treating with BSA-PANI and irradiation, the tumors in mice were almost completely eliminated and the therapeutic effects were better than any other groups. The staining results of the histological sections showed that BSA-PANI cannot cause obvious blood vessel damage and cell necrosis, and the main organs of the mice treated with BSA-PANI and irradiation were almost the same as that of normal healthy mice. Thus, BSA-PANI with good biocompatibility were demonstrated to be promising agents for pH-responsive PA and PTT of tumors. Recently, Wang et al. prepared an iron-copper co-doped polyaniline nanoparticle (Fe–Cu@PANI) for the PA and PTT of tumors via the one-pot method.110 Glutathione (GSH) can be used as a biomarker for predicting cancer because its concentration in cancer cells is significantly higher than that in normal cells.111 Cu(II) in the nanoparticles can generate protons by redox reaction with GSH at the tumor site, which can promote the protonation of PANI and eventually redshifted the absorption spectrum of Fe–Cu@PANI, accompanied by the etching of nanoparticles. Thus, Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles can generate heat under NIR irradiation and induce PA and PTT in the tumor microenvironment. By recording the PA signal of the Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticle solution after reaction with GSH, the PA intensity progressively improved with increasing GSH concentration. After that, the tumors of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were evaluated with PA, and it was discovered that the intensity of PA at the tumor site was remarkably stronger than that of other tissues, and a noticeable PA signal was still apparent at the tumor site after 24 hours. After the co-incubation of Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles with HL-7702 cells for 24 hours, it was discovered that more cancer cells were actually eliminated compared with those not irradiated by the laser, indicating that Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles can be applied for the PTT of tumors. Later, Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles were injected into the 4T1 tumor-bearing mice to evaluate the in vivo therapeutic effect. Irradiating with the NIR laser at 1.0 hour post-injection of Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles, the temperature at the tumor site rose rapidly increased from the initial temperature of 36.7 °C to 55.6 °C while it only increased to 40.3 °C in the PBS group. Observing the photos of mice from different groups at different time periods after administration, only by injecting Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles and irradiating with the laser did it show obvious inhibitory effect on the tumors. In summary, the prepared Fe–Cu@PANI nanoparticles provides a new way to activate PA and PTT in the tumor microenvironment and great potential for the PTT of cancer. Similarly, a photothermal composite with pH-sensitive properties was prepared by Xu et al.112 In detail, they synthesized a complex consisting of amine-capped aniline trimer (ACAT) as photothermal reagents and β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) as enhancing the water solubility of ACAT through host–guest interactions. The absorption peak of the resulting ACAT-CD complex exhibited a significant redshift (from 590 nm to 776 nm), when it was exposed to an acidic environment. Under the irradiation of NIR light, the results revealed that the ACAT-CD solution at pH 5.0 exhibited the strongest temperature increase compared to that in pure water and at pH 7.4, and its photothermal conversion efficiency was calculated to reach an ultrahigh value of 92.2%. Subsequently, the therapeutic effect of the ACAT-CD complex in tumor-bearing mice was investigated under different treatments. The temperature of the tumors injected with ACAT-CD was found to be elevated by approximately 25.1 °C relative to the body temperature under NIR light irradiation, which is much higher than that of injected saline. During the three weeks of treatment, tumors injected with ACAT-CD and irradiated with NIR light were effectively ablated, while the tumors in the control groups showed multiplicative increase. In addition, no apparent damage was found in other major organs in the mice. In a nutshell, the ACAT-CD complex was proved to be a promising pH-sensitive photothermal reagent with better selectivity and powerful photothermal conversion capabilities.
 Fig. 7  The process of BSA-polyaniline (PANI) preparation for photoacoustic imaging (PAI) and PTT treatment and its potential formation mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 109 copyright 2019 Wiley Online Library. 
Conjugated polymers with D–A structures have become a class of photothermal reagents with wide interest owing to their extended light absorption and high photothermal conversion efficiency.113–115 By designing D–A structures, the bandgap of the conjugated polymers can be reduced, thus causing a redshift in the absorption peak and improving the absorption of NIR light.89 Cao et al. reported a narrow bandgap D–A conjugated polymer with the maximum absorption peak located in the NIR-II window.116 They utilized thiophene-fused benzodifurandione-based oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (TBDOPV) as the acceptor and 2,2′-bithiophene (DT) as the donor to obtain the desired conjugated polymer TBDOPV-DT by the Stille coupling polymerization. The results of the CCK-8 assay indicated that TBDOPV-DT NPs would not induce a significant decrease in the cell viability even at high concentrations, and its photothermal conversion efficiency was calculated to be 49.2%. These results showed the potential advantages of TBDOPV-DT for biological applications such as the phototherapy of cancer. Zhang et al. also designed a D–A conjugated polymer with a remarkably low bandgap as well as superior photothermal conversion performance.117 The D–A conjugated polymer (PBIPDI-TT) was prepared using (3E,7E)-3,7-bis(4-(2-decyltetradecyl)-4H-thieno[3,2-b]pyrrole-5,6-dione)-5,7-dihydropyrrolo[2,3-f]indole-2,6(1H,3H)-dione (BTPDI) as the acceptor and thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) as the donor prepared via Stille polymerization. By observing the absorption spectrum of PBIPDI-TT in solution, it was found that it has the strongest light absorption at about 970 nm. Consequently, the photothermal conversion ability of PBIPDI-TT NPs was studied under NIR laser irradiation (980 nm). PBIPDI-TT NPs exhibited good photostability and relatively high photothermal conversion efficiency (20.3%), which demonstrated its advantages as photothermal reagents.
In addition to conjugated polymers, some small organic molecules such as cyanine dyes, diketopyrrolopyrrole, and phthalocyanine have attracted extensive attention in biomedicine. Since most cyanide dyes intensely absorb light energy and turn it into thermal energy or singlet oxygen, exerting a therapeutic effect, therefore, they have been widely used in biological probes118 and photothermal reagents.84 Nevertheless, they also have some shortcomings, such as poor solubility in aqueous solutions and low photostability.119 In this regard, some measures have been taken to overcome these shortcomings by encapsulating small molecule dyes in micelles, liposomes, and porous nanostructures.120–122 As one of the typical representatives of cyanine dyes, indocyanine green (ICG) has been approved for clinical imaging by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and it can also be used as a photothermal agent as well as an efficient photosensitizer (PS) in PDT and PTT, respectively.123 Zheng et al. loaded DOX and ICG onto poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)-lecithin-polyethylene glycol to create nanoparticles (DINPs) by the sonication method (Fig. 8A).124 Using the encapsulation effect of PLGA, it is possible to avoid the undesirable characteristics of ICG, such as easy aggregation and poor stability in aqueous solution, and easy removal in blood. Thus, the encapsulation of ICG exhibited enhanced fluorescence stability compared with these free ICG (Fig. 8B); meanwhile, laser-irradiated nanoparticle DINPs exhibit promising possibilities for cancer targeting imaging and chemotherapy-photothermal therapy. Nevertheless, conventional nanoparticles are easily recognized by the immune system and eliminated by the liver and kidneys.125 NPs coated with cell membranes have received widespread attention owing to their prolonged blood circulation time, reduced immunogenicity, and active targeting ability, which can improve the biocompatibility and therapeutic effects.126,127 Chen et al. used cancer cell membranes to encapsulate nanoparticles ICG/PLGA, thereby forming core–shell structures (ICNPs).128 The obtained ICNPs have a classic core–shell structure and the ICG showed improved encapsulation and release in cancer MCF-7 cell membrane vesicles. More importantly, ICNPs displayed the homologous targeting of cancer MCF-7 cells on account of the cellular adhesion molecules on the cancer cell membranes for the specific targeting of the source cells through homologous binding mechanisms (Fig. 9A). Fluorescence imaging and PA images of nude mice with MCF-7 tumors revealed a significant tumor accumulation effect of ICNPs 24 hours after injection, which may be attributed to the specific targeting ability of the nanoparticle surface. The highest temperature of 55.3 °C was found in nude mice with MCF-7 tumors that were injected with ICNPs using laser irradiation, while the growth of the MCF-7 tumors was completely suppressed and did not reappear within 18 days (Fig. 9B). In addition, both H&E staining and blood biochemistry tests illustrated that ICNPs possessed low toxicity in vivo. All in all, the strategy of using cell membranes to encapsulate nanoparticles to achieve homogenous targeting can provide a reference for cancer targeted therapy.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of doxorubicin (DOX) and indocyanine green (ICG) loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)–lecithin–polyethylene glycol (PEG) nanoparticles (DINPs) using single-step sonication. (B) Fluorescence imaging of nude mice within 24 hours after intratumoral injection of free ICG and DINPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 124 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic of ICG-loaded and cancer cell membrane-coated nanoparticles (ICNPs) with homologous targeting for dual-modality imaging (fluorescence and photoacoustic (PA) imaging), and imaging-guided photothermal therapy. (B) Diagram of the tumor treatment effect of PTT in mice with MCF-7 tumors under different materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) is a typical electron withdrawing group with a planar structure and has been employed for the PTT of cancer because of its high absorption coefficient and excellent photostability.129,130 In addition, it also possesses the characteristics of good flatness, easy modification, and electron deficiency. Therefore, when it is combined with electron donors, its optical band gap can be adjusted to the NIR region to obtain stronger near-infrared absorption. For instance, Li et al. synthesized four D–A conjugated polymers (CPs) (CP1–CP4) containing DPP and various thiophene derivatives (monothiophene, thienothiophene, bithiophene, and benzodithiophene) using the Stille coupling reaction.131 Subsequently, the four synthesized D–A CPs (CP1–CP4) were respectively prepared into four small-sized conjugated polymer dots (Pdots) (Pdots 1–4) through a nanoprecipitation method. It is worth noting that Pdot-1 (DPP-monothiophene) showed the best photothermal effect among the four polymer dots. The photothermal conversion efficiency of Pdot-1 was as high as 65% when Pdot-1 was irradiated by an NIR laser. Moreover, Pdot-1 was observed to possess better photostability than ICG and almost complete tumor elimination under laser irradiation. By transforming similar small organic molecules with electron deficiency into nanoparticles based on the donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) system, the photothermal efficiency and light stability could be greatly improved compared to the single organic small molecules. This will provide us with an alternative strategy for developing multifunctional biomaterials based on PTT. Dong et al. introduced triphenylamine (TPA) as an electron donor group in the D–A–D structure containing diketopyrrolopyrrole.132 After forming the nanoparticles, the prepared DPP-TPA NPs have a sharp NIR absorption peak at 660 nm. The photothermal conversion efficiency of DPP-TPA NPs was achieved to be 34.5% and the yield of singlet oxygen was about 33.6% under laser irradiation at 660 nm. When the tumors of the mice were exposed to the same power of the laser, the tumors were totally eradicated and no tumor regression appeared. The above results demonstrated that multifunctional DPP-TPA NPs with D–A–D can promote the efficiency of imaging-guided PTT/PDT.
Porphyrin is a typical heterocyclic compound with tetrapyrrole interaction structure formed by methine bridge interconnection.133 Another typical organic macromolecule with tetrapyrrole interaction structure is phthalocyanine and its derivative is naphthalocyanine. They have also been applied to imaging and PTT because of the high extinction coefficient in the NIR region.134 Tsivadze et al. synthesized tetra-15-crown-5-dibutoxyoxanthrenocyanines, which possess the unique properties of switchable absorption and emission in the NIR spectral range.135 By attaching 15-crown-5-α-dibutoxyoxanthreno to the phthalocyanine, the obtained molecules achieved higher water solubility and its absorption could be reversibly adjusted from 686 to 1028 nm.
Now, researchers are constantly looking for new methods to improve the photothermal properties of organic dyes or polymer NPs. For example, Zhang et al. developed biocompatible electron donor–acceptor conjugated semiconductor nanoparticles (PPor-PEG NPs) with light collection unit. To improve the photothermal conversion efficiency, they were able to introduce a light-harvesting unit side branch on the D–A polymer chain, and the results revealed a photothermal conversion efficiency as high as 62.3%.35 Although the photothermal conversion efficiency has been moderately enhanced, the reproducibility of batch preparation will undoubtedly be affected by the addition of other components to NPs, which is not conducive for clinical translation. Given that the twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) formed by the rotation of active molecules in small molecules is conducive for increasing heat generation, Tang et al. proposed a strategy based on “molecular movement in aggregates”, combining the advantages of dark TICT and reverse AIE into a method. They introduced molecular rotors (TPA) and 2-decylmyristyl macromolecular groups in the plane D–A–D cores to help stabilize the molecular motion and the dark TICT state of small-molecule NIRb14. The enhanced TICT characteristics were caused by the breaking of intermolecular interactions in the aggregated state within the NP, thus enhancing the photothermal properties.136
4.3 Organic–inorganic composite materials
To date, a large number of photothermal materials have been applied in the treatment of cancer. According to the different components, they are classified into inorganic photothermal materials and organic photothermal materials. Inorganic photothermal materials usually possess outstanding features such as large extinction coefficient, easy surface functionalization, efficient photothermal conversion, and better photostability but suffer from high cost, poor biodegradability, and long-term toxicity.137,138 Although organic photothermal materials have better biodegradability and biocompatibility, their complex synthesis procedures, poor photothermal stability, and low photothermal conversion efficiency hinder their application in PTT.84,139 On account of the unsatisfactory therapeutic effect acquired from single inorganic or organic materials, organic–inorganic composite materials with improved efficacy for the PTT of cancer are extremely attractive. Organic–inorganic composite materials not only integrate their respective advantages but also possess synergistic effects.140 Consequently, organic–inorganic composite materials have great potential in the PTT of cancer compared to single components. Currently, according to the most important role played by organic–inorganic composite materials in the PTT of cancer, it can be roughly divided into the following three categories: photothermal materials delivery, imaging-mediated PTT, and PTT-based combination therapy.
Since most inorganic nanoparticles used in cancer photothermal therapy are usually hydrophobic and potentially toxic, the surface functionalization of inorganic nanoparticles is required to improve the dispersibility and biocompatibility by commonly using polymers represented by PEG.141 For instance, Li et al. prepared PEGylated copper nanowires (CuNWs) as the photothermal material for cancer therapy.142 After being functionalized with PEG, CuNWs changed from hydrophobic to hydrophilic and can be uniformly dispersed in water. In addition, the prepared PEGylated CuNWs were found to be wrapped around the cancer cells due to their increased flexibility. The results of the in vitro assay of PEGylated CuNWs suggested that they can effectively ablate cancer cells under radiation. When PEGylated CuNWs were injected intratumorally into mice bearing colon (CT26) cancer cells, under NIR laser irradiation, the temperature reached 22.6 °C within 6 minutes, and the tumor growth was significantly restrained. Besides, non-toxic and biodegradable chitosan have also been applied to enhance the stability and biocompatibility of inorganic nanoparticles.143 The targeting of photothermal reagents toward cancer cells is also related to the effect of PTT. In addition to the EPR, some biomolecules including FA and hyaluronic acid (HA) are usually employed to boost the targeting of photothermal materials.144,145 Liu et al. synthesized mesoporous silica nanoparticles with pH sensitivity (DOX-HPCF) for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma, consisting of DOX and FA.146 The temperature of DOX-HPCF rapidly rose to 62.3 °C from an initial 25.3 °C when they were exposed to the NIR laser, which was owing to the photothermal effect of polydopamine (PDA). Due to the synergistic effect of FA targeting and photothermal action, DOX-HPCF was found to have the strongest inhibitory effect on SMMC-7721 liver cancer cells under NIR laser irradiation, and the calculated half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) also proved the above conclusion. The apoptosis assay revealed that the percentage of apoptosis in the SMMC-7721 liver cancer cells that were treated with HPCF was obviously higher than the other groups, which was due to the targeting effect of HA, leading to the higher uptake of DOX-HPCF. Correspondingly, the in vivo antitumor assay suggested that DOX-HPCF had excellent tumor growth inhibitory effect and more HPCF accumulated in the tumor after the treatment. Jacinto et al. utilized HA and D-α-tocopherol polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate (TPGS) to functionalize gold-core mesoporous silica shell (AuMSS) nanorods to obtain AuMSS-TPGS-HA by grafting.147 Under the irradiation of the NIR laser, it was found that the AuMSS functionalization had a negligible impact on the photothermal properties of gold nanorods. Furthermore, both the Live/Dead test and the hemocompatibility assays demonstrated that different concentrations of AuMSS-TPGS-HA exhibited better biocompatibility. More importantly, thanks to the ability of HA to target the cancer cells that overexpress the CD44 receptor, the HeLa (CD44 overexpressing cell line) cells uptook more AuMSS-TPGS-HA than those treated with non-targeted AuMSS nanorods. It was also found that the amount of AuMSS-TPGS-HA taken up in the HeLa cells was higher than that of normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF, low CD44 expression). These results all indicated that the introduction of HA through surface functionalization can improve the biocompatibility of AuMSS and targeting specificity toward the cancer cells.
Aside from the treatment, imaging-guided PTT can also be recognized as an essential approach toward cancer treatment. Therefore, the development of multimodal photothermal materials with diagnostic and therapeutic applications is another research focus in the design and preparation of photothermal materials. To date, the most commonly exploited methods are imaging-guided PTT include fluorescence image-guided PTT and photoacoustic image-guided PTT.137,148 Nevertheless, since most of these photothermal reagents are limited to single-pixel imaging, it is difficult to obtain ideal spatiotemporal resolution and sensitivity. Therefore, multimodal imaging-guided is expected to become a promising strategy for gaining outstanding therapeutic and diagnostic effects. Recently, Cai et al. fabricated a multifunctional nanocomposite (FIP-99mTc) via self-assembly for multimodal imaging-guided PTT of metastatic lymph nodes in breast tumor.149 In this study, FIP-99mTc was mainly composed of Fe3O4, IR-1061, and 99mTc, which were used for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT), and the second NIR fluorescence imaging, PAI and PTT, respectively. Under the NIR laser irradiation, FIP exhibited excellent photothermal effect and photostability, in which its photothermal conversion efficiency reached ∼32.8%. The biocompatibility of FIP was examined by MTT, and the results showed that it displayed no cytotoxicity. Also, under the irradiation of the NIR laser, it was able to ablate almost all the cancer cells, indicating a better therapeutic effect. More importantly, by collecting and analyzing the NIR-II fluorescence, PA, magnetic resonance (MR), and SPECT/computed tomography (CT) imaging data of injecting FIP or FIP-99mTc into living mice with lymphatic metastasis model, it was found that FIP can effectively metastasize from the primary tumor and accumulate in the metastatic lymph nodes (Fig. 10A). The above results suggested that FIP-99mTc could be used for the in vivo multimodal imaging of lymphatic metastasis. After intratumoral injection, FIP induced a temperature increase by 54 °C at metastatic lymph nodes of mice bearing 4T1 tumors under NIR laser irradiation. The growth and metastasis of the tumor were found to be effectively suppressed at 45 days after treatment. In summary, this multifunctional nanocomposite with excellent multimodal imaging-guided PTT provides a new direction for the development of multimodal photothermal materials.
 Fig. 10  (A) Magnetic resonance (MR), near infrared (NIR)-II fluorescence, PA, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/computed tomography (CT) imaging of 4T1 primary tumors in mice after injection of FIP or FIP-99mTc. Adapted with permission from ref. 149 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Synthesis and therapeutic mechanisms of two nanoparticles for PTT and ultrasound therapy (UST) combination therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 151 copyright 2020 Wiley Online Library. 
Although PTT has emerged as an effective and promising method for cancer theragnostics, this single treatment usually fails to completely eradicate cancer cells and prevent their recurrence. Therefore, by combining PTT with other treatments including chemotherapy and PTT, PDT and PTT, as well as SDT and PTT as a way to create synergistic effects is expected to further improve the effectiveness of cancer treatment. As a general problem of PTT, the limited penetration depth of NIR light in the tissues has been an obstacle in the development of PTT for cancer. Complete tumor elimination is difficult to achieve since the laser intensity decreases as the tissue depth increases. Ultrasonic therapy (UST) with non-invasive treatment and local treatment is an available method to treat deep-seated tumors.150 Xu et al. successfully eradicated tumors by integrating PTT and UST.151 In this study, polyethylene glycol- and polyethyleneimine-modified gold nanorods (mPEG-PEI-AuNRs), and mPEG-PEI and calcium carbonate nanoparticles (mPEG-PEI/CaNPs) were used for the combination therapy of cancer. The mPEG-PEI-AuNRs were prepared by the Schiff base reaction on the surface of PEI-AuNRs, while the mPEG-PEI/CaNPs were prepared by electrostatic interaction (Fig. 10B). Following the irradiation of aqueous solutions of mPEG-PEI-AuNRs containing diverse Au concentrations for 10 minutes, the temperature increased to 60 °C. In addition, mPEG-PEI-AuNRs displayed excellent photostability and were calculated to possess a photothermal conversion efficiency up to 27.7%. The apparent generation of CO2 bubbles was found in HeLa cells and MCF-7 cells incubated with the mPEG-PEI/CaNPs for 6 hours compared to cells incubated without mPEG-PEI/CaNPs. This phenomenon revealed that the acidic environment contributes to the generation of CO2 bubbles. The generated carbon dioxide bubbles not only strengthen the PA signal yielded by mPEG-PEI-AuNRs but also effectively kill tumor cells under the action of ultrasound. After the mPEG-PEI-AuNRs and mPEG-PEI/CaNPs were injected in MCF-7 tumor-bearing mice for 24 hours, followed by NIR laser irradiation and US irradiation, these results suggested that the tumor was entirely eradicated within 24 days and did not recur, which was likely attributed to the combined treatment effect of PTT and UST. In conclusion, this combined therapy strategy of PTT and UST can effectively improve the efficiency of tumor treatment and has great application prospects in eradicating tumors. However, the combined PDT/PTT usually requires different wavelengths of laser irradiation,152 while the combined PTT/SDT requires light and ultrasound stimulation.153 The combination of chemotherapy and PTT has received widespread attention due to the controlled release and targeting of drugs.154 Nanoscale metal–organic frameworks (NMOFs) have been employed in stimuli-responsive drug release owing to their general structure and chemical properties.155 Deng et al. constructed the Au@MOF drug carrier with a yolk–shell nanostructures (YSNs) that is remotely controlled and responsive to stimulation.156 The yolk–shell structured Au@MOF was composed of Au star nanoparticles as the yolks and the zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) as the shell, where YSNs allow the loading of more drugs compared to normal core–shell nanostructures. Since ZIF-8 will degrade in the weakly acidic tumor microenvironment, the designed Au@MOF will release drugs (DOX) accompanied by the photothermal effect produced from Au star nanoparticles under NIR irradiation. Due to the Au star of Au@MOF exhibiting absorption up to 1200 nm, the authors utilized different wavelengths irradiation (808 and 1064 nm) to analyze its photothermal properties because the photothermal ability of Au@MOF was positively correlated with Au concentration and laser intensity. Upon 808 nm NIR laser irradiation, the temperature of Au@MOF (200 ppm) rose to 81.6 °C and a high photothermal conversion efficiency of 30.2% was achieved. When irradiated with an NIR laser of 1064 nm wavelength, it had a higher photothermal conversion efficiency (48.5%). These results suggested that Au@MOF possessed strong NIR absorption ability in the NIR-II region. In addition, Au@MOF was seen to have high DOX loading capacity (29%) and high DOX releasing capacity (29%) under low pH 5.0 when irradiated with an NIR laser of 1064 nm wavelength. The cell viability of the HeLa cells treated with Au@MOF-DOX under 1064 nm irradiation decreased to 13% at DOX concentration of 50 mg mL−1 while other groups (DOX, Au@MOF, Au@MOF-DOX, and treated with or without laser) showed limited cytotoxic effect. Au@MOF-DOX was intravenously injected into H22 tumor-bearing mice to investigate the antitumor effect. After treating mice with different materials, Au@MOF-DOX under 1064 nm laser irradiation showed the best inhibition of tumor growth, which confirmed the synergistic anti-tumor effect of Au@MOF-DOX. After the treatment was completed, images of the tumor-bearing mice and the tumor section illustrated the synergistic anti-tumor effect as well. It was worth noting that the group treated with DOX alone showed weight loss compared with the other groups, which suggested that the synergistic anti-tumor effect of Au@MOF-DOX could reduce the toxic effect on organisms. In a word, the integration of chemotherapy with PTT is not a simple addition but a synergistic effect that can improve the efficiency of cancer treatment and the inherent defects.
5. Summary and outlook
In this review, three important metrics used to evaluate photothermal materials are presented and briefly described, followed by the photothermal conversion mechanism and the calculation of photothermal conversion efficiency for different photothermal materials, and finally a detailed summary of the preparation and applications of inorganic, organic, and organic–inorganic composites in PTT has been given. Detailed illustration is summarized as: (1) the chemical, physical, and biological parameters of the photothermal materials were evaluated for the material feasibility, photothermal conversion efficiency, and biocompatibility; (2) the photothermal conversion mechanism of different types of photothermal materials were classified and certain photothermal conversion efficiency were also listed; (3) the preparation methods and the biological applications of the photothermal materials were summarized; (4) current obstacles in photothermal materials development and the prospects in biological applications were also illustrated.
Although the research on photothermal conversion materials has made great progress, due to the reality of ICG being the only FDA-approved NIR imaging and photothermal agent, much more efforts should be undertaken for its development. Also, the challenges of PTT for further clinical trials are still urgently needed to be overcome.
(1) Effective heat generation within the lesion. The temperature within the lesion determines the therapeutic efficacy, which hence requires the good photothermal convention efficiency of the material. Compared to inorganic photothermal materials, organic materials seem to be much more suitable for biological applications. The primary reason should be their modifiable “D–A” chemical structures. For example, the rapidly developed semiconducting polymers. The absorbance of these materials could be easily adjusted to the desired wavelength, even from the NIR region (808 nm) to the NIR II region (1064 nm). Besides, due to the conjugated structure, “D–A”-like materials achieve significant “π–π” stacking effect that improved the photothermal conversion efficiency for the enhanced non-radiative transition. Also, these conjugated structure materials have high molar extinction coefficient, which helps in NIR light absorption and conversion efficiency. Therefore, the “D–A”-like organic photothermal materials shall have great prospects in the future.
(2) Beside the photothermal conversion efficiency, the biocompatibility is also the focus of photothermal materials. The accumulation and the metabolism should be taken into consideration regarding the material design. In particular, PTT is concentration-dependent, which requires good material accumulation within the lesions. Such accumulation inevitably occurs in normal cells. Therefore, the tumor specificity and metabolic property of the materials appear to be particularly important in biological approaches. Targeting moieties, antibodies can be used to form a convenient tumor specific system. As for the metabolic property, inorganic materials seem to be stable in the bio-system that appear to be poorly degradable. Organic materials, for example, cyanine derivatives are favorable for their degradability, which, however, have unideal photothermal effect. Recently developed bio-degradable semiconducting polymers have potential prospects for the designed metabolic property. The introduction of phenothiazine and diketopyrrolopyrrole endowed the semiconducting polymers degradability in a biological microenvironment.
(3) The synergistic effect of the combination of PTT and other therapies has proved to be a promising direction. The photothermal therapy is initiated by NIR laser irradiation. Such high NIR laser has good tissue penetration, which can cause damage to the skin. Also, over activated immunogenicity during PTT with high therapeutic temperature threatens the treatment outcomes. However, lower irradiation power cannot generate enough high temperature to kill the tumor cells, which brings the following recurrence. Better therapeutic efficacy with low side effect is expected and shall be the direction for PTT development. The strategy of PTT combined with other therapies can achieve a win–win situation that lowers the irradiation power and also the dose of other therapeutic agents, which will become another desirable development direction for PTT.
We believe that the disadvantages in currently developed photothermal materials will be overcome by continuous efforts in multidisciplinary integration and their further clinical applications will certainly be realized.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFA0709900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22077101, 21675085 and 21402219), the Joint Research Funds of Department of Science & Technology of Shaanxi Province and Northwestern Polytechnical University (2020GXLH-Z-008, 2020GXLH-Z-021 and 2020GXLH-Z-023), the Natural Science Foundation of Ningbo (202003N4049, 202003N4065), the Open Project Program of the Analytical & Testing Center of Northwestern Polytechnical University (2020T018), the Open Project Program of Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (No. 2020WNLOKF023), Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi (2020ZDLGY13-04), China-Sweden Joint Mobility Project (51811530018) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. Postdoctoral research funding schemes of Jiangsu Province (No. 2020Z011). Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX21_1100).
References
H. Sung, 
            et al.
          , Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2021, 71, 209–249 CrossRef .
J. Sehouli and J. P. Grabowski, Cancer, 2019, 125, 4598–4601 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Bioact. Mater., 2018, 3, 347–354 CrossRef .
S. Gai, 
            et al.
          , Nano Today, 2018, 19, 146–187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1638–1642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geng, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2015, 11, 1603–1610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, 
            et al.
          , Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 2201–2212 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jaque, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9494–9530 RSC .
B. Lü, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 767 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9330–9339 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, 
            et al.
          , Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3118–3126 RSC .
J. Li, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2018, 155, 217–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7317–7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2017, 122, 188–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Melamed, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1380–1387 RSC .
Y. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2016, 12, 1458–1468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900004 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2017, 13, 1603990 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2019, 192, 292–308 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3259–3271 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4896–4903 RSC .
R. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8103–8113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Nanomedicine, 2019, 16, 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 382–387 RSC .
J. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5995–6005 RSC .
W. Xu, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 60, 7476–7487 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2206 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang and K. Pu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700710 CrossRef .
T. Guo, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 13, 306–311 CrossRef .
Y. Lyu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1801–1810 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4265–4275 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2020, 17, 657–674 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605094 CrossRef .
M. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
R. S. Riley and E. S. Day, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 9, e1449 Search PubMed .
G. H. Lu, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2019, 195, 13–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Chen, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32667–32674 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dumas and P. Couvreur, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2153–2157 RSC .
X. Ding, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1451–1468 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4950–4965 RSC .
L. Cheng, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10869–10939 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharifi, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2323–2343 RSC .
E. P. Porcu, 
            et al.
          , Biotechnol. Adv., 2016, 34, 768–789 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kowada, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4953–4972 RSC .
S. Guha, 
            et al.
          , Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7826–7834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xi, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907855 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, 
            et al.
          , Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17521–17530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2017, 143, 29–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800458 CrossRef .
J. Song, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6102–6113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2643–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Ng and G. Zheng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11012–11042 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908073 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9761–9771 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13958–13964 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2015, 11, 985–993 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Chang and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1427–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15809–15812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8884–8897 RSC .
R. Cheheltani, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2016, 102, 87–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Higbee-Dempsey, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7783–7794 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Austin, 
            et al.
          , Arch. Toxicol., 2014, 88, 1391–1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 5847–5861 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, 
            et al.
          , Drug Discovery Today, 2015, 20, 595–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2437–2449 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2015, 53, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2015, 347, 1308–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Guler, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6078–6083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2017, 132, 37–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 190–204 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gong, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 438–446 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, 
            et al.
          , J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 160–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5646–5652 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xin, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804838 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6621–6628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sinha, 
            et al.
          , RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63859–63866 RSC .
R. Imani, 
            et al.
          , RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77818–77829 RSC .
P. Gong, 
            et al.
          , Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 573–582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1847–1859 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29899–29905 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802591 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705980 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Su, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3989–3992 RSC .
C. Schwechheimer, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6557–6563 RSC .
T. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700487 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 278–287 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4273–4288 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhen, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2021, 17, 2004723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8179–8234 RSC .
Y. Lyu and K. Pu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600481 CrossRef .
P. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 520, 58–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33032–33042 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, 
            et al.
          , Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 1573–1580 RSC .
K. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2018, 161, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Geng, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7995–8005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1801254 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5605–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. N. Zare, 
            et al.
          , J. Med. Chem., 2020, 63, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. de Albuquerque, 
            et al.
          , Synth. Met., 2004, 146, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
C. Korupalli, 
            et al.
          , Bioengineering, 2020, 7, 94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12746–12754 RSC .
E. Ju, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1574–1580 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tian, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2019, 15, 1902926 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabe3588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2018, 14, 1703400 CrossRef .
X. Xu, 
            et al.
          , CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 2502–2509 Search PubMed .
T. Dong, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800135 CrossRef .
X. Men, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909673 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19665–19672 RSC .
Y. Cao, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 718–725 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Dyes Pigm., 2017, 147, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhattarai and Z. Dai, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700262 CrossRef .
P. Karuso, 
            et al.
          , Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1820–1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2018, 14, 1704247 CrossRef .
E. B. Ehlerding, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500223 CrossRef .
H.-J. Yoon, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5683–5691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2017, 112, 324–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2056–2067 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Dobrovolskaia, 
            et al.
          , Nanomedicine, 2014, 10, 1453–1463 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7043–7050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xuan, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9610–9618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10049–10057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10124–10134 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, 
            et al.
          , Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 3609–3613 RSC .
S. Li, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8669–8675 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1054–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12394–12405 RSC .
Y. Zhang and J. F. Lovell, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 9, e1420 Search PubMed .
E. A. Safonova, 
            et al.
          , Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 2450–2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5359–5368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5369–5382 RSC .
N. Fernandes, 
            et al.
          , Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2990–3020 RSC .
C. Yu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4289–4305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hao, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2571–2609 RSC .
V. Biju, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 744–764 RSC .
K.-C. Li, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12082–12090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Salem, 
            et al.
          , J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2018, 182, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13599–13602 RSC .
L. Jing, 
            et al.
          , Theranostics, 2016, 6, 40–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, 
            et al.
          , Drug Delivery, 2020, 27, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Jacinto, 
            et al.
          , Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 188, 110778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2020, 243, 119934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49407–49415 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Theranostics, 2015, 5, 1291–1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009314 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13067–13077 RSC .
Z. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2020, 232, 119685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41167–41177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, 
            et al.
          , Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3294–3305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6772–6780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of photothermal materials with the photothermal conversion mechanism and applications in photothermal therapy (PTT).	 

 		 

BAuNSP	808	75.5	Redox reactions	
52

Ag2S-NDs	785	35.0	Electrostatic interactions and precipitation reactions	
70

TiN-PEG NPs	808	48.0	Silane-coupling chemistry	
73

FGO-PEG-FA	808	—	Amidating reactions	
82

Apt@GO@Au-His@a-ZnO@DOX NCs	808	38.0	Controlled hydrothermal growth and coupling reaction	
83

Ppy	808	—	Microemulsion method	
98

PPy@BSA-Gd	808	—	“One-pot” method	
99

D-PPy@PNAs	808	20.2	
In situ oxidative polymerization, electrostatic interactions, and π–π interactions	
100

mTiO2@PPy-HNK	808	35.3	Soft-templating method and in situ oxidation polymerization	
101

PEDOT:PSS-PEG	808	—	LBL self-assembly approach	
102

BSA-PANI	808	37.0	Polymerization and in situ self-assembly	
109

Fe–Cu@PANI	808	—	One-pot method	
110

ACAT-CD	—	92.2	Host–guest interaction	
112

TBDOPV-DT	1064	49.2	One-step emulsion method	
116

PBIPDI-TT	980	20.3	Stille polymerization	
117

DINPs	808	—	Single-step sonication method	
124

ICNPs	808	—	Extrusion	
128

DPP-Monothiophene	808	65.0	Nanoprecipitation method	
131

DPP-TPA	660	34.5	Reprecipitation method	
132

PPor-PEG NPs	630	62.3	Nanoprecipitation approach	
35

NIRb14	808	31.2	Nanoprecipitation method	
136

PEGylated CuNWs	808	12.5	Heating-up method	
142

DOX-HPCF	808	—	Michael addition or the Schiff base reaction	
146

AuMSS-TPGS-HA	808	—	Sequential condensation	
147

FIP-99mTc	808	32.8	Self-assembling	
149

mPEG-PEI-AuNRs	808	27.7	Schiff base reaction	
151

Au@MOF	1064	48.5	Complexation	
156


 	Fig. 2  (A) Chain vesicles and non-chain vesicles of Au nanoparticles (NPs). Adapted with permission from ref. 61 copyright 2015 Wiley Online Library. (B) Schematic diagram for the preparation of branched nanoporous gold nanoshell (BAuNSP) by the “one-step” approach with polymer NPs with reducing activity as the templates and the reducing agent. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Dissociation of AcetalDextran-Au NPs micelles in acidic lysosomes leading to dispersion of AuNPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 64 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Precise synthesis of Ag2S nanodots with imaging and therapeutic potential in albumin nanocages. Adapted with permission from ref. 70 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Viability of HeLa cells treated with various therapeutic patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2018 Elsevier. (B) The variation of the tumor temperature in tumor-bearing mice irradiated with laser within 5 minutes. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Representative photos of mice bearing 4T1 tumors after various treatments. Adapted with permission from ref. 98 copyright 2012 Wiley Online Library. (B) Illustration scheme for the fabrication of polypyrrole@bovine serum albumin-Gd (PPy@BSA-Gd). Adapted with permission from ref. 99 copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the preparation of doxorubicin-loaded poly(acrylic acid-b-N-isopropylamide-b-acrylic acid) nanogels (D-PPy@PNA) and photothermochemotherapy application. Adapted with permission from ref. 100 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  The process of BSA-polyaniline (PANI) preparation for photoacoustic imaging (PAI) and PTT treatment and its potential formation mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 109 copyright 2019 Wiley Online Library.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of doxorubicin (DOX) and indocyanine green (ICG) loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)–lecithin–polyethylene glycol (PEG) nanoparticles (DINPs) using single-step sonication. (B) Fluorescence imaging of nude mice within 24 hours after intratumoral injection of free ICG and DINPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 124 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic of ICG-loaded and cancer cell membrane-coated nanoparticles (ICNPs) with homologous targeting for dual-modality imaging (fluorescence and photoacoustic (PA) imaging), and imaging-guided photothermal therapy. (B) Diagram of the tumor treatment effect of PTT in mice with MCF-7 tumors under different materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Magnetic resonance (MR), near infrared (NIR)-II fluorescence, PA, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/computed tomography (CT) imaging of 4T1 primary tumors in mice after injection of FIP or FIP-99mTc. Adapted with permission from ref. 149 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Synthesis and therapeutic mechanisms of two nanoparticles for PTT and ultrasound therapy (UST) combination therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 151 copyright 2020 Wiley Online Library.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
