Atomic Fluorescence Spectrometry : a suitable detection technique in speciation studies for arsenic , selenium , antimony and mercury  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B917755H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B917755H
(Critical Review)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2010, 25, 933-946Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsAtomic Fluorescence Spectrometry: a suitable detection technique in speciation studies for arsenic, selenium, antimony and mercury

        
          
            D. 
            Sánchez-Rodas
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. T. 
            Corns
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            B. 
            Chen
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            P. B. 
            Stockwell
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry and Materials Science, Faculty of Experimental Sciences, El Carmen Campus, University of Huelva, 21007, Huelva, Spain
bP S Analytical, Arthur House, Crayfields Industrial Estate, Main Road, Orpington, Kent BR5 3HP, UK
Received 
      27th August 2009
    , Accepted 31st March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      23rd April 2010
    AbstractAtomic Fluorescence Spectrometry (AFS) is an ideal detection technique for speciation studies concerning hydride forming elements (mainly As, Se and Sb) and Hg. The analytical features of AFS, such as detection limits below the µg L−1 and the wide linear calibration range, up to the mg L−1, allow its application to a great variety of environmental, biological and food samples. AFS represents a suitable alternative to other atomic spectrometers commonly employed in speciation studies such as Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS) and Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). The instrumentation used for AFS and the design of the vapour generation and optical layouts required to sustain the full benefits of the AFS approach are also described. The present review explains and comments on the instrumental couplings of chromatographic (HPLC and GC) and non-chromatographic separations (CE) with AFS detection, with online hydride generation for the speciation of inorganic and organic compounds of As, Se and Sb, and cold vapour for Hg. Other optional intermediate steps are online photo-oxidation (UV), pyrolysis or Microwave Assisted Digestion (MAD) for non-directly reducible compounds. Many different sample types (e.g. water, soils, air, biota, food) have been analysed using these instrumental couplings with AFS detection. These are summarised and discussed.D. Sánchez-RodasDaniel A. Sanchez-Rodas Navarro studied at his hometown University (Seville, Spain), getting a BSc in Chemistry in 1992. He obtained a PhD in Analytical Chemistry in 1997 at the University of Huelva (Spain), where he actually holds a position as Senior Lecturer (Professor Titular de Universidad) in Analytical Chemistry since 2008. He has also performed research activities at the Universities of Siegen (Germany), Odense (Denmark) and at P S Analytical Ltd (UK). His main research interests are speciation of As, Se and Sb in environmental samples, focused on sample treatment and the hyphenation of chromatography and atomic spectroscopy detectors.W. T. CornsDr Warren Corns graduated from the University College of North Wales with a BSc in Marine Chemistry in 1988. He was awarded a Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Plymouth in 1991 and is currently the Head of Research and Development for P S Analytical. In 1996 Warren was awarded the Hilger Atomic Spectroscopy Prize. He is the appointed Royal Society of Chemistry, UK principal expert serving on ISO, CEN, and BSI standardization committees for mercury measurements in natural gas and ambient air. Dr Corns has published more than 50 peer-reviewed articles concerning trace element analysis of mercury and hydride forming elements.B. ChenDr Bin Chen has extensive analytical chemistry experience in the field of trace metal speciation analysis and hydride generation techniques using GC, HPLC, ICP-MS, AFS and AAS. Bin completed a PhD in Analytical Chemistry at Xiamen University in 2002. As a postdoctoral fellow at University of Heidelberg in Germany he was awarded a Fellowship of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for his research into the Geochemical Cycle of Antimony in the German Environment. In 2005 he joined School of Public Health at University of Michigan in USA. In 2007 Bin relocated to the UK to become Senior Applications Specialist at P S Analytical.P. B. StockwellPeter Stockwell has a broad experience, in government scientific service, in academia, in a large instrumentation company and now since 1983 as founder and managing director of his own scientific instrument company P S Analytical (PSA). PSA develops instruments for the determination of mercury, arsenic, selenium and antimony. Along with the University of Plymouth and Petronas Gas Malaysia, PSA were awarded the Royal Society of Chemistry Industrial Division Team Award in March 2000. In 2009 PSA and the National Physical Laboratory received the CITAC award for their contribution to metrology for the validation of a calibration standard for mercury measurement.
1. Introduction
Speciation has been defined as the distribution of an element amongst defined chemical species in a system.1 Speciation has become a common and useful tool in several scientific fields as it provides information about the properties (e.g. bioavailability, mobility and toxicity) of the different chemical species in which an element can be distributed. The importance of speciation studies has resulted in an abundant scientific literature describing speciation of several metals (Hg, Se, Cr and Sn) and metalloids (As and Sb) in environmental, biological and food samples.2,3
Most analytical methods employed for speciation involve the hyphenation of separation techniques, mainly chromatography (GC and HPLC) with specific element detectors based either on atomic absorption (AAS), atomic emission (ICP-AES), or mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).4,5 Hydride Generation (HG) for As, Se and Sb, and Cold Vapour (CV) generation for Hg are commonly used as online post-column derivatisation to separate and preconcentrate the analytes from sample matrices, thus eliminating potential interferences in the detection that may arise in some direct couplings (e.g. LC-MS with an electrospray ionization interface).6
AFS represents a suitable alternative to the other atomic and mass spectrometric techniques. AFS has been described to be superior to AAS7,8 and similar to ICP-MS regarding sensitivity and linear calibration range, with further advantages (simplicity, lower acquisition and running costs) for arsenic speciation9,10 and selenium speciation11 in routine analysis. AFS provides interesting analytical features, such as low detection limits (below the µg L−1) and wide linear calibration range (from µg L−1 to mg L−1).12 AFS spectrometers are commonly based on the use of non-dispersive instruments, equipped with Boosted Discharge Hollow Cathode Lamps (BDHCLs) as the excitation radiation source. The volatile species of As, Se and Sb, obtained from liquid samples after HG, are carried with an argon flow to a gas–liquid separator, followed by atomization and excitation in an argon–hydrogen diffusion flame. For Hg, the CV technique is employed, with no need of a flame for atomization. For those chemical species that do not readily form volatile species, such as some complex organometallic species, additional online derivatisation steps are needed (e.g. photo-oxidation, pyrolysis or microwave digestion) before HG or CV.
The use of AFS as a suitable detector for speciation studies has only recently been considered. An early review on As and Se speciation by HPLC hyphenated to specific detectors13 mentions barely 10 references based on AFS detection out of a total 152 references. The potential use of AFS in Hg, Se and As speciation studies was also briefly indicated in a review in 2000, when AFS was described as a promising possibility for speciation studies.14 The use of AFS detection is also mentioned in a more recent review for mercury,15 as well as another review for arsenic speciation.16 However, in these reviews, the number of references dedicated to AFS is rather limited. A recent review on speciation based on non-chromatographic separations also includes AFS detection.17
The present review aims to give a critical vision of the state of the art of speciation studies of As, Se, Sb and Hg based on AFS detection, considering the extensive number of scientific articles published in the last ten years. The present review describes and comments on the instrumental couplings of chromatographic (HPLC and GC) and non-chromatographic separations (Capillary Electrophoresis, control of chemical conditions involved in HG or CV) with AFS detection. Many different sample types (e.g. water, soils, air, biota, food) have been analysed using these instrumental couplings with AFS detection. These are summarised and discussed. Future developments will also be considered.
2. Atomic Fluorescence Spectrometry instrumentation
Atomic fluorescence is a spectroscopic process which is based on absorption of radiation of specific wavelengths by an atomic vapour with subsequent detection of radiationally deactivated states via emission in a direction (typically) orthogonal to the excitation source. Both the absorption and the subsequent atomic emission processes occur at wavelengths which are characteristic of the atomic species present. AFS is a very sensitive and selective method for the determination of a number of environmentally and biomedically important elements such as mercury, arsenic, selenium, bismuth, antimony, tellurium, lead and cadmium.
The main types of atomic fluorescence are (a) resonance fluorescence, (b) direct line fluorescence and (c) stepwise line fluorescence. Resonance fluorescence occurs when atoms absorb and re-emit radiation of the same wavelength, this is the predominant form of fluorescence measured by analytical chemists. These wavelengths can be different. Direct line fluorescence is quenched when an atom is excited from the ground state to a higher excited electronic state and then undergoes a direct radiational transition to a metastable level above the ground state. Stepwise line fluorescence occurs when the upper energy levels of the exciting and the fluorescence line are different. The excited atoms may undergo deactivation, usually by collisions to a lower excited state rather than return directly to the ground state.
The intensity of the fluorescence radiation depends on a number of factors: (a) the intensity of the excitation source, (b) the concentrations of the atoms i.e. the atomiser, (c) the quantitative efficiency of the process (i.e. the ratio of the energy emitted in the fluorescence to the energy absorbed per unit time) and (d) the extent of any self-absorption in the atomiser. The fluorescence radiation is linearly dependent on the source radiation and the fluorescence quantum efficiency of the transition as long as saturation is avoided. If the atomic concentration is low the fluorescence signal varies linearly against the total atomic concentration. AFS intensity is additionally proportional to the concentration of analyte in the sample and the optical efficiency of the instrument industry—the solid angles used for excitation and collection of radiation.
The stated disadvantages of atomic fluorescence are (a) quenching and (b) interferences. Quenching occurs when excited atoms collide with other molecules in the atomisation sources. Those processes are discussed in more detail by several good reviews.18,19 An additional disadvantage of “generic” AFS is source scatter and atomizer emission causing spectral interferences. These are then minimal when HG and CV are used.
As with other techniques interferences are of two major types. Spectral interferences occur when lines in the source overlap lines in the matrix elements in the atomiser. Chemical interferences result from various chemical processes during atomisation that reduce the population of free atoms.
The basic layout of an AFS instrument is similar to AAS except that the light source and detectors are placed at right angles.
Instruments for AFS can be categorized into dispersive and non-dispersive, depending on wavelength selection. Dispersive instruments require a low resolution monochromator if a line radiation source is employed, but for a continuum radiation source a high resolution monochromator is required. In non-dispersive instruments monochromators are not employed, resulting in a simpler design and lower costs. Non-dispersive instruments can be prone to interferences, due to stray light and background emission from the atomizer.20 In non-dispersive instruments equipped with line-radiation source, these interferences can be minimized using a filter that allows a defined bandwidth to reach the detector. In most AFS systems wavelength selection is achieved using a filter located between the source and the detector.
A number of excitation sources have been used in AFS, primarily spectral line sources and continuous sources. Since the intensity of the fluorescence radiation is proportional to the exciting radiation, excitation sources with a high intensity are required in order to achieve good sensitivity and wide linear dynamic range. The source should be simple and easy to use, have good short term and long term stability and require minimum maintenance to obtain optimum performance. The BDHCL meets these requirements. This is commercially available and this has contributed significantly to the availability of commercial AFS instruments. Most atomisers used for AFS are similar to those used in AAS or AES. The basic requirements are, for an efficient and rapid production of free atoms with minimal background noise, long residence time for the analyte in the optical path and low quenching properties. In addition ease of handling and economic cost of operations are also important.
2.1. Mercury by cold vapour
Mercury has a significant vapour pressure at room temperature and it therefore can be measured without additional thermal energy. Mercury vapour produced by reduction of the metal from its compounds with a suitable reductant (sodium borohydride or tin(II) chloride) is swept out of the reaction vessel using an argon carrier gas and introduced into the optical beam where the mercury atoms can be excited by a suitable source, e.g. a mercury discharge lamp. A schematic optical arrangement for mercury measurement is shown in Fig. 1. The AFS radiation is usually detected using a photo-multiplier tube (PMT). The instrument uses a ratiometric approach to compensate for lamp drift by relating the PMT signal to the reference cell signal.21
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the continuous flow vapour/hydride generator and optical configuration of an AFS system for mercury analysis. 
For any analytical procedure there are several aspects of the cycle that need to be addressed and controlled. Stockwell and Corns have discussed this in some detail with respect to automated analysis.21 Without doubt the most important is the sampling itself so that a fully representative sample is taken which has not been compromised in any way or form.
For the determination of mercury (and also for hydride forming elements), there are two fundamental parts of the measurement cycle that must be operated in a controlled manner. These are firstly the chemical process of generating the analyte in a vapour form and secondly the transference of the vapour for quantification of the analyte using a specific AFS instrument. Attention to detail with these parameters is extremely important.
A schematic diagram of a continuous-flow vapour generator is shown in Fig. 1.22 The reductant, blank and sample solutions are delivered by variable-speed multichannel peristaltic pumps. An electronically controlled switching valve alternates between blank and sample solutions and two of the liquid streams (reductant and sample or reductant and blank) are butt-mixed in the sample valve, where the reaction starts to occur. The streams and all gaseous products are continuously and rapidly pumped into a glass gas–liquid separator, from which the gaseous products are carried, by argon gas through a dryer system, finally reaching the AFS detector.
The design of the AFS detector for mercury analysis is relatively simple owing to the absence of a thermally energised atomiser.23 Generally, a UV mercury vapour discharge lamp is used as excitation source and the fluorescence light is detected by a PMT, which is positioned perpendicular to the excitation source. In addition, Fig. 1 illustrates the vapour generation system and optical configuration of an AFS system.24
A glass chimney is used for introduction of mercury vapour into the optical path. The chimney is shielded with a high flow rate of argon. A 253.7 nm interference filter is employed between the introduction chimney and the PMT to keep stray light away from the latter.
Since the system is used to determine total inorganic mercury (Hg2+), the first requirement for performing analysis is to liberate all mercury compounds from the sample matrices and then convert all organic forms of mercury to Hg2+ by various digestion/oxidation procedures.
For natural water sample analysis the levels of interest are relatively low and the hot oxidising method using permanganate–peroxodisulfate has been found to be unsuitable for low-level mercury determination because of the high blanks found in these reagents.25 Bromine monochloride has been found to be an excellent oxidant and preservative for total mercury in water samples,26 working faster and more efficiently on many organomercurials.25,26 Hydroxylamine hydrochloride is added to destroy the excess bromine before analysis with CV-AFS. This method has often been used for converting organic mercury to Hg2+.27–32
Once all forms of mercury have been converted to Hg2+, the latter is reduced to elemental mercury (Hg0) by using either alkaline or acidified stannous chloride.
The mercury vapour produced is carried by argon gas to the AFS instrument.
2.2. Hydride-forming elements
Several environmentally important elements such as As, Se, Bi, Sb, Te, Ge, Sn and Pb can form volatile and covalent hydrides. HG is a preferred technique when hydride-forming elements are to be analysed by atomic spectrometry.33,34 The advantage of volatilisation as a gaseous hydride clearly lies in the separation and enrichment of the analyte element and thus in a reduction or even complete elimination of interferences. In a well designed system 100% transfer of the analyte to the detector can be achieved.
Tsujii and Kuga in 197435 were the first to describe hydride-generation coupled to non-dispersive AFS. They reported a detection limit of 2 ng for arsenic analysis. Thompson in 197536 was the first to apply a dispersive AFS system for the determination of arsenic, selenium, antimony and tellurium after hydride generation detection limits using this system ranged from 0.06 to 0.1 µg L−1.
Although various metal–acid reactions (e.g. Zn–HCI) have been used as a means of producing hydride, NaBH4 is preferred as the reductant because the technique is easy to automate, since only solutions are involved and therefore a high sample throughput can be achieved. The design of this system is similar to that of the cold vapour generation system used in CV-AFS for mercury analysis.
The schematic layout of the automated instrument to determine the hydride forming elements is shown in Fig. 2. The optical configuration is similar in concept to that used for mercury analysis but makes use of a unique multireflectance filter (MRF) to concentrate the wavelengths of interest onto the PMT detector, lowering the detection limits. The MRF is configured so that the specific fluorescence waste lighting for the element water test is collected, forming an additional effect and also, commercially available BDHCL lamps exist for all of the elements discussed.
 Fig. 2  Block diagram for the Excalibur Atomic Fluorescence Detector. 
Once the hydride has been formed and driven out of the solution, it can be directly delivered by an inert gas such as argon to the atomiser where it is excited by a fluorescence light source and measured by a detector such as solar blind PMT. Corns et al.37 have investigated different types of diffusion flame atomiser for hydride forming elements. From the study they concluded that the AFS signals were optimal using an argon hydrogen flame. The atomisation in the flame is not due to thermal decomposition but due to free radicals in the flame.
As with any other technique, HG-AFS suffers from interferences. Welz38 gave an extensive discussion about various interferences encountered in hydride generation. However, experience over a number of years has shown that with the greater sensitivity of AFS, dilution of the samples can significantly reduce or eliminate interferences. Spectral interference is not a problem for HG-AFS because the analyte element passes into the atomiser as gaseous hydride, while concomitants normally remain in the reaction vessel.
Since this review is primarily related to speciation studies, separation techniques such as HPLC and GC are used to separate the species prior to measurement. As the species are eluted they must be converted to the elemental form and care in this step is vitally important in order to maintain the integrity of the species and allow reliable measurement.
Several of the cited references refer to instrumentation that has been built in research departments, whilst others have coupled commercially available AFS instruments to commercial chromatographic systems. To the authors' knowledge, AFS instruments for the analysis of hydride-forming elements and mercury are currently being manufactured by several companies: P S Analytical Ltd, Orpington, Kent, UK, Brooks Rand Ltd, Seattle, WA, USA, Tekran Inc, Toronto, Canada and also by these companies in China: Beijing Titan Instrument Co, Beijing Rayleigh Analytical Instrument Corporation, East and West Analytical Instruments, Beijing and Beijing Kechuang Haiguang Instrument Co Ltd.
3. Speciation of As based on AFS detection
The speciation of arsenic involves several chemical species, both inorganic and organic ones. The oxyanions, arsenite and arsenate, the monomethyl and dimethyl arsenic species (MMA and DMA) generate volatile arsines when reduced with NaBH4 in acidic media. There are other methylated species, such as the trimethyl arsenic oxide (TMAO), tetramethyl arsenic ion (TETRA), arsenobetaine (AB), arsenocholine (AC) and several arsenoribosides (commonly referred to as arsenosugars), that do not readily form volatile species. In this case, the destruction of the organic part of the molecules is required prior to the HG step, and can be achieved by means of either photo-oxidation (with a strong oxidant K2S2O8 in basic media and UV radiation), thermooxidation (with a strong oxidant K2S2O8 in basic media and heating), or a microwave (MW) assisted digestion.
The addition of an H2 flow at the gas–liquid separator has been proposed, in order to maintain a steady flame in the AFS atomizer, and not to depend on the H2 produced during the hydride generation step.7
3.1. Speciation with chromatographic separation
HPLC based on ion-exchange is the preferred separation technique for arsenic speciation combined with AFS detection, as most of the arsenic species exist in solution as negatively or positively charge species, depending on the pH. They are separated commonly by HPLC using either strong ion exchange columns39 or in some cases with reversed phased columns with ion-paring reagents.40,41 The use of ion exchange columns is widely employed in most speciation studies, as the separation process is more reproducible and less prone to sample matrix interferences than with reversed phased columns with ion-paring reagents. Up to twelve arsenic species have been determined in a single run with an anion-exchange column.42 Detection limits in the µg L−1 level or lower are easily achieved with HPLC-HG-AFS. As an example, detection limits of 0.2, 0.1, 0.2, 0.2 and 0.3 µg L−1 have been reported for each of the following species: As(III), As(V), DMA, MMA and AsB (the later with a post-column UV photo-oxidation step).12 Improvement of the detection limits has been reported with new gas–liquid separator designs.43,44
The HPLC-HG-AFS have been successfully applied to a great variety of samples, as summarised in Table 1. There are applications to various types of aqueous samples, such as pore water,45 leachates from chromate-copper-treated wood,46 wastewater,47 gold mine tailings,48 acid mine drainage49–51 or beer.52 For urine samples,53 some authors have indicated the benefits of AFS compared to AAS8 and ICP-MS10 applied to speciation of inorganic species.
Table 1 Selected references (in chronological order) for As speciation with AFS detection




As species
Sample matrix
Instrumental coupling
Analytical features
Reference (year)





a Microwave assisted digestion.
b Trichloroacetic acid.
c Ultraviolet photo-oxidation.
d Thermo-oxidation.
e Environmental Protection Agency's Synthetic Precipitation Leaching Procedure and Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure.





As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, AsC, TMAO
Seaweeds, urine
HPLC-MWa-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing reagents + MeOH, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O mixture

40 (1996)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: aqueous TFAb + MeOH

41 (1996)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Urine
HPLC-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing reagents + MeOH

53 (1998)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB
Urine
HPLC-UVc-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8

12 (1998)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, TMAO, AsC, TETRA
Marine reference material
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine + citric acid, pH 2.65 polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6.0, sample extraction: MeOH/water mixture

67 (1999)


AsB, AsC, TMAO
Seafood
HPLC-TOd-HG-AFS
Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer + H2O, pH 4.5, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O mixture

70 (2000)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Fresh water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer + H2O, pH 6.0

43 (2001)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, arsenosugars
Oysters
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O

6 (2002)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Leachate from treated wood
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.81, sample extraction: EPA's SPLP and TCLPe

46 (2004)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, AsC, arsenosugars
Seafood
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine + HCl, pH 2.65, polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.6

71 (2005)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, Nitarsone
Chicken meat
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O

50 (2006)


As(III), As(V)
Acid mine drainage
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8

49 (2006)


As(III), As(V)
Mining polluted soils
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: H3PO4 and ascorbic acids

54 (2007)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Underground water, urine
HPLC-HG-AFS
Column: polymeric anion-exchange, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6

44 (2007)


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA
Gold mine tailings
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: ammonium phosphate, pH 6

48 (2008)




For inorganic solid samples, the arsenic species have to be previously extracted before injection onto the HPLC column. Both phosphoric acid and ascorbic acid solutions have been applied for extraction of polluted mining soil54,55 or reference materials (river sediment, agricultural soil, and sewage sludge).56,57 The extraction yield is improved by shaking, ultrasonic and microwave assisted extraction.58 Microwave irradiation works well for the extraction of soil, sludge and related samples' extraction, with efficiencies over 90% and short extraction times ranging 10–20 min. Lower recoveries are found when the extraction is performed with sonication. Hydroxylammonium hydrochloride solutions have also been employed for quantitative extraction of inorganic arsenic species from atmospheric particulate matter, such as total suspended particles,59 PM10 particles60 and PM2.5 particles.61 In this case, shorter extraction times (4 min) are obtained again with microwave irradiation in comparison with sonication (30 min). Other extractants such as water, CaCl2 and phosphoric acid solutions have been also employed with coarse and fine atmospheric particles.62,63
Mild extractants, mainly methanol/water mixtures, have been reported for biological samples: seaweeds,40 rice straw,64 feed,65 chicken meat,66 marine reference materials,67 oysters,68 fresh water fish69 and seafood.70,71 Photo-oxidation is required to determine the most common arsenic species found in biological samples (e.g. AsB, AsC and arsenosugars), as they do not generate volatile hydrides. Photo-oxidation to convert these species into inorganic arsenic is achieved after chromatographic separation by use of a strong oxidant (K2S2O8) and UV light emitted from a low pressure Hg lamp. The extraction times using microwave irradiation are similar to the ones found for inorganic samples, usually ranging from 10–30 min. The combination of microwave irradiation with an ultrasonic probe allows the extraction time for chicken meat samples to be reduced to 7 minutes. The extraction time has been further reduced to 3 min using pressurised liquid extraction for biological marine samples.72
3.2. Speciation of As without chromatographic separation
Speciation without chromatographic separation of the analytes can be performed by adjusting the reagents (NaBH4 and HCl solutions) employed for Hydride Generation. This allows the operator to select which species is converted into a volatile hydride. This off-line approach is reserved exclusively for inorganic and methylated arsenic species (As(III), As(V), MMA, and DMA). Some authors have described speciation of As(III) and As(V) in water by control of the acidity of the HG step. High acidity allows simultaneous determination of As(III) and As(V), whereas low acidity allows only As(III), as As(V) is not converted into a hydride at neutral or basic pH. As(V) is measured by difference of the two measurements. This approach has been applied to water73 and medicines.74 A more complete approach allows speciation of As(III), As(V), DMA, and MMA in wine, by control of the reaction media: citrate buffer for As(III), acetic acid for As(III) + DMA, 6 M HCl for As(III) + As(V). MMA is calculated by difference.75 A similar approach is employed by other authors for speciation of the same four arsenic species in vegetables.76
Another non-chromatographic approach for speciation of As(III) and As(V) in water considers Multisyringe Flow Injection Analysis (MSFIA) with one multi-port selection valve. KI is needed to reduce As(V) to As(III), so As(V) is measured by difference with total inorganic As.77
A recent alternative to chromatographic separation is the online separation of the arsenic species by Capillary Electrophoresis (CE). CE-HG-AFS has been reported for speciation of As(III), As(V), DMA and MMA. In this case, online preconcentration (enrichment factor 37–50 fold) of the arsenic species is achieved, setting a high pH of the sample solution and low pH of the CE buffer, allowing detection limits in the range 5.0–9.3 µg L−1.78 The design of an efficient interface, gas–liquid separator, AFS atomizer, and elimination of backpressure of CE separation has also been described.79 A microchip CE-HG-AFS version has also been described with As(III) and As(V) in water samples.80
4. Speciation of Se based on AFS detection
The majority of selenium speciation studies deal with two inorganic species (oxyanions selenite Se(IV) and selenate Se(VI)) and some selenoaminoacids (selecystine (SeCys), selenomethionine (SeMet), selenocisteine (SeCys(2)), selenoethionine(SeEt) and selenomethylselenocystine (SeMeSeCys)). Fewer studies also consider volatile selenium species (dimethyl selenide (DMSe), diethyl selenide (DEDSe) and dimethyl diselenide (DMDSe)). Of the two inorganic species and the selenoaminoacids, only inorganic Se(IV) forms a volatile hydride (SeH4) during the HG step. Se(VI) has to be reduced to Se(IV) before it reaches the AFS detector. The same procedure has to be followed for the selenoaminoacids, which includes an oxidation of the organic part of the molecules. Almost all publications describe the separation of the Se(IV), Se(VI) and selenoaminoacids by HPLC, either with reverse-phase columns, anion-exchange columns, or both types combined.81 Other alternatives to the chromatographic separation are CE and pervaporation (PV), although their use is not widely extended.
4.1. Speciation of Se with chromatographic separation
The early articles devoted to Se speciation with AFS detection determined Se(IV) and Se(VI) in aqueous media using a C18 silica column modified with didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB). The authors did not employ an intermediate HG step. Instead, they employed an ultrasonic nebulizer as interface between HPLC and AFS, which resulted in detection limits of 8.6 and 30 µg L−1 for the two oxyanions.82 For the separation of selenoaminoacids, the same research group tested also a hydraulic high pressure nebulizer as interface, with detection limits of 50, 42, and 71 µg L−1 for SeCys, SeMet and SeEt, respectively.83 When applied to real sample analysis (edible mushrooms), the use of hydraulic high pressure nebulisation resulted in complicated background effects and matrix problems.84
The first description of HPLC-HG-AFS for the Se speciation (Se(VI), Se(VI) and SeCys) employed a strong anion exchange column for chromatographic separation.85 The reduction of the oxidation state and the destruction of the organic portion of the selenoaminoacids were performed with MW assisted digestion and online addition of a redox mixture (HCl solution of KBr and KBrO3). This allowed detection limits of 0.2, 0.3 and 0.5 µg L−1 for selenite, selenocystine and selenate, respectively. The comparison of HG to ultrasonic nebulisation and hydraulic high pressure nebulisation corroborates the better detection limits obtained by HG.86 HPLC-MW-HG-AFS has been used employed for speciation of D and L enantiomers of Se in breast and formula milk.11 Online reduction after HPLC separation can also be accomplished by adding an HBr solution, heating at 100 °C. It has been applied to the determination of Se(IV), Se(VI) and SeCN in petroleum refinery wastewater and gold mine wastewater.87
Combinations of HPLC columns are frequently employed in Se speciation studies. Column switching with reversed and anion exchange columns has been proposed with HPLC-MW-AFS for the determination of Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys, SeMet and SeEt in aqueous solution88 and in Se spiked yeast, after pressurised liquid extraction (PLE).89 A similar combination of columns has been employed for the determination of selenium species in infant formulae and diet supplements.90 Other approaches combine both anion and cation-exchange columns.91
The use of UV irradiation (HPLC-UV-HG-AFS) has been also employed for the determination of selenoaminoacids in an instrumental coupling similar to the one used for arsenic speciation, either with an anion exchange column92 or a reversed-phase column modified with DDAB (didocecyldimethylammonium bromide).93 HPLC-UV-HG-AFS has been for Se speciation in aqueous samples (water and urine)94,95 and to a great variety of biological samples: reference material prepared from Brazil nuts,96 oyster extracts,97 selenium enriched pumpkin seeds,98 sesame seeds,99 selenious yeast tablets and spiked urine,95 cow milk after supplementation of feeding with Se forms,100 plant leaves101 and edible leaves.91 The extraction of the selenocompounds from these biological matrices is commonly accomplished by enzymatic or basic hydrolysis, as it has been reviewed.81 A summary of Se speciation applications based on AFS is described in Table 2.
Table 2 Selected references (in chronological order) for Se speciation with AFS detection




Se species
Sample matrix
Instrumental coupling
Analytical features
Reference (year)





a Ultrasonic nebulization.
b Didodecyldimethylammonium bromide.
c Hydraulic high pressure nebulization.
d Microwave induced reduction.
e Ultraviolet photo-oxidation.





Se(IV), Se(VI)
Aqueous standards
HPLC-USNa-AFS
Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,b mobile phase: phosphate buffer + MeOH + DDAB, pH 6

82 (1999)


SeMet, SeEt, SeCys
Aqueous standards
HPLC-HHPNc-AFS
Reversed-phase column, mobile phase aqueous TFA + MeOH

83 (1999)


Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys
Spiked water samples
HPLC-MWd-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion exchange column, mobile phase: KAc + K2SO4 pH 6.5

85 (1999)


S(IV), Se(VI), SeCys, SeMet
Water certified reference material
HPLC-UVe-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer

92 (2000)


Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCN
Gold mine wastewater
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: gradient elution with NaOH

87 (2001)


Se(IV), SeCys, SeMet, SeEt
Spiked food supplements
HPLC-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,d mobile phase: gradient elution with ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH + DDAB

93 (2001)


Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys, SeMet, SeEt
Water, urine
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,d mobile phase: ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH + DDAB

94 (2001)


Total Se, SeMet
Brazil nuts
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6, reversed-phase column modified with DDAB, mobile phase: ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH+ DDAB

96 (2003)


D-SeCys, L-SeMet isomers
Yeast
HPLC-MW-HG-AFS
Column switching: polymeric anion-exchange column + reversed phase column, mobile phase: H2O + KAc solution

89 (2004)


Se (IV), SeCys, SeMet
Water, oysters
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion

97 (2005)


Se(IV), SeMeCys, SeCys, SeMet
Yeast tablet, urine
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer

95 (2006)


Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys(2), SeMet
Cow milk
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing TEABr

100 (2007)


Total Se, SeMet
Sesame seeds
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridinium formate, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion

99 (2007)


Se(IV), Se(VI), SeMet, SeCys(2) SeMeSeCys
Plant leaves
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6, cation exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine, pH 1.5, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion

91 (2008)




It is worth mentioning the alternative to HG proposed by some authors,102 based on online UV photolysis and a UV/TiO2 photocatalyst reduction device, as the interface between HPLC and AFS. It has been successfully applied to the speciation of Se in water-soluble extracts of garlic shoots.
4.2. Speciation without chromatographic separation
Se speciation based on AFS detection without previous chromatographic separation is scarce, and most of them consider only Se(IV) and Se(VI). Flow systems combined with HG-AFS are the most common non-chromatographic approaches. The analysis of samples with and without a pre-reduction step using KBr allows the determination of Se(IV) or total inorganic selenium in milk, Se(VI) being calculated by difference.103 FIA-HG-AFS has been described for inorganic selenium speciation in sewage and sludge samples, combining extraction and reduction in a microwave oven. This setup allows determination of Se(IV) and total inorganic selenium.104 Also, there is an FIA application that uses online reduction with a novel electrochemical HG process for the determination of Se(IV) and Se(VI), consisting of an electromagnetic induction oven for reduction and a homemade tubular electrolytic cell as hydride generator. This alternative provides similar detection limits to conventional HG.105
Also, Capillary Electrophoresis has been coupled online to HG-AFS for speciation of Se(IV) and Se(VI) in water samples, using HCl for Se(VI) reduction. The detection limits are 33 and 25 µg L−1.106
A recent non-chromatographic speciation study107 considers a UV photochemical vapour generator for speciation of Se(IV) and Se(VI) with AFS detection, based on the reaction of the analyte with an organic acid under different reaction conditions. This approach gives good detection limits of 0.02 and 0.1 µg L−1 for Se(IV) and Se(VI), respectively.
There is one reference to PV coupled to AFS, for the determination of volatile methylated Se species (DMSE and DMDSe) for slurry sampling,108 although it presents the main drawback of pervaporation efficiencies ranging from 55–85%.
Proteomics, a particular case of speciation study, usually employs off-line non-chromatographic separations in combination with atomic detectors. Off-line separation by SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) followed by HG-AFS has been reported for the speciation study of Se-containing proteins.109
5. Speciation of Sb based on AFS detection
There are only three antimony species that are considered in speciation studies: the two oxyanions, antimonite Sb(III) and antimonate Sb(V), and the trimethylantimony ion (Me3Sb). All three generate volatile hydrides in acid media with NaBH4 solutions, although the poorer signal for Me3Sb can be enhanced by including a photo-oxidation step.
5.1. Speciation with chromatographic separation
Liquid chromatography is always employed as the separation technique, and most of the applications correspond to water samples. The earliest work utilizes HPLC-HG-AFS for speciation of Sb(III) and Sb(V) in water samples using a miniaturized polymeric anion-exchange column. The separation of the Sb species took place under isocratic conditions with an ammonium tartrate solution. Detection limits for Sb(III) and Sb(V) were 0.8 and 1.9 µg L−1, respectively.110 The same research group reported later a similar instrumental coupling for speciation of Sb(III), Sb(V) and Me3Sb. Chromatographic separation of the three compounds was achieved using a longer column, and a gradient programme with KOH and ammonium tartrate. Improved detection limits of 0.04, 0.09 and 0.26 µg L−1 were obtained.111 Other authors have also reported the speciation of the Sb(V) and Me3Sb species in water samples and environmental samples with a similar HPLC-HG-AFS coupling.112,113
The difficulties in obtaining reproducible chromatograms for Sb species have been emphasized.114 The concentration of the tartrate solution commonly used as mobile phase in gradient elution programmes is critical to avoid significant Sb(III) oxidation. Also, equilibrium time of the column was found to be critical to avoid Sb(III) double peak formation. These authors have applied HPLC-HG-AFS for speciation of Sb in terrestrial plants, using citric acid as extractant and sonication,115 and in coal fly ash, after extraction with citrate at pH 5.116
As mentioned above, the introduction of a UV photo-oxidation step has been proposed in order to improve the signal of the Me3Sb at the AFS detector. HPLC-UV-HG-AFS has been applied to the extraction of Sb species with citric and ascorbic acids in marine sediment extracts117 and marine biota (algae and mollusc).118 The optimization of the irradiation time and addition of K2S2O8 solution result in a detection limit for Me3Sb similar to that for inorganic species: 0.03, 0.04, and 0.03 µg L−1 for Sb(III), Sb(V) and Me3Sb, respectively.119 The main applications of Sb speciation with AFS detection are summarised in Table 3.
Table 3 Selected references (in chronological order) for Sb speciation with AFS detection




Se species
Sample matrix
Instrumental coupling
Analytical features
Reference (year)




Sb(III), Sb(V)
Water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: ammonium tartrate pH 6.9

110 (2000)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient

112 (2001)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient

111 (2002)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Water
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient

114 (2004)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Sediment reference material
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: EDTA + hydrogen phthalate, sample extraction: citric and ascorbic acid

117 (2005)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Terrestrial plants
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient, sample extraction: citric acid

119 (2006)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Water, soil reference material
HPLC-HG-AFS
Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: 20 mM EDTA, 8 mM hydrogen phthalate, 1 mM carbonate, pH 10

113 (2006)


Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb
Marine algae, molluscs
HPLC-UV-HG-AFS
Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: EDTA + hydrogen phthalate, sample extraction: H2O, MeOH, EDTA, citric acid

118 (2007)




5.2. Speciation without chromatographic separation
There are few examples of non-chromatographic Sb speciation. Speciation of Sb(III) and Sb(V) is achieved in water samples by HG-AFS considering that adding 8-hydroxyquinoline effectively masks hydride generation of Sb(V), thus preventing its AFS detection. Therefore, in two independent analyses, Sb(III) or total inorganic antimony is determined, and Sb(V) is calculated by difference.120 Also, flow injection with online preconcentration has been applied for Sb(III) and Sb(V) speciation in natural waters. Sb(III) is retained as a complex with ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) at pH 1 in a knotted reactor, whereas Sb(V) is not. Afterwards, Sb(III) is eluted with HCl 1.5 M.121
6. Speciation of Hg based on AFS detection
Hg speciation considers inorganic Hg(II), alkylated compounds (MeHg and EtHg) and arylated compounds (PhHg). The separation of the mercury species can be achieved either by GC or HPLC, although GC is preferred. CV is employed with liquid chromatography as online post-column derivatisation to convert inorganic Hg to its elemental state Hg0, using either SnCl2 or NaBH4 solutions. For methylated compounds additional steps are necessary, such as pyrolysis with GC separation, oxidation with either UV or an oxidising solution, prior to vapour generation AFS detection.
6.1. Speciation with chromatographic separation
When liquid chromatography is employed in combination with AFS detection (HPLC-CV-AFS), it is compulsory to include an online intermediate step in order to convert the organic mercury species into inorganic mercury. This oxidation has been achieved by various means: K2S2O8 + Cu(II) solution for MeHg and EtHg,122 ultraviolet radiation for MeHg123 or addition of a KBr/KBrO3 mixture in HCl.124 The chromatographic separation of Hg species is always achieved with reversed-phase columns124–126 with mixtures of water, organic solvents (e.g. MeOH) and sometimes the addition of a complexing agent (e.g. 2-mercaptoethanol).125 Detection limits of 0.2 µg L−1 for MeHg, 0.07 µg L−1 for Hg(II), 0.06 µg L−1 for PhHg, and 0.12 µg L−1 for EtHg have been reported.
HPLC-CV-AFS has been applied to liquid samples (river water)126 and solid samples. In this latter case, an extraction medium is required: 6 M HCl + 0.1 M NaCl for fish samples,125 50% aqueous MeOH + 0.2 M citric acid for marine biota (zoobenthos)126 and river sediments.122,123
Gas chromatography has been more widely employed than liquid chromatography for Hg speciation with AFS detection. Although there are some early references that used GC-AFS,127,128 most of them include an online intermediate step for Hg species oxidation, pyrolysis (pyro) being the most widely employed.129 Before analysis by GC-pyro-AFS, all samples have to be extracted with an appropriated organic solvent. Stockwell and Lean130 have coupled commercially available gas chromatography instruments with a specific commercial mercury atomic fluorescence detector. Fully automated instruments are therefore available and an example is shown in Fig. 3. The various mercury species are separated in the GC column and as they emerge from the outlet are pyrolysed to form mercury which is quantified on the AFS detector. Lean and Stockwell131 have used similar systems to provide a valuable speciation service for a range of sample types. It is also a common procedure to derivatise the analytes to increase their volatility. Hg and MeHg in water samples have been extracted with dithiozone into an organic solvent and ethylated with sodium tetraethyl borate (NaBEt4).132 Ethylation has also been applied to seafood,133 sediments,134 biological samples and vaccines.135 Phenylation has also been proposed for derivatisation of MeHg in marine fish products, followed by solid phase microextraction.136,137 Enzymolysis or alkaline extraction has been employed for organomercury in food samples138 and fish reference material.139Table 4 contains several applications of AFS to Hg speciation.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram and photograph of the GC-AFS system. 
Table 4 Selected references (in chronological order) for Hg speciation with AFS detection




Hg species
Sample matrix
Instrumental coupling
Analytical features
Reference (year)





a Solid-phase microextraction.
b Microwave assisted extraction.





EtHg, MeHg
Water
GC-AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: preconcentration onto sulfhydryl cotton fibre, KBr + CuSO4 elution, back extraction with Cl2CH2

127 (1996)


MeHg
Fish certified reference material
GC-AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization + SPMEa

128 (1998)


Hg(II), MeHg
Sediment CRM
HPLC-UV-CV-AFS
Reversed-phase column. Mobile phase: MeOH + 2 mercaptoethanol, pH 5, sample extraction: KOH/MeOH in ultrasonic bath, back extraction with Cl2CH2

123 (2001)


MeHg, EtHg
Food
GC-pyro-AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: alkaline extraction, enzymolysis, Cl2CH2/C6H8 extraction

138 (2002)


Hg(II), MeHg
Water
GC-pyro-AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization

132 (2002)


Hg(II), MeHg
Seafood
GC-pyro-AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization

133 (2004)


Complexes of MeHg, EtHg, PhHg
Fish
HPLC-CV-AFS
Reversed-phase column. Mobile phase: 7% MeOH and 0.05% 2-mercaptoethanol, pH 5, sample extraction: 6 M HCl + 1 M NaOH + MAEb

125 (2004)


MeHg, EtHg
Human biological samples
GC-pyro_AFS
Capillary column. Sample extraction: acid leaching, Cl2H2 extraction, NaPR4B derivatisation

135 (2007)




Detection limits of GC-pyro-AFS have been improved by some authors following different procedures. Derivatisation followed by cryogenic trapping has been successfully applied prior to GC-pyro-AFS for the determination of Hg(II) and MeHg in surface water140 and sediments134 with improved detection limits of 0.13 ng L−1 for Hg(II) and 0.01 ng L−1 for MeHg with HG. Also, a two-fold improvement of detection limits for Hg(II) and MeHg with GC-pyro-AFS has been reported using a home-modified AFS detector, with the inclusion of a quartz flow cell into the detector, which increases the concentration of Hg atoms in the detector.141
6.2. Speciation without chromatographic separation
Flow injection systems have been applied for Hg(II) and MeHg speciation. Online UV decomposition followed by CV-AFS has been applied to river water, preconcentrating both species in a column containing 2-mercaptobenzimidazole loaded on silica gel. Desorption of inorganic Hg is performed with 0.05 M potassium cyanide (KCN) and MeHg with 2 M HCl.142 Also, acidic slurries of certified reference materials (fish), with traces of K2Cr2O7 and a surfactant, are injected into the flow system. Mercury species are oxidised by adding a mixture of KBr/KBrO3 heated at 50 °C for total Hg determination. In the absence of the oxidant, free Hg is measured.143
Another proposal to distinguish between Hg(II) and MeHg is photo-induced chemical/cold vapour generation, using only one reagent, formic acid. Under room natural light or UV irradiation, both species are converted to Hg0, which are later detected by CV-AFS. In the absence of UV irradiation, only Hg(II) is measured, whereas MeHg is calculated by difference.80,107
Also, a new vapour generation system for Hg species (Hg(II) and MeHg) has been proposed, based on the UV irradiation of mercaptoethanol as an effective sample introduction unit for AFS detection. The new method has been validated with CRMs (BRC 463 tuna fish and BCR 580 estuarine sediment).144
There are some recent applications of CE directly coupled to AFS for speciation of Hg(I), MeHg, EtHg, and PhHg. The use of a hydrostatically modified electro-osmotic flow and a new developed interface allows online volatile species formation. The detection limits reported (6.8–16.5 µg L−1) are in the same range as those obtained by chromatographic separation. So far, it has been successfully applied to Hg speciation in marine Certified Reference Materials (CRMs).145 Another application of CE is the online hyphenation of flow injection, miniaturized CE and AFS. Hyphenation of FI-CE is achieved by a modified flow-through chamber as interface. The capillary outlet of CE was coupled to the AFS with a concentric “tube-in-tube” interface. A fast separation of Hg(II) and MeHg takes place in 60 s, with detection limits of 0.1 and 0.2 µg mL−1, when applied to water samples.146 The same authors have described an alternative of chip-based CE in connection to AFS detection, for speciation studies.147
7. Multielemental speciation
Multielemental speciation can be achieved either by coupling in tandem two AFS detectors, or using dual channel AFS instruments. The first approach has been employed for simultaneous determination of Se(IV) and Se(VI), As(III), As(V), DMA, and MMA in contaminated water samples.86 Equally, two AFS detectors in series have been coupled for simultaneous determination of As(III), As(V), MMA and mercury species (Hg2+ and MeHg+) in spiked natural fresh water samples.148 On the other hand, dual channel instruments have been employed for the simultaneous speciation of As(III), As(V), Sb(III) and Sb(V) in traditional Chinese medicines, by control of acidity.74
8. Conclusions and future work
The use of AFS detection is widely extended for speciation of As, Se, Sb and Hg, for both routine and research studies, comprising more than a hundred scientific articles published in the last decade. Analytical features, such as low detection limits and wide linear calibration ranges, make AFS a suitable atomic detector in speciation studies, superior to AAS and equal to ICP-MS or ICP-AES, as long as single element speciation studies are considered. Compared to ICP techniques, AFS provides additional advantages: low acquisition and running costs, robustness and ease of operation.
Whilst future developments in the vapourisation step and the preference of the instrumentation for atomic fluorescence may emerge, it is the simplicity of the current instrumentation of both AFS and CV that is most appealing and ensures its continuing use for speciation studies.
There is no doubt that speciation studies will become more relevant, however, it is necessary to define adequate international standard methods so that data are transferable between different regimes. Other separation techniques may be added to the analysts' expertise, however, it is clear that AFS is an invaluable tool for the analyst.
References
D. M. Templeton, F. Ariese, R. Cornelis, L. G. Danielsson, H. Muntau, H. P. Van Leeuwen and R. Lobinski, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72(8), 1453–1470 CrossRef CAS .

Trace Element Speciation for Environment, Food and Health, ed. L. Ebdon, L. Pitts, R. Cornelis, H. Crews, O. F. X. Donard and Ph. Quevauviller, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2001 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Elemental Speciation II: Species in the Environment, Food, Medicine and Occupational Work, ed. R. Cornelis, J. Caruso, H. Crews and K. Heumann, Wiley, Chichester,  2005 Search PubMed .

          W. Goessler and D. Kuehnelt, in Environmental Chemistry of Arsenic, ed. W. T. Frankenberger, Jr, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2002, ch. 2, pp. 27–50 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Elemental Speciation: Techniques and Methodology, ed. R. Cornelis, J. Caruso, H. Crews and K. Heumann K, Wiley, Chichester,  2003 Search PubMed .
D. Sanchez-Rodas, A. Geiszinger, J. L. Gomez-Ariza and K. A. Francesconi, Analyst, 2002, 127, 60–65 RSC .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas and I. Giraldez, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1999, 74, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Heilier, J. P. Buchet, V. Haufroid and D. Lison, Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health, 2005, 78(1), 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas, I. Giraldez and E. Morales, Talanta, 2000, 51, 257–268 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Lindberg, W. Goessler, M. Grander, B. Nermell and M. Mahter, Toxicol. Lett., 2007, 168(3), 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, V. Bernal-Daza and M. J. Villegas-Portero, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 520(1–2), 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas, R. Beltran, W. Corns and P. Stockwell, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12, 439–447 CrossRef CAS .
T. Guerin, A. Astruc and M. Astruc, Talanta, 1999, 50, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, Trends Anal. Chem., 2000, 19(1), 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leemakers, W. Baeyens and Ph. Quevauviller, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(5), 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smedts, C. Meert, C. H. C. De Bisschop, R. Morabito and Ph. Quevauviller, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kumar and P. Riyazuddin, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2007, 87(7), 469–500 CrossRef CAS .

          G. K. Kirkbright and M. Sargent, in Atomic Absorption and Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Academic Press, London,  1974 Search PubMed .

          C. Th. J. Alkemade and P. J. Th. Zeegers, in Spectrochemical Methods of Analysis, ed. J. D. Winefordner, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .

          L. H. J. Lajunen and P. Perämäk, in Spectrochemical Analysis by Atomic Absorption and Emission, RSC, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  2004, ch. 7, pp. 276–285 Search PubMed .

          P. B. Stockwell and W. T. Corns, Automatic Chemical Analysis, Taylor and Francis, London, ISBN 0-7484-0480-05,  1996 Search PubMed .
Reproduced from PSA10.055 Millennium Excalibur User Manual, Issue 1.0, March 1998, by permission of P S Analytical Ltd.

          Y. Cai, Atomic Fluorescence in Environmental Analysis, in Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry,  2000, ed. R. A. Meyers, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 2270–2292 Search PubMed .
Reproduced from PSA10.025 Millennium Merlin User Manual, Issue 1.0, October 1997, by permission of P S Analytical Ltd.
J. Olafsson, Mar. Chem., 1982, 11, 129–142 CrossRef CAS .
O. Szakacss, A. Lasztity and Z. Horvath, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1980, 121, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Jones, M. E. Jacobson, R. Jaffe, J. West-Thomas, C. Arfstrom and A. Alli, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 1995, 80, 1285–1294 CAS .
J. P. Hurley, J. N. Benoit, C. L. Babiarz, M. M. Shafer, A. W. Andren, J. R. Sullivan, R. Hammond and D. A. Webb, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 1867–1875 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gagnon, A. Pelletier and A. Mucci, Mar. Chem., 1997, 59, 159–176 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jaffe, Y. Cai, J. West-Thomas, M. Morales and R. D. Jones, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 1997, 59, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Mason and K. A. Sullivan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 942–947 CrossRef CAS .
W. Van Delft and G. Vos, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1988, 209, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Campell, Pure Appl. Chem., 1992, 64(2), 227–244 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Dědina and D. L. Tsalev, in Hydride Generation Atomic Absorption Spectrometry, ed. J. D. Winefordner and I. M. Kolthoff, Wiley, Chichester,  1995 Search PubMed ; A. D. Campbell, Pure Appl. Chem., 1992, 64(2), 227–244 Search PubMed .
K. Tsujii and K. Kuga, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1974, 72, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Thompson, Analyst, 1975, 100, 307–310 RSC .
W. T. Corns, P. B. Stockwell, L. Ebdon and S. H. Hill, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1993, 8, 71–77 RSC .

          B. Welz, in Atomic Absorption Spectrometry, 2nd edn, VCH, Weinheim,  1985 Search PubMed .
J. T. Van Eltern and Z. Slejkovec, J. Chromatogr., A, 1997, 789, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Le, M. S. Ma and N. A. Wong, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 4501–4506 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mester and P. Fodor, J. Chromatogr., A, 1996, 756, 292 CrossRef .
S. Simon, H. Tran, F. Pannier and M. Potin-Gautier, J. Chromatogr., A, 2004, 1024, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bohari, A. Astruc and J. Cloud, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16, 774–778 RSC .
C. J. Wei and J. X. Liu, Talanta, 2007, 73(3), 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hutton, D. W. Bryce, W. Russeau, H. J. Glass, L. E. T. Jenkin, W. T. Corns and P. B. Stockwell, Mineral. Mag., 2005, 69(5), 577–589 CrossRef CAS .
B. I. Khan, H. M. Solo-Gabriele, B. K. Dubey, T. G. Townsend and Y. Cai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(17), 4527–4534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Segura, J. Muñoz, Y. Madrid and C. Cámara, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374, 513–519 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Luo, L. Q. Zhao and B. X. Xu, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2008, 28(1), 206–208 CAS .
V. Oliveira, A. M. Sarmiento, J. L. Gomez-Ariza, J. M. Nieto and D. Sanchez-Rodas, Talanta, 2006, 69(5), 1182–1189 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sanchez-Rodas, V. Oliveira, A. M. Sarmiento, J. L. Gomez-Ariza and J. M. Nieto, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(7), 1594–1599 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Sarmiento, V. Oliveira, J. L. Gomez-Ariza, J. M. Nieto and D. Sanchez-Rodas, Chemosphere, 2007, 66(4), 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Melo Cohelo, C. Parrilla, M. L. Cervera, A. Pastor and M. de la Guardia, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 482, 73–80 CrossRef .
X. C. Le and M. Ma, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70(9), 1926 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ruiz-Chancho, R. Sabe, J. F. López-Sanchez, R. Rubio and P. Thomas, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 151(3–4), 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ruiz-Chancho, J. F. López-Sanchez and R. Rubio, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 387(2), 627–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vergara Gallardo, Y. Bohari, A. Astruc, M. Potin-Gautier and M. Astruc, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 44, 257–268 CrossRef .
M. Montperrus, Y. Bohari, M. Bueno, A. Astruc and M. Astruc, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 16, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Yuan, B. He, E. L. Gao, J. X. Lu and G. B. Jiang, Microchim. Acta, 2007, 159(1–2), 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
V. Oliveira, J. L. Gomez-Ariza and D. Sanchez-Rodas, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(2), 335–340 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sanchez-Rodas, A. M. S. de la Campa, J. D. de la Rosa, V. Oliveira, J. L. Gomez-Ariza, X. Querol and A. Alastuey, Chemosphere, 2007, 66(8), 1485–1493 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Sanchez de la Campa, J. D. de la Rosa, D. Sanchez-Rodas, V. Oliveira, A. Alastuey, X. Querol and J. L. Gómez Ariza, Atmos. Environ., 2008, 42, 6487–6495 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Slejkovec, I. Salma, J. T. Van Eltern and E. Zemplen-Papp, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 830–834 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Farinha, J. Slejkovec, J. T. Van Elteren, H. T. Wolterbeek and M. C. Freitas, J. Atmos. Chem., 2004, 49, 343–353 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Yuan, G. B. Jiang and B. He, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 103–110 RSC .
J. J. Liu, H. X. Yu, H. B. Song, J. Qiu, F. M. Sun, P. Li and S. M. Yang, J. Environ. Monit., 2008, 10(8), 975–978 RSC .
D. Sanchez-Rodas, J. L. Gomez-Ariza and V. Oliveira, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385(7), 1172–1177 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Slejkovec, J. T. Van Eltern and A. R. Byrne, Talanta, 1999, 49, 619–627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vilano and R. Rubio, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 15, 658–666 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Slejkovec, Z. Bajc and D. Z. Doganoc, Talanta, 2004, 62(5), 931–936 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Suñer, V. Devesa, I. Rivas, D. Vélez and R. Montoro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1501–1507 RSC .
R. Schaeffer, C. Soeroes, I. Ipolyi, P. Fodor and N. S. Thomaidis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 547(1), 109–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Mato-Fernandez, J. R. Otero-Rey, J. Moreda-Pineiro, E. Alonso-Rodriguez, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo and D. Prada-Rodriguez, Talanta, 2007, 71(2), 515–520 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ma, W. B. Xie, J. Liu, X. Y. Li and Y. W. Jin, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2007, 27(4), 807–809 CAS .
L. L. Yang, N. Li and D. Q. Zhang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2007, 27(4), 810–812 CAS .
I. B. Karadjova, L. Lampugnani, M. Onor, A. D'Ulivo and D. L. Tsalev, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 816–823 CrossRef .
M. N. M. Reyes, M. L. Cervera, R. C. Campos and M. de la Guardia, Talanta, 2008, 75(3), 811–816 CrossRef CAS .
L. O. Leal, R. Forteza and V. Cerdá, Talanta, 2006, 69(2), 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25(12), 1837–1842 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin, Y. Jiang, X. P. Yan and X. W. He, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2004, 25(4), 618–621 CAS .
F. Li, D. D. Wang, X. P. Yan, R. G. Su and J. M. Lin, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2006, 26(6), 1158–1161 CAS .
J. L. Capello, C. Fernández, B. Pedras, P. Santos, P. González and C. Vaz, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1442–1447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mester and P. Fodor, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 386(1–2), 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
E. Puskel, Z. Mester and P. Fodor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14(6), 973–976 RSC .
Z. Stefanka, I. Ipolyi, M. Dernovics and P. Fodor, Talanta, 2001, 55(3), 437–447 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas, E. Morales, O. Hergott and I. L. Mar, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1999, 12(10), 783–787 CrossRef .
I. Ipolyi and P. Fodor, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 413(1–2), 12–23 .
D. Wallschlager and N. S. Bloom, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16(11), 1322–1328 RSC .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas, M. Caro, I. Giraldez and E. Morales, J. Chromatogr., A, 2000, 889, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, M. A. C. de la Torre, I. Giraldez and E. Morales, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 524(1–2), 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vinas, I. Lopez-Garcia, B. Merino-Merono, N. Campillo and M. Hernández-Córdoba, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 535(1–2), 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
D. Majez, J. Osvald and V. Stibilj, Food Chem., 2008, 107(1), 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vilano and R. Rubio, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15(2), 177–180 RSC .
I. Ipolyi, Z. Stefenka and P. Fodor, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 435(2), 367–375 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ipolyi, W. Corns, P. Stockwell and P. Fodor, J. Autom. Methods Manage. Chem., 2001, 23(6), 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, S. M. Mo, P. Zhang, Y. Q. Cai, S. F. Mou, G. B. Jiang and M. J. Wen, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1118(1), 139–143 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Bodo, Z. Stefanka, I. Ipolyi, C. Soros, M. Dernovics and P. Fodor, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(1), 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. Simons, A. Barats, F. Pannier and M. Potin-Gautier, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(4), 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
P. Smrkolj, V. Stibilj, I. Kreft and E. Kapolna, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(12), 1501–1504 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kapolna, V. Gerely, M. Dernovics, A. Illes and P. Fodor, J. Food Eng., 2007, 79(2), 494–501 CrossRef CAS .
O. Muniz-Naveiro, R. Dominguez-Gonzalez, A. Bermejo-Barrera, P. Bermejo-Barrera, J. A. Cocho and J. M. Fraga, Talanta, 2007, 71(4), 1587–1593 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mazej, I. Falnoga, M. Veber and V. Stibilj, Talanta, 2006, 68, 558–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Q. Q. Wang and B. L. Huang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(2), 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cavas-Montesinos, A. de la Guardia, T. Teustch, M. L. Cervera and M. De la Guardia, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 696–699 RSC .
A. E. Moreno, C. Perez-Conde and C. Camara, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15(6), 681–868 RSC .
W. B. Zhang, W. Gan, L. J. Shao and X. Q. Lin, Spectrosc. Lett., 2006, 39(6), 533–545 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lu and X. P. Yan, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(1), 155–160 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. H. He, Q. Ma and X. D. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 746–750 RSC .
M. E. Moreno, R. Munoz, C. Perez-Conde and C. Camara, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2000, 78(3–4), 413–426 .
C. Y. Chen, J. J. Zhao, P. Q. Zhang and Z. F. Chai, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 272(3), 426–430 .
A. Sayago, R. Beltran and J. L. Gomez-Ariza, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15(4), 423–428 RSC .
A. Sayago, R. Beltran, M. A. F. Recamales and J. L. Gomez-Ariza, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1400–1404 RSC .
P. J. Craig, T. Sergeeva and R. O. Jenkins, Microchim. Acta, 2001, 137(3–4), 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vinas, I. Lopez-García, B. Merino-Meroño and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Talanta, 2006, 68(4), 1401–1405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miravet, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, J. Chromatogr., A, 2004, 1052(1–2), 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miravet, E. Billa, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(12), 1207–1213 RSC .
R. Miravet, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 576(2), 200–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Potin-Gautier, F. Pannier, W. Quiroz, H. Pinochet and I. de Gregori, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 553(1–2), 214–222 CrossRef CAS .
I. De Greogi, W. Quiroz, H. Pinochet, F. Pannier and M. Potin-Gautier, Talanta, 2007, 73(3), 458–465 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miravet, E. Bonilla, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 20(1), 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Deng, Y. W. Chen and N. Belzile, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 432(2), 293–302 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Jin, Y. Tian, X. C. Tao and S. P. Bi, At. Spectrosc., 2007, 28(6), 220–226 CAS .
H. Hintelmann and R. D. Wilken, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1993, 7(3), 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramalhosa, S. R. Segade, E. Pereira, C. Vale and A. Duarte, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 448(1–2), 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bramanti, C. Lomonte, M. Onor, R. Zamboni, A. D'Ulivo and G. Raspi, Talanta, 2005, 66(3), 762–768 CrossRef CAS .
P. Houserova, D. Matejicek, V. Kuban, J. Pavlickova and J. Komarek, J. Sep. Sci., 2006, 29(2), 248–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Margetinova, P. Houserova-Pelcova and V. Kuban, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 615(2), 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, R. Jaffe, A. Alli and R. D. Jones, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1996, 334(3), 251–259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, S. Monsalud, K. G. Furton, R. Jaffe and R. D. Jones, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12(8–9), 565–569 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Cabanero, C. Carvahlo, Y. Madrid, C. Batoreu and C. Camara, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2005, 103(1), 17–36 CrossRef CAS .

          P. B. Stockwell and D. Lean, personal communication.

          D. Lean and P. B. Stockwell, personal communication.
M. Logar, M. Horvat, H. Akagi and B. Pihlar, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(6), 1051–1021 .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, F. Lorenzo, T. Garcia-Barerra and D. Sanchez-Rodas, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 511(1), 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stoichev, R. C. R. Martin-Doimeadios, E. Tessier, D. Amouroux and O. F. X. Donard, Talanta, 2004, 62(2), 433–438 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gibicar, M. Logar, N. Horvat, A. Marn-Pernat, R. Ponikvar and M. Horvat, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 388(2), 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jokai, L. Abranko and P. Fodor, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53(14), 5499–5505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Abranko, B. Kmellar and P. Fodor, Microchem. J., 2007, 85(1), 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ebdon, M. E. Foulkes, S. Le Roux and R. Munoz-Olivas, Analyst, 2002, 127(8), 1108–1114 RSC .
J. J. B. Nevado, R. C. R. Martin-Doimeadios, F. J. C. Bernardo and M. J. Moreno, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1093(1–2), 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stoichev, R. C. R. Martin-Doimadios, D. Amoroux, N. Molenat and O. X. F. Donard, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 517–521 RSC .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, F. Lorenzo and T. Garcia-Barrera, Chemosphere, 2005, 61(10), 1401–1409 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bagheri and A. Gholami, Talanta, 2001, 55(6), 1141–1150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cava-Montesinos, A. de la Guardia, C. Teustch, M. L. Cervera, A. Pastor and M. de la Guardia, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1386–1390 RSC .
Y. M. Yin, J. H. Qiu, L. M. Yang and Q. Q. Wang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 388(4), 831–836 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Yan, X. B. Yin, D. Q. Jiang and X. W. He, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(7), 1726–1732 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Wang, F. Li and X. P. Yan, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1117(2), 246–249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, D. D. Wang, X. P. Yan, R. G. Su and J. M. Lin, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2006, 26(6), 1158–1161 CAS .
J. L. Gomez-Ariza, F. Lorenzo and T. Garcia-Barrera, J. Chromatogr., A, 2004, 1056(1–2), 139–144 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
D. Sánchez-Rodas	Daniel A. Sanchez-Rodas Navarro studied at his hometown University (Seville, Spain), getting a BSc in Chemistry in 1992. He obtained a PhD in Analytical Chemistry in 1997 at the University of Huelva (Spain), where he actually holds a position as Senior Lecturer (Professor Titular de Universidad) in Analytical Chemistry since 2008. He has also performed research activities at the Universities of Siegen (Germany), Odense (Denmark) and at P S Analytical Ltd (UK). His main research interests are speciation of As, Se and Sb in environmental samples, focused on sample treatment and the hyphenation of chromatography and atomic spectroscopy detectors.
W. T. Corns	Dr Warren Corns graduated from the University College of North Wales with a BSc in Marine Chemistry in 1988. He was awarded a Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Plymouth in 1991 and is currently the Head of Research and Development for P S Analytical. In 1996 Warren was awarded the Hilger Atomic Spectroscopy Prize. He is the appointed Royal Society of Chemistry, UK principal expert serving on ISO, CEN, and BSI standardization committees for mercury measurements in natural gas and ambient air. Dr Corns has published more than 50 peer-reviewed articles concerning trace element analysis of mercury and hydride forming elements.
B. Chen	Dr Bin Chen has extensive analytical chemistry experience in the field of trace metal speciation analysis and hydride generation techniques using GC, HPLC, ICP-MS, AFS and AAS. Bin completed a PhD in Analytical Chemistry at Xiamen University in 2002. As a postdoctoral fellow at University of Heidelberg in Germany he was awarded a Fellowship of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for his research into the Geochemical Cycle of Antimony in the German Environment. In 2005 he joined School of Public Health at University of Michigan in USA. In 2007 Bin relocated to the UK to become Senior Applications Specialist at P S Analytical.
P. B. Stockwell	Peter Stockwell has a broad experience, in government scientific service, in academia, in a large instrumentation company and now since 1983 as founder and managing director of his own scientific instrument company P S Analytical (PSA). PSA develops instruments for the determination of mercury, arsenic, selenium and antimony. Along with the University of Plymouth and Petronas Gas Malaysia, PSA were awarded the Royal Society of Chemistry Industrial Division Team Award in March 2000. In 2009 PSA and the National Physical Laboratory received the CITAC award for their contribution to metrology for the validation of a calibration standard for mercury measurement.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the continuous flow vapour/hydride generator and optical configuration of an AFS system for mercury analysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Block diagram for the Excalibur Atomic Fluorescence Detector.	 


As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, AsC, TMAO	Seaweeds, urine	HPLC-MWa-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing reagents + MeOH, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O mixture	
40 (1996)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: aqueous TFAb + MeOH	
41 (1996)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Urine	HPLC-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing reagents + MeOH	
53 (1998)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB	Urine	HPLC-UVc-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8	
12 (1998)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, TMAO, AsC, TETRA	Marine reference material	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine + citric acid, pH 2.65 polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6.0, sample extraction: MeOH/water mixture	
67 (1999)
AsB, AsC, TMAO	Seafood	HPLC-TOd-HG-AFS	Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer + H2O, pH 4.5, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O mixture	
70 (2000)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Fresh water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer + H2O, pH 6.0	
43 (2001)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, arsenosugars	Oysters	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O	
6 (2002)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Leachate from treated wood	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.81, sample extraction: EPA's SPLP and TCLPe	
46 (2004)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, AsC, arsenosugars	Seafood	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine + HCl, pH 2.65, polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.6	
71 (2005)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA, AsB, Nitarsone	Chicken meat	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: MeOH/H2O	
50 (2006)
As(III), As(V)	Acid mine drainage	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8	
49 (2006)
As(III), As(V)	Mining polluted soils	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 5.8, sample extraction: H3PO4 and ascorbic acids	
54 (2007)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Underground water, urine	HPLC-HG-AFS	Column: polymeric anion-exchange, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6	
44 (2007)
As(III), As(V), MMA, DMA	Gold mine tailings	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: ammonium phosphate, pH 6	
48 (2008)


Se(IV), Se(VI)	Aqueous standards	HPLC-USNa-AFS	Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,b mobile phase: phosphate buffer + MeOH + DDAB, pH 6	
82 (1999)
SeMet, SeEt, SeCys	Aqueous standards	HPLC-HHPNc-AFS	Reversed-phase column, mobile phase aqueous TFA + MeOH	
83 (1999)
Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys	Spiked water samples	HPLC-MWd-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion exchange column, mobile phase: KAc + K2SO4 pH 6.5	
85 (1999)
S(IV), Se(VI), SeCys, SeMet	Water certified reference material	HPLC-UVe-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer	
92 (2000)
Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCN	Gold mine wastewater	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: gradient elution with NaOH	
87 (2001)
Se(IV), SeCys, SeMet, SeEt	Spiked food supplements	HPLC-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,d mobile phase: gradient elution with ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH + DDAB	
93 (2001)
Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys, SeMet, SeEt	Water, urine	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column modified with DDAB,d mobile phase: ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH + DDAB	
94 (2001)
Total Se, SeMet	Brazil nuts	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6, reversed-phase column modified with DDAB, mobile phase: ammonium acetate buffer + MeOH+ DDAB	
96 (2003)
D-SeCys, L-SeMet isomers	Yeast	HPLC-MW-HG-AFS	Column switching: polymeric anion-exchange column + reversed phase column, mobile phase: H2O + KAc solution	
89 (2004)
Se (IV), SeCys, SeMet	Water, oysters	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion	
97 (2005)
Se(IV), SeMeCys, SeCys, SeMet	Yeast tablet, urine	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer	
95 (2006)
Se(IV), Se(VI), SeCys(2), SeMet	Cow milk	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Reversed-phase column, mobile phase: ion-pairing TEABr	
100 (2007)
Total Se, SeMet	Sesame seeds	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: pyridinium formate, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion	
99 (2007)
Se(IV), Se(VI), SeMet, SeCys(2) SeMeSeCys	Plant leaves	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion exchange column, mobile phase: phosphate buffer, pH 6, cation exchange column, mobile phase: pyridine, pH 1.5, sample extraction: enzymatic digestion	
91 (2008)

Sb(III), Sb(V)	Water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: ammonium tartrate pH 6.9	
110 (2000)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient	
112 (2001)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient	
111 (2002)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Water	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient	
114 (2004)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Sediment reference material	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: EDTA + hydrogen phthalate, sample extraction: citric and ascorbic acid	
117 (2005)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Terrestrial plants	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: KOH and ammonium tartrate gradient, sample extraction: citric acid	
119 (2006)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Water, soil reference material	HPLC-HG-AFS	Polymeric cation-exchange column, mobile phase: 20 mM EDTA, 8 mM hydrogen phthalate, 1 mM carbonate, pH 10	
113 (2006)
Sb(III), Sb(V), Me3Sb	Marine algae, molluscs	HPLC-UV-HG-AFS	Polymeric anion-exchange column, mobile phase: EDTA + hydrogen phthalate, sample extraction: H2O, MeOH, EDTA, citric acid	
118 (2007)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram and photograph of the GC-AFS system.	 


EtHg, MeHg	Water	GC-AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: preconcentration onto sulfhydryl cotton fibre, KBr + CuSO4 elution, back extraction with Cl2CH2	
127 (1996)
MeHg	Fish certified reference material	GC-AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization + SPMEa	
128 (1998)
Hg(II), MeHg	Sediment CRM	HPLC-UV-CV-AFS	Reversed-phase column. Mobile phase: MeOH + 2 mercaptoethanol, pH 5, sample extraction: KOH/MeOH in ultrasonic bath, back extraction with Cl2CH2	
123 (2001)
MeHg, EtHg	Food	GC-pyro-AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: alkaline extraction, enzymolysis, Cl2CH2/C6H8 extraction	
138 (2002)
Hg(II), MeHg	Water	GC-pyro-AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization	
132 (2002)
Hg(II), MeHg	Seafood	GC-pyro-AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: NaEt4B derivatization	
133 (2004)
Complexes of MeHg, EtHg, PhHg	Fish	HPLC-CV-AFS	Reversed-phase column. Mobile phase: 7% MeOH and 0.05% 2-mercaptoethanol, pH 5, sample extraction: 6 M HCl + 1 M NaOH + MAEb	
125 (2004)
MeHg, EtHg	Human biological samples	GC-pyro_AFS	Capillary column. Sample extraction: acid leaching, Cl2H2 extraction, NaPR4B derivatisation	
135 (2007)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
