A thermally insulated solar evaporator coupled with a passive condenser for freshwater collection   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA05781B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA05781B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22428-22439A thermally insulated solar evaporator coupled with a passive condenser for freshwater collection†

        
          
            Shuwen 
            Cheng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhehao 
            Sun‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaxin 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zongyou 
            Yin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liying 
            Liu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Li
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Metallurgy, Northeastern University, Shenyang 100819, China. E-mail: liuly@smm.neu.edu.cn
bResearch School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: li.g@unimelb.edu.au
Received 
      8th July 2021
    , Accepted 27th August 2021First published on 31st August 2021AbstractUsing solar energy to generate vapor and using passive freshwater collectors are sustainable and eco-friendly approaches to address the issue of clean water scarcity. The current challenge for solar evaporation is to develop facile manufacturing materials and scalable methods with high solar conversion efficiency by heat localization. In addition, a decrease in the solar evaporation rate due to humidity saturation in the evaporation chamber is also a reason for the lower freshwater collection rate. In this paper, we demonstrate a solar-driven, interfacial evaporation-based and passive electricity-independent desalination unisystem, which consists of an evaporation chamber that uses hydrophilic and low-cost carbonized biomass full of water transportation microchannels, for the first time, as a solar evaporator. Meanwhile, the designed external aluminum condenser of the condensation chamber realizes freshwater collection. With improved designs and repeated tests, such a desalination unisystem achieves a stable evaporation rate of 1.492 kg m−2 h−1 and solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of ∼90.8% under 1 sun. It also simultaneously generates freshwater with a collection efficiency of ∼85.4% compared to the evaluated water evaporation rate in the open atmosphere. This portable, easily implemented, and nonenergy-consuming desalination unisystem has the potential to provide new inspiration for the realm of seawater desalination and wastewater treatment.
1. Introduction
In recent decades, the demand for freshwater has soared with the increasing population, economic growth, and global industrialization of human society, and the shortage of freshwater has posed a great threat to the development of human society.1,2 Although 71% of the surface of the Earth is covered by water, most of it is seawater, which is hard to drink due to its high salinity. Desalination is of great significance for freshwater generation. Maturing technologies such as the reverse osmosis membrane (ROM) process3,4 and the multistage flash distillation (MFD) process5 are energy-intensive, costly, have sophisticated requirements, and require large installations, leaving most of the people living in freshwater-deficient regions with no affordable options for freshwater.6 Moreover, the drawbacks of high energy consumption and harm to the environment are obstacles for such technologies.7 Therefore, seeking new alternative technologies for desalination has become a new pursuit to promote future sustainable development and solve freshwater crises.
Solar evaporation is regarded as one of the most promising energy-saving techniques and is facilely implemented for generating portable freshwater, especially in remote regions that lack electricity or infrastructure. The past few decades have witnessed the emergence of innovative materials designed for solar-energy harvesting technologies at the air–water interface for energy-efficient vapor generation.8,9 In such an interfacial evaporation system, solar energy is first absorbed by the photothermal layer, and then the heat is localized at the air–water interface by the thermally insulating layer, which hinders the heat loss from the heating region to water.10 Much effort has been invested in exploring promising solar absorbers involving the synthesis and discovery of materials with high photothermal conversion efficiency,11–13 including carbon-based materials,14–21 polymer-based materials,22 and plasmonic nanostructured materials.23–25 Most solar-to-vapor evaporators are too expensive or complicated to fabricate and synthesize, which impedes their large-scale utilization and promotion in practical applications. Increasing attention has been paid to the research of biomass and natural materials treated by carbonization because of their inherent advantages.26,27 Most natural biomass evaporators are sustainable, low-cost, and ecofriendly with rapid capillary transport via natural channels in bundles, such as wood-derived evaporators, which possess unique bimodal porous structures that are desirable for efficient and stable water desalination; however, they have relatively low solar-to-vapor efficiencies (below 80%). He et al. reported surface carbonized balsa wood for vapor generation, achieving an evaporation rate of ∼0.8 kg m−2 h−1 and a photothermal efficiency of ∼58% under 1 sun illumination.28 Xue et al. employed carbonized wood as an absorber for water evaporation, which reached a solar-thermal efficiency of 72% under 1 sun.29 Moreover, wood is a resource with a relatively high cost for use in natural biomass evaporators; thus, it is not economical for large-scale utilization.30,31 Recently, solar-driven interfacial evaporators have been employed in passive desalination and freshwater recovery devices. An increased freshwater recovery rate is achieved through reducing heat loss,32 regulating the surface morphology of the solar absorber,33,34 fabricating broadband solar absorbers,35 harvesting and reusing the vaporization enthalpy,36 and enhancing condensation.37 Unfortunately, most of these designs focused on the performance of the evaporator and did not consider portable systems with electricity-independent external condensation.
Many recent efforts have still been committed to the development of low-cost, environmentally friendly and energy-saving solar evaporators, and to minimize the use of chemicals and the impact on the environment, especially carbonized biomass, such as carbonized pomelo peel,38,39 biomass Ulva,40 cotton,41 sugarcane42 and so on. A new type of natural biomass evaporator, reed, evokes the potential of seawater evaporation applications in this work. Reed is one of the most abundant renewable resources on Earth and has the characteristics of rapid growth and wide distribution. Due to the structure, reeds have high mechanical properties (pressure and tension resistance).43 The regular cylindrical structure of the reed stalks and the protection of the waxy epidermis make it possible to make large-scale arrays with stable performance in salt water. The arrays can float vertically on water without any commercial foam support which is unfriendly to the environment. The channels of reed stalks are a 1D (one dimension) structure which is a powerful strategy for continuous water transport from bulk water to the interface of solar evaporator, as recently reported in many studies, such as cotton,44 lotus seedpods,45 and sunflower.46 The vertical structure is considered to have the most beneficial effect on the evaporation performance, whether it is on the micro-scale or the macro-scale. The 1D structure and ultra-low thermal conductivity make the contact heat loss of the water transmission channel and the pipe wall negligible, and the downward heat loss is perfectly minimized.47 Since reed stalks are renewable with high biomass production, widely present in nature and easily fabricated as evaporators without any chemical treatment, they provide the potential for the future design of diversified, efficient and cost-effective solar evaporators.
Here, we demonstrate strategies to address the relative humidity and droplet accumulation issues of passive freshwater collection unisystems. The unisystem includes low-cost, high thermal insulation and rapid water transport carbonized reed stalk arrays as evaporators and electricity-independent external chimney-like condensers. Our findings are the first to show that reed stalks with carbonization treatment enable highly effective water vapor generation under 1 sun illumination. The microchannels of vascular bundles and the hierarchical structure in carbonized reed stalks provide high water transport capacity and ultralow thermal conductivity (0.033 W m−1 K−1), which is much lower than that of wood (∼0.270 W m−1 K−1).28,48 Meanwhile, the solar absorbance of the carbonized solar absorber is 92% with excellent self-cleaning performance in simulated seawater for long-term use. The carbonized reed stalk array indicates an average evaporation rate of 1.492 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of 90.8%, superior to efficiencies of recently reported biomaterials. Therefore, reed stalks can be identified as an ideal natural device for solar vapor generation. In the freshwater collection experiment, the external condensation chamber addresses two of the obstacles for improving the collection rate during the freshwater collection process. One is the fogging phenomenon on the inner incident panel, which will weaken the solar illumination on the surface of the evaporator. For this, we apply a superhydrophilic antifogging agent, which forms a water film on the inner panel of the acrylic evaporation chamber, reducing the reflection, refraction, and scattering of light caused by the accumulation of droplets during desalination, and maintains the evaporation rate of the evaporator. The other problem is the humidity saturation in the evaporation chamber, which immensely inhibits the vapor generation of the evaporator. The addition of an external condensation chamber realizes a lower relative humidity in the evaporation chamber by approximately 10% and increases the water collection rate to 85.4%. The design of the electricity-independent external chimney-like condenser of the passive freshwater collection unisystem provides new inspiration for improving the freshwater collection rate of seawater desalination.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Material preparation
The reed stalks used in this experiment were harvested from the lakeside (Hubei Province, China). Compounds such as NaCl, MgSO4, KCl, and CaCl2 for preparing simulated seawater and methylene blue for coloration were provided by China National Medicines Co., Ltd.

Preparation of carbonized stalks. 
Reed stalks were cut into 25 mm-lengths along the growth direction. The stalk blocks were washed in deionized water for 2 h to remove impurities. After drying overnight at room temperature, a natural porous stalk structure was obtained. Then, the stalk blocks were heated on an iron plate which was set on top of an alcohol heater for uniform surface carbonization. The temperature of the iron plate was controlled in the range of 200 to 280 °C, and the stalks were pressed and heated on the iron plate repeatedly to prevent them from over-burning. The carbonized stalks were then immersed quickly in deionized water to achieve rapid quenching. A carbonized stalk was approximately 10 mm in diameter; the stalk contained a solar absorption layer (2 mm) and a capillary water-pumping layer (23 mm), and the thickness of the solar absorption layer was controlled with burning time. The carbonized stalks were directly used as a solar vapor generator.


Preparation of reed stalk evaporator arrays (RSEAs). 
Several carbonized stalks (diameter: 9–10 mm) were bonded into an array by using environmentally friendly oily glue (purchased from Wenzhou Guangqian Electric Co., Ltd, China) on the surface of the stalks. The use of glue would not block the reed stalk's internal capillary structure since it has a natural waxy epidermis layer.


Preparation of simulated seawater. 
27.5 g NaCl, 5.5 g MgSO4, 0.9 g KCl, and 1.1 g CaCl2 were added to 1 L deionized water and stirred for 2 h, resulting in 3.5 wt% simulated seawater.

2.2 Material characterization
The morphology and microstructure of the samples were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Zeiss Ultra Plus, Germany). The bonding structure of the stalk block was analyzed by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy in the range of 400–4000 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1 (Agilent Cary 660-spectrophotometer, USA). Information on elements and chemical bonds from specimen surfaces was obtained using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), (EscaLab 250Xi, USA). The optical reflection and transmission spectra were measured in the range of 300–2500 nm with a UV3600 spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, USA). Thermal conductivities were detected based on the transient hot-wire method using thermal conductivity equipment (LFA467, Germany). The changes in flame characteristics were detected by using TG-IR equipment (PerkinElmer, USA). The pore structures of samples were characterized with a mercury porosimeter (Micromeritics AutoPore IV 9500, USA).
2.3 Vapor generation experiments
RSEAs floated in a 50 mL beaker filled with deionized water, and the evaporation rate was calculated according to the effective area of the illuminated surface. The samples of RSEAs were fixed using expanded polystyrene (EPS) foam and floated in a 20 mL beaker full of deionized water. Vapor generation was conducted using a solar simulator (PLS-SXE300D, Beijing Perfectlight, China). The mass change of water evaporation was recorded by using a high-accuracy balance (0.1 mg, LE204E, Mettler Toledo, USA). The temperatures of the samples and water were measured with a thermocouple, and the temperature on the top surface of the evaporator was recorded using an infrared thermal imager (Hikvision-H10, Hikvision Digital Technology Co., Ltd, China). The intensity of simulated sunlight was calibrated using an optical power meter (TES-1332, TES electrical electronic Co., Ltd, Taiwan, China). The environmental conditions were maintained at 20 °C and 45% humidity.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Evaporator structure and characterization
In Fig. 1, we schematically illustrate the working mechanism of carbonized reed stalks, which are low-cost, scalable, and self-floating devices for solar vapor generation. Fig. 1a shows the air–water interfacial evaporator, which contained double layers. The top layer functioned as the solar absorber and transformed the energy into heat, while the bottom untreated layer served as the floating support, the water transport carrier and the thermal insulator at the air–water interface. Moreover, there were abundant microchannels near the epidermis, enhancing the rapid water transport from the bottom to the surface of the evaporator. Fig. 1b–d show images of the scalable and eco-friendly fabrication process of carbonized reed stalks. In general, the harvested reed stalks were washed and dried naturally, glued together as an array, and floated on water, keeping the top surface moist from the bulk water by pumping water spontaneously. Notably, the epidermis outside the carbonized reed stalk array was a superhydrophobic structure (ca. 0.2 mm) that could protect the evaporator from the erosion of saline water and enhance its long-term durability.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the carbonized reed stalk array for solar evaporation. (a) Working principles of the carbonized reed stalk as an efficient, scalable, environmentally-friendly and low-cost evaporator for brine desalination. The intense capillary channels (including the vessel channels and microchannels near the epidermis) ensure sufficient water replenishment to the top solar absorber surface during vapor generation. (b)–(d) Images of the scalable and eco-friendly fabrication process of carbonized reed stalk arrays by simple flame and glue treatments. 
To further demonstrate the feasibility of reeds as evaporators to execute solar evaporation, we analyze scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 2) to reveal the surface morphology and salt tolerance of the reed stalk. Fig. 2a and b show the top view of the natural reed stalk. The surface of the reed stalk includes two main structures: vascular strands with diameters of 200–300 μm and hexagonal honeycomb tracheids with diameters of 40–80 μm (Fig. 2a). These two structures are connected by the sclerenchyma with a supporting function, whose diameter is approximately 5–10 μm (Fig. 2b). To detect the salt tolerance of reed stalks immersed in brine, stalks were soaked in simulated seawater (salinity: 3.5 wt%) for 15 d (Fig. 2e) and 30 d (Fig. 2g–i) and then dried at room temperature overnight. The image shows that the supporting structure of tracheids and the permeability of vascular strands are not destroyed after being immersed in brine, showing great potential to be used during an extended period. The average pore diameter of reed stalks is ∼2 μm, which is close to that of corn, and is very conducive to rapid water capillary action.49 At the same time, it's clear from the large pore diameter of the reed stalks in the SEM images in Fig. 2g that large-diameter hydrophilic porous microchannels enable continuous dissolution of the formed salt to the bulk water.50 Therefore, compared with other biomass-derived materials (see Table S1†), the wide range of pore sizes inside reed stalks including micropores and macropores, exhibits strong capillary force in water pumping and excellent self-cleaning performance in salt water. Fig. 2i shows that channels formed by sclerenchyma cells near the epidermis are able to quickly pump water from the bottom faster than that of the vascular bundles distributed in the middle (Fig. 2h). Finally, the channels helped water reach the photothermal layer and spread on the illumination absorber surface. Generally, long channels of vascular strands are used to pump water, inorganic salt, and nutrients for plants during their growth process. In this work, they showed potential for efficiently transporting water for evaporation. Significantly, the surface carbonization of reed stalks did not cause blockage in water transport channels (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the surface morphology and salt tolerance (salinity: 3.5 wt%). (a) Natural stalks: a top-view image showing dense vascular bundles and hexagonal honeycomb tracheids (distance: ∼500 μm). (b) Natural stalks: a lateral view of the vascular bundle. (c) and (d) Natural stalks: a cross-sectional view of the growth direction; tracheids are square along the growth direction with a large diameter ranging from 60 to 100 μm. (e) Soaked in saline water for 15 days: the morphology remains unchanged after soaking in brine. (f) Carbonized stalks: a top-view image showing that the morphology of sieve tubes as well as the water transport capacity is not affected. (g)–(i) Soaked in brine for 30 days: the morphology remained unchanged after soaking in brine. A magnified SEM image showing the composition of vascular bundles and highly dense ducts close to the peel. 
Next, the chemical components and functional groups of the natural and carbonized reed stalks were identified by XPS and FTIR spectroscopy. Fig. 3a and b show the curve fitting of the C 1s XPS spectra of the natural and carbonized stalks, while the XPS survey spectra including C 1s, O 1s, and N 1s spectral peaks are all displayed in Fig. 3c. C, H, O, and N are the main elements of reed stalks, as they are mainly composed of cellulose. Compared to the spectral peaks of natural stalks (Fig. 3a), carbonized stalks showed a strong peak at 288.1 eV (Fig. 3b) corresponding to the CO bond, matching with the FTIR spectra shown in Fig. 3d. The natural stalk possesses C–O, C–H, and a few CO bonds. After carbonization, the peak of the C–O bond decreased dramatically, while the peak of the CO bond enhanced with the carbonization process. This transformation indicated that some C–O bonds were oxidized to CO bonds during carbonization. It is worth mentioning that the existing hydrophilic groups such as C–H and C–O ensured the capillary water suction properties of reed stalks. In order to explore the carbonization process with increase in temperature, the data were obtained by using a thermo-infrared spectrometer under an air atmosphere (heating rate: 10 °C min−1). As shown in the TG curves in Fig. 3e, the carbonization process of reed stalks can be divided into 5 stages. (1) room temperature to T1 (30 to 98.8 °C): this stage was the dehydration stage, and bound water and free water in the reed stalks volatilized and caused weight loss (ca. 7.2%). (2) T1 to T2 (98.8 to 200.0 °C): there is almost no substance consumption at this stage. (3) T2 to T3 (200.0 to 288.2 °C): at this stage the polymers (cellulose, lignin, etc.) in the reed stalks were rapidly decomposed with temperature and formed coke (ca. 62.8%). (4) T3 to T4 (288.2 to 360.2 °C): at this stage, the coke continued to react violently with oxygen and decomposed, resulting in a mass reduction (ca. 28%). (5) T4 to T5 (360.2–700 °C): the remaining material hardly reacted with air, and about 2% of the material remained finally. Fig. 3f shows the 3D infrared spectra of gas phase products produced with increasing temperature, illustrating the change of functional groups in reed stalks. The peaks from 3500 to 3800 cm−1 represent the production of H2O due to the broken of C–H bond during the oxidative combustion process. The peaks at 2250–2400 cm−1 and 600–700 cm−1 at 270 °C and 370 °C were attributed to the stretching vibration of the CO bond of the CO2 produced. The peaks at around 2000–2250 cm−1 indicated the produced CO due to the breaking of the C–O–C bond and CO bonds at 270 °C, while the peaks at 1650–1850 cm−1 were derived from the CO vibration of carbonyl compounds. As shown by the results obtained from the thermo-infrared spectrometer, the flame temperature of reed stalks should be controlled between 200 and 300 °C during the carbonization process to prevent excessive carbonization from destroying the internal microchannel structure.
 Fig. 3  Elemental and functional group characterization of reed stalks. The XPS curve fitting of the C 1s spectra of the (a) natural stalk and the (b) carbonized stalk, demonstrates that quite a few C–O groups are oxidized to CO groups during the flame treatment process. (c) XPS survey spectra of the natural stalk and the flamed stalk. C 1s, N 1s, and O 1s spectral peaks. (d) FTIR spectra show substantial C–O, CO, and O–H groups on the surface of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk. (e and f) TG curves and 3D infrared spectra which were detected by using a thermo-infrared spectrometer under an air atmosphere. 
To achieve high-performance solar evaporation, the reed as the evaporator should have a high photothermal conversion efficiency. Solar radiation absorbance is a significant factor nexus between interface temperature and photothermal conversion efficiency (Fig. 4a). Compared to the natural stalk of ca. 20% absorbance in the visible and near-infrared regions, the light absorbance on the top surface of the carbonized stalk was ultrahigh (over 98%) in the ultraviolet light and visible light regions (280–780 nm) and was approximately 92% in the infrared region (780 nm–2500 nm). The overall light absorbance of carbonized reed stalks for sunlight could reach a high value of ∼96.8%, weighted by the standard air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) solar spectrum. In comparison, natural stalks showed an integral average absorbance of only approximately 27.6%. This feature played a remarkable role in the surface carbonization process to promote solar absorbance of reed stalks, which was attributed to the deposited black carbon particles generated in the process. In addition, the increased roughness of the natural reed stalk surface caused by the carbonization treatment could reduce the light reflection and enhance the photothermal absorbance of the surface. Solar absorbance could be calculated according to the following formula:51 (1)where λ is the wavelength of light, R(λ) is the reflectance, and T(λ) is the transmittance of the reed stalk at wavelength λ. A(λ) is the standard AM 1.5 solar radiation spectrum, and λmin and λmax are wavelengths of 280 nm and 2500 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Structural properties of the reed stalk. (a) The absorbance spectra of the Janus evaporator from 250 nm to 2500 nm (left-hand side axis), and solar spectral irradiance (right-hand side axis). (b) Comparisons of thermal conductivities of current reported solar evaporators. (c) Capillary performance of natural reed stalks (Φ 9 mm × 15 mm) along the growth direction. (d) Progress of salt accumulation and self-discharging during 24 h. 
Thermal insulation plays a vital role in heat localization and the temperature maintenance at the evaporation interface, and can reduce heat losses and enhance evaporation rates.51 For most photothermal conversion evaporators (PCEs), low heat conduction takes up most heat loss, essentially depending on their thermal conductivity. Therefore, the lower the thermal conductivity of PCEs, the better the heat will be concentrated in evaporators. The thermal conductivity of the reed stalk under wet and dry conditions is shown in Fig. S1.† The carbonized stalk displayed an ultralow thermal conductivity of ∼0.033 W m−1 K−1, much lower than that of water (0.6 W m−1 K−1). Surprisingly, the thermal conductivity of the dry carbonized stalk was even lower than that of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator (0.039 W m−1 K−1) and much lower than that of flamed wood (0.330 W m−1 K−1), only 10% of that of this emerging biomass-derived solar evaporator (Fig. 4b). The inherently abundant closed air-filled chambers of reed stalks, which can be observed in the SEM images in Fig. 2c and d, are considered as the poor thermal conductor (20 °C: 0.026 W m−1 K−1).52 Numerous aligned tracheids, which are teemed with air, are arranged radially in the shape of squares with a diameter of approximately 100 μm (Fig. 2d). Thus, they formed natural heat insulation chambers preventing moisture diffusion, ensuring low density to allow stalks to easily float on water and ensuring low thermal conductivity of the bottom layer. Besides, the high porosity (93.83%) proved that reed stalks were filled with abundant air, leading to the lower thermal conductivity of the reed stalks (Table S2, see the ESI† for details). Compared with other biomass-derived materials, the porosity of reed stalks was higher than that of the reported biomass materials, and the thermal conductivity of reed stalks was lower than that of the reported biomass materials (see Table 1). In addition, compared to the dry carbonized stalk, the wet stalk had a relatively higher thermal conductivity (ca. 0.103 W m−1 K−1) due to the hydrophilicity and capillarity of the reed stalk, enabling water to fill up the internal space. Despite this, the air filled in the tracheid maintained the stalk's excellent thermal insulation performance and low thermal conductivity compared to previously used carbon-based evaporators (Fig. S1†). In addition, the thermal conductivities of the natural stalk under dry and wet conditions were 0.033 W m−1 K−1 and 0.101 W m−1 K−1, respectively, indicating that the thermal insulation performance was maintained by the surface carbonization process.
Table 1 Comparison of the thermal conductivity and porosity of different biomass-derived evaporators




Biomass-derived materials
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Porosity (%)




Sugarcane42
0.08
85.50


Mushrooms19
0.28
90.40


Lotus seedpod45
0.21
—


Wood53
0.11 (in-plane direction)
≈70


Bamboo52
0.181
—


This work
0.033
93.83




The capillary performance was also related to the sufficient water supply when the reed stalk evaporators floated on water.54Fig. 4c shows the water adsorption time of reed stalks along the vascular bundle direction. To observe the capillary properties of the reed stalks from the inside to the outside, the reed epidermis layer was carefully removed, and we cut the reed stalk into 25 mm pieces (diameter ∼10 mm). Methylene blue solution was used as a chromogenic agent to make the results more apparent. The results shown in Fig. 4c and Movie S1† revealed that the capillary effect mainly occurred in the bundles with higher density near the epidermis layer, which can pump water from the bottom faster than the bundles in the middle of the stalks. Obviously, at approximately 60 seconds, the water was sucked up and achieved 80% coverage of the surface, and the concentration of the chromogenic agent increased gradually from the inside to the outside. Cutting along the growth direction, we found that the middle vascular bundle also played a substantial role in absorbing water. The results were not only highly consistent with those of the SEM images but also revealed the excellent hydrophilicity and capillary performance of reed stalks.
To further evaluate the salt tolerance performance of the reed stalk evaporator, we used oil adhesive to glue twelve 25 mm-long carbonized stalks into RSEAs and immersed them in simulated seawater, with an average salinity of ∼3.5 wt% (components: 27.5 g NaCl, 5.5 g MgSO4, 0.9 g KCl, and 1.1 g CaCl2 in 1 L deionized water). Fig. 4d shows the self-cleaning performance of the evaporator arrays in saltwater. To mimic the actual solar irradiation in a day, we turned on the light source for 8 h corresponding to daytime and then turned off the light source to simulate the nighttime. According to the images, no apparent salt deposition was found on the surface of RSEAs when the light was turned on in the first 2 h. As the salt precipitation rate gradually exceeded the diffusion and dissolution rate of salt, significant salt crystals gradually precipitated in the last six hours. When the light was turned off at the 8th hour, the salt residues vanished gradually, and no deposit was observed on the surface of RSEAs at the 24th hour. The diffusion and convection traces of the concentrated brine from the top surface of RSEAs to the brine underneath were recorded in Movie S3.† This experiment demonstrates that the RSEAs can dissolve additional deposited salts and generate clean water vapor simultaneously under long-term continuous sunlight illumination. After being dried naturally the carbonized surface of RSEAs remained clean, rough, and black due to the ions spontaneously diffusing from the surface with high concentration to the bottom with a relatively low concentration through the capillary channels in the RSEAs. This phenomenon is known as evaporator self-cleaning.23 According to Fick's law, the diffusion kinetics of salt is determined by the inherent characteristics of the porous absorber. The structure of a self-cleaning evaporator should have high porosity to promote the diffusion of ions back into water. The porosity has a linear relationship with the self-cleaning time, indicating that the higher the porosity of the absorber, the faster the speed of salt self-cleaning.55 According to our experimental data of porosity in Table S2† and comparison of porosity in Table 1, the results show that reed stalks have higher porosity compared with other biomass-derived materials, resulting in faster self-cleaning of salt. To judge the effect of salt deposition on evaporation performance, we measured the mass change and converted it into evaporation efficiency, which is shown in the histogram. Interestingly, the histogram shows that salt had little influence on the water evaporation rate of the reed stalk evaporator with the accumulation of salt residues, and the evaporation rate was reduced by 19.6% at the eighth hour compared to that at the first hour. Compared with the self-cleaning evaporator previously reported,28,39,47,48 as time increases, the decrease in the evaporation rate is not very significant, indicating that the reed has better salt resistance. After self-cleaning overnight, the evaporation rate returned to 99.8% of the initial evaporation rate, indicating that almost all the salt deposited on the carbonized surface was removed.
3.2 Evaporation performance
As mentioned above, broadband solar absorption, outstanding thermal insulation, self-flotation, high water absorption, and excellent salt tolerance allow RSEAs to be directly used as low-cost photothermal conversion evaporators. A systematic evaluation of the solar water evaporation performance of RSEAs was performed under 1 sun solar illumination. Fig. 5a shows the evaporation rate curves of the time-dependent net mass changes of the carbonized stalks, natural stalks, and pure water. The curve data were obtained by calculating the mass change of water recorded by using an electronic balance divided by the area of RSEAs, and the evaporation rate was derived by fitting the slope of the curves. The mass loss measured under dark conditions (Fig. S2†) was subtracted when calculating the net mass change under 1 sun illumination. As shown in Fig. S2,† the results proved that carbonized stalks had better evaporation performance than natural stalks under 1 sun and had no much difference under the dark conditions. The evaporation rate of the carbonized stalk was 1.492 kg m−2 h−1, which was 2.2 times higher than that of the natural stalk and was 6.8 times higher than that of pure water. The temperatures on the surface of natural stalks and carbonized stalks were measured by using an infrared thermal imager (Fig. 5b and c). It could easily be observed that the surface temperature of carbonized stalks under 1 sun could increase rapidly in 5 min and stabilize at approximately 41.8 °C, while the surface temperature of natural stalks could only reach up to 31.2 °C.
 Fig. 5  Evaporation performance of reed stalks. (a) Mass changes of pure water, natural stalk/water, and carbonized stalk/water over time under 1 sun illumination. (b) Temperatures of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk as a function of time. (c) Typical infrared photos of a carbonized stalk (top) and a natural stalk (bottom) versus time. (d) Cycling performance of the net evaporation rate of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk under 1 sun illumination in the case that each cycle sustains over 1 h. (e) Comparisons of evaporation performances of current reported solar evaporators. (f) The measured salinities of the seawater samples (concentration: 3.5 wt%) before and after desalination. 
The solar-to-vapor efficiency is also significant for evaluating the evaporation performance of RSEAs, which was calculated based on eqn (S1).† The calculated energy conversion efficiency was 90.8% for carbonized stalks and 43.6% for natural stalks. The evaporation performance of carbonized reed stalks, which are a kind of low-cost, widely grown lakeside plant treated with a simple carbonization process, is comparable to those of recently reported high-cost artificial materials and other carbon-based biomass materials (Fig. 5e).12,16,18,19,25,29,31,34,54,56–62 The high solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency was due to the strong capillary performance of vascular bundles in reed stalks, which pumped the water continuously and transferred it to the photothermal interface, ensuring continuous evaporation. In addition, the high light absorption of the upper carbonized surface and the thermal insulation of the lower part of the Janus evaporator confined the heat loss of the evaporation interface. Recycling and long-term performance are also related to the future sustainable use and the cost of RSEAs. Fig. 5d shows the recycling performance of natural stalks and carbonized stalks during 5 cycling tests. The results showed that after 5 cycling tests, the maximum evaporation rate difference between individual cycles under 1 sun was just 8% for carbonized stalks and 5% for natural stalks.
Solar desalination and freshwater collection experiments were also designed to study the desalination performance of RSEAs. First, we designed a double-layer acrylic box with a built-in sink to collect fresh water evaporated from the RSEAs (case 1), which was condensed on the wall of the acrylic box and flowed down due to gravity. Fig. 5f shows the comparison of the changes of the salinity and the ion concentration (primarily focus on Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and K+) before and after desalination by RSEAs. The concentrations of Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and K+ in the collected freshwater declined dramatically from 13600 ppm, 1120 ppm, 390 ppm, and 440 ppm to 1.83 ppm, 0.09 ppm, 0.35 ppm, and 0.51 ppm, respectively, much lower than that of the drinking water standard defined by the WHO (Water Health Organization, marked with dotted lines in Fig. 5f).63 The removal efficiency of these four metal ions was above 99.98%.
3.3 Freshwater collection
Although various novel designs of solar evaporators have emerged in the recent decade, the integration of solar evaporators and freshwater collection systems is the primary reason for promoting their actual application. Fig. 6a shows the schematic diagram of the self-designed electricity-independent passive device for freshwater recovery in this work, which is energy-saving and relatively low cost. The device was inspired by the chimney-like effect which was composed of an evaporation chamber (EC) and a condensation chamber (CC). The EC consists of a double-layer acrylic box (for maintaining the temperature of the EC and reducing heat loss) with a built-in sink (for collecting fresh water) on the top and an insulation layer (polystyrene foam) and solar evaporator at the bottom. Meanwhile, the density of the acrylic material is lower than that of glass, which makes it easier for the future improved device to float on water. The CC is mainly composed of aluminum tubes (aluminum tubes have a lower density than the copper tube and a higher thermal conductivity than other metal tubes) and connected to the EC by silicon tubes. The experimental device is shown in Fig. 6b. In the experiment, a wet cotton cloth was wrapped around the outer wall of the condensation chamber, as the wet-bulb effect can further reduce the temperature of the condensation chamber and then increase the temperature difference between the EC and the CC.
 Fig. 6  Passive electricity-independent freshwater collection. (a) Schematic diagram of the freshwater collection device. (b) Photograph of the freshwater collection device. (c) Infrared thermal image of the freshwater collection device. (d) Comparison of condensed droplets before and after using the nano-scale anti-fogging agent. (e) Photograph of freshwater collected in the condensation chamber (CC). (f) Changes in temperature and relative humidity over time in the evaporation chamber (EC). The temperature and relative humidity in the system tend to be stable after 3 h. (g) Comparisons of light transmission rates before and after using the nano-scale anti-fogging agent (green columns) and freshwater collection efficiencies among three cases (blue columns). 
To explore the factors affecting the freshwater recovery efficiency, we carried out three sets of experiments (Table 2), and an 8 hour test was conducted for each case, simulating the sunshine time in a day. The abovementioned experiment in Fig. 5f was named case 1 and carried out under the following experimental conditions: room temperature (18.7 centigrade), no wind, a sealed setup with the original acrylic EC, and no CC and solar illumination of 1 sun. The experimental results showed that the collection efficiency of clean water in case 1 was 67.2% of the evaluated water evaporation rate of 1.49 kg m−2 h−1in the open atmosphere. The reasons why the recovery rate in case 1 was obviously lower than the evaporation rate in the open atmosphere were as follows: (i) the illumination transmission was reduced to 88.6% because of the double-layer acrylic setup (Fig. 6g, green columns). (ii) The condensed droplets generated on the acrylic inner panel caused the reflection, refraction, and scattering of light and further weakened the light intensity reaching the evaporating surface (Fig. 6d, left). As shown in the green columns in Fig. 6g, the light intensity of the evaporating surface decreased to 78.6%, significantly affecting the evaporation rate of RSEAs. (iii) The vapor accumulated gradually in a sealed environment, increasing the relative humidity in the system and inhibiting the vapor generation of the RSEAs (Fig. 6f).
Table 2 Different experimental conditions in three cases




Cases
Anti-fogging agent
Condensation (CC)




Case 1
×
×


Case 2
✓
×


Case 3
✓
✓




Therefore, to solve the problem of droplet condensation, we further designed and optimized our system, as shown in case 2, where a commercial superhydrophilic nanoscale antifogging agent was used on the inner panel of the EC. The results showed that the hydrophilic film formed by water vapor and the antifogging agent reduced the energy loss of light, and the light intensity returned to 88.3%, nearly the same as that in the original panel. In addition, the temperature of the EC in case 2 was different from that in case 1. As the maximum temperature in the chamber increased with the light intensity, the maximum temperature in case 2 was approximately 40.3 centigrade, while that in case 1 was only 37.2 centigrade. Significantly, the collection rate increased to 77.2% of the evaluated water evaporation rate of 1.49 kg m−2 h−1 in the open atmosphere, confirming that the use of a superhydrophilic antifogging agent improved the temperature of the EC and enhanced the evaporation rate of RSEAs compared to that in case 1.
Then, to solve the problem of vapor accumulation in the EC and further improve the collection efficiency, an external condensation chamber was added, which was separated from the EC. As the antifogging agent was also of great significance to the subsequent water vapor mass transfer and chimney-like effect of the CC, the antifogging agent was also used in case 3 (Fig. 6b). The PVC foam sponge was wrapped outside the silicone tube to reduce the heat loss caused by the contact between the tube and air, while the wet cotton cloth was wrapped outside the Al-tubes to reduce the temperature of the CC. The infrared thermal image in Fig. 6c confirmed that the temperature of the CC was only approximately 13.4 centigrade, lower than room temperature (18.7 centigrade). As shown in Fig. 6f, the maximum temperature (32.7 centigrade) and maximum relative humidity (88.2%) of the EC in case 3 were both lower than those of case 2, with the vapor flowing spontaneously to the CC due to the temperature gradient. The collection efficiency in case 3 increased to 85.4% of the evaluated water evaporation rate of 1.49 kg m−2 h−1 in the open atmosphere, where freshwater was collected at a rate of 44.5% (0.567 kg m−2 h−1) in the CC and 55.5% (0.706 kg m−2 h−1) in the EC (Fig. 6e). The results indicated that the addition of an external CC played an effective role in solving the problem of water vapor enrichment in the EC and reduced the inhibition effect on the evaporation of the RSEAs. As a result, the water recovery efficiency was increased to 85.4% after the optimization strategy, demonstrating that the device had a higher freshwater recovery efficiency than other electricity-independent desalination and recovery systems.21,64
4. Conclusions
A solar evaporator made of reed stalks with high thermal insulation, fast water transport, low cost, and great salt-tolerance performance during desalination was developed in this work. Reed stalks, mainly composed of lignocellulose, are rich in tracheids and vascular bundles inside their lignocellulose structure, which gives them ultralow thermal conductivity (0.033 W m−1 K−1) and good water transport performance. The carbonized stalks were made into an array for a larger evaporation area via a simple flame process and gluing, displaying excellent evaporation performance with an evaporation rate of 1.492 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of 90.8% under 1 sun illumination. The difference in ion concentrations before and after desalination indicates that the carbonized reed stalk has good desalination performance, and the excellent self-cleaning performance in brine also reflects its potential as a promising long-term seawater evaporator. The carbonized reed stalk evaporator was found to be an effective solar vapor-generation evaporator for the first time. Furthermore, a passive electricity-independent freshwater collection device was also designed and demonstrated. The experimental results show that the introduction of an antifogging agent and the design of an external condensation chamber solve the problems of light weakening and high humidity inhibiting evaporation, thus remarkably improving the efficiency of freshwater recovery. The freshwater recovery efficiency of the device in this work is 85.4% of the evaluated water evaporation rate in the open atmosphere. This new design of a passive electricity-independent freshwater collection device with an external chimney-like condensation chamber provides inspiration for the future development of high-performance freshwater collection devices.
Author contributions
S. Cheng designed this study. S. Cheng performed the experiments. Z. Sun assisted with the synthesis. S. Cheng, Y. Wu and P. Gao conducted SEM observations. S. Cheng and Z. Sun, co-wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant number 22078054), Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (grant number N182508027), and the Project of XingLiao Talents (grant number XLYC1807119).
Notes and references
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bernauer and T. Böhmelt, Nature Sustainability, 2020, 3, 350–356 CrossRef .
A. Ali, R. A. Tufa, F. Macedonio, E. Curcio and E. Drioli, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qasim, M. Badrelzaman, N. N. Darwish, N. A. Darwish and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2019, 459, 59–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Ahmed, R. Hashaikeh and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2019, 453, 54–76 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, X. Lai, Z. Liu and W. Liu, Energy, 2018, 152, 896–905 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
B. Gido, E. Friedler and D. M. Broday, Atmos. Res., 2016, 182, 156–162 CrossRef .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Alnaimat, M. Ziauddin and B. Mathew, Desalination, 2021, 499, 114860 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Q. Fang, X. Xi, Y. Chen and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 586–593 RSC .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. A. Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Li, S. Ptasinska, M. Lieberman and T. Luo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5510–5518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Li, B. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, D. Tang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16503–16511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Geng, W. Sun, P. Ying, Y. Zheng, J. Ding, K. Sun, L. Li and M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007648 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, L. Li, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. AA, 2020, 8, 14736–14745 RSC .
W. Li, Z. Li, K. Bertelsmann and D. E. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900720 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, G. Xiong, H. Yang, B. Gong, Y. Tian, C. Xu, Y. Wang, T. Fisher, J. Yan, K. Cen, T. Luo, X. Tu, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901286 CrossRef .
F. Yang, J. Chen, Z. Ye, D. Ding, N. V. Myung and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Storer, J. L. Phelps, X. Wu, G. Owens, N. I. Khan and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15279–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, T. Zhao and M. Cao, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2020, 5, 419–432 RSC .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
G. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Yang, J. Li, T. Ding, J. Duan, B. Qi and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15052–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Chen, S. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Dai, U. Ray, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, N. Quispe, Y. Yao, A. Gong, U. H. Leiste, H. A. Bruck, J. Y. Zhu, A. Vellore, H. Li, M. L. Minus, Z. Jia, A. Martini, T. Li and L. Hu, Nature, 2018, 554, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
G. Xue, Q. Chen, S. Lin, J. Duan, P. Yang, K. Liu, J. Li and J. Zhou, Glob. Chall., 2018, 2, 1800001 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, A. Guo, T. Mei, J. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5629–5635 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Kim, S. J. Kang, S. Lee, J. Ok, Y. Kim, S. H. Roh, H. Hong, J. K. Kim, H. Chae, S. J. Kwon and T. I. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003862 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, B. Li, B. Bhatia, C. Wang, K. L. Wilke, Y. Song, O. Labban, J. H. Lienhard, R. Wang and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 830–839 RSC .
K. Vinoth Kumar and R. Kasturi Bai, Desalination, 2008, 230, 51–61 CrossRef .
X. Liu, D. D. Mishra, Y. Li, L. Gao, H. Peng, L. Zhang and C. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4571–4582 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Geng, W. Sun, P. Ying, Y. Zheng, J. Ding, K. Sun, L. Li and M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2170020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, N. Li, C. Guo, J. He, S. Wang, L. Qiao, F. Li, L. Yu, M. Wang and X. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128051 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, X. Peng, J. Xue, Y. Wei, Y. Sun and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11013–11024 RSC .
J. Liu, Q. Liu, D. Ma, Y. Yuan, J. Yao, W. Zhang, H. Su, Y. Su, J. Gu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9034–9039 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Deng, S. Wang, C. Liao, Y. Meng and T. Pham, BioResources, 2013, 8, 1986–1996 Search PubMed .
D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 141, 406–412 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, J. Liu, J. Gu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Su and D. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6217–6221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, W. Zhang, I. Zada, Y. Zhang, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su, D. Pantelic, B. Jelenkovic and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 2171–2179 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Li, B. Jiang, H. Zhang, N. He, S. Yang, D. Tang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28179–28187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, W. Li, W. Song, L. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 349–357 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Yao, Y. Yuan, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Gu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000126 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. Chen, E. Hitz and D. Siddhartha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707134 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Fan, H. Min, H. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Yang and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 1–11 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
G. Song, Y. Yuan, J. Liu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Fang, J. Gu, D. Ma and D. Zhang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1900003 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, F. Jia, A. Huang, Y. Qin, S. Song, Y. Li and M. A. C. Arroyo, Desalination, 2020, 481, 114359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Yang, G. Chen, Y. Yao, F. Jiang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel, H. Xie, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Joule, 2017, 1, 588–599 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Huang, S. Tian, X. Cui, Y. Wan, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. Li and C. S. Lee, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100498 CrossRef .
H. M. Wilson, S. A. R. Rahman, A. E. Parab and N. Jha, Desalination, 2019, 456, 85–96 CrossRef CAS .

          W. H. Organization, Guidelines for drinking-water quality,  2004, vol. 38, pp. 104–108 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, Z. Wang, C. Chang, B. Fu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, Desalination, 2020, 484, 114423 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05781b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the carbonized reed stalk array for solar evaporation. (a) Working principles of the carbonized reed stalk as an efficient, scalable, environmentally-friendly and low-cost evaporator for brine desalination. The intense capillary channels (including the vessel channels and microchannels near the epidermis) ensure sufficient water replenishment to the top solar absorber surface during vapor generation. (b)–(d) Images of the scalable and eco-friendly fabrication process of carbonized reed stalk arrays by simple flame and glue treatments.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the surface morphology and salt tolerance (salinity: 3.5 wt%). (a) Natural stalks: a top-view image showing dense vascular bundles and hexagonal honeycomb tracheids (distance: ∼500 μm). (b) Natural stalks: a lateral view of the vascular bundle. (c) and (d) Natural stalks: a cross-sectional view of the growth direction; tracheids are square along the growth direction with a large diameter ranging from 60 to 100 μm. (e) Soaked in saline water for 15 days: the morphology remains unchanged after soaking in brine. (f) Carbonized stalks: a top-view image showing that the morphology of sieve tubes as well as the water transport capacity is not affected. (g)–(i) Soaked in brine for 30 days: the morphology remained unchanged after soaking in brine. A magnified SEM image showing the composition of vascular bundles and highly dense ducts close to the peel.	 

 	Fig. 3  Elemental and functional group characterization of reed stalks. The XPS curve fitting of the C 1s spectra of the (a) natural stalk and the (b) carbonized stalk, demonstrates that quite a few C–O groups are oxidized to CO groups during the flame treatment process. (c) XPS survey spectra of the natural stalk and the flamed stalk. C 1s, N 1s, and O 1s spectral peaks. (d) FTIR spectra show substantial C–O, CO, and O–H groups on the surface of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk. (e and f) TG curves and 3D infrared spectra which were detected by using a thermo-infrared spectrometer under an air atmosphere.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Structural properties of the reed stalk. (a) The absorbance spectra of the Janus evaporator from 250 nm to 2500 nm (left-hand side axis), and solar spectral irradiance (right-hand side axis). (b) Comparisons of thermal conductivities of current reported solar evaporators. (c) Capillary performance of natural reed stalks (Φ 9 mm × 15 mm) along the growth direction. (d) Progress of salt accumulation and self-discharging during 24 h.	 

Sugarcane42	0.08	85.50
Mushrooms19	0.28	90.40
Lotus seedpod45	0.21	—
Wood53	0.11 (in-plane direction)	≈70
Bamboo52	0.181	—
This work	0.033	93.83

 	Fig. 5  Evaporation performance of reed stalks. (a) Mass changes of pure water, natural stalk/water, and carbonized stalk/water over time under 1 sun illumination. (b) Temperatures of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk as a function of time. (c) Typical infrared photos of a carbonized stalk (top) and a natural stalk (bottom) versus time. (d) Cycling performance of the net evaporation rate of the natural stalk and the carbonized stalk under 1 sun illumination in the case that each cycle sustains over 1 h. (e) Comparisons of evaporation performances of current reported solar evaporators. (f) The measured salinities of the seawater samples (concentration: 3.5 wt%) before and after desalination.	 

 	Fig. 6  Passive electricity-independent freshwater collection. (a) Schematic diagram of the freshwater collection device. (b) Photograph of the freshwater collection device. (c) Infrared thermal image of the freshwater collection device. (d) Comparison of condensed droplets before and after using the nano-scale anti-fogging agent. (e) Photograph of freshwater collected in the condensation chamber (CC). (f) Changes in temperature and relative humidity over time in the evaporation chamber (EC). The temperature and relative humidity in the system tend to be stable after 3 h. (g) Comparisons of light transmission rates before and after using the nano-scale anti-fogging agent (green columns) and freshwater collection efficiencies among three cases (blue columns).	 

Case 1	×	×
Case 2	✓	×
Case 3	✓	✓
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05781b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
