Gold–graphene nanocomposites for sensing and biomedical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TB00511F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TB00511F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4301-4324Gold–graphene nanocomposites for sensing and biomedical applications

        
          
            Kostiantyn 
            Turcheniuk
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rabah 
            Boukherroub
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sabine 
            Szunerits
          
          
        
      *
      Institut d'Electronique, de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie (IEMN, UMR CNRS 8520), Université Lille1, Cité Scientifique, Avenue Poincaré, 59652 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. E-mail: Sabine.Szunerits@iri.univ-lille1.fr;   Tel: +33 3 62 53 17 25
Received 
      20th March 2015
    , Accepted 16th April 2015First published on 16th April 2015AbstractRecent developments in materials science and nanotechnology have propelled the development of a plethora of materials with unique chemical and physical properties for biomedical applications. Graphitic nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes, fullerenes and, more recently, graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) have received a great deal of interest in this domain. Besides the exceptional physico-chemical features of these materials, another advantage is that they can be easily produced in good quantities. Moreover, the presence of abundant functional groups on their surface and good biocompatibility make them highly suitable for biomedical applications. Many research groups have utilized GO and rGO nanocargos to effectively deliver insoluble drugs, nucleic acids and other molecules into cells for bioimaging and therapeutic purposes. Gold nanostructures (Au NSs), on the other hand, have also attracted great attention owing to their applications in biomedical fields, organic catalysis, etc. Loading of GO and rGO sheets with Au NSs generates a new class of functional materials with improved properties and thus provides new opportunities in the use of such hybrid materials for catalytic biosensing and biomedical applications. This review article is aimed at providing an insight into the important features of gold–graphene nanocomposites, the current research activities related to the different synthetic routes to produce these nanocomposites, and their potential applications in sensing and biomedical therapy, notably photothermal therapy (PTT).
Kostiantyn Turcheniuk
Kostiantyn Turcheniuk graduated from Kiev National University, Ukraine (BSc and MSc in organic chemistry). He completed his PhD in organometallic chemistry at the Institute of Biorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, Kiev, Ukraine, in 2012. Since that time he has been working as a post-doctoral research associate at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), Lille, France. His ongoing research interests embrace synthesis and characterisation of gold–graphene nanocomposites with application in the field of biomedics.
Rabah Boukherroub
Rabah Boukherroub is a Director of Research at the CNRS, and a group leader at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS & University Lille 1, France. His research interests are in the area of synthesis of functional nanomaterials (metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, semiconductor nanowires, graphene, carbon dots, etc.), surface chemistry, and photophysics of semiconductor–metal nanostructures with an emphasis on biosensors and lab-on-chip applications, drug delivery, and development of new tools for studying molecular dynamics in vivo. He is the co-author of more than 320 research publications and has written 25 book chapters in subjects related to nanotechnology, materials chemistry, and biosensors. He has 9 patents or patents pending.
Sabine Szunerits
Sabine Szunerits, since 2009, has been a Professor in Chemistry at the University Lille 1, France, and was nominated 2011 as member of the “Institut Universitaire de France” (IUF). Her current research interests are in the area of materials science with an emphasis on the development of novel analytical platforms and interfaces for the study of affinity binding events and in the modification of nanostructures (diamond particles, magnetic particles, nanographene) for biomedical applications. She is the co-author of more than 190 research publications, has written 16 book chapters and has 6 patents.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous progress in the design and use of nanomaterials geared towards biomedical and biological applications. Among these nanomaterials, gold nanostructures (Au NSs) have especially been intensively studied (Fig. 1A). Au NSs of different shapes and sizes can be easily prepared using solution-based techniques; they have low toxicity and can be readily attached to molecules of biological relevance and interest. They are, therefore, well-suited for a wide range of biological applications comprising genomics, biosensors, immunoanalysis, detection and photothermolysis of microorganisms and cancer cells, targeted delivery of drugs, DNA and antigens as well as optical bioimaging. It has been argued that Au NSs could be used in fact in almost all medical applications such as diagnostics, therapy, prevention, and hygiene.1,2
 Fig. 1  (A) TEM images of Au nanostructures; (B) optical extinction spectra of citrate-capped spherical Au nanoparticles (green) and Au nanorods (blue); (C) relative cell viability of MDA-MB-231 cells for different concentrations of CTAB coated Au NRs.16 
The exceptional optical properties of Au NSs, including large optical field enhancements and their addressability via spectroscopic techniques, have made them of particular interest as labels and for biosensing. The optical properties are dominated by the excitation of collective oscillations of the nanoparticles' conduction band electrons, called localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR), by the incoming electromagnetic waves.3,4 At the LSPR, the incoming light is absorbed or scattered by the Au NSs, and concurrently, there is an electromagnetic field enhancement close to the surface of the particle. The position of the plasmonic resonance depends on the particle size, shape, composition, interparticle distance as well as the dielectric environment. As seen in Fig. 1B, spherical Au NPs of 20 nm in diameter show a LSPR band at ≈520 nm, while Au nanorods are characterized by two LSPR bands at 522 and 736 nm.5 As the position of the LSPR band is in addition influenced by the refractive index of the surrounding medium, such structures have been intensively used to detect molecular-binding events in the nano-environment of the particle.3,5–7
The other way to employ Au NPs for sensing is to use discrete particle aggregation in response to biological elements, which results in a measurable color change. These colorimetric sensing systems exhibited relatively low detection limits with a high degree of sensitivity.8,9 The use of colloidal Au NPs as staining agents has become a standard procedure in biological microscopy and several reviews have discussed the use of Au NPs in a variety of diagnostic and therapeutic applications.8,10–12
However, the use of as-synthesized Au NPs in biological systems is limited due to particle instability and nonspecific binding. These limitations are even increasingly pronounced in high ionic strength media, such as those used for biological assays. The particle aggregation depends strongly on the type of ligand used to passivate the nanoparticles' surface. The ligands can be displaced or even cross-linked due to the multitude of ionic species present in solution. Care has, in addition, to be paid to the biocompatibility of the particle ligand. For instance, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) modified gold nanorods (Au NRs) can be routinely prepared and display good colloidal dispersibility and stability. However, one of the major concerns is related to the cytotoxicity of the surfactant, CTAB, used to stabilize the particles. CTAB molecules can induce cytotoxicity by disrupting cellular membranes (Fig. 1C).13 CTAB is not only toxic to cells, but also very difficult to remove completely.14,15 In addition, CTAB-coated Au NRs lack targeting capabilities, something of critical importance for active targeting of cancer cells, pathogens, etc.
Since the synthesis methodologies of Au NSs of different sizes, shapes, and surface chemistries are fairly mature, the current efforts for performance enhancement are moving towards the construction of novel Au NP-based assemblies. An emerging method that has shown great promise involves the use of carbon nanoshells and carbon-based nanomatrices to encapsulate and to embed the Au NPs.17,18 A more recently discovered carbon-based material is graphene.19,20 Graphene is a sheet of two-dimensional (2D) single layer sp2 hybridized carbon atoms with exceptional electrical, optical, thermal and mechanical properties. Since its discovery by Geim and co-workers in 2004, research on graphene has increased in an exceptional rate exploring different properties and applications ranging from electronic and optoelectronic devices to photoconductive materials in solar cells and others. With the rapid development of synthetic methods and functionalization approaches of graphene oxide (GO), a highly oxidized form of graphene consisting of single atom-thick layers of graphene sheets with carboxylic acid, epoxide and hydroxyl groups in the plane, its outstanding potential for biomedical applications such as bioimaging, drug delivery and tissue engineering,21 as well as biosensing,22,23 has been exploited. However, the use of GO and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), obtained by reductive treatment of GO, in the biomedical field is relatively new. It started with the seminal report on the use of GO as an efficient nanocarrier for drug delivery by Dai et al. in 2008.24 Since then a lot of interesting work has been carried out to explore the use of graphene and in particular GO and rGO for biomedical applications.25
Having said that, a number of reports have demonstrated lately that graphene–Au NPs hybrid structures can act synergistically to offer a number of unique physicochemical properties.22 In this respect, electronic applications have been the first and most popular ones of graphene-based materials due to the high electron mobility of graphene, and graphene–Au NPs hybrids have shown their potential for reducing the sheet resistance of rGO-based devices.26 Moreover, the combination of Au NSs with graphene sheets can result in a positive synergistic effect and has made a pronounced impact on the biomedical and biosensing fields.27
This review chapter is focused on the description of the synthetic aspects of Au NSs wrapped with carbon-based materials, in particular graphene derivatives and the potential applications of the resulting Au NSs–graphene nanocomposites in the biomedical field. The number of publications based on GO–Au NPs and rGO–Au NPs hybrids from 2009 to 2014 shows a steady increase (Fig. 2). It is hoped that this review article will help in generating greater interest in the wider use of graphene–Au NPs hybrids in biomedical and biological fields.
 Fig. 2  Number of articles published from 2009 to 2014 according to Scopus on GO–Au NPs (red) and rGO–Au NPs (blue) hybrids for biomedical-related research. 
We will start the review with a detailed description of the currently available procedures for the fabrication of GO, rGO and graphene wrapped Au NSs, followed by approaches to embed Au NSs onto graphene-based nanosheets. Then, a detailed discussion of the application of the different hybrid structures for drug/gene delivery, photothermal therapy, electrochemical sensing and bioimaging is provided. The review is concluded with some perspectives in the field.
2. Preparation of GO and its properties
Graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are emerging materials for biomedical applications owing to their attractive physico-chemical properties. GO can be prepared in bulk quantities through extensive oxidation/exfoliation of graphite (Fig. 3A).28 Upon oxidation, hydrophilic groups such as hydroxyl, carbonyl, and epoxy groups are introduced onto the surface of GO sheets. The presence of these oxygen-containing groups makes GO stably suspended in pure water for some time; however GO sheets tend to aggregate in salt- or protein-rich solutions such as cell medium and serum (Fig. 3B).24 Furthermore, cytotoxicity tests have shown that GO exhibits a certain concentration dependent toxicity to cells (Fig. 3B).29
 Fig. 3  Graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide: (A) their formation, (B) UV-vis absorption characteristics, water and cell medium dispersibility (60 μg mL−1), and relative cell viability of HeLa cells upon incubation with different concentrations of GO, rGO, GO–PEG and rGO–PEG for 72 h, (C) different concepts for the formation of water dispersible GO and rGO.24,31,35,36 
In recent years, extensive efforts have been devoted to the preparation of GO with good dispersibility in various aqueous media. Two approaches have been developed to produce homogeneous and stable GO dispersions in solution. In the first strategy, covalent bonds are formed between the pending functional groups of GO and biocompatible polymers (Fig. 3C). Due to its minimal toxicity, biocompatibility, protein resistance and good solubility in water and other common solvents, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) has become the reagent of choice for the covalent functionalization of GO. The polymer-functionalized GO sheets were not noticeably toxic in vitro and in vivo at the tested doses.30 Dai et al. initially produced PEG-functionalized GO as a nanocarrier to load anticancer drugs via non-covalent physisorption and studied its cellular uptake.24,31 It was demonstrated that PEG-modified GO was biocompatible without obvious toxicity and could be loaded with aromatic anticancer drugs with high efficiency.21 The other approach to prepare stable GO dispersions utilizes non-covalent functionalization. High molecular weight surfactants such as Pluronic have been used to produce stable GO dispersions in water through micelle encapsulation.32 The use of sodium salt of pyrene butyric acid has also been reported to form stable GO dispersions in water through π–π stacking interaction between pyrene moieties and π-orbitals of GO (Fig. 3C).33 Hu et al. proposed an electrostatic self-assembly strategy for the formation of dispersible GO–Au NRs, where poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP) served as a stabilizing surfactant to avoid the aggregation of GO sheets (Fig. 3C).34
3. Preparation of rGO and its properties
The reduced form of GO, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), can provide GO with enhanced and modified optical and electrical properties and has garnered a lot of research interest. Reduction of GO to rGO can be achieved chemically (using e.g. hydrazine monohydrate, sodium borohydride, hydroquinone), thermally, photochemically and by other means.28,37–52 Hydrazine monohydrate is still the most widely used, mainly due to its strong reduction activity to eliminate most oxygen-containing functional groups of GO and its ability to yield stable rGO aqueous dispersions.50 However, with hydrazine as the reducing agent, its residual trace may strongly decrease the performance of rGO-based devices. In addition, hydrazine is a highly toxic and potentially explosive chemical. To avoid using hydrazine, many environmentally friendly and high-efficiency reductants have been developed and used for the reduction of GO, including vitamin C,53,54 amino acids,54 reducing sugars,52 alcohols,44 hydroiodic acid,55 reducing metal powder,56,57 sodium citrate,58 tea,59 lysozyme,60 dopamine,48,61etc. Compared to GO, rGO showed enhanced absorption over a wide wavelength window (Fig. 3B), making it particularly appealing for photothermal applications. While rGO is often less cytotoxic than GO (Fig. 3B), the cytotoxicity of rGO depends strongly on its preparation and the degree of reduction (residual oxygen-containing groups).62–65 However, as rGO tends to aggregate strongly due to π–π stacking interactions, chemical modification of rGO has become indispensable which will in turn affect the cytotoxicity of rGO (Fig. 3B). We have recently compared PEG-modified GO and PEG-modified rGO and found that PEG–rGO is somehow less cytotoxic than GO–PEG.66 This observation was believed to be partially due to the difference in shape: GO–PEG displays a needle-like morphology, while rGO–PEG has a spherical shape. This example illustrates the difficulty to pin down a priori the expected cytotoxicity of these materials where size, shape, solubility as well as surface functions are all dictating the overall cell viability.
4. Fabrication of graphene–Au nanoparticles
The principal driving force for the growing research trends in the field of graphene–metal nanohybrids is the formation of nanocomposite materials of superior properties, resulting from the combination of the properties of GO and graphene with metal NPs. GO and graphene have a number of properties that make them more favorable materials compared to other carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), the most studied carbon-based nanomaterial, for the synthesis of nanocomposite structures.67 There are currently two synthetic routes for the preparation of graphene–Au NPs composite materials. The dispersion of Au NPs on GO or rGO sheets provides an easy way to decorate graphene sheets with Au nanostructures. Encapsulation of Au clusters inside graphene-based cages is the other approach (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Decoration of GO and rGO with Au nanostructures using different interaction forces. 
GO and rGO are considered adapted for both approaches, as their oxygen-containing functional groups are essential for further chemical reactions and integration of Au NSs through electrostatic interactions, covalent linkage and π–π stacking (Fig. 4). Great attention is currently dedicated to the in situ synthesis of rGO or GO nanosheets decorated with Au nano-stars, rods, clusters,68 nanowires,69 and nanocubes.70 Next to the local formation of catalytic sites in Au NS decorated graphene, which can be used for the development of high performance biosensors, catalytic devices and energy storage devices, an important feature of the integration of Au NSs onto GO or rGO sheets is the inhibition of aggregation of the resulting graphene sheets in dry state and in solution. Although single layer sheets of GO can be isolated, the van der Waals interactions of individual rGO sheets are so strong that aggregation of graphene sheets occurs with the tendency to form a graphite layered structure. The presence of metal NPs on rGO sheets prevents restacking of the graphene sheets.71 Motivated by this finding, recent research efforts have focused on the synthesis of metal NPs-GO–rGO composite materials. The Au NSs act as spacers, increasing the distance between the graphene sheets, thereby making both faces of graphene accessible.
4.1. Au NS embedded graphene nanocomposites
Synthesis of Au NS loaded graphene nanocomposites can be broadly classified into two categories, viz. in situ and ex situ growth. In the in situ approach, simultaneous chemical reduction of GO and Au salt is carried out in order to synthesize Au NPs–rGO composite materials, while the ex situ approach involves the synthesis of Au NPs of desired size and shape and their transfer onto graphene, GO or rGO matrix.

4.1.1. 
            Ex situ
          . 
Graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide. 
In the ex situ method, the Au NPs are synthesized separately from GO or rGO nanosheets and are linked by utilizing electrostatic, π–π or van der Waals interactions for binding. In this respect, 2-mercaptopyridine modified Au NPs are linked to GO nanosheets using π–π stacking (Fig. 5A).69 The use of cysteine as a linker molecule is in particular attractive. As it contains both thiol and amino groups, linking to the carboxylic acid groups of GO via its NH2 group and to Au NRs via its SH group can be achieved. The integrated Au NRs were found to separate the GO sheets within the 3D layer-by-layer structure. Extensive 3D tomography studies revealed that graphene sheets are placed in a parallel manner rather than in a random manner.69 Poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP) was proposed by Hu et al. as a stabilizing surfactant to prevent the aggregation of GO sheets, to which Au NRs were loaded (Fig. 5B).36 They also noticed a significant change in the plasmonic behavior of the GO–Au NRs matrix with a red shift from 780 to 830 nm of the transversal plasmonic mode.36 GO nanosheets functionalized with (3-mercaptopropyl)triethoxysilane (MPTES) were synthesized to improve the affinity for Au NPs.72 Using a self-assembled method, the MPTES-functionalized GO was dispersed in DMF under ultrasonication for 5 h and then reduced with hydrazine at 95 °C for 1 h. Finally, Au NPs with a well-defined size (2–5 nm) were added to the reduced graphene solution.
 Fig. 5  
Ex situ approaches for the integration of Au NSs onto GO and rGO: (A) π–π stacking interaction of 2-mercaptopyridine modified Au NPs with GO nanosheets (reprinted with permission from Huang, et al., Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738); (B) poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP) modified GO and loading of Au NRs by charge interaction (reprinted with permission from Hu, et al., Carbon, 2013, 51, 255); (C) bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a stabilizing and reducing agent for GO with subsequent Au NP integration (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279). 
The main advantage of this approach is the good control over the particle size, shape and loading. Spherical31,69,73–75 and rod shaped Au NSs were used for the decoration of GO.76,77 The driving force is considered to be the electrostatic interaction between negatively charged GO and positively charged CTAB- or cysteine-functionalized Au NRs. Moreover, the method was preferably used for the decoration of GO rather than rGO; the latter can be easily obtained through in situ reduction processes. A general platform for the assembly of Au NSs onto GO and rGO was developed by Deng and co-workers.35 Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as both a reducing agent and a stabilizer to prepare BSA–GO/rGO–Au NPs composites according to Fig. 5C.
Graphene. 
Next to GO and rGO, graphene thin films can also be decorated with Au NSs by thermal evaporation of Au via lithographic approaches. It has been found that Au deposited by thermal evaporation on graphene interacts differently with this substrate depending on the layer number of graphene sheets (Fig. 6A). With the aim to explore the capacity of graphene to probe surface enhanced Raman (SERS) activity, Au NPs of well-defined dimensions (140, 210 or 320 nm) were deposited onto a multilayer system composed of a Si/SiO2 (300 nm)/graphene system (Fig. 6B) through thermal evaporation using masks.78 Significant Raman enhancements (up to 35) could be measured for both G and 2D bands which scaled with the nanoparticle cross-section78 and the number of graphene layers.79 We have shown lately that gold nanoarrays can be directly transferred onto graphene thin films using e-beam lithography (Fig. 6C).80
 Fig. 6  Decoration of graphene with an ordered array of Au NPs: (A) influence of the number of graphene layers on the morphology of the deposited nanostructures after annealing at 1260 °C in vacuum for 30 s (reprinted with permission from Zhou, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 944); (B) SEM image of Au NP modified graphene sheets (SiO2 (purple), graphene (blue), gold electrodes and dots (yellow)) and Raman spectra (laser wavelength of 633 nm) (reprinted with permission from Schedin, et al., ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5617); (C) SEM images of graphene-coated gold thin films decorated with Au NPs by EBL with a center-to-center distance of 300 nm. The particles are 50 nm in height and 80 nm (a), 110 nm (b), and 140 nm (c) in diameter (reprinted with permission from Maurer, et al., Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 507). 


4.1.2. 
            In situ synthesis of Au NPs on GO and rGO. 
While the ex situ approach is well adapted to form controlled GO–, rGO– and graphene–Au NSs nanocomposites, most work done in this field focused on in situ approaches.69,72,81–84
Reduction processes in mixed solution. 
In most cases, a GO suspension is mixed with HAuCl4 and the mixture is treated with a reducing agent such as sodium borohydride, sodium citrate, hydrazine hydrate, ascorbic acid, glucose, etc., resulting in simultaneous reduction of Au3+ solution to Au0 and GO to rGO (Fig. 7A).82 Although the mechanism of reduction is not clearly understood, it has been hypothesized that it involves three steps: the oxygen functionalities of GO provide the reactive nucleation sites. After the reduction of Au cations by a reducing agent such as citrate,58,85,86 sodium borohydride,70,87,88 ascorbic acid,89–91 tyrosine,92 poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA),93 sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),94 or ionic liquid,95 as well as with the assistance of sonolysis,83,96 the growth of Au particles starts; the nanoparticles remain attached to the GO sheet. The reduction agents used simultaneously reduce GO to rGO, resulting in the formation of Au NPs–rGO nanocomposites. While so far it is impossible to distinguish the role of each oxygen containing group in the nucleation of Au NPs, oxygen-rich GO platforms are reported to promote Au NP integration.70 As a proof, thermally reduced GO, hydrazine reduced GO and conventional GO were used in a study to estimate the influence of level of reduction on the nucleation growth.82 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of obtained Au–graphene composites revealed the absence of Au NPs in the case of hydrazine reduced GO, a homogeneous distribution of discrete Au NPs on the surface of GO and agglomerated Au NPs with a scarce distribution on the surface of thermally heated GO (Fig. 7B). Song et al.97 reported that GO surfaces enriched with carboxylic acid groups did not facilitate Au seeding, while thiol-functionalized GO97,98 possessed high affinity to gold allocating the seeds in a highly ordered manner. Yang et al. used the ethanethiol-perylene tetracarboxylic diimide (ETPTCDI)-mediated strategy for the preparation of highly ordered Au NPs on rGO nanosheets in a two-step process (Fig. 7B).99 The perylene moiety strongly binds to GO, while the thiol functionalities of ETPTCDI allocate Au seeds. Subsequent reduction with hydrazine in the presence of ammonia gave the corresponding rGO–ETPTCDI. Thereafter, the HAuCl4 precursor is added to the reaction mixture and Au nanodots are formed without the addition of any reducing agent. Electron transfer from rGO–ETPTCDI is believed to be the cause for the reduction of Au3+ to Au0. Furthermore, to avoid particle aggregation mercaptoacetic acid was added during the formation of Au particles.
 Fig. 7  (A) Different in situ reduction strategies; (B) influence of chemical state of GO on the distribution of Au NPs: SEM and TEM images (reprinted with permission from Goncalves, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796 and Yang, et al., Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1864);99 (C) XRD pattern of GO, rGO and Au NPs–rGO nanohybrid (reproduced with permission from Y. Wang, et al., J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(14), 5319). 
Au NPs–rGO composites could also be synthesized using sodium citrate as an environmentally friendly reducing and stabilizing agent.58 In this one pot synthesis, citrate ions act as a capping agent for the simultaneous reduction of the Au ions and GO. Au NPs of ∼7 nm in size were uniformly distributed over the rGO nanosheets. A green in situ approach for the synthesis of aqueous stable rGO–Au NP hybrids using PVP as a stabilizer and ascorbic acid as a reducing agent for both GO and gold ions was proposed by Iliut et al., more recently.100 Muszynsky et al. have applied a solution-based process to synthesize Au NPs of 3–30 nm in diameter supported on octadecylamine modified GO, making them readily dispersible in tetrahydrofuran.88 Recently, Gkikas et al. reported on the simultaneous formation and stabilization of gold nanoparticles on GO covalently modified with poly(L-proline) (PLP).101
The in situ growth of Au NPs on the surface of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) modified GO using NaBH4 as a reducing agent improved the dispersion of Au NPs, but also stabilized cholinesterase with high activity and loading efficiency.102 The formation of the Au NPs–rGO nanohybrid was confirmed by XRD (Fig. 7C). GO shows a characteristic peak at 2θ = 10.4°, while rGO has a characteristic peak at 2θ = 27.7°. Such a peak is also observed in the XRD pattern of Au NPs–rGO nanocomposites. The XRD pattern revealed that the Au NPs are crystalline with a face-centered cubic packing arrangement of the bulk metal.
Alternative processes. 
Next to the formation of Au NSs–graphene nanocomposites during reduction processes in mixed solution, the direct reduction of Au ions on rGO was reported.103 rGO thin films, prepared by GO reduction with hydrazine, were deposited by vacuum filtering a solution of rGO suspension on quartz and immersed in an aqueous solution of HAuCl4·3H2O. During the immersion process, Au NPs were produced by spontaneous reduction of Au3+ on the rGO sheets. The mechanism of reduction of Au3+ ions on rGO involves galvanic displacement and redox reaction due to the relative potential difference. It is believed that Au NP deposition was promoted by electrons present on the negatively charged rGO. This was further supported by the negative zeta potential value (−39 mV) measured on the rGO aqueous suspension at pH 7, and the reduction potential of +0.38 V vs. SHE estimated from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). This value is much lower than +1.002 V vs. SHE corresponding to the reduction potential of AuCl4−, suggesting a spontaneous reduction of Au3+ ions on rGO.
Electrochemical deposition is an efficient and green technique for the synthesis of Au NPs–rGO nanocomposites, produced by simultaneous electrochemical reduction and electrodeposition of Au NPs onto rGO.104,105 Fu et al. synthesized Au NPs–rGO nanocomposites by electrochemical co-reduction of Au salt and GO in an ionic liquid.105
Photochemical and photothermal methods are other green approaches investigated for the synthesis of Au NPs–GO composite materials to avoid the commonly used toxic chemicals. Moussa et al. investigated the reduction of Au metal ions using 532 nm laser and tungsten lamp irradiation of a mixture of GO and metal ions derived from HAuCl4 in different solvents such as water–ethanol, water–polyethylene glycol (PEG) or pure water.106 Ethanol and PEG act as scavengers for the holes, generated upon irradiation of GO, and thus promote GO reduction by the photogenerated electrons. In the reducing environment, provided by ethanol or PEG, the photogenerated electrons reduce the metal ions, and since the alcohol radicals (C2H4OH˙) are strong reducing agents they undergo oxidation to CH3CHO and therefore reduce GO to rGO.106
High-frequency ultrasound reduction is a convenient and clean approach to carry out the synthesis of Au NPs–graphene nanocomposites. The interaction between ultrasound and gas molecules (monoatomic or diatomic), in aqueous solutions, results in the growth and violent collapse of microbubbles. This collapse generates high temperature conditions within the bubbles, which leads to the formation of highly reactive H˙ and OH˙ ions. In general, the H˙ radicals rapidly recombine or react with H2O, which rules out the possibility that they will act as reducing agents for other substrates. If the organic solutes are volatile, the reducing radicals are directly generated within the bubbles. These radicals can reduce the substrate such as metal ions in solution, GO to rGO or a mixture of metal ions–GO. Vinodgopal et al.83 reported on the ultrasound-induced reduction of GO and HAuCl4 in 2% aqueous solution of poly(ethylene glycol) to synthesize Au NPs–rGO nanocomposites.
Formation of anisotropic gold nanostructures on rGO. 
The in situ synthesis is also adapted for the formation of rGO matrices modified with anisotropic Au NPs. The roughness of GO seems to be the underlying driving force. The formation of Au snow flake particles different from multipod and star shaped Au NSs is governed only by the presence of GO (Fig. 8A).107 Marzan and co-workers showed clearly the influence of GO on the morphology of branched Au NSs.108 The Au NSs formed in the absence of GO displayed thinner and more abundant branches when compared to rGO–Au NSs prepared by the same protocol (Fig. 8B). By simply varying the ratio of [Au3+]/[Auseeds] concentration, different morphologies were obtained. Nanopatches of GO anchored Au NSs were successfully synthesized via the HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) mediated route.109 HEPES also facilitates anisotropic growth and shape control of Au NSs along the (111) direction through strong affinity of the piperazine ring for the (110) planes of Au in comparison to weak adsorption on the (111) planes. HEPES reduction of Au precursors occurs due to oxidation of the N atom of a piperazine ring and usually proceeds at room temperature and neutral pH. In this work, the important role of GO concentration was shown. By increasing the GO to Au ratio, enhanced nucleation and high anisotropy occurred. This indicates the role of GO in the controlled growth of near-infrared (NIR) tunable Au NSs (Fig. 8C).
 Fig. 8  (A) Hydroxylamine mediated anisotropic growth of gold nano snowflakes on a GO substrate (reprinted with permission from Goncalves, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796); (B) the decoration of rGO with gold nanostars by a Ag+ mediated protocol (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6(24), 21798–21805); (C) TEM and UV/vis images of nanopatches of GO anchored Au NSs synthesized via a HEPES-mediated route (reprinted with permission from Nergiz, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(18), 16395–16402). 

4.2 Graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide wrapped Au NPs
As discussed briefly beforehand, the usefulness of GO and rGO for nanoparticle formulation is limited by their poor colloidal stability, which necessitates surface chemistry modification with stabilizing agents. The fabrication of a continuous shell of graphene, GO or rGO over Au NPs is proposed to overcome such limitation. The presence of oxygen functionalities on GO and rGO results in an overall negative zeta potential of such nanostructures, facilitating the interaction with positively charged Au NPs, like those formed through stabilization with CTAB. One of the first attempts to fabricate graphene-like carbon shells around Au NPs was that proposed by Chopra et al.18 Au NPs on 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) modified Si substrates were used as catalysts for the growth of the graphene shell using a CVD process (Fig. 9A). Carbon shells of ∼1.2–2.8 nm in thickness were formed over a period of 1 h, corresponding to ∼5–9 independent graphene layers with an interplanar spacing of 0.34 ± 0.01 nm. CVD growth times above 4 h caused the rupture of the graphene shell and dissociation from the Au NPs. A modified approach was recently reported by Bian et al.110 An aqueous solution of HAuCl4, used as the metal precursor, was loaded onto fumed silica powder and subjected to methane CVD for graphene shell growth. Modification with polyoxyethylene stearyl ether molecules made the formed graphene-coated gold nanostructures water dispersible and extremely stable in extreme pH environments and under high salt conditions (Fig. 9B).110
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM images of graphene wrapped Au NPs synthesized using a CVD process (reprinted with permission from Chopra, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1176); (B) stability of different graphene wrapped Au NP suspensions (reprinted with permission from Bian, et al., Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6093); (C) TEM images of rGO–Au NRs and rGO–Au NSs together with optical and Raman images (reprinted with permission from Lim, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075); (D) TEM images of 20 nm Au–GO capsules (reprinted with permission from Ma, et al., J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1(47), 6495). 
Next to CVD approaches, chemical strategies have been shown in addition to allow the wrapping of GO and rGO over Au NSs.27,111–113 Kohane and co-workers developed plasmonic nanoparticles coated with rGO through electrostatic interactions between nanosized GO and cysteamine stabilized Au NPs or CTAB stabilized Au NRs, followed by chemical reduction to generate partially reduced GO.111 As measured by high resolution-transmittance electron microscopy (HR-TEM), rGO shells of ≈1 nm (Au NPs) and 2.5 nm (Au NRs) were formed in this way (Fig. 9C). Raman analysis showed distinctive Raman peaks at 1355 cm−1 (D band) and 1593 cm−1 (G band) together with bands at 2710 cm−1 (2D band) and 2900 cm−1 (D + D′ band) indicative of the successful chemical reduction of GO layers. The obtained nanostructures had an overall negative surface potential and showed improved colloidal stability compared to rGO nanosheets. A similar approach was used by Xu et al. to prepare GO wrapped Au NRs.112 A different approach to produce individually GO wrapped Au NPs was reported by Ma et al.114 The nanostructures were fabricated by using a one-step synthetic method by mixing HAuCl4 with nanoscale GO sheets and adding NaBH4 at certain time intervals (Fig. 9D).
We have shown lately the interest of covalently linking rGO to Au NRs. Such a hybrid can be synthesized via amide bond formation between amine-PEG-terminated rGO (rGO–PEG–NH2) and HOOC–PEG–Au NRs, formed following the well established seed-mediated procedure in the presence of CTAB and dicarboxylic polyethyleneglycol in the growth solution (Fig. 10).115,116 A representative TEM image of the rGO–PEG–Au NRs hybrid shows the presence of a rGO–PEG layer of ≈1.5 nm around the Au NRs. The UV-vis spectrum of the rGO–PEG–Au NRs hybrid displays two bands at 589 nm and 680 nm corresponding to the transverse and longitudinal plasmon oscillations of the Au NRs, respectively (Fig. 10B). The presence of rGO is furthermore evidenced by the absorption maximum at 270 nm and an overall increase in absorption from the visible to the NIR. The rGO–PEG–Au NRs hybrid (average size of 60 ± 15 nm) is in addition highly dispersible in aqueous media and stable for several months (Fig. 10C). In contrast to the HOOC–PEG–Au NRs, the in vitro toxicity of the rGO–PEG–Au NRs hybrid to MDA-MB-231 cells was drastically improved (Fig. 10D). No obvious decrease of cell viability was noticed for MDA-MB-23 cells when incubated with rGO–PEG–Au NRs (10 μg mL−1) for 78 h in strong contrast to Au NRs, where at the same concentration cell viability was around 20%. The hybrid also proved to be less toxic than GO, but somewhat more cytotoxic than rGO–PEG–NH2.
 Fig. 10  (A) (a) Synthesis of HOOC–PEG–Au NRs, (b) covalent linking of rGO–PEG–NH2 with HOOC–PEG–Au NRs; TEM image of a Au NR coated with rGO–PEG–NH2; (B) UV-vis of rGO–PEG–Au NRs; (C) stability of different matrices in PBS (100 μg mL−1): (1) GO, (2) rGO–COOH, (3) rGO–PEG–NH2, (4) Au NRs, (5) rGO–PEG–Au NRs; (D) relative cell viability of MDA MB 231 cells upon incubation with different concentrations (0–40 μg mL−1) of rGO–PEG–Au NRs, rGOPEG–NH2 and GO for 78 h.27 
4.3 Graphene-wrapped Au NPs
While not extensively investigated, some examples on the wrapping of surface linked Au NPs with graphene sheets have been reported lately (Fig. 11).117–119 Such approaches were in particular expected to improve the SERS signals.120,121 Hegg et al. post-coated Au NSs with graphene sheets to form Au cavities.118 As seen in Fig. 11A, the structures consisted of two Au disks with a height of 45 nm and a diameter of ≈100 nm with an interparticle distance of ≈30 nm on a flat SiO2 surface of 300 nm in thickness. Graphene, prepared by mechanical cleavage,122 was transferred on top of the structures. Suspended in this way graphene is under tensile strain and possesses enhanced Raman signals compared to unperturbed graphene, with Raman enhancement of up to 103 fold.118 Wang et al. reported on the formation of graphene coated Au nanopyramid tips.119Fig. 11B illustrates a typical sample that consists of three regions located immediately next to each other: the Au tipped surface, the flat Au surface and the surface of flat SiO2 of 200 nm in thickness. The hexagonally ordered Au nanopyramid arrays of ≈250 nm base with the radius of curvature at the apex as small as 1 nm are fabricated on a continuous Au film of 200 nm in thickness using the nano-casting process described by Sun et al.123 It is based on the self-assembly of polystyrene beads on silicon substrates followed by plasma etching and Au deposition. Graphene transfer over the formed Au tips was achieved by mechanical transfer of CVD grown graphene (Fig. 11B). Interestingly, such structures showed a giant enhancement of graphene Raman signals of up to 107.119
 Fig. 11  (A) Sketch of the gold cavities sample formation (reprinted with permission from Heeg, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 301); (B) schematic of the graphene–Au nanopyramid sample and SEM image of graphene on Au tips (scale bar 1 μm, inset: schematic image of graphene on Au tips) and of hexagonally arranged arrays of Au tips which sharply folded graphene (scale bar 200 nm). The dotted black circle indicates a hanging graphene fold between neighboring tips (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6244). 
5. Applications of gold–graphene nanocomposites
Since the successful fabrication of single layered graphene, graphene and its derivatives have been the shining stars in materials science. More recently, the use of graphene in biomedicine has aroused widespread interest for various applications including drug and gene delivery, cancer therapy, biomedical imaging, biosensors as well as tissue engineering scaffolds. The first report on the use of graphene as a therapeutic agent dates back to the work of Dai et al. in 2008, where pegylated graphene oxide (PEG–GO) was used for the delivery of water insoluble cancer drugs.24 The drug-loaded PEG–GO was tested for cancer cell killing capability and exhibited high potency with IC50 values of 6 nM for the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116. This work illustrated the potential of a graphene-based nanocarrier as an efficient drug-delivery agent for aromatic and water insoluble drugs. The exciting achievements over the last few years have been extensively reviewed by different researchers and will not be further discussed here.124,125 Instead, a brief overview of recent work on biomedical applications of Au–graphene nanocomposites will be provided (Fig. 12), as these composite materials opened up different exciting therapies and applications for biology.
 Fig. 12  Biomedical applications of Au–graphene nanocomposites. 
5.1. Drug/gene delivery and cancer therapy
GO is an ideal nanocarrier for water insoluble drugs and gene delivery. The unique structural features such as a high surface specific area (2630 m2 g−1), large and planar sp2-hybridized carbon domains and the presence of a large number of oxygen-containing groups render GO stable in physiological media and capable of loading of drugs via chemical conjugation or π–π stacking interactions. For example, doxorubicin (DOX) loading of 6.05 mg mg−1 at 0.32 mg mL−1 drug concentration was achieved on GO.75
Xu et al. combined chemo- and photothermal (see Section 5.2) targeted therapy by designing hyaluronic acid modified Au NRs–GO core–shell nanocomposites loaded with DOX for the selective treatment of hepatoma Huh-7 cancer cells (Fig. 13A).112 Around 15.3% of DOX was released from the nanostructures at pH = 5.3, while by means of NIR irradiation a release of up to 34.5% was achieved. The chemo-photothermal combined therapy showed 4-fold higher targeted cell death rates than single chemotherapy or photothermal therapy. In line with this work, graphene-isolated Au nanocrystals (GIAN) modified with DOX provided an efficient therapeutic platform for combined chemo- and photothermal targeted therapy. Obvious differences in cell death were observed for DOX loaded GIAN with and without NIR (808 nm) treatment giving rise to photothermally enhanced chemotherapeutic effects.110 Polyethyleneimine (PEI) modified GO encapsulated Au NSs were recently proposed as novel gene vectors for pDNA (Fig. 13B). The efficiency of the Au NSs–GO–PEI hybrids was shown to be high (65%). Moreover, viability of HeLa cells was preserved (90%) compared to poor cell survival when using PEI as a gene vector.126 Yuan et al. investigated recently the effect of multifunctional micro-RNA-122 loaded GO@Au nanocomposites on drug-resistant liver cancer cells.127 Indeed, it is now well known that the expression of micro-RNA-122 is down-regulated in many hepatoma cells. The development of a combination of monoclonal P-glycoprotein antibodies, folic acid and micro-RNA-122 loaded GO@Au nanocomposites promoted apoptosis in drug-resistant HepG2 cells with drug targeting and controlled release properties.127
 Fig. 13  (A) Hyaluronic acid modified Au NRs–GO core–shell nanocomposites loaded with doxorubicin for the selective treatment of hepatoma Huh-7 cancer cells (reprinted with permission from Xu, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12911–12920); (B) schematic illustration of the synthesis of GO–PEI–Au NPs and GO–PEI–Au NRs, and the possible mechanism of gene delivery (reprinted with permission from Xu, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2715–2724). 
5.2. Photothermal therapy (PTT)
While the high surface area is primordial for efficient drug and gene loading, the strong optical absorption in the near infrared light (NIR) region makes GO (rGO)-based nanocomposites in addition suitable for photothermal therapy (PTT).128 One of the current modalities for PTT is the use of NIR light absorbing agents that convert optical energy into heat, leading to the thermal ablation of cancer cells and pathogens. The use of NIR has the advantage that water, melanin and hemoglobin have absorption minima in this region and light between 700 and 900 nm is most likely to pass directly through tissues without significant absorption and heat generation.129 The high photothermal effect under low power NIR irradiation of GO and in particular rGO due to their effective light-to-heat conversion has made graphene-based materials competitive photothermal agents.66,94,130–133 Although rGO shows 6-fold higher NIR absorption than GO,134 the low quantum efficiency of rGO and its broad absorption spectrum render it less sensitive to specific wavelengths. To overcome this limitation and to enhance the photothermal effect, Au–graphene hybrid cargos have been proposed. Indeed, Au-based nanomaterials exhibit strong visible to NIR absorption owing to the localized surface plasmon resonance effects, rendering them the most powerful agents for PTT cancer treatment and bacteria killing.8,135,136 Different Au–graphene hybrid materials have been proposed in the last few years and have shown enhanced therapeutic efficiency at physiologically safe doses.68,110,112,114,137 El-Shall and co-workers demonstrated the coupling of photothermal effects of gold nanostructures of controlled size and shape with GO nanosheets dispersed in water.138 It was noted that laser irradiation of gold nanorods in the presence of GO resulted in well-dispersed ultrasmall gold nanoparticles of 2.9 ± 1.7 nm in diameter when illuminated for 10 min at 532 nm (4 W).138 The enhanced photothermal effect of Au nanostructures coated with rGO in the NIR was first investigated by Kohane and co-workers.111 When stimulated by NIR light, Au nanoshells and Au nanorods coated with rGO produced enhanced photothermal effects (Fig. 14A).111 The effectiveness of these nanomaterials for PTT was demonstrated with cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). While in the absence of irradiation HUVECs exposed to rGO coated Au particles showed no significant cytotoxicity (Fig. 14A(c)), under irradiation (3 W cm−2, 808 nm) a time-dependent decrease in cell viability was observed. The photothermal therapeutic response of cancer cells to aptamer-modified gold nanoparticles embedded on GO was recently shown to facilitate targeted treatment of tumor cells by NIR light-activatable photothermal therapy.139 Due to the specific interaction between the MUC1-binding aptamer and the MUC1 transmembrane mucin glycoprotein on the cell membrane selective targeting is achieved. Furthermore, under NIR illumination the nanocomposites induced a transient increase in the expression of heat shock proteins (HSP70), which may cause irreversible damage to cancer cells.139
 Fig. 14  Chemo-photothermal therapy with graphene wrapped Au NSs: (A) TEM image of a graphene wrapped Au NR (a), heating curves (b) and cell viability under light illumination (reprinted with permission from D.-K. Lim, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079); (B) change of E. coli UTI89 concentration in the presence of multimeric heptyl-α-D-mannoside modified rGO–PEG–Au NR particles upon irradiation at 4 or 8 W cm−2 for 10 min at 700 nm together with effective targeting demonstration. The fluorescent images correspond to E. coli UTI89 expressing the fluorescent Katushka protein, FTIC-labeled multimeric heptyl-α-D-mannoside modified rGO–PEG–Au NRs and the overlap of both images (with permission from K. Turcheniuk, et al., J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 375). 
More recently, graphene wrapped Au NRs were used for the photothermal ablation of bacteria.27,140 The development of non antibiotic based treatments against bacterial infections is a complex task. New strategies to treat such infections are thus urgently needed. We developed lately Au NRs coated with rGO–PEG (rGO–PEG–Au NRs) for the selective killing of uropathogenic E. coli UTI89 (Fig. 14B). Targeted killing of E. coli UTI89 was in addition achieved through functionalization of the photothermal target with multimeric heptyl α-D-mannoside probes. This currently offers a unique biocompatible method for the ablation of pathogens with the opening of probably a new possibility for clinical treatment of patients with urinary infections.
5.3. Biosensing and bioimaging

5.3.1 Electrochemical sensors based on gold nanoparticles–graphene hybrids. 
Graphene and its derivatives have been intensively used for the detection of diverse biomolecules including dopamine, amino acids, biomolecules, etc.22,141–144 Several types of biosensors have been constructed including fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), plasmonic, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), field-effect transistor (FET) and electrochemical means. One field where Au NPs–graphene nanocomposites have had an enormous impact is in electrochemical-based sensing. Carbon materials are widely used in both analytical and industrial electrochemistry, as they show a wide potential window and are low cost materials in comparison to metal electrodes such as Au or Pt. In the case of graphene-based electrodes, next to a large potential window, fast heterogeneous electron transfer kinetics for various analytes and the involvement of additional “chemical amplification effects” (e.g. in the case of aromatic structures such as dopamine interacting strongly with rGO via π–π stacking interactions)145 have made these electrodes well adapted for sensing. The integration of Au NPs into graphene nanosheets allows one in certain cases to efficiently improve the sensitivity and detection limit of the sensor due to improvement of the electron transfer or through its catalytic reaction with certain analytes (e.g. hydrogen peroxide) (Table 1). The synergistic effect of the rGO matrix decorated with Au NPs on the electrochemical performance of a glucose sensor was for example shown by Shan et al.146 Immobilization of glucose oxidase onto rGO–Au NPs–chitosan matrices resulted in a composite electrode with a detection limit of 180 μM for glucose and a linear range from 2 to 14 mM.
Table 1 Graphene–Au NPs hybrid based electrodes for electrochemical sensing applicationsa




Hybrid
Analyte
LOD linear range sensitivity
Ref.





a PDDA: poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride); HRP: horseradish peroxidase.





rGO–Au NPs–chitosan–GODx
Glucose

LOD = 180 μM
2–14 mM
99.5 μA μM−1 cm−2


146



Graphene:MWCNT–Au NPs
Glucose

4.8 μM 5–175
μM
29.72 μA μM−1 cm−2


152



GO–Ag/Au NPs–mercaptophenylboronic acid
Glucose

0.33 mM
2–6 mM


153



Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots–Au NPs
Hydrogen peroxide
0.12 μM

154



PDDA–Au NPs–graphene
Uric acid

0.1 μM
0.5–20 μM
103.8 μA μM−1 cm−2


155



rGO−Au NPs–enzyme
Cholesterol

0.05 μM
0.05–0.35 mM
3.14 μA μM−1 cm−2


156



Graphene–Au NPs

L-Histidine
0.1 pM 10 pM–10 μM

157



rGO–Au NPs

L-Lactate tumor biomarker

0.13 μM
10 μM–5 mM
154 μA mM−1 cm2


158



Single-layered GO–Au NPs
DNA
100 fM

149



Graphene–Au NPs–PANI
DNA

2.11 pM
10–1000 pM


159



rGO–Au NPs–toluidine blue
DNA

2.95 pM
0.1 pM–1 nM


150



PDDA-modified rGO–Au NPs
Angiogenin

0.064 pM
0.1 pM–5 nM


160



rGO–Au NPs–anti-CEA
Antigen carcinoembryonic

0.01 ng mL−1
0.05–350 ng mL−1


161



Graphene–Au–Fe3O4
Prostate specific antigen

5 ng mL−1
0.01–10 ng mL−1


162



rGO–Au NRs–antibody
Transferrin
0.0375–40 μg mL−1

163



rGO–Au@Pd–thionine–HRP–Ab2
Carbohydrate antigen 19-9

006 U mL−1
0.015–150 U mL−1


164



Graphene–aptamer–Au NPs
ATP/Hg2+

ATP: 15 nM (10 nM–4 mM)
Hg2+: 0.5 nM (0.5–500 nM)


165



rGO–Au NPs
Cells

5.2 × 103 cells per mL−1
1.6 × 104−1.6 × 107 cells per mL−1


166





The concept of using Au NP decorated graphene for the catalysis of electrochemical reactions has been used to detect hydrogen peroxide (Fig. 15). Fang et al. took advantage of the cationic properties of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) functionalized graphene for the preparation of a graphene–Au NPs heterostructure with enhanced electrochemical catalytic ability towards hydrogen peroxide.147 Indeed, the sensor exhibited a detection limit of 0.44 μM over a linear range from 0.5 μM to 0.5 mM. The good performance of the sensor was ascribed to the high loading and uniform dispersion of the Au NPs on the graphene nanosheets. We recently investigated the reducing properties of tyrosine for the in situ synthesis of aqueous stable rGO–Au NPs hybrids from GO and Au ions. The resulting nanocomposite showed electrochemical activity for nonenzymatic detection of H2O2 with a detection limit of 20 μM over a wide linear range from 0.02 to 25 mM. Jiang and co-workers used Au NP–graphene hybrid structures for the detection of H2O2 in living cells. The results indicated that a higher efflux of H2O2 is observed in tumor cells versus normal cells.148
 Fig. 15  (A) Amperometric response curve at rGO–Au NPs–Tyr–GC polarized at −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl with subsequent additions of H2O2, inset: SEM image of the rGO–Tyr–Au NPs nanohybrid; cyclic voltammograms of rGO–Au NPs–Tyr–GC in N2-saturated 0.1 M PBS solution (pH 7.4) in the absence and presence of 10 mM H2O2 (scan rate: 50 mV s−1) together with the calibration curve;151 (B) schematic illustration of an electrochemical DNA sensor (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2728–2733). 
DNA sensing is another common application of Au NP–graphene hybrids. Mandler and co-workers showed that the surface of graphene–Au NP electrodes can be easily modified by thiolated DNA through strong Au–S bonding.149 When the target DNA completely hybridizes with the probe DNA, the electron is transferred from the electrode surface to methylene blue to catalyze ferrocyanide, thus showing a reduction peak in the DVP measurements. A DNA biosensor using nanocomposites of Au NPs/toluidine blue in rGO was recently proposed by Peng et al.150 Differential pulse voltammetry was employed to monitor the hybridization of DNA by measuring the changes in the peak current of toluidine blue. Under optimal conditions, the decreased currents were proportional to the logarithm of the concentration of the target DNA in the range of 1 × 10−11−1 × 10−9 M with a limit of detection of 2.95 × 10−12 M.150
Next to electrochemical sensing, a graphene–gold NPs hybrid FET sensor for the detection of proteins was proposed by Chen et al.167 Thermally reduced graphene oxide sheets were decorated with Au NPs which were covalently conjugated to anti-immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies. Upon introduction of the target protein, the direct current was measured resulting in a detection limit of 13 pM, which is among the best reported for carbon-based materials. The sensors also showed excellent selectively when exposed to other protein mismatches.


5.3.2 Gold nanoparticles–graphene hybrids for surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). 
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), a spectroscopic technique combining modern laser spectroscopy with the optical properties of metallic nanostructures, provides one of the most effective ways to dramatically enhance the Raman signal of molecules attached to nanometer-sized metal structures.168 Consequently, SERS has been widely applied in different fields, including sensing and medical diagnosis.168,169 It was used for the detection of single molecule interactions,170 and identification of biomolecules,171–173 genes,174 proteins,175 cancer cells,148,176 and others.177–179
Traditionally, Au and Ag NPs are used for SERS studies.180 Anisotropic structures such as Au NRs have in this respect proved to be highly efficient SERS substrates.108 Recent studies have demonstrated that graphene and its derivatives have the ability to enhance Raman signals as do Au NSs.181 The discovery of graphene-mediated SERS (G-SERS or simply GERS) by Ling et al.181 began with an accidental experiment, in which it was found that there are many “emerging bands” of mechanically exfoliated graphene when it is treated with organic solvents. Systematic G-SERS experiments using dyes such as phthalocyanine as Raman probes clearly showed that graphene enhances the Raman signals of the molecules (Fig. 16A). Strictly speaking, graphene does not fit the traditional definition of a SERS substrate because of the absence of the electromagnetic field contribution found in other plasmonic materials such as metal nanostructures. The origin of GERS is chemical enhancement. This leads to the conclusion that the GERS enhancement should be highly relevant to the chemical nature of graphene. Indeed, it was shown that GO possesses a higher enhancement factor than just the graphene sheet.182 From the discussion above, it can be expected that the combination of graphene and Au NPs will result in a dual-enhancement of the Raman signal via chemical (graphene) and electromagnetic (Au NPs) enhancement.69,107,183,184 Hu et al. compared recently the Raman signals of adsorbed aromatic dye molecules such as crystal violet onto GO, Au NRs and Au NRs–graphene hybrids (Fig. 16B) and validated clearly the enhanced SERS signal of Au NRs–GO nanohybrids.185
 Fig. 16  (A) The G-SERS effect: (a) schematic illustration of the molecules of graphene deposited on Si/SiO2 (300 nm), (b) comparison of the Raman signals of phthalocyanine (0.2 nm in thickness) deposited on graphene (red line) and on a Si/SiO2 substrate (blue) upon 632.8 nm excitation (reprinted with permission from Ling, et al., Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 553); (B) Raman spectra of crystal violet on Au NR (red), GO (blue), and GO–Au NR (green) surfaces together with relative intensity of the observed Raman signals (reprinted with permission from Hu, et al., Carbon, 2013, 51, 255). 
Au NPs–graphene hybrid structures have also shown their potential for molecular bioimaging. HeLa cells incubated with GO–Au NPs hybrids exhibit a much stronger Raman signal than that recorded on cells incubated with pristine GO (Fig. 17A).186 Guo et al. reported around the same time on a one-pot green route for intracellular synthesis of gold nanostructures assisted by poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) functionalized GO.187 The distribution of the nanostructures in cells allowed for the sensitive monitoring of intracellular chemical compositions including the cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and even the nuclei using SERS (Fig. 17B).187 The group by Zhang et al. used SERS to study the mechanism of the cellular uptake of GO@Au NPs nanocomposites.188 An inhomogeneous distribution of GO inside the cell was seen and with internalization into CaSki cells mainly via clathrin-mediated endocytosis.188
 Fig. 17  Raman bioimaging using Au NPs–graphene hybrids: (A) optical (a, c, e, g) and Raman (b, d, f, h) images of HeLa 229 cells. Cells were incubated with GO (e, f) and Au NPs–GO hybrids (g, h) at 37 °C for 24 h before imaging. Cells incubated in the medium without GO (a and b) and in the medium with Au NPs (c and d) are shown as control (scale bar: 10 mm) (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7084–7089); (B) GO–PVP–IGAuNs SERS spectra of A549 cells collected from the regions corresponding to the cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and nucleolus (upper) together with typical SERS images of A549 cells obtained with GO–PVP–IGAuNs, showing the distribution of Au NSs inside the cell. The dotted lines in the images are drawn to indicate the boundaries of selected cells (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10338–10344); (C) dark field scattering images and Raman map of the G band (1600 cm−1) intensity of SKBR-3 cells incubated with GO–Au NSs clearly showing the presence of GO in the cytosol and absence of the same in the nucleus (reprinted with permission from Nergiz, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16395–16402); (D) detection strategy to monitor differentiation of neuronal stem cells and Raman spectra of neuronal stem cells on Au NPs and GO–Au NPs substrates, and Raman peaks obtained from previous spectra on Au (black) and GO–Au NPs (red) substrates (reprinted with permission from Kim, et al., Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8660–8670). 
More recently, Raman mapping of the graphitic band of GO of GO–Au NPs revealed that the hybrid was concentrated in the cytoplasm of the cell with weak or no signal from the nucleus (Fig. 17C). Kim and co-workers moved towards the detection of neural stem cell differentiation using 3D GO encapsulated Au NPs (Fig. 17D).179 The Raman peaks achieved from undifferentiated stem cells on the hybrid were 3.5 times higher than peaks obtained from normal metal structures and were clearly distinguishable from those of differentiated cells. The number of CC bonds and the Raman intensity at 1656 cm−1 were found to correlate positively. Indeed, the membrane of the undifferentiated cell line is rich in unsaturated molecules possessing CC bonds – this being the feature to differentiate cells by SERS.179

6. Conclusion and perspectives
The development of gold–graphene nanocomposites has seen a significant progress in the last few years. Within the field of electrochemical sensing, the graphene–Au NPs hybrid materials have received a significant amount of attention and have shown considerable improvement in their sensitivity and selectivity compared to graphene or Au NPs alone. Graphene–Au NPs hybrid materials showed high sensing performance with respect to biologically relevant analytes such as DNA and proteins, as well as small molecules such as dopamine and hydrogen peroxide. The report on the fabrication of a non-enzymatic hydrogen peroxide sensor for the sensitive detection of H2O2 levels in human serum and when released from human cervical cancer cells is one of the advancements in this field.154 These developments would not have been possible without a large input from materials scientists on the development of synthetic methods for decorating graphene with Au nanostructures. Although conventional CVD graphene with Au NPs showed distinctive performance in electronics and for surface-enhanced Raman imaging, the high costs involved and the low production yield made CVD graphene not the primary choice for biomedical applications. Solution phase fabricated graphene oxide (reduced graphene oxide) has thus been the material of choice for such applications. The use of such structures for photothermal therapy has been particularly attractive with real therapeutic potential. Most recently, the delivery of a zinc phthalocyanine photosensitizer by means of Au@GO NPs was shown.189 The sequential action of photodynamic therapy and photothermal therapy considerably enhanced the therapeutic effect on the treatment of HeLa cells.
Another still rather unexploited field is the use of such structures for combating microbial infections caused by diverse pathogens. One of the first reports in this direction is that of Hussain et al.65 It was demonstrated that a rGO–Au NPs nanocomposite prepared using an eco-friendly route shows good biocompatibility with human cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa), and possesses high antibacterial activity against two Gram-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus subtilis) and two Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa). The bacterial cell death is believed to be caused by the leakage of sugars and proteins from the cell membrane in contact with the Au NPs–rGO matrix. This field is still rather unexploited even though work is ongoing in this direction.
The use of gold supported graphene nanomaterials as potential vaccine carriers and adjuvants has been lately considered by the group of Zhang et al.190 It could be shown that GO@Au NPs decorated with ovalbumin as a model antigen can efficiently stimulate RAW264.7 cells to secrete tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), a mediator for cellular immune response. Such nanostructures stimulated potent humoral and cellular immune responses against antigens. This finding will open up the potential applications of graphene–Au NPs as cancer and viral vaccines.
The research of GO based scaffolds for cell culture is a relatively new direction that deserves further investigation in the future. The accelerated growth, differentiation and proliferation of stem cells hold great promise in tissue engineering and other biomedical fields such as regenerative medicine. The future will thus bring still lots of exciting applications.
Since the biocompatibility and cytotoxicity of such hybrids can be well tuned by using appropriate surface chemistry approaches, these nanostructures will be still a focus of interest in the coming years. However, the potential long term toxicity seems to be still a major obstacle for clinical use.
Further developments in this field require the understanding of the structural properties and interaction mechanisms between the Au NPs and graphene sheets from both theoretical and experimental aspects. Moreover, another challenge is connected with the graphene matrix. As an essential matrix of the nanocomposites, the synthesis of high quality graphene is necessary and represents an important aspect for the design and preparation of nanocomposites of controlled properties. The last challenge involves the control of the size, shape, crystallinity, and distribution of Au NPs on graphene nanosheets. Finally, both Au NPs and GO–rGO matrices offer the possibility for the functionalization of their surfaces with different molecules of interest and thus open new avenues for designing multifunctional nanocomposites with potential applications in various areas of research. This will be achieved through multidisciplinary efforts from chemists, materials scientists, physicists and biologists.
References
R. Wilson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2028–2045 RSC .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8999–9010 RSC .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Spadavecchia, A. Barras, J. Lyskawa, P. Woisel, W. Laure, C.-M. Pradier, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3288–3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits, J. Spadavecchia and R. Boukherroub, Rev. Anal. Chem., 2014, 33, 153–164 CAS .
O. Zagorodko, J. Spadavecchia, A. Yanguas Serrano, I. Larroulet, A. Pesquera, A. Zurutuza, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 11211–11216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pissuwan, C. H. Cortie, S. M. Valenzuela and M. B. Cortie, Trends Biotechnol., 2010, 28, 207–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boisselier and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1759–1782 RSC .
D. Pissuwan, S. M. Valenzuela and M. B. Cortie, Biotechnol. Genet. Eng. Rev., 2008, 25, 93–112 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gosh, G. Han, M. De, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1307–1315 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bechet, P. Couleaud, C. Frochot, M.-L. Viriot, F. Guillemin and M. Barberi-Heyob, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 612–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Goodman, C. D. McCusker, T. Ylmaz and V. M. Rotello, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 897–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niidome, M. Yamagata, Y. Okamoto, Y. Akiyama, H. Takahashi, T. Kawano, Y. Katayama and Y. Niidome, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 343–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Hauck, A. A. Ghazani and W. C. W. Chan, Small, 2008, 4, 153–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Turcheniuk, C.-H. Hage, J. Spadavecchia, L. Heliot, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Encyclopedia of nanotechnology, Nano-Plasmonics section, ed. B. Bhushan, Springer Editorial,  2014–2015, accepted Search PubMed .
M. Kim, K. Sohn, H. B. Na and T. Hyeon, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1383–1387 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chopra, L. G. Bachas and M. R. Knecht, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1176–1178 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goenka, V. Santa and S. Santa, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 173, 75–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Yin, T.-H. Kim, J.-W. Choi and K.-B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12785–12799 RSC .
K. R. Ratinac, W. J. Yang, J. J. Gooding, P. Thordarson and F. Braet, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chung, Y. K. Kim, D. Shin, S.-R. Ryoo, B. H. Hong and D.-H. Min, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2211–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Nguyen and Y. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6245–6266 RSC .
K. Turcheniuk, C.-H. Hage, J. Spadavecchia, A. Y. Serrano, I. Larroulet, A. Pesquera, A. Zurutuza, M. G. Pisfil, L. Heliot, J. Boukaert, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 375–386 RSC .
W. S. Hummers and J. R. E. Offerman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chatterjee, H.-J. Eom and J. Choi, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 1109–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. Ruan, H. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Wo, S. J. Guo and D. X. Cui, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Z. Zu and B.-H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13651–13657 CAS .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, Q. Zhou, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2011, 50, 3267–3273 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Hu, J. Ron, J. Cui, Y. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Wang and Y. Liu, Carbon, 2013, 51, 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. J. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
O. Fellahi, M. R. Das, Y. Coffinier, S. Szunerits, T. Hadjersi, M. Maamache and R. Boukherroub, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4662–4669 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Amarnath, C. E. Hong, N. H. Kim, B. C. Ku, T. Kuila and J. H. Lee, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3497–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Moon, J. H. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 73, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Murali, Y. Zhu, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3443–3447 RSC .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton, B. Jain, D. A. Dikin, A. Abouimrane, K. Amine and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4380–4391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kaminska, A. Barras, Y. Coffinier, W. Lisowski, J. Niedziolka-Jonsson, P. Woisel, J. Lyskawa, M. Opallo, A. Siriwardena, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5386–5393 CAS .
I. Kamińska, M. R. Das, J. Niedziółka-Jönsson, P. Woisel, J. Lyskawa, M. Opallo, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1016–1020 Search PubMed .
I. Kaminska, M. R. Das, Y. Coffinier, J. Niedziolka-Jonsson, P. Woisel, M. Opallo, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1221–1223 RSC .
D. Li, M. B. Mueller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner, G. G. Wallace and G. Gordon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang and S. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CAS .
J. Gao, F. Liu, Y. L. Liu, N. Ma, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2213–2218 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Pei, J. P. Zhao, J. H. Du, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, K. Wang, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. P. Song and B. Shao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, K. Wang, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y. M. Ren, L. P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Xing, M. Guo, F. Xu, X. Wang, H. J. Gruber, B. Zhang and J. Tang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 599–611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. X. Shi and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1127–1133 CAS .
F. Yang, Y. Q. Liu, L. A. Gao and J. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22085–22091 CAS .
L. Q. Xu, W. J. Yang, K.-G. Neoh, E.-T. Kang and G. D. Fu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8336–8339 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Kim, M.-H. Kim and D.-H. Min, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3195–3197 RSC .
E. L. K. Chng and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8227–8235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, H. S. Chu, W. S. Koh and E. P. Li, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 14395–14400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hussain, A. Gogoi, R. K. Sarma, P. Sharma, A. Barras, R. Boukherroub, R. Saikia, P. Sengupta and M. R. Das, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 1774–1784 CAS .
K. Tucheniuk, C.-H. Hage, L. Heliot, S. Railyan, V. Zaitsev, J. Spadavecchia, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Nano LIFE, 2015, 5, 1540002 CrossRef .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
D. Lin, T. Qin, Y. Wang, X. Sun and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1320–1329 CAS .
J. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Ji, F. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738 RSC .
X. Huang, H. Li, S. Li, S. Wu, F. Boey, J. Ma and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12245–12248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CAS .
F. A. He, J. T. Fan, F. Song, L. M. Zhang and H. L. W. Chan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1182–1188 RSC .
P. Fakhri, M. Nasrollahzadeh and B. Jaleh, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48691–48697 RSC .
Z. Zhu, L. Ma, M. Su, D. Liu and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1432–1438 RSC .
M. Balcioglu, M. Rana and M. V. Yigit, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6187–6193 RSC .
U. Dembereldorj, S. Y. Choi, E.-O. Ganbold, N. W. Song, D. Kim, J. Choo, S. Y. Lee, S. Kim and S.-W. Joo, Photochem. Photobiol., 2014, 90, 659–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Xue, M. Gao, Y. H. Xue, L. Zhu, L. M. Dai, A. Urbas and Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15332–15338 CAS .
F. Schedin, E. Lidorikis, A. Lombardo, V. G. Kravets, A. K. Geim, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5617–5626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Lee, S. Shim, B. Kim and H. Suk Chin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2381–2387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maurer, R. Nicolas, G. Lévêque, P. Subramanian, J. Proust, J. Béal, S. Schuermans, J.-P. Vilcot, Z. Herro, M. Kazan, J. Plain, R. Boukherroub, A. Akjouj, B. Djafari-Rouhani, P.-M. Adam and S. Szunerits, Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 507–512 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kundu, C. Nethravathi, P. A. Deshpande, M. Rajamathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
G. Goncalves, P. A. A. P. Marques, C. M. Granadeiro, H. I. S. Nogueira, M. K. Singh and J. Gracio, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796–4802 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, B. Neppolian, I. V. Lightcap, F. Grieser, M. Ashokkumar and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1987–1993 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Gao, L. Ci, C. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Sahu, M. M. Devi, P. Mukherjee, P. Sen and K. Biswas, J. Nanomater., 2013, 6 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Lu, S. Zhang, J. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8980–8989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Movahed, M. Fakharian, M. Dabiri and A. Bazgir, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5243–5247 RSC .
R. Muszynski, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5263–5266 CAS .
M. Iliut, C. Leordean, V. Canpean, C.-M. Teodorescu and S. Astilean, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 1, 4094–4104 RSC .
L. Zhou, H. Gu, C. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Lv and R. He, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 430, 103–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sharma, G. Darabdhara, T. M. Reddy, A. Borah, P. Bezboruah, P. Gogoi, N. Hussain, P. Sengupta and M. R. Das, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 139–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Fu, S. J. Zhen and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2013, 138, 3075–3081 RSC .
Z.-G. Le, Z. Liu, Y. Qian and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5348–5353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, Y. Kuang, Z. Huang, X. Wang, N. Du, J. Chen and H. Zhou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 499, 250–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-R. Li, X.-L. Li, M.-C. Xu, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1697–1703 CAS .
M. Song, J. Xu and C. Wu, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 2012, 5 Search PubMed .
F.-B. Wang, J. Wang, L. Shao, Y. Zhao and X.-H. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 82–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, L. Hu, X. Ma, S. Ye, L. Cheng, X. Shi, C. Li, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1868–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iliut, C. Leordean, V. Canpean, C.-M. Teodorescu and S. Astilean, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4094–4104 RSC .
M. Gkikas, G. V. Theodosopoulos, B. P. Das, M. Tsianou, H. Iatrou and G. Sakellariou, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 60, 106–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Zhang, D. Du, Y. Shao, Z. Li, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5319–5325 RSC .
B. S. Kong, J. Geng and H. T. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2174–2176 RSC .
M. Du, T. Yang and K. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9253–9560 RSC .
Y. C. Fu, P. H. Li, J. Q. Xie, X. H. Xu, L. H. Lei, C. Chen, C. Zou, W. Deng and S. Z. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1784–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moussa, G. Atkinson, M. SamyEl-Shall, A. Shehata, K. M. AbouZeid and M. B. Mohamed, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9608–9619 RSC .
K. Jasuja and V. Berry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2358–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Polavarapu and L. M. Liz-Marzan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21798–21805 CAS .
S. Z. Nergiz, N. Gandra, S. Tadepalli and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16395–16402 CAS .
X. Bian, Z.-L. Song, Y. Qian, W. Gao, Z.-Q. Cheng, L. Chen, H. Liang, D. Ding, X.-K. Nie, Z. Chen and W. Tan, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, A. Barhoumi, R. G. Wylie, G. Reznor, R. S. Langer and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, D. Yang, L. Mei, Q. Li, H. Zhu and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12911–12920 CAS .
Y. Jin, J. Wang, H. Ke, S. Wang and Z. Dai, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 4794–4802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Q. Y. Qu, Y. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Zhao, K. W. Ng and Y. L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6495–6500 RSC .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1389–1393 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Kim, M. K. Oh, S. Park, S. K. Kim and B. H. Hong, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 999–1003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heeg, R. Fernandez-Garcia, A. Oikonomou, F. Schedin, R. Narula, S. A. Maier, A. Vijayaraghavan and S. Reich, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 301–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, W. Zhang, O. Liang, M. Pantoja, J. Katzer, T. Schroder and Y. H. Xie, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6244–6249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Xiao, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Ling and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 928–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Ling, J. Xiao, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Kong, H. Xu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9281–9286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, J. Y. Lee, B. Li, W. Liu, C. Q. Miao, Y. H. Xie, X. Wei and T. P. Russell, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 036102 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shen, L. Zhang, M. Liu and Z. Zhang, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 283–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinsion, S. M. Tabakman, K. Yang and H. Dai, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, D. Yang, L. Mei, B. Lu, L. Chen, Q. Li, H. Zhu and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 10, 2715–2724 Search PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Kang, M. Li, N. He and G. Zhang, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2015, 13, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Graham, C. M. MacNeill and N. H. Levi-Polyachenko, Nano LIFE, 2013, 3, 1330002 CrossRef .
R. A. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi and A. Akhavan, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 8017–8025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, Small, 2013, 9, 3593–3601 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yang, J. Wan, S. Zhang, B. Tian, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 33, 2206–2214 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, D. Vinh and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6825–6831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Laser. Med. Sci., 2008, 23, 217–228 CrossRef PubMed .
P. C. Ray, S. A. Khan, A. K. Singh, D. Senapati and Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3193–3209 RSC .
S. Z. Nergiz, N. Gandra, S. Tadepalli and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16395–16402 CAS .
A. F. Zedan, S. Moussa, J. Terner, G. Atkinson and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Y.-T. Tseng, G. Suo, L. Che, J. Yu, W.-J. Choi, C.-C. Huang and C.-H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5097–5106 CAS .
D. Lin, T. Quin, Y. Wang, X. Sun and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1320–1329 CAS .
K. R. Ratinac, W. J. Yang, J. J. Gooding, P. Thordarson and F. Braet, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 803–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jiang, Small, 2011, 7, 2413–2427 CAS .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
L. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, H. Feng, J. Lu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, D. X. Han, Q. Zhang, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1070–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, S. Guo, C. Zhu, Y. Zhai and E. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11277–11282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, X. Wang, K. K. Shiu, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, Q. Li, B. Chen and H. Jiang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 789–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, D. Mandler and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2728–2733 RSC .
H.-P. Peng, Y. Hu, P. Liu, Y.-N. Deng, P. Wang, W. Chen, A.-L. Liu, Y.-Z. Che and X.-H. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 207, 269–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Q. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Li, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, unpublished results.
Y. Yu, Z. Chen, S. He, B. Zhang, X. Li and M. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 147–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Gupta, N. Atar, M. L. Yola, M. Eryilmaz, H. Torul, U. Tamer, I. H. Boyaci and Z. Ustundag, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 406, 231–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2014, 87, 1903–1910 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xue, H. Zhao, Z. Wu, X. Li, Y. He and Z. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 29, 102–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Parlak, A. Tiwari, A. P. F. Turner and A. Tiwari, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 53–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Z. Chen, L. Guo and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5476–5478 RSC .
S. Azzouzi, L. Rotariu, A. M. Benito, W. K. Maser, M. Ben Ali and C. Bala, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 69, 208–286 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, E. Hua, M. Liang, C.-C. M. Ma, Z. Liu, S. Sheng, M. Liu, G. Xie and W. Feng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 51, 201–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ma, C. Wang, K. Li and Y. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 232–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong, W. Wu, D. Wang, D. Wang, J. Shan, Y. Qing and Z. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2379–2383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, Z. Xiang, J. He, G. Wang, H. Li, Z. Qian and M. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 627–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. P. Sun, B. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Gao and D. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 45, 230–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, Z. Yang, Y. Zhuo, Y. Chai and R. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 66, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Xu, L. Han, M. Zhou, C. Zhu and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 7301–7307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, J. Ji, D. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 44, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Bo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, Y. Wang, H. Kneipp, L. T. Perelman, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1667 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21116–21120 RSC .
G. Das, N. Patra, A. Gopalakrishnan, R. P. Zaccaria, A. Toma, S. Thorat, E. Di Fabrizio, A. Diaspro and M. Salerno, Analyst, 2012, 137, 1785–1792 RSC .
M. Li, J. Zhang, S. Suri, L. J. Sooter, D. Ma and N. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2837–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 22, 47–52 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Cao, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2002, 297, 1536–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Palla, F. G. Bosco, T. Rindzevicius, T. S. Alstrom, M. S. Schmidt, A. Boisen, J. Ju and Q. Lin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5350–5359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, S. Feng, H. Huang, W. Chen, H. Shi, N. Liu, L. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Yu and R. Chen, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2012, 10, 478–484 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qian, X.-H. Peng, D. O. Ansari, Q. Yin-Goen, G. Z. Chen, D. M. Shin, L. Yang, A. N. Young, M. D. Wang and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2007, 26, 83–90 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zavaleta, A. De La Zerda, Z. Liu, S. Keren, Z. Cheng, M. Schipper, X. Chen, H. Dai and S. S. Gambhir, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2800–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Kim, K. B. Lee and J. W. Choi, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8660–8670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-M. Lin, Y. Cui, Y.-H. Xu, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 1729–1745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, L. Xie, Y. Fang, H. Xu, H.-L. Zhang, J. Kong, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. L. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 553–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, H. Cai, W. Zhang, X. Li, N. Pan, Y. Luo, X. Wang and J. G. Hou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jasuja, J. Linn, S. Melton and V. Berry, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1853–1860 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, H. Li, C. Liusman, Z. Yin, S. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1817–1821 RSC .
C. Hu, J. Rong, J. Cui, Y. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Wang and Y. Liu, Carbon, 2013, 51, 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. Wei, J. L. Wang, F. Peng, D. Luo, R. Cui, Y. Niu, X. Qin, Y. Liu, H. Sun, J. Yang and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7084–7089 RSC .
Z. Liu, C. Hu, S. Li, W. Zhang and Z. Guo, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10338–10344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, C. Zong, H. Shen, M. Liu, B. Chen, B. Ren and Z. Zhang, Small, 2012, 16, 2577–2584 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Kim, H. K. Na, S. Kim, H. Jang, S. J. Chang and D. H. Min, Small, 2015 DOI:10.1002/smll.201402269 .
Y. Cao, Y. Ma, M. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Tu, H. Shen, J. Dai, H. Guo and Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6963–6971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Kostiantyn Turcheniuk
	Kostiantyn Turcheniuk graduated from Kiev National University, Ukraine (BSc and MSc in organic chemistry). He completed his PhD in organometallic chemistry at the Institute of Biorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, Kiev, Ukraine, in 2012. Since that time he has been working as a post-doctoral research associate at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), Lille, France. His ongoing research interests embrace synthesis and characterisation of gold–graphene nanocomposites with application in the field of biomedics.

Rabah Boukherroub
	Rabah Boukherroub is a Director of Research at the CNRS, and a group leader at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS & University Lille 1, France. His research interests are in the area of synthesis of functional nanomaterials (metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, semiconductor nanowires, graphene, carbon dots, etc.), surface chemistry, and photophysics of semiconductor–metal nanostructures with an emphasis on biosensors and lab-on-chip applications, drug delivery, and development of new tools for studying molecular dynamics in vivo. He is the co-author of more than 320 research publications and has written 25 book chapters in subjects related to nanotechnology, materials chemistry, and biosensors. He has 9 patents or patents pending.

Sabine Szunerits
	Sabine Szunerits, since 2009, has been a Professor in Chemistry at the University Lille 1, France, and was nominated 2011 as member of the “Institut Universitaire de France” (IUF). Her current research interests are in the area of materials science with an emphasis on the development of novel analytical platforms and interfaces for the study of affinity binding events and in the modification of nanostructures (diamond particles, magnetic particles, nanographene) for biomedical applications. She is the co-author of more than 190 research publications, has written 16 book chapters and has 6 patents.

 	Fig. 1  (A) TEM images of Au nanostructures; (B) optical extinction spectra of citrate-capped spherical Au nanoparticles (green) and Au nanorods (blue); (C) relative cell viability of MDA-MB-231 cells for different concentrations of CTAB coated Au NRs.16	 

 	Fig. 2  Number of articles published from 2009 to 2014 according to Scopus on GO–Au NPs (red) and rGO–Au NPs (blue) hybrids for biomedical-related research.	 

 	Fig. 3  Graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide: (A) their formation, (B) UV-vis absorption characteristics, water and cell medium dispersibility (60 μg mL−1), and relative cell viability of HeLa cells upon incubation with different concentrations of GO, rGO, GO–PEG and rGO–PEG for 72 h, (C) different concepts for the formation of water dispersible GO and rGO.24,31,35,36	 

 	Fig. 4  Decoration of GO and rGO with Au nanostructures using different interaction forces.	 

 	Fig. 5  
Ex situ approaches for the integration of Au NSs onto GO and rGO: (A) π–π stacking interaction of 2-mercaptopyridine modified Au NPs with GO nanosheets (reprinted with permission from Huang, et al., Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738); (B) poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP) modified GO and loading of Au NRs by charge interaction (reprinted with permission from Hu, et al., Carbon, 2013, 51, 255); (C) bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a stabilizing and reducing agent for GO with subsequent Au NP integration (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279).	 

 	Fig. 6  Decoration of graphene with an ordered array of Au NPs: (A) influence of the number of graphene layers on the morphology of the deposited nanostructures after annealing at 1260 °C in vacuum for 30 s (reprinted with permission from Zhou, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 944); (B) SEM image of Au NP modified graphene sheets (SiO2 (purple), graphene (blue), gold electrodes and dots (yellow)) and Raman spectra (laser wavelength of 633 nm) (reprinted with permission from Schedin, et al., ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5617); (C) SEM images of graphene-coated gold thin films decorated with Au NPs by EBL with a center-to-center distance of 300 nm. The particles are 50 nm in height and 80 nm (a), 110 nm (b), and 140 nm (c) in diameter (reprinted with permission from Maurer, et al., Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 507).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Different in situ reduction strategies; (B) influence of chemical state of GO on the distribution of Au NPs: SEM and TEM images (reprinted with permission from Goncalves, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796 and Yang, et al., Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1864);99 (C) XRD pattern of GO, rGO and Au NPs–rGO nanohybrid (reproduced with permission from Y. Wang, et al., J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(14), 5319).	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Hydroxylamine mediated anisotropic growth of gold nano snowflakes on a GO substrate (reprinted with permission from Goncalves, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796); (B) the decoration of rGO with gold nanostars by a Ag+ mediated protocol (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6(24), 21798–21805); (C) TEM and UV/vis images of nanopatches of GO anchored Au NSs synthesized via a HEPES-mediated route (reprinted with permission from Nergiz, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(18), 16395–16402).	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM images of graphene wrapped Au NPs synthesized using a CVD process (reprinted with permission from Chopra, et al., Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1176); (B) stability of different graphene wrapped Au NP suspensions (reprinted with permission from Bian, et al., Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6093); (C) TEM images of rGO–Au NRs and rGO–Au NSs together with optical and Raman images (reprinted with permission from Lim, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075); (D) TEM images of 20 nm Au–GO capsules (reprinted with permission from Ma, et al., J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1(47), 6495).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) (a) Synthesis of HOOC–PEG–Au NRs, (b) covalent linking of rGO–PEG–NH2 with HOOC–PEG–Au NRs; TEM image of a Au NR coated with rGO–PEG–NH2; (B) UV-vis of rGO–PEG–Au NRs; (C) stability of different matrices in PBS (100 μg mL−1): (1) GO, (2) rGO–COOH, (3) rGO–PEG–NH2, (4) Au NRs, (5) rGO–PEG–Au NRs; (D) relative cell viability of MDA MB 231 cells upon incubation with different concentrations (0–40 μg mL−1) of rGO–PEG–Au NRs, rGOPEG–NH2 and GO for 78 h.27	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Sketch of the gold cavities sample formation (reprinted with permission from Heeg, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 301); (B) schematic of the graphene–Au nanopyramid sample and SEM image of graphene on Au tips (scale bar 1 μm, inset: schematic image of graphene on Au tips) and of hexagonally arranged arrays of Au tips which sharply folded graphene (scale bar 200 nm). The dotted black circle indicates a hanging graphene fold between neighboring tips (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6244).	 

 	Fig. 12  Biomedical applications of Au–graphene nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Hyaluronic acid modified Au NRs–GO core–shell nanocomposites loaded with doxorubicin for the selective treatment of hepatoma Huh-7 cancer cells (reprinted with permission from Xu, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12911–12920); (B) schematic illustration of the synthesis of GO–PEI–Au NPs and GO–PEI–Au NRs, and the possible mechanism of gene delivery (reprinted with permission from Xu, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2715–2724).	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemo-photothermal therapy with graphene wrapped Au NSs: (A) TEM image of a graphene wrapped Au NR (a), heating curves (b) and cell viability under light illumination (reprinted with permission from D.-K. Lim, et al., Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079); (B) change of E. coli UTI89 concentration in the presence of multimeric heptyl-α-D-mannoside modified rGO–PEG–Au NR particles upon irradiation at 4 or 8 W cm−2 for 10 min at 700 nm together with effective targeting demonstration. The fluorescent images correspond to E. coli UTI89 expressing the fluorescent Katushka protein, FTIC-labeled multimeric heptyl-α-D-mannoside modified rGO–PEG–Au NRs and the overlap of both images (with permission from K. Turcheniuk, et al., J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 375).	 


rGO–Au NPs–chitosan–GODx	Glucose	
LOD = 180 μM
2–14 mM
99.5 μA μM−1 cm−2
	
146

Graphene:MWCNT–Au NPs	Glucose	
4.8 μM 5–175
μM
29.72 μA μM−1 cm−2
	
152

GO–Ag/Au NPs–mercaptophenylboronic acid	Glucose	
0.33 mM
2–6 mM
	
153

Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots–Au NPs	Hydrogen peroxide	0.12 μM	
154

PDDA–Au NPs–graphene	Uric acid	
0.1 μM
0.5–20 μM
103.8 μA μM−1 cm−2
	
155

rGO−Au NPs–enzyme	Cholesterol	
0.05 μM
0.05–0.35 mM
3.14 μA μM−1 cm−2
	
156

Graphene–Au NPs	
L-Histidine	0.1 pM 10 pM–10 μM	
157

rGO–Au NPs	
L-Lactate tumor biomarker	
0.13 μM
10 μM–5 mM
154 μA mM−1 cm2
	
158

Single-layered GO–Au NPs	DNA	100 fM	
149

Graphene–Au NPs–PANI	DNA	
2.11 pM
10–1000 pM
	
159

rGO–Au NPs–toluidine blue	DNA	
2.95 pM
0.1 pM–1 nM
	
150

PDDA-modified rGO–Au NPs	Angiogenin	
0.064 pM
0.1 pM–5 nM
	
160

rGO–Au NPs–anti-CEA	Antigen carcinoembryonic	
0.01 ng mL−1
0.05–350 ng mL−1
	
161

Graphene–Au–Fe3O4	Prostate specific antigen	
5 ng mL−1
0.01–10 ng mL−1
	
162

rGO–Au NRs–antibody	Transferrin	0.0375–40 μg mL−1	
163

rGO–Au@Pd–thionine–HRP–Ab2	Carbohydrate antigen 19-9	
006 U mL−1
0.015–150 U mL−1
	
164

Graphene–aptamer–Au NPs	ATP/Hg2+	
ATP: 15 nM (10 nM–4 mM)
Hg2+: 0.5 nM (0.5–500 nM)
	
165

rGO–Au NPs	Cells	
5.2 × 103 cells per mL−1
1.6 × 104−1.6 × 107 cells per mL−1
	
166


 	Fig. 15  (A) Amperometric response curve at rGO–Au NPs–Tyr–GC polarized at −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl with subsequent additions of H2O2, inset: SEM image of the rGO–Tyr–Au NPs nanohybrid; cyclic voltammograms of rGO–Au NPs–Tyr–GC in N2-saturated 0.1 M PBS solution (pH 7.4) in the absence and presence of 10 mM H2O2 (scan rate: 50 mV s−1) together with the calibration curve;151 (B) schematic illustration of an electrochemical DNA sensor (reprinted with permission from Wang, et al., Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2728–2733).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) The G-SERS effect: (a) schematic illustration of the molecules of graphene deposited on Si/SiO2 (300 nm), (b) comparison of the Raman signals of phthalocyanine (0.2 nm in thickness) deposited on graphene (red line) and on a Si/SiO2 substrate (blue) upon 632.8 nm excitation (reprinted with permission from Ling, et al., Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 553); (B) Raman spectra of crystal violet on Au NR (red), GO (blue), and GO–Au NR (green) surfaces together with relative intensity of the observed Raman signals (reprinted with permission from Hu, et al., Carbon, 2013, 51, 255).	 

 	Fig. 17  Raman bioimaging using Au NPs–graphene hybrids: (A) optical (a, c, e, g) and Raman (b, d, f, h) images of HeLa 229 cells. Cells were incubated with GO (e, f) and Au NPs–GO hybrids (g, h) at 37 °C for 24 h before imaging. Cells incubated in the medium without GO (a and b) and in the medium with Au NPs (c and d) are shown as control (scale bar: 10 mm) (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7084–7089); (B) GO–PVP–IGAuNs SERS spectra of A549 cells collected from the regions corresponding to the cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and nucleolus (upper) together with typical SERS images of A549 cells obtained with GO–PVP–IGAuNs, showing the distribution of Au NSs inside the cell. The dotted lines in the images are drawn to indicate the boundaries of selected cells (reprinted with permission from Liu, et al., Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10338–10344); (C) dark field scattering images and Raman map of the G band (1600 cm−1) intensity of SKBR-3 cells incubated with GO–Au NSs clearly showing the presence of GO in the cytosol and absence of the same in the nucleus (reprinted with permission from Nergiz, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16395–16402); (D) detection strategy to monitor differentiation of neuronal stem cells and Raman spectra of neuronal stem cells on Au NPs and GO–Au NPs substrates, and Raman peaks obtained from previous spectra on Au (black) and GO–Au NPs (red) substrates (reprinted with permission from Kim, et al., Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8660–8670).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
