Nanostructured catalysts for electrochemical water splitting: current state and prospects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA02334G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA02334G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11973-12000Nanostructured catalysts for electrochemical water splitting: current state and prospects

        
          
            Xiumin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaogang 
            Hao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Abuliti 
            Abudula
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guoqing 
            Guan
          
        
      *ab
aGraduate School of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University, 1-Bunkyocho, Hirosaki 036-8560, Japan
bNorth Japan Research Institute for Sustainable Energy (NJRISE), Hirosaki University, Matsubara, Aomori 030-0813, Japan. E-mail: guan@hirosaki-u.ac.jp;  Fax: +81-17-735-5411
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China
Received 
      19th March 2016
    , Accepted 13th June 2016First published on 14th June 2016AbstractHydrogen is an ideal candidate for the replacement of fossil fuels in the future due to zero emission of carbonaceous species during its utilization. Water electrolysis is a dependable link of primary renewable energy and stable hydrogen energy. In this work, the fundamentals of water electrolysis, current popular electrocatalysts developed for cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in liquid electrolyte water electrolysis are reviewed. The main HER catalysts include noble metals, non-noble metals and composites, noble metal-free alloys, metal carbides, chalcogenides, phosphides and metal-free materials while the OER catalysts are focused on efficient Co-based, Ni-based materials and layered double hydroxide (LDH) materials. The strategies to improve catalytic activity, long-term durability and endurance to electrochemical erosion are introduced. The main challenges and future prospects for the further development of electrodes for water electrolysis are discussed. It is expected to give guidance for the development of novel low-cost nanostructured electrocatalysts for electrochemical water splitting.
1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of the sustainable energy economy, it becomes more and more important to utilize renewable energy more efficiently and stably. Primary renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar power, are environmentally friendly. However, most of them suffer from daily and seasonal intermittent and regional variability. To avert these problems, this unstable energy can be translated into stable hydrogen energy by water electrolysis.1 Since water is a very stable chemical, water splitting technologies such as thermochemical water splitting2–5 and solar thermochemical water splitting,6,7 have to obtain thermal energy from nuclear plants8 or solar energy.6,7 A representative technique of hyperthermal hydrogen evolution, a 2-step cycle way, has been widely studied.2,3 In this way, the water decomposition temperature can be effectively reduced from about 4000 °C to approximate 1500 °C. The other thermal water decomposition technique, the iodine–sulphur (IS) cycle way,4,5 is also considered as a technically and economically feasible option for the co-generation of hydrogen and electricity from nuclear energy. However, these methods require high reaction temperatures (above 1000 °C), which limits their extensive applications.
Water splitting via photocatalytic and photo-electrochemical approaches has attracted considerable attention recently since it can utilize solar energy directly.9–15 However, the low energy conversion efficiency limits its large-scale application. In contrast, water electrolysis shows excellent adaptability, which can efficiently produce hydrogen (and oxygen) from the intermittent energy source via electrochemical energy devices. Hydrogen is considered as an alternative energy carrier, instead of batteries, for renewable energy storage and can be subsequently reconverted into electricity via fuel cells.16
Since water electrolysis was first reported in 1789,17 it has been studied and applied widely. This method has high efficiency and flexibility, and can produce hydrogen with high-purity (≈100%). However water electrolysis still needs more efforts to develop electrodes and electrolytes with low-cost catalysts that have long-term durability. The electrodes include cathodes for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and anodes for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Based on electrolytes working at low temperature, water electrolysis can be divided into (acidic) polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) water electrolysis, acid liquid electrolyte water electrolysis (ACIWE) and alkaline liquid electrolyte water electrolysis (ALKWE). PEM water electrolysis is one of the water electrolysis technologies available on the market. During PEM water electrolysis, the PEM selectively conducts positive ions such as protons to create a local acidic environment. As shown in Table 1, it can operate at high current densities (capable of achieving values above 2 A cm−2) and high pressures (over 150 bar),19 which reduces the operational cost. However, only a few electrode materials can exhibit adequate stability in this process.20 To date, both the anodic and cathodic reactions are generally catalysed by platinum-group metal (PGM) based catalysts such as Pt, Ru, Ir and their oxides. Furthermore, the PEM electrolyzer also showed worse long-term stability than liquid electrolyte devices. Despite ALKWE being only able to operate at a low current density and pressure, thanks to the nature of liquid electrolyte, electrodes with alternative catalysts, rather than noble metals, also show adequate chemical and mechanical stability. Recently, various non-precious catalysts have been found to have noble metal-like performance, and some of them even show higher catalytic activity than commercial noble metal electrodes.20–24
Table 1 State-of-the-art for the specifications of polymer and liquid electrolyte electrolysis18




Specifications
Polymer electrolyte electrolysis
Liquid electrolyte electrolysis




Electrolyzer pressure (bar)
<150
<30


Current density (A cm−2)
0.6–2.0
0.2–0.4


Cell voltage (V)
1.8–2.2
1.8–2.4


Power density (W cm−2)
<4.4
<1


Voltage efficiency (%)
67–68
62–68


Cell area (m2)
<0.03
<4


H2 production rate (Nm3 h−1)
30
760


Lifetime (years)
10–20
20–30




Cathodic HER and anodic OER are two crucial half-cell reactions of electrochemical water splitting. Decomposition of pure water into hydrogen and oxygen at standard temperature and pressure (25 °C, 1 atm) is not favourable in thermodynamic terms, as described by the following equations: Anode: 2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e−, Eoox = −1.23 V(1) Cathode: 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2 (g), Eored = 0.00 V(2)
The standard oxidization potential of the OER is defined as 1.23 V related to a relative hydrogen electrode (RHE) and the standard reduction potential of HER is 0 V (vs. RHE) at 25 °C, 1 atm. However, in a practical water electrolysis process, a larger applied potential is always required because it involves complex electron and ion transfer processes, which leads to sluggish kinetics and poor energy efficiency.25 Specifically, during water electrolysis, some disadvantageous factors of electrode materials, such as activation energy, ion and gas diffusion, and some factors related to device such as solution concentration, wire and electrodes resistances, electrolyte diffusion blockage, bubble formation, and heat release should be considered.20,22 These factors result in additional potential over the standard one, which is called overpotential (η). Many researchers attempted to elucidate the reaction mechanism and improve electrolyzers, minimising the energy loss, since some device factors could become more significant with an increase in the applied current density. However, a more crucial aspect is to seek the assistance of suitable electrocatalysts which could decrease the overpotential greatly and consequently promote the reaction rate and total cell efficiency. Similar to those common catalysts, nanostructured electrocatalysts could provide different transition states and lower the activation energy. Consequently, more molecules adsorbed on the surface of electrodes obtain the energy needed to reach the transition state. Hence, nanostructured electrocatalysts can promote reactions which would otherwise be blocked or slowed by the kinetic barrier. In other words, nanostructured electrocatalysts may increase the reaction rate or enable the reaction to occur at a lower potential. In addition, a rational nanostructure and porous morphology will not only increase active sites and reduce the catalyst amount but also contribute to alleviate the overpotential brought about by resistances of ions, gas diffusion and charge transfer. Among the HER catalysts, platinum is acknowledged as the most efficient HER electrocatalyst with almost zero overpotential and a very low Tafel slope (the additional potential in case of a tenfold current increase). However, all PGMs suffer from high cost and scarcity, which limits their use in large-scale industrial applications. Thus, it is necessary to find alternative materials with low cost and high efficiency to replace them or reduce the amount of PGMs in a practical electrode. Recently nickel and nickel-based alloys have been found to have high activity and long-term stability for the ALKWE process.24 In addition, various carbide, sulfide, phosphide and nitride based transition metals (TM) have also developed as noble metal-free catalysts for the ACIWE process.
For both ALKWE and ACIWE processes, there is a noticeable overpotential that occurs at the anode side where the OER takes place because it involves a more complex four-electron oxidation process. Similar to the HER, with the assistance of an electrocatalyst, the overpotential of the OER can be decreased greatly. To date, in both acidic and alkaline media, the IrO2 catalyst is considered as the best catalyst in terms of activity and stability.19 Although RuO2 is more active than IrO2, it is limited by its corrosion stability.26 However, both Ir and Ru are quite expensive. Many researchers dedicated their efforts to developing OER catalysts with a reduced amount of Ir (Ru) or based on other TM oxides. Particularly for ALKWEs, Co or Ni based oxides and layered double hydroxides (LDH) have been proved to be quite stable and active in alkaline media.
In this review, recently developed efficient electrocatalysts for water electrolysis are summarized. Firstly, the thermodynamics and electrochemistry of the HER and the OER as well as the most accepted reaction pathways are introduced in brief. Then, various HER electrocatalyst families based on their components, i.e., noble metals, non-noble metals, alloys and transition metal carbides, chalcogenides, phosphides and metal-free, are reviewed. For OER electrocatalysts, Co-based, Ni-based and LDH based materials are mainly introduced in detail. Finally, the main challenges and future prospects for the further development of electrodes for water electrolysis are discussed.
2. Fundamentals of water electrolysis
2.1 Fundamentals of the HER
The HER mechanism is highly dependent on the pH value of the electrolyte. As revealed by the Nernst equation under standard conditions (25 °C, 1 atm), the Nernst potential referenced to a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) decreases linearly by 59 mV for each pH unit increase, however for a RHE reference scan the Nernst potential can be directly regarded as zero for any pH value of the electrolyte: (3)
The Nernst potential reflects the thermodynamic equilibrium potential at which electrochemical reactions occur. However as discussed above, the real water electrolysis process requires a greater applied potential to overcome those adverse issues such as high activation energy, sluggish kinetics and poor energy efficiency. As such, the HER usually requires extra energy rather than that dictated by the Nernst equation. Taking this into consideration, the applied potential can be expressed as: E = EHER + iR + η(4)where iR is the ohmic potential drop of current flow in ionic electrolyte and η is the overpotential. Here, the overpotential is directly related to the energy efficiency of the electrolyser, thus it is the most remarkable characteristic to compare and evaluate the performances of electrodes and electrolysers. With the assistance of electrocatalysts, the overpotential of the HER can be significantly reduced. Over Pt electrodes, the overpotential can be weakened to approximate zero, and other efficient catalysts also can reduce it to nearly 100 mV or less.
A good understanding of the water splitting HER process is undoubtedly necessary to gain insight into issues such as how to determine the reaction rate and how to offer directions for the design and synthesis of electrocatalysts. The HER rate is highly dependent on the pH value of electrolyte for both the ACIWE and ALKWE processes.27 The HER could occur based on either the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel mechanisms. In acidic solutions, the HER proceeds according to the following steps:28
(1) Combination of a proton and an electron on the catalyst surface which results in an adsorbed hydrogen atom: A + H+ + e− → AHads (Volmer reaction)(5)
(2) The adsorbed hydrogen atom combines with a proton and an electron to produce a hydrogen molecule: AHads + H+ + e− → H2 + A (Heyrovsky reaction)(6)
(3) Coupling of two adsorbed hydrogen atoms to produce a hydrogen molecule: AHads + AHads → H2 + 2A (Tafel reaction)(7)
Due to the high pH in alkaline conditions, the HER proceeds via a different Volmer reaction and Heyrovsky reaction:29
(1) Attributed to the low concentration of protons, molecular H2O instead of H+ couples with an electron which results in an adsorbed hydrogen atom on the catalyst. H2O + e− + A → AHads + OH− (Volmer step)(8)
(2) The adsorbed hydrogen atom combines with molecular H2O and an electron to produce a hydrogen molecule: AHads + H2O + e− → H2 + OH− + A (Heyrovsky reaction)(9)
(3) The Tafel reaction is the same as the ACIWE case, two adsorbed hydrogen atoms are coupled together to produce a hydrogen molecule: AHads + AHads → H2 + 2A (Tafel reaction)(10)where, A represents the hydrogen adsorption site and AHads represents the adsorbed hydrogen atom at the site. The HER is initiated with the proton discharge step (Volmer reaction, eqn (5)) but the subsequent hydrogen desorption step may proceed through two possible pathways, either the electrodesorption step (Heyrovsky reaction, eqn (6)) or the proton recombination step (Tafel reaction, eqn (7)). The HER mechanism can be inferred by the Tafel plot derived from the polarization curve.30,31 Ideally, the Tafel slope represents the intrinsic nature of the electrocatalyst and the empirical values of the Tafel plot can provide helpful information to explain the probable HER mechanisms at the active sites. In alkaline conditions, the HER rate of the Pt/C electrode is controlled by the Volmer step which offers a Tafel slope of ∼120 mV dec−1. In acidic solutions, if the reaction rate of the electrode is determined by the Volmer reaction or controlled by the Volmer and Heyrovsky reactions comparably, the Tafel slope will also reach a high value of ∼120 mV dec−1. In contrast, if the rate-limiting step of the HER is the Heyrovsky or Tafel reaction, a much smaller Tafel slope of about ∼40 mV dec−1 or ∼30 mV dec−1 will be uncovered. However, it should be noted that the Tafel slope can be disturbed by many other factors such as applied potential, the presence of adsorbates and mass transport in porous structures. For example, for a Pt electrode, experimental results have indicated that its rate-limiting step is determined by the Tafel reaction and a small Tafel slope of 30 mV dec−1 was revealed.32 However, with the applied potential increased, the catalyst surface was covered by almost a saturated adsorption of hydrogen atoms, which led to accelerated atom–atom recombination. As a result, the rate-limiting step was changed to a Volmer step with a Tafel slope of ∼120 mV dec−1.
2.2 Thermodynamics of the OER
As stated in the introduction, though the thermodynamic potential for the OER is 1.23 V under standard conditions, an additional potential referred to as overpotential is required in a practical process. It is found that besides IrO2, the elementary steps of the OER occurring over all catalysts usually involve the adsorption of OH and O species on the catalyst surface.20,25 The following scheme is demonstrated under alkaline conditions, which is similar to that for the acidic case: OH− + * → OHads + e−(11) OHads + OH− → Oads + H2O + e−(12)where, * is the active site of the catalyst surface, and “ads” represents the adsorption on the catalyst surface. The formation of O2 may be through two possible pathways. The first one is the direct coupling of two Oads intermediates: Oads + Oads → O2(13)
In the second pathway, intermediate OOHads is formed at first by the reaction of Oads with OH− and subsequently it is combined with OH− to produce O2. The thermodynamic barrier of reaction (13) is always larger than those of reactions (14) and (15): Oads + OH− → OOHads + e−(14) OOHads + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−(15)
To understand the reaction mechanism conveniently, steps (1), (2), (4), and (5) are modified as eqn (16)–(19). Both schemes (reactions (11), (12), (14), and (15) and reactions (16)–(19)) are equivalent based on thermodynamics. At a neutral pH value, the second scheme is obtained by substituting H2O (l) ⇌ H+ (aq) + OH− (aq) into the first scheme. 2H2O + * → OHads + H2O + e− + H+(16) OHads + H2O → Oads + H2O + e− + H+(17) Oads + H2O → OOHads + e− + H+(18) OOHads → O2 + e− + H+(19)
The Gibbs free energy change for steps (16)–(19) can be expressed as ΔG1 = ΔGOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)(20) ΔG2 = ΔGO − ΔGOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)(21) ΔG3 = ΔGOOH − ΔGO − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)(22) ΔG4 = 4.92 [eV] − ΔGOOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)(23)where U is the measured potential referenced to NHE under standard conditions, and the free energy change of the proton is calculated using the Nernst equation as ΔGH+ (pH) = −kBTln(10) × pH. The Gibbs free energies of eqn (20)–(23) refer to the adsorption energies of Oads, OHads and OOHads. In an ideal case, the ΔG of each elementary reaction step is equal to 1.23 eV,33 which indicates that there is no overpotential derived from thermodynamic hindrance. Here, this assumption ignores the effect of kinetic barriers. In fact, as demonstrated by Rossmeisl et al.,34 for the RuO2 catalyst, a large free energy difference of 1.60 eV was found in the third step where the second water molecule was decomposed. These results indicated that at potentials above 1.60 V, all reaction steps of the OER (over RuO2) are exothermic. Koper et al.33 also suggested that the energetic relationship between OHads and OOHads may be the most problematic one in achieving an ideal situation. Similar to the HER, the overpotential of the OER is commonly thought to be decided by the highest kinetic activation barrier of the individual reaction steps. In other words, the overpotential is limited by the step with the maximum change of the Gibbs free chemisorption energy of two subsequent adsorbed intermediates. Thus, the theoretical overpotential can be obviously defined as: η = max[ΔG1, ΔG2, ΔG3, ΔG4]/e − 1.23 [V](24)
The Nernst potential of the OER is also highly dependent on the pH of the electrolyte, as shown in the following Nernst equation: (25)
Based on experimental results, the overpotential is related to the logarithmical current density (j) and thus, the linear portion of the Tafel plot can be expressed as the Tafel equation: η = a + blogj(26)
3. Electrocatalysts for the HER
3.1 Noble metal based electrocatalysts
PGMs including Pt, Ru, Rh, Ir and Pd, have been proven as excellent cathode catalysts for hydrogen evolution. Among them, Pt is the most efficient and stable HER electrocatalyst in acidic or alkaline electrolytes. Due to its high cost, to utilize it reasonably and efficiently, three major strategies have been considered: (i) to increase the number of reactive sites by fabrication of a Pt surface with a nanostructure for the arrangement of atoms on the surface to expose more [1 1 0] surfaces of Pt; (ii) depositing monolayer Pt on low-cost materials as alternatives to PGM electrocatalysts; (iii) alloying PGM with other metals to increase the site-specific activity.
Designing the catalyst micro- or nano-structure is an efficient strategy to increase the surface area greatly. Since water electrolysis always occurs on the surface of the catalyst, a nanostructured catalyst not only has more active sites per geometric area but also facilitates the diffusions of ions, electrolyte and generated gas. Over the past decade, PGM-based nanomaterials with well-controlled shape and geometrical configurations have been rationally designed and fabricated.35–37 For instance, Xiong et al.38 designed a unique Pt shell@Pd core nanocube on a graphene substrate, which showed superior catalytic activity for the HER with a current density of up to 791 mA cm−2 at a potential of −300 mV and a Tafel slope of as low as 10 mV per decade. Synthesis of PGM catalysts with porous nanostructures is another promising method to increase the surface area and activity. To date, template syntheses, dealloying methods and surfactant-assisted syntheses have been developed to synthesize porous PGM catalysts for improving the activity.35,37 However, the as-prepared porous PGM may be dissolved in various reaction environments and it is difficult to fabricate tri- or multi-metallic nanostructures using the above methods.35,37
Much research has indicated that the [1 1 0] surface of Pt has a higher activity for the HER than [1 1 1] or [1 0 0] surfaces,31,39 while the hydrogen adsorption on the structure of the inner layer varies according to the following trend Pt(111) > Pt(100) > Pt(110).40 Hence, it is necessary to control the crystal structure of Pt. Recently, Pt nanocrystals with well-defined shapes have been prepared via various chemical routes in different solvent systems. As a result, Pt catalysts with controllable crystal faces greatly increase not only the catalytic activity but also the reaction selectivity.41
In order to reduce the loading amount of Pt maximally, many efforts have been devoted to depositing a monolayer of it on low-cost alternative materials to obtain Pt-like catalysts (Fig. 1A). For instance, Leonard et al.42 deposited platinum nanoparticles with a thickness of 3–5 nm on various transition metal carbides (TMC), and found that Mo2C and WC are the ideal supports, as shown in Fig. 1B, Pt/Mo2C and Pt/WC exhibited triple and double enhanced HER activity compared with commercial Pt/C. Besides, Nb4C3 and Cr3C2 were also proven to be two promising catalyst supports for replacing carbon. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicated that WC and Mo2C have similar bulk electronic properties to those of Pt,43 thus they are compatible. Recently, novel Pt–WC, Pt–W2C and Pt/Mo2C composites were developed and they also showed comparable activity and stability to bulk Pt. Therefore, modification of Pt on low cost materials could not only reduce noble metal content but also enhance the activity by reciprocal modification and intensification. Markovic et al.44 deposited 3D-M hydr(oxy)oxides (M = Ni, Co, Fe, Mn) on Pt(111) and Au(111) substrates and tested their activity for the HER and OER. The results indicated that the modified composites had a greater activity than that of Pt and Au substrates for either the HER or OER, and the activity followed the order Mn < Fe < Co < Ni. In their other work,45 nanometer-scale Ni(OH)2 clusters were controllably arranged on a Pt electrode surface (Fig. 1C) and the as-prepared composite electrode manifested an eightfold activity increase in catalyzing the HER relative to the Pt-nano electrode in alkaline environments (Fig. 1D). As revealed by Fig. 1C, in this catalyst, Ni(OH)2 should play a promoting role in the water dissociation and thereby enhance the formation rate of Had intermediates on the Pt surface. Fig. 1E shows an efficient tactic to get high active electrocatalysts with an obviously reduced amount of Pt,46 in which one-dimensional ultrathin platinum nanowires (1.8 nm) are grown on two-dimensional single-layered nickel hydroxide.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic of the design of a Pt monolayer deposited on low-cost materials from ref. 43 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) The HER current densities of various TMC supported Pt electrodes in 0.1 M HClO4. The bar graph represents the current at −144 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic of water dissociation, formation of Pt adsorbed H atoms and the Ni(OH)2 catalyzed OH− desorption. (D) Comparison of the HER activities of Pt(111) with different modification treatment. (C) and (D) are from ref. 45, copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Scheme of the synthesis of a Pt nanowires/layered Ni(OH)2 composite and (F) the corresponding HER activity in 0.1 KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
These hybrid materials exhibited remarkably high electrocatalytic activity for HER in alkaline solution with 4–5 times higher activity than that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 1F). Alloying Pt with other metals is another efficient strategy to obtain highly active and low cost catalysts. Alloys usually show different physical and chemical properties to the corresponding pure material, thus it is possible to get alloys with an unusual performance. Nørskov et al.47 compared the activity of over 700 binary alloys for the HER theoretically via a high-throughput screening scheme based on DFT. As shown in Fig. 2A, the predicted activity of Pt/Bi is comparable to, or even higher than that of pure Pt. The experimental results (Fig. 2B) indicate that the Pt/Bi alloy has an improved HER performance compared with that of pure Pt, in agreement with the computational screening results.
 Fig. 2  (A) Computational high-throughput screening for hydrogen adsorption on 256 pure metals and surface alloys, (B) hydrogen evolution after each stage of BiPt surface alloy synthesis on a fluorine-doped tin-oxide substrate. Inset: (1) deposited Pt film (2) Pt film deposited by Bi (3) BiPt surface alloy after annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. 
As we know, the catalytic properties of materials depend strongly on their microscopic structure. Liu et al.48 synthesized a novel bimetallic Pt/Cu hexapod nanostructure by a one-pot strategy, which showed enhanced catalytic activity over that of Pt black for the HER and methanol oxidation. Chen et al.49 also reported a synthetic method for the synthesis of a new class of catalysts built from Pt–nickel nanocrystals. The synthetic scheme and structural characteristics are presented in Fig. 3. Attributed to the novel nanoframe structure of the Pt3Ni alloy, the obtained catalyst showed more than 22 times higher catalytic activity than that of conventional Pt/C catalysts. Here, it should be noted that the Pt3Ni nanoframe only contains about 15% precious Pt metal.
 Fig. 3  Schematic and corresponding TEM images of the synthesis of the samples. (A and A1) Initial PtNi3 polyhedra. (B and B2) PtNi intermediates. (C and C1) Pt3Ni hollow nanoframes. (D and D1) Annealed Pt3Ni nanoframes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3.2 Non-noble metals and composites
In the last few decades, to find suitable alternatives for PGMs, researchers have investigated various non-noble catalysts for the HER. However, non-noble metals always show poor activity and/or stability. Miles and Thomason50 measured the HER activity of 31 metals using cyclic voltammetric techniques, and found that the catalytic activity order of non-noble metals is Ni > Mo > Co > W > Fe > Cu.
Generally, metallic cathodes with a denser microstructure are not beneficial for the reaction. Thus, the development of cathodes with a nanostructured surface is the key approach for improving the activity and decreasing the overpotential. Fortunately, with the assistance of conductive support carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or graphene, this objective can be easily achieved. For instance, McArthur et al.51 decorated Ni nanoparticles on CNTs with multiwalls using a pulsed laser ablation procedure. Fei et al.52 dispersed small amounts of cobalt on nitrogen-doped graphene, and found that this catalyst showed high activity with a low onset overpotential of 30 mV, attributed to the coordinated association of metal centres and nitrogen. However, gradual deactivation occurred when such catalysts were used for continuous alkaline electrolysis because of the reversible formation of hydride species.53 To improve the performance of non-precious metals, using TM alloys and compositing metals with other catalysts or supports to alter the electronic structure and/or increase the surface area is another efficient approach.

3.2.1 Noble metal-free alloys. 
In industrial ALKWE processes, nickel-based alloys or other composites are the most popular cathode materials because of their low-cost, competitive activity with PGMs and high corrosion resistance in alkaline solution.24 For decades, nickel-based alloys have been investigated widely, with many studies devoted to alloying nickel with TMs. Raj54 prepared several binary Ni-based alloys on mild-steel substrates for the HER using electrodeposition techniques. The polarization results indicated that the catalytic activity of alloys followed the order NiMo > NiZn > NiCo > NiW > NiFe > NiCr. The NiMo alloy not only showed the highest catalytic activity but also revealed the best stability. As such, binary or ternary Ni–Mo alloys are considered as the most popular catalysts for water electrolysis with good chemical and mechanical stability, high activity and low resistance.24 These excellent electrochemical properties were explained by the hypohyper-d-electronic interactive effect in Brewer-type intermetallic systems,55 indicating that Mo in the left half transition series has empty or half-filled d-electron orbitals while Ni in the right half of the transition series has internally paired d-electrons. As such, by virtue of consummate cooperation in the electrocatalytic reaction, noble metal-like properties can be revealed. Recently, Gray et al.56 reported a method to synthesize unsupported Ni–Mo nanopowders, which can be suspended in common solvents and coated onto any substrate. The obtained Ti foil supported Ni–Mo alloy (1 mg cm−2) showed very good performance for the HER in 1 M NaOH with almost zero onset overpotential and about 80 mV overpotential to afford 10 mA cm−2 current density. A ternary alloy containing Ni and Mo was also reported. Huang et al.57 found that the addition of Zn within the alloy promoted the conversion of metallic Ni and Mo to high valence states significantly, and further explored that the alloy with a [Zn] of 1–3 at% presented a 10- and 1.5-fold enhanced current density compared to those of pure Ni and NiMo alloy. As shown in Fig. 4A, NiMoZn alloy showed excellent electroactivity with a zero onset overpotential and a low overpotential (about 30 mV) to sustain a 10 mA cm−2 current density in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  (A) The HER activity of NiMoZn alloy nanoparticles with different Zn concentrations from ref. 57, copyright 2015 Elsevier. Galvanostatic (B) and Nyquist (C) results of Fe-based catalysts with or without B/Si dopant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2016 Elsevier. (D) Bimetallic sites of a Ti-modified Cu surface, (E) SEM image of a CuTi alloy. Scale bar, 200 nm, (F) comparison of HER activity of a CuTi alloy with Pt/C and Cu. (D–F) are from ref. 29 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Fe-based alloys are another type of attractive and efficient water splitting cathode materials due to their high degree of hardness, good corrosion resistance and high catalytic activity. Rosalbino et al.58 prepared several Fe–R crystalline alloys, i.e., Fe90Ce10, Fe90Sm10, Fe90Y10 and Fe90MM10 (MM = mischmetal) for the HER in 1 M NaOH solution, and found that Fe90MM10 showed the best electrocatalytic activity. They considered that the high activity may be ascribed to the synergetic effects between the intermetallic phases as a consequence of the change of the electronic properties due to the appropriate combination of the 3d 6-orbitals of Fe with the 5d 1-orbitals of La. Recently, Röntzsch et al.59 reported an efficient technique to improve the HER activity of Fe-based alloys by doping of B and Si after a CV-pretreatment procedure. As shown in Fig. 1B, after doping of the metalloids B and Si, the current density of the FeCo alloy increased, which should be attributed to the enlargement of the surface area. In their following work,60 the effect of the dopants B and Si on the catalytic activity was quantified in more detail. After CV-pretreatment of Fe-based alloys, a porous surface layer was formed and an enlarged surface area was achieved. In addition, the CV procedure obviously increased the intrinsic activity, which resulted in a lower overpotential value. The EIS results for Fe alloys (Fig. 4C) revealed that the lower overpotential value should be due to both surface area increase and intrinsic activity improvement.
Besides the above popular alloys, some work based on other elements also revealed amazing results. For instance, Lu et al.29 reported that a hierarchical nanoporous Cu–Ti bimetallic electrocatalyst showed a catalytic activity twice that of a Pt/C catalyst. The Cu and Ti atoms were considered to create unique Cu–Cu–Ti hollow sites (Fig. 4D), which had a Pt-like hydrogen-binding energy. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4E and D, the hierarchical porosity of the nanoporous Cu–Ti bimetal ensured a large-surface area for the HER, which showed an even higher HER activity than that of Pt/C.


3.2.2 Noble metal-free composites. 
To date, various metals and alloys have been developed for the HER. However, their electrocatalytic activities are still suppressed by a high overpotential due to the inefficient water decomposition step under alkaline conditions. Besides this, these catalysts cannot endure acid erosion. To overcome these limits, two strategies are considered: (i) introducing a second functional component, usually an oxide or hydroxide, which play a promoting role in the water splitting via the formation of intermediates on it, and subsequently the intermediates are absorbed by nearby TM sites and activated to hydrogen molecules; (ii) enhancing the acidic stability of catalysts by encapsulating the metal or alloy nanoparticles into some special shells such as a graphene shell.
To enhance the water electrolysis stability for ALKWE, Markovic et al.61 deposited Ni(OH)2 nanoclusters on 9 TM substrates (Cu, Ag, Au, Ru, Ir, Pt, Ni, V, Ti). Revealed by the activity histogram in Fig. 5, compared with the corresponding pure TM elements, the overpotentials of Ni(OH)2/TM for the HER are significantly reduced, and range from 200 to 500 mV. Moreover, Ni(OH)2 modified TM substrates showed similar activity trends in alkaline solution as in acid solution, indicating the enhancement of catalysts in the presentation of Ni(OH)2. Gong et al.62 synthesized a nanoscale NiO shell@Ni core heterostructure on the sidewalls of carbon nanotubes, and found that the catalyst showed a similar activity to that of Pt. Ni metal has a H atom binding energy close to that of Pt, but it has a worse HER catalytic activity than that of Pt. When Ni metal is combined with NiO, in the interface of NiO/Ni, the OH− generated by H2O dissociation could be preferentially absorbed on NiO sites owing to its strong electrostatic affinity to the positively charged Ni2+ species and the existence of more unfilled d orbitals in Ni2+ ions than in Ni metal. Simultaneously, the nearby Ni metal sites would facilitate H adsorption and promote the Volmer process. As such, the synergistic HER catalytic activity of NiO/Ni appears.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of the HER overpotential of bare metal surfaces and Ni(OH)2-modified surfaces in 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M HClO4. The inset shows the process of water dissociation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
To extend the application of non-noble metals and alloys to acidic environments, several groups proposed to protect the metallic electrocatalyst using a carbon material shell. For instance, a Ni–Sn@C core/shell structure was synthesized by combining sol–gel, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and etching processes.63 As revealed in Fig. 6A, a Ni–Sn nanoparticle with a diameter of about 40 nm was encapsulated in a hollow carbon capsule with a diameter of about 150 nm. This core/shell catalyst had a high conductivity and large active surface area and exhibited good electrocatalytic activity toward the HER. However, its stability was still not satisfactory in acid solution although it was better than the single Ni–Sn one. Tavakkoli et al.64 used single-walled CNTs as the carbon shell to encapsulate Fe nanoparticles using a CVD technique (Fig. 6B), and found that such a carbon shell not only protected the active metal nanoparticles from oxidation but also let the desired reactants traverse it. As a result, the obtained Fe/CNTs composite demonstrated a high activity for the HER in acidic electrolyte which was even comparable to that of a platinum catalyst. An 18 h electrolysis test indicated that such a carbon shell played an efficient role in preventing acidic corrosion. Yang et al.65 also did interesting work based on this idea. They encapsulated Fe–Co alloy nanoparticles in a nitrogen-doped graphene layer by direct thermal treatment of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) at 600 °C. From Fig. 6C, one can see that the obtained composite material showed a unique structure with a graphene shell and a FeCo alloy core, which showed a very stable performance even after 10000 cycles. By DFT calculations, it was found that the nitrogen dopant can provide an adsorption site for H* and that an appropriate increase in the nitrogen doping amount will decrease the Gibbs free energy of H adsorption for the HER. Deng et al.66 reported that an FeCo alloy and N dopant can synergistically optimize the electronic structure of CNTs and the adsorption free energy of H atoms on CNTs.
 Fig. 6  (A) TEM image and illustration of NiSn@C nanoparticles from ref. 63. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society (B) TEM image of carbon-encapsulated iron nanoparticles from ref. 64, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (C) TEM image and illustration of FeCo alloy particles encapsulated in nitrogen doped graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) TEM image of FeCo@N-CNTs from ref. 66 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.3 Transition metal carbides
Transition metal carbides (TMCs), such as tungsten carbide (WC, W2C), and molybdenum carbide (MoxCy), are known to have Pt-like electronic and catalytic properties, and have been well investigated in various application fields. Especially, carbides, sulfides, nitrides, silicides and borides based on Group IV–VI have proven to be active for the HER and not so poisoning and susceptible to easy deactivation as noble metals.21,22 Among them, WC and Mo2C are thought to be more active than other materials.67 Regmi et al.42 compared the electroactivity of 9 TMCs for HER, and found that the Mo2C catalyst had significantly higher activity than others, followed by WC and V8C7 in order. Michalsky et al.68 investigated the enhanced electroactivity for the HER over eight mono- and bimetallic carbides and correlated the current densities to hydrogen binding energies calculated via electronic structure computations, and found that these carbides had activities higher than those of their parent metals and intermediate between the catalytic activities of the Pt group and early transition-metal surfaces. They considered that the increase in the HER activities of these metal carbides should be related to their higher sensitivity (about 3-fold) to the coverage-induced weakening of hydrogen adsorption relative to their parent metal surfaces.
Different phases of molybdenum carbides can be obtained by different preparation conditions.69 Leonard et al.70,71 synthesized four kinds of Mo–C phases, i.e., α-MoC1−x, β-Mo2C, μ-MoC, γ-Mo2C, using an amine–metal oxide hybrid method, and measured their electrocatalytic activity and stability for the HER in 0.1 M HClO4 (Fig. 7A and B), and found that hexagonal –Mo2C had the best activity followed by γ-Mo2C while the other two had very poor activity. Bulk MoxCy can be directly used as a cathode in acid or basic media but shows an obviously lower activity than that of Pt. Thus, increasing the surface area to enrich active sites is considered as an efficient approach to improve its performance. MoxCy prepared using a traditional temperature programmed reaction (TPR) method usually has a bulk structure with a very low surface area. Furthermore, the surface of obtained MoxCy is always covered by a carbon layer generated from carbon-containing gases and as such, some active sites are lost.72,73 To solve this problem, recently, nanostructured MoxCy was prepared via carburization of organic–inorganic hybrid amine-containing molybdenum based materials, by which MoxCy with various morphologies including nanorods, nanospheres, and microflowers were obtained71,73 (Fig. 8). Tang et al.75 synthesized nanoporous molybdenum carbide nanowires with 1D morphology of several micrometers in length and 80–120 nm in width by using a MoOx/amine hybrid precursor. In their following work,76 this nanowire-like Mo2C was evaluated as a cathode catalyst for the HER. Due to the aggregation-free microstructure with high surface area (63.9 m2 g−1), the nanowire-like Mo2C modified glassy carbon electrode showed a very low onset overpotential of 70 mV and a high current density of 60 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 200 mV which was 50 fold and 8 fold higher than that of commercial and bulk Mo2Cs. Following an organic–inorganic hybrid template strategy, Tian et al.74 utilized p-phenylenediamine as a carbon source and synthesized nanosheet and nanowire-like Mo2C by controllably tuning the molar ratio of MoOx and p-phenylenediamine. Wu et al.77 prepared Mo2C with a nanoparticle structure and a surface area of as high as 120 m2 g−1 by using glucose as the carbon source. Both Mo2Cs prepared by Tian et al. and Wu et al. showed an enhanced performance when compared with the bulk one. Xia et al.78 demonstrated a MOF-assisted strategy to synthesize nanostructured TMCs. The NENU-5 MOFs containing a substantial amount of Mo was heated at 800 °C in a N2 atmosphere to produce MoCx–Cu and then, the metallic Cu nanoparticles in the MoCx nano-octahedra was removed by Fe3+ ion etching. The obtained catalyst showed remarkable HER activity with 142 and 151 mV overpotentials to drive 10 mA cm−2 current density in acidic and basic solutions, respectively. Especially in basic solution, MoCx nano-octahedra showed an even lower Tafel slope (59 mV per decade) than that of Pt/C catalyst (113 mV per decade).
 Fig. 7  (A) XRD patterns of α-MoC1−x, η-MoC, γ-MoC and β-Mo2C. The insets show corresponding crystal structures. (B) Polarization curves of four kinds of molybdenum carbide and Pt/C, CNTs in 0.1 M HClO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 8  SEM images of, (a) β-Mo2C synthesized by mesitylamine at 750 °C (b) β-Mo2C synthesized by 4-Cl-o-phenylenediamine, at 675 °C (c) α-MoC1−x synthesized by o-phenylenediamine, at 625 °C (d) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine, at 675 °C (e) β-Mo2C synthesized by aniline with 4:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 675 °C (f) β-Mo2C synthesized by 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine, at 875 °C, (g) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine with 4:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 675 °C (h) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine with 8:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 850 °C (i) β-Mo2C synthesized by 1,6-hexanediamine, at 675 °C, (j) β-Mo2C synthesized by 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, at 850 °C (k) α-MoC1−x synthesized by hexamethylenetetramine, at 850 °C, (l) β-Mo2C synthesized by hexamethylenetetramine, at 900 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71 copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, the assistance of a conductive 3D substrate is a good way to increase the surface area, reduce the electric resistance and facilitate electrolyte and generated gas diffusion. CNTs and graphene have been proven to be good carbon supports for depositing MoxCy materials in situ.79 Lee et al.80 deposited molybdenum compounds (Mo2C, Mo2N, and MoS2) on a carbon nanotube–graphene (CNT–GO) hybrid support by a modified urea-glass route. Among these catalysts, the Mo2C/CNT–GO composite showed the best performance for the HER with an onset overpotential of 62 mV and a Tafel slope of 58 mV dec−1. It is considered that the CNT–GO hybrid support played an important role in alleviating aggregation generation and facilitating electrolyte and electron transfer. Similarly, Šljukić et al.81 deposited Mo2C nanoparticles on CNTs and carbon xerogel (CXG). These two different carbon supports effectively increased the catalyst surface area. It was found that both Mo2C/CNTs and Mo2C/CXG had onset overpotentials of below 2 mV.
Recently, Chen et al.82 reported interesting work on soybean-derived molybdenum carbide (MoSoy), which was composed of –Mo2C and γ-Mo2N phases. The catalyst showed good HER catalytic activity and stability in acid solution, which were attributed to the synergistic effect of –Mo2C and γ-Mo2N. Here, the nitrogen and carbon atoms around the molybdenum catalytic centres facilitated the hydrogen production. In addition, the activity of the MoSoy catalyst was enhanced further by supporting it on graphene sheets and revealed a comparable performance to the noble-metal Pt for hydrogen production. Another interesting catalyst was designed by Wang et al.83 They synthesized MoxC modified N-doped carbon vesicles encapsulating Ni nanoparticles using a solid-state thermolysis method. Due to the synergistic effect of efficient hydrogen absorption of Ni metal and high activity of MoxC, the as-prepared catalyst showed excellent catalytic performance for the HER with almost zero onset potential and a quite low overpotential of 68 mV at 10 mA cm−2.
A tactic to finely tune the electroactivity of MoxCy is through the modification of the crystal structure of MoxCy with metals. For instance, Pt–Co bimetal modified molybdenum carbide showed an excellent performance for the oxygen reduction reaction.84 It is possible to dope a second metal into the lattice of β-Mo2C. It has been reported that the incorporation of Ni into the Mo2C lattice brought about a change in the charge distribution in the catalyst framework, resulting in a synergistic effect of Ni and Mo2C toward decreasing the hydrogen binding energy and enhancing the catalytic performance of the HER.85 Fe can also be incorporated into the lattice of β-Mo2C and the oxidized Fe in β-Mo2C gave rise to a broader valence band, resulting in the enhancement of the catalytic activity for the HER.86
As stated above, tungsten carbide is also an efficient and stable electrocatalyst for the HER. However, during a typical preparation of tungsten carbide, particle sintering will occur due to the uncontrollable high-temperature carbonization process,87 which usually limits the surface area of the obtained catalyst. Similar to molybdenum carbide, synthesis of a porous microstructure and assistance of conductive 3D substrate are two popular approaches to increase the surface area. Generally, carbonaceous gases such as CH4, C2H6 and CO or other carbon-containing compounds can be used as carbon sources to reduce the tungsten precursor. Much research has indicated that the microstructure of the catalyst was highly dependent on the species of the carbon source and the synthesis conditions.87 Ma et al.88 used a gas–solid reaction system with ammonium metatungstate and a CH4/H2 atmosphere to synthesize walnut-shell-like WC particles with mesoporosity (Fig. 9A). Lee et al.89 synthesized W2C microspheres with a surface area of 176 m2 g−1 using a resorcinol–formaldehyde polymer as a carbon precursor (Fig. 9B). Duan et al.90 synthesized tungsten carbide with a special spherical hollow microstructure by using glucose as carbon source and found that the synthesis temperature was the crucial factor in determining the final compound and microstructure (Fig. 9C), and found that the WC hollow microsphere displayed good HER activity with an onset potential of 100 mV vs. SHE and a 73 mV dec−1 Tafel slope. Here, the hollow and cracked structure of the catalyst was considered to be beneficial for its electrocatalytic properties.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of (A) microporous WC from ref. 88, copyright 2007, Elsevier. (B) Globular WC from ref. 89, copyright 2008, Elsevier, (C) hollow globular WC from ref. 90, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (D) CNTs supported coral-like WC from ref. 91, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. TEM images of (E) CNTs supported WC from ref. 92, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society (F) WC derived by soybean from ref. 93, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Since nanotechnology was introduced to synthesize tungsten carbide materials, the accumulational structure was reduced efficiently. However, for pure tungsten carbide, it is still difficult to get a nanosize structure, and generally the obtained particles have a diameter of 1–3 μm. Thus, more attention has been paid on forming composites of them with conductive graphene or CNTs. Some researchers have demonstrated the growth of tungsten carbide on CNT substrates, in which the WC layer can grow along free-standing carbon nanotubes. For instance, Lin et al.91 deposited a thin tungsten layer on CNT forests followed by carbonization in an inert atmosphere to obtain tungsten carbide. The obtained WC showed a 3D nanorod branch structure with a diameter of ∼200 nm (Fig. 9D). Similarly, Fan et al.92 deposited nanocrystalline WC with about 20 nm diameter on the tip of vertically aligned CNTs (Fig. 9E), which exhibited a good catalytic activity for the HER with current densities of 10 mA cm−2@145 mV and 117.6 mA cm−2@300 mV in acid solution.
Biomass has also been used for tungsten carbide synthesis. Meng et al.93 used soybean powder and ammonium tungstate as carbon and tungsten sources, respectively and heated them with graphene. As shown in Fig. 9F, a mixture consisting of W2C, WC and WN nanoparticles was deposited on graphene nanoplatelets finally. This composite catalyst showed a low overpotential of 105 mV to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER in acidic media. The authors believed that the coupling between the catalysts and graphene could significantly reduce the charge transfer resistance and increase the active surface area.
3.4 Metal sulfides and selenides
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) as popular alternatives of noble metals for the HER in ACIWE have been well studied and rapidly developed. Current research has indicated that Group 6 TMD (MX2; M = Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te) are an exciting catalyst family. As shown in Fig. 10, the metallic phase of TMDs known as the 1T (transition metal in octahedral coordination) phase has exceptionally higher HER activity when compared to its 2H (transition metal in trigonal prismatic coordination) counterpart, and is comparable to the HER performance of platinum.94,95 In general, the Tafel slope of Pt is as low as 30 mV dec−1. In contrast, for 1T MoS2,96 the Tafel slope is about 43 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 10  Top view and side view of 2H, 1T, and 1T′ 4 × 4 × 1 MoS2. Cyan: Mo; yellow: S. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, various ways have been developed to expose more 1T phase active sites to improve the performance of TMDs. Chemical exfoliation is considered as an efficient and simple way to achieve this purpose. For instance, WS2 was successfully exfoliated to monolayered nanosheets via lithium intercalation, and showed a very low overpotential for the HER.94 Semiconducting 2H-MoS2 was also exfoliated to 1T-MoS2 nanosheets with proliferative active sites by lithium intercalation by Jin et al.96 It has been proven that this approach can result in superior HER catalytic activity and control of the nanostructure. However, it should be noted that the perfect 1T phase is metastable and sometimes such a structure is dynamically unstable.97 Recently, a more stable 1T′ phase of MoS2, which is a distorted 2 × 1 reconstruction of the 1T phase, was reported.94 Revealed by the work of Kuo et al.,98 the basal plane of 1T′-MX2 (M = Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te) 2D materials had a lower energy and was more stable than the corresponding 1T counterparts. Among them, sulphides showed the best catalytic performance, followed by selenides and tellurides. Recently, Du et al.99 reported a phase transition method, in which through a negative charge injection method, semiconducting 2H-MoS2 was transformed to metallic 1T MoS2 and further distorted into the 1T′-MoS2 phase. Here, negatively charged 1T-MoS2 also showed better thermodynamic stability. Currently, a strategy by activating and optimizing the basal plane of monolayer 2H-MoS2 to improve the HER activity has been proposed. Nørskov et al.100 demonstrated how to activate the 2H-MoS2 basal plane via the introduction of sulphur vacancies and strain (Fig. 11A and B). Experimental and theoretical results indicated that the S-vacancies of the basal planes are new catalytic sites, where gap states around the Fermi level allow hydrogen to bind with the exposed Mo directly. They also found that the straining of the surface by S-vacancies resulted in an optimal hydrogen adsorption free energy (the value can reach 0 eV). As a result, the strained MoS2 with S-vacancies showed an enhanced HER activity (Fig. 11C). Phani et al.101 also discovered the phase transformation phenomenon of MoS2 (2H-1T) by the in situ generation in S-doped carbon, which resulted in the enrichment of edge planes and enhancements in the electronic conductivity and charge density. This kind of catalyst showed a much higher activity than that of general MoS2 with a comparable performance to that of a Pt electrode.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic of the top and side views of the original monolayer 2H-MoS2, strained MoS2 and strained MoS2 with S-vacancies. (B) TEM image of a MoS2 monolayer with S-vacancies (C) HER activity of the Au substrate, Pt electrode, MoS2, strained MoS2 without S-vacancies, unstrained MoS2 with S-vacancies, and strained MoS2 with S-vacancies, the displayed overpotentials were recorded at 10 mA cm−2 current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides the fine-tuning of the TMD phase, some other rational and efficient strategies on the nanoscale were conducted to improve the electrocatalytic activity. These strategies can be divided into three aspects: (i) nanostructuring the TMD catalysts, (ii) doping foreign atoms into the TMD lattice, (iii) combining TMDs with conductive materials such as CNTs and graphene. TMDs generally have a layered structure analogous to that of graphite with weak van der Waals interactions between neighbouring layers, thus MoS2 nanosheets with expanded interlayer spacing will result in more catalytic sites. Gao et al.102 reported a microwave-assisted method to synthesize narrow MoS2 nanosheets. Revealed by Fig. 12A, the obtained MoS2 had an edge-terminated structure and an expanded 9.4 Å interlayer spacing. Benefiting from the above two characteristics, the obtained catalyst exhibited a low onset potential of 103 mV and a Tafel slope of 49 mV dec−1. In order to further enrich the active sites, ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets were developed recently. Wang et al.103 synthesized ultrathin MoS2 nanoplates with a thickness of ∼5 nm and lateral plate sizes of 200–300 nm using a solvent-dependent control route (Fig. 12B). It is believed that the high density of basal edges and abundant unsaturated active S atoms of the MoS2 nanoplates resulted in a higher catalytic activity for HER than for the conventional nanoplates. Gao et al.104 prepared polysaccharides from glucose in situ during a hydrothermal process, which can serve as a template for fabricating ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets. After carbonization, polysaccharides and the Mo source were further transformed into MoS2/C integrated nanosheets with a 2–4 nm thickness (Fig. 12C). This MoS2/C material showed a good performance for the HER with a low onset overpotential of ∼80 mV and a high current density of 88 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 200 mV due to the enriched rim-sites and the enhanced conductivity of the carbon matrix. Such a strategy for the design of an ultrathin structure was extended to synthesize other TMDs, for instance, Liu et al.105 prepared ultrathin WS2 nanosheets with a thickness of 5–20 nm using a high-temperature solution-phase method. The obtained WS2 catalyst exhibited efficient and durable activity for the HER.
 Fig. 12  TEM images of (A) MoS2 nanostructures from ref. 102 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets from ref. 103, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (C) Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet and the inset shows common MoS2 from ref. 104, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (D) MoS2 quantum dots and corresponding size distribution from ref. 107, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) MoS2 nanosheet with 1, 2, 3, 4 layers from ref. 108, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
It has been reported that the current density of MoS2 nanoparticles for the HER linearly depend on the edge length of MoS2 nanosheets.106 Hence, the controllable synthesis of MoS2 nanocatalysts with ultrasmall size and a precise number of layers should be an efficient approach for improving their performance. Liu et al.107 prepared MoS2 quantum dots with a 3.6 nm monolayer thickness (Fig. 12D). Benefiting from abundant catalytic edge sites and excellent conductivity of the monolayer structure, the MoS2 quantum dots showed good catalytic activity. Kwak et al.108 reported a controllable preparation of MoS2 layers with a precise number of layers from one to four (Fig. 12E). Revealed by DFT calculations and HER activity measurements, the turnover frequency of MoS2 nanoparticles in the HER increased in a quasi-linear manner with a decrease in the layer number. It is believed that this kind of small MoS2 nanoparticles have the features of a higher Mo–S coordination number, easier formation of the 1T phase and lower activation energy.
Inspired by the high activity and controllable preparation, research on it has increased rapidly. Besides the nanosheet structure, various other interesting microstructures were also designed. As shown in Fig. 13, Sun et al.109 prepared hollow CoS nanoprisms using a microwave-assisted synthesis route (Fig. 13A). Compared with the traditional CoS catalyst, the resulting CoS nanoprisms presented a much higher electrocatalytic activity for the HER with an overpotential of 373 mV to reach a current density of 50 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M phosphate buffer with a pH value of 7. Liu et al.110 utilized SnO2 nanotubes as a template to deposit sheet-like MoS2 on both the outer and inner surfaces of it (Fig. 13B). Such a MoS2 nanosheet/SnO2 nanotube heterostructure has many more exposed catalytic edges with excellent electrical coupling to the SnO2 nanotubes. Jaramillo et al.111 also modified the surface structure of MoS2 with the assistance of a mesoporous Si template. As shown in Fig. 13C, the obtained double-gyroid MoS2 film had a highly ordered bicontinuous network with nanoscale pores. The high surface curvature mesostructure provided a high surface area and large edge sites, also resulting in excellent activity for the HER.
 Fig. 13  (A) TEM images of hollow CoS nanoprisms from ref. 109 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM images of MoS2/SnO2 from ref. 110 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Structural model of mesoporous MoS2 from ref. 111 copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (D) Schematic of MoS2/N-graphene composites from ref. 119 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (E) SEM image of MoS2 monolayer@nanoporous gold from ref. 122, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (F) Polarization curves of PPy/MoSx electrodes from ref. 125, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
Element doping is also one of the effective approaches to fine-tune the crystal form and microstructure of TMDs and subsequently improve their HER activities. To date, foreign metals such as Co, Ni, Fe, V and so on, and anions such as S and Se have been deliberately introduced into TMD lattices. Dai et al.112 fabricated metal (Fe, Co, Ni)-doped MoS2 layers on carbon black as cathodic electrocatalysts for the HER. Compared with the original MoS2 catalyst, the current densities of the NiMoS and FeMoS phases recorded at a 200 mV overpotential increased from 2.80 to 3.19, 5.03 mA cm−2, respectively. Especially, the current density of Co doped MoS2 reached as high as 61.9 mA cm−2, indicating that Co-doping played a crucial role for the promoting activity for the HER. It is considered that the excellent HER activity should be benefiting from the synergetic structural and electronic modulations of Co and MoS2 as well as abundant defects in the active edge sites. Besides the above advantages, the Co dopant also shows the ability to reduce the free energy of hydrogen adsorption, resulting in an enhanced catalytic activity.113 Stimulated by these results, other Co-doped TMDs were also developed. For instance, CNT supported Co–FeS2 nanosheets also showed an excellent HER catalytic activity (120 mV overpotential@20 mA cm−2) since Co doping led to an obvious reduction in the kinetic energy barrier of hydrogen atom adsorption on the FeS2 surface.114 Other efficient metal dopants were reported by Yang et al.115 in which Fe doped NiS2 showed an excellent performance. Revealed by DFT calculation results, Fe played a similar role to that of Co.
Anion (S, Se) doping is another useful and popular approach to fine-tune the structure and improve the performance of TMDs. The DFT results indicated that Se doping is favorable to reduce the kinetic barrier of the HER and the free energy of hydrogen adsorption. To date, various anion doped TMDs with different microstructures such as Se-doped MoS2 nanosheets,116 Se-doped CoS2 nanowires,117 Se-doped WS2 nanotubes,118 and so on were reported. All of them showed obviously enhanced performances compared with the corresponding pure ones. Shi et al.117 prepared anion doped TMDs, and found that ternary Co(S0.73Se0.27)2 nanowires exhibited excellent HER activity. Only a 157 mV overpotential was required in 0.5 M H2SO4 to drive the 100 mV cm−2 current density with a low Tafel slope of 45.3 mV dec−1.
Combining TMDs with conductive carbon materials, polymers or other catalytic materials is also an effective strategy to prepare electrocatalysts.21–23 Much research has indicated that N-doped graphene and carbon nanotubes can efficiently reduce the free energy of hydrogen adsorption. Dong et al.119 decorated MoS2 nanoparticles on a 3D layered graphene network (Fig. 13D), and found that it had an efficient electrocatalytic activity for the HER with a low onset potential of 112 mV and a Tafel slope of 44 mV dec−1. Further electrical and microcosmic investigations as well as DFT calculations indicated that the high activity is due to the abundant active sulfur edge sites of the MoS2 nanoparticles and high conductivity and nitrogen active functional moieties of graphene. 3D porous metals are also considered as ideal substrates for the deposition of TMDs. To date, Mo mesh,120 Ni foam,121 porous Au122 and the like were selected as highly conductive substrates. As shown in Fig. 13E, Chen et al.122 designed a coral-like 3D porous gold substrate via a chemical dealloying route, and subsequently let monolayer MoS2 grow on the internal surface of it. Due to the novel 3D porous structure, the MoS2 monolayer@Au electrode exhibited excellent catalytic activity toward the HER with a small Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1 and 118 mV onset potential. Such heterogeneous catalysts with heterostructures usually show fantastic synergistic properties through the reinforcement or modification of each other and thus, hybridizing TMDs with matched materials should be a good way to offset performance defects. Jaramillo et al.123 synthesized wire-like MoO3@MoS2 core–shell composites, in which the MoO3 core serves as a physical support and provides electron transport channels while the MoS2 shell provides excellent catalytic activity and protection against acid corrosion. Liang et al.124 synthesized a highly efficient MoS2/CoSe2 catalyst which can work in acidic media. The composite exhibited fast hydrogen evolution kinetics with a very low onset potential of 11 mV and a Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1, which is comparable to those of a commercial Pt/C catalyst. It is considered that the high activity is due to the synergistic effect of active MoS2 and CoSe2 and the increased number of catalytic sites. Li et al.125 fabricated an active PPy/MoSx composite using an electrochemical copolymerization method. The catalyst demonstrated comparable performance to that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst with a 0 mV onset potential and a very low Tafel slope of 29 mV dec−1 for the HER (Fig. 13F). This outstanding activity is attributed to the porous and conductive PPy material and high S:Mo ratio (5.0:1) which ensure more active S edge sites.
Amorphous TMDs have been developed as another attractive family of low-cost and high efficient catalysts since the initial work on the HER catalytic activity of amorphous MoSx was started in 2011.126 As discussed above, crystalline MoS2 is a promising alternative to Pt; however the synthesis of MoS2 typically requires vacuum apparatus, corrosive H2S for sulfidation and a high annealing temperature, which limits its wide applications. On the other hand, amorphous MoSx can be easily deposited on the working electrode by an electrochemical method using a [MoS4]2− precursor at a low temperature and pressure. In addition, a wet chemistry method was also successfully applied for the synthesis of amorphous MoSx.23,127 Hu et al.128 prepared amorphous MoS3 by potentiostatic oxidation, and found that MoS3 can be transformed to the active species MoS2+x during a HER test. Yeo et al.127 studied the catalytic activity of S sites (apical S2−, bridging S22− and terminal S22−) in electrodeposited amorphous MoSx for the HER, and found that the turnover frequency for H2 production increased linearly with an increase in the percentage of S atoms with higher electron binding energies. In addition, DFT and Raman spectroscopy results indicated that apical S2− atoms showed very weak H adsorption ability but that bridging S22− had a higher catalytic activity than terminal S22−. Furthermore, besides MoSx, other amorphous TMD materials such as CoSx, NiSx and CoSex were also proven to be efficient catalysts for the HER. For instance, Lewis et al.129 prepared an amorphous CoSe2 film using an electrodeposition method and found that the film required only a 135 mV overpotential to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4.
3.5 Transition metal phosphides
Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) as another family of promising noble metal-free HER catalysts, were firstly mentioned by Rodriguez's group in 2005.130 Based on DFT calculation results, they found that diluting the Ni concentration in Ni2P by the introduction of P elements resulted in Ni2P(001) behaving somewhat like hydrogenase rather than the pure metal surface. Recently, TMPs have experimentally manifested as a promising family of earth abundant electrocatalysts for both the HER and OER under various conditions.131 Recently, various TMPs based on Group VIA–IB were proven to be active for the HER, and among of them, nickel phosphides and cobalt phosphides are thought to be more active than other materials. Schaak et al.132 synthesized TMP electrodes based on the reaction of various commercially available metal foils (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and NiFe) with various organophosphine reagents, and found that all of the phosphides exhibited good HER and OER catalytic activities. Especially, Ni2P electrodes showed the highest activity with required overpotentials of −128 mV and −183 mV to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER in acid and base electrolytes, respectively.
To date, one common approach to prepare TMPs is solution-phase synthesis using tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP) as a phosphorus source. At an elevated temperature of around 300 °C, the C–P covalent bond could be broken, and then different precursors, including metal, metal acetylacetonates, metal carbonyl compounds and metal oxides, can be phosphorized. Lewis and Schaak et al. firstly used TOP as a phosphorus precursor to synthesize Ni2P133 and CoP134 nanoparticles successfully. The obtained phosphides had hollow crystalline structures with uniform sizes (10–20 nm), and both Ni2P and CoP showed a high catalytic activity for the HER and good durability in 0.5 M H2SO4, to produce a current density of 20 mA cm−2. Low overpotentials of 85 mV and 130 mV were required for CoP and Ni2P, respectively. Other popular gas–solid reaction systems were developed to prepare TMPs by Hu's group,135 in which hypophosphites were heated at elevated temperatures to produce PH3. This active gas could phosphatize Ni2+ easily and subsequently form Ni2P. However, the above-mentioned common methods still suffer some serious problems, for example, the raw materials or intermediates are toxic, and the materials are expensive. Thus, the development of new methods to synthesize high-performance TMPs with controllable phase composition, structure, and morphology is necessary.
In order to investigate the influence of phosphorus content on the catalytic activity and corrosion resistance for the HER in acidic medium, Kucernak et al.136 compared the performance of an electrodeposited nickel–phosphorus alloy (8 at% P), hydrothermally synthesised Ni12P5 (29 at% P) and ball-milled commercial Ni2P (33 at% P). The results indicated that with an increase in the phosphorus content, nickel phosphide showed higher corrosion resistance and HER activity. Dismukes et al.137 prepared crystalline Ni5P4 with an abundance of P which showed a high performance efficiency on par with that of Pt in strong acid (33 mV dec−1 Tafel slope and −62 mV overpotential at −100 mA cm−2 in 1 M H2SO4). Recently, in order to expose more active sites, the design of TMPs with novel nanostructures has become a hot topic. As shown in Fig. 14A, Tour et al.138 synthesized porous nanorods with a mixed-phase of Co phosphide/Co phosphate by direct reaction of a phosphorus vapor with anodized Co oxide porous films. The obtained thin films showed superior activity for catalytic H2 and O2 evolution reactions. Recently, Lewis et al.139 demonstrated the synthesis of branched CoP nanorods (Fig. 14B) by reacting cobalt(II) acetylacetonate with trioctylphosphine in the presence of trioctylphosphine oxide. When these novel CoP nanorods were deposited on Ti electrodes, it required a low overpotential of 117 mV to produce a current density of 20 mA cm−2 in 0.50 M H2SO4. Huang et al.140 also prepared Co2P nanorods which proved to be a new efficient HER electrocatalyst with the overpotentials of 167 and 171 mV to offer a current density of 20 mA cm−2 in acidic and basic solutions, respectively. In their other work,141 as shown in Fig. 14C, hierarchical nanowires array of FeP were grown on carbon fiber paper which exhibited a high catalytic activity for the HER. The overpotentials required for a current density of 20 mA cm−2 were as small as 45 and 221 mV in acidic and basic solutions, respectively, corresponding to Tafel slopes of 53 and 134 mV dec−1. Recently, a templated-preparation method was also introduced to prepare TMPs. For instance, Li et al.142 developed hollow CoP polyhedra as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for the HER and OER which were templated by Co-centered metal–organic frameworks (Fig. 14D). The as-prepared CoP hollow polyhedra particles had a large specific surface area and high porosity. Also, they showed good electrocatalytic performances for both the HER and OER in acidic and alkaline media. Liu et al.143 used Co3O4 sheets as a precursor and prepared ultrathin CoP nanosheets for electrochemical water splitting successfully (Fig. 14E), which showed high OER and HER activities in a basic solution. Yan et al.144 reported the preparation of 3D MoP by using sponge (polyurethane, PU) as a sacrificial template. The obtained MoP microsheet possessed a large surface area and a porous channel-rich structure. When the MoP sponge was used as a bulky and binder-free HER electrode, good catalytic properties in acidic electrolyte were exposed (105 mV overpotential@10 mA cm−2 current density). In addition, a phosphorus-containing porous polymer was also used as a template as well as a P source to prepare TMPs. The polymer can be easily ionized to form an ionic porous polymer after treatment with hydrogen iodide. Upon ionic exchange, transition-metal-containing anions were loaded into the polymer framework and replaced the original iodide anions, which resulted in a polymer framework containing metal anions. After pyrolysis under a hydrogen atmosphere, a metal phosphide containing porous carbons was obtained. As shown in Fig. 15, a typical work was demonstrated by Zhang et al.,145 in which tris(4-vinylphenyl)phosphane, tetrathiomolybdate (MoS42−) and hexacyanoferrate (Fe(CN)63−) were chosen as P, Mo, and Fe sources. The obtained MoFeP@porous carbon composites exhibited superior electrocatalytic activity for the HER under acidic conditions. Another interesting phosphide nanostructure was designed by Yu et al.146 (Fig. 14F). Ni–Co Prussian blue analogue nanocubes were used as the template. Due to the novel quasi-hollow nanocube structure and compositional merits, NiCoP showed a better electrochemical performance for the HER in alkaline solution than cobalt phosphide microcubes, nickel phosphides nanoplates and cobalt nickel phosphide stacked nanoplates, which required an overpotential of 150 mV to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a low Tafel slope of 60.1 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 14  (A) SEM images of porous Co phosphide/Co phosphate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) TEM images of highly branched CoP nanostructures from ref. 139 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) TEM images of a hierarchical nanowire array of FeP nanowires from ref. 141 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) TEM images of CoP hollow polyhedra from ref. 142 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (E) TEM images of a CoP nanosheet from ref. 143 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (F) TEM images of NiCoP nanocubes from ref. 146 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  Preparation of ionic polymer–metal and related mesoporous carbons embedded with metal phosphides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Even though the development time of TMPs for the HER and OER is relatively short, several efficient strategies have been exploited to further improve their performance referring to other well-studied materials such as carbides. For example, doping with other elements, hybrids with other catalytic materials and composites with carbon materials were investigated. Herein, we introduce some typical works about it. Jaramillo et al.147 and Liu et al.148 developed sulfur doped molybdenum phosphide and cobalt phosphide respectively, and they showed an attractive performance for chemical water splitting. Wu et al. doped Co into MoP materials and found that a Co–MoP electrode showed an obviously enhanced performance for the HER. They considered that the high activity should be due to the reduction in the particle size, which promoted charge transfer and enhanced the intrinsic activity of each active site after Co doping. Heterogeneous catalysts may have surprising synergistic effects. As demonstrated by Kuang et al.,149 they applied WP2 nanorods and MoP nanosheets to obtain a porous Mo–W–P hybrid electrocatalyst and found that the prepared composites showed enhanced catalytic performances with an overpotential of 138 mV to drive 100 mA cm−2 current density.
To improve the conductivity of the catalysts and well disperse the active components, compositing TMPs with carbon materials like CNTs and graphite has proven to be an efficient approach because of their large surface area and nanostructure. For instance, Liu et al.150 composited Ni2P nanoparticles with N-doped reduced graphene oxide, and found that it exhibited a good catalytic activity for the HER with a very low onset overpotential (37 mV), a small Tafel slope (59 mV dec−1) and lower HER activation energy (46.9 kJ mol−1). They believed that the good performance should be attributed to the synergistic effect of graphene and Ni2P nanoparticles. Liu et al.151 synthesized a series of cobalt phosphide-based electrocatalysts using a thermal decomposition approach, and found that the crystalline phase can be controlled by changing the phosphide source species. The catalytic activity was found to be in the following order: CoP/NCNTs > Co2P/NCNTs > CoP/CNTs > Co2P/CNTs > CoP > Co2P. They considered that this result should be attributed to the different atomic ratios of Co:P and the strong interaction between cobalt phosphide and carbon species and the doping of N atoms into the CNTs.
3.6 Metal-free catalysts
As stated above, due to the advantages of high electronic conductivity, ideal 3D microstructure, good resistance to corrosion, carbon materials such as carbon nanotube and graphene have been widely used as substrates for the deposition of electrocatalytic materials.152 Moreover, the substitution of some carbon atoms of the original graphene by heteroatoms (N, B, P, and S) is a feasible approach to fine-tune its electronic structure and chemical/electrochemical properties. As such, the electrocatalytic properties for the HER may be promoted remarkably by heteroatom doping153 (Fig. 16A). A comprehensive work on the effects of heteroatom dopants in graphene on the HER activity was performed by Qiao's group.154 They designed and synthesized N, P, S, B, O, F doped or dual-doped graphene as metal-free electrocatalysts for the HER. DFT results indicated that N and P could coactivate adjacent C atoms of the graphene matrix by adjusting the valence orbital energy level. It was found that dual-doped graphenes had higher HER activities than corresponding single-doped ones. Besides graphene, other carbon materials such as activated CNTs,155 B doped multi-walled CNTs,156 N doped hexagonal carbon,157 N-doped activated carbon,158 poly(3,4-dinitrothiophene)/CNT159 and mesoporous crystalline silicon160 were also reported as effective water electrolysis catalysts, and some of them showed comparable properties to those of traditional metallic catalysts.
 Fig. 16  (A) Polarization curves of N-microporous graphene (N-MPG), microporous graphene (MPG), N-graphene (N-G) and graphene (G) electrodes from ref. 153 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Polarization curves of C3N4, N-graphene and their composites from ref. 161 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (C) HER activity comparison of S. aureus derived carbon catalysts and common N-graphene, reduced graphene, Pt/C, reprinted with permission from ref. 163, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) HER activity of carbon catalysts derived from human hair at different pyrolysis temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon nitride (C3N4), which has a similar 2D crystal structure to that of graphene, is considered as another promising low-cost electrocatalyst for the HER. For pure C3N4, it has an onset potential of as low as 100 mV in alkaline solution, but its current density is also low. To solve this problem, combining C3N4 with graphene and design of co-nitrides with other atoms has attracted much research attention. Zheng et al.161 coupled carbon nitride with N-doped graphene to produce a hybrid electrocatalyst, and found that it needed a 240 mV overpotential to afford a 10 mA cm−2 current density (Fig. 16B). This good activity was rationalized by DFT calculations, which indicated that the chemical and electronic coupling of C3N4 with graphene could synergistically promote H adsorption. Rao et al.162 reported borocarbonitride catalysts with high activity. Especially, carbon-rich ones (BC7N2) only required a 56 mV onset potential and 70 mV overpotential to achieve 10 mA cm−2 current density, close to Pt catalysts.
Metal-free catalysts derived from biomass have also been considered. As we know, there may be many kinds of metal impurities in biomass materials and the impurities may be transformed to metal oxides or carbides in the catalyst preparation process. Chen et al.163 obtained N and P functionalized carbon materials from bacterium which were further treated by ZnCl2 salt. This kind of catalyst demonstrated a low onset overpotential of 76 mV and a Tafel slope of 58.4 mV dec−1 (Fig. 16C). N and S co-doped porous carbon materials derived from peanut root nodules164 and human hair165 were also reported. Both of them showed a very high surface area (513.3 and 535.2 m2 g−1) and good electroactivity similar to commercial Pt electrodes. Fig. 16D shows the attractive carbon catalysts derived from human hair, which needed less than a 100 mV overpotential to afford a 10 mA cm−2 current density. This work provide a unique paradigm for the synthesis of highly efficient catalysts from abundant biomass.
4. Catalysts for the OER
As discussed above, the OER has a more remarkable overpotential than hydrogen evolution due to the complex four-electron oxidation process. To date, effective catalysts for decreasing the OER overpotential of water splitting have been mainly Ru and Ir based catalysts. As demonstrated by Cherevko's group,26 the OER activity of Ru and Ir based catalysts decreases as Ru > Ir ≈ RuO2 > IrO2 and the onset potentials are 120, 127, 135, and 147 mV, respectively. However the dissolution of the catalysts increases as IrO2 ≪ RuO2 < Ir ≪ Ru, and the dissolution of metals is 2–3 orders of magnitude higher compared to their corresponding oxides. Just like other noble metals, the price and scarcity of Ru and Ir based catalysts impedes their large-scale applications. A great deal of effort and progress have been devoted to develop OER catalysts with low-cost materials or a reduced amount of Ir(Ru). Some non-precious metals such as Sn, Cu and La were doped on Ir(Ru) catalysts.19,20 Sui et al. prepared alloyed CuIr nanocages with the help of a Cu nanoparticle template.166 This alloy not only significantly reduced the amount of Ir but also remarkably enhanced its catalytic activity by forming a unique nanocage structure and tuning the d-band structure of Ir. In the ACIWE field, Ir and Ru-based catalysts have been widely studied. However, in the ALKWE field, researchers pay more attention to low cost materials based on TMs because these catalysts show comparable if not even better performance than noble metals and reveal adequate chemical and mechanical stability. Regarding low-cost OER catalysts, Ni and Co based materials are considered as the promising selection since they show a comparable activity to noble metal oxides for ALKWE. Boettcher et al.167 synthesized NiOx, FeOx, CoOx, MnOx, NiyCo1−yOx, Ni0.9Fe0.1Ox and IrOx films and subsequently compared their OER electrocatalytic properties. They found that NiOx and Ni0.9Fe0.1Ox catalysts showed better activity than IrOx; especially in alkaline media, the activity of Ni0.9Fe0.1Ox was one order of magnitude higher than that for IrOx films. Recently, a huge combinatorial screening of nearly 3500 trimetallic oxides was done by Stahl and co-workers.168 As shown in Fig. 17, some valuable trends and promising catalysts have been found, in which Co and Ni are essential elements for designing low-overpotential OER catalysts. It is reported that after incorporation of foreign metal ions, the activity of single Co or Ni metal oxide can be enhanced. In particular, Ni–Fe oxides containing a third metal (e.g., Ni–Fe–Al, Ni–Fe–Ga, and Ni–Fe–Cr) were proven to be highly effective catalysts.
 Fig. 17  Maximal average activity of cobalt- and nickel-containing triads and dyads from ref. 168, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Substrate as another important factor for OER activity has often been overlooked. Bell et al.169 found that the turnover frequency of the OER indicated by Co3O4 submonolayer on Au substrate was 40 times higher than that for bulk Co3O4 and Ir. The OER activity of Co3O4 deposited on different subtracts decreased in the order Au > Pt > Pd > Cu > Co. It is considered that the high OER activity of the Co3O4/Au composite was attributed to the high oxidation state of the CoIV cations which is believed to be essential for the OER occurring. However, it should be noted that this “substrate effect” is only applicable for very thin films. At higher coverages, the activity approaches bulk Co3O4 activity. Recently, Jaramillo and coworkers170 systematically investigated interactions between metal oxides (MnO4) and noble metals (Au, Pd, Pt and Ag), and found that the activity enhancement of a MnO4 layer on Au was likely from the Au/Mn interface sites, and the loss of this activity enhancement with thicker films was likely due to the blocking of these interfacial sites. In their following work,171 it was found that the existence of Au in MnOx led to an order of magnitude higher TOF than that of pure MnOx catalysts.
4.1 Co-based OER catalysts
Metallic Co is a promising catalyst selection for the OER. However, even though some endeavours have been devoted to synthesizing highly stable metallic Co nanoparticles,172 Co metal is still unstable at high anodic potentials. In order to exploit highly efficient alternative OER electrocatalysts, numerous Co based catalysts such as metal oxides,173 hydro(oxy)oxides,173–175 perovskites,176 sulfides,177,178 nitride179 and phosphates180 have been studied. CoSx, CoNx and CoPx materials have exhibited superior HER electrocatalytic activity,23 but they have also attracted tremendous attention for OER application because of their exceptional 3d electronic configurations.181 Li et al.180 demonstrated good HER and OER performances of hollow polyhedral CoP in both acidic and alkaline environments. Liu et al.178 found that Ti mesh supported CoS2 nanosheets exhibited a high current density of 300 mA cm−2 at an applied potential of 1.7 V vs. RHE.
Recently, Switzer et al.173 deposited Co(OH)2 microcones on Au-coated glass substrates by an electrochemical method, which were easily oxidized to CoOOH, and the as-prepared CoOOH film was then converted to Co3O4 by thermal decomposition. As a result, Co3O4 showed better OER activity than Co(OH)2 and CoOOH precursors with a Tafel slope of 60 mV dec−1. Cobalt has several oxide types with different cobalt valencies, but the abundant and diversiform d-orbital endowed Co3O4 phase has more active sites for electrocatalytic water splitting.182 Recently, many efforts have been devoted to the controllable synthesis of cobalt oxides, and diverse structures and morphologies, i.e. nanoparticles,183,184 nanorods,184 nanosheets185 and porous nanostructures,186 have been fabricated via electrochemical and chemical routes. These studies indicate that the nanostructure and crystalline phase of the cobalt oxides should be the critical factors to influence their properties. Thus, the precise design of cobalt oxide with various crystallographic nanostructures is mainly considered. Thermal synthesis was found to be a good way to obtain cobalt oxides with novel morphologies. Li et al.185 synthesized Co3O4 with nanocube, nanobelt and nanosheet shapes via a hydrothermal strategy combined with thermal treatment (Fig. 18A–C). One can see that Co3O4 with different microstructure exposed diverse planes, i.e., [112] in the nanosheets, [011] in the nanobelts, and [001] in the nanocubes, respectively. Fig. 18D–G shows spinel cobalt oxides prepared by Chen's group,183 and it can be seen that Co3O4 has well-defined cubic and octahedral morphologies. They proved that the obtained Co3O4 had predominantly exposed [100] and [111] planes, and with the increase in the proportion of the [111] surfaces, a higher catalytic activity was obtained since there are more cobalt ions on the (111) surface. Yan et al.184 also prepared Co3O4 nanorods and nanocubes with well-defined crystal structures using a thermal method, and found that rod-like Co3O4 exhibited a superior OER catalytic activity in alkaline electrolytes. In addition, the current density indicated that the [110] plane is more active than the [100] plane. Recently, facile and controllable electrochemical methods were developed to synthesize a Co(OH)2 precursor and then transform it to Co3O4. Our group187 systematically compared Co3O4 electrodes prepared by four kinds of electrodeposition methods with different deposition and calcination conditions. As revealed by SEM images (Fig. 19), Co3O4 nanosheets obtained using a unipolar pulse electro-deposition (UPED) method showed a more uniform structure on carbon rods and higher catalytic activity when compared with those prepared using a common cyclic voltammetry (CV) method, potentiostatic method (PM) and pulse potentiostatic method (PPM). Moreover, the OER over it needed an overpotential of 275 mV, which resulted in a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the electrocatalytic activity of Co3O4 can be enhanced by incorporating additional metal (Li, Cu, Ni, Co, and Fe) into the oxide. For instance, Zhao et al.188 studied the synergistic effects of Fe and Ni incorporated Co3O4 for the OER. In the case of Fe incorporated Co3O4, a significantly enlarged BET surface area and an improved electrical conductivity were obtained with a high OER catalytic activity. Nikolov et al.189 compared the electrochemical properties of binary metal (Li, Ni, Cu) doped Co3O4 and found that the activity increased in the order Co3O4 < NixCo3−xO4 ≪ CuxCo3−xO4 < LixCo3−xO4.
 Fig. 18  TEM images and structure model of a typical Co3O4 nanosheet (A), Co3O4 nanobelt (B), and Co3O4 nanocube (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. SEM images of (D) Co3O4 nanocubes, (E) truncated nanocubes, (F) truncated nanooctahedra, and (G) nanooctahedra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 19  SEM images of Co(OH)2 films and corresponding Co3O4 films prepared by CV (A1 and A2), PM (B1 and B2), PPM (C1 and C2), UPED (D1 and D2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 187, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Choreographed precursors or templates were also found to be helpful for designing the microstructure of ion doped Co3O4. In the work of Asefa et al.,190 a metal-embedded graphitic C3N4 with a 3D network nanostructure was used to synthesize Ni-doped Co3O4. Here, the network structure of the C3N4 template not only improved the catalytic activity of the complex but also efficiently prevented the formation of aggregation/agglomeration. In another work,191 a Cu2O template was employed to design NiCo2O4 nanosheets with an octahedral cage array. Attributed to the nanocage array and Ni incorporation, the NiCo2O4 catalyst showed a much better performance than Co3O4 nanocages or NiCo2O4 nanoparticles.
Despite the results from DFT calculations indicating that Cu doping had a negative impact on the improvement of the Co3O4 activity, Cu incorporated Co3O4 with an enhanced performance was reported by the groups of Wu192 and Bikkarolla.193 The catalytic activity of CuxCo3−xO4 was found to be highly dependent on the Cu doping amount, and the optimized molar ratio was Cu0.7Co2.3O4. Also, the incorporation of Cu into a Co3O4 spinel lattice efficiently improved the OER activity and electrochemical stability, and decreased the charge transport resistance. Besides the spinel microstructure, sheet-like Co3O4 was also used as a doping receptor. For instance, hierarchical CoMoO4 nanosheets with a flower array were successfully assembled.194 Due to the high surface area and intersectant architecture of the nanosheets, the catalyst exhibited a much higher current density and lower onset overpotential than that of pure Co3O4.
Coupling Co-based catalysts with catalytic or conductive materials is another viable and efficient way to further enhance the catalytic and conductive performance. To date, various catalytic materials such as Co2MnO4,195 NiCo2O4,196 CoxFe3−xO4,197 SnO2,198 and NiO2 (ref. 199) were employed to enhance the performance of Co3O4 or build a 3D heterostructure. Tour and co-worker199 deposited amorphous binary nickel and cobalt oxide layers on it using an electrochemical method, and obtained a good OER activity (∼325 mV overpotential@10 mA cm−2 current density with ∼39 mV dec−1 Tafel slope), which was rationalized by its high porous morphologies and amorphous structure. Recently, Co based catalysts with more rational 3D core/shell heterostructures have also attracted considerable attention due to their high surface area, and fast electron and electrolyte transfer ability. Gu et al.197 fabricated a hierarchical Co3O4@CoxFe3−xO4 core/shell structure on Ni foam where CoxFe3−xO4 sheets served as the shell and Co3O4 nanowires as the core. This kind of porous heterostructure had a large surface area and good conductivity, and revealed a high activity (390 mV overpotential@150 mA cm−2) due to the intrinsic good catalytic properties of CoxFe3−xO4. Our group employed a facile UPED process combined with thermal oxidation to fabricate CuO/Co3O4 composites with various novel morphologies.200 Especially, as shown in Fig. 20, a CuO pillar@Co3O4 nanosheet core/shell 3D hierarchical structure with a sea anemone-like array was formed and exhibited remarkable catalytic activity for the OER with an overpotential of as low as 227 mV to drive 10 mA cm−2. It is considered that the good catalytic activity should be benefit from the following aspects: (i) the direct growth of the Cu/Co(OH)2 precursor by one-step electrodeposition ensured a good interface connection between different components and substrate; (ii) the reasonable core/shell architecture greatly augmented the contact areas between the active sites and electrolyte, and the porous Co3O4 nanosheets facilitated charge and ion diffusion; (iii) the open spaces between neighboring branches are good for diffusion of electrolyte and generation of gas.
 Fig. 20  (A) SEM images of a CuO/Co3O4 composite and (B) polarization curves of a CuO/Co3O4 composite and the corresponding pure one. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Different to the HER, conductive carbon and metal materials are more easily corroded at a high oxidization potential in alkaline solution. Although metal substrates such as Ni, Cu and Fe have higher corrosion resistance with an increase in the pH value, serious electrochemical corrosion and contamination still occur. In general, carbon can be thermodynamically oxidized at a potential of 207 mV.201 However, due to kinetic hindrances, carbon can bear stronger corrosion above 1100 mV. In carbon materials, CNTs and graphene have better chemical and electrochemical corrosion resistance and are widely used to design 3D microstructures for OER electrodes.202 Yang et al.203 supported CoFe2O4 on N and S dual doped reduced graphene oxide networks, marked as CFO/NS-rGO. Due to the covalent coupling of CFO and NS-rGO as well as the 3D hierarchical porous structure, good catalytic activities were exhibited for the OER. Moreover, it was found that its activity can be fine-tuned by adjusting the N/S doping amount and CFO catalyst loading amount. Yan et al.204 anchored cobalt carbonate hydroxide hydrate nanosheets into oxidized multiwalled CNTs in virtue of diethylenetriamine, and found that the as-prepared composite was an efficient electrocatalyst toward the OER with a low onset overpotential of ∼240 mV and a 51 mV dec−1 Tafel slope.
4.2 Nickel-based OER catalysts
Ni-based catalysts are one of the most promising alternatives to catalyze the OER owing to their advantages of low cost and abundant reserves. Oxides and hydroxides are considered as the most efficient nickel-based catalysts for the OER. Recently, nickel phosphide,205 sulfides206 and selenides207 also attracted considerable attention since some interesting results were obtained. As discussed above, nickel sulfides are efficient HER catalysts. However, for OER application, a low onset potential was also revealed, but their current densities were not satisfactory. Du et al.205 firstly studied the electrocatalytic activity of Ni2P nanowires for the OER, and found that with CV continuous scanning, the current density was increased while the onset potential was reduced, indicating that Ni2P nanowires were the catalyst precursor and the electroactive species were formed subsequently. Matranga and co-worker208 designed an organometallic Ni6(PET)12 (PET = phenylethyl thiol) complex with crystal structure, and confirmed a large number of electrochemically accessible active sites by turnover frequency determination (70 s−1@2 V vs. RHE). Based on DFT calculations, it was found that the small adjustment in the adsorbate binding structure can change the determining step during the OER process and the onset potential.
As already discussed above, nickel oxides and hydroxides are promising electrocatalysts and Ni(OH)2 can be easily obtained by chemical or electrochemical methods. As illustrated in Fig. 21, hydrous α-Ni(OH)2 can be formed spontaneously when metallic nickel is immersed in an alkaline media. Then, it can be aged and converted to anhydrous β-Ni(OH)2 in base or in a vacuum environment.209 Moreover, at a high anodic potential (above 450 mV vs. Hg/HgO reference), α-Ni(OH)2 and β-Ni(OH)2 can be oxidized to γ-NiOOH and β-NiOOH respectively, then β-NiOOH can be further converted to γ-NiOOH at a potential above 600 mV.210 Generally, β-NiOOH shows better electrocatalytic activity than that of γ-NiOOH. However, the reason for the apparent higher activity is still not clear and it is still controversial as to whether β-NiOOH is a true catalyst or a catalyst precursor. Bell et al.210 utilized in situ Raman spectroscopy to identify the composition of the oxide layer, and found that the initial γ-NiOOH was aged to β-NiOOH film by electrochemical cycling which was about 3-fold more active than the former one. It is proposed that the OER active species might not be β-NiOOH since unidentified oxide was observed during oxidation. Wang et al.211 demonstrated a new strategy to synthesize β-Ni(OH)2 from NiGa LDH nanoplate precursors by selectively etching away Ga3+ ions, which was then further converted to NiSe2 using a solution method. During the conversion, the catalyst maintained a plate-like nanostructure, and the etching process resulted in porous nanosheets of β-Ni(OH)2 and NiSe2 catalysts. Benefiting from the advantage of the porous nanostructure, the obtained β-Ni(OH)2 and NiSe2 showed good activity for electrocatalytic OER and HER, respectively.
 Fig. 21  Schematic of redox transformation of Ni(OH)2/NiOOH materials from ref. 209, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In order to further improve the OER catalytic activity, a combination of Ni-based catalyst with transition metal is a feasible solution. For decades, numerous studies have indicated that Fe is the most compatible element for combining with nickel-based catalysts to enhance the OER activity. To date, various Ni–Fe bimetallic electrocatalysts, including NiFe oxides,212 NiFe hydroxides213 and NiFe oxyhydroxides214 have been widely and deeply studied as OER electrocatalysts. Especially, NiFe hydroxide nanosheets have attracted considerable attention, which can be easily synthesized using chemical or electrochemical methods. As demonstrated by Lu et al.,213 amorphous Ni–Fe hydroxide nanosheets prepared using a potentiostatic method had a high surface area and fast electron transport properties. In 10 M KOH solution, Ni–Fe hydroxide showed a high current density of 500 mA cm−2 at a 240 mV overpotential. Nickel oxides and oxyhydroxides as other popular hosts of foreign iron dopants have attracted considerable attention. Bell et al.214 reported that Ni–Fe oxyhydroxide with about 40% Fe exhibited several orders of magnitude higher OER activity than the corresponding Ni and Fe-based films. However it should be noted that the optimal amount of Fe dopant was controversial in published work, the composites with the best OER catalytic activity were also revealed at 10% (ref. 215) or 25% (ref. 212) Fe content. Especially, Friebel et al.212 claimed that the state of existing Fe in Ni–Fe oxides was highly dependent on the content. When the Fe amount was below 25%, Ni was substituted by Fe cations and the oxidized catalyst was in the form of γ-Ni1−xFexOOH, and with the increase in Fe content, the activity increased. However, if the Fe doping amount was increased above 25%, the γ-FeOOH phase could nucleate instead. As shown in Fig. 22, theoretical overpotentials of Fe sites in pure or doped γ-NiOOH and γ-FeOOH materials were much lower than those of Ni sites. In addition, supported by DFT calculations, they found that Fe sites in Ni1−xFexOOH rather than Ni sites were active sites for water oxidation. Recently, Ni–Fe oxides containing a third metal were also reported to be able to further enhance OER activity. Among them, ternary Ni–Fe–Co,216 Ni–Fe–Al,217 Ni–Fe–Ga,168 and Ni–Fe–Cr168 are the most attractive ones. Mukerjee et al.216 considered that the charge transfer of Co cations could influence the formation of a conductive NiOOH phase, and that the NiOOH phase was a prerequisite for activating Fe sites; on the other hand, the existence of Co may adjust the Ni and Fe local geometry, thus it optimized the bond strength of Fe–OH/OOH. Stahl et al.217 believed that the Al atoms of Ni–Fe–Al oxides should play an important role in binding and activating water molecules during O–O bond formation and/or adjusting Ni redox properties.
 Fig. 22  (a) OER pathway and intermediates. (b) Theoretical OER overpotentials of Ni and Fe sites in pure and doped γ-NiOOH and γ-FeOOH materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Despite Fe sites in Ni–Fe based catalysts being considered as the active sites for the OER, the roles of Fe in Ni-based electrocatalysts are controversial. In early reports,218 a trace of iron impurity (0.01%) introduced from the electrolyte or co-precipitated into thin film nickel oxide electrodes would remarkably affect the OER activity of nickel oxide electrodes. Recently, Boettcher et al.219 did a strict piece of work about exploring the role of iron incorporation in nickel–iron oxyhydroxide, and found that after Fe incorporation, the conductivity of NiOOH could be increased over 30 fold. However, they considered that this is not the main reason for the activity increasing. Based on TOF results related to the film thickness, it was found that Fe co-deposited films showed a Fe-induced partial-charge transfer mechanism, which can activate Ni centres throughout the catalyst film. They also found that the absorption of Fe impurities was responsible for the dramatic increase in the activity of aged Ni(OH)2/NiOOH, which disproves the long-held view that β-NiOOH is intrinsically more active for the OER than γ-NiOOH. Hence, more efforts are necessary to better understand the effect of Fe doping.
4.3 LDH-based OER catalysts
Layered double hydroxides, which belong to hydrotalcite-like compounds, are a large group of 2D anionic clay materials, whose chemical formula can be represented by the following general formula220[M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2]x+[Ax/n]n·mH2O.
As shown in Fig. 23, LDHs built from the stacking of brucite-like octahedral layers where M2+ cations (Ni2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, Mg2+, or Zn2+etc.) are coordinated octahedrally by hydroxyl groups, but a fraction of divalent metal cations are substituted isomorphously by M3+ cations (Fe3+, Al3+, Mn3+, Cr3+, In3+, Ga3+etc.), the resulting positive layer charge and compensating solvated anions (An−). Here, the value of x is generally in the range 0.2–0.33 which is equal to the molar ratio of M3+: (M2+ + M3+).
 Fig. 23  Structural model of a typical LDH with different M2+/M3+ molar ratio from ref. 220, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Especially, metallic cations from the transition group can enhance the charge transport of the material. The charge transport process could be realized as following: an “electron hopping” along the layers occurs owing to an inner redox reaction of the M2+ and M3+ couple, and a migration of anions inside the interlayers to compensate the positive extra charge.221 To date, a huge amount of LDHs have been developed for electrochemical supercapacitors, electrochemical sensors and electrocatalysts.219 In particular, various LDHs such as binary MgAl, NiAl, ZnAl, CoAl, MgGa, NiGa, ZnGa, ZnCo, CoCo, CoFe, NiCo, NiFe and LiFe and ternary FeNiCo, NiFeMn220–233 have been devoted to promote water oxidization. Hu et al.222 found that CoMn LDH nanoplates had a high OER activity, and their turnover frequency was more than 20 times higher than Co and Mn oxides and hydroxides and 9 times higher than a precious IrO2 catalyst. Jiang et al.223 synthesized low-cost NiCo-LDH nanosheets with an onset overpotential of 290 mV. Revealed by a comparison histogram, the NiCo-LDH showed a higher activity than those of Ni(OH)2, Co(OH)2 and NiCo(OH)4 as well as those of published ZnCo, CoFe and CoNi LDH materials.
LDH materials containing iron have generally exhibited excellent activity for the OER. To date, many researchers have compared the OER activity of NiFe LDH with other LDH materials in different categories. For instance, Shao et al.224 compared a NiFe LDH with CoFe and LiFe LDH materials; Song et al.225 compared a NiFe LDH with CoCo and NiCo LDHs; Tonelli et al.226 compared a NiFe LDH with NiAl, CoFe and CoAl LDHs. All this work indicated that NiFe LDHs showed the best properties among various LDH materials. Sun et al.227 demonstrated outstanding performance NiFe-LDH nanosheets with a low onset overpotential of 230 mV and a low overpotential of 250 mV@10 mA cm−2 with a low Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1.
As shown in Fig. 23, the hydroxyl groups of the LDH layers are oriented toward the interlayer region which can form hydrogen bonds between the interlayer anions and water molecules. It should be noted that LDH materials have relatively weak interlayer bonding. Thus, it is possible to expand the inter-layer distance in LDHs with the assistance of anions and some small organic molecules. Song et al.225 did a typical work about the intercalation and exfoliation of LDH materials. In their work, they claimed that increasing the inter-layer distance is a prerequisite for successful exfoliation. As shown in Fig. 24A, a representative NiFe LDH with CO32− anions, and a CoCo LDH and NiCo LDH with Br− anions were prepared and the interlayer spaces were further extended by anion exchange. Specifically, NiFe LDH was dipped into ClO4− concentrated aqueous solutions while CoCo LDH and NiCo LDH were immersed into NO3− solutions. Revealed from XRD results (Fig. 24B), the inter-layer distance of the NiFe LDH increased from 7.7 to 9.1 Å while the distance of the CoCo and NiCo LDHs increased from 7.8 to 8.7 Å. The enlarged interlayer space after anion exchange was found to be more easily exfoliated to single-layer nanosheets in the following purged formamide dispersion. The OER activity measurement indicated that at 10 mA cm−2 current density the overpotentials of LDHs were decreased by 40–54 mV after exfoliation and the current densities at 300 mV overpotentials were enhanced by 2.6-, 3.4- and 4.5-fold after exfoliations of CoCo, NiCo and NiFe LDHs, respectively (Fig. 24C). Moreover, the exfoliated LDH nanosheets also reflected reduced Tafel slopes, which were decreased from 59, 65 and 67 mV per decade to 45, 41 and 40 mV per decade for CoCo, NiCo and NiFe LDHs, respectively.
 Fig. 24  (A) Schematic of the exfoliation of LDH materials. (B) OER activity comparison of NiFe LDH, NiCo LDH, CoCo LDH and corresponding exfoliated ones (C) XRD spectra of original LDHs, ions intercalated LDHs and exfoliated LDHs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Sun et al.228 reported a ternary LDH containing Ni, Fe and Mn cations, which showed better OER activity than for NiFe LDH and commercial Ir/C catalysts. It is considered that the Mn4+ ions doped into the laminate of the layered structure can adjust the electronic structure and subsequently improve the electric conductivity. Their work provided a strategy for transition metal doping to increase the performance of LDHs. Other multi-transition metal based LDHs were also synthesized by Yang et al.229via controlling the ratio of tri- and bi-valent ions. The as-prepared FeNiCo LDH showed advanced catalytic activity for the OER with a low onset overpotential of 210 mV. In addition, the catalytic kinetics of the FeNiCo LDH improved with an increase in the Co incorporation due to the increased specific surface area, reduced charge transfer resistance and improved activity.
As discussed above, NiFe-based LDHs have a superior activity which are even comparable to the best noble catalysts toward the OER. However, they usually show an unsatisfactory conductivity and their 2D microstructure limits the specific surface area per geometric area. To solve these problems, nanoarray architectures on conductive substrates or assistance by conductive carbon materials were considered. Sun et al.230 assembled NiCoFe LDH nanoplates on a Co based nanowire array with a small size, large surface area, and high porosity. As expected, the core/shell nanoarray electrode showed enhanced catalytic activity compared with the corresponding pure LDH nanoparticles and nanowire arrays, and only a small overpotential of 257 mV was required for an 80 mA cm−2 current density. Feng et al.231 designed a ternary hierarchical composite consisting of Co0.85Se nanosheets, exfoliated graphene foil and NiFe LDH, which had a high surface area of 156 m2 g−1 and a strong coupling effect. The obtained composite electrode showed a greatly enhanced performance compared to the commercial Ir/C electrode with a high current density of 100 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. RHE.
Despite the potential oxidization corrosion of carbon, conductive carbon materials such as CNTs, graphene, and carbon quantum dot are ideal partners for LDH materials. It is found that with the assistance of a carbon support the conventional planar structure of LDH materials can be rebuilt to a 3D architecture with a high active surface area.232,233 A typical work was conducted by Shi et al.232 As shown in Fig. 25A and B, the reduced graphene was immobilized vertically on the surface of the electrode at first and then, the NiFe LDH nanosheets were immobilized on graphene modified substrates by electrochemical deposition. Thanks to the 3D interpenetrating network, the NiFe LDH/graphene showed an electrochemically active surface area 3.3 times that of conventional planar materials. This electrode also demonstrated a higher activity than a precious IrO2 electrode for the OER in alkaline environment (Fig. 25C). Liu et al.233 used carbon quantum dots as a support for depositing NiFe LDH nanoplates. Revealed from SEM and TEM images, the resulting composite showed a 3D complex sheet-particle structure. As a result, this composite also exhibited excellent electroactivity for the OER with an overpotential of ∼235 mV to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 25  (A) Scheme of the fabrication of the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene electrode. (B) Side view of the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene composite. (C) Polarization curves of IrO2 and the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Conclusions and remarks
Water electrolysis to hydrogen and oxygen is one alternative way to store the unstable electricity generated by renewable energy such as solar, wind and tide energy. To promote the efficiency of water electrolysis and reduce the cost, the key is to develop highly-efficient, low cost electrocatalysts with a low overpotential as well as low Tafel slope for the HER and OER.
To date, PGM catalysts have shown excellent performance for both the HER and OER. However, to maximize the rational utilization of these rare resources, noble metals with nanostructure and/or controllable crystal forms have been well studied to obtain a better performance than commercial ones. Deposition of a PGM monolayer on a low-cost support is an alternative way to reduce utilization amount as well as enhance the properties. Based on the well-understood rate-limiting step of water splitting thermodynamics over noble metal electrodes, modifying, compositing or alloying PGMs with specified materials on purpose have resulted in improving the performance by orders of magnitude. Especially, Ni(OH)2 and NiO have been found to play a promoting role in water dissociation by enhancing the formation rate of Had intermediates of the Volmer process on the Pt surface.
In recent years, more attention has been focused on replacing PGM catalysts with low cost non-noble materials and non-metal materials. Various efficient tactics have been considered to enhance the performance of non-precious catalysts. Especially, by designing and fabricating catalysts with nanostructures to increase the surface area, active sites and conductivity, various nanostructured catalysts with various morphologies using various physical, chemical or electrochemical nanotechnologies have been developed. Furthermore, various MOFs, conductive supports and well-designed precursor templates have been employed to prepare special microstructures for non-noble metal electrocatalysts. Even so, non-precious metal catalysts generally show a lower activity and stability than PGMs. Thus, fine-tuning the crystal structure by foreign element doping or alloying has been attempted to obtain a noble metal-like electronic distribution. It is expected that electrocatalysts can be obtained with noble metal-like properties.
Although many achievements in noble-metal free HER and OER catalysts have been reported, the obtained electrocatalysts still suffer from some serious issues when it comes to large-scale applications. Even though some of them have shown comparable activity with commercial PGM electrodes, their long-term stability and large scale fabrication cannot reach the level of state-of-the-art PGM-based electrodes. Electrodes for a practical process should have excellent electrochemical and mechanical durability, which can be maintained for at least several years. Furthermore, coating the electrocatalysts on the electrodes always leads to a poor connective interface between the catalyst and substrate, especially for electrodes with a large area. In addition, electrodes including carbon supports (CNTs, graphene) and some 3D microstructures (core–shell nanostructure) with excellent performance often have unsatisfactory mechanical stability. Therefore, the process of electrode preparation should be improved eagerly.
Furthermore, chemical and electrochemical corrosion are also full of challenges. In general, non-precious pure metallic catalysts and many alloys suffer acidic corrosion for the HER in acid solution. More serious corrosion phenomena always occurs during the OER. At high anodic potentials, both the catalyst and substrate will be in higher oxidation states. As already discussed, Ni can be oxidized to Ni(OH)2 and NiOOH during the OER, and carbon will be oxidized above 1.1 V vs. RHE. Thus, improving the chemical and/or electrochemical corrosions of HER and OER catalysts as well as their support/substrate is also an urgent issue.
To date, for HER and OER catalysts, they are usually studied respectively. In order to reveal a good performance, the HER is generally conducted in acid solution while the OER in an alkaline environment. Thus, when they are combined in a water electrolysis system, many serious problems could occur: low activity, poor stability or low corrosion resistance. Therefore, in future studies, it will be necessary to evaluate the electrocatalysts in both acid and alkaline solutions. Fortunately, this issue has attracted some groups' attentions. For instances, Bard et al.234 evaluated four kinds of materials, i.e., IrO2, Co3O4, Co–Pi and Pt materials as OER catalysts in acidic, neutral and alkaline solutions, and found that all of the materials showed a high activity at high pH values. McCrory et al.235 studied ten kinds of metal oxides as OER catalysts in various solutions, and found that those non-noble metal systems achieved 10 mA cm−2 current density at operating overpotentials between 350 and 430 mV in alkaline solution; however, except for IrOx, all the oxides were unstable under oxidative conditions in acidic solutions. In their following work236 18 HER and 26 OER electrocatalysts were investigated in solar water splitting devices. Among the HER catalysts, catalysts like Pt, NiMo, NiMoCo can operate at 10 mA cm−2 with overpotentials of <100 mV in acidic and/or alkaline solutions; however, for OER catalysts in acidic solution, only noble metal based materials showed promising activity and stability, whereas in alkaline solution many OER catalysts performed with similar activity. From now on, more efforts should be focused on evaluating HER and OER performance simultaneously in various environments for developed catalysts.
In other aspects, it is still a challenge for HER/OER catalysts to operate at high current densities, such as 2 A cm−2, in a water electrolyzer. To date, most HER and OER catalysts were studied at ≤10–100 mA cm−2 current densities in low-current devices. Most recent work on electrocatalysts has focused on integrating catalysts and evaluating them in low-current devices. On the other hand, it should be noted that high-current conditions require different electroanalytical techniques beyond CV and Tafel measurements to explain the mass-transport effect.237 Moreover, during the measurements, the generated O2 could diffuse into the cathode chamber where O2 will be reduced back to water with the generated hydrogen. This phenomenon will become worse at a high current density. In addition, the low maximum applied current density is also due to the high ohmic resistance of the liquid electrolyte and diaphragm.
An evaluation standard should be set up in order to compare different electrocatalysts. Here, some important aspects, i.e., standard electrolyte, standard geometric area on different shapes of electrodes (e.g. plane, wire, mesh, and foam), standard catalyst loading amount on electrode, standard current density, standard potential range and scan rate of polarization curve and so on. Also, a standard method to evaluate the electrochemical impedance and faradic efficiency should be also considered.
In summary, although many efforts have been devoted to develop and improve HER and OER catalysts, more research is still needed to enhance the performance of the developed catalysts and to develop new materials. In order to exploit more mature catalysts as the cathode and anode, research based on the requirement of practical applications and the combination of HER and OER investigations in one study require more attention.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by ZiQoo Chemical Incorporation. Japan. The authors also gratefully appreciate the assistance of group members of Professor Hao’s group at the Taiyuan University of Technology, China and Professor Guan’s Group at Hirosaki University, Japan.
Notes and references
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221–1250 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishida, N. Gokon, T. Hatamachi and T. Kodama, Energy Procedia, 2014, 49, 1970–1979 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lange, M. Roeb, C. Sattler and R. Pitz-Paal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 12108–12119 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ying, X. Zheng and G. Cui, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 115, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, L. Xu, L. Wang, D. Li, P. Zhang and S. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 773–783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Chen, C. Xu, K. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Zhou and K. Cen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 2215–2221 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 254–285 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. El-Emam, H. Ozcan and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 11168–11177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gannouni, I. Ben Assaker and R. Chtourou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 7252–7259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. S. Thind and A. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 63, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahmad, S. K. Kamarudin, L. J. Minggu and M. Kassim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria and Z. Mi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2801 CAS .
Q. Huang, Z. Ye and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15824–15837 CAS .
M. Bhatt and J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10632–10659 CAS .
H. Wu, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 81–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 476, 90–91 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Smolinka, M. Günther and J. Garche, NOW-Studie: Stand und Entwicklungspotenzial der Wasserelektrolyse zur Herstellung von Wasserstoff aus regenerativen Energien, Technical report, Fraunhofer ISE,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 CAS .
F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Cheng, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19764–19788 RSC .
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 CAS .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
F. Safizadeh, E. Ghali and G. Houlachi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 256–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bajdich, M. Garcia-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Nørskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521–13530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J.-P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255 CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Tian, L. Ma, C. Dai, C. Yang and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1676–1683 RSC .
Q. Lu, G. S. Hutchings, W. Yu, Y. Zhou, R. V. Forest, R. Tao, J. Rosen, B. T. Yonemoto, Z. Cao and H. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. M. Bockris and E. C. Potter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1952, 99, 169–186 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3571–3594 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Eliezer, Physical Electrochemistry, John Wiley, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z.-W. Qu, H. Zhu, G.-J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2439–2450 RSC .
S. Guo and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 240–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and C. M. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7016–7031 RSC .
S. Bai, C. Wang, M. Deng, M. Gong, Y. Bai, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12120–12124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Markovic, B. N. Grgur and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5405–5413 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gómez, J. M. Orts, B. A. lvarez-Ruiz and J. M. Feliu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 228–238 CrossRef .
J. Chen, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 81–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Regmi, G. R. Waetzig, K. D. Duffee, S. M. Schmuecker, J. M. Thode and B. M. Leonard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10085–10091 CAS .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, Y. C. Kimmel and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3025–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Wang, H. Li, L. Li, G. Zhou, R. Yu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1404 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron and M. Mavrikakis, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miles and M. Thomason, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1459–1461 CrossRef CAS .
M. McArthur, L. Jorge, S. Coulombe and S. Omanovic, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jiménez, G. Ye, N. D. Kim, E. L. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin and J. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Soares, O. Teschke and I. Torriani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Raj, J. Mater. Sci., 1993, 28, 4375–4382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakšić, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1987, 12, 727–752 CrossRef .
J. R. McKone, B. F. Sadtler, C. A. Werlang, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Su, H. Aslan, J. Kibsgaard, S. Wendt, L. Meng, M. Dong, Y. Huang and F. Besenbacher, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rosalbino, D. Maccio, E. Angelini, A. Saccone and S. Delfino, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 403, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Müller, T. Rauscher, A. Schmidt, T. Schubert, T. Weißgärber, B. Kieback and L. Röntzsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 8926–8937 CrossRef .
C. I. Müller, K. Sellschopp, M. Tegel, T. Rauscher, B. Kieback and L. Röntzsch, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 196–206 CrossRef .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, A. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 12663–12666 CrossRef .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M.-C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M.-C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D.-Y. Wang and J. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lang, Y. Shi, J. Wang, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9098–9102 CAS .
M. Tavakkoli, T. Kallio, O. Reynaud, A. G. Nasibulin, C. Johans, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen and K. Laasonen, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4618–4621 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Z. Lun, G. Xia, F. Zheng, M. He and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3563–3571 CAS .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 CAS .
S. Wirth, F. Harnisch, M. Weinmann and U. Schröder, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .
R. Michalsky, Y.-J. Zhang and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1274–1278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, G. Guan, P. Phanthong, X. Li, J. Cao, X. Hao, Z. Wang and A. Abudula, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18803–18811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, Y. N. Regmi and B. M. Leonard, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 6525–6528 CrossRef .
C. Wan, N. A. Knight and B. M. Leonard, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10409–10411 RSC .
Y. Ma, G. Guan, X. Hao, Z. Zuo, W. Huang, P. Phanthong, K. Kusakabe and A. Abudula, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44175–44184 RSC .
Y. Ma, G. Guan, P. Phanthong, X. Hao, W. Huang, A. Tsutsumi, K. Kusakabe and A. Abudula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9485–9496 CAS .
C. Ge, P. Jiang, W. Cui, Z. Pu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri, A. Y. Obaid, X. Sun and J. Tian, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 182–186 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, C. Zhang, S. Xie, W. Hua, Y. Zhang, N. Ren, H. Xu and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5560–5562 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liao, S. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Bian, Y. Zhang, M. D. Scanlon, X. Hu, Y. Tang, B. Liu and H. H. Girault, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 387–392 CAS .
C. Tang, A. Sun, Y. Xu, Z. Wu and D. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, L. Yu, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, C.-H. Wang, K. Sasaki, N. Marinkovic, W. Xu, J. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. Adzic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 943–951 CAS .
D. H. Youn, S. Han, J. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Šljukić, M. Vujković, L. Amaral, D. Santos, R. Rocha, C. Sequeira and J. Figueiredo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15505–15512 Search PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, S. Iyer, S. Iyer, K. Sasaki, C.-H. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1818–1826 CAS .
S. Wang, J. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Bao, B. Xiao, D. Su, H. Li and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15753–15759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, H. Meng, M. Cai and P. K. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1954–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiong, L. Li, L. Zhang, W. Ding, L. Peng, Y. Wang, S. Chen, S. Tan and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1863–1867 CAS .
C. Wan and B. M. Leonard, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4281–4288 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
C. Ma, J. Sheng, N. Brandon, C. Zhang and G. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2824–2829 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Ham, R. Ganesan and J. S. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6865–6872 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, D. Wang, Z. Wu and B. Duan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 3229–3237 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Lin, O. Pitkänen, J. Mäklin, R. Puskas, A. Kukovecz, A. Dombovari, G. Toth and K. Kordas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14609–14616 CAS .
X. Fan, H. Zhou and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5125–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, E. Hu, L. Zhang, K. Sasaki, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18572–18577 CAS .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy and G. Eda, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Calandra, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 245428 CrossRef .
D. B. Putungan, S.-H. Lin and J.-L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21702–21708 RSC .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, F. Ma, Y. Jiao, E. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13124–13128 CAS .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Kumar, N. Chandrasekaran and K. L. Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5052–5055 RSC .
M.-R. Gao, M. K. Chan and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7493 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, X. Ge, Z. Liu, J.-Y. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12794–12798 CAS .
N. Liu, L. Yang, S. Wang, Z. Zhong, S. He, X. Yang, Q. Gao and Y. Tang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 588–594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, W. Huang, Q. Gong, C. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Li and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7860–7863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, L. Pang, Y. Zhang, X. Ren, H. Fan and S. F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10693–10697 CAS .
B. Seo, G. Y. Jung, Y. J. Sa, H. Y. Jeong, J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Kim, J. C. Kim, H. S. Shin, S. K. Kwak and S. H. Joo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3728–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4252–4255 RSC .
Y. Huang, Y.-E. Miao, L. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, J. Pan and T. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10673–10679 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, K. Du, Z. Li, M. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Sun, X. Zhang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27242–27253 CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
D.-Y. Wang, M. Gong, H.-L. Chou, C.-J. Pan, H.-A. Chen, Y. Wu, M.-C. Lin, M. Guan, J. Yang and C.-W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1587–1592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Long, G. Li, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Zhang, S. Xiao, W. Guo and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11900–11903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, Q. Ma, H. Fan, L. Pang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, X. Ren and S. F. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15997–16000 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Zhou, D. Xi, Z. Shi, C. He, H. Xia, G. Liu and G. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, F. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, M. Safdar and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8468–8476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, C. Liu, H. Ye, L. Hu, B. Fugetsu, W. Dai, Y. Cao, X. Qi, H. Lu and X. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, C. Zheng, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 653–659 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chang, C. T. Lin, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, W. Zhang, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, P. Liu, L. Chen, W. Cong, Y. Ito, J. Han, X. Guo, Z. Tang, T. Fujita and A. Hirata, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Gao, J. X. Liang, Y.-R. Zheng, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Gao, J. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Zhuo, K. Du, B. Chen, Z. Zhu, Y. Shao and M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3761–3766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
L. R. L. Ting, Y. Deng, L. Ma, Y.-J. Zhang, A. A. Peterson and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 861–867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2002–2011 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Carim, F. H. Saadi, M. P. Soriaga and N. S. Lewis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13835–13839 CAS .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14871–14878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shia and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
C. G. Read, J. F. Callejas, C. F. Holder and R. E. Schaak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12798–12803 CAS .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5427–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, H. Vrubel, M. Bensimonb and X. Hu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5917–5921 RSC .
A. R. J. Kucernak and V. N. N. Sundaram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17435–17445 CAS .
A. B. Laursen, K. R. Patraju, M. J. Whitaker, M. Retuerto, T. Sarkar, N. Yao, K. V. Ramanujachary, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1027–1034 CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3175–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. W. Roske, C. G. Read, J. C. Crompton, J. M. McEnaney, J. F. Callejas, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5420–5425 CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. Chena, Z. C. Lv, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, Z. Peng, Y. Zhao, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1454–1460 CAS .
M. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2158–2165 CAS .
J. Chang, L. Liang, C. Li, M. Wang, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2287–2295 RSC .
C. Deng, F. Ding, X. Li, Y. Guo, W. Ni, H. Yan, K. Sun and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 59–66 CAS .
S. Han, Y. Feng, F. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Yao, W. Zhao, F. Qiu, L. Yang, Y. Yao, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3899–3906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, X. Yu and U. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1633–1636 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 14661–14665 CrossRef .
W. Liu, E. Hu, H. Jiang, Y. Xiang, Z. Weng, M. Li, Q. Fan, X. Yu, E. I. Altman and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Xu, H. Rao, W. Xu, H. Chen, W. Zhang, D. Kuang and C. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1468–1475 CAS .
Y. Pan, N. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Lin, Y. Chen, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4745–4754 CAS .
D. Janas and K. Koziol, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3037–3045 RSC .
X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Z. Ao and G. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, Q. Liu, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9340–9342 RSC .
Y. Cheng, Y. Tian, X. Fan, J. Liu and C. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 143, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen, H. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Z. Wen, S. Ci, J. Chen and Z. He, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 49161–49164 RSC .
K. Xie, H. Wu, Y. Meng, K. Lu, Z. Wei and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 78–82 CAS .
F. Dai, J. Zai, R. Yi, M. L. Gordin, H. Sohn, S. Chen and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3605 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
M. Chhetri, S. Maitra, H. Chakraborty, U. V. Waghmare and C. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 95–101 CAS .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, K. Goh, W. Jiang, D. Yu, Ö. Birer, R. Jiang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7210–7214 CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Leng, W. Zhou, J. Huang, M. Zhao, J. Zhan, C. Feng, Z. Tang, S. Chen and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 357–366 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Yang, L. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Ke and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8840–8846 CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Sui, G. Xiao, X. Yang, Y. Wei, G. Zou and B. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19669–19673 CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Gerken, S. E. Shaner, R. C. Massé, N. J. Porubsky and S. S. Stahl, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2376–2382 CAS .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5587–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Seitz, T. J. P. Hersbach, D. Nordlund and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4178–4183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gorlin, C. Chung, J. D. Benck, D. Nordlund, L. Seitz, T. Weng, D. Sokaras, B. M. Clemens and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4920–4926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Q. Li, C. H. Wu, H. Zhu, A. Mendoza-Garcia, B. Shen, J. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7071–7074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Liu, J. A. Koza and J. A. Switzer, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, G. Du, S. Yang, C. Xu, M. Lu, Z. Liu and J. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12930–12936 CAS .
M. A. Sayeed, T. Herd and A. P. O'Mullane, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 991–999 CAS .
M. Xing, L.-B. Kong, M.-C. Liu, L.-Y. Liu, L. Kang and Y.-C. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18435–18443 CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Li, G. Li, F. Peng and H. Yu, Catal. Today, 2015, 245, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Liang, Q. Liu, X. Sun, Y. He and A. M. Asiri, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 92–96 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Y. Tong, X. Li, S. Tao, Z. Fang, W. Chu, X. Wu and C. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 3, 236–242 RSC .
M. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 2158–2165 Search PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mattioli, P. Giannozzi, A. Amore Bonapasta and L. Guidoni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15353–15363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. X. Kronawitter and B. E. Koel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29387–29393 RSC .
Y. Zhang, F. Ding, C. Deng, S. Zhen, X. Li, Y. Xue, Y.-M. Yan and K. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2015, 67, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16136–16137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, T. Tian, J. Jiang and L. Ai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Guan, X. Du, A. D. Jagadale, J. Cao, X. Hao, X. Ma and A. Abudula, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 76026–76031 RSC .
C. Xiao, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10122–10125 RSC .
I. Nikolov, R. Darkaoui, E. Zhecheva, R. Stoyanova, N. Dimitrov and T. Vitanov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 429, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, J. Su, R. Silva, A. Goswami, B. R. Sathe and T. Asefa, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7522–7524 RSC .
X. Lv, Y. Zhu, H. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Su, J. Huang, Y. Yao and C. Li, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 4148–4154 RSC .
X. Wu and K. Scott, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12344–12351 RSC .
S. K. Bikkarolla and P. Papakonstantinou, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 243–251 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Yu, L. X. Jiang and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14361–14364 RSC .
D. Wang, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5312–5315 RSC .
D. Pletcher, X. Li, S. W. Price, A. E. Russell, T. Sönmez and S. J. Thompson, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, D. Jia, Y. Peng, S. Song, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and D. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8882–8886 RSC .
S. Zhao, C. Li, J. Liu, N. Liu, S. Qiao, Y. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan, C. Xiang and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9518–9523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Guan, X. Du, J. Cao, X. Hao, X. Ma, A. D. Jagadale and A. Abudula, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15012–15014 RSC .

          F. N. Büchi, M. Inaba and T. J. Schmidt, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Durability, Springer Science and Business Media LLC, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Minguzzi, F.-R. F. Fan, A. Vertova, S. Rondinini and A. J. Bard, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 217–229 RSC .
W. Yan, X. Cao, J. Tian, C. Jin, K. Ke and R. Yang, Carbon, 2016, 99, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Xiao, X. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Xue, L. Jing, X. Zhai, Y.-M. Yan and K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 464–472 CrossRef CAS .
A. Han, H. Chen, Z. Sun, J. Xu and P. Du, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11626–11629 RSC .
W. Zhou, X.-J. Wu, X. Cao, X. Huang, C. Tan, J. Tian, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2921–2924 CAS .
A. T. Swesi, J. Masud and M. Nath, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1771–1782 CAS .
D. R. Kauffman, D. Alfonso, D. N. Tafen, J. Lekse, C. Wang, X. Deng, J. Lee, H. Jang, J.-s. Lee, S. Kumar and C. Matranga, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1225–1234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Klaus, Y. Cai, M. W. Louie, L. Trotochaud and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7243–7254 CAS .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8394–8400 CAS .
H. Liang, L. Li, F. Meng, L. Dang, J. Zhuo, A. Forticaux, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5702–5711 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng and R. Alonso-Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. C. Walsh and D. Pletcher, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1162–1167 RSC .
M. K. Bates, Q. Jia, H. Doan, W. Liang and S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 155–161 CrossRef .
J. Y. Chen, J. T. Miller, J. B. Gerken and S. S. Stahl, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1382–1386 CAS .
D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fan, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7040–7066 RSC .
E. Scavetta, M. Berrettoni, M. Giorgetti and D. Tonelli, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 2451–2461 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16481–16484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, A. Zhang, L. Li and L. Ai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 445–451 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Shao, H. An, Z. Wang, S. Xu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6624–6631 RSC .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CAS .
Y. Vlamidis, E. Scavetta, M. Gazzano and D. Tonelli, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 653–660 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, W. Zhu, Q. Yang, X. Lei, J. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sun and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6479–6482 RSC .
Z. Lu, L. Qian, Y. Tian, Y. Li, X. Sun and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 908–911 RSC .
X. Long, S. Xiao, Z. Wang, X. Zheng and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1120–1123 RSC .
Q. Yang, T. Li, Z. Lu, X. Sun and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11789–11794 RSC .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 CAS .
X. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6921–6928 CAS .
D. Tang, J. Liu, X. Wu, R. Liu, X. Han, Y. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7918–7925 CAS .
A. Minguzzi, F. F. Fan, b A. Vertova, S. Rondininia and A. J. Bard, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 217–229 RSC .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Neyerlin, W. Gu, J. Jorneb and H. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, 631–635 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Electrolyzer pressure (bar)	<150	<30
Current density (A cm−2)	0.6–2.0	0.2–0.4
Cell voltage (V)	1.8–2.2	1.8–2.4
Power density (W cm−2)	<4.4	<1
Voltage efficiency (%)	67–68	62–68
Cell area (m2)	<0.03	<4
H2 production rate (Nm3 h−1)	30	760
Lifetime (years)	10–20	20–30
Anode: 2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e−, Eoox = −1.23 V	(1)
Cathode: 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2 (g), Eored = 0.00 V	(2)
	(3)
E = EHER + iR + η	(4)
A + H+ + e− → AHads (Volmer reaction)	(5)
AHads + H+ + e− → H2 + A (Heyrovsky reaction)	(6)
AHads + AHads → H2 + 2A (Tafel reaction)	(7)
H2O + e− + A → AHads + OH− (Volmer step)	(8)
AHads + H2O + e− → H2 + OH− + A (Heyrovsky reaction)	(9)
AHads + AHads → H2 + 2A (Tafel reaction)	(10)
OH− + * → OHads + e−	(11)
OHads + OH− → Oads + H2O + e−	(12)
Oads + Oads → O2	(13)
Oads + OH− → OOHads + e−	(14)
OOHads + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−	(15)
2H2O + * → OHads + H2O + e− + H+	(16)
OHads + H2O → Oads + H2O + e− + H+	(17)
Oads + H2O → OOHads + e− + H+	(18)
OOHads → O2 + e− + H+	(19)
ΔG1 = ΔGOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)	(20)
ΔG2 = ΔGO − ΔGOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)	(21)
ΔG3 = ΔGOOH − ΔGO − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)	(22)
ΔG4 = 4.92 [eV] − ΔGOOH − eU + ΔGH+ (pH)	(23)
η = max[ΔG1, ΔG2, ΔG3, ΔG4]/e − 1.23 [V]	(24)
	(25)
η = a + blogj	(26)

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic of the design of a Pt monolayer deposited on low-cost materials from ref. 43 copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) The HER current densities of various TMC supported Pt electrodes in 0.1 M HClO4. The bar graph represents the current at −144 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic of water dissociation, formation of Pt adsorbed H atoms and the Ni(OH)2 catalyzed OH− desorption. (D) Comparison of the HER activities of Pt(111) with different modification treatment. (C) and (D) are from ref. 45, copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Scheme of the synthesis of a Pt nanowires/layered Ni(OH)2 composite and (F) the corresponding HER activity in 0.1 KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Computational high-throughput screening for hydrogen adsorption on 256 pure metals and surface alloys, (B) hydrogen evolution after each stage of BiPt surface alloy synthesis on a fluorine-doped tin-oxide substrate. Inset: (1) deposited Pt film (2) Pt film deposited by Bi (3) BiPt surface alloy after annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic and corresponding TEM images of the synthesis of the samples. (A and A1) Initial PtNi3 polyhedra. (B and B2) PtNi intermediates. (C and C1) Pt3Ni hollow nanoframes. (D and D1) Annealed Pt3Ni nanoframes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) The HER activity of NiMoZn alloy nanoparticles with different Zn concentrations from ref. 57, copyright 2015 Elsevier. Galvanostatic (B) and Nyquist (C) results of Fe-based catalysts with or without B/Si dopant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2016 Elsevier. (D) Bimetallic sites of a Ti-modified Cu surface, (E) SEM image of a CuTi alloy. Scale bar, 200 nm, (F) comparison of HER activity of a CuTi alloy with Pt/C and Cu. (D–F) are from ref. 29 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of the HER overpotential of bare metal surfaces and Ni(OH)2-modified surfaces in 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M HClO4. The inset shows the process of water dissociation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) TEM image and illustration of NiSn@C nanoparticles from ref. 63. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society (B) TEM image of carbon-encapsulated iron nanoparticles from ref. 64, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (C) TEM image and illustration of FeCo alloy particles encapsulated in nitrogen doped graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) TEM image of FeCo@N-CNTs from ref. 66 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) XRD patterns of α-MoC1−x, η-MoC, γ-MoC and β-Mo2C. The insets show corresponding crystal structures. (B) Polarization curves of four kinds of molybdenum carbide and Pt/C, CNTs in 0.1 M HClO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of, (a) β-Mo2C synthesized by mesitylamine at 750 °C (b) β-Mo2C synthesized by 4-Cl-o-phenylenediamine, at 675 °C (c) α-MoC1−x synthesized by o-phenylenediamine, at 625 °C (d) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine, at 675 °C (e) β-Mo2C synthesized by aniline with 4:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 675 °C (f) β-Mo2C synthesized by 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine, at 875 °C, (g) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine with 4:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 675 °C (h) α-MoC1−x synthesized by p-phenylenediamine with 8:1 amine:Mo ratio, at 850 °C (i) β-Mo2C synthesized by 1,6-hexanediamine, at 675 °C, (j) β-Mo2C synthesized by 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, at 850 °C (k) α-MoC1−x synthesized by hexamethylenetetramine, at 850 °C, (l) β-Mo2C synthesized by hexamethylenetetramine, at 900 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71 copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of (A) microporous WC from ref. 88, copyright 2007, Elsevier. (B) Globular WC from ref. 89, copyright 2008, Elsevier, (C) hollow globular WC from ref. 90, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (D) CNTs supported coral-like WC from ref. 91, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. TEM images of (E) CNTs supported WC from ref. 92, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society (F) WC derived by soybean from ref. 93, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Top view and side view of 2H, 1T, and 1T′ 4 × 4 × 1 MoS2. Cyan: Mo; yellow: S. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic of the top and side views of the original monolayer 2H-MoS2, strained MoS2 and strained MoS2 with S-vacancies. (B) TEM image of a MoS2 monolayer with S-vacancies (C) HER activity of the Au substrate, Pt electrode, MoS2, strained MoS2 without S-vacancies, unstrained MoS2 with S-vacancies, and strained MoS2 with S-vacancies, the displayed overpotentials were recorded at 10 mA cm−2 current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of (A) MoS2 nanostructures from ref. 102 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets from ref. 103, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (C) Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet and the inset shows common MoS2 from ref. 104, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (D) MoS2 quantum dots and corresponding size distribution from ref. 107, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) MoS2 nanosheet with 1, 2, 3, 4 layers from ref. 108, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) TEM images of hollow CoS nanoprisms from ref. 109 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM images of MoS2/SnO2 from ref. 110 copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Structural model of mesoporous MoS2 from ref. 111 copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (D) Schematic of MoS2/N-graphene composites from ref. 119 copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (E) SEM image of MoS2 monolayer@nanoporous gold from ref. 122, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (F) Polarization curves of PPy/MoSx electrodes from ref. 125, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) SEM images of porous Co phosphide/Co phosphate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) TEM images of highly branched CoP nanostructures from ref. 139 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) TEM images of a hierarchical nanowire array of FeP nanowires from ref. 141 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) TEM images of CoP hollow polyhedra from ref. 142 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (E) TEM images of a CoP nanosheet from ref. 143 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (F) TEM images of NiCoP nanocubes from ref. 146 copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Preparation of ionic polymer–metal and related mesoporous carbons embedded with metal phosphides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Polarization curves of N-microporous graphene (N-MPG), microporous graphene (MPG), N-graphene (N-G) and graphene (G) electrodes from ref. 153 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Polarization curves of C3N4, N-graphene and their composites from ref. 161 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (C) HER activity comparison of S. aureus derived carbon catalysts and common N-graphene, reduced graphene, Pt/C, reprinted with permission from ref. 163, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) HER activity of carbon catalysts derived from human hair at different pyrolysis temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Maximal average activity of cobalt- and nickel-containing triads and dyads from ref. 168, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  TEM images and structure model of a typical Co3O4 nanosheet (A), Co3O4 nanobelt (B), and Co3O4 nanocube (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. SEM images of (D) Co3O4 nanocubes, (E) truncated nanocubes, (F) truncated nanooctahedra, and (G) nanooctahedra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of Co(OH)2 films and corresponding Co3O4 films prepared by CV (A1 and A2), PM (B1 and B2), PPM (C1 and C2), UPED (D1 and D2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 187, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) SEM images of a CuO/Co3O4 composite and (B) polarization curves of a CuO/Co3O4 composite and the corresponding pure one. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200, copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of redox transformation of Ni(OH)2/NiOOH materials from ref. 209, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) OER pathway and intermediates. (b) Theoretical OER overpotentials of Ni and Fe sites in pure and doped γ-NiOOH and γ-FeOOH materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
[M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2]x+[Ax/n]n·mH2O.

 	Fig. 23  Structural model of a typical LDH with different M2+/M3+ molar ratio from ref. 220, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Schematic of the exfoliation of LDH materials. (B) OER activity comparison of NiFe LDH, NiCo LDH, CoCo LDH and corresponding exfoliated ones (C) XRD spectra of original LDHs, ions intercalated LDHs and exfoliated LDHs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225 copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Scheme of the fabrication of the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene electrode. (B) Side view of the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene composite. (C) Polarization curves of IrO2 and the NiFe LDH/reduced graphene composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
