Low power, non-coherent sensitized photon up-conversion: modelling and perspectives   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP23900K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP23900K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322-4332Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLow power, non-coherent sensitized photon up-conversion: modelling and perspectives†

        
          
            Angelo 
            Monguzzi
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Riccardo 
            Tubino
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sajjad 
            Hoseinkhani
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marcello 
            Campione
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Francesco 
            Meinardi
          
          
        
      b
aDipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali, Università Milano Bicocca, Milano, Italy. E-mail: angelo.monguzzi@mater.unimib.it;  Fax: +39 02 64485400;   Tel: +39 02 64485173
bDipartimento di Scienze Geologiche e Geotecnologie, Università Milano Bicocca, Milano, Italy
Received 
      6th December 2011
    , Accepted 27th January 2012First published on 30th January 2012AbstractIn the last few years, non-coherent sensitized photon up-conversion (SUC) in multi-component systems has been developed to achieve significantly high quantum yields for various chromophore combinations at low excitation powers, spanning from the ultraviolet (UV) to near infrared (NIR) spectrum. This promising photon energy management technique became indeed suitable for wide applications in lighting technology and especially in photovoltaics, being able to recover the sub-bandgap photons lost by current devices. A full and general description of the SUC photophysics will be presented, with the analysis of the parameter affecting the photon conversion quantum yield and the quantities which define the optimal working range of any SUC system, namely the threshold and saturation excitation intensity. It will be shown how these quantities depend on intrinsic photophysical properties of the moieties involved and on the SUC solid host matrix. The model proposed represents a powerful tool for evaluation of a newly proposed system, and its reliability will be discussed in respect to an optimized system with SUC yield of 0.26 ± 0.02. The results obtained will outline the research guidelines which must be pursued to optimize the SUC efficiency for its perspective technological applications.
Angelo Monguzzi
Angelo Monguzzi is a post-doc fellow at the University of Milano Bicocca, where he graduated in Physics in 2005 and obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2008. In 2009 he got the prize for Young Researcher Communication of the Società Italiana di Fisica. During his PhD he focused his scientific activity on photophysical properties of organic materials for photonics and optoelectronics. He published 30 scientific papers in the most relevant Physics, Chemistry and Materials Science international journals. From 2007 he started his study of sensitized up-conversion, actually the main topic of his work.
Riccardo Tubino
Riccardo Tubino is a full professor of Physics at the University of Milano-Bicocca. His scientific activity is focused on the optical properties of organic semiconductors, photophysical properties of light harvesting materials and novel infrared light sources. He is an author of over 200 articles published on the most relevant Physics and Material Science journals.
Sajjad Hoseinkhani
Sajjad Hoseinkhani has received his PhD in physics from the Politecnico di Milano in 2010. During his PhD, he studied the photophysics and excited state dynamics of the conjugated carbon materials especially carbon nanotubes with extreme temporal resolution by ultra-short femtosecond Pump-Probe Spectroscopy. He is currently a post-doctoral researcher at Material Science Department in the Bicocca University of Milan, where his research activity deals with photoluminescence spectroscopy, focusing on photon up-conversion by triplet–triplet annihilation in organic systems.
Marcello Campione
Since his PhD in Materials Science: Nanostructured Materials in 2005, Marcello Campione has been working on the study of the growth dynamics and structural properties of thin films of molecular organic semiconductors using scanning probe microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and X-ray diffraction methods. Since 2009 he is a Permanent Researcher in Experimental Physics at the Università di Milano Bicocca. His main scientific interests are the analysis of the microscopic growth mechanism of molecular organic thin films by scanning probe techniques, the study of organic–organic epitaxy, and the growth of single crystals of organic semiconductors for device applications.
Francesco Meinardi
After his Physics degree at the University of Milano (1992), Francesco Meinardi earned a master in “Material Science and Technology” (1995), and in 1999 obtained a researcher position in Experimental Physics at the Milano-Bicocca University where he is a professor of Physics of Matter from 2005. His present research activity is focused on photophysics of organic materials. Main research topics include: cooperative effects in organic semiconductors, photophysics of conjugated oligomers, host–guest compound, organolanthanide complexes. He published more than 130 papers in international journals, and in 2007 organized the fourth edition of the “European conference on organic electronic and related phenomena”.
1. Introduction
In the last five years, a brand new strategy for obtaining photon up-conversion with low-power non-coherent radiation sources has been proposed and developed. This approach is based on the annihilation of metastable triplet states of organic oligomers which are indirectly excited via energy-transfer (ET) from a suitable sensitizer. In this way, S. Baluschev at the Max-Planck-Institute of Mainz (Germany), and the group led by F. N. Castellano at the Bowling Green State University (U.S.A.) obtained sensitized up-conversion (SUC) with yields sufficiently high to allow for bright up-converted emission to be detected by naked eyes at excitation power densities comparable with the solar irradiance and using non-coherent excitation sources.1–9
Following this approach, it is possible to obtain SUC quantum efficiencies (QYSUC) higher than 10% by using excitation power densities as low as a few mW cm−2, instead of MW cm−2 or GW cm−2 that are typically required for conventional second harmonic generation or two-photon absorption techniques. For this reason, SUC materials are currently considered to be promising candidates for improving the performances of photovoltaic (PV) devices and photocatalytic hydrogen production (PC) systems, as recently reported by Castellano's group.10 In fact, the efficiency of both PV and PC systems is mainly limited by the incomplete overlap between the absorption spectrum of the active medium and the solar spectrum, which leaves a large portion of the solar emission unutilized. Current efforts for overcoming such limitation are focused on strategies for adapting the working spectral range of PV and PC devices to the solar emission profile, either by using new active materials exhibiting wide absorption spectra, or by modifying the device architecture.11,12 In this regard, the SUC approach operates in a reversed logic as it provides a mean to tune the spectral distribution of the solar irradiation matching the wavelength range in which a PV or PC device works with the highest yield,13–18 being therefore fully implementable to the existing device concepts. Potential applications of SUC also include the fabrication of flexible, transparent and multicolour displays, and lighting devices.19–21
To date, however, the applicability of SUC to real technologies is still greatly limited by several issues. Specifically: (i) SUC materials work efficiently in the visible spectral range, while absorption in the near infrared and emission in the UV are far from being obtained; (ii) high SUC efficiencies are commonly observed in solutions, while SUC efficiency larger than 1% in solid materials has only recently been demonstrated;22 (iii) an exhaustive theoretical model able to establish the optimal dye concentration for maximizing the SUC efficiency has not yet been realized.
In this paper, after a brief description of the SUC photophysics, we present a general model in which the main parameters affecting QYSUC, threshold (Ith) and saturation (Isat) excitation fluences are accounted for. The obtained findings and the ability of the model to predict real SUC behaviours are confirmed by experimental investigation of a case system. This model is expected to be the starting point for assessing the validity of novel SUC materials for PVs and other applications. In the last section, we provide a review of the most recent SUC-dye pairs and strategies for SUC in the solid-state.
2. SUC Parametrization and quantum yield
Standard multi-photon processes such as two-photon absorption (TPA) and second harmonic generation (SHG) require excitation power densities of MW cm−2 or GW cm−2 to occur efficiently.23 This is not the case of SUC, in which photon conversion occurs through four distinct photophysical steps (Fig. 1, red arrows): (i) linear (one-photon) absorption of excitation radiation by a donor molecule producing singlet excited states, SD, (ii) population of the triplet states, TD, of the donor via intersystem crossing (ISC) from SD states, (iii) energy-transfer (ET) from the excited TD states to metastable triplet states, TA, of an acceptor molecule, and finally (iv) triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) yielding high-energy singlet excited states SA of the acceptor moiety from which the up-converted emission takes place. By efficient TA sensitization, this mechanism permits UC at excitation fluencies as low as the solar irradiance (100 mW cm−2, under AM1.5 conditions, for the whole solar spectrum). Fig. 2 shows the absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of some of the most common donor/acceptor SUC systems: for light conversion from green to blue (Fig. 2A, 9,10-diphenylanthracene, DPA, and Pt(II) octaethylporphyrin, PtOEP), red to blue (Fig. 2B, perylene, PERYL, and Pd(II) meso-tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphyrin, PdPh4TBP) and red to green (Fig. 2C, 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl) anthracene, BPEA, and Pd(II) meso-tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphyrin, PdPh4TBP). The molecular structures of the compounds are reported in the ESI† (Fig. S1). Up-converted PL can be obtained in solution at excitation power densities lower than 1 mW cm−2. However, to evaluate the realistic technological applicability for each SUC system it is crucial to know (i) the maximum QYSUC, (ii) the excitation intensity threshold Ith (namely the incident fluence required to maximize the conversion yield), and (iii) the saturation intensity Isat, which indicates the excitation fluence for which TA becomes strong enough to negatively affect the efficiency of the bimolecular processes necessary for SUC (ET, TTA).
 Fig. 1  Outline of the energy levels involved in the SUC process for a model donor/acceptor pair. Solid arrows indicate transitions in which a photon is involved while dashed arrows indicate radiationless transitions. 
 Fig. 2  Up-converted PL spectrum for common acceptor and donor pairs in THF solution, namely (A) DPA/PtOEP, (B) PERYL/PdPh4TBP and (C) BPEA/PdPh4TBP. Arrows indicate the excitation wavelength (0.5 mW cm−2) in the donor absorption band (dashed lines). 
On the basis of the photophysics described above, the overall QYSUC (namely the fraction of up-converted photons per absorbed photon) can be expressed as24–31 QYSUC = ½fϕAϕISCϕTTAϕET,(1)where ϕA, ϕISC, ϕTTA, and ϕET are the quantum efficiencies of acceptor PL, donor ISC, TTA and donor/acceptor ET, respectively. Eqn (1) indicates that QYSUC is determined by intrinsic photophysical properties of the donor and acceptor moieties (such as f, ϕA, ϕISC), by quantities depending on the molecular concentration (ϕET) and by a parameter (ϕTTA) which depends on both intrinsic and extrinsic factors. As a consequence, SUC optimization requires a careful selection of donor/acceptor pairs as well as a suitable choice of their respective concentrations. The factor 1/2 is required since two low-energy photons are needed to produce a high-energy one. The parameter f is the statistical probability for obtaining a singlet excited state after annihilation of two triplet states. The annihilation is mediated by the formation of a collisional complex (T–T) of singlet, triplet or quintet multiplicity (S, T, Q in Fig. 1) originating from the tensor product of the initial spin states. The weighted statistical probability of formation of these states is 1:3:5.32–35 Generally, the pure statistical factor f = 1/9 representing the potential fraction of generated singlets can be enlarged to 1/4, since quintet complexes are not energetically accessible. The T–T complex then produces a ground state moiety, through quenching of a triplet plus a higher-energy Tn,A state which decays back to TA. Therefore, for each four T–T encounter complexes (3 with triplet character and 1 with singlet) five TA are lost for one generated up-converted photon, thus giving the expected upper limit for aromatic compounds f = 2/5. The latter value implies that 40% of T–T collisions generate an excited singlet, as it is indeed observed in anthracene.36–38 In some cases this limit can be further exceeded. If T2,A − TA > kBT the collisional complex can decay back to TA with no energy loss, or T2,A states can undergo reverse intersystem crossing into S1, which leads to fluorescence from the T2,A channel.39 In this scenario, f values approaching unity can in principle be reached for suitably selected acceptors, as shown by Cheng et al. who recently demonstrated f values up to 0.66 between rubrene triplets (i.e. QYSUC = 0.33).40
As concerns the other parameters in eqn (1), the quantum yield of acceptor PL, ϕA, is given by the ratio krad/ktot, where ktot is the total decay rate of the excited state and krad is the radiative decay rate of the underpinning electronic transition. In general, ϕA depends on dye concentration, excitation power density and on the local environment surrounding the dye, which determines the non-radiative deactivation channels.41,42 A good acceptor should have ϕA ≈ 1, and its emission efficiency should be preserved in the working conditions of the targeted SUC application and ideally in the solid state.

ϕ
ISC is a measure of the ability of a molecule to switch the excitation energy from a singlet to a triplet excited state by a spin flip transition which changes the spin multiplicity. The ISC rate kISC between an initial singlet 1Ψ0i and a final triplet state 3Ψ0f can be written as (2)where FCWD is the Franck–Condon weighted density of states, which is the density of vibrational states of the triplet manifold multiplied for the Franck–Condon vibrational overlap.43 The spin–orbit Hamiltonian HSO is (3)where αfs is the fine structure constant, Zμ is the effective nuclear charge for a nucleus μ, and L and S are the orbital and spin momenta, respectively.44,45 This Hamiltonian represents the coupling between the spin and orbital momenta of an electron i around a nucleus μ. ϕISC can be enhanced both by reducing the molecular symmetry, which increases the spin–orbit coupling, and by the presence of the heavy atom in the molecular frame.46–48 Therefore, the extent of ISC is a crucial parameter for the selection of light harvesting donors, which should also possess a large linear absorption cross-section (as typical for S0 → Sn spin permitted electronic transitions). Commonly used donors belong to the family of metal–porphyrin complexes, where the conjugated porphyrin macrocycle is responsible for strong optical absorption and high ϕISC is assured by the presence of the heavy metal cation. In contrast, highly symmetric fluorescent compounds are ideal acceptors due to the extremely low ϕISC from the TA to the ground state which results in triplets lifetimes up to several milliseconds, thus allowing for a large number of collision events before recombination.41,49,50 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as DPA, PERY and BPEA, exhibit both ϕA ≈ 1 and metastable triplet states suitable to enhance TTA.51
In contrast to ϕA and ϕISC, the yields ϕET and ϕTTA depend also on the concentration (CA) of the acceptor species. These latter parameters are defined as the ratio between the ET (TTA) rate, kET (kTTA), and the total donor (acceptor) triplet decay rate , through the equations (4) (5)where D = (kBT/6πηRi) is the total diffusion coefficient of a molecule with hindrance radius Ri in a solvent of viscosity η at temperature T. Radiationless ET (eqn (4)) is generally a combination of Dexter and Förster type mechanisms (a is the closest donor/acceptor distance), with transfer rates kDxET and kFsET depending on their characteristic transfer radii RDx and RFs.52–54Eqn (4) has been formulated in the rapid diffusion limit regime, which is commonly considered a reasonable approximation given the long lifetime of the excited states and the large molecular diffusivities in THF. Usually, in SUC systems where bi-molecular reactions involve forbidden or partially allowed electronic transitions, the Förster contribution to eqn (4) becomes negligible.52–54,64α(E) is the donor absorption coefficient in cm−1, Iexc is the excitation intensity in photons s−1 cm−2 and γTT is the second-order decay rate for TTA in cm3 s−1.55 Therefore, for a system with known ϕISC and ϕA, acceptor concentration CA and D determined by the matrix embedding the dyes, it is possible to predict QYSUC through eqn (1). The optimization of ϕET and ϕTTA is required to increase QYSUC and to reduce the Iexc needed to reach the maximum efficiency regime. Recently, we proposed to use the excitation power Ith at which ϕTTA = 0.5 as a figure of merit for simple SUC systems, and demonstrated that25 (6)Eqn (4)–(6) suggest that the best strategy for optimizing SUC is to raise both the acceptor and the donor concentrations in order to maximize ϕET and increase α(E). However, large donor concentrations (CD) may negatively affect QYSUC by inducing acceptor-to-donor back-ET which cannot be neglected a priori because of the non-null resonance between the involved electronic levels.52 In order to take this effect into account, in eqn (1), (4)–(6) it is necessary to introduce an effective ET efficiency, ΦET, which is defined as the ratio between the number of TA states which decay spontaneously or via TTA and those decaying via TD. By considering multiple forward (donor-to-acceptors) and backward (acceptors-to-donor) transfer sequences it is possible to demonstrate that (7)where ϕFw and ϕBk are the standard efficiencies of forward and backward ET, respectively. It is straightforward that when ϕBk = 0, eqn (7) results in ΦET = ϕET = ϕFw. On the other hand, if ϕFw = 1, then ΦET =1, hence the existence of a back-ET channel does not affect the total yield.
A careful analysis of influence of back-ET on SUC is therefore imperative for a correct evaluation of the real performances. In general, the back-ET efficiency is defined as . ϕBk is a function of kTTA and therefore depends on the excitation intensity Iexc. In the approximation of negligible saturation effects on ET rates, the evolution of the SUC excited states population density is described by the following set of rate equations: (8) (9) (10)where  is the spontaneous decay rate of acceptor triplets, SA is the population density of acceptor excited singlets and  is their decay rate. By solving this set of equations under steady state conditions, as under continuous wave (CW) excitation, we obtain the intensity of up-converted light (ISUC), (11)with . To check the reliability of the proposed model, we measured QYSUC and Ith for a set of four DPA:PtOEP tetrahydrofuran (THF) solutions with progressively lower acceptor concentrations (Fig. 3): 10−2 M (DPA2, blue dots), 10−4 M (DPA4, green triangles), 10−5 M (DPA5, orange diamonds) and 10−6 M (DPA6, red hexagons). The donor concentration CD has been kept constant at 10−4 M. All samples were prepared and sealed in a glove box under nitrogen atmosphere, with oxygen concentration below 0.1 ppm. Fig. 3 reports the value of QYSUC as a function of the excitation power Iexc under CW excitation at 532 nm.56–58 As previously demonstrated, ISUC depends linearly on the excitation intensity when Iexc ≫ Ith. In this range QYSUC is constant at its maximum value. The thresholds Ith can be directly identified in the logarithmic plot of QYSUCvs. Iexc as the power density at which the curves change their slope, or more quantitatively the power density where ϕTTA = 0.5.
 Fig. 3  Experimental QYSUC for DPA2 (10−2 M, blue circles), DPA4 (10−4 M, green triangles), DPA5 (10−5 M, orange diamonds) and DPA6 (10−6 M, red hexagons) as a function of Iexc under CW excitation at 532 nm. PtOEP concentration has been kept constant at 10−4 M. The two straight lines represent the QYSUC dependency from Iexc in the low and high excitation power density ranges. The threshold intensity Ith is indicated as the point at which straight lines cross. For clarity, only DPA2 Ith is reported in the graph. 
The highest QYSUC = 0.26 ± 0.02 is obtained for the sample with largest acceptor concentration. For lower CA, the yield decreases to 0.17 for DPA4, 0.08 for DPA5 and 0.005 for DPA6. By assuming ϕA = 0.96 and ϕISC = 1,47,57–60 the overall yield depends only on f, ϕTTA and ΦET. From the data collected for sample DPA2, where ϕFw ≫ 0.99 and hence, ΦET ≈ ϕFw, f = 0.52 is obtained from the maximum QYSUC value. This observation is consistent with the fact that in DPA T2,A > TA.61 For other samples, the reduction of QYSUC cannot be justified just by the lower ϕFw; the effect of back-ET must be accounted for. The solid lines in Fig. 3 are the QYSUC values obtained from the fit of the experimental ISUC data to eqn (11). It should be noted that the only fitting parameter is the back-ET rate, which is the same for all samples since CD does not change among the sample set (eqn (4)). From the fit, we obtain kBk = 1500 Hz. Experimental and theoretical results show that, even in the case of low kBk, ϕFw ≈ 0.90, and Iexc ≫ Ith, the reduction of QYSUC due to back-ET is as large as 35% for DPA4 in respect to DPA2. Similarly, detrimental effects are observed also on Ith. The experimental thresholds are reported in Fig. 4 (blue dots) and, once again, the progressive reduction of Ith at increasing CA is well predicted by eqn (6) taking into account ΦET by using eqn (7) (dashed line, with α(E) = 12.5 cm−1). We wish to point out that back-ET is relevant especially in real devices. For example, in an ideal SUC-enhanced solar cell the SUC process would take place in a film optically coupled to a PV device. The SUC layer should be as thin as possible, in order to avoid unnecessary and potentially expensive modifications to the PV device architecture. Therefore, the light harvester/donor must be able to absorb more than 90% of the incident light within the limited optical path. This feature clearly requires high CD, which in turn would promote back-ET with dramatic effects on QYSUC. The data reported in Fig. 3 reveal a further interesting aspect of SUC photophysics. Looking at the sample with the lowest CA (red hexagons, orange diamonds), upon increasing the excitation intensity above the initial saturation plateau, the conversion yield progressively decreases below the value predicted by the model described above. Since TA states have a long lifetime, for large Iexc their number can approach CA, thus significantly reducing the number of acceptors available for ET (eqn (4)) and consequently QYSUC. We suggest to define Isat as the excitation intensity at which the ET efficiency, ZET (Iexc), decreases by a factor n of its value at CA ≫ TA (Φ0ET). In general, from eqn (4) the triplet density TA at which Φ0ET is reduced by a factor n is (12)where ξ = 4πDRDx. By solving eqn (8) and (9) for steady state conditions, we obtain (13)
In order for SUC to be conveniently applied in solar energy conversion, suitable values of ZET (Iexc) are of the order of ZET ≈ 0.9Φ0ET (i.e. n = 1.11). The dotted red line in Fig. 4 represents the theoretical Isat as predicted by eqn (16) as a function CA. As expected, by increasing the acceptor concentration, saturation occurs at progressively higher intensities. The most relevant finding here is that for CA > 10−4 M, Isat occurs only when Iexc > 1023 ph s−1 cm−2 (which corresponds at 3.7 kW cm−2 for a photon wavelength of 532 nm). This value is completely out of range with respect to the power densities available at AM1.5. It should be noted that the saturation effect at low CA is amplified in the QYSUC calculation (see eqn (1), (4) and (5)) strongly affecting the system performances.
 Fig. 4  Theoretical (lines) and experimental (dots) values for Ith (blue dashed line) and Isat (red dotted line) as a function of the acceptor concentration in a DPA:PtOEP(10−4 M):THF solution, with an optical path of 0.1 cm. 
These results allow for tracing further guidelines for the realization of SUC based devices. Specifically, the analysis of back-ET and Isat highlights the importance of careful tuning of the concentration of photoactive moieties in order to find a convenient equilibrium between technological and photophysical requirements for optimized SUC. For example, large CD-values ensure high optical density of a potential SUC coating, but concomitantly promote strong back-ET with detrimental effects on QYSUC. As a consequence, very large CAs must be used to push ϕFw as close to unity as possible, which ultimately renders the device performances independent of back-ET. The proposed kinetic analysis is strongly dependent on the electronic properties of the employed donor/acceptor pairs, which determine the bimolecular interaction radii and consequently ϕFw, ϕBk and γTT.
It is noteworthy that the proposed model maintains its validity as long as the chemical compounds are stable under high intensity excitation and in high concentration regimes as in the case of DPA and PtOEP. It has been demonstrated that photoinduced processes such as dimerization by cycloaddition chemistry and photooxidation could affect QYSUC.62,63 Therefore, the extent of possible photoinduced chemical reactions must be estimated to avoid quenching of QYSUC due to molecular degradation (see Fig. S2, ESI†).
3. SUC in the solid state
To effectively develop technological applications of SUC, it is necessary to extend the high QYSUC at low excitation observed in solution to the solid state. At this aim, some fundamental aspects should be considered for the rational design of efficient up-converting solid materials. (i) As previously demonstrated, the matrix must ensure reasonably high diffusion of molecules and/or molecular excitons, which is strictly necessary for SUC operation at low excitation photon densities.65,66 (ii) The hosts must protect the dyes from molecular oxygen (O2) which typically quenches the triplet states involved in SUC.29,60 (iii) The materials should be inexpensive and easily processable for industrial fabrication techniques.
In order to fulfil the first requirement and ensure a large exciton mobility, we have grown a DPA single crystal doped with PtOEP (Cryst-UC).67 Indeed, in molecular single crystals triplet excitons have a diffusion length similar to that of dyes in low viscosity solvents.68–71 The cryst-UC (0.4 × 0.5 mm2) luminescence spectrum under 532 nm excitation is reported in Fig. 5. Besides the intense emission from PtOEP at 660 nm, a weak blue light at 435 nm is emitted from DPA, with intensity increasing with the square of the incident power, thus confirming its SUC origin. To understand the reasons for such low QYSUC, we investigated the sample morphology. Fig. 6A is a picture of Cryst-UC, grown with the procedure described in ref. 66. Fig. 6B reports a Cryst-UC image taken by a confocal microscope under 532 nm CW excitation. Despite the presence of uniform areas, several structures emitting red light are observed. Fig. 6C reports the same image filtered to selectively detect the red emission. The bright red emitting needles in the left high corner on the crystal surface are composed of aggregated PtOEP, which crystallize separately from DPA.72 The segregated pure donor crystals cannot experience the ET necessary to SUC and no blue emission is detected from these areas (Fig. 6D). All in all, single crystals obtained by co-crystallization of acceptor/donor tend to form segregated crystal structures, thus preventing the intimate contact between donors and an acceptor at the molecular level which is needed for the efficient ET to occur. Novel strategies to avoid segregation upon co-crystallization should be therefore envisaged. Following the suggestion of Islangulov et al., we turn our attention on dye doped amorphous polymeric films.7 These authors incorporated Pd(II) octaethylporphyrin (PdOEP) and DPA into a copolymer of ethyleneoxide and epichlorohydrin (EO-EPI). By using this host, they successfully obtained SUC from 544 nm to 435 nm by low power non-coherent excitation thanks to the molecular mobility of the dye within the rubber polymer which allows ET and TTA. Up-converted light is indeed completely suppressed at 77K when the system is frozen losing its rubber properties. We and others have been able to observe SUC by using more rigid polymers such as cellulose acetate or poly-methylmethacrylate (PMMA). Cellulose acetate is an inert and easy to handle host matrix. It is transparent in the spectral range of optical activity of the selected chromophores (PdPh4TBP and BPEA) which successfully yield red-to-green SUC. We have directly compared the QYSUC to that of the corresponding THF solution under low power excitation, and have observed a reduction of three orders of magnitude. Even with ϕFw ≈ 1, the molecular mobility of the acceptor and its exciton diffusivity in cellulose acetate are too low to ensure a good ϕTTA.73 SUC was observed also in rigid PMMA films. To overcome the problem of low molecular mobility Merkel and Dinnocenzo used very high concentrations of the emitter molecule thus allowing for exciton migration within the acceptor population. Despite this strategy a disappointingly low QYSUC value of 2 × 10−4 has been measured under solar excitation power density of 0.9 mW cm−2 (estimated by indirect methods based on the comparison between directly excited acceptor fluorescence and donor phosphorescence).74
 Fig. 5  (A) Blue PL spectrum of a Cryst-UC sample under CW excitation at 532 nm as a function of the incident power of 1 mW (green), 2 mW (blue) and 3 mW (pink) and (B) red emission under 2 mW excitation. 
 Fig. 6  (A) White light transmission image of Cryst-UC. (B) RGB PL image under 532 nm excitation. (C) Red filtered PL spectrum and (D) blue filtered PL spectrum. 
A general principle for selecting host polymers for SUC could be deduced from these results, as proposed by T. N. Singh-Rachford et al.75 The best approach is to use host materials with low glass transition temperature (TG).76 When T < TG, the amorphous regions of a polymer solid are in the glassy state and polymer chains are frozen in their position. The chains are incapable of segmental motion which allows the dye molecules to wiggle. Under these conditions the excitation diffusion is determined by the hopping between the nearby acceptor centres. Since energy migration is due to short range interactions, the total excitation diffusion is strongly limited. As shown above, ϕFw can be manipulated by using large acceptor/donor concentration. However, the portion of excited acceptors in glassy hosts is limited to a small sphere of volume determined by the ET radius.24,29,65,77 Due to its low excitation mobility, the density of TA states is enough to allow TTA only in the limited region around donor centres. Polymers with low TG are instead in the partially fluid rubber state even at room temperature, which translates in chromophores with sufficient mobility for SUC to take place.75,78
At last, the coupling of the chromophores to an amorphous matrix should be carefully checked, since it could increase the decay rate  of metastable TA states by activating additional non-radiative decay channels with detrimental effects on TTA.41,55,79
To date, several groups reported on solid state SUC, showing a variety of potential polymeric hosts. For example, the acceptor moiety can be eliminated by using a properly selected emitting host matrix. This method has been demonstrated in poly-9,9-bis(2-ethyl-hexyl)fluorene (PF2/6) films doped with PdOEP and in a blue emitting poly-spirobifluoreneanthracene (PSFA) co-polymer doped with low concentration of PtOEP.31,80 Upon 532 nm excitation of PdOEP the characteristic blue emission of PF2/6 was observed together with the expected phosphorescence of the PdOEP component.31 In this particular case, the authors proposed different mechanisms responsible for up-converted PF2/6 emission. Beyond the SUC described in Fig. 1, sequential multiphoton absorption and/or TTA on the porphyrin followed by ET to the higher energy singlets of the host result in blue up-converted emission. It is possible to discriminate between these mechanisms by considering the excitation power density regime, which should in principle be significantly higher in the case of multiphoton absorption compared to SUC. At any rate, co-polymers such as PSFA open the way to additional tuning methods of the SUC host matrix. Laquai et al. demonstrated a net increase in the up-converted fluorescence compared with the anthracene-free spirobifluorene copolymer (PSF) and polyfluorene (PF) thin films. This increase is ascribed to the higher ϕET towards anthracene arising from a better energy resonance with respect to PSF and PF triplet states. It is concluded that tuning the position of the polymer triplet level and proper choice of the dopant in samples of optimized compositions can lead to a further increase of solid state QYSUC.80
An interesting example of converting solid system has been very recently tested by J. Lissau et al. The authors observed low power photon SUC on the surface of nanostructured metal oxides, the same materials currently used to build dye sensitized solar cells. Unfortunately, they recorded an extremely low QYSUC of 6 × 10−4, given that photoactive dyes on oxide surfaces are completely exposed to oxygen.81 We found a possible solution to the O2 contamination problem by incorporating a SUC bicomponent system into polymeric nanoparticles. The confinement of all of the involved photophysical processes in a nanometre-scale volume makes each nanoparticle a single and isolated high-efficiency up-converting unit. As a consequence, these dual dye-loaded nanoparticles can be used to produce drop-cast films, as well as dopants for polymeric matrices, while still preserving the performances of the moieties in solution.22
5. Display and lighting applications of SUC
Systems capable of generating short-wavelength radiation from long-wavelength light sources are very desirable because of their wide application potential, which is not limited to energy conversion technologies, but instead extends to coloured displays and lighting applications. Specifically, given current global energy concerns, increasing efforts are being focused in the development of materials that emit white-light in the pursuit of highly efficient lighting devices, thereby minimizing electrical energy waste in daily applications.82,83 With this perspective, solid state SUC systems should potentially provide a remarkable progress in design and fabrication of advanced light-emitting devices.
The principle on which most up-conversion based displays operate is multiphoton absorption followed by ET in rare-earth ion doped solids.84 However these systems require moderate (tens of kW cm−2) to high (MW cm−2) excitation intensities, which are usually above the damage threshold of most optical materials.85 Another disadvantage of ion-doped UC displays is the complicated technology to obtain large area devices. Indeed, in the case of heavy metal fluoride glasses doped with rare earth ions, samples with acceptable optical quality have a relatively small size (of the order of 10−2 m), while dispersing doped glassy UC powders into a polymer matrix results in highly scattering materials.84 T. Miteva et al. overcame these problems by proposing robust all-organic, flexible and transparent displays based SUC, which can be fabricated on large surface areas.8,19 The displays have good brightness and show stable operation for more than 100 hours. The optical density of the screens can be easily tuned, in order to obtain the required transmittance for the excitation beam depending on the application, and the response time of the device can be adjusted allowing for kHz-refreshing rate of the displayed information. Moreover, the remarkable robustness of the materials allows efficient manufacturing techniques, such as printing and roll-to-roll processing, to be used.
Also white light emission can be realized by exploiting SUC. T. N. Singh-Rachford et al. successfully obtained broad band white emission by combining up-conversion and down-conversion phenomena in acceptor species which form emitting excimers in bicomponent systems. An emission spectrum can be tuned by varying the acceptor concentration CA, on which depend both up-converted emission intensity and excimers formation. In this way, by mixing the acceptor singlet emission with lower energy excimer luminescence, a well balanced white light can be obtained starting from single frequency laser excitation.20 Chen et al. obtained a bright white emission by SUC by exploiting a different approach.21 They employed 2,4,5,7-tetraiodo-6-hydroxy-3-fluorone (TIHF) and DPA as donor/acceptor pair. The sensitizer exhibits a phosphorescent emission in the yellow region of the spectrum in an energy range far from DPA lowest triplet state. As a consequence, the ET to DPA is not complete, but still efficient to achieve blue up-converted light to be mixed with the yellow one. By varying CA and Iexc (which below Ith controls QYSUC), the authors obtained a good quality white light (X = 0.33, Y = 0.40 in the CIE convention) by using an excitation power density one order of magnitude lower than the one necessary in Tm3+/Yb3+/Er3+-doped nanocrystals.86
The explored approaches are based on the exploitation of dye pairs. We are currently working on an alternative technique to obtain white or tunable PL by introducing a third component. Since the acceptor up-converted PL can be shifted in energy of more than 0.5 eV with respect to the absorption band of the light harvester, we introduced an additional molecular species able to emit light after being excited by the acceptor up-converted light. In this way, it is possible to achieve multi-peak luminescence in a wide spectral region and by varying dye concentrations, to obtain white light emission upon single low-frequency excitation.87
6. Materials for SUC
Commonly used SUC dyes present a good solubility in a variety of solvents, and chemical as well as thermal stability. Both commercial and custom synthesized polyacenes-like acceptors and metallo–organic donors fulfil the requirements previously illustrated to allow SUC with reasonably high yield. Fig. 7 shows the spectral properties of a commonly used acceptor/donor pair which gives rise to red-to-green conversion. Incident red photons are absorbed in the Q-band of PdPh4TBP around 630 nm (blue circles). Donor PL (blue triangles) is resonant with BPEA triplets at 810 nm (red arrow), which are quickly populated by ET and experience TTA with a consequent singlet emission in the green region (green solid line). The large energy gap between Soret and Q absorption bands allows to keep high BPEA ϕA thus avoiding re-absorption by the donor.87–90 Furthermore, the large acceptor SA–TA singlet/triplet splitting permits acceptor sensitization even by using different donors, with an UC energy gain as large as 0.65 eV.48,91,92
 Fig. 7  Solid line is the PL spectrum of a BPEA in 10−4 M THF solution. It falls in spectral window between Soret and Q absorption bands of PdPh4TBP (circles). PdPh4TBP phosphorescence (triangles) is quenched by BPEA triplets (solid arrow), whose energy is enough to match BPEA singlet manifold absorption (dotted line) after TTA thus generating PL. 
A system composed of aromatic hydrocarbons as acceptors paired to metallo–organic complexes as donors shows unbeaten performances up to now.1 However, the choice of producing SUC by a limited family of compounds reduces the wavelength range which can be up-converted. For example, it is still difficult to synthesize metalloporphyrins to up-convert solar photons possessing energy below silicon based PV bandgap solar photons.93 Moreover, the highest energy blue shift so far obtained by these materials is 0.8 eV.10,80
The design of new acceptors and donors is essential for successful future application to real devices. T. N. Singh-Rachford et al. reported a new acceptor molecule belonging to the family of BODIPY chromophores.94–97 BODIPY fluorophores possess high ϕA and high resistance to photo-bleaching and are therefore suitable materials to be used under continuous excitation.98,99 The same group successively proposed a dye pair to obtain visible-to-UV up-conversion by the use of a small metal-free organic molecule as sensitizer, namely the 2,3-butanedione (BIACETYL). In deareated benzene solution with a commercial laser dye 2,5-diphenyloxazole (PPO) as acceptor, they obtained UC up-converted dye emission at 360 nm by 442 nm excitation. Unfortunately, the intrinsically low ϕA keeps QYSUC at a low level.1,80 Recently, clever supramolecular architectures (porphinatozinc (II) and metal(II)polypyridyl (M) units connected via an ethynyl linker) as donors have been proposed, with the purpose of expanding the spectral window covered by SUC systems and finely tune the electronic properties of known moieties to improve the ET processes even at the solid state.99 Most importantly, these supramolecular sensitizers allow for the use of new acceptors which can produce relevant wavelength shifting from the NIR to the visible spectral region.
Another new approach is to consider novel donor/acceptor pairs as proposed by Cheng et al., who observed that SUC is subject to several enthalpic losses that limit the up-conversion margin. They address one of these losses, namely the donor/acceptor ET, by selecting a fluorophore whose triplet state energy slightly exceeds that of the sensitizer. By choosing suitable concentrations for the sensitizer and emitter molecules, it is possible to use the entropy (instead of the energy) as the driving force for the migration of triplet excitation from the sensitizer to the emitter, thus obtaining a large energy shift by SUC of 0.94 eV.100
7. Conclusions
A complete description of the SUC process has been presented based on the general principles that control the SUC efficiency independently from the specific molecules adopted. SUC has been fully parameterized to quantitatively predict the overall efficiency of every donor/acceptor pair. The proposed analysis allows for tracing important guidelines for the rational design of up-converting solid materials, and to improve the existing systems. Furthermore, the analysis of SUC kinetics, improved with the introduction of the back-ET effect and Isat, predicts the optimal excitation range to fully exploit SUC materials.
A maximum QYSUC = 0.26 ± 2 with Ith = 1.7 × 1015 ph cm−2 s−1 has been reported for a model SUC dye-pair in solution, which emphasizes the potential of this process as a powerful tool to effectively manipulate photon energy. The striking feature of the SUC mechanism is that it works with low excitation power densities, in contrast to standard UC processes. This feature could be exploited for the fabrication of inexpensive, low-consumption light sources and wavelength-shifting devices for lighting technologies. Most importantly, it opens the way to SUC-PV devices where the low-energy tail of a solar spectrum, which is usually lost because of the low light-harvesting cross section of most PV materials in the red and infrared spectral ranges (Fig. 8), is efficiently recovered.101
 Fig. 8  Outline of a model PV cell coupled with a SUC device. Incoming photons are partially absorbed (blue and green arrows) while sub-bandgap photons (red arrows) reach the SUC layer. Here, they are up-converted and emitted, thus higher energy photons re-absorbed by the cell. 
In order to be employed in PVs, it is imperative that SUC operates at maximum efficiency under the solar irradiance. Thanks to the fast energy diffusion in solution, which enhances all short range bimolecular processes, even at low dye concentrations, Ith is comparable to the solar intensity under AM1.5 conditions.102 Indeed, samples presented in this paper can approach their maximum QYSUC even under solar excitation as, for example DPA2 which shows QYSUC (AM1.5) = 0.13. However, the reported yields in solid state materials are still significantly lower than in solution. For amorphous flexible polymeric matrixes, mobility of both molecules and excitons is strongly reduced which represents the main bottleneck for efficient SUC in these materials. For crystalline solids, the tendency of phase separation seriously reduces the necessary intimate contact between donor and acceptor moieties necessary for ET. To date, the best host matrix has been identified with disordered rubbery polymers and co-polymers with low TG, able to grant an even low molecular mobility and a good mixing of the active moieties.1,103
In summary, several research lines should be pursued to optimize the SUC efficiency for technological applications: (i) the design and synthesis of new donor/acceptor pairs with the necessary photophysical requirements, namely strong one-photon absorption in the NIR region and fast ISC for the donor. For the acceptor, long-lived triplet states resonant with the triplets of the donor moiety are needed. Electronic structures suitable for the singlet generation by TTA and high ϕA are also critical. The latter aspect is necessary to cover all the spectral ranges interesting for applications and also to obtain photon energy conversion with reasonable yields. (ii) In the solid state, the overall QYSUC is still too low. While the net ET efficiency ΦET is tuneable to its maximum value by varying CA in each matrix, the second order rate constant γTT (which is determined by energy diffusivity) represents the real limitation for achieving low power high QYSUC. It is in fact difficult to obtain the dye mobility of a solution in a solid material. Single crystals could in principle grant large diffusion lengths for the excitation energy, but their applicability is hampered by the high costs and the cumbersome procedure for the fabrication of suitable bi-component crystals. Room for possible improvements is represented by reducing of acceptors spontaneous decay rate . Such a goal could be achieved by using a matrix that shields the dye from the interactions with the environment. In such a way, even with an intrinsic low diffusion coefficient, the long triplet lifetime should permit a sufficient diffusion length to allow high ϕTTA.
However, the easiest and most direct approach to reach maximum QYSUC in solids seems to modify the absorption properties of the light harvesting dye. In fact, large absorption bandwidths α′(E) = ∫a(E)dE of 50–60 nm versus 15 nm currently used could be achieved by the introduction of proper donor mixtures, with a distribution of absorption bands while keeping the necessary energy matching condition between acceptor and donor triplet states. In such a way, the enhanced harvesting of low power solar light combined with high ΦET can ensure large TA densities needed to have ϕTTA close to one, therefore easily reaching the maximum efficiency regime.
Acknowledgements
This work has been gratefully supported by Fondazione Cariplo (Grant 2009.2657), PRIN 2008J3ESEA, and by ENI S.p.A.—Div. Corporate Centro di Ricerca Energie Non Convenzionali. A. M. thanks “Dote Ricercatori”: FSE, Regione Lombardia for funding. We want to thank Andrea Laurin for his help with CW measurements.
Notes and references
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 11440–11445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, P. E. Keivanidis, G. Wegner, J. Jacob, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen, T. Miteva, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 061904 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 143903 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, T. Miteva, Y. Avlasevich, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov, G. Nelles, A. Cheprakov, A. Yasuda, K. Mullen and G. Wegner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7693–7696 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776–3778 Search PubMed .
R. R. Islangulov, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1171–1174 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haefele, J. Blumhoff, R. S. Khnayzer and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Khnayzer, J. Blumhoff, J. A. Harrington, A. Haefele, F. Deng and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 209–211 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 169–181 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W. Kramer and H. U. Gudel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505 CrossRef .
T. Trupke, A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, P. Wurfel and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3327–3338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Liang, X. Y. Huang and Q. Y. Zhang, J. Fluoresc., 2009, 19, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. O'Brien, S. Rallabandi, U. Tripathy, M. F. Paige and R. P. Steer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 475, 220–222 CrossRef CAS .
J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835 CAS .
T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles and S. Baluschev, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 103002 CrossRef .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3906–3910 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, C. Y. Hung, K. H. Wang, H. L. Chen, W. S. Fann, F. C. Chien, P. L. Chen, T. J. Chow, C. P. Hsu and S. S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4064–4066 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, M. Frigoli, C. Larpent, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley, Berlin,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155122 CrossRef .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, T. Miteva, G. Wegner, T. Roberts, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov and A. Cheprakov, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 013007 CrossRef .
S. K. Sugunan, U. Tripathy, S. M. K. Brunet, M. F. Paige and R. P. Steer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 8548–8556 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, T. Khoury, R. Clady, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1795–1799 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, M. M. Salamone and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 125113 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, T. Khoury, R. Clady, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 1047–1053 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, U. Scherf, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2095 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 7711–7714 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Charlton, R. Dabestani and J. Saltiel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 3473–3476 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Saltiel and B. Atwater, Advances in Photochemistry, Wiley, New York,  1988 Search PubMed .
A. J. McLean and T. G. Truscott, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1990, 86, 2671–2672 RSC .
P. P. Levin, Dokl. Phys. Chem., 2003, 388, 10 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Groff, R. E. Merrifield and P. Avakian, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1970, 5, 168 CrossRef CAS .
W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 44, 2902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, K. Kikuchi and H. Kokubun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1976, 42, 494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, T. Khoury, R. Clady, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 66–71 RSC .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press, USA,  1999 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy,Springer-Verlag, 3rd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599 CrossRef CAS .

          A. B. Zahlan, G. M. Androes, H. F. Hameka, F. M. Heineken, C. A. Hutchinson, Jr., G. W. Robinson and J. H. van der Waals, The Triplet State, Eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1967 Search PubMed .
S. K. Lower and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 1966, 66, 199 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, Z. Shuai, G. Pourtois and J. L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 3899–3907 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Morris, M. A. Mahaney and J. R. Huber, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 16, 329 Search PubMed .
K. Schmidt, S. Brovelli, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, C. Bazzini, T. Caronna, R. Tubino, F. Meinardi, Z. Shuai and J. L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 10490–10499 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hanela and D. B. Paul, Aust. J. Chem., 1984, 37, 553 CrossRef .
D. J. Gisser, B. S. Johnson, M. D. Ediger and E. D. Von Meerwall, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kohler and H. Bassler, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 66, 71–109 CrossRef .
M. Inokuti and F. Hirayama, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Thomas, W. F. Carlsen and L. Stryer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1978, 75, 5746 CrossRef CAS .
L. Stryer, D. D. Thomas and C. F. Meares, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng., 1982, 11, 203 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner, S. Choi, J. L. Katz and S. A. Rice, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1963, 11, 323 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Casey and E. L. Quitevis, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 6590–6594 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Montalti, A. Credi, L. Prodi and M. T. Gandolfi, Handbook of Photochemistry, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton FL, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Nayak, M. L. Muro-Small, S. Goeb, M. J. Therien and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2791 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, R. A. Fuh, J. Li, A. Corkan and J. S. Lindsey, Photochem. Photobiol., 1998, 68, 141–142 CAS .
A. K. Bansal, W. Holzer, A. Penzkofer and T. Tsuboi, Chem. Phys., 2006, 330, 118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ting, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1967, 1, 335–336 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov and F. N. Castellano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5957–5959 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kytka, A. Gerlach, F. Schreiber and J. Kováč, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 131911 CrossRef .
U. Gösele, M. Hauser, U. K. A. Klein and R. Frey, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1975, 34, 519 CrossRef .
B. P. Lyons and A. P. Monkman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 235201 CrossRef .
R. P. Groff, R. E. Merrifield, P. Avakian and Y. Tomkievicz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1970, 25, 105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campione, R. Ruggerone, S. Tavazzi and M. Moret, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2437–2443 RSC .
A. K. Tripathi, M. Heinrich, T. Siegrist and J. Pflaum, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2097–2101 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Merrifield, Pure Appl. Chem., 1971, 27, 481 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Burkhart, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 1974, 96, 6276 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avakian and R. E. Merrifield, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1964, 13, 541 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campione, E. Fumagalli, L. Raimondo, A. Monguzzi, F. Meinardi and A. Sassella, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 832–840 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1171 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Merkel and J. P. Dinnocenzo, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 303 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12007 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
V. May, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10086–10105 RSC .

          I. R. Levine, Physical Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, NY, 3rd edn,  1988 Search PubMed .

          M. Volkhard and O. Kuhn, Charge and Energy Transfer Dynamics in Molecular Systems, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
F. Laquai, G. Wegner, C. Im, A. Busing and S. Heun, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 074902 CrossRef .
J. Sandby Lissau, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23226–23232 Search PubMed .
B. W. D'Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585–1595 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. C. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908–912 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rapaport, J. Miliez, M. Bass, A. Cassanho and H. Jensen, J. Disp. Technol., 2006, 2, 68 CrossRef CAS .
E. Downing, L. Hesselink, J. Ralston and R. Macfarlane, Science, 1996, 273, 1185–1189 CAS .
V. Mahalingam, F. Mangiarini, F. Vetrone, V. Venkatramu, M. Bettinelli, A. Speghini and J. A. Capobianco, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17745 CAS .
A. Monguzzi, F. Riva, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 521, 17–19 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Gisser, B. S. Johnson, M. D. Ediger and E. D. Von Meerwall, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 512 CrossRef CAS .
M. Goutermann, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1961, 6, 138 CrossRef .
D. B. Papkowsky and T. C. O'Riodan, J. Fluoresc., 2005, 15, 569 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov and A. Cheprakov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 181103 CrossRef .
J. V. Morris, M. A. Mahaney and J. R. Huber, Chem. Phys., 1976, 16, 329 CrossRef .
V. Yakutkin, S. Aleshchenkov, S. Chernov, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, A. Cheprakov and S. Baluschev, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9846–9850 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Haefele, R. Ziessel and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, Dr H. Guo, W. Wu, W. Wu and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, W. Wu, W. Wu, Dr H. Guo and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1626 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nastasi, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, S. Diring and R. Ziessel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3982 RSC .
G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and A. Harriman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, W. Wu, W. Wu, H. Guo and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1626–1629 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, T. Khoury, R. Clady, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 1047–1053 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. Haneda, N. K. Labhsetwar, S. Hishita and N. Ohashi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 401, 579–584 CrossRef CAS .

          S. R. Wenham, M. A. Green and M. E. Watt, Applied Photovoltaics, Bridge Printery, Sydney (AUS),  1994 Search PubMed .
J. Mezyk, R. Tubino, A. Monguzzi, A. Mech and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 087404 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23900kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

Angelo Monguzzi
	Angelo Monguzzi is a post-doc fellow at the University of Milano Bicocca, where he graduated in Physics in 2005 and obtained his PhD in Materials Science in 2008. In 2009 he got the prize for Young Researcher Communication of the Società Italiana di Fisica. During his PhD he focused his scientific activity on photophysical properties of organic materials for photonics and optoelectronics. He published 30 scientific papers in the most relevant Physics, Chemistry and Materials Science international journals. From 2007 he started his study of sensitized up-conversion, actually the main topic of his work.

Riccardo Tubino
	Riccardo Tubino is a full professor of Physics at the University of Milano-Bicocca. His scientific activity is focused on the optical properties of organic semiconductors, photophysical properties of light harvesting materials and novel infrared light sources. He is an author of over 200 articles published on the most relevant Physics and Material Science journals.

Sajjad Hoseinkhani
	Sajjad Hoseinkhani has received his PhD in physics from the Politecnico di Milano in 2010. During his PhD, he studied the photophysics and excited state dynamics of the conjugated carbon materials especially carbon nanotubes with extreme temporal resolution by ultra-short femtosecond Pump-Probe Spectroscopy. He is currently a post-doctoral researcher at Material Science Department in the Bicocca University of Milan, where his research activity deals with photoluminescence spectroscopy, focusing on photon up-conversion by triplet–triplet annihilation in organic systems.

Marcello Campione
	Since his PhD in Materials Science: Nanostructured Materials in 2005, Marcello Campione has been working on the study of the growth dynamics and structural properties of thin films of molecular organic semiconductors using scanning probe microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and X-ray diffraction methods. Since 2009 he is a Permanent Researcher in Experimental Physics at the Università di Milano Bicocca. His main scientific interests are the analysis of the microscopic growth mechanism of molecular organic thin films by scanning probe techniques, the study of organic–organic epitaxy, and the growth of single crystals of organic semiconductors for device applications.

Francesco Meinardi
	After his Physics degree at the University of Milano (1992), Francesco Meinardi earned a master in “Material Science and Technology” (1995), and in 1999 obtained a researcher position in Experimental Physics at the Milano-Bicocca University where he is a professor of Physics of Matter from 2005. His present research activity is focused on photophysics of organic materials. Main research topics include: cooperative effects in organic semiconductors, photophysics of conjugated oligomers, host–guest compound, organolanthanide complexes. He published more than 130 papers in international journals, and in 2007 organized the fourth edition of the “European conference on organic electronic and related phenomena”.

 	Fig. 1  Outline of the energy levels involved in the SUC process for a model donor/acceptor pair. Solid arrows indicate transitions in which a photon is involved while dashed arrows indicate radiationless transitions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Up-converted PL spectrum for common acceptor and donor pairs in THF solution, namely (A) DPA/PtOEP, (B) PERYL/PdPh4TBP and (C) BPEA/PdPh4TBP. Arrows indicate the excitation wavelength (0.5 mW cm−2) in the donor absorption band (dashed lines).	 
QYSUC = ½fϕAϕISCϕTTAϕET,	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 3  Experimental QYSUC for DPA2 (10−2 M, blue circles), DPA4 (10−4 M, green triangles), DPA5 (10−5 M, orange diamonds) and DPA6 (10−6 M, red hexagons) as a function of Iexc under CW excitation at 532 nm. PtOEP concentration has been kept constant at 10−4 M. The two straight lines represent the QYSUC dependency from Iexc in the low and high excitation power density ranges. The threshold intensity Ith is indicated as the point at which straight lines cross. For clarity, only DPA2 Ith is reported in the graph.	 
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 4  Theoretical (lines) and experimental (dots) values for Ith (blue dashed line) and Isat (red dotted line) as a function of the acceptor concentration in a DPA:PtOEP(10−4 M):THF solution, with an optical path of 0.1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Blue PL spectrum of a Cryst-UC sample under CW excitation at 532 nm as a function of the incident power of 1 mW (green), 2 mW (blue) and 3 mW (pink) and (B) red emission under 2 mW excitation.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) White light transmission image of Cryst-UC. (B) RGB PL image under 532 nm excitation. (C) Red filtered PL spectrum and (D) blue filtered PL spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 7  Solid line is the PL spectrum of a BPEA in 10−4 M THF solution. It falls in spectral window between Soret and Q absorption bands of PdPh4TBP (circles). PdPh4TBP phosphorescence (triangles) is quenched by BPEA triplets (solid arrow), whose energy is enough to match BPEA singlet manifold absorption (dotted line) after TTA thus generating PL.	 

 	Fig. 8  Outline of a model PV cell coupled with a SUC device. Incoming photons are partially absorbed (blue and green arrows) while sub-bandgap photons (red arrows) reach the SUC layer. Here, they are up-converted and emitted, thus higher energy photons re-absorbed by the cell.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23900k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
