Ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry; from basic research to applications and back again  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B606490F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B606490F
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2006, 4869-4883Ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry; from basic research to applications and back againJohannes G. Vosa and John M. Kelly*baNational Centre for Sensor Research, School of Chemical Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, IrelandbSchool of Chemistry and Centre for Chemical Synthesis and Chemical Biology, Trinity College, Dublin 2, IrelandReceived 8th May 2006, Accepted 30th August 2006First published on 21st September 2006AbstractSince the mid 1970's interest in the chemistry and applications of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes has increased steadily. In this perspective, the development of this area is tracked and discussed taking into account new scientific developments as well as novel applications. The interaction between basic and applied research is of particular importance and selected examples are highlighted.Johannes G. Vos and John M. KellyProfessor Han Vos is Professor of Inorganic Chemistry in Dublin City University. He obtained his Primary Degree and PhD (supervisor Dr W. L. Groeneveld) in Coordination Chemistry (1978) from Leiden University, The Netherlands and carried out post-doctoral work at the University of Dublin, Trinity College (supervisor Prof. J. M. Kelly) and the University of Fribourg, Switzerland (supervisor Prof. A. von Zelewsky). He joined Dublin City University in 1982. He has published more than 200 refereed papers in the area of ruthenium chemistry. He was Head of the School of Chemistry from 1996 to 2000 and again from 2003 to 2005. He is a Member of the Royal Irish Academy. His research interests are in the design of supramolecular systems containing transition metal complexes. Of particular relevance are the synthesis, photophysical and electrochemical properties of dinuclear and polymeric ruthenium and osmium polypyridyl complexes both in solution and when immobilised on solid substrates. The application of these compounds as optical and electrochemical sensors and in molecular electronics are investigated.John M. Kelly obtained his B.Sc. from the University of Manchester in 1965, an M.Sc. in organic photochemistry from McMaster University (supervisor, John J. McCullough) and his Ph.D. from the University of London (supervisor, George Porter) in 1970. After a Leverhulme Teaching Fellowship at the University of the West Indies, Jamaica, he carried out postdoctoral work in Ernst Koerner von Gustorf's group at the Max Planck Institut für Strahlenchemie, Mülheim. He joined Trinity College Dublin in 1973 and was Head of Department from 1994–2000. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and a Member of the Royal Irish Academy (MRIA). Current research interests include the transient spectroscopy of DNA and metal-containing compounds, the use of photochemical reagents to carry out site-specific reactions on DNA, and the synthesis of micro- and nano-particles of metal oxides for application in electronic devices and biosensors.IntroductionOver the last 20–30 years ruthenium polypyridyl complexes have been investigated in perhaps greater detail than any other class of luminescent metal complexes. Many thousands of compounds have been prepared and a very extensive literature has evolved dealing with synthesis, photophysics, electrochemistry, solar cells, biosensors, modified electrodes, displays, etc. The enormous popularity of this class of compounds, and also of the related osmium, rhodium and iridium compounds has been driven by the wide range of applications that such compounds have seen and, potentially, will see in the future. Many of these applications are related to the well defined electrochemical and photophysical properties of the compounds. In addition, the extensive synthetic chemistry available allows for systematic manipulation of their physical properties while substituents, which allow immobilisation on a variety of surfaces, can be introduced. Investigation into the chemistry of ruthenium began in earnest in the late 1950s and 60s with the publication of the dinuclear complex [(NH3)5Ru2pz]2+ (pz is pyrazine) by Creutz and Taube1 and the first report of luminescence of the paradigm complex [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (bpy is 2,2′-bipyridine) by Paris and Brandt.2 However, the investigation of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes really exploded in the mid to late 1970's with the realisation that the combination of excited state and electrochemical properties of the compound [Ru(bpy)3]2+ should enable it to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. The fact that these observations were made in the middle of an energy crisis was further instrumental in generating such interest. Although it became clear that the initial expectations of photochemical water splitting were not easily realised, the almost ideal combination of physical properties of the compounds was sufficiently promising to encourage the search for potential applications in other areas. In this perspective a personal overview of many different aspects of ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry will be given. The aim of the overview is to outline the research lines that have evolved over the last number of years and show how basic research and application driven investigations have combined in producing a dynamic area of research. The simultaneous emergence of instrumentation, especially in the area of photophysics where femto- and pico-second timescales can now be probed routinely, has supported this expansion. These developments have not only given the scientific community additional instrumentation, but have, more importantly, extended the timescale of events to the edge of what can be called chemistry—the ‘impulsive limit’.3 In recent years the focus may have switched somewhat from ruthenium to other metals such as Re, Rh, Os etc. but the lessons learned over the last 30–40 years with ruthenium complexes are still very relevant for today's research community—a community forever searching for new properties and materials. This perspective will be based, to a large extent, on work carried out in our laboratories over the last 25 years combined with results obtained by other groups. Issues addressed will be: synthetic chemistry, polymer films and monolayers, supramolecular chemistry, photophysics and electrochemistry of dinuclear compounds, DNA interactions, molecular electronics and applications such as solar cells, sensors and displays which have arisen from these fundamental studies.Synthetic aspectsOne of the reasons that ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry has expanded so enormously is that compounds of this type have an extensive synthetic chemistry. No other metallic compounds, with the possible exception of ferrocene, show similar stability and flexibility. As a second row transition metal, the ligand field is considerably larger than that observed for first row metals. This has the result that higher temperatures are needed to exchange ligands, but overall the compounds obtained are very stable. In addition ligands can be exchanged in a systematic manner, removing some while maintaining the presence of others often with retention of stereo-configuration.4 Melting points are invariably high and the compounds are often stable in solvents such as concentrated sulfuric acid. Importantly they are also stable under conditions normally encountered in synthetic organic chemistry; this, combined with the fact that from a synthetic point of view substituents on coordinated polypyridyl ligands do not behave very differently from their non-coordinated analogues, results in a rich “inorganic” organic chemistry. The ability to utilise this extensive synthetic expertise has enabled researchers to prepare intricate molecular assemblies, something that is impossible with a first row transition metal such as iron. This ability to synthesize “designer compounds” has been central to the development of the area.[Ru(bpy)2Cl2]·2H2O and its analogues are well-known precursors and many thousands of complexes have been prepared5 including optically pure compounds.6 The preparation of tris heteroleptic compounds is substantially more challenging but there are now a number of methods available that have opened the path for further extension of multinuclear systems of even greater complexity7,8 Some approaches reported are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1  Methods for the synthesis of tris heteroleptic compounds. The development of novel synthetic methods has been important for the preparation of multinuclear metal complexes. Often dinuclear systems cannot be obtained easily in pure form by the direct reaction of bridging ligands with metal centres, either because mononuclear precursors are needed in the case of heteronuclear compounds or due to the formation of coordination isomers. Tzalis and Tor have developed a palladium mediated cross-coupling between optically pure bromo and ethynyl substituted phenanthroline complexes as shown in Fig. 2.9 Hanan and co-workers have used Pd coupling reactions (see Fig. 3) to build up bridging ligands aimed at the preparation of heteronuclear dinuclear compounds.10 Fig. 2  Palladium catalysed coupling reaction.  Fig. 3  Preparation of heterometallic dinuclear complexes. (i) 2-Pyridylzinc bromide, Pd(PPh3)4, DMF, r.t., 97% yield; (ii) Os(bpy)2Cl2, HOCH2CH2OH, 43% yield. In our own laboratories we have prepared dinuclear compounds of the multidentate ligand shown in Fig. 4. Although the bridging ligand shown at the top of the figure can be prepared in good yield it is evident that a range of isomers can be expected upon direct reaction of that ligand with two metal centres. As a result a different route was taken based upon the Ni(0) catalysed coupling reaction of a bromo substituted mononuclear precursor as shown in Fig. 4.11 It is important to note that the presence of the bromo substituent on the 5-position of the triazole ring not only enables the coupling reaction, but also determines the coordination isomer formed for the mononuclear precursor, since the presence of a bulky group at that position prevents coordination of the neighbouring N4 atom. Fig. 4  Stepwise synthesis of dinuclear ruthenium complex by Ni(0) catalysed coupling reaction. Balzani and co-workers, in their study of dendritic systems based on the bridging ligand bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine (dpp), have also followed multistep synthetic approaches.12 In this complexes-as-metals and complexes-as-ligands approach they prepared a wide range of polynuclear compounds. Some typical precursors utilised in their approach are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5  a) Precursors for the preparation of metal dendrimers based on polypyridyl moieties. b) Energy transfer pathways for compounds containing Ru centres (open circle) and Os centres (black circle) in bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine (box) based dendrimers. Of particular interest is the introduction of protecting groups at selected nitrogen atoms (compound B, Fig 5a), aimed at reducing the range of products obtained. Åkermark and Styring and co-workers, in their detailed studies of artificial mimics of the water splitting component of photosystem II have reported several examples (see Fig. 6) of the application of multistep organic chemistry techniques to inorganic compounds.13 A mixed Ru–Mn trinuclear compound (see Fig. 6) was prepared in a four step synthesis starting from a ruthenium bis(bpy) precursor. Fig. 6  Comparison of natural and artificial photosynthetic assemblies. Reproduced from ref. 13. Another example of how both the modification of ligands and of complexes can be carried out is shown in Fig. 7.14 Fig. 7  Alternative approaches to obtain complexes with substituted bpy ligands. Ligand modification of coordinated ligands can produce coordination isomers, which cannot be obtained by other means as shown in Fig. 8.15 Methylation of the complex occurs at the sterically hindered N1 position of the triazole ring. When the N1 substituted ligand is reacted with a Ru(bpy)2 precursor directly, a single product is obtained in which the triazole ring is coordinated to the metal centre via the N4 atom. Interestingly this sterically favoured N4 isomer can be obtained by photolysis of the N2 species shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8  Stereoselective methylation of a ruthenium complex. Another example of regioselective substitution carried out by Rau and co-workers is shown in Fig. 9. Here selective substitution of bromine by methoxy groups is observed.16 Modification of coordinated ligands has also been used to enable the introduction of potentially reactive substituents such as hydroquinones by deprotection of presursor complexes containing methoxy moieties.17 Fig. 9  Regioselective introduction of methoxy groups in a coordinated 1,10-phenanthroline ligand. Reproduced from S. Rau, R. Fischer, M. Jäger, B. Schäfer, S. Meyer, G. Kreisel, H. Görls, M. Rudolf, W. Henry and J.G. Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 2001 with permission. Copyright Wiley Publishers, 2004. With the increasing complexity of the compounds prepared, the need for purification and characterisation techniques capable of producing and identifying high purity molecular materials has become increasingly important. UV/VIS and emission spectroscopy are in general a good indication for the type of coordination environment of the ruthenium centre, but these techniques are somewhat less useful for the corresponding osmium complexes. Mass spectrometry, especially through the use of electrospray ionisation (ESI-MS) and cold spray ionisation (CSI-MS), is of particular help for the study of multinuclear and labile coordination compounds and for probing non-covalently bound species in solution or in biomolecules.18a–c The most detailed information is normally obtained from NMR spectroscopy. For low spin Ru(II) high quality spectra can be obtained. With increasing complexity of the compounds the number of signals will, however, increase and more and more resonances will overlap. One solution is the introduction of deuteriated ligands. With a partial deuteriation of the ligands cleaner spectra can be obtained, which give more information about the more detailed aspects of the NMR spectroscopic data. An example is given in Fig. 10.18d Fig. 10  1H NMR spectra of [Ru(bpy)2(phpztr)]+ (Hphpztr is 3-phenyl-5-(pyrazine-2′-yl)-1,2,4-triazole) and some of its isotopologues in CD3CN (phpztr− signals indicated by arrows). Adapted with permission from W. R. Browne, C. M. O’Connor, J. S. Killeen, A. L. Guckian, M. Burke, P. James, M. Burke and J.G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 4245. Copyright American Chemical Society. Importantly, deuteriation can also be used to determine the nature of the excited state in mixed ligand compounds. Results obtained show that to a first approximation, deuteration of ligand A in the hypothetical complex [M(A)2(B)] will lead to an increase in the emission lifetime when the emitting state is based on that ligand. Otherwise the emission lifetime will be unchanged. This behaviour is observed for many mixed ligand compounds.19 It needs to be considered, however, that coupling of excited states (i.e. fast internal conversion between low lying excited states) may take place, in which case the results obtained may be less clear. An additional role for deuteriation of ligands is encountered in resonance Raman (rR) spectroscopy.19,20 When used in conjunction with excited state rR, deuteriation becomes an important tool in determining the nature of the emitting state. Since the vibrational features observed in excited state rR are related to the ligand where the excited state is located, a frequency shift in certain vibrational features upon deuteriation can provide direct evidence that the excited state under investigation is localised on the deuteriated ligand. In certain cases 99Ru NMR spectroscopy can be useful, especially in the identification of coordination isomers.21Ultimately semi-preparative HPLC is often the only way to achieve ultrapure compounds. The samples are first investigated using analytical HPLC and after a method is developed semipreparative separation can be obtained. For the average ruthenium complex cation exchange chromatography is most helpful,22 although alternative enantioselective separations using column chromatography and other HPLC columns have been reported also.23Solar energy applicationsIn the mid 1970's a paper appeared reporting that a surfactant derivative of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ when immobilised on a glass slide was able to split water using sunlight. Although, it was recognised soon afterwards that highly purified samples did not show this effect,24 the application of this type of ruthenium complex to the photoinduced splitting of water became a very active area of research. In particular, since it was realised that thermodynamically such a process should be possible. During the 1980's thousands of new compounds were reported.5 The aim of these studies was to improve the photostability and/or the photoinduced energy/electron transfer properties of the compounds. Extensive studies have been carried out investigating the potential use of catalytic cycles as outlined in Fig. 11.25 Fig. 11  Heterogeneous catalytic cycle proposed for the splitting of water. There are, however, several problems with such approaches, in particular the fast back reaction between the oxidised ruthenium complex and the reduced methylviologen (MV+). Efficiencies were, therefore, low and much effort was paid to the study of half catalytic cycles using sacrificial agents. Many efforts were made to reduce the effect of back reactions. Investigations in heterogeneous systems based on micelles, bilayers, ion-exchange resins, colloids, polymers, Nafion films and polyelectrolytes were carried out.26 None of these did, however, lead to stable, highly efficient systems. The real breakthrough came in the early 1990’s with the work of Grätzel and co-workers who developed photovoltaic cells based on nanocrystalline TiO2 surfaces modified with monolayers of ruthenium complexes27
				(see Fig. 12). Fig. 12  Schematic of dye sensitised solar cell including an immobilised ruthenium complex and the iodine/iodide redox couple needed for regeneration of the oxidised dye. With this arrangement efficient conversion of solar energy to electricity was demonstrated without the need for sacrificial donors. The efficiency of this device is based on two important components. Firstly, the use of nanocrystalline films with roughness factors of about 1000, leading to high surface coverages and therefore high absorption of incident light. Secondly, the very fast electron injection from the dye into the TiO2
				(See Fig. 13) coupled to a back reaction that is many orders of magnitude slower. This very fast electron injection has a surprising consequence. Fig. 13  Interaction between molecular component and nanocrystalline surface in Grätzel type solar cell. Thus the compound shown in Fig. 13, which contains two monodentate ligands, is known upon irradiation in solution, to undergo fast ligand exchange, in acetonitrile, the solvent used in the solar cell. This is, however, not observed for the immobilised dye and cells have been shown to be stable for a very long time. This suggests that injection is likely to take place very rapidly from a state close to the Franck–Condon state, e.g. an 1MLCT or vibrationally hot 3MLCT state and not from the equilibrated 3MLCT (THEXI) state, which is known to lead to subsequent population of the 3MC state resulting in photodecomposition.It is generally assumed that a direct chemical bond between the semiconductor surface and the molecular component is required, mostly a carboxy or phosphonate grouping. Importantly, however, it has been shown that for a dinuclear ruthenium/osmium compound injection from the osmium centre which is not attached directly, can take place via through space electron transfer.28 The structure of this compound is shown in Fig. 14. Fig. 14  Structure of a dinuclear ruthenium/osmium compound (dcbpy is 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine). Investigation of this compound in solution shows as expected that the emission is osmium based and energy transfer occurs from the ruthenium to the osmium centre. When attached to nanocrystalline TiO2, no emission is observed. Assuming that electron transfer is only efficient when the centre excited is covalently bound to the nanocrystalline surface and that the energy transfer cascade is away from the surface this was, initially, surprising. The osmium centre does not seem to have a through bond deactivation pathway. It seems likely, however, that electron transfer does occur but through space to a neighbouring nanoparticle. Many detailed studies on the behavior of TiO2 and other types of nanocrystalline surfaces modified with ruthenium polypyridyl complexes have been reported.29 In another example a ruthenium complex covalently bound to a methylviologen moiety was immobilised via the ruthenium centre to a nanocrystalline electrode. It was shown that the long lived photoinduced charge separation can be modulated by the potential applied to the electrode.30 Efficient electrochromic devices have also been reported.31Polymer modified electrodesAs pointed out already one result of the early investigations in the potential application of ruthenium compounds in solar devices was the explosion in the number of new materials. One type of material developed at that time was that of ruthenium containing polymers. Initially these materials were developed for their potential photophysical properties26,32 but also their electrochemical behaviour proved to be of great interest and their investigation together with that of the analogous osmium polymers led to the development of electrochemical and biosensors. Their properties as rectifying interfaces have also been investigated.33 In the following section some aspects of electrode surfaces modified with these polymers are discussed. The first example discussed is based on the well known photolability of ruthenium complexes. The effect of photolysis of an electrode modified with the ruthenium polymer [Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]+
				(for structure see Fig. 15) is shown in Fig. 16.34 Fig. 15  Structure of typical redox polymers; M is Ru or Os. N equals 5, 10, 15, 25 and represents the ratio between pyridine polymer units and metal centres.  Fig. 16  Photolysis of electrode modified with [Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]Cl. Black; effect of photolysis on electrochemical properties. red; limiting current obtained for the oxidation of Fe(II) using a rotating disc electrode. Dotted line before and solid line after photolysis. Adapted with permission from O. Haas, M. Kriens and J.G. Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1318. Copyright American Chemical Society. In this figure the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of the layer is recorded upon continuous irradiation. The redox couple initially observed at 640 mV is replaced by a new signal at 840 mV vs. SCE. These changes can be explained by the photolytic ligand exchange process32,35 shown in eqn (1); [Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]+
						+ H2O →
						[Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10H2O]2+
						+ Cl−(1)Since the polymer layers are in the order of one micron thick direct contact between the ruthenium centres and the electrode surface is not expected to be efficient especially not when one takes into account the short excited state lifetime (about 10 ns) of these polymers. Deactivation of the excited state by the electrode surface is therefore not expected to be efficient. The osmium analogues do not show any photoinduced ligand exchange as expected. For this reason this material has been employed in fundamental studies. The ideal electrochemistry of the osmium analogues is shown in Fig. 17. Fig. 17  Cyclic voltammogram (I–E) and correlated EQCM curve (ΔMvs. E)
					(red) for a [Os(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]+ polymer film in p-toluenesulfonic acid.36a Reprinted from J. Electroanal. Chem., 389, A.P. Clarke, J.G. Vos, A.R. Hillman and A. Glidle, Overall Redox Switching Characteristics of Osmium Containing Poly(4-vinylpyridine) Films Immersed in Aqueous p-Toluenesulphonic Acid, 129, Copyright (1995), with permission from Elsevier. This well-defined behaviour coupled with excellent stability of the redox centres allowed for detailed study of the charge transport and determination of the importance of parameters such as electron hopping, polymer movement and ion transport for the overall charge transport process. The fact that ion transport is closely related to the metal based redox process is illustrated in the mass increase (ΔM) of the layer as identified by an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM).36 Electrochemical studies on the effect of temperature, electrolyte concentration, crosslinking,37 layer thickness etc. have been carried out and a detailed understanding has been obtained of the charge transport properties of thin layers of these materials. These studies have shown that the rate determining step of the charge transport process can vary from polymer movement to electron hopping and ion transport depending on the nature of the electrolyte and the distance between the metal centres.38 The latter can be changed by synthetic means (see Fig. 15). In the present example one out of ten pyridine units of the polymer is bound to a metal centre. Important for such studies is the exact nature of the polymer film when in contact with electrolyte. This type of information can be obtained using in situ neutron reflectivity measurements, which can provide direct information about issues such as film swelling as a function of the nature and the concentration of the electrolyte.39This detailed fundamental electrochemical information together with the stability of the layers has led to the application of electrodes modified with such polymers as electrochemical sensors. The osmium polymers have been studied widely as electron relays in biosensors by Heller and co-workers.40 Enzymes are incorporated into the polymer layer and in a series of elegant studies the properties of these layers for the detection of glucose were investigated. Electrochemical sensors have been developed for analytes such as nitrite,41 nitrate42 and ascorbic acid.43 In the development of these sensors the ability to manipulate the redox potential of the metal centres has been shown to be an important variable and as a result analytical problems can be solved by tuning the redox potentials of polymer and analyte. This is illustrated in Fig. 16 using the photolability of the polymer layer. The CV's in the diagram indicate that ligand exchange results in a considerable increase in the redox potential of the polymer layer. This increase is directly reflected in the onset of the current voltage curves (shown in red) obtained for the oxidation of Fe(II) using a rotating disc electrode. The broken line shows the current obtained with the chloro polymer, while the behaviour for the same oxidation process of the photoproduct is shown in the continuous curve. Fig. 16 shows that mediation is initiated at the onset of the redox wave of the polymer layer and is, therefore, controlled by the redox potential of the metal centre. The mediation reaction taking place can be represented as; (2)Eqn (2) shows that the mediating current is, apart from the concentration of the redox partners, also strongly dependent on the second order rate constant kH, which is determined by the ΔG of the reaction. The difference between the redox couples of mediator and substrate is therefore a determining factor for the current voltage curves obtained. This observation can be used to devise electrochemical sensors, specific for particular analytes.For example, using a dual-electrode setup, where one electrode is coated with the ruthenium polymer and the other one with the Os(II) analogue (see Fig. 15) it is possible to simultaneously detect Fe(II) and Fe(III). The ruthenium polymer is capable of measuring Fe(II) but not able to reduce Fe(III), the osmium polymer has a redox potential, which mediates the reverse reaction.44From these investigations it appears that the electrochemical properties of these polymer layers are in broad terms controlled by two components. The redox potential is controlled by the nature of the metal centre, but the polymer properties control the kinetics and thermodynamics of charge transport through the layer. For example, ion transport is greatly dependent on the amount of swelling of the layer and of the interaction between anion and polymer backbone. This has the result that the “fundamental” properties of a particular polymer can not be determined. Parameters, such as charge transport rates, activation energies and catalytic behaviour will always depend of the interaction between the polymer layer and the contacting electrolyte, therefore, the results obtained are specific to the measurement conditions.45The stability of the metal centres involved in these polymer studies, together with the fact that their redox potentials can be changed systematically has also lead to a detailed investigation of their application as self-assembled monolayers. Redox centres of this type modified with pyridine or thiol groupings have been immobilized on gold and silver electrodes and detailed studies of their electrochemical properties have been carried out.45,46Intercomponent interaction in dinuclear metal complexes; molecular devicesAt the beginning of the 1980's the synthetic effort in ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry was directed towards the preparation of mononuclear complexes since at that stage the main aim of the work carried out was to produce dyes for solar applications. By 1990,5,47 less than 100 multinuclear compounds had been reported which showed luminescent properties. However, study of multinuclear compounds became more central, driven by the search for molecular devices and molecular machines.48,49 In this context a molecular machine or motor is defined as a molecular assembly capable of changing its position as a result of an external impulse. Extensive research in this field has been carried out using rotaxanes and catenanes.50 A light driven organic molecular rotor has also been reported.51 In the area of ruthenium chemistry Sauvage and co-workers have utilised the photochemical lability of ligands in ruthenium polypyridyl complexes as the starting point for the design of molecular motors where light driven and thermal movements can be instigated.52The development of molecular devices was encouraged by the emergence of supramolecular chemistry and by the increased knowledge that became available in the late 1980's concerning the natural photosynthetic centre in bacteria and plants. Suddenly the multi-step energy transfer and charge separation processes observed in nature were better understood and the desire to prepare artificial assemblies and model systems to study these processes took central stage. A good example of this approach is shown in Fig. 6 where a comparison is made between the components in both natural and artificial photosynthetic assemblies.13 As a result of this general interest more than 400 multinuclear compounds containing polypyridyl were listed by 19965a and many more have been reported since.53 The reader is directed to these references for a detailed overview of this area.The definition generally used to describe a supramolecular arrangement in this field of research is that in such an assembly the individual centres should retain many of their properties when incorporated, but that the assembly as a unit has new properties over and above those observed for the individual components. Examples of such additional processes are energy or electron transfer. The parameters generally used to modulate the intercomponent processes such as energy and electron transfer in multinuclear complexes are the control of the distance between the metal centres and the nature of the bridge. In the following example the importance of these two factors is illustrated. Firstly, the effect of the nature of the bridge is varied while the distance between the metal centres remains the same. The dinuclear compounds discussed are based on the bridging ligands a, b, c shown in Fig. 18. Fig. 18  Triazole based bridging ligands. The discussion will be based upon representations of the HOMO and LUMO orbitals of these compounds as obtained from DFT calculation and shown in Fig. 19 and 20.54 It is important to point out that the DFT results are in excellent agreement with the experimental results. The reader is referred to the original papers for details.55 Fig. 19  DFT presentations of HOMO and LUMO orbitals of dinuclear complexes based on the bridging ligands a and b shown in Fig. 18. HOMO and LUMO of complex with ligand a are A and C respectively. B and D represent the HOMO and LUMO of the compound with ligand b. Electron densities shown as yellow and blue.  Fig. 20  DFT representation of HOMO (A) and LUMO (B) for the dinuclear complex with ligand c in Fig. 18. The electron density repesentations shown in Fig. 19 indicate that the nature of the HOMO in the complex with the pyridine and pyrazine bridge are very similar (see A and B). In both compounds the HOMO is based on the metal centre as expected while the triazole grouping also carries a significant electron density. For both compounds two metal based oxidation potentials are observed with the separation (ΔE) of 300 mV; this relatively large value indicates a significant amount of interaction, which is hole transfer in nature. This interpretation is in agreement with the considerable electron density present on the triazole ring in the HOMO and by the dependence of ΔE on pH as observed in complexes based in the bis-triazole ligand d shown in Fig. 18.56 A comparison between the representations c and d in this figure shows that the nature of the excited state in the two compounds is very different. For the pyridine compound the excited state is clearly bpy based while for the pyrazine compound the excited state is based on the pyrazine bridge. These results are in agreement with the experimental data obtained for these compounds.The HOMO and LUMO orbital representations for the dinuclear compound based on bridging ligand c are shown in Fig. 20. It is striking that with relatively small variations in the ligand nature the electronic properties of the compounds are so different. The HOMO in the compound shown in Fig. 20 is still based on the metal centres with again a significant contribution on the triazole. It is important to note that this electron density is now not directly located between the two metal centres. Electrochemical data indicate that interaction between the metal centres in the ground state is only weak and that this interaction is taking place via the pyrazine based LUMO. Therefore, interaction is not based on hole transfer as observed for the two other compounds. So, irrespective of the presence of two negatively charged ligand components the interaction between the metal centres is much reduced compared to the compounds based in the ligands a and b. Clearly, the interaction between the metal centres depends most strongly on the moiety directly bridging the metal centres, this is triazole for the first two compounds and pyrazine for the latter. These results suggest that by manipulation of the nature of the ligand the interaction between the metal centres can be influenced very effectively, even if the distance between them remains the same.In the literature the importance of the distance between metal centres has been considered in great detail.57,58 Energy transfer rates observed for the compounds shown in Fig. 21 vary from ln ken values of about 20 to 14 when the distance between the metal centres is varied from 2.5 (n = 1) to 4.2 nm (n = 3). Detailed studies have also been carried out on dendritic systems containing both Ru and Os centres.12 An example of energy transfer pathways in such compounds is shown in Fig. 5b. Fig. 21  RuOs dinuclear compound n
					= 1, 2, 3. Optical sensingThe long-lived excited state lifetimes of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes have been instrumental for their development as luminescence sensors, in particular for the detection of O2.59 The commercial application of this type of sensor, where oxygen concentration is directly related to the emission intensity or lifetime is well underway. The most common approach taken in these studies is the immobilisation of the complexes in a solid matrix. Several environments have been used including polymers, Nafion and Vicor glass. Excellent results have been obtained by the immobilisation of ruthenium complexes in sol–gel type layers.60 In this approach thin sol–gel coatings are attached to waveguides or optical fibres and ruthenium complexes are immobilised either by electrostatic means or by covalent bonds. This method of coating is cheap and very flexible. For example, parameters such as thickness and porosity of the layer can be varied by changing the coating parameters. Ruthenium complexes such as [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 and [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2, dpp = 4,4′-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline, have been incorporated into sol–gel or polymeric matrices and their oxygen sensing capabilities have been investigated. It is important to realise that the photophysical properties of the compounds may be affected by the matrix itself.61 CO262 and pH63 sensors have been developed also by taking a similar approach.The emission properties of ruthenium complexes have also been employed in anion sensing,64 with typically polypyridyl ligands being modified with anion recognition groupings such as that shown in Fig. 22. Fig. 22  Anion recognition luminophore. With such receptor sites, anions such as phosphate are bound via hydrogen bonding interaction and the binding typically influences the emission properties of the complexes. Cation binding has also been observed by the introduction of binding sites such as crown ethers, EDTA or other similar groupings.65 For example, changes in emission wavelength and lifetime have been observed upon interaction of biimidazole complexes of ruthenium upon interaction with metal ions such as Zn, Ni, Co and Pd.66 The emitting properties have further been used in biological applications (see below).Electroluminescent displaysThe emitting properties of ruthenium compounds have recently also been successfully applied in the development of electroluminescent devices. Work in this area has been motivated by work by Bard and co-workers67 who noted that by using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ complexes in a solid state assembly efficient light emitting electrochemical cells could be produced. The mechanism behind this emission process is the reaction of electrochemically produced oxidised and reduced ruthenium complexes as outlined in eqn (3) and (4); [Ru(bpy)3]2+
						+ e−
						→
						[Ru(bpy)3]+(3) [Ru(bpy)3]2+
						→
						[Ru(bpy)3]3+
						+ e−(4)The reduced and oxidised compounds will then diffuse away from the electrode where they are produced and as a result a reaction layer is formed where emission is observed. [Ru(bpy)3]+
						+
						[Ru(bpy)3]3+
						→
						*[Ru(bpy)3]2+
						+
						[Ru(bpy)3]2+(5)This principle was recently further developed by De Cola and co-workers68 using a semiconducting polymer film doped with a phosphorescent complex. The layer consists of a substituted polyphenylenevinylene polymer (PPV) and a dinuclear ruthenium complex [RuRu]4+
				(see Fig. 23). At a forward bias of +5 V a red emission is obtained, originating from the combination of reduced and oxidised ruthenium complexes as shown above. Interestingly however at −5 V a green emission is observed. This emission can be explained by electron transfer from the doubly reduced ruthenium complex to oxidised PPV to create excited state PPV*. Alternatively the ruthenium complex can act as a mediator for a stepwise electron transfer from the electrode to PPV to produce PPV− as shown in eqn (6) and (7) below; [RuRu]2+
						+ 2PPV˙+
						→
						[RuRu]4+
						+ PPV*
						+ PPV(6) [RuRu]2+
						+ 2PPV →
						[RuRu]4+
						+ 2PPV−(7) Fig. 23  Electroluminescent spectra of PPV and a ruthenium complex at reverse (left) and forward bias (right). Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers; from S. Weller, K. Brunner, J.W. Hofstraat and L. De Cola, Nature, 2003, 421, 54. On this basis a device was constructed where a blend of the ruthenium complex and PPV was used. A schematic representration is shown in Fig. 24. The figure shows that by varying the bias in the device green or red light is produced. Fig. 24  Schematic representation of electrochemiluminescent device. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers; from S. Weller, K. Brunner, J.W. Hofstraat and L. De Cola, Nature, 2003, 421, 54. Interactions with nucleic acids and other biomoleculesFor more than 20 years there has been great interest in the study of the interaction of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes with nucleic acids.69 While much of the initial interest was stimulated by the Barton group's use of the enantiomers of such complexes as possible chiral probes for DNA,70 it was quickly recognised that, as the photophysical and electrochemical properties of the complex can be systematically varied by appropriate ligand substitution, they also have great potential as luminescent probes and as photochemical reagents.Changing the ligands of the complexes also provides a means to vary the nature and strength of binding to nucleic acids. Thus while all cationic complexes are expected to be attracted to the negative charged DNA, it can also be imagined that those complexes with extended heteroaromatic ligands might insert that ligand between the base-pairs of B-form double-stranded DNA (that is bind via intercalation.) In agreement with this hypothesis, it was observed that while [Ru(bpy)3]2+ binds relatively weakly to DNA (mainly through electrostatic interaction in one of the grooves), the interaction of [Ru(phen)3]2+ is much stronger.71 The partial intercalative nature of this binding was initially demonstrated using an electrophoretic/topoisomerase method to monitor the unwinding of the helix and the binding of this complex has since subsequently been studied in great detail using hydrodynamic72 and dichroism methods.73One of the first complexes which was shown to bind significantly more strongly to DNA was [Ru(bpy)2(HAT)]2+, where HAT is 1,4,5,8,9,12-hexaazatriphenylene (for structures see Fig. 25).74 This complex also showed a significantly different absorption spectrum and markedly enhanced emission upon DNA binding-features which are presumably a consequence of the changed environment experienced because of the intercalation of the HAT ligand between the base-pairs of DNA. Fig. 25  Some heteroaromatic ligands used in DNA intercalating ruthenium complexes. However the most dramatic effect of increasing the size of one of the heteroaromatic ligands is found for complexes such as [Ru(bpy)2(dppz)]2+, initially synthesised by Sauvage and co-workers75 and examined with DNA by Barton and co-workers.76 As the complex is non-luminescent in water but emits strongly in non-polar solvents or when intercalated into DNA, its use as a light-switching DNA probe has been proposed. The complex photophysical behaviour of such dppz complexes both in aqueous solution and when bound to DNA has been examined in a number of detailed fast reaction investigations, using luminescence measurements, visible transient absorption methods and vibrational (transient resonance Raman and CARS) techniques.77 These have emphasised the role of water in determining the relative stability of the dark and light states and have revealed the dominant control of entropy when the complex is in an aqueous environment.The analogous dipyridoquinoxaline (dpq) complexes, such as [Ru(bpy)2(dpq)]2+, do not show DNA light-switching behaviour, as the complexes in water luminesce quite strongly.78 Remarkably, amide substitution of the dpq to give [Ru(bpy)2(dpqa)]2+, produces a complex which is quite non-emissive in water. However it does luminesce in organic solvents or when bound to DNA, with a quantum yield, which is significantly greater than that of [Ru(bpy)2(dppz)]2+.79 Probing the amide carbonyl-stretch region using picosecond infra-red measurements has demonstrated that in water the initially formed MLCT state is rapidly deactivated (ca, 7 ps) to a longer-lived excited state (650 ps), which exhibits a strikingly different IR spectrum in the 1500–1700 cm−1 region, suspected to be due to an intramolecular charge transfer state.80A particularly dramatic effect of substitution on the photophysical and photochemical properties of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes is observed when phenanthroline is replaced by 1,4,5,8-tetraazaphenanthrene (TAP) or HAT. Initial experiments demonstrated that [Ru(TAP)3]2+ was much more efficient at causing single strand ‘nicking’ of DNA than either [Ru(bpy)3]2+ or [Ru(phen)3]2+.81 Subsequently it was shown that this complex formed covalent photo-adducts with DNA.82 Detailed studies then revealed that such behaviour depends crucially on the oxidising power of the excited state and that such behaviour is found for complexes such as [Ru(bpy)L2]2+ or [RuL3]2+
				(L = TAP, HAT) but not for the mono-substituted complex [Ru(bpy)2L]2+.83 Luminescence lifetime and laser flash photolysis experiments confirmed that these excited states could oxidise guanine either as the free nucleotide (5′-GMP) or in DNA, but not (except for the most oxidising complexes) the other nucleobases. The formation of adducts was attributed to the reaction of the radical products formed by initial electron transfer and subsequent proton transfer. Ru2+*
						+ GMP → Ru+
						+ GMP˙+(8) GMP˙+
						→ GMP(−H)˙
						+ H+(9) Ru+
						+ GMP(−H)˙
						+ H+
						→ Ru2+
						+ GMP(10) Ru+
						+ O2
						→ Ru2+
						+ O2˙−(11)The product of the photoreaction of [Ru(TAP)3]2+ with 5′-GMP was isolated and identified.84a Subsequently the photoproduct formed on DNA by [Ru(TAP)2(bpy)]2+ was enzymatically excised from DNA (see Fig. 26).84b It was shown that the adduct was of an unusual type, the bond between the metal complex and the DNA being directly between the TAP ligand and the exocyclic NH2-group of the guanine. More recently the Kirsch-De Mesmaeker group has demonstrated that in the photoadduct formed between [Ru(HAT)2(phen)]2+ and 5′-GMP a bond is formed between the ligand and the 6-O atom of the guanine.85 Fig. 26  Comparative structures of the products of (a)
					[Ru(TAP)2(bpy)]2+ and (b)
					[Ru(HAT)2(phen)]2+. The details of the photooxidation of guanine continue to be probed using complexes, such as [Ru(TAP)2(dppz)]2+ which combine oxidising power with strong intercalation into DNA.86 Both the forward and back reaction of this complex show a significant isotope effect when the reaction is carried out in D2O, a fact that has been attributed to the reaction proceeding by proton-coupled electron transfer.Various approaches have been taken to further enhance the binding of metal complexes to DNA. This includes the use of multinuclear complexes.87 A particularly interesting case is that of Δ,Δ-[µ-(11,11′-bidppz)(phen)4Ru2]4+, which binds very strongly to double-stranded DNA, but with remarkably slow kinetics.88 Stereoselective interactions between [{Ru(phen)2}2(µ-HAT)]4+ and nucleotides (5′-GMP, 5′-AMP) or denatured DNA have been observed, with the meso-isomer interacting much more strongly than the Δ,Δ- or Λ,Λ-enantiomers.89 A further interesting example of preferential binding is that exhibited by [{Ru(Me2bpy)2}2(µ-2,2′-bipyrimidine)]4+, which was examined in the presence of the deoxyoligonucleotide d(CCGAGAATTCCGG)2.90 It was observed that the Δ,Δ-enantiomer bound to the bulge, which is formed in the non-complementary regions of the double-stranded DNA, whereas its Λ,Λ-isomer did not.The targeting of specific sequences on DNA is however probably best achieved by linking the metal complex to an oligonucleotide having a sequence complementary to that of the target. This has been used to design a range of sequence-specific luminescence probes.91 A similar approach can be used to photochemically target particular sequences. For example with one characteristic of chronic myeloid leukaemia, it has been shown that visible-light excitation causes oxidative damage only at the guanine G21 located in close proximity to the photosensitising [Ru(phen)3]2+-centre (Fig. 27).92 Linking of [Ru(TAP)2(4,7-Ph2phen)]2+-type centres to oligonucleotides has been exploited to study the distance dependence of the photo-induced electron transfer from guanine to the excited state of the metal complex.93 The formation of photoadducts leads to cross-linking of the two strands and a resultant blocking of exonuclease activity. Fig. 27  Photochemical targeting of oxidative damage to a particular guanine in a sequence characteristic of chronic myeloid leukaemia. It may be seen therefore that the rich chemical and structural diversity of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes has provided the biological chemist with a range of chemical, luminescent and photochemical probes to study DNA and potentially to open up new routes to therapeutic agents.Molecular electronicsRecently we reported on the application of osmium polypyridyl complexes as potential molecular transistors. Other similar papers have also appeared.94 Of interest is to note that this new development arose from our long standing interest in polymer modified electrodes. This is illustrated in Fig. 28, which shows that the redox active metal center employed is the same as in the earlier polymers. The present work furthermore builds on the extensive work carried out on self assembled monolayers.45,46 The most striking observation obtained in these studies is that self-assembled monolayers of these molecules show transistor like behaviour in situ and at room temperature. The tunneling currents observed are in agreement with theoretical studies and are controlled by the redox properties of the metal center, which allows for systematic variations. The potential of such compounds therefore looks promising. Fig. 28  Experimental and simulated in situ STS (scanning tunnelling spectroscopy) data. Adapted from; T. Albrecht, A. Guckian, J. Ulstrup and J. G. Vos, Trans. Nanotech. IEEE, 2005, 4, 430. © 2005 IEEE. Concluding remarksAlthough [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was first prepared in the 1930's, research on ruthenium polypyridyl chemistry really got underway following the initial promise of its application to the conversion and storage of solar energy. Many hundreds of compounds were prepared with the aim of enhancing the photophysical and electrochemical properties and at the same time improving the photochemical stability of the compounds. The successful development of the Grätzel cell owes much to this work, although it is somewhat ironic that the compounds now routinely used in this device are actually photolabile in solution. However, the synthetic experience gained has proved invaluable for the design and preparation of complexes for a wide variety of applications including the active components for biosensors, molecular motors, optical displays and molecular electronics. In the last two rather new areas considerable growth may be expected in the near future, as initial results68 are very promising. It may be expected that ruthenium polypyridyl complexes will play pivotal roles in these and other areas of nanotechnology. For the next generation of electronic devices the design of “real” molecular wires—connectors that will facilitate interaction between for example donor and acceptor moieties—are needed. At present many rod-like systems have been labelled as molecular wires, however most show a rapid decrease in energy upon electron transfer and there is therefore place for further synthetic efforts to achieve long-range conductivity. Of interest in this area may also be the recent observations made that carbon nanotubes can be coated efficiently with the redox polymers discussed above.95 This observation offers the possibility of the development of an alternative type of molecular wire in the future.Significant developments are also expected in the application of ruthenium complexes as biological probes and possibly even as the active constituent of phototherapeutic procedures. Equally it is likely, especially given the belated realisation amongst politicians that the world needs to consider alternatives to carbon-based fuels, that we may see a rekindling of interest in artificial photosynthesis and solar energy conversion. Another possible development is of catalytic systems for the photochemical or electrochemical reduction of CO2. It would certainly not be a surprise to see polypyridyl complexes involved in these processes. Indeed it may be possible, and would be very gratifying, to see the promise of the studies carried out over almost 30 years lead to established technology.AcknowledgementsWe are thankful to all the postgraduates and postdoctoral collaborators who have contributed enormously to our research effort. We also wish to thank our many national and international collaborators. It is impossible to mention them all but we wish to thank in particular, Professors Jan Reedijk, Vincenzo Balzani, John McGarvey, Luisa De Cola, Fanny Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Sebastiano Campagna, Robert Forster and Rob Hillman and Drs Ronald Hage and Tia Keyes. We wish to thank Drs Wesley Browne and Tim Albrecht for useful discussions during the preparation of this manuscript. Finally we wish to thank Enterprise Ireland, Science Foundation Ireland and the EU for financial support.References and notesC. Creutz and H. Taube, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1969, 91, 3988 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Paris and W. W. Brandt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1959, 81, 5001 CrossRef CAS .i.e. the limit in which the pulse duration is less than a single vibrational oscillation period.   L. Dhar, J. A. Rogers and K. A. Nelson, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 157 Search PubMed .D. Hesek, Y. Inoue, S. R. L. Everitt, H. Ishida, M. Kunieda and M. G. B. Drew, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 317 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) V. Balzani, A. Juris, M. Venturi, S. Campagna and S. Serroni, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 759–833 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. De Cola and P. Belser, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 301 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) V. Balzani and F. Scandola, Supramolecular Photochemistry, Ellis Horwood, New York,  1991 Search PubMed .
  (a) U. Knof and A. von Zelewsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 302 CrossRef ; 
  (b) N. C. Fletcher, P. C. Junk, D. A. Reitsma and F. R. Keene, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1998, 133 RSC .For a review see:   L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon and C. M. Kepert, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1329 Search PubMed .
  (a) D. A. Freedman, J. K. Evju, M. K. Pomije and K. R. Mann, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5711 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Mulhern, S. Brooker, H. Görls, S. Rau and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2006, 51 RSC .D. Tzalis and Y. Tor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 852 CrossRef CAS .Y. Fang, M. I. J. Polson and G. S. Hanan, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 5 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Fanni, C. Di Pietro, S. Serroni, S. Campagna and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2000, 42 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Di Pietro, S. Serroni, S. Campagna, T. Gandolfi, R. Ballardini, S. Fanni, W. R. Browne and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 2871 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) G. Denti, S. Campagna, S. Serroni, M. Ciano and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 2944 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Balzani, S. Campagna, G. Denti, A. Juris, S. Serroni and M. Venturi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 26 CrossRef CAS .L. Sun, L. Hammarström, B. Åkermark and S. Styring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 36 RSC .J. S. Killeen, W. R. Browne, M. Skupin, J.-H Fuhrhop and J. G. Vos, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 1078 RSC .
  (a) S. Fanni, S. Murphy, J. S. Killeen and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 1320 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Fanni, F. M. Weldon, L. Hammarström, E. Mukhtar, W. R. Browne, T. E. Keyes and J. G. Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 529 CrossRef CAS .S. Rau, R. Fischer, M. Jäger, B. Schäfer, S. Meyer, G. Kreisel, H. Görls, M. Rudolf, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 2001 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. Whittle, N. S. Everest, C. Howard and M. D. Ward, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 2025 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. O'Brien, M. Duati, S. Rau, A. L. Guckian, T. E. Keyes, N. M. O'Boyle, A. Serr, H. Görls and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2004, 514 RSC .
  (a) M. Tominaga, K. Suzuki, T. Murase and M. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11950 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Kumazawa, M. Yoshizawa, H.-B. Liu, Y. Kamikawa, M. Moriyama, T. Kato and M. Fujita, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2519 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Potier, H. Rogniaux, G. Chevreux and A. Van Dorsselaer, Methods Enzymol., 2005, 402, 361 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) W. R. Browne, C. M. O'Connor, J. S. Killeen, A. L. Guckian, M. Burke, P. James, M. Burke and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 4245 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. E. Keyes, E. Müller, P. Pechy, M. Grätzel and J. G. Vos, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1995, 2705 RSC ; 
  (b) T. E. Keyes, C. M. O'Connor, U. O'Dwyer, C. C. Coates, P. Callaghan, J. J. McGarvey and J. G. Vos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 8915 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Danzer and J. R. Kincaid, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 3976 CrossRef CAS .S. Gaemers, J. van Slagteren, C. M. O'Connor, J. G. Vos, R. Hage and C. J. Elsevier, Organometallics, 1999, 18, 5238 CrossRef CAS .B. E. Buchanan, R. Wang, J. G. Vos, R. Hage, J. G. Haasnoot and J. Reedijk, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 3263 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) For a review see:   F. R. Keene, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1007, 121, 159 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) W. R. Browne, C. M. O'Connor, C. Villani and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5461 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. R. Browne, D. Hesek, J. F. Gallagher, C. M. O'Connor, J. S. Killeen, F. Aoki, H. Ishida, Y. Inoue, C. Villani and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2003, 2597 RSC ; 
  (d) D. Hesek, Y. Inoue, S. R. L. Everitt, H. Ishida, M. Kunieda and M. G. B. Drew, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 39, 317 .
  (a) G. Sprintschnik, H. W. Sprintschnik, P. P. Kirsch and D. G. Whitten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 2337 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Sprintschnik, H. W. Sprintschnik, P. P. Kirsch and D. G. Whitten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 4949 .K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1979, 18, 781 CrossRef .M. Kaneko, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1101 CrossRef CAS ; P. M. Ennis, J. M. Kelly and C. M. O'Connell, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1986, 2485 RSC ; P. M. Ennis and J. M. Kelly, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 5735 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Lees, C. J. Kleverlaan, C. A. Bignozzi and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5343 CrossRef .C. A. Bignozzi, R. Argazzi and C. J. Kleverlaan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 87 RSC .G. Will, G. Boschloo, S. N. Rao and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8067 CrossRef CAS .D. Cummins, G. Boschloo, M. Ryan, D. Corr, S. N. Rao and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11449 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Clear, J. M. Kelly, C. M. O'Connell and J. G. Vos, J. Chem. Res. (M), 1981, 3039. Search PubMed .H. D. Abruña, P. Denisevich, M. Umaña, T. J. Meyer and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1 CrossRef CAS .O. Haas, M. Kriens and J. G. Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1318 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Clear, J. M. Kelly, D. C. Pepper and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1979, 33, L139 CrossRef .
  (a) A. P. Clarke, J. G. Vos, A. R. Hillman and A. Glidle, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 389, 129 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Kelly, J. G. Vos and A. R. Hillman, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 4121 RSC .
  (a) A. P. Doherty and J. G. Vos, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 3424 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. P. Doherty, M. A. Stanley, G. Arana, C. E. Koning, R. H. G. Brinkhuis and J. G. Vos, Electroanalysis, 1995, 7, 333 CAS .
  (a) R. J. Forster and J. G. Vos, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 1863 RSC ; 
  (b) R. J. Forster and J. G. Vos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 1503 CAS ; 
  (c) R. J. Forster and J. G. Vos, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 4330 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. J. Forster and J. G. Vos, in Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry, Vol XXVII Analytical Voltammetry, ed. M. R. Smyth and J. G. Vos, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1992, p. 465 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. W. Wilson, R. Cubitt, A. Glidle, A. R. Hillman, P. M. Saville and J. G. Vos, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 3533 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. W. Wilson, L. Bailey, R. Cubitt, M. Gonsalves, A. Glidle, A. R. Hillmann, J. G. Vos, C. Hogan and J. R. P. Webster, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 843 RSC .C. R. Rajagopolan, A. Aoki and A. Heller, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 3719 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. M. Malone, A. P. Doherty, M. R. Smyth and J. G. Vos, Analyst, 1992, 117, 1259 RSC ; 
  (b) A. P. Doherty and J. G. Vos, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1992, 88, 2903 RSC .
  (a) A. P. Doherty, M. A. Stanley, D. Leech and J. G. Vos, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1996, 319, 111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. A. Stanley, J. Maxwell, M. Forrestal, A. P. Doherty, B. D. MacCraith, D. Diamond and J. G. Vos, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1994, 299, 81 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Doherty, M. A. Stanley and J. G. Vos, Analyst, 1995, 120, 2371 RSC .A. P. Doherty, R. J. Forster, M. R. Smyth and J. G. Vos, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 572 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Forster, T. E. Keyes and J. G. Vos, Interfacial, Supramolecular Assemblies, Wiley, Chichester,  2003 Search PubMed .
  (a) R. J. Forster, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 3394 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. J. Forster, P. J. Ploughman and T. E. Keyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 11948 CrossRef CAS .V. Balzani and L. Moggi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1009, 97, 313 Search PubMed .
  (a) V. Balzani, Small, 2005, 1, 278 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Bazani, M. Venturi and A. credo, Molecular Devices and Machines, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
  (a) For reviews see:   J. P. Sauvage, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 611 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. P. Collin, V. Heitz, S. Bonnet and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2005, 8, 1065 .R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, M. T. Candolfi, L. Prodi, M. Venturi, D. Philp, H. G. Rickets and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 1301 CrossRef .N. Koumura, W. J. Zijlstra, R. A. Delden, N. Harada and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 1999, 401, 152 CrossRef CAS .P. Mobian, J.-M. Kern and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2392 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) For reviews see:   K. D. Demadis, C. M. Hartshorn and T. J. Meyer, T. J., Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2655 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. D. Ward and J. A. McCleverty, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 276 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) E. Baranoff, J.-P. Collin, L. Flamigni and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 147 RSC  ; see also reference 5.N. M. Boyle, PhD Thesis, Dublin City University,  2004 .
  (a) W. R. Browne, N. M. O'Boyle, W. Henry, A. L. Guckian, S. Horn, T. Fett, C. M. O'Connor, M. Duati, L. De Cola, C. G. Coates, K. L. Ronayne, J. J. McGarvey and J. G. Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1229 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Hage, J. G. Haasnoot, H. A. Niewenhuis, J. Reedijk, D. H. De Ridder, J. G. Vos and R. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 9245 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Hage, J. G. Haasnoot, J. Reedijk, R. Wang and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 1991, 30, 3263 CrossRef CAS .C. Di Pietro, S. Serroni, S. Campagna, T. Gandolfi, R. Ballardini, S. Fanni, W. R. Browne and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 2871 CrossRef CAS .B. Schlicke, P. Belser, L. DeCola, E. Sabbioni and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 4207 CrossRef CAS .C. Chiorboli, M. T. Indelli and F. Scandola, Molecular Wires, Top. Curr. Chem., ed. L. De Cola, Springer, Berlin,  2005, vol. 257 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. N. Demas and B. A. DeGraff, Anal. Chem., 1991, 63, 829A CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. E. Lippitsch, J. Pusterhofer, M. J. P. Leiner and O. S. Wolfbeis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1988, 205, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. N. Demas and B. A. DeGraff, Chem. Educ., 1997, 74, 690 Search PubMed .B. D. MacCraith, C. M. McDonagh, G. O'Keeffe, T. E. Keyes, J. G. Vos, B. O'Kelly and J. F. McGilp, Analyst, 1993, 118, 385 RSC .K. Mongey, J. G. Vos, B. D. MacCraith, C. M. McDonagh, C. Coates and J. J. McGarvey, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1473 RSC .G. Orellana, M. C. Morena-Bondi, E. Segovia and M. D. Marazuela, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 2210 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. Grigg and W. D. J. A. Norbert, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 1300 RSC ; 
  (b) J. M. Price, W. Xu, J. N. Demas and B. A. DeGraff, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Malins, H. G. Glever, T. E. Keyes, J. G. Vos, W. J. Dressick and B. D. MacCraith, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 67, 89 CrossRef .
  (a) P. D. Beer and J. Cadman, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 205, 131 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Duff, A. Grüßung, J.-L. Thomas, M. Duati and J. G. Vos, Polyhedron, 2003, 22, 775 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) V. W. W. Wang and A. S. F. Kay, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2000, 300–302, 82 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. D. Beer, Chem. Commun., 1996, 689 RSC .S. Rau, T. Buttner, C. Temme, H. Gorls, D. Walther, M. Duati, S. Fanni and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 1621 CrossRef CAS .M. Buda, G. Kalyzhny and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6090 CrossRef CAS .S. Weller, K. Brunner, J. W. Hofstraat and L. De Cola, Nature, 2003, 421, 54 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. Nordén, P. Lincoln, B. kerman and E. Tuite, Met. Ions Biol. Syst., 1996, 33, 177 CAS ; 
  (b) E. D. A. Stemp and J. K. Barton, Met. Ions Biol. Syst., 1996, 33, 325 CAS ; 
  (c) C. Moucheron, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker and J. M. Kelly, Struct. Bonding, 1998, 92, 163 CAS ; 
  (d) K. E. Erkkila, D. T. Odom and J. K. Barton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2777 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) L. N. Ji and X. H. Zou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 216–217, 513 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. Metcalfe and J. A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 215 RSC ; 
  (g) M. J. Clarke, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 236, 209 CrossRef CAS ; H. Chao and L.-N. Li, Bioinorg. Chem. Appl., 2005, 3, 15 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. K. Barton, A. T. Danishefsky and J. M. Goldberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 2172 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. K. Barton, J. M. Goldberg, C. V. Kumar and N. J. Turro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 2081 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Kelly, A. B. Tossi, D. J. McConnell and C. OhUigin, Nucleic Acids Res., 1985, 13, 6017 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Satyanaryana, J. C. Dabrowiak and J. B. Chaires, Biochemistry, 1992, 31, 9319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Satyanaryana, J. C. Dabrowiak and J. B. Chaires, Biochemistry, 1993, 32, 2573 CrossRef CAS .P. Lincoln and B. Norden, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9583 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. B. Tossi and J. M. Kelly, Photochem. Photobiol., 1989, 49, 545 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. de Buyl, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, A. Tossi and J. M. Kelly, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1991, 60, 27 CrossRef CAS .J.-C. Chambron, J.-P. Sauvage, E. Amouyal and P. Koffi, Nouv. J. Chim., 1985, 9, 527 Search PubMed .
  (a) Y. Jenkins, A. E. Friedman, N. J. Turro and J. K. Barton, Biochemistry, 1992, 31, 10809 CrossRef CAS ; R. M. Hartshorn and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5919 CrossRef .
  (a) I. Haq, P. Lincoln, D. Suh, B. Nordén, B. Z. Chowdhry and J. B. Chaires, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 4788 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. J. C. Olson, D. Hu, A. Hörmann, A. M. Jonkman, M. R. Arkin, E. D. A. Stemp, J. K. Barton and P. F. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11458 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. G. Coates, L. Jacquet, J. J. McGarvey, S. E. J. Bell, A. H. R. Al-Obaidi and J. M. Kelly, Chem. Commun., 1996, 35 RSC ; C. G. Coates, L. Jacquet, J. J. McGarvey, S. E. J. Bell, A. H. R. Al-Obaidi and J. M. Kelly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7130 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. Onfelt, P. Lincoln, P. Norden, J. S. Baskin and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2000, 97, 5708 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. G. Coates, P. L. Callaghan, J. J. McGarvey, J. M. Kelly, P. E. Kruger and M. E. Higgins;, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2000, 31, 283 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. G. Coates, J. Olofsson, M. Coletti, J. J. McGarvey, B. Önfelt, P. Lincoln, B. Nordén, E. Tuite, P. Matousek and A. W. Parker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12653 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) L. Ujj, C. G. Coates, J. M. Kelly, P. E. Kruger, J. J. McGarvey and G. H. Atkinson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4854 CrossRef ; 
  (h) M. K. Brennaman, J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, C. N. Flemming, P. Jang, T. J. Meyer and J. M. Papanikolas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15094 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) B. Önfelt, J. Olofsson, P. Lincoln and B. Nordén, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 1000 CrossRef .
  (a) J. G. Collins, J. R. Aldrich-Wright, I. D. Greguric and P. A. Pellegrini, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 5502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Aldrich-Wright, C. Brodie, E. C. Glazer, N. W. Luedtke, L. Elson-Schwab and Y. Tor, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1018 RSC ; 
  (c) K. ODonoghue, J. C. Penedo, J. M. Kelly and P. E. Kruger, Dalton Trans., 2005, 1123 RSC .K. A. O'Donoghue, J. M. Kelly and P. E. Kruger, Dalton Trans., 2004, 13 RSC .C. Creely, J. M. Kelly, P. E. Kruger and K. A. O'Donoghue, manuscript in preparation.J. M. Kelly, D. J. McConnell, C. OhUigin, B. Tossi, A. Kirsch-De Maesmaeker, A. Masschelein and J. Nasielski, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 1821 RSC .
  (a) M. Kelly, M. M. Feeney, A. B. Tossi, J.-P. Lecomte and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Anti-Cancer Drug Des., 1990, 5, 69 ; 
  (b) M. M. Feeney, J. M. Kelly, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, J.-P. Lecomte and A. B. Tossi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1994, 23, 69 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. P. Lecomte, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, J. M. Kelly, A. B. Tossi and H. Görner, Photochem. Photobiol., 1992, 55, 681 CAS ; 
  (b) J. P. Lecomte, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, M. M. Feeney and J. M. Kelly, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 6481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Blasius, C. Moucheron and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 3971 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) L. Jacquet, J. M. Kelly and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 913 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Jacquet, R. J. H. Davies, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker and J. M. Kelly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11763 CrossRef CAS .R. Blasius, H. Nierengarten, M. Luhmer, J. F. Constant, E. Defrancq, P. Dumy, A. van Dorsselaer, C. Moucheron and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. G. Coates, P. Callaghan, J. J. McGarvey, J. M. Kelly, L. Jacquet and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, J. Mol. Struct., 2001, 598, 15 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Ortmans, B. Elias, J. M. Kelly, C. Moucheron and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Dalton Trans., 2004, 668 RSC .
  (a) F. M. O'Reilly, J. M. Kelly and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1013 RSC ; 
  (b) F. M. O'Reilly and J. M. Kelly, New J. Chem., 1998, 215 RSC ; 
  (c) F. M. O'Reilly and J. M. Kelly, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 7206 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Alrich-Wright, C. Brodie, E. C. Glazer, N. W. Luedtke, L. Elson-Schwab and Y. Tor, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1018 RSC .L. M. Wilhelmsson, F. Westerlund, P. Lincoln and B. Norden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12092 CrossRef CAS .A. Brodkorb, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, T. J. Rutherford and F. R. Keene, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 2151 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Smith, J. G. Collins, B. T. Patterson and F. R. Keene, Dalton Trans., 2004, 1277 RSC .
  (a) W. Bannwarth, D. Schmidt, R. L. Stallard, D. Hornung, R. Knorr and F. Müller, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1988, 71, 2085 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Telser, A. Cruickshank, K. S. Schanze and T. L. Netzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 7221 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Jenkins and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 8736 CrossRef ; 
  (d) D. J. Hurley and Y. Tor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2194 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. Ossipov, P. I. Pradeepkumar, M. Holmer and J. Chattopadhyaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3551 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) G. N. Grimm, A. S. Boutorine, P. Lincoln, B. Nordén and C. Hélène, ChemBioChem, 2002, 3, 324 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. M. Kelly, A. B. Tossi, D. J. McConnell, C. OhUigin, C. Helene and T. le Doan, in Free Radicals, Metal Ions and Biopolymers, ed. P. C. Beaumont, D. J. Deeble, B. J. Parsons and C. Rice Evans, Richelieu Press, London,  1989, p. 143 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. W. Crean, Y. T. Kavanagh, C. M. O'Keeffe, M. P. Lawler, C. Stevenson, R. J. H. Davies, P. H. Boyle and J. M. Kelly, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 1024 RSC .
  (a) D. Garcia-Fresnadillo, N. Boutonnet, S. Schumm, C. Moucheron, A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, E. Defrancq, J. F. Constant and J. Lhomme, Biophys. J., 2002, 82, 978 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Schumm, M. Prevost, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo, O. Lentzen, C. Moucheron and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2768 ; 
  (c) O. Lentzen, J. F. Constant, E. Defrancq, M. Prevost, S. Schumm, C. Moucheron, P. Dumy and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, ChemBioChem, 2002, 106, 2768 ; 
  (d) O. Lentzen, E. Defrancq, J. F. Constant, S. Schumm, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo, C. Moucheron, P. Dumy and A. Kirsch-De Mesmaeker, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 9, 100 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Albrecht, A. Guckian, J. Ulstrup and J. G. Vos, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1451 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Albrecht, A. Guckian, J. Ulstrup and J. G. Vos, IEEE Trans. Nanotech., 2005, 4, 430 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Albrecht, K. Moth-Poulsen, J. B. Christensen, A. Guckian, T. Bjornholm, J. G. Vos and J. Ulstrup, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 131, 265 RSC ; 
  (d) R. Bechman, K. Beverly, A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, J. W. Choi, E. DeIonno, J. Green, E. Johnston-Halperin, Y. Luo, B. Sheriff, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 131, 9 RSC .F. Frehill, M. in het Panhuis, N. A. Young, W. Henry, J. Hjelm and J. G. Vos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13205 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
Johannes G. Vos and John M. Kelly	Professor Han Vos is Professor of Inorganic Chemistry in Dublin City University. He obtained his Primary Degree and PhD (supervisor Dr W. L. Groeneveld) in Coordination Chemistry (1978) from Leiden University, The Netherlands and carried out post-doctoral work at the University of Dublin, Trinity College (supervisor Prof. J. M. Kelly) and the University of Fribourg, Switzerland (supervisor Prof. A. von Zelewsky). He joined Dublin City University in 1982. He has published more than 200 refereed papers in the area of ruthenium chemistry. He was Head of the School of Chemistry from 1996 to 2000 and again from 2003 to 2005. He is a Member of the Royal Irish Academy. His research interests are in the design of supramolecular systems containing transition metal complexes. Of particular relevance are the synthesis, photophysical and electrochemical properties of dinuclear and polymeric ruthenium and osmium polypyridyl complexes both in solution and when immobilised on solid substrates. The application of these compounds as optical and electrochemical sensors and in molecular electronics are investigated.John M. Kelly obtained his B.Sc. from the University of Manchester in 1965, an M.Sc. in organic photochemistry from McMaster University (supervisor, John J. McCullough) and his Ph.D. from the University of London (supervisor, George Porter) in 1970. After a Leverhulme Teaching Fellowship at the University of the West Indies, Jamaica, he carried out postdoctoral work in Ernst Koerner von Gustorf's group at the Max Planck Institut für Strahlenchemie, Mülheim. He joined Trinity College Dublin in 1973 and was Head of Department from 1994–2000. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and a Member of the Royal Irish Academy (MRIA). Current research interests include the transient spectroscopy of DNA and metal-containing compounds, the use of photochemical reagents to carry out site-specific reactions on DNA, and the synthesis of micro- and nano-particles of metal oxides for application in electronic devices and biosensors.

 	Fig. 1  Methods for the synthesis of tris heteroleptic compounds.	 

 	Fig. 2  Palladium catalysed coupling reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Preparation of heterometallic dinuclear complexes. (i) 2-Pyridylzinc bromide, Pd(PPh3)4, DMF, r.t., 97% yield; (ii) Os(bpy)2Cl2, HOCH2CH2OH, 43% yield.	 

 	Fig. 4  Stepwise synthesis of dinuclear ruthenium complex by Ni(0) catalysed coupling reaction.	 

 	Fig. 5  a) Precursors for the preparation of metal dendrimers based on polypyridyl moieties. b) Energy transfer pathways for compounds containing Ru centres (open circle) and Os centres (black circle) in bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine (box) based dendrimers.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of natural and artificial photosynthetic assemblies. Reproduced from ref. 13.	 

 	Fig. 7  Alternative approaches to obtain complexes with substituted bpy ligands.	 

 	Fig. 8  Stereoselective methylation of a ruthenium complex.	 

 	Fig. 9  Regioselective introduction of methoxy groups in a coordinated 1,10-phenanthroline ligand. Reproduced from S. Rau, R. Fischer, M. Jäger, B. Schäfer, S. Meyer, G. Kreisel, H. Görls, M. Rudolf, W. Henry and J.G. Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 2001 with permission. Copyright Wiley Publishers, 2004.	 

 	Fig. 10  1H NMR spectra of [Ru(bpy)2(phpztr)]+ (Hphpztr is 3-phenyl-5-(pyrazine-2′-yl)-1,2,4-triazole) and some of its isotopologues in CD3CN (phpztr− signals indicated by arrows). Adapted with permission from W. R. Browne, C. M. O’Connor, J. S. Killeen, A. L. Guckian, M. Burke, P. James, M. Burke and J.G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 4245. Copyright American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Heterogeneous catalytic cycle proposed for the splitting of water.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of dye sensitised solar cell including an immobilised ruthenium complex and the iodine/iodide redox couple needed for regeneration of the oxidised dye.	 

 	Fig. 13  Interaction between molecular component and nanocrystalline surface in Grätzel type solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 14  Structure of a dinuclear ruthenium/osmium compound (dcbpy is 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine).	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of typical redox polymers; M is Ru or Os. N equals 5, 10, 15, 25 and represents the ratio between pyridine polymer units and metal centres.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photolysis of electrode modified with [Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]Cl. Black; effect of photolysis on electrochemical properties. red; limiting current obtained for the oxidation of Fe(II) using a rotating disc electrode. Dotted line before and solid line after photolysis. Adapted with permission from O. Haas, M. Kriens and J.G. Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1318. Copyright American Chemical Society.	 
[Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]+
						+ H2O →
						[Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10H2O]2+
						+ Cl−	(1)

 	Fig. 17  Cyclic voltammogram (I–E) and correlated EQCM curve (ΔMvs. E)
					(red) for a [Os(bpy)2(PVP)10Cl]+ polymer film in p-toluenesulfonic acid.36a Reprinted from J. Electroanal. Chem., 389, A.P. Clarke, J.G. Vos, A.R. Hillman and A. Glidle, Overall Redox Switching Characteristics of Osmium Containing Poly(4-vinylpyridine) Films Immersed in Aqueous p-Toluenesulphonic Acid, 129, Copyright (1995), with permission from Elsevier.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 18  Triazole based bridging ligands.	 

 	Fig. 19  DFT presentations of HOMO and LUMO orbitals of dinuclear complexes based on the bridging ligands a and b shown in Fig. 18. HOMO and LUMO of complex with ligand a are A and C respectively. B and D represent the HOMO and LUMO of the compound with ligand b. Electron densities shown as yellow and blue.	 

 	Fig. 20  DFT representation of HOMO (A) and LUMO (B) for the dinuclear complex with ligand c in Fig. 18.	 

 	Fig. 21  RuOs dinuclear compound n
					= 1, 2, 3.	 

 	Fig. 22  Anion recognition luminophore.	 
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
						+ e−
						→
						[Ru(bpy)3]+	(3)
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
						→
						[Ru(bpy)3]3+
						+ e−	(4)
[Ru(bpy)3]+
						+
						[Ru(bpy)3]3+
						→
						*[Ru(bpy)3]2+
						+
						[Ru(bpy)3]2+	(5)
[RuRu]2+
						+ 2PPV˙+
						→
						[RuRu]4+
						+ PPV*
						+ PPV	(6)
[RuRu]2+
						+ 2PPV →
						[RuRu]4+
						+ 2PPV−	(7)

 	Fig. 23  Electroluminescent spectra of PPV and a ruthenium complex at reverse (left) and forward bias (right). Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers; from S. Weller, K. Brunner, J.W. Hofstraat and L. De Cola, Nature, 2003, 421, 54.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of electrochemiluminescent device. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers; from S. Weller, K. Brunner, J.W. Hofstraat and L. De Cola, Nature, 2003, 421, 54.	 

 	Fig. 25  Some heteroaromatic ligands used in DNA intercalating ruthenium complexes.	 
Ru2+*
						+ GMP → Ru+
						+ GMP˙+	(8)
GMP˙+
						→ GMP(−H)˙
						+ H+	(9)
Ru+
						+ GMP(−H)˙
						+ H+
						→ Ru2+
						+ GMP	(10)
Ru+
						+ O2
						→ Ru2+
						+ O2˙−	(11)

 	Fig. 26  Comparative structures of the products of (a)
					[Ru(TAP)2(bpy)]2+ and (b)
					[Ru(HAT)2(phen)]2+.	 

 	Fig. 27  Photochemical targeting of oxidative damage to a particular guanine in a sequence characteristic of chronic myeloid leukaemia.	 

 	Fig. 28  Experimental and simulated in situ STS (scanning tunnelling spectroscopy) data. Adapted from; T. Albrecht, A. Guckian, J. Ulstrup and J. G. Vos, Trans. Nanotech. IEEE, 2005, 4, 430. © 2005 IEEE.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
