Hollow fibers: from fabrication to applications  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC02991F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC02991F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 9166-9177Hollow fibers: from fabrication to applications

        
          
            Ye 
            Tian
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoyang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Liqiu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *c
aCollege of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, 110169 Shenyang, China
bFoshan Graduate School of Northeastern University, Foshan, 528300, China
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: lqwang@hku.hk
Received 
      7th June 2021
    , Accepted 5th August 2021First published on 9th August 2021AbstractHollow fibers have attracted more and more attention due to their broad range of applications in numerous fields. We review the latest advance and summarize the fabrication methods, types and applications of hollow fibers. We mainly introduce the fabrication methods of hollow fibers, including co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods, template methods, 3D printing methods, electrospinning methods, self-crimping methods and gas foaming process. Meanwhile, we summarize four types of hollow fibers: one-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers, multi-hollow fibers and branched hollow fibers. Next, we focus on the main applications of hollow fibers, such as gas separation, cell culture, microfluidic channels, artificial tubular tissues, etc. Finally, we present the prospects of the future trend of development. The review would promote the further development of hollow fibers and benefit their advance in sensing, bioreactors, electrochemical catalysis, energy conversion, microfluidics, gas separation, air purification, drug delivery, functional materials, cell culture and tissue engineering. This review has great significance for the design of new functional materials and development of devices and systems in the related fields.
Ye Tian
Dr. Ye Tian received his PhD from the University of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Liqiu Wang. He is currently an Associate Professor in the College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University. His current research interests focus on microfluidics, the fabrication and applications of functional mini/microfibers, biomaterials, tissue engineering, soft matter, functional surfaces and interfaces.
Zhaoyang Wang
Ms Zhaoyang Wang is a master student in the College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, under the supervision of Dr. Ye Tian. Her research interests focus on microfluidics, biomaterials and functional fibers.
Liqiu Wang
Prof. L. Q. Wang received his PhD from the University of Alberta. He is currently a chair professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Hong Kong. He has over 30 years of university experience in thermal and power engineering, energy and environment, transport phenomena, materials, nanotechnology, biotechnology, and applied mathematics and 2 years of industry experience in technology and IP development as a Chief Scientist and CTO.
1. Introduction
Hollow fibers are of increasing interest because of their potential application in various fields, including cell culture,1,2 drug delivery,3 bioreactors,4 gas separation,5 microextraction,6 sensing7 and water purification.8 Due to the unique tubular structure, hollow fibers can closely resemble human tubular tissues, such as esophagus,9 intestine,10 trachea11 and blood vessels,12 ensuring their wide application in tissue engineering.1,3 Such hollow materials have great application prospects and value in not only biomedical engineering but also industrial fields.
However, there are some limitations which have hindered progress in the fields mentioned above for decades. For example, the fabrication of hollow fibers is difficult, limiting their investigation. Therefore, there is an urgent demand to develop innovative techniques for the fabrication of hollow fibers in a controllable, simple and rapid manner. In addition, for biological applications, the cell-loading or protein-loading into hollow fibers without loss of biological activity remains challenging. It is also challenging for some traditional fabrication methods to fabricate hollow fibers with controlled morphologies.13
In this review, we concentrate on the fabrication methods, types and applications of hollow fibers by reviewing some recent progress in the area of hollow fibers concisely (Fig. 1). We also attempt to shed some light on the future directions of hollow fiber research and development. We aim to provide those working on hollow fibers with a better understanding of the field and promote the development of hollow fibers through new fabrication techniques and extend their application in different fields. This review is helpful for the design of novel functional materials that can be extended to develop devices or systems for diverse areas and benefits their further advance in sensing, bioreactors, microfluidics, gas separation, functional materials, cell culture and tissue engineering.
 Fig. 1  Summary of the common fabrication methods, types and applications of hollow fibers. The hollow fibers produced by different fabrication methods have different morphology, including one-layered, multi-layered, multi-hollow and branched hollow fibers. Different morphology hollow fibers can be used in various fields, such as artificial tubular tissues, micromotors and drug carriers. 
2. Fabrication of hollow fibers
2.1. Co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods
The co-extrusion/co-axial spinning method13–47 is widely used to fabricate hollow fibers, as shown in Fig. 2. In this method, the spinneret consists of at least two coaxial tubes (Fig. 2a–c). The core solution or bore fluid is injected into the central tube, as the removable template to form the hollow of the fiber. In addition, one sample solution (Fig. 2b and c) or several sample solutions (Fig. 2a) are extruded from the other tubes to generate the shell of the hollow fiber. The shell of the hollow fiber can be solidified by cross-linked reaction14,15 (Fig. 2a and b) or photopolymerization (Fig. 2c).16 After the removal of the core solution, the hollow fiber can be obtained. This method is commonly subcategorized into dry–wet spinning method, thermally induced phase separation method, melt-spinning/cold-stretching method and microfluidics method.
 Fig. 2  Co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods for the fabrication of hollow fibers. (a) Spinning of single layer and double layer hollow fibers by the co-extrusion method. Adapted from ref. 14 (b) Image and explanatory illustration of the device for fabrication of collagen gel hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 15 (c) Schematics of hollow fiber formation via co-extrusion. Adapted from ref. 16 (d) Schematic of the dry–wet spinning method. Adapted from ref. 19 (e) Preparation of porous hollow fibers by thermally induced phase separation. Adapted from ref. 44 (f) Preparation of hollow fibers by melt spinning/cold stretching. Adapted from ref. 46 (g) Microfluidic devices for fabricating chitosan microfibers with tubular internal surfaces. Adapted from ref. 32 (h) Schematic of hollow microfiber generation using a two-channel microfluidic device. Adapted from ref. 33 (i) The microfluidic apparatus is capable of producing micro-tubes. Adapted from ref. 34 (j) Schematic diagram of the chip used to fabricate heterogeneous multi-hollow microfibers. Adapted from ref. 40 
The dry–wet spinning method14,17–25 has great advantage in spinning high-viscosity fluids into hollow fibers with high-throughput and a uniform structure. The bore fluid and dope solution are injected into the spinneret at the same time. Different from the other co-extrusion spinning methods, after pressed out from the spinneret, the fiber first passes through an air gap. In the process, the fiber is pulled and the fiber diameter decreases. After that, the fibers enter the wet spinning coagulation bath to coagulate the dope solution, then after the removal of the core solution, the hollow fiber can be obtained (Fig. 2d).
The thermally induced phase separation method42–44 is a kind of wet spinning method. Above the melting point of the polymer, the polymer can be dissolved in a solvent with high boiling point and low volatility, and then the polymer solution will undergo phase separation after cooling. During the preparation of hollow fibers, the polymer solution is used as the external phase and a gas or another liquid is used as the core-forming phase, and both of them are introduced into the spinneret. The resultant fibers are collected in a cold bath. During the cooling process, phase separation occurs (Fig. 2e). Because the solvent is extracted by a volatile extractant, porous hollow fibers can be obtained.
The melt-spinning/cold-stretching45–47 method is mainly to melt the polymers and extrude them with high stress. During the stretching process, because of the existence of a layered parallel structure in polymer materials, they are pulled apart to form micropores, and the pore structure is fixed by a heat setting process. During melt spinning, the bore fluid and dope solution are injected into the spinneret at the same time. The liquid filament solidifies gradually when it passes through the cooling medium, and then it is drawn at high speed by the winding device below (Fig. 2f). This method can achieve rapid preparation of hollow fibers with high mechanical strength. However, the limitation of heat-sensitive materials impedes the use of this method.
Microfluidics is capable of precisely controlling small quantity of liquids, and thus enables accurate generation of fibers. Microfluidic spinning13,16,27–40 has been widely used for fabricating hollow fibers in a controllable, simple and rapid manner. For the capillary-based microfluidic devices (Fig. 2g), two or more cylindrical capillaries are tapered using a micropipette puller to generate injecting and focusing orifices. The tips of the capillaries are polished to desired diameters using a fine sand paper. The capillary microfluidic device is made by co-axially aligning a glass slide, two or more syringe needles and two or more cylindrical glass capillaries in square glass capillaries glued together with glue. For glass pipettes and PDMS substrate microfluidic devices (Fig. 2h–j), the tapered glass pipette is inserted into the channel of the PDMS substrate used to generate the core jet for the formation of the hollow. The sample solutions are injected through the sample channels of the PDMS substrate and the sample solutions wrapping the core jet can be solidified by cross-linked reaction33 (Fig. 2h) or photopolymerization (Fig. 2i).34,35 By changing the flow rate of the core jet, the diameter of the hollow can be tuned easily. Microfluidic spinning can continuously produce hollow fibers with well-controlled morphologies. Fig. 2j shows a special microfluidic chip for the fabrication of multi-hollow fibers.40 In this chip, there are several core solutions to form multiple hollows.
The co-extrusion/co-axial spinning method can fabricate hollow fibers continuously with high throughput.
2.2. Template methods
Template methods26,48–51 are effective in fabricating hollow fibers. Template methods can be grouped into three categories: template coating method,26,48 hard template method49 and soft template method.49 In the template coating method (Fig. 3a), a templated rod is inserted into sample solutions. The sample solution can then be coated on the surface of the templated rod. After coating, the sample solution coating on the rod is solidified. Finally, the templated rod is removed and the hollow fiber is obtained. In the hard template method (Fig. 3b), plastic tubes and metal rods are used as the outer templates and the inner templates, respectively. The inner surface of the tubes and the outer surface of the metal rods are pre-coated with oil to ensure their easy removal. Then, a PDMS mixture is perfused into the plastic tubes. Next, metal rods are inserted into the center of PDMS. After PDMS curing, the plastic tubes and metal rods are removed, and the resulting PDMS tubes are cleaned to remove residual pre-coated oil. In the soft template approach (Fig. 3c), plastic tubes are used as the outer templates and pre-coated with oil. Then, a PDMS mixture is perfused into the plastic tubes. During the curing of PDMS, the airflow through the tubes with a small rotation is maintained constant. After PDMS curing, plastic tube removal and the resultant PDMS tube cleaning, the PDMS hollow fiber can be obtained. Template methods are confined by their discontinuity and the length of the hollow fiber is also limited.
 Fig. 3  Template methods, 3D printing methods, electrospinning methods, self-crimping method and gas foaming process for the fabrication of hollow fibers. (a) The template coating methods for fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 26 (b) The hard template fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 49 (c) The soft template fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 49 (d) and (e) 3D printing of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 52 and 53 (f) Schematic illustrations of the setup for co-axial electrospinning. Adapted from ref. 55 (g) Electrospinning system for fabrication of aligned nanofibrous tubes. Adapted from ref. 59 (h) Schematic illustration of the three-step preparation process of bio-inspired 3LVG. Adapted from ref. 60 (i) Preparation of a double-layer temperature-sensitive hydrogel film and the self-alignment process. Adapted from ref. 67 (j) Schematic diagram of the hollow fiber prepared by the gas foaming process and SEM diagrams of the hollow fiber membrane. Adapted from ref. 68 
2.3. 3D printing methods
3D printing methods52–54 are very popular methods for the fabrication of hollow fibers. With these methods, inks/bioinks are post-fabricated or directly deposited through an extrusion nozzle to generate hollow fibers. There are two modes for fabrication of hollow fibers (Fig. 3d and e): one is that the vertical extrusion nozzle can be rotated around and a horizontal substrate can be moved in the vertical direction; and the other is that a horizontal rod can be rotated at a constant rate and an extrusion nozzle can be moved along the axial direction of the rod. The hollow fiber can be fabricated by 3D printing methods precisely. However, the printing process is slow, expensive and severely limited by printing resolution and materials.
2.4. Electrospinning methods
Electrospinning methods55–66 are rapid techniques to fabricate hollow fibers. Electrospinning methods include two categories: co-axial electrospinning methods and general electrospinning methods. In co-axial electrospinning methods (Fig. 3f), the core solution and shell solution are injected into the inner and outer channels of a co-axial spinneret, respectively. Meanwhile, a high voltage is applied between the co-axial spinneret and the collector. Under the action of the high voltage electric field, the core solution wrapped by the shell solution is extruded out from the spinneret and solidifies into core–shell fibers. After the removal of the core, the hollow fiber can be easily obtained. The general electrospinning methods are shown in Fig. 3g and h. In Fig. 3g, two horizontal uniaxially aligned electrodes are grounded as the fiber collector.59 The electrode holders rotated at a controlled speed are fixed on a stage and driven by a motor. A syringe with a cone-shaped needle (the spinneret) is connected to a high voltage power supply via a platinum wire inserted in the solution. After electrospinning, the hollow fiber can be generated between two electrodes. In Fig. 3h, a horizontally rotated rod is used as a template and a spinneret is used for generation of solid micro/nanofibers.60 The micro/nanofibers are uniformly sprayed on the rod. After the removal of the rod, the micro/nanofiber-based hollow fiber is obtained. Electrospinning methods can fabricate hollow fibers rapidly and continuously. However, it is difficult to prepare multi-layer and complex hollow fibers. In addition, due to the existence of electrostatic high voltage, this preparation method cannot be widely used in the biomedical field.
2.5. Self-crimping methods
The self-crimping method is a new method for the fabrication of hollow fibers. Some polymer materials are temperature sensitive. When the temperature is lower or higher than some critical temperature, the material itself will swell and deform. Changing the ambient temperature can make its deformation controllable. Chen et al. proposed to choose N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) and sodium alginate (NaA) to fabricate a hydrogel film.67 The hydrogel film has a two-layer structure: NaA layer and NaA@PNIPAM layer. Then the film is soaked in Cu2+ aqueous solution and Cu2+ is doped on both sides of the film. Different compositions give different structural characteristics on both sides of the material. When the temperature is below 31 °C, PNIPAM swells and the hydrogel film will bend to the Cu2+@NaA side, and when the temperature is higher than 31 °C, it will bend to the Cu2+@NaA@PNIPAM side (Fig. 3i). Therefore, the hollow fiber with different surface materials can be obtained.
2.6. Gas foaming process
The gas foaming process68 is an ingenious preparation method. Barroso-solares et al. used electrospinning to fabricate a fiber mat composed of solid fibers. They put the mat into a high pressure vessel, and introduced CO2 into the vessel until the complete gas saturation of the mat. The saturation temperature is higher than the melting point of the polymer of this mat, so the fiber mat became soft and produced a large number of bubbles inside.68 During the solidification of the polymer solution, the gas continuously escaped from the solution to form numerous micropores on the fiber wall. Due to a layer of water-soluble polymer coated on the surface of the fiber before that and the blocking effect of the water-soluble polymer layer on the outer wall of the fiber, the bubbles in the fiber can’t escape in time and merge inside to form a hollow structure (Fig. 3j).
3. Types of hollow fibers
In general, the hollow fibers can be grouped into four categories: one-layered hollow fibers (Fig. 4a–h), multi-layered hollow fibers (Fig. 4i and j), multi-hollow fibers (Fig. 4k) and branched hollow fibers (Fig. 4l and m). One-layered hollow fibers8,24–26,30–32,39,48–50,58,59,61,69–72 have the structure of only a single core and a single shell, and are widely fabricated and used in industrial fields and biomedical engineering. One-layered hollow fibers can be fabricated by co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods,17,19,20,23–26,30–32,39 template methods,48–50 3D printing methods52–54 and electrospinning methods.58,59,61–65 In addition, the hollow of hollow fibers is generally circular (Fig. 4a and c–h), but it can also be designed in different shapes (Fig. 4b) by changing the shape of the core solution. By tuning the flow rate of the core solution and shell solution or the diameter of the spinneret, respectively, the inner and outer diameters of hollow fibers can be easily adjusted. Moreover, the multi-layered hollow fibers are also fabricated by using different solutions as shell solutions in the co-extrusion method14 or by multi-step spinning on the same collector in the electrospinning method.60 The two-layered hollow fiber and the three-layered hollow fiber are shown in Fig. 4i and j, respectively. This multi-layered structure can highly resemble the human tubular tissues, such as blood vessels. By adding multi-core-solution, the multi-hollow fibers are also fabricated40 as shown in Fig. 4k. The branched Y-shaped28 (Fig. 4l) and vasculature-like52 (Fig. 4m) hollow fibers can also be fabricated by 3D printing methods, which can simulate the human vascular networks. The self-crimping method can prepare double-layer hollow fibers with different compositions (Fig. 4n).67 These versatile types of hollow fibers have been demonstrated to have a broad range of applications in different fields, including tissue engineering, microfluidics, drug delivery and new textiles.
 Fig. 4  Types of hollow fibers. (a) The lumen of PVDF industrial hollow fibers containing PVP or PVP + DB. Adapted from ref. 8 (b) The cross-sectional morphology of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 25 (c) The nickel oxide-yttria-stabilized zirconia hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 26 (d) SEM images of the section of the cellulose/collagen microtubes. Adapted from ref. 48 (e) Hollow fibers fabricated with 5% sodium alginate. Adapted from ref. 50 (f) Scanning electron microscopy image of the cross section of a virgin porous hollow fiber cathode. Adapted from ref. 69 (g) Overview of the cross-section of the prepared Psf hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 70 (h) SEM images of the cross sections of hollow core micro-fibers. Adapted from ref. 71 (i) SEM micrographs of the cross section of double-layer hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 14 (j) Three-layer structure of three-layered hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 60 (k) Confocal laser scanning microscope images of cross-sections of Ca-alginate microfibers with multiple hollows. Adapted from ref. 40 (l) SEM image of the Y-shaped structural hollow hydrogel fibers. Adapted from ref. 28 (m) Branched vasculature-like hollow fibers fabricated by the 3D printing method. Adapted from ref. 52 (n) Double-layer hollow fiber prepared by the self-crimping method. Adapted from ref. 67 
4. Applications of hollow fibers
4.1. Gas separation and air purification
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is generally considered as an industrial waste gas which can lead to the Greenhouse effect. Gas separation5,19,20,23,73–78 is a very important application in industrial fields. Hollow fibers are promising candidates for industrial gas separation. Lively et al. developed a hollow-polymeric-fiber-based technology5 to achieve postcombustion CO2 capture and release, which makes full use of the morphology of hollow fibers. In this technology, the cooling water passes through the hollow to maximize sorption capacities during CO2 sorption and steam passes through the hollow to desorb CO2 efficiently (Fig. 5a). Keller et al. fabricated SiC-PEI fibers and CNT-zeolite fibers. When the temperature changes, the hollow fiber can swing. This phenomenon can make the fiber to be in contact with the gas fully, so that the fiber can absorb CO2 at low temperature and release the gas molecules at high temperature23 (Fig. 5b). Liu et al. engineered high-performance hollow fibers by synthesizing new rigid polyimides with bulky CF3 groups and greatly improved CO2/CH4 separation performance.73 Cacho-Bailo et al. investigated the ZIF-9 @ Ni hollow fibers for gas mixture separation by feeding equimolar gas mixtures into the lumen of hollow fibers and studied the effects of temperature on H2/CO2 separation (Fig. 5c).68 Sutrisna et al. developed surface functionalized UiO-66/Pebax-based ultrathin composite hollow fibers for gas separation to achieve both improved CO2 permeance and selectivity.76 Hollow fibers demonstrate their unique advantages for gas separation due to their special structures and morphologies. With the development of technology, hollow fibers will be further applied in gas separation to achieve excellent separation performance.
 Fig. 5  Applications of hollow fibers for gas separation and air purification, cell culture and microfluidic channels. (a) Schematic illustration of sorption and desorption modes in the hollow fiber sorbents. Adapted from ref. 5 (b) Schematic diagram of the fiber prepared by the dry–wet spinning method for CO2 separation. Adapted from ref. 23 (c) The ZIF-9@Ni hollow fiber for gas mixture separation. Adapted from ref. 75 (d) Optical micrograph of the cell-laden hollow Ca-alginate microfibers after the growth of Chlorella pyrenoidosa cells for 7 days. Adapted from ref. 30 (e) SEM and confocal images of myotubes grown for ten days on the inner surface of a chitosan/PCL nanofibrous tubular scaffold with aligned nanofibers. Adapted from ref. 59 The middle sketch shows the locations (marked by black squares) on the tubular scaffolds where the images were taken. (f) The picture of the cell-loaded fiber under an optical microscope and the distribution of fluorescently labeled cells inside the fiber. Adapted from ref. 64 (g) Scheme of the experimental setup for the hollow-microfiber-based microfluidic fluorescence detection system. Adapted from ref. 71 (h) The Cu@C hollow fiber based microfluidic chip system. Adapted from ref. 83 
Air purification is a subcategory of gas separation by hollow fibers. The air purification by hollow fibers usually separates acidic gases79 and excessive greenhouse gases80 from polluted air.
4.2. Cell culture
Cell culture15,22,28,30,35,38,39,41,50,59,64,70,81,82 is an indispensable step in many biological experiments, tissue engineering and biomedical applications. Hollow fibers composed of biocompatible materials can be treated as the ideal scaffolds of cell culture. Their hollow structure offers a unique 3D space for cell growth and their shell serves as a barrier to protect the cells from the external environment without affecting nutrient delivery.30 Chu et al. seeded Chlorella pyrenoidosa cells on the hollow tubular internal surface of Ca-alginate hollow fibers. After a 7-day culture, the cells grew and finally filled the internal surface of Ca-alginate hollow fibers (Fig. 5d), which enabled confined growth of the cells along their hollow internal surface.30 Zhang et al. cultured myoblast cells on the inner surface of a hollow fiber scaffold, consisting of aligned chitosan/PCL nanofibers (Fig. 5e).53 The results showed the good proliferation and differentiation of muscle cells, respectively, indicating that aligned myotubes are formed. Ranjan et al. reported a microporous hollow fiber consisting of a shell of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)/polyethylene oxide (PEO) and a core of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) mixed with PC12 cell suspension.64 This structure facilitates the exchange of waste and nutrients. After three days of cell culture, the cells can cover 30–50% inner surface of the fibers, and after seven days, the cells are still alive. The results prove that this fiber can be used for cell culture in vitro. The characteristics of cell growth along the fiber wall can be used to generate complex network structures, such as neural networks (Fig. 5f). Therefore, biocompatible-material-based hollow fibers are well capable of 3D cell culture as 3D scaffolds, which benefit tissue engineering, biomedical engineering and clinical medicine.
4.3. Microfluidic channels
Microfluidics can manipulate micro-scale liquids precisely and controllably, and has thus attracted more and more attention. Hollow fibers are ideal candidates for application in microfluidic channels71,83 due to their hollow structure. Lu et al. fabricated microfibers with the wavelength-scale-diameter hollow core, which can be used as a microfluidic channel with liquid with trace amounts.71 The hollow-microfiber-based microfluidic fluorescence detection system (Fig. 5g) showed good performance for fluorescence measurement. In addition, Zhou et al. fabricated Cu@C hollow fibers as ideal candidates for application in microfluidic channels.83 The Cu@C hollow fibers maintained their expedite hollow channels after embedment into PDMS and the PDMS combined tightly with the shell of the Cu@C hollow fibers (Fig. 5h), resulting in that the liquid analyte had to pass through the hollow channels and enabling the excellent performance of Cu@C hollow fibers as microfluidic channels. It is a new fabrication strategy of microfluidic chips to use hollow fibers as microfluidic channels, which may offer more opportunities for the further development of microfluidics.
4.4. Artificial tubular tissues
Tubular tissues, such as esophagus, intestine, trachea and blood vessels, play important roles in the human body. Due to their similar tubular structures, hollow fibers can be used as artificial human tubular tissues. Therefore, hollow fibers have wide applications in tissue engineering, biomedical engineering and clinical medicine. The blood vessel is a tubular tissue that is found throughout the body. Therefore, many researchers have used hollow fibers to reproduce the blood vessels.12,13,24,48,49,60,61 Wang et al. fabricated an artificial blood vessel (Fig. 6a) with excellent cytocompatibility, permeability and mechanical characteristics using polysaccharide cellulose-based hollow fibers via the template method.48 By lining the human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) on the inner surface of hollow fibers, the artificial blood vessels reproduced the structures and functions of blood vessels, which were used for modeling transvascular migration of tumor cells (Fig. 6b). In addition, Zhang et al. constructed elastomeric biomimetic blood vessels (Fig. 6c) based on hollow PDMS tubes lining HUVECs in the interior surfaces of hollow PDMS tubes.49 These endothelialized PDMS blood vessels were used for interconnection of multiple organ modules of an integrated multi-organs-on-a-chip platform (Fig. 6d) and biological responses of these PDMS blood vessels upon drug treatment (Fig. 6e). Moreover, the artificial esophagus tissue,9 artificial intestinal grafts,10 artificial trachea tissue11 and human brain organoids27 were also developed based on hollow fibers. Given their broad application prospect and values, however, hollow-fiber-based artificial tubular tissues are still in their infancy.
 Fig. 6  Applications of hollow fibers for artificial tubular tissues, bioreactors and sensing. (a) Simulation of cellulose artificial blood vessels. Adapted from ref. 48 (b) Intravasation of HCCLM9 cells from the surrounding collagen into the simulated vascular lumen. Adapted from ref. 48 (c) Endothelialization of the PDMS tubes. Adapted from ref. 49 (d) Endothelialized PDMS vessels for interconnection of multiple organ modules. Adapted from ref. 49 (e) Biological responses of the endothelialized PDMS vessels upon drug treatment. Adapted from ref. 49 (f) Sketch diagram of the SPR probe fabrication process. Adapted from ref. 7 (g) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup of the hollow fiber SPR sensor for microfluidic chips. Adapted from ref. 7 (h) The fabrication of a PDMS-embedded enzyme-entrapped hollow alginate microfiber bioreactor. Adapted from ref. 33 
4.5. Bioreactors and sensors
Hollow fibers as functional materials are also used for bioreactors4,33 and sensors.7,34,51 Chen et al. reported a hollow fiber bioreactor to retain the genetically engineered cells, which was capable of removing and recovering Hg2+ effectively at low concentrations.4 Liu et al. demonstrated a microstructured-hollow-fiber-based surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensor for microfluidic chips.7 A fiber grinding-polishing and butt-jointing technology was employed to configure the hollow fiber SPR sensing probe (Fig. 6f). This hollow-fiber-based SPR sensor can monitor the refractive index variation of the liquid samples in the internal and external sensing channels in the microfluidic chip at the same time due to the air hole in the fiber as the natural microfluidic channel (Fig. 6g). Asthana et al. presented the fabrication of an enzyme-entrapped alginate hollow fiber (Fig. 6h) as a biocatalytic microchemical reactor for chemical synthesis.33 Hollow-fiber-based bioreactors and sensors are warranted for application in microfluidics, biotransformation and chemical synthesis.
4.6. Microrobots and micromotors
Some chemical reactions can promote hollow fiber movement by generating bubbles.84,85 Lu et al. used MnO2 to catalyze H2O2 to generate O2 to drive the segments of hollow fibers to move.84 Wang et al. modified catalase on the inner wall of the hollow fibers, and then put them into H2O2 solution to catalyze the reaction.85 In this way, bubbles can be obtained, and the hollow fiber can move forward. But the movement of the hollow fiber is very slow and the motion trajectory is uncontrollable, so a novel method was proposed. Li et al. fabricated a rotatable hollow fiber fabric.62 After surface coating, the hollow fiber fabric can float on water. Through ethanol soaking, the hollow cavity can be filled with ethanol. The ethanol flows out of the cavity and forms a concentration gradient within a certain range when the hollow fiber fabric is immersed in water. A surface tension gradient at the interface of the two liquids leads to mass transfer and the solution molecules form a liquid flow, resulting in fabric rotation. Further, the fabric was sealed in a beaker filled with water by a transparent film, and a certain pressure was applied to the center of the film to dent it. When the beaker was irradiated with light, the ethanol dissolved in the water volatilized, and then condensed on the film, but due to the concave structure in the center, the ethanol droplets dripped back onto the fabric again, so long-term continuous high-speed rotation could be realized (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  Applications of hollow fibers for micro robots and micro motors, gas dehumidification, drug delivery and thermal insulating cooler. (a) Movement mechanism of the rhombic hollow fiber fabric. Adapted from ref. 62 (1) Observation of the concentration gradient on the water surface using an infrared imaging camera. (2) Schematic diagram of the force of water molecules and ethanol molecules on the gas–liquid interface. (3) Formation of the concentration gradient on the water surface. (4) Force analysis derived from the concentration gradient. (b) The cross-sectional view pictures of the hollow fiber taken by SEM and the schematic diagram of air dehumidification. Adapted from ref. 17 (c) SEM images of the hollow fiber covered with the NEXARTM layer. Adapted from ref. 21 (d) Schematic representation of the dehumidification setup. Adapted from ref. 21 (e) Scheme of 3D printing of the magnetically driven drug delivery system and the magnetic-driven drug release and the deformation of the hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 54 (f) Preparation process of hierarchical hollow fibers as a thermal insulating cooler for buildings. Adapted from ref. 66 
4.7. Gas dehumidification
Hollow fibers are often used for gas dehumidification due to their large specific surface area and good mass and heat transfer performance. Modifying hydrophilic molecules on the surface of hollow fibers can offer the hollow fibers with the ability to capture moisture, so as to achieve air dehumidification. Gebreyohannes et al. prepared a hollow fiber coated with amino acid ionic liquid submicrospheres (Fig. 7b).17 Amino acid ionic liquids have very good hydrophilicity; therefore, they can highly capture water molecules in the air. Experiments had proved that the water vapor permeance of the membrane made of this hollow fiber is as high as 10605 GPU and that the membrane has high N2 selectivity. This membrane can be heated at 40 °C for 90 minutes after continuous dehumidification for six hours, and the permeability of the membrane can be restored to the original level; therefore, the membrane can be recycled for a long time. Upadhyaya et al. fabricated a NEXARTM-coated hollow fiber, by sealing both sides of the pre-prepared hollow fiber with epoxy resin and then immersing the fiber in 52% NEXARTM tetrahydrofuran solution.21 NEXARTM is highly ordered and self-assembled in tetrahydrofuran to form negative ion columnar nanochannels (Fig. 7c and d). This structure can ensure high water penetration.
4.8. Drug delivery
The hollow structure of the hollow fiber provides the possibility to load drugs. By controlling the deformation of the hollow fiber, the controlled release of the drug can be achieved. At the same time, due to the existence of the outer wall of the hollow fiber, drug molecules can only escape through the holes on the outer wall, and drug diffusion is hindered, which can achieve the sustained drug release. Wang et al. used coaxial 3D printing technology to print a hollow fiber with a crisscross grid shape54 (Fig. 7e). The mixture of Fe3O4 and sodium alginate (10 wt%) was used as the shell solution, and DOX – a model drug – mixed with 4 wt% sodium alginate was used as the core solution. Under an external magnetic field, the walls of the hollow fiber attracted each other, thereby squeezing out the internal medicine. Since the medicine is mixed with the sodium alginate gel (4 wt%) in advance, the medicine cannot escape from the micropores on the wall of the hollow fiber without external force, ensuring the timely and quantitative release of the medicine on demand. Barroso-Solares et al. fabricated a hollow fiber with a porous structure using the gas dissolving foaming process.68 This fiber can load 15 wt% Ibuprofen and the drug release time can be maintained for 2280 hours. Under the same conditions, the drug-release time of the solid drug-loaded fiber is only 40 minutes. So, the hollow fibers are promising for drug delivery.
4.9. Thermal insulating cooler
The hierarchical hollow microfibers can also be used as a scalable and effective thermal insulating cooler for buildings. Zhong et al. used electrospinning technology to fabricate a kind of hierarchical hollow microfiber with a nanostructure,66 which has not only extremely low thermal conductivity, but also high selective infrared emissivity (Fig. 7f). Due to these two characteristics the hollow fiber can not only ensure that the indoor cold air does not exchange heat with the outside, but also that it fully reflects the heat radiation produced by the sun. There are 200 nm nanoblocks and 50 nm nanopores on the wall of the hollow fiber, resulting in that the hollow fiber can disperse sunlight effectively. The hollow of the hollow fiber is filled with air, a poor conductor of heat. Therefore, the hollow fiber has very low thermal conductivity. The shell of the hollow fiber consists of poly(vinyl fluoride), and poly(vinyl alcohol) can be used as the core flow to generate the hollow structure. Both poly(vinyl fluoride) and poly(vinyl alcohol) are dissolved in organic solvents. When the solvent volatilizes, nanopores can be formed on the wall of the hollow fiber. The characteristic size of these nanopores is close to the average free path of gas molecules in the air (70 nm), which limits the movement of air molecules and reduces the gas conduction. Through the COMSOL simulation of the thermal conductivity of single hollow fibers, the thermal conductivity of hollow fabric is 0.0297 W m−1 K−1, which is far lower than that of the solid fiber of the same material.
4.10. Electrochemical catalysis
Hollow fibers with a porous structure are widely used in the field of electrochemical catalysis86–90 because of their large specific surface area. The pores on the fiber wall increase the active sites of the reaction, which has obvious advantages compared with other catalytic materials with the same volume.

Chen et al.
86 fabricated a Cu–Sn alloy hollow fiber by the co-extrusion method (Fig. 8a), and the fiber was used as an electrocatalyst to reduce CO2 to CO. The selectivity of CO2 can be tuned by changing the proportion of Cu and Sn in the fiber. The Cu–Sn45% hollow fiber had a positive effect on formate production, and the Faraday efficiency could reach more than 90% at −0.75 V. The good properties are attributed to the synergistic effect of favorable phase and specific structure.
 Fig. 8  Applications of hollow fibers for electrochemical catalysis and energy conversion and storage. (a) Working diagram of the Cu–Sn hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 86 (b) The porous structure of the fiber endows the fiber with multiple active sites. Adapted from ref. 87 (c) Schematic diagram of the hollow fiber for energy conversion. Adapted from ref. 91 (d) Hollow fiber used for supercapacitors for energy storage. Adapted from ref. 92 (e) Preparation of the G/CNTs/PANI composite hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 94 (f) The schematic diagram of the fiber converting light energy into electrical energy for storage. Adapted from ref. 94 (g) Structure and application of a fiber-optic DSSC in deep sea. Adapted from ref. 95 

Gao et al.
87 employed the coaxial electrospinning method to obtain a core–shell nanofiber composed of a TPP/PVP (TPP = triphenylphosphine, PVP = polyvinylpyrrolidone) core and a DCDA/PAN (DCDA = dicyandiamide, PAN = polyaniline) shell, and after polymerization and pyrolysis, the hollow structure could be obtained. The electrocatalytic properties of the fibers were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). Due to the abundant active sites, continuous conductive pathways and good mass transfer channels, the fiber had excellent trifunctional electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution, which is superior to that of many other carbon-based metal free materials. Fig. 8b shows the porous structure of the fiber, indicating that it has rich active sites.
Kas et al.88 prepared copper containing hollow fibers by the dry–wet spinning method. It was used as an electrode to reduce CO2. The compact copper hollow fiber as a gas diffuser and cathode can produce very high CO yield, which is equivalent to the use of precious metals. The remarkable electrocatalytic performance of the electrode is attributed to the porous structure of the fiber and the favorable mass transfer conditions. The hydrogen evolution reaction on these electrodes is not only suppressed to a very low level, but also the total current density of carbon dioxide reduction at low potential is higher than ever before.
4.11. Energy conversion and storage
With the depletion of fossil fuels and the deterioration of the environment, it is urgent to explore renewable, cost-effective and eco-friendly materials to develop energy conversion and storage systems.91–96 Renewable energy plays a very important role in the future energy infrastructure construction. To accelerate the wide application of renewable energy, large-scale energy conversion and storage technology is urgently needed. The hollow structure of the hollow fiber can capture gas91 (Fig. 8c) and increase reactive sites and specific surface area92 (Fig. 8d), and due to these characteristics the hollow fiber can be used to prepare batteries93 or supercapacitors,94 which makes energy conversion and storage possible.
Liu et al.94 prepared graphene/carbon nanotubes (G/CNTs) hollow carbon nanotube fibers, and then synthesized G/CNTs/PANI composite hollow fibers. Polyaniline (PANI) can be formed by in situ polymerization of aniline (Fig. 8e). As an integrated device of fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cells and supercapacitors with common electrodes, the composite hollow fiber has a total power conversion and storage efficiency of up to 2.1%. The fiber can also be used to prepare high performance fiber-like supercapacitors (Fig. 8f).
Ding et al.95 have successfully fabricated optical elements from hollow fibers (Fig. 8g). The hybrid Ti wire/N719-TiO2 nanotube photoanode and twisted Ti wire/Pt counter electrode were placed in a long afterglow phosphor modified hollow fiber filled with a liquid I−/I3− electrolyte to prepare fiber-optic induced dye-sensitized solar cells. CoSe and Pt3Ni counter electrodes were used to replace expensive platinum electrodes. The fiber-optic induced solar cell has the advantages of high power conversion efficiency, convenient operation, good flexibility, and continuous power generation after light illumination.
Through the sealing of both ends of the solar cell, the liquid electrolyte does not leak, and the external environment does not affect the photovoltaic performance. Therefore, it has good long-term stability even in underground and deep-sea applications. The solar cell is activated rapidly under the stimulation of sunlight, and the output efficiency remains unchanged for 168 hours under atmospheric conditions; a photoelectric conversion efficiency of up to 0.7% was measured on solar cells with CoSe reverse electrodes.
5. Conclusions and outlook
We make a concise review on the recent progress in the field of hollow fibers, facilitating the design and fabrication of functional materials and extending potential applications of hollow fibers in other areas. Especially, we overview the fabrication methods which have been developed so far, such as co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods (dry–wet spinning and microfluidic spinning), template methods, 3D printing methods, electrospinning methods, self-crimping method and gas foaming process (Table 1). We also discuss different types of hollow fibers fabricated by these existing methods and popular applications of hollow fibers, such as gas separation, cell culture, microfluidic channels, artificial human tubular tissues, bioreactors, sensing, micro robots, micro motors, gas dehumidification, drug delivery, thermal insulating coolers, electrochemical catalyst assembly and energy converter (Table 2).
Table 1 Summary and comparison of preparation methods of hollow fibers




Fabrication methods
Representative fiber types
Advantages
Disadvantages




Co-extrusion/co-axial spinning method13,14,17–25,27–40
Dry–wet spinning method14,17–25
One-layered hollow fibers
Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall
Complex preparation


Thermally induced phase separation method42–44
One-layered hollow fibers
Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall. Wide range of applications
Complex preparation


Melt-spinning/cold-stretching method45–47
One-layered hollow fibers
Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall
Poor controllability on morphology, limited range of application


Microfluidic methods13,16,27–40
One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers, multi-hollow fibers
Good controllability, simpleness, high-resolution, continuous fabrication
Low-throughput


Template methods26,42–45
One-layered hollow fibers
Simpleness, good controllability
Time-consuming, low-throughput, discontinuity


3D printing methods46–48
One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers, multi-hollow fibers, branched hollow fibers
Good controllability, good cell-loading, versatility, high-resolution
Slow, time-consuming, expensive, requires superb professional skills


Electrospinning methods49–59
One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers
Simpleness, rapidness, versatility
High energy-consuming, high-risk, poor controllability on morphology


Self-crimping method60
One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers
Simpleness, good controllability
Low-throughput


Gas foaming process61
One-layered hollow fibers
Good controllability, good cell-loading, porous fiber wall
Complex preparation




Table 2 Types, typical performance, main applications and main properties of hollow fibers




Fiber types
Typical performance
Main applications
Main properties
Notes




One-layered hollow fibers8,26,48,50,69–71
Large specific surface area, uniform inner diameter
Gas separation, water purification, cell culture, artificial tubular tissues, microfluidic channel, electrochemical catalysis, energy conversion and storage
Extensibility, flexibility, cell adhesion, biocompatibility, selective adsorption, air permeability
The characteristics of the fiber have a great relationship with its material, but not with its structure


Multi-layered hollow fibers14,60,67
Complex structure, high degree of functionality
Water purification, artificial tubular tissues, micromotors
Extensibility, flexibility


Multi-hollow fibers40
Complex structure, high degree of functionality
Cell culture
Cell adhesion, biocompatibility


Branched hollow fibers28,52
Complex structure, high degree of functionality
Artificial tubular tissues
Cell adhesion, biocompatibility




The field of hollow fibers is emerging and developing, with great promise and value. There are many works needed to be done in the future. For example, new fabrication techniques need to be developed, enabling multi-functional hollow fibers to be fabricated precisely and continuously. Multi-type hollow fibers, like shaped hollow fiber (namely, a hollow fiber with non-circular cross-section or hollow structure) and Janus hollow fiber, need to be fabricated, meeting the increasing demands by industries and other fields. More applications need to be explored as well. We believe that hollow fibers will have a bright future and be of significance in numerous fields.
Author contributions
Ye Tian: writing – manuscript preparation, reviewing and editing. Zhaoyang Wang: writing – manuscript preparation. Liqiu Wang: reviewing, revising and supervision.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The financial support from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (GRF 17205421, 17204420, 17210319, 17204718, and CRF C1006-20WF), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515110126 and 2021A1515010130) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (N2119006) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
H. Onoe and S. Takeuchi, Drug Discovery Today, 2015, 20, 236–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sakai, Y. Liu, E. J. Mah and M. Taya, Biofabrication, 2013, 5, 015012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Perez and H. W. Kim, Acta Biomater., 2015, 21, 2–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, E. Kim, M. L. Shuler and D. B. Wilson, Biotechnol. Prog., 1998, 14, 667–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. C. Ryan, P. Lively, B. T. Kelley, H. W. Deckman, J. H. Drese, C. W. Jones and W. J. Koros, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 7314–7324 CrossRef .
A. H. Ide and J. M. F. Nogueira, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 2911–2920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Yang and L. Yuan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 265, 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Oikonomou, S. Karpati, S. Gassara, A. Deratani, F. Beaume, O. Lorain, S. Tencé-Girault and S. Norvez, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 538, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dorati, A. De Trizio, S. Marconi, A. Ferrara, F. Auricchio, I. Genta, T. Modena, M. Benazzo, A. Benazzo, G. Volpato and B. Conti, Macromol. Biosci., 2017, 17, 1600426 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kitano, D. M. Schwartz, H. Zhou, S. E. Gilpin, G. R. Wojtkiewicz, X. Ren, C. A. Sommer, A. V. Capilla, D. J. Mathisen, A. M. Goldstein, G. Mostoslavsky and H. C. Ott, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 765 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, D. Li, Z. Yin, A. He, M. Lin, G. Jiang, X. Song, X. Hu, Y. Liu, J. Wang, X. Wang, L. Duan and G. Zhou, Acta Biomater., 2017, 58, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Bosio, J. Brown, M. J. Rodriguez and D. L. Kaplan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1227–1235 RSC .
K. H. Lee, S. J. Shin, Y. Park and S. H. Lee, Small, 2009, 5, 1264–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Noor, J. Koll, M. Radjabian, C. Abetz and V. Abetz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 414–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, G. Zhang, Q. Wang and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19789–19797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Haase, H. Jeon, N. Hough, J. H. Kim, K. J. Stebe and D. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1234 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Y. Gebreyohannes, L. Upadhyaya, L. P. Silva, G. Falca, P. J. Carvalho and S. P. Nunes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 17763–17771 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Le, B. A. Pulido and S. P. Nunes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22343–22349 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, F. Pan, A. Lindbrathen, X. Zhang, M. Hillestad, Y. Nie, L. Bai, X. He and M. D. Guiver, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Liu, G. Liu, W. Qiu and W. J. Koros, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 59, 5333–5339 CrossRef .
L. Upadhyaya, A. Y. Gebreyohannes, F. H. Akhtar, G. Falca, V. Musteata, D. K. Mahalingam, R. Almansoury, K. C. Ng and S. P. Nunes, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 614, 118450 CrossRef CAS .
K. Skrzypek, M. Groot Nibbelink, J. Liefers-Visser, A. M. Smink, E. Stoimenou, M. A. Engelse, E. J. P. de Koning, M. Karperien, P. de Vos, A. van Apeldoorn and D. Stamatialis, Macromol. Biosci., 2020, 20, e2000021 CrossRef .
L. Keller, T. Lohaus, L. Abduly, G. Hadler and M. Wessling, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
N. Diban, S. Haimi, L. Bolhuis-Versteeg, S. Teixeira, S. Miettinen, A. Poot, D. Grijpma and D. Stamatialis, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 6450–6458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, Z. Thong, K. Y. Wang and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 541, 413–424 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, C. Ren, S. Fang, Y. Wang and F. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18853–18860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Wang, F. Yin, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Liu, H. Wang, N. Sun, H. Liu and J. Qin, Integr. Biol., 2017, 9, 774–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Li, C. Liu, Y. Sun and Q. Hu, Biomicrofluidics, 2016, 10, 064104 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-Q. Wen, R. Xie, W.-G. Liang, X.-H. He, W. Wang, X.-J. Ju and L.-Y. Chu, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2015, 87, 471–480 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Meng, W. Wang, R. Xie, X. J. Ju, Z. Liu and L. Y. Chu, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2673–2681 RSC .
M. Y. Jiang, X. J. Ju, K. Deng, X. X. Fan, X. H. He, F. Wu, F. He, Z. Liu, W. Wang, R. Xie and L. Y. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3925–3935 RSC .
X.-H. He, W. Wang, K. Deng, R. Xie, X.-J. Ju, Z. Liu and L.-Y. Chu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 928–936 RSC .
A. Asthana, K. H. Lee, S. J. Shin, J. Perumal, L. Butler, S. H. Lee and D. P. Kim, Biomicrofluidics, 2011, 5, 24117 CrossRef .
W. Jeong, J. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, G. Mensing and D. J. Beebe, Lab Chip, 2004, 4, 576–580 RSC .
D. Kim, A. Jo, K. B. C. Imani, D. Kim, J. W. Chung and J. Yoon, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 4351–4359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, X. Wang, Q. Du, J. Tang and J. Jiang, Biomicrofluidics, 2019, 13, 064108 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Aykar, D. E. Reynolds, M. C. McNamara and N. N. Hashemi, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 4095–4102 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Yu, L. Jiang and J. Qin, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 109705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takei, N. Kishihara, S. Sakai and K. Kawakami, Biochem. Eng. J., 2010, 49, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, W. Wei, Y. Wang, C. Xu, Y. Guo and J. Qin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6649–6655 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, R. Deng, K. M. Schumacher, M. Kurisawa, H. Ye, K. Purnamawati and J. Y. Ying, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 863–869 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, M. Ding, J. Wu, Q. Chen, H. Zhao, Y. Yu, Y. Pan, J. Qian, J. Miao, Y. Tu and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 10922–10941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, W. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Rajabzadeh, N. Kato, Y. Sasaki, H. K. Shon and H. Matsuyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 618, 118586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, W. Ma, L. Huang, R. Li, Q. Huang, C. Xiao and Z. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 634, 119429 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hufenus, Y. Yan, M. Dauner and T. Kikutani, Materials, 2020, 13, 4298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ji, C. Xiao, K. Chen, F. Zhou, Y. Gao, T. Zhang and H. Ling, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 621, 118953 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhong, J. Zhou and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 632, 119374 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, Y. Pei, M. Xie, Z. H. Jin, Y. S. Xiao, Y. Wang, L. N. Zhang, Y. Li and W. H. Huang, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 1178–1187 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. S. Zhang, S. M. Bakht, J. Aleman, S. R. Shin, K. Yue, M. Sica, J. Ribas, M. Duchamp, J. Ju, R. B. Sadeghian, D. Kim, M. R. Dokmeci, A. Atala and A. Khademhosseini, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 1579–1586 RSC .
S. M. Yoo and R. Ghosh, Biochem. Eng. J., 2014, 91, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, Y. Shi, J. Luo, L. Zhang and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4122–4129 RSC .
Q. Gao, Z. Liu, Z. Lin, J. Qiu, Y. Liu, A. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Xiang, B. Chen, J. Fu and Y. He, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 399–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, Y. He, J. Z. Fu, A. Liu and L. Ma, Biomaterials, 2015, 61, 203–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Liu, B. Chen and Y. Luo, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 168, 38–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, P. Wang, Z. Su, G. Ma and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 181–190 RSC .
D. Zhou, W. L. Song and L. Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21472–21478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sitt, J. Soukupova, D. Miller, D. Verdi, R. Zboril, H. Hess and J. Lahann, Small, 2016, 12, 1432–1439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dror, W. Salalha, R. Avrahami, E. Zussman, A. L. Yarin, R. Dersch, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Small, 2007, 3, 1064–1073 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jana and M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2575–2581 RSC .
K. Liu, N. Wang, W. Wang, L. Shi, H. Li, F. Guo, L. Zhang, L. Kong, S. Wang and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3758–3764 RSC .
B. Marelli, M. Achilli, A. Alessandrino, G. Freddi, M. C. Tanzi, S. Fare and D. Mantovani, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 1566–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, F. Guo, Z. Cui, J. Zhou, Y. Zhai, Y. Du, J. Liu, N. Wang and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 53503–53509 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang, Z. Miao, X. Zhang and Z. Su, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 286, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Ranjan, P. Zeng, B. Li and Y. Zhang, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2175–2188 RSC .
C. Su, Y. Li, H. Cao, C. Lu, Y. Li, J. Chang and F. Duan, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 583, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, Y. Li, P. Zhang, S. Gao, B. Liu, Y. Wang, T. Meng, Y. Zhou, H. Hou, C. Xue, Y. Zhao and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10076–10083 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, W. Huang, Q. Zhao and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 3054–3059 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barroso-Solares, D. Cuadra-Rodriguez, M. L. Rodriguez-Mendez, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez and J. Pinto, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 8820–8829 RSC .
K. P. Katuri, N. M. Bettahalli, X. Wang, G. Matar, S. Chisca, S. P. Nunes and P. E. Saikaly, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9504–9511 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Teotia, D. Kalita, A. K. Singh, S. K. Verma, S. S. Kadam and J. R. Bellare, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 1, 372–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-l. Li, D.-r. Li, J.-h. Chen, Z.-y. Liu, G.-h. Wang, X.-p. Zhang, F. Xu and Y.-q. Lu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 953–957 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, M. R. Chowdhury, J. Qi, L. Xia, B. D. Huey and J. R. McCutcheon, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 540, 344–353 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, N. Li, S. J. Miller, D. Kim, S. Yi, Y. Labreche and W. J. Koros, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13754–13758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Wan, T. Yang, G. G. Lipscomb, D. J. Stookey and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 538, 96–107 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cacho-Bailo, M. Etxeberria-Benavides, O. David, C. Tellez and J. Coronas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20787–20796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Sutrisna, J. Hou, M. Y. Zulkifli, H. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Liang, D. M. D'Alessandro and V. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 918–931 RSC .
X. Wang, M. Sun, B. Meng, X. Tan, J. Liu, S. Wang and S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13448–13451 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Song, X. Tan, B. Meng, J. Liu and S. Liu, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 502, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, K. Li and W. K. Teo, AIChE J., 2005, 51, 1367–1376 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, E. S. Sanders, S. S. Kulkarni, D. J. Hasse and W. J. Koros, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 465, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ellis and J. B. Chaudhuri, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2007, 96, 177–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qiu, X. Qu, D. J. Brackett, M. R. Lerner, D. Li and C. Mao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2492–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, B. Jia, F. Fu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13504–13508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, H. Shen, Y. Wei, H. Ge, J. Wang, H. Peng and W. Liu, Small, 2020, 16, e2003678 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xi, F. Kong, J. C. Yeo, L. Yu, S. Sonam, M. Dao, X. Gong and C. T. Lim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10590–10595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, J. Xu, J. Zou, D. Liu, Y. Situ and H. Huang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6594–6601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Xiao, D. Kong, R. Iqbal, Q.-H. Yang and L. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103879 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kas, K. K. Hummadi, R. Kortlever, P. de Wit, A. Milbrat, M. W. Luiten-Olieman, N. E. Benes, M. T. Koper and G. Mul, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Huong, Le, L. F. Dumée, S. Lacour, M. Rivallin, Z. Yi, L. Kong, M. Bechelany and M. Cretin, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 587, 103879 CrossRef .
H. Tian, J. Zhao, X. Wang, L. Wang, H. Liu, G. Wang, J. Huang, J. Liu and G. Q. Lu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1647–1655 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Tong, K. Huang, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2021, 82, 100888 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, L. Xie, G. Sun, F. Su, Q.-Q. Kong, F. Li, W. Ma, J. Shi, D. Jiang, C. Lu and C.-M. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 455–465 RSC .
Q. Dai, W. Lu, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, X. Zhu and X. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 595, 117569 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Z. Chen, T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li, H. Li and T. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, Y. Zhao, J. Duan, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12233–12235 RSC .
X. Meng, Y. Liu, N. Yang, X. Tan, J. Liu, J. C. Diniz da Costa and S. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2017, 205, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Ye Tian
	Dr. Ye Tian received his PhD from the University of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Liqiu Wang. He is currently an Associate Professor in the College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University. His current research interests focus on microfluidics, the fabrication and applications of functional mini/microfibers, biomaterials, tissue engineering, soft matter, functional surfaces and interfaces.

Zhaoyang Wang
	Ms Zhaoyang Wang is a master student in the College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, under the supervision of Dr. Ye Tian. Her research interests focus on microfluidics, biomaterials and functional fibers.

Liqiu Wang
	Prof. L. Q. Wang received his PhD from the University of Alberta. He is currently a chair professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Hong Kong. He has over 30 years of university experience in thermal and power engineering, energy and environment, transport phenomena, materials, nanotechnology, biotechnology, and applied mathematics and 2 years of industry experience in technology and IP development as a Chief Scientist and CTO.

 	Fig. 1  Summary of the common fabrication methods, types and applications of hollow fibers. The hollow fibers produced by different fabrication methods have different morphology, including one-layered, multi-layered, multi-hollow and branched hollow fibers. Different morphology hollow fibers can be used in various fields, such as artificial tubular tissues, micromotors and drug carriers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Co-extrusion/co-axial spinning methods for the fabrication of hollow fibers. (a) Spinning of single layer and double layer hollow fibers by the co-extrusion method. Adapted from ref. 14 (b) Image and explanatory illustration of the device for fabrication of collagen gel hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 15 (c) Schematics of hollow fiber formation via co-extrusion. Adapted from ref. 16 (d) Schematic of the dry–wet spinning method. Adapted from ref. 19 (e) Preparation of porous hollow fibers by thermally induced phase separation. Adapted from ref. 44 (f) Preparation of hollow fibers by melt spinning/cold stretching. Adapted from ref. 46 (g) Microfluidic devices for fabricating chitosan microfibers with tubular internal surfaces. Adapted from ref. 32 (h) Schematic of hollow microfiber generation using a two-channel microfluidic device. Adapted from ref. 33 (i) The microfluidic apparatus is capable of producing micro-tubes. Adapted from ref. 34 (j) Schematic diagram of the chip used to fabricate heterogeneous multi-hollow microfibers. Adapted from ref. 40	 

 	Fig. 3  Template methods, 3D printing methods, electrospinning methods, self-crimping method and gas foaming process for the fabrication of hollow fibers. (a) The template coating methods for fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 26 (b) The hard template fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 49 (c) The soft template fabrication of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 49 (d) and (e) 3D printing of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 52 and 53 (f) Schematic illustrations of the setup for co-axial electrospinning. Adapted from ref. 55 (g) Electrospinning system for fabrication of aligned nanofibrous tubes. Adapted from ref. 59 (h) Schematic illustration of the three-step preparation process of bio-inspired 3LVG. Adapted from ref. 60 (i) Preparation of a double-layer temperature-sensitive hydrogel film and the self-alignment process. Adapted from ref. 67 (j) Schematic diagram of the hollow fiber prepared by the gas foaming process and SEM diagrams of the hollow fiber membrane. Adapted from ref. 68	 

 	Fig. 4  Types of hollow fibers. (a) The lumen of PVDF industrial hollow fibers containing PVP or PVP + DB. Adapted from ref. 8 (b) The cross-sectional morphology of hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 25 (c) The nickel oxide-yttria-stabilized zirconia hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 26 (d) SEM images of the section of the cellulose/collagen microtubes. Adapted from ref. 48 (e) Hollow fibers fabricated with 5% sodium alginate. Adapted from ref. 50 (f) Scanning electron microscopy image of the cross section of a virgin porous hollow fiber cathode. Adapted from ref. 69 (g) Overview of the cross-section of the prepared Psf hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 70 (h) SEM images of the cross sections of hollow core micro-fibers. Adapted from ref. 71 (i) SEM micrographs of the cross section of double-layer hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 14 (j) Three-layer structure of three-layered hollow fibers. Adapted from ref. 60 (k) Confocal laser scanning microscope images of cross-sections of Ca-alginate microfibers with multiple hollows. Adapted from ref. 40 (l) SEM image of the Y-shaped structural hollow hydrogel fibers. Adapted from ref. 28 (m) Branched vasculature-like hollow fibers fabricated by the 3D printing method. Adapted from ref. 52 (n) Double-layer hollow fiber prepared by the self-crimping method. Adapted from ref. 67	 

 	Fig. 5  Applications of hollow fibers for gas separation and air purification, cell culture and microfluidic channels. (a) Schematic illustration of sorption and desorption modes in the hollow fiber sorbents. Adapted from ref. 5 (b) Schematic diagram of the fiber prepared by the dry–wet spinning method for CO2 separation. Adapted from ref. 23 (c) The ZIF-9@Ni hollow fiber for gas mixture separation. Adapted from ref. 75 (d) Optical micrograph of the cell-laden hollow Ca-alginate microfibers after the growth of Chlorella pyrenoidosa cells for 7 days. Adapted from ref. 30 (e) SEM and confocal images of myotubes grown for ten days on the inner surface of a chitosan/PCL nanofibrous tubular scaffold with aligned nanofibers. Adapted from ref. 59 The middle sketch shows the locations (marked by black squares) on the tubular scaffolds where the images were taken. (f) The picture of the cell-loaded fiber under an optical microscope and the distribution of fluorescently labeled cells inside the fiber. Adapted from ref. 64 (g) Scheme of the experimental setup for the hollow-microfiber-based microfluidic fluorescence detection system. Adapted from ref. 71 (h) The Cu@C hollow fiber based microfluidic chip system. Adapted from ref. 83	 

 	Fig. 6  Applications of hollow fibers for artificial tubular tissues, bioreactors and sensing. (a) Simulation of cellulose artificial blood vessels. Adapted from ref. 48 (b) Intravasation of HCCLM9 cells from the surrounding collagen into the simulated vascular lumen. Adapted from ref. 48 (c) Endothelialization of the PDMS tubes. Adapted from ref. 49 (d) Endothelialized PDMS vessels for interconnection of multiple organ modules. Adapted from ref. 49 (e) Biological responses of the endothelialized PDMS vessels upon drug treatment. Adapted from ref. 49 (f) Sketch diagram of the SPR probe fabrication process. Adapted from ref. 7 (g) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup of the hollow fiber SPR sensor for microfluidic chips. Adapted from ref. 7 (h) The fabrication of a PDMS-embedded enzyme-entrapped hollow alginate microfiber bioreactor. Adapted from ref. 33	 

 	Fig. 7  Applications of hollow fibers for micro robots and micro motors, gas dehumidification, drug delivery and thermal insulating cooler. (a) Movement mechanism of the rhombic hollow fiber fabric. Adapted from ref. 62 (1) Observation of the concentration gradient on the water surface using an infrared imaging camera. (2) Schematic diagram of the force of water molecules and ethanol molecules on the gas–liquid interface. (3) Formation of the concentration gradient on the water surface. (4) Force analysis derived from the concentration gradient. (b) The cross-sectional view pictures of the hollow fiber taken by SEM and the schematic diagram of air dehumidification. Adapted from ref. 17 (c) SEM images of the hollow fiber covered with the NEXARTM layer. Adapted from ref. 21 (d) Schematic representation of the dehumidification setup. Adapted from ref. 21 (e) Scheme of 3D printing of the magnetically driven drug delivery system and the magnetic-driven drug release and the deformation of the hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 54 (f) Preparation process of hierarchical hollow fibers as a thermal insulating cooler for buildings. Adapted from ref. 66	 

 	Fig. 8  Applications of hollow fibers for electrochemical catalysis and energy conversion and storage. (a) Working diagram of the Cu–Sn hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 86 (b) The porous structure of the fiber endows the fiber with multiple active sites. Adapted from ref. 87 (c) Schematic diagram of the hollow fiber for energy conversion. Adapted from ref. 91 (d) Hollow fiber used for supercapacitors for energy storage. Adapted from ref. 92 (e) Preparation of the G/CNTs/PANI composite hollow fiber. Adapted from ref. 94 (f) The schematic diagram of the fiber converting light energy into electrical energy for storage. Adapted from ref. 94 (g) Structure and application of a fiber-optic DSSC in deep sea. Adapted from ref. 95	 

Co-extrusion/co-axial spinning method13,14,17–25,27–40	Dry–wet spinning method14,17–25	One-layered hollow fibers	Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall	Complex preparation
Thermally induced phase separation method42–44	One-layered hollow fibers	Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall. Wide range of applications	Complex preparation
Melt-spinning/cold-stretching method45–47	One-layered hollow fibers	Rapidness, versatility, continuous fabrication, porous fiber wall	Poor controllability on morphology, limited range of application
Microfluidic methods13,16,27–40	One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers, multi-hollow fibers	Good controllability, simpleness, high-resolution, continuous fabrication	Low-throughput
Template methods26,42–45	One-layered hollow fibers	Simpleness, good controllability	Time-consuming, low-throughput, discontinuity
3D printing methods46–48	One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers, multi-hollow fibers, branched hollow fibers	Good controllability, good cell-loading, versatility, high-resolution	Slow, time-consuming, expensive, requires superb professional skills
Electrospinning methods49–59	One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers	Simpleness, rapidness, versatility	High energy-consuming, high-risk, poor controllability on morphology
Self-crimping method60	One-layered hollow fibers, multi-layered hollow fibers	Simpleness, good controllability	Low-throughput
Gas foaming process61	One-layered hollow fibers	Good controllability, good cell-loading, porous fiber wall	Complex preparation

One-layered hollow fibers8,26,48,50,69–71	Large specific surface area, uniform inner diameter	Gas separation, water purification, cell culture, artificial tubular tissues, microfluidic channel, electrochemical catalysis, energy conversion and storage	Extensibility, flexibility, cell adhesion, biocompatibility, selective adsorption, air permeability	The characteristics of the fiber have a great relationship with its material, but not with its structure
Multi-layered hollow fibers14,60,67	Complex structure, high degree of functionality	Water purification, artificial tubular tissues, micromotors	Extensibility, flexibility
Multi-hollow fibers40	Complex structure, high degree of functionality	Cell culture	Cell adhesion, biocompatibility
Branched hollow fibers28,52	Complex structure, high degree of functionality	Artificial tubular tissues	Cell adhesion, biocompatibility

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
