Thermodynamic limits of atmospheric water harvesting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01071B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01071B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4025-4037Thermodynamic limits of atmospheric water harvesting†

        
          
            Akshay K. 
            Rao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew J. 
            Fix
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yun Chi 
            Yang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            David M. 
            Warsinger
          
        
      *
      School of Mechanical Engineering and Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. E-mail: dwarsing@purdue.edu
Received 
      1st April 2022
    , Accepted 18th July 2022First published on 13th September 2022AbstractAtmospheric water harvesting (AWH) is a rapidly emerging approach for decentralized water production, but current technology is limited by trade-offs between energy consumption and yield. The field lacks a common basis to compare different AWH technologies and a robust understanding of the performance impacts of water recovery, desorption humidity (for sorbent systems), and realistic component-level efficiencies. By devising a set of unifying assumptions and consistent parameters across technologies, we provide the first fair thermodynamic comparison over a broad range of environmental conditions. Using 2nd law analysis, or least work, we study the maximum efficiency for common open system AWH methods – fog nets, dew plates, membrane-systems, and sorption processes – to identify the process performance limits. We find that the thermodynamic minimum for any AWH process is anywhere from 0× (relative humidity (RH) ≥ 100%) to upwards of 250× (RH < 10%) the minimum energy requirement of seawater desalination. Sorbents have a particular niche in colder (T < 310 K), arid regions (<6 g kg−1). Membrane-systems are best at low relative humidity and the region of applicability is strongly affected by vacuum pumping efficiency. Dew harvesting is best at higher humidity (RH > 40%) and fog harvesting is optimal when super-saturated conditions exist. Increasing efficiency at the component-level, particularly for vacuum pumps and condensers, may be the most promising avenue for improvement. Enabled by peta-scale computing, our findings use geographical and parametric mapping to provide a framework for technology deployment and energy-optimization.

Broader context
Intensifying global water scarcity calls for a diverse set of water technologies, including atmospheric water harvesting (AWH) – a process that uses energy to extract water from the air. These technologies provide exceptionally pure water from the surrounding environment with simple systems. While there are many different technologies for AWH, it is difficult to compare them on a fair basis. In this perspective, we critically evaluate each mechanism type – dew, fog, membrane, and sorbent, using the 2nd law of thermodynamics. We show the maximum achievable efficiency of each type of process over a range of temperature and humidity conditions. Additionally, we map the minimum energy requirement and efficiency-optimal technology for water harvesting across the globe using atmospheric data. From this understanding, we show how specific improvements in the design of systems and processes can reduce the energy required per amount of water collected for current methods by over an order of magnitude. This AWH study is the broadest analysis by technology, environmental conditions, and geography. This approach reveals technology niches and guidance for the industrial development of AWH.

Introduction
Climate and water scarcity
Climate induced desertification1 and widespread groundwater resource exhaustion2 are exacerbating global freshwater scarcity. As of 2020, two-thirds of the global population lived in water stress for at least 1 month out of the year.3,4 The issue is particularly concentrated in remote and arid regions (RH < 30%). Current water purification technologies are constrained by high potential for GHG emissions, slowly disappearing groundwater, brine disposal requirements, and distribution costs due to centralization.2,5 However, the atmosphere holds over six times the amount of freshwater in all the Earth's rivers, and this is projected to grow as the climate warms.6,7 Effective atmospheric water harvesting (AWH) technology provides a means to access this widely available, renewable water source. This is particularly important in remote or rural regions, where long-distance transportation of water is costly.8 Therefore, an efficient and scalable solution to accessing atmospheric water could create large benefits, with a specific niche for decentralized applications.
Atmospheric water harvesting
Atmospheric water harvesting (AWH) technology seeks to efficiently access the highly pure water that is available in the ambient air. Water in the atmosphere is widely available and may be free from salt and mineral contaminants. This creates an opportunity for decentralized water purification with relatively little need for pre-treatment. Air- and water-borne pathogens and worsening pollution will require some post-treatment for AWH to be used for drinking water.9 However, this treatment is likely less difficult than filtering trace contaminants, such as arsenic and boron, that are found in oceans and rivers.10 The primary disadvantage is that energy needs for AWH in most situations are orders of magnitude higher than even seawater desalination. This motivates the need for a robust understanding of the fundamental energy requirements, and their geospatial context, to determine limiting factors and identify the best use cases.
There are several performance metrics that are used to evaluate AWH technologies in terms of energy requirements and yields. The most common metrics include the specific water production (SWP) and the specific energy consumption (SEC).11 SWP quantifies yield on an area or mass of water basis. SEC describes the energy input of a process, per mass of water collected. In a similar vein, the moisture harvesting index quantifies the energy needs as a fraction of the liquid–vapor phase change energy .12
While these metrics consider thermodynamic principles, they do not provide a fundamental understanding of the absolute limitations, agnostic of process and energy source, and lack a rigorous connection to thermodynamic laws. In contrast, the least work framework quantifies the thermodynamic minimum energy requirement to obtain liquid water from a given water source. This is discussed further in eqn (1) in Methods.
Prior reviews have used the least work framework to understand desalination systems13,14 and specific sorbent water harvesters.15–17 However, none have compared multiple AWH technologies with thermodynamic analysis or optimization. Thus, performance comparisons of known technologies have previously been largely qualitative. This study aims to use the least work framework to provide a broad quantitative understanding of the energy requirements for AWH processes, with a rigorous connection to thermodynamic fundamentals.
Current water harvesting technologies
AWH technology can be partitioned into direct harvesting and vapor concentration methods, as described by Fig. 1. Direct harvesting aims to capture liquid water by physically trapping droplets or cooling the ambient air–water mixture. Vapor concentration uses novel materials to separate water molecules from other air components before condensing to liquid.
 Fig. 1  Visualization of technologies (outer circle) and fundamental process categories (inner circle). Dropwise condensation on a tube (Dew, Energy Transport Research Lab UIUC); SEM Polysulfone–graphene oxide composite membrane (Mokkapati et al., 2017); SEM graphene structured fog net (Song et al., 2018); Optical microscope MOF-303 (Omar Yahi laboratory, UC Berkeley). 
Dew harvesting processes are the primary method of direct harvesting. Dew water systems cool air until the saturation pressure meets the vapor pressure of water (dew point temperature) and water condenses.12 This can be accomplished using active or passive (radiative) heat transfer and various grades of thermal energy. Active technologies are not constrained by the energy supply, but common cooling technologies, such as heat pumps or chillers, are anywhere from 3–30% efficient.18,19 Passive methods, such as solar powered devices or radiative cooling, are largely limited by ambient forces like convective losses and cloud cover and may only produce water in higher humidity regions.20 Dew harvesting in lower humidity regions or for high recovery must employ an active cooling technology to meet high energy requirements.
Fog harvesting, the alternative direct harvesting approach, requires environments in which liquid droplets exist in the ambient air. These systems collect small droplets using a fine mesh or use alternative methods to induce super-saturated conditions.21 It can harvest large volumes of water at a time, but it is largely limited to a specific climate regions and high humidity seasons.22 Recent advances in materials and nanoscale manufacturing have created new opportunities for higher yields.23
Sorbent systems concentrate water vapor by trapping water molecules in low surface-energy structures. Commonly used technologies include silica gels, zeolites, hygroscopic polymers, and more recently, metal organic frameworks (MOF).24 In this paper we focus on MOFs and a hybrid polymer sorbent since they have been shown to be the most thermodynamically efficient sorbent method.25 Since diffusion is the driving force, these systems are limited to a sorbent-dependent humidity range.26 Key limitations include total water capacity (yield), energy barrier for water release, water release and capture speed, and the material stability over time.16,23 This is further expanded upon in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of experimental atmospheric water harvesting technologies




Method
Fog21,31,32
Dew (S3)20,24,33
Membrane (S11)24,34,35
Sorption (S5)8,24,36,37


Driving Force
Ambient air flow
Cooling
Vacuum Pressure
Diffusion and heat transfer





a Cloud seeders and chillers do not have a unified metric for area, SEC, or SWP.
b Passive systems are denoted as SEC = 0. In reality, the energy is supplied by natural energy harvesting, bypassing electrical energy conversion. Refer to supplemental sections S3, S11, and S5 for more detail.





Technology
Mesh harvester
Cloud seedera
Active chillera
Passive radiative cooler
Membrane harvester
Sorbent materials






Challenges to scalability
Limited to specific regions
Limited to specific regions
Energy efficiency
Low cooling power
N2, O2 selectivity, H2O permeance
Large volumes, material degradation






Practical inefficiencies
Biological contaminants
—
Low COP devices
Ambient heat losses
Vacuum pump efficiency, membrane selectivity and permeance
Low COP devices, material stability, parasitic convection






Inefficiencies of ideal processes
—
—
Temperature gradients, finite recovery
Temperature gradients, finite recovery
Uncontrolled mixing, finite recovery
Temperature gradients, uncontrolled mixing, finite recovery






Operating humidity
>100%
45–100%
>4 g kg−1
40–100%
—
10–90%






Specific energy consumption
0b
—
830–25000 kJ kg−1
0b
580–830 kJ kg−1
0b–23000 kJ kg−1






Specific water production
0–10 kg m−2 day−1
—
20–200000 kg day−1
0.03–0.85 kg m−2 day−1
0.7–16.8 kg m−2 day−1
0.1–8.7 kg kg−1 day−1




Membrane separation processes use a partial vacuum to pull water vapor across a vapor-selective membrane. Implementing membranes in conventional dew processes has shown dramatic (nearly 50%) reductions in energy consumption.27 Similarly, many studies have staged such membranes in HVAC systems and other processes to reduce the energy requirement for cooling and dehumidification of air–water mixtures.28–30
As described by Table 1, the environmental requirements of each approach refer to typical operating humidity ranges of each process. Membrane systems operating ranges are constrained by the ultimate vacuum pressure of the vacuum pump. Given a perfect vacuum pump, the lower bound to operating membrane systems approaches 0%. However, prior modelling efforts have considered the range between 25–100%.38 Scalability requirements are derived from current technological and operational limitations. Ideal inefficiencies represent process level considerations that cause entropy generation, such as heat transfer or mixing fluids of different composition or humidity. Practical inefficiencies also induce entropy generation but can be mitigated by improvements at the component level (e.g. vacuum pump efficiencies, pipe friction, etc.). None of the water harvesting methods are mature technologies, however improvements in process design may address significant practical issues.
Each technology employs a different method to drive the process, shown by Table 1, thus resulting in trade-offs in scalability, ideal process efficiencies, and key practical limitations. Active technologies generally have higher yields but come with the trade-off of high electricity consumption. Fog, and dew harvesting are generally used in higher humidity regions, while sorption systems can generally be operated at lower humidity regions (<30%). Passive sorbent systems may use day-night temperature variation to efficiently produce water but suffer from low yields.26Table 1 describes the electrical energy consumption required to implement current technologies. The analysis of processes in this paper considers the thermodynamic energy requirements that can be generalized to active or passive systems.
Methods
Numerical model
The least work framework is a process agnostic approach to analyze fundamental limits of any water acquiring process, according to the 2nd law of thermodynamics. This framework is commonly used in desalination to compare the performance of processes with different driving forces, that accomplish the same task. Models are computed using the humid air properties in EES39 and the CoolProp library in Python.40 The properties from both databases are thoroughly validated against ASHRAE thermodynamic property standards.41 Material properties for MOF-801, MOF-303, MIP-200, Al-Fumarate, Co2Cl2(BTDD), MIL-101, and a hybrid polymer sorbent (polypyrrole chloride + poly N-isopropylacrylamide gel), such as water uptake and desorption conditions, are taken directly from experimental results.42–44 One exception was made for the hybrid polymer gel sorbent, for which data was not available regarding the enthalpy of adsorption. However, it is well established that this value is usually slightly greater than the enthalpy of vaporization,45 therefore, we have assumed a representative value equal to the average enthalpy of adsorption of all MOFs considered in a prior review paper. The materials were selected from an exhaustive review paper on MOF materials and applications and other sorbent material literature. The complete set of equations can be found in the Methods section (ESI†). Code for each process model can be found on GitHub upon publication: https://github.com/Warsingerlab/published-models/.
Modelling framework
The primary equations for each process are listed as a function of the ambient temperature and humidity.
The thermodynamic minimum, or least work, is found as a function of the ambient temperature and humidity.13 The limit represents an infinitesimal change to the environment, or the recovery ratio approaching zero. (1) is the minimum energy requirement per mass of water collected (kJ kg−1). ω is the ambient humidity ratio, dω is the change in humidity ratio through the process, and ω* is the dehumidified air humidity ratio. ẽ is the flow exergy of a given fluid stream. T is the ambient temperature. Subscript: water and HA, represent pure water and humid air, respectively.
As an extension of this, the dew energy requirement uses the same formulation but accounts for the change in temperature that occurs when cooling the air to the dew point. (2) signifies the energy requirement for dew water collection. Tdp represents the dew point temperature of the ambient air. The limit is dropped, as the minimum energy for dew processes does not occur at infinitesimal recovery.
The sorbent energy requirement conducts a similar exergy analysis on a basis of a cycle.15 This is depicted in S5. (3) represents the energy requirement for water collection via the sorbent system. It is comprised of a desorption term (qdes), a condensation term (qcond), and a regeneration term (qregen). Each of these heat transfer components are described on a per mass of water basis. Each heat transfer term is divided by a coefficient of performance, or COP, for heating (h) or cooling (c). The Carnot-device formulation (q/COP) is equivalent to the species-exergy formulation in a system with no explicit entropy generation. The energy transfer terms for the MOF are defined for an adsorption–desorption-regeneration cycle.
Like the sorbent process, the membrane process energy consumption is calculated by the sum of the work input and heat transfer divided by their respective efficiencies.30 This is depicted in S11. (4) represents the energy requirement for water collection via an open system membrane process. To represent the state-of-the-art, we consider a Claridge–Culp–Liu process that features a membrane configuration in an open system.30 Subscripts vac and comp represent the vacuum pump and compressor used by the system. As shown by Bergmair et al. (2015), the influence of membrane permeability and selectivity has negligible impact to performance beyond state-of-the-art materials.27 This assumption was checked by our models and the energy consumption showed <0.1% change with permeabilities above 1000 GPU.
All ideal process models assume a Carnot device for heating and cooling, as well as isentropic pumps and compressors, thus providing an understanding of the thermodynamic limits for each process. However, for the purpose of providing an understanding of process performance with more “realistic” components, the same models are used while assuming COP = 3, ηvac = 20%, and ηcomp = 65%. While each of these values would vary based operating conditions, these represent conservative constant values. (5)For all processes, the recovery ratio (r) is defined as the amount of water removed from the air, as a fraction of the humidity ratio of the ambient air. One exception is for the membrane process. Since the membrane process condenser is exposed to a pure water vapor stream, without air, the recovery ratio relates to the condensed water to the total water vapor flow entering the condenser. Due to significant differences between the continuous and batch processes, we evaluate each technology at their respective optimal recovery ratios and demonstrate how varying a technology's recovery ratio effects relative performance to the other technologies.
Mapping and computing
The modelling framework was applied to global weather data from the NASA MERRA2 project.46 The database provided temperature, pressure, and humidity of surface air in 1 h increments from January 01, 2021, to December 31, 2021. The spatial resolution of data was 0.5° in latitude and 0.625° in longitude. The mapping approach computed the least work at each coordinate for every time step, resulting in over 1.8 billion model evaluations. Then, the average annual energy requirements were determined from the hourly calculations. The calculation was conducted using AMD Epyc 7662 “Rome” CPUs at 3.1 GHz for a total of 432 hours of compute time.
Model validation
A previously published MOF cycle model was replicated and compared against the published results to ensure the foundation of the present model was based on an accepted framework.26 This is shown in the ESI,† procedures and in S6. The assumptions and sensitivity analyses regarding the sorbent properties are presented in S5–S10. The membrane model is based on prior published models.30 The ideal dew model is an extension of the least work framework that is novel to this work.
Assumptions and limitations
The limitations of this model are primarily derived from the process-agnostic description of least work, the range of the thermodynamic property database, the high sensitivity of the sorbent model to the desorption relative humidity, and the focus on open system analysis. Additionally, the nucleation dynamics of fouling, icing and fog are not captured in this model.
The CoolProp, thermodynamic property database for humid air mixture is limited in its range of validity.40 Data is exclusively for conditions where the humidity is greater than 4 gw kgair−1, or the dewpoint is greater than the freezing point.
In this study, we consider only radiative or advective fog. This assumes the droplet composition is pure water or only contains aerosols that are not chemically combined with water, such as dust. Fog that is induced by reactive particles, for example salt in sea fog or aerosols in valley fog, may require small additional considerations associated with chemical bonding energy. Further, water harvesting from more impure fog events may not uphold the same assumptions of minimal post-treatment, as other AWH methods imply.
The sorbent process model assumed ideal sorbent isotherm behaviour based on seven representative adsorbent materials, focusing on the adsorption energy, desorption relative humidity, and maximum water uptake. The properties were chosen from an exhaustive review on existing sorbents to provide a range of humidity operating conditions.43–45 Path specific uptake and the uptake dynamics of specific sorbents were not considered to maintain generalizability for comparison. However, an integral method is used to determine the desorption outlet humidity, as has been done in literature.15
This work considers the open system version of these technologies for fair comparison. Future work should look to unifying the thermodynamics of closed systems to bridge the gap between current technology and the minimum least work. Efficient process design is discussed further in the Field-wide challenges section.
The exergy-based models that are used in this study are not able to account for nucleation phenomena such as fouling and icing. System dynamics are process specific but may significantly alter energy consumption when ambient air is not homogenous, or weather conditions are rapidly fluctuating. Surface phenomena such as fouling and icing are also highly specific to individual devices or processes. Along with model limits, this study assumed that any sub-freezing temperature has the potential for frost accumulation and therefore is not viable for water harvesting. Dynamic surfaces47 and superhydrophobic surfaces48,49 have been shown to allow for condensers to avoid icing with low energy consumption. In desalination, hydrophobic surfaces also have been shown to mitigate the fouling propensity of membranes.50
The least work framework allows for precise description of a system's maximum efficiency, but the minimum energy requirement is not practically achievable. A reversible (100% efficient) process is reliant on asymptotic requirements such as isothermal separation and infinitesimal recovery. Real processes must operate at a finite recovery to meet practical yield or capacity constraints.
Exergy analysis shows characteristics of ideal systems, but practical considerations may limit the feasibility of achieving such conditions and alter the optimality conditions. For example, entropy generation due to heat transfer in dew plates may significantly impact the overall system efficiency and optimal recovery ratio. However, such impacts may only be predicted by understanding the locations and dynamics of device-specific entropy generation. In this work, we apply realistic efficiency assumptions to components (e.g., vacuum pumps, condensers, etc.) and propagate this through the process models to provide some insight into the difference between the thermodynamic limits and more practical systems. Furthermore, it is important to note that technology deployment is only in-part driven by energy. Techno-economic and social considerations may conflict with thermodynamic optimality.
Results & discussion
Energy requirements and process efficiencies
The second law efficiency of any process can be defined by the ratio between the least work (environment dependent) and the process energy requirement (process dependent) since the least work is thermodynamically ideal. For any process (dew, sorbent, fog, etc.), the second law efficiency represents the maximum efficiency limit or the thermodynamic losses that are built into the process. The least work, shown by Fig. 2a may be used to evaluate the efficiency of any water harvesting process. The data sets of all contour plots are included in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  Energy requirements and process efficiency for water harvesting vary based on the driving force and ideal processes. (a) The minimum least work (Ẇleast,min/ṁw) or thermodynamic minimum energy requirement irrespective of the process, is plotted as a contour variable on the psychometric chart. The intermediate white lines represent constant relative humidity ranging from 10% to saturation. The least work assumes an infinitesimal recovery ratio (the amount of water removed from the available water in the air), which represents the minimum thermodynamic change to the environment. Near the top left corner (RH = 100%), the least work approaches 0 kJ kg−1. (b) The second law efficiency (ηII), of an ideal dew collection device is found as the minimum energy consumption of dew divided by the least work (thermodynamic minimum Fig. 2a). The minimum energy consumption is found from a steady state derivation of the first and second laws of thermodynamics. The second law efficiency represents the thermodynamic viability of dew harvesting with respect to the ambient conditions. The energy consumption of dew harvesting is evaluated at the optimal recovery ratio, described in Fig. 3. (c) The efficiency of an ideal open-system membrane water harvesting device with the Claridge–Culp–Liu configuration (S11) is shown. (d) The efficiency of an ideal sorbent process, consisting of seven sorbent materials, is found as the minimum energy consumption for the process divided by the least work. The desorption relative humidity is set based on each material's operating relative humidity range.15 The dotted line denotes the shift between two sets of desorption conditions. The humidity ratio of the heated air exiting the desorption process is calculated used an integral average. Cooling and heating are provided using Carnot heat engines or refrigeration cycles. 
The least work (minimum energy requirement) is strongly controlled by the ambient relative humidity. At saturation (RH = 100%), the least work for isothermal water harvesting approaches 0. Below this humidity, the least work exponentially increases, reaching nearly 500 kJ kg−1 at extremely arid conditions (RH < 10%). It is important to note that the least work is defined as a theoretical process that enacts minimal change to the environment by recovering an infinitesimal fraction of water from the ambient air. The recovery ratio is defined as the fraction of water vapor that is removed from the available water in the ambient air.
Dew harvesting processes are strongly impacted by the ambient humidity, shown by Fig. 2b. Both the least work and the dew energy requirement improve near saturation (RH = 100%) and drastically suffer in arid conditions. Since dew processes aim to cool a humid air mixture to the dew point (saturation temperature), a lower ambient relative humidity results in more cooling of air that is required. In practice, passive technologies may not meet required cooling loads while active technologies require additional infrastructure for energy input.
Membrane processes are most effective in hot and arid regions, as shown by the trend in Fig. 2c. The value proposition of this system, like other separation mechanisms, is the ability to avoid cooling ambient air. The ideal membrane system efficiency is nearly constant (40–55%) over a wide range of ambient conditions (RH < 60%). At higher humidity, the least work trends to zero while the membrane energy requirement remains stable, thus resulting in low overall efficiency. The SEC for any process can be calculated by dividing the least work (1a) by the second law efficiency (1b–d). It should be noted that the process recovery and vacuum pump efficiency strongly affects the system efficiency, as described by S12 and S13. To obtain maximum efficiency in membrane-based processes, operation should aim to condense all water that passes the membrane. Additional efficiency gains may be made by operating at lower water vapor flux and mitigating concentration boundary layer effects. A closed system design may further improve the 2nd law efficiency of membrane processes, as shown by Bergmair et al. (2015).27
Sorbent processes, are mostly influenced by the ambient temperature but are constrained to a specific regime of relative humidity, as shown by Fig. 2d. The process complexity and multiple heat transfer interactions make the efficiency trends relatively unintuitive. The characteristic isotherm, which relates the water uptake to the temperature and humidity, and material-specific adsorption kinetics determine the operating conditions. The system efficiency is highly sensitive to these conditions (S8), however the peak efficiency for sorbent systems may occur in semi-arid regions.
Sorbent systems are optimized for a specific humidity by creating large and steep water uptake at the designed relative humidity. The maximum uptake capacity increases the theoretical water collection rate but does not significantly impact the specific energy consumption, as shown by S9. Section S10 (ESI†) shows that the desorption humidity is by far the most sensitive parameter in the model, explaining the sudden increase in efficiency at RH = 18% in Fig. 2d. However, increasing the desorption relative humidity (RHdes) of the adsorbent provides minimal process improvement beyond the desorption condition of approximately 20% RH, shown in S9. This is due to the fact that, while a higher RHdes value would lead to higher yields, the specific energy consumption for desorption remains relatively constant for a set desorption temperature. Additionally, while each sorbent has unique thermal properties and experience different uptake dynamics, we show in the ESI,† that these parameters have minimal effect on the system level specific energy consumption. Though, these parameters would affect system sizing and yield, which are design-specific parameters and therefore not considered in this thermodynamic framework.
Supersaturated fog and saturated humid air mixtures
Fog is liquid water droplets suspended in air and refers to the supersaturated humid air state. Both saturated air (RH = 100%) and fog (RH > 100%) theoretically require no energy to harvest. An ideal fog system requires zero energy because the water is already in the liquid state. On the other hand, an ideal system that condenses 100% humid air has water in the vapor state, but the free energy change of condensation is zero. The concept can be mathematically supported with Maxwell's relations, where  or dh = Tds at constant pressure.51 Here, h is the specific enthalpy, s is the specific entropy, T is the temperature, and p is the pressure. Since dg = dh −Tds + sdT (g is Gibb's Free Energy) and phase change occurs at constant pressure and temperature (dh = Tds), then dg = 0. This implies the minimum energy requirements for condensation are zero.
Due to these facts, the minimum energy requirements for harvesting water from fog or harvesting water from a water–air mixture at 100% RH are theoretically equivalent. However, practical technologies for harvesting water from 100% humid air are not equivalent to the thermodynamic minimum. In reality, dew plates, membrane-based systems, and sorbents, must overcome the latent heat of phase change. Fog nets must overcome the free energy barrier associated with forming a new surface. This surface energy is controlled by the surface hydrophobicity and geometry and is orders of magnitude lower than the enthalpy of vaporization.
Where fog is widely available (e.g., Hamilton, NZ; San Francisco, CA; Atacama, Chile; etc.) it may be highly effective to implement fog nets, due to near zero energy requirements. However, the dynamics of fog are complex and geospatial prediction of fog events is an active area of research.52 Optimization of fog collection may require enhancing surface hydrophilicity to minimize the energy barrier for collection.53,54 Additionally, hydrophobic materials can accelerate droplet shedding off the surface for easier collection and distribution.55,56
Energy-optimal water recovery in active systems
The results in Fig. 2b were calculated at the optimal recovery ratio for dew collection, which is a non-obvious function of the ambient conditions. The fractional recovery of water significantly impacts both the cooling load and cooling efficiency (Carnot). When varying recovery ratio, the energy consumption for dew harvesting has a non-zero minimum value, unlike minimum least work.
Increasing the recovery ratio above the energy-optimal condition may require an additional 10–20 kJ kg−1 for every 10% increase. However, decreasing recovery below the optimal condition raises the energy requirement exponentially, as shown by Fig. 3a. The energy-recovery function for ideal dew harvesting is bounded (0 < R < 1) and convex. In the case of a constant, realistic COP, efficiency is maximized at high recovery (S4).
 Fig. 3  Optimal recovery for ideal dew harvesting systems. The energy requirement of dew harvesting is shown as a function of the fraction of water recovered from the air with respect to (a) ambient humidity and (b) ambient temperature. The optimal recovery occurs at the minimum of each plot. The horizontal axis is stopped at 0.5 to avoid frost-inducing conditions (Tcond < 273 K). (c) The optimal recovery ratio to minimize energy consumption for dew harvesting is shown on the contour axis of the psychometric chart. Each point aims to minimize the function shown in 2a, subject to constraints: 0 < R < 1 and Tcond >273.15 K. R is the recovery ratio and Tcond is the condensation temperature (shown as T3 in S3). The labelled white lines represent constant relative humidity. The three subfigures distinguish the optimality conditions with respect to humidity, temperature, and freezing constraints. 
At low absolute humidity, low recovery ratios are required to avoid sub-freezing dew point temperatures (S4). Conversely, at high humidity, low recovery is ideal to minimize energy requirements. This is shown by Fig. 3. The optimal recovery, shown by Fig. 3b, shows the case for the minimum energy requirement. It may be used to approximate operational set point conditions for practical water harvesting process. However, specific processes may have inefficiencies that create different economically optimal operating conditions.
Determining the optimal recovery in sorbent systems can be challenging due to the complexity of the process. Low recovery in sorbent systems create large energy requirements, like dew processes. The energy requirements of desorption and regeneration are largely controlled by material properties like heat capacity and desorption temperature. A sensitivity analysis on the recovery ratio for the open sorbent cycle showed that the optimal recovery ratio was approximately 65% across a range of conditions (S8). A recovery ratio in this range provides sufficiently high-water collection, while also using relatively warm condensing temperatures and thus a high Carnot COP for causing the condensation. This optimal recovery ratio in the sorbent process is notably higher than that for the least work.
Understanding recovery ratios in ideal fog systems is less straightforward. Passive fog sysetms are unable to control the recovery ratio since the driving is dependent on the ambient conditions. Whereas, in the sorbent open process, the amount of water that enters the condensing portion of the system is dependent on the uptake and sorbent dynamics, as well the ambient temperature and humidity.
For membrane processes, the operating system pressure and energy requirement of the vacuum pump are set by the ambient humidity and selectivity of the membranes. Since the condenser in the membrane process contains pure water vapor, the optimal recovery is 100%. To maintain fair comparison, the water recovery of the membrane process was constrained to be equal to sorbent process. In practical applications, the exergy losses due to friction and pumping will incentivize higher recovery while inefficiencies associated with cooling will push the optimum towards a lower recovery. Recovery is expanded upon in Fig. S8 (ESI†).
Realistic energy comparison
The energy requirements of open system membrane, dew, and sorbent processes with realistic component efficiencies (non-ideal) are over an order of magnitude above the thermodynamic minimum, as shown by Fig. 4a. In this work, realistic efficiencies are modeled by a coefficient of performance (COP) of 3.18 In practice, COPs may be lower at higher temperature differences.
 Fig. 4  A comparison of energy requirements is shown for (a) ideal and (b) realistic component-level and operational assumptions over a range of ambient humidity. The minimum energy requirement (black) is consistent between the comparison and refers to the least work at the ambient condition. The ideal case involves Carnot heating and cooling devices and isentropic pumps. The real case uses a constant heat transfer COPs of 3, vacuum pump efficiencies of 20%, and compressor efficiencies of 65%. The efficiency-optimal technology deployment is similarly shown for (c) ideal and d realistic assumptions over a wide range of conditions. 
The minimum energy requirement, or least work, trends towards zero as the temperature approaches the dew points (saturation point) and the temperature difference is minimized (Fig. 4a).
Dew harvesting is best deployed in high humidity regions (Fig. 4b); however, it can be competitive with sorbent processes in some near room-humidity conditions. The dew harvesting energy requirement is most strongly affected by the cooling COP (S14).
The sorbent process is competitive with dew and membrane-based methods in room temperature and lower conditions (310 K) and at lower humidity (<6 g kg−1). However, the decision boundaries between technologies are strongly affected by modeling assumptions such as the desorption humidity, and cooling COP.
Membrane processes, modeled with realistic assumptions for pump efficiencies (ηvac = 20%, ηcomp = 65%),57 are best for hot and arid conditions. Additionally, increasing the condenser recovery to near 100% mimics a closed-membrane system with low pressure recirculation.38 Practical considerations such as the pump and condenser inefficiencies, membrane selectivity, and scaling will further decrease the process efficiency.
It should be noted that, membrane and sorbent process are not limited in operation to these regions. On the contrary, they will operate well under higher humidity conditions (and use less energy). The amount of energy used at high humidity ambient conditions is still higher than dew processes and the thermodynamic minimum leading to peak second law efficiencies at lower RH values. Thus, Fig. 4b suggests, somewhat counter intuitively, that dew systems, which are very simple processes, are rather efficient in more humid conditions, and therefore implementing these more complex processes (sorbent and membrane) may not provide a fundamental thermodynamic benefit.
Fog harvesting is usually constrained to super-saturated conditions (top left of Fig. 4b), where water is already in the liquid phase. In these conditions, the energy requirement is negligible and therefore far superior to dew harvesting, membrane, or sorbent systems.
The most promising avenues to impact the efficiency in AWH processes are improving efficiency in cooling devices and vacuum pumps. More efficient cooling increases viability for dew harvesting, while improving the performance of all AWH processes. More efficient vacuum pumping and near-vacuum compression solely benefit membrane processes. This results in membranes outperforming other methods in low humidity cases, while dew is best in high humidity conditions. Membranes also outperform all water harvesting technologies when the condenser recovery is 100%.
Geospatial analysis of minimum energy requirements
On Earth, the 95% confidence interval of least work for water harvesting may range from 0–500 kJ kg−1, with annual average values ranging from 0–280 kJ kg−1 (Fig. 5). The lowest energy regions tend to be near the equator and over the oceans, due to high humidity. The energy requirements tend to increase significantly over landmass, especially inland, and vary significantly over small distances. The overarching trends in least work and humidity may be influenced by patterns resembling Hadley cells.58 For example, certain regions in Central Africa are highly conducive to water harvesting, whereas the Northern and Southern regions of the continent are averse to atmospheric water harvesting (high least work). Water harvesting on ships, over the Ocean, could be energetically optimal and annually stable, from this cursory analysis. However, airborne salt particles near the ocean surface may create additional energy requirements that are not accounted for here.
 Fig. 5  The least work, or minimum energy requirements for water harvesting is computed using hourly data from 2021. This map shows the geographic distribution of (a). The average energy requirements and (b. The variation quantified by the 95% confidence interval. The light-blue shade represent)s geographic regions where water harvesting may encounter barriers with frost accumulation (average temperature <274 K). The map uses the surface air temperature, humidity, and pressure in hourly increments at 2 m from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021. The raw data has a spatial resolution of 0.625° × 0.5° and is from the NASA MERRA-2 reanalysis project.46 (c) The efficiency-optimal technology deployment is shown for “typical” (yearly average) conditions using the specific process operating conditions and material assumptions shown by the realistic case of Fig. 4. The technology deployment map uses the average temperature and humidity in 2021 at a spatial resolution of 1.25° × 1.00°. S15–17 describe the global humidity and temperature dataset. 
At high and low latitudes (outside ±60 degrees), the temperatures are often below the freezing point of water (273.15 K), which may induce icing rather than liquid water collection (light blue in Fig. 5). The effects of climate change may limit the applicability of the extrapolation of these results.59 Further analysis should use this framework to evaluate the efficiency of specific technologies and consider long-term climate trends.
The optimal technology deployment is strongly controlled by the ambient environmental conditions and changes throughout the year, as shown by Fig. 4c, d and 5c. Under conservative estimates for component efficiency and recovery, this analysis suggests that dew harvesting may be most beneficial on an average day (∼53.5% of the globe). Membrane (∼0.2%) and sorbent (∼11.4%) technologies may be most applicable in upper and lower latitudes (>45° or <−45°) and inland regions in Northern Africa and Australia. Regions with high temperature and humidity fluctuations result in high variation in least work and are highlighted in yellow through Fig. 5b. These areas (West coast of North and South Americas, Northern Africa, Middle East, India, etc.) may benefit from a hybridization of technologies (dew-membrane, dew-sorbent, etc.) to adapt to weather changes that impact process conditions.
Further study of novel technologies and weather fluctuations may use similar approaches and process models to consider the optimal deployment problem. However, this comparison is limited due to the many social and economic factors that are not considered in this purely thermodynamic study.
Field-wide challenges
AWH technology faces significant device and system-level barriers to being a reliable solution to water production. Current research and development trends in tangential fields such as interfacial physics, membrane science, and thermal hydraulics are crucial to bridge the gap between current processes and the thermodynamic minimum.
Sorbents for water harvesting may benefit from highly tuneable materials, as the efficiency of this technology is the most sensitive to the ambient environment. Adsorbent material design is an ongoing research challenge, which aims to increase total water capacity (yield) and capture speed, and decrease the energy barrier for water release, while maintaining material stability over time. Engineering sorbents to desorb in energy-optimal conditions will improve process efficiency, but with diminishing returns as we have shown. Further, maximizing water uptake will improve the specific water production but has a less important effect on the system energy-efficiency. Reducing energy requirements for desorption and regeneration is a primary need to raise the efficiency ceiling for adsorbent systems.
For membrane-based water harvesting, advanced material processing to achieve vapor selectivity is paramount. Ongoing challenges with membranes include creating rigid, thin, and flexible nanoscale structures, manufacturing at scale without defects, and realizing membranes that are highly selective to N2 and O2 but highly permeable to H2O.
Dew harvesting technology may benefit from both process design and material modification. From a process design perspective, closed-loop systems that recirculate air and optimize the condenser temperature and recovery can yield significant efficiency benefits. Further, material and surface modifications – making a surface more hydrophobic or hydrophilic – can be valuable in improving water collection and frost avoidance, but risks quick degradation and often use toxic materials, such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).60,61
For all technologies, components such as efficient heat pumps and compressors are imperative to reaching the maximum thermodynamic potential. For condensing water, most cooling processes have low efficiencies (3–30%), which then propagate into reducing the AWH system 2nd law efficiency. High efficiency cooling cycles that can operate at a low temperature difference (5–10 K) will be particularly impactful for dew and membrane processes.
Novel process design that incorporates recirculation, energy reuse, multi-staging, and closed systems have been demonstrated to increase the 2nd law efficiency by as much as a factor of two.37 In the case of sorbents, single-stage open and closed cycles with no energy recovery may achieve similar 2nd law efficiency.15 Recirculation and energy reuse can allow a system to greatly reduce the energy input requirements for a condenser or vacuum pump, by recovering energy from a previous point in the process. Multi-staging allows a process to reduce the driving force within each stage without reducing the total yield.62
Conclusions
The thermodynamic efficiency limits of AWH technology create fundamental understanding for optimizing and tailoring future technologies for specific use cases. Idealized analysis shows the efficiency limit for dew harvesting processes (∼60%), sorbent processes (∼45%), and membrane processes (∼60%), and reveals that efficiencies highly vary based on the ambient conditions. The recovery ratio most strongly controls the energy requirements of dew and membrane systems. Operating at a poorly tuned recovery ratio may increase the energy requirements by over 100% in some cases. Furthermore, the energy-optimal decision boundary between all processes is tightly linked with the environment (temperature and humidity), and strongly controlled by the component-level efficiencies. This work provides a simple computational basis for evaluating the feasibility of AWH against other water technologies like water reuse or desalination.
The energy-viability for operating any water harvesting process is largely controlled by the ambient humidity. Regions that consistently experience high humidity (near saturation) may be best for water harvesting, as the least work of water harvesting approaches zero at saturation.
Optimal operation of dew and sorbent processes will aim to tailor the water recovery based on the ambient environment. The recovery ratio most significantly impacts the performance of dew harvesting systems and is highly sensitive to ambient humidity levels. We show that it is best to operate at a higher recovery when in arid (low relative humidity) conditions. However, below an absolute humidity of approximately 10 gw kgair−1, the optimal recovery ratio must be reduced to avoid frost accumulation. The optimal recovery ratio may increase when considering practical systems with adverse temperature gradients and frictional effects. This suggests that dew harvesting processes should be tailored to use multiple recirculation passes and optimal control of the condenser based on the environment.
When comparing ideal processes, dew processes are most effective in high humidity (RH > 50%), while the membrane systems are better for arid regions. When accounting for component inefficiencies, sorbents may have a particular niche in room temperature and arid conditions (T < 310 K, ω < 6 g kg−1). Increasing the condenser recovery and heat transfer efficiency most significantly improves the membrane process, thus increasing its region of viability. Dew harvesting is always optimal in high humidity scenarios and fog harvesting is always best when super-saturated conditions are available. Based on “average-day” conditions and realistic assumptions of materials and efficiencies (Fig. 5c), dew is optimal on approximately 53.5% of the globe, while sorbent (11.4%) and membrane (0.2%) have much lower regions of optimality. 34.9% of the globe has a temperature less than 274 K and may be unsuitable for water harvesting.
Sorbent processes are generally inefficient compared to membrane and dew harvesting processes but suffer less from component level inefficiencies. However, it is the only process driven by heat and consequently may be viable when paired with cheaply available waste heat. Further, efforts to maximize the uptake and cycling speed of these materials may increase the viability for smaller footprint devices but have less impact than adsorption and desorption kinetics when considering the system-level energy needs.
Future work may consider hybrid systems (e.g., dew-sorbent, dew-membrane). This approach may take advantage of the high overlap in components and allow for adaptation to regular diurnal and seasonal fluctuations in ambient conditions.2,59
Through thermodynamic analysis, we see that current water harvesting processes have room to improve efficiency by over an order of magnitude. This leads us to conclude that future water harvesting technology can improve by selecting optimal operating environments, improving component-level efficiency, and tuning the system-level water recovery. Solutions to field-wide challenges in advanced surface materials, heat pumps, compressors, and energy reuse devices will significantly improve the energy efficiency and yield of atmospheric water harvesting technology.
Author contributions
Akshay K. Rao: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing, visualization. Andrew J. Fix: methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing, visualization. Yun Chi Yang: software, investigation, data curation, visualization. David M. Warsinger: conceptualization, writing, supervision, project administration, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Evelyn Wang and Dr Hyunho Kim for providing experimental property data for MOF-801. We would also like to thank Dr Freek Kaptejin, Dr Tian Li, and Dr Bikram Bhatia for valuable academic discussions and feedback, as well as Dr Thomas Beecham for access to supercomputing resources. We thank Geoffery Lenter and staff at Information Technology at Purdue (ITaP) for providing advice for using high performance computing resources. We would also like acknowledge Anna V. Rausch, Curtis Eckstein, Aaron Harp, and Dominick J. Maiorano for contributions and suggestions about figure and manuscript preparation. Finally, we thank the Purdue department of Mechanical Engineering and the Center for High Performance Buildings for funding this work.
Notes and references
J. F. Reynolds, D. M. Stafford Smith, E. F. Lambin, B. L. Turner, M. Mortimore, S. P. J. Batterbury, T. E. Downing, H. Dowlatabadi, R. J. Fernández, J. E. Herrick, E. Huber-Sannwald, H. Jiang, R. Leemans, T. Lynam, F. T. Maestre, M. Ayarza and B. Walker, Science (1979), 2007, 316, 847–851 CAS .

          United Nations, The United Nations World Water Development Report: Water and Climate Change, 2020.
L. Castillo, W. Gutierrez and J. Gore, Sci. Am., 2018, 1–17 Search PubMed .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Jones, M. Qadir, M. T. H. van Vliet, V. Smakhtin and S. Mu Kang, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 657, 1343–1356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Inamdar and V. Ramanathan, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 1998, 103, 32177–32194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pascolini-Campbell, J. T. Reager, H. A. Chandanpurkar and M. Rodell, Nature, 2021, 593, 543–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Zhao and G. Yu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 671–684 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Kaseke and L. Wang, Geohealth, 2018, 2, 327–332 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Teychene, G. Collet, H. Gallard and J. P. Croue, Desalination, 2013, 310, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Raveesh, R. Goyal and S. K. Tyagi, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 239, 114226 CrossRef .
B. Gido, E. Friedler and D. M. Broday, Atmos. Res., 2016, 182, 156–162 CrossRef .
K. Mistry and J. Lienhard, Entropy, 2013, 15, 2046–2080 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Warsinger, E. W. Tow, K. G. Nayar, L. A. Maswadeh and J. H. Lienhard V, Water Res., 2016, 106, 272–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, S. R. Rao, A. LaPotin, S. Lee and E. N. Wang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 161, 120253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hua, J. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105977 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lord, A. Thomas, N. Treat, M. Forkin, R. Bain, P. Dulac, C. H. Behroozi, T. Mamutov, J. Fongheiser, N. Kobilansky, S. Washburn, C. Truesdell, C. Lee and P. H. Schmaelzle, Nature, 2021, 598, 611–617 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Steven Brown and P. A. Domanski, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 64, 252–262 CrossRef CAS .
O. Labban, T. Chen, A. F. Ghoniem, J. H. Lienhard and L. K. Norford, Appl. Energy, 2017, 200, 330–346 CrossRef .
M. Dong, Z. Zhang, Y. Shi, X. Zhao, S. Fan and Z. Chen, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2020, 24, 43–52 CrossRef .
O. Klemm, R. S. Schemenauer, A. Lummerich, P. Cereceda, V. Marzol, D. Corell, J. van Heerden, D. Reinhard, T. Gherezghiher, J. Olivier, P. Osses, J. Sarsour, E. Frost, M. J. Estrela, J. A. Valiente and G. M. Fessehaye, Ambio, 2012, 41, 221–234 CrossRef .
J. Ju, H. Bai, Y. Zheng, T. Zhao, R. Fang and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–6 Search PubMed .
A. Entezari, M. Ejeian and R. Wang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2019, 161, 114109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1452–1475 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Logan, S. Langevin and Z. Xia, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, S. R. Rao, E. A. Kapustin, L. Zhao, S. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–8 CrossRef .
D. Bergmair, S. J. Metz, H. C. de Lange and A. A. van Steenhoven, Desalination, 2014, 339, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Fix, J. E. Braun and D. M. Warsinger, Appl. Energy, 2021, 295, 116950 CrossRef .
J. Woods, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 33, 290–304 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Claridge, C. Culp, W. Liu, M. Pate, J. Haberl, J. Bynum, O. Tanskyi and F. Schaff, Int. J. Refrig., 2019, 101, 211–217 CrossRef .
O. R. Al-Jayyousi and M. S. Mohsen, Water Environ. J., 1999, 13, 195–199 CrossRef .
Y. Tai, H. Liang, A. Zaki, N. el Hadri, A. M. Abshaev, B. M. Huchunaev, S. Griffiths, M. Jouiad and L. Zou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12318–12325 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vuollekoski, M. Vogt, V. A. Sinclair, J. Duplissy, H. Järvinen, E. M. Kyrö, R. Makkonen, T. Petäjä, N. L. Prisle, P. Räisänen, M. Sipilä, J. Ylhäisi and M. Kulmala, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 2015, 19, 601–613 CrossRef .
F. Bagheri, Water Resour. Ind., 2018, 20, 23–28 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, L. Y. Wang and T. S. Chung, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 220, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 12, 20 Search PubMed .
A. LaPotin, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, A. Leroy, H. Kim, S. R. Rao and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 166–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bergmair, S. J. Metz, H. C. de Lange and A. A. van Steenhoven, Desalination, 2014, 339, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado, “EES-Engineering Equation Solver,” Version 6.648 ND, F-Chart Software, Middleton,  2004 .
I. H. Bell, J. Wronski, S. Quoilin and V. Lemort, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2498–2508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Herrmann, H. J. Kretzschmar and D. P. Gatley, HVACR Res., 2009, 15, 961–986 CrossRef .
H. Kim, H. J. Cho, S. Narayanan, S. Yang, H. Furukawa, S. Schiffres, X. Li, Y. B. Zhang, J. Jiang, O. M. Yaghi and E. N. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Wang and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8303–8377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Dai and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806446 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Kocher, S. K. Yee and R. Y. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 253, 115158 CrossRef CAS .

          Global Modeling and Assimilation Office (GMAO), Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center (GES DISC), 2015.
S. Khodakarami, L. Li and N. Miljkovic, Proc. SPIE, 2021, 11824, 33–42 Search PubMed .
A. J. Mahvi, K. Boyina, A. Musser, S. Elbel and N. Miljkovic, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2021, 172, 121162 CrossRef .
L. Li, S. Khodakarami, X. Yan, K. Fazle Rabbi, A. A. Gunay, A. Stillwell and N. Miljkovic, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2201521 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Tow, D. M. Warsinger, A. M. Trueworthy, J. Swaminathan, G. P. Thiel, S. M. Zubair, A. S. Myerson and J. H. Lienhard V, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 556, 352–364 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Moran and H. N. Shapiro, Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics, 5th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Torregrosa, C. Combs and J. Peters, Earth Space Sci., 2016, 3, 46–67 CrossRef .
C. Liu, J. Fan and H. Bao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 216, 110700 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Zhu, M. M. R. M. Hendrix, N. J. H. G. M. Lousberg, G. de With, A. C. C. Esteves and J. H. Xin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1150–1154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. B. Jiang, S. Y. Li, C. Kaya, T. Stegmaier, Z. W. Han and L. Q. Ren, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16127–16137 RSC .
D. E. M. Warsinger, J. Swaminathan, L. A. Maswadeh and J. H. Lienhard, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 492, 578–587 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Bui, Y. Wong, M. R. Islam and K. J. Chua, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 539, 76–87 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. W. Frierson, J. Lu and G. Chen, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2007, 34, 18804 CrossRef .
E. Jansen, J. H. Christensen, T. Dokken, K. H. Nisancioglu, B. M. Vinther, E. Capron, C. Guo, M. F. Jensen, P. L. Langen, R. A. Pedersen, S. Yang, M. Bentsen, H. A. Kjær, H. Sadatzki, E. Sessford and M. Stendel, Nat. Clim. Change, 2020, 10, 714–721 CrossRef .
C. Liu, J. Fan and H. Bao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 216, 110700 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gurumukhi, S. Chavan, S. Sett, K. Boyina, S. Ramesh, P. Sokalski, K. Fortelka, M. Lira, D. Park, J. Y. Chen, S. Hegde and N. Miljkovic, Matter, 2020, 3, 1178–1195 CrossRef .
J. Y. Wang, R. Z. Wang, L. W. Wang and J. Y. Liu, Energy, 2017, 138, 542–551 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01071bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Intensifying global water scarcity calls for a diverse set of water technologies, including atmospheric water harvesting (AWH) – a process that uses energy to extract water from the air. These technologies provide exceptionally pure water from the surrounding environment with simple systems. While there are many different technologies for AWH, it is difficult to compare them on a fair basis. In this perspective, we critically evaluate each mechanism type – dew, fog, membrane, and sorbent, using the 2nd law of thermodynamics. We show the maximum achievable efficiency of each type of process over a range of temperature and humidity conditions. Additionally, we map the minimum energy requirement and efficiency-optimal technology for water harvesting across the globe using atmospheric data. From this understanding, we show how specific improvements in the design of systems and processes can reduce the energy required per amount of water collected for current methods by over an order of magnitude. This AWH study is the broadest analysis by technology, environmental conditions, and geography. This approach reveals technology niches and guidance for the industrial development of AWH.


 	Fig. 1  Visualization of technologies (outer circle) and fundamental process categories (inner circle). Dropwise condensation on a tube (Dew, Energy Transport Research Lab UIUC); SEM Polysulfone–graphene oxide composite membrane (Mokkapati et al., 2017); SEM graphene structured fog net (Song et al., 2018); Optical microscope MOF-303 (Omar Yahi laboratory, UC Berkeley).	 



Technology	Mesh harvester	Cloud seedera	Active chillera	Passive radiative cooler	Membrane harvester	Sorbent materials


Challenges to scalability	Limited to specific regions	Limited to specific regions	Energy efficiency	Low cooling power	N2, O2 selectivity, H2O permeance	Large volumes, material degradation


Practical inefficiencies	Biological contaminants	—	Low COP devices	Ambient heat losses	Vacuum pump efficiency, membrane selectivity and permeance	Low COP devices, material stability, parasitic convection


Inefficiencies of ideal processes	—	—	Temperature gradients, finite recovery	Temperature gradients, finite recovery	Uncontrolled mixing, finite recovery	Temperature gradients, uncontrolled mixing, finite recovery


Operating humidity	>100%	45–100%	>4 g kg−1	40–100%	—	10–90%


Specific energy consumption	0b	—	830–25000 kJ kg−1	0b	580–830 kJ kg−1	0b–23000 kJ kg−1


Specific water production	0–10 kg m−2 day−1	—	20–200000 kg day−1	0.03–0.85 kg m−2 day−1	0.7–16.8 kg m−2 day−1	0.1–8.7 kg kg−1 day−1
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Energy requirements and process efficiency for water harvesting vary based on the driving force and ideal processes. (a) The minimum least work (Ẇleast,min/ṁw) or thermodynamic minimum energy requirement irrespective of the process, is plotted as a contour variable on the psychometric chart. The intermediate white lines represent constant relative humidity ranging from 10% to saturation. The least work assumes an infinitesimal recovery ratio (the amount of water removed from the available water in the air), which represents the minimum thermodynamic change to the environment. Near the top left corner (RH = 100%), the least work approaches 0 kJ kg−1. (b) The second law efficiency (ηII), of an ideal dew collection device is found as the minimum energy consumption of dew divided by the least work (thermodynamic minimum Fig. 2a). The minimum energy consumption is found from a steady state derivation of the first and second laws of thermodynamics. The second law efficiency represents the thermodynamic viability of dew harvesting with respect to the ambient conditions. The energy consumption of dew harvesting is evaluated at the optimal recovery ratio, described in Fig. 3. (c) The efficiency of an ideal open-system membrane water harvesting device with the Claridge–Culp–Liu configuration (S11) is shown. (d) The efficiency of an ideal sorbent process, consisting of seven sorbent materials, is found as the minimum energy consumption for the process divided by the least work. The desorption relative humidity is set based on each material's operating relative humidity range.15 The dotted line denotes the shift between two sets of desorption conditions. The humidity ratio of the heated air exiting the desorption process is calculated used an integral average. Cooling and heating are provided using Carnot heat engines or refrigeration cycles.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optimal recovery for ideal dew harvesting systems. The energy requirement of dew harvesting is shown as a function of the fraction of water recovered from the air with respect to (a) ambient humidity and (b) ambient temperature. The optimal recovery occurs at the minimum of each plot. The horizontal axis is stopped at 0.5 to avoid frost-inducing conditions (Tcond < 273 K). (c) The optimal recovery ratio to minimize energy consumption for dew harvesting is shown on the contour axis of the psychometric chart. Each point aims to minimize the function shown in 2a, subject to constraints: 0 < R < 1 and Tcond >273.15 K. R is the recovery ratio and Tcond is the condensation temperature (shown as T3 in S3). The labelled white lines represent constant relative humidity. The three subfigures distinguish the optimality conditions with respect to humidity, temperature, and freezing constraints.	 

 	Fig. 4  A comparison of energy requirements is shown for (a) ideal and (b) realistic component-level and operational assumptions over a range of ambient humidity. The minimum energy requirement (black) is consistent between the comparison and refers to the least work at the ambient condition. The ideal case involves Carnot heating and cooling devices and isentropic pumps. The real case uses a constant heat transfer COPs of 3, vacuum pump efficiencies of 20%, and compressor efficiencies of 65%. The efficiency-optimal technology deployment is similarly shown for (c) ideal and d realistic assumptions over a wide range of conditions.	 

 	Fig. 5  The least work, or minimum energy requirements for water harvesting is computed using hourly data from 2021. This map shows the geographic distribution of (a). The average energy requirements and (b. The variation quantified by the 95% confidence interval. The light-blue shade represent)s geographic regions where water harvesting may encounter barriers with frost accumulation (average temperature <274 K). The map uses the surface air temperature, humidity, and pressure in hourly increments at 2 m from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021. The raw data has a spatial resolution of 0.625° × 0.5° and is from the NASA MERRA-2 reanalysis project.46 (c) The efficiency-optimal technology deployment is shown for “typical” (yearly average) conditions using the specific process operating conditions and material assumptions shown by the realistic case of Fig. 4. The technology deployment map uses the average temperature and humidity in 2021 at a spatial resolution of 1.25° × 1.00°. S15–17 describe the global humidity and temperature dataset.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01071b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
