Multifunctional two-dimensional nanocomposites for photothermal-based combined cancer therapy  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR04044G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR04044G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15685-15708Multifunctional two-dimensional nanocomposites for photothermal-based combined cancer therapy

        
          
            Xianwen 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liang 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: lcheng2@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      13th May 2019
    , Accepted 1st July 2019First published on 3rd July 2019AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) nanocomposites have been widely used in biomedical applications during the past few years due to their extraordinary physicochemical properties, which has proved their importance in the field of nanomedicine. Benefiting from the excellent optical absorption in the near-infrared window and large specific surface area, many efforts have been devoted to fabricating 2D nanomaterial-based multifunctional nanoplatforms to realize photothermal therapy (PTT)-based or chemotherapy-based synergistic treatment, which exhibits obvious anti-tumor effects and significantly enhances the therapeutic efficiency of cancer compared with monotherapy. In particular, 2D nanocomposites are usually fabricated as intelligent nanoplatforms for stimuli-responsive nanocarriers, whose therapeutic effects could be specifically activated by the tumor microenvironment (TME). In addition, different fluorescent probes and functional inorganic nanomaterials could be absorbed on the surface of 2D nanomaterials to fabricate multifunctional hybrid nanomaterials with satisfactory magnetic, optical, or other properties that are widely used for multimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy. In this review, the latest development of multifunctional 2D nanocomposites for combination therapy is systematically summarized, mainly focusing on PTT-based synergistic cancer therapy, and the other forms and potential forms of synergistic cancer therapy are also simply summarized. Furthermore, the design principles of 2D nanocomposites are particularly emphasized, and the current challenges and future prospects of 2D nanocomposites for cancer theranostics are discussed simultaneously.Xianwen WangXianwen Wang received his B.S. degree in chemical engineering and technology from Anhui Normal University in 2015. He obtained his Master's degree in pharmaceutical engineering from the Hefei University of Technology in 2018. Since then, he has been a Ph.D. candidate under the guidance of Prof. Zhuang Liu at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) at Soochow University. His current research interest is the development of multifunctional nanomaterials for application in cancer theranostics.Liang ChengDr Liang Cheng received his PhD degree from the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) at Soochow University in 2012, and then joined Soochow University as a faculty member. He was promoted to an associate professor in 2014 and a full professor in 2018. His research work has been focused on the development of multifunctional nanomaterials for biomedical application.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials are defined as a class of freestanding sheet-like nanomaterials, showing a high ratio of lateral size to thickness.1–6 As a newly emerging class of nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials have attracted considerable attention since the discovery of exfoliated graphene in 2004, which led to the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2011.4,6–8 To date, a large family of 2D materials has been reported, such as graphene-based nanomaterials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), palladium (Pd) nanosheets, black phosphorus (BP), and transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides (MXenes), and 2D clays like layered double hydroxides (LDHs), and other 2D nanomaterials.8–10 So far, many strategies have been developed to design and fabricate various types of 2D nanomaterials, including hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis,11 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),12 liquid-phase exfoliation,13 and mechanical exfoliation.14 In general, these prepared strategies could be divided into bottom-up and top-down approaches.4,6,14–18 Undoubtedly, 2D nanomaterials have become one of the research hotspots of scientists and researchers in a wide range of fields owing to their unusual physicochemical properties, versatile functionalities, the large number of species, and broad application prospects in electronics, catalysis, solar cells, optoelectronics, etc.19,20
2D nanomaterials are highly diverse in terms of optical, chemical, and mechanical properties as well as morphology, size, biodegradability, and biocompatibility. These different properties and characteristics make them meaningful nanomaterials for biomedical applications, including multimodal imaging, biosensors, drug/gene delivery and cancer treatment.21 Another outstanding advantage of 2D nanomaterials is that they have very large specific surface area compared with other dimensional nanomaterials, so that they could efficiently adsorb various types of molecules including drugs, fluorescent probes, nucleic acids, proteins, and other molecules by covalent or non-covalent interactions, and achieve superior controlled release via external stimuli.7 Simultaneously, a series of functional nanoparticles, such as Fe3O4 nanoparticles, TiO2 nanoparticles, Au nanoparticles, and some inorganic quantum dots, could be effectively adsorbed onto the surface of 2D nanomaterials, endowing them with additional functions like radiological, magnetic, and imaging properties, etc.7 In addition, 2D nanomaterials usually have unique sheet-like nanostructures and could respond to near-infrared (NIR) light, which is very useful in optical therapies, including PTT and photodynamic therapy (PDT). Considering these advantages, 2D nanomaterials have proved to be superior nanoplatforms for theranostic application.22 Despite the rapid development of therapeutic 2D nanomaterials and their nanocomposites, most previous reports have focused on the fabrication or optimization of monotherapy, while lots of preclinical and clinical studies have shown that monotherapy is not as effective as expected, due to the recurrence and metastasis of cancer.23 The combination of 2D nanomaterials with other functional moieties could confer them with highly enriched properties for imaging-guided synergistic cancer treatment, making 2D nanocomposites emerge as a new class of therapeutic agents in biomedicine.24
Although a certain number of reviews have given a systematic and detailed review of the 2D nanomaterials in different fields, such as catalysis, solar cells, bioimaging, biosensors, tissue engineering, and cancer therapy,15,16,19,21,22,24–34 the research of 2D nanocomposites in the biomedical field is still in the early stage of maturity, especially reviews focused on 2D nanocomposites for synergistic cancer therapy are still rare.16,35 Therefore, in order to make a clear distinction between our contribution and other related reviews on 2D nanomaterials, the application of 2D nanocomposites based on their photothermal properties for combined cancer treatment is systematically summarized in this review (Scheme 1). Furthermore, the design principles of 2D nanocomposites are highlighted. The current challenges and future prospects, and the development and exploitation based on 2D nanocomposites in nanomedicine are discussed, which opens up new possibilities for designing 2D nanocomposites for synergistic cancer treatment.
 Scheme 1  2D nanocomposites for photothermal-combined cancer therapy. PTT–chemotherapy;134 PTT–PDT;71 PTT–immunotherapy;116 PTT–RT;83 PTT–GT;102 PTT–SDT.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 116, Copyright from 2014, Elsevier; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
2. Design principles of 2D nanocomposites
The state-of-the-art development and design of 2D nanocomposites used in synergetic cancer treatment involves the hybridization or combination of 2D nanomaterials with various kinds of functional components like chemotherapeutic drugs, biomolecules, photosensitizers, polymers, inorganic nanoparticles, and sonosensitizers to enhance and endow their ability to perform intelligent actions stimulated by specified signals, including NIR light, acidic pH, and redox process, as well as the synergistic improvement of different therapies.24,36 In addition, targeting moieties, mainly including peptides, folic acid (FA), and antibodies, could also be introduced onto the surface of the 2D nanocomposites for efficient tumor accumulation. To date, loading and chemical grafting approaches are the most extensive strategies to fabricate 2D nanocomposites for synergetic cancer treatment.
Loading is a common technique by which these functional species could be noncovalently coated at the basal plane and the edges of 2D nanomaterials.37 For example, graphene and its derivatives could be considered as amphiphilic aromatic-like molecules, mainly consisting of hydrophilic edges and a largely hydrophobic basal plane. The basal plane provides a hydrophobic surface, which could firmly interact with hydrophobic components through π–π stacking or hydrophobic interactions.24 On the other hand, hydrophilic species could be noncovalently linked at the edges by hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction.38 The noncovalent loading of functional components onto the surface of 2D nanomaterials includes the “loading-from” approach and “loading-to” approach.24
The loading-from approach refers to the process of loading functional species on their surface through π–π stacking or hydrophobic interactions by using 2D as the matrix.24 This approach is simple but efficient, and has been extensively used in the preparation of 2D nanocomposites with enhanced and even new characteristics, which could be significantly modified by endogenous or exogenous stimuli, leading to irreversible conformation changes or structure disintegration.24
The loading-to approach refers to the process in which 2D nanomaterials are coated on the surface of nanoparticles to obtain core@shell nanostructures or embedded into a polymer matrix to fabricate 2D nanocomposites via hydrogen bonding and/or π–π interactions. This approach mainly involves mixing a colloidal suspension of 2D nanomaterials with the required nanoparticles or polymers via simple stirring.
Grafting is another technique that covalently connects inorganic nanoparticles, polymers, or organic moieties to the skeleton of 2D nanomaterials.39,40 In particular, most of the 2D nanomaterials (e.g., graphene oxide, GO, LDHs, TMD nanosheets) possess chemically reactive oxygen functional groups at their basal plane and edges.24 Therefore, grafting can endow 2D nanomaterials with enriched functions and responsiveness to various stimuli through the reactions of these groups.
3. 2D nanocomposites for synergistic cancer therapy
Numerous preclinical and clinical studies have shown that the effect of monotherapy such as chemotherapy is limited, and it is difficult to completely eliminate malignant tumors, which is mainly due to individual differences among cancer patients and the emergence of drug resistance in cancer cells.41,42 However, it is noteworthy that tackling multiple targets and combined therapy have demonstrated great potential to improve the therapeutic effect of cancer. The unique advantage of 2D nanomaterials is that they have satisfactory NIR absorption with prominent photothermal conversion efficiency (PTCE), and could be used for PTT against tumors (Table 1).21 Unfortunately, it is difficult to completely eradicate cancer cells by PTT alone, especially deep-seated cancer cells, which is mainly due to the unavoidable light scattering and absorption effect of NIR light in the body.43 In addition, the thermal tolerance of cancer cells due to the expression of heat shock proteins under high temperatures also limits the efficiency of PTT.44 This phenomenon is encouraging, as hyperthermia could not only eradicate tumor cells that are insensitive to radiotherapy (RT) or chemotherapy, but also improve intratumoral blood flow and increase oxygen levels at the tumors, thereby significantly improving the therapeutic efficacy of monotherapy such as chemotherapy, PDT, and RT.45 Furthermore, the hyperthermia generated by PTT could induce endosomal disruption, gene/drug escape from endosomes and release from cytosol, thus achieving high-efficiency cancer treatment.46,47 In this part, we focused on the development of 2D nanocomposites for PTT-based synergistic therapy (Table 2).
Table 1 Photothermal conversion efficiency of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites




Materials
Photothermal conversion efficiency
Ref.




Graphene
25.9%

148



Antimonene
41.8%

57



2D boron
42.5%

59



VS2
31.5%

135



ReS2
79.2%

149



MoS2
24.3%

150



Ti3C2@Au
39.6%

80



Ti3C2
28.3%

79



Pd
52%

151



Sb2Se3
40.56%

126



WS2
32.83%

152



MoSe2
54.3%

153



NbSe2
24.1%

154



Ta2NiS5
35%

155



BP
28.4%

156



Nb2C
28.6%

127



TaS2
39%

128



TeO2/(NH4)xWO3
43.6%

89



Au@TiO2
42.05%

110



GO–TiO2–MnOx
18.4%

109



Cu-LDH
53.1%

157



Au@LDH/B
21.7%

158



MnO2
21.4%

159





Table 2 Summary of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites for photothermal-based combined cancer therapy




Types
Materials
Ref.




PTT/chemotherapy
rGO-BPEI-PEG-DOX

56



NGO-PEG-DA/DOX

58



GO-HA-DOX

61



MoS2-PEG-FA/DOX

62



WS2@Fe3O4-DOX

140



Co9Se8

134



Ti3C2-DOX

160



Nb2C-DOX

161



RGD-Ti3C2@mMSNs-DOX

162



BP-DOX

163



Antimonene/DOX

57



Boron/DOX

59



Pd-DOX

151



HMSS–NH2/DOX@Pd

164



Au@LDH/B

158



Cu-Doped LDH

157



PTT/PDT
GO-PEG-Ce6

69



rGO-ZnO-HA

165



UCNPs-NGO/ZnPc

65



WSe2-MB

166



WS2-MB

152



MoS2-PEG/Ce6

70



MoS2-PEG/TBO

72



BP@PEG-Ce6

71



RdB/PEG-BP

167



Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6

73



Pd-Ce6

168



Au@GO-ZnPC

169



PTT/RT
Gd:WS2

83




64Cu-FeSe2/Bi2Se3

84



Ti2C3@Au

80



MoS2/Bi2S3

85



WS2 QDs/WS2

83 and 86



MoS2@polyaniline

87



ReS2

88



TeO2/(NH4)xWO3

89



Bi2Se3

90



BP/Bi2O3

91




131I-RGO

92




88Re-WS2

93



PTT/GT
BP-PEI-siRNA

101



WS2@PEI-siRNA

102



MoS2-DNA

103



NGO-PEG-PEI-siRNA

170



GO-FA-siRNA

98



PEG-BPEI-rGO-pDNA

171



2D Au

104



PTT/SDT
GO-TiO2-MnOx

109



Au@TiO2

110



PTT/immunotherapy
BPQD-RMNV &PD-L1

114



IDOi-loaded rGO &PD-L1

115



GO-PEG-PEI-CpG

116



MoS2-CPG

117



PTT/PDT/chemotherapy
Ti3C2-DOX-HA

119



BP-DOX

81



Gd3+ and Yb3+ co-doped LDH-ICG

120



rGO-Au-spinach

172



PTT/PDT/chemotherapy/MHT
GQD-Fe3O4/SiO2-liposome-DOX

173





3.1 Combination of PTT with chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is one of the most common treatment methods in cancer treatment. However, the emergence of drug resistance has weakened the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy, so finding a best strategy to overcome drug resistance has been one of the important and difficult points in the field of cancer treatment.48–50 Numerous studies have demonstrated that PTT-induced hyperthermia could significantly enhance the sensitivity of tumor cells to various DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic drugs like paclitaxel, 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN38), and doxorubicin (DOX), because hyperthermia could obviously interfere with DNA repair.46 Furthermore, hyperthermia has been widely thought to enhance drug cellular uptake via increasing the cell membrane permeability.51,52 In addition, PTT is extensively recognized as not only directly destroying cancer cells, but also improving the efficacy of chemotherapy, because hyperthermia can promote drug release at the tumors.46,53 The NIR light-responsive drug release in the tumor site could reverse multidrug resistance mechanisms such as drug efflux.54 Based on this, PTT combined with chemotherapy could produce additional synergistic therapeutic effects.43
When it comes to the design and fabrication of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposite-based intelligent nanoplatforms for combined therapy of PTT and chemotherapy, targeted drug delivery in response to tumor microenvironment (TME, e.g. NIR light, acidic pH, GSH) is one of the most commonly used strategies.55 With this tumor-targeting ability, the therapeutic effects could be significantly improved without any potential toxicity to normal tissues. Graphene and GO are the earliest nanomaterials reported as drug nanocarriers for combined PTT–chemotherapy.56 Because of the large number of 2D materials developed, more and more 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites have been used in combined PTT–chemotherapy of cancer. For example, Tao et al. firstly prepared 2D antimonene nanosheets (AM NSs) by the liquid exfoliation strategy from bulk antimony, and the degradability, biocompatibility, and performance of the as-obtained AM NSs as an excellent drug nanoplatform were systematically studied and discussed both in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 1a).57,58 The as-prepared polyethylene glycol (PEG)-modified AM (AM-PEG) NSs not only possess outstanding optical absorbance in the NIR window, but also have good PTCE of 41.8%, so they can be used for efficient PTT to destroy tumors. Moreover, the AM-PEG NSs can also be used as drug carriers to load DOX with the loading capacity of up to 150%, which is mainly attributed to its large specific surface area. The as-obtained AM-PEG/DOX NSs exhibited multi-response (acidic pH, NIR light) drug release and high-efficiency tumor accumulation, indicating that AM NSs could act as excellent drug carriers for cancer chemotherapy. More importantly, the AM-PEG/DOX NSs have achieved remarkable anticancer effects in vitro and in vivo through PTT-enhanced chemotherapy, which obviously improved the therapeutic efficiency of tumors compared to monotherapy.
 Fig. 1  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–chemotherapy of cancer. (a) AM-PEG/DOX,57 (b) B-PEG/DOX nanosheets,59 and (c) MoS2–PEG-FA/DOX nanocomposites could effectively load chemotherapeutic drugs to achieve combined PTT and PDT therapy against cancer.60 Adapted with permission from ref. 57, Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright from 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, Ji et al. reported a new top-down approach, which combined thermal oxidation etching with liquid exfoliating technologies to fabricate ultrathin 2D boron nanosheets (B NSs) with high yield and quality (Fig. 1b).59 The underlying mechanism of this approach is that after the first liquid exfoliation, the B–B units on the thick layer could be gradually oxidized in air at high temperature to form B2O3 and dissolved into water, and then BO33− could be easily formed by the second liquid exfoliation. Therefore, the size and thickness of the B block will be reduced to the desired nanoscale by utilizing the method described above. The as-obtained B NSs were then evaluated as novel photonic drug delivery nanoplatforms for imaging-guided cancer treatment. To further improve their biocompatibility and dispersion, B-NSs were modified by amine terminated PEG through the strategy of electrostatic adsorption. The as-prepared PEGylated B (B-PEG) NSs exhibited an outstanding PTCE of 42.5%, and could be employed as the photothermal agents (PTAs) for PTT. Furthermore, the B-PEG NSs could also load chemotherapeutic agents such as DOX owing to their large specific surface area. More importantly, the therapeutic experiments have proved that B-PEG/DOX NSs have a synergistic anticancer effect by combining PTT and chemotherapy, which significantly inhibits the growth of tumors compared with PTT or chemotherapy alone. Similarly, Zhu and co-workers achieved efficient and synergistic cancer therapy of MoS2 nanosheets loaded with DOX through inhibiting exocytosis pathway-induced loss (Fig. 1c).60
To further endow 2D nanocomposites with specific cancer cell targeting capabilities, targeting moieties, including peptides, FA, and antibodies could also be introduced onto the surface of 2D nanocomposites for high-efficiency accumulation and uptake at the tumors.22 For example, Jung and co-workers successfully fabricated the GO–hyaluronic acid (HA) conjugate for combined PTT-chemo cancer treatment.61In vitro bioimaging confirmed the targeted delivery of drug-loaded conjugates to skin tumors of mice owing to leakage structures and overexpression of HA receptors of tumors. Moreover, the NIR laser irradiation also results in the complete destruction and damage of tumor tissues without any recurrence. Our group also successfully prepared functionalized MoS2 nanosheets with FA modified lipoic acid conjugated PEG (LA-PEG) by chemical exfoliation, and MoS2-PEG-FA nanosheets can be used as an excellent drug platform to highly efficiently load different drug molecules such as DOX and SN38 owing to their extraordinarily high surface area.62 After loading with DOX, the as-prepared MoS2-PEG-FA/DOX nanocomposites can selectively target folate-receptor-positive cancer cells. Moreover, the tumor-bearing Balb/c mice intravenously injected with MoS2-PEG-FA/DOX nanocomposites with subsequent 808 nm laser irradiation, an obvious synergistic effect in inhibiting tumor growth was observed by the combination of chemotherapy and PTT. The above results adequately explained that the NIR light photothermal-responsive nanoplatform offers a promising combinatorial strategy for improving therapeutic efficacy and reducing the side-effects associated with chemotherapy.
3.2 Combination of PTT with PDT
PDT is a non-invasive technique that can be used for the clinical treatment of various diseases, including cancer. PDT can effectively and selectively activate photosensitizers to produce lots of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by using NIR light of appropriate wavelength as an exogenous stimulant, thus effectively destroying cancer cells.63 However, the most commonly used photosensitizers are hydrophobic, so aggregation often occurs in physiological solutions, resulting in a poor efficiency of ROS production. Therefore, the effective delivery and intelligent release of photosensitizers at tumor sites are the key factors to achieve high-efficiency PDT.64,65 The 2D nanocomposites as ideal nanocarriers could load and deliver different hydrophobic photosensitizers to reach the tumor site. When photosensitizers are loaded, 2D nanomaterials can be used as good quenching agents to inhibit the production of ROS. However, once the photosensitizer is released from the 2D nanocomposites under external stimuli, the ability to generate ROS could be recovered.22 These characteristics make 2D nanomaterials intelligent nanoplatforms for photosensitizer delivery owing to the fact that PDT based on 2D nanocomposites can be realized in a controlled manner at the required location. Moreover, the potential toxic side effects on healthy tissues could be decreased during the delivery in the body.
It is noteworthy that TME is highly hypoxic, resulting in a lower ROS production rate, which limits the therapeutic effect of PDT.66 To overcome the shortcoming of PDT, PDT and PTT can be effectively combined to develop synergistic phototherapy, which could realize super-additive therapeutic effects. In this combined formulation, mild hyperthermia produced by PTT could increase the concentration of intracellular photosensitizers by improving the membrane permeability, thereby enhancing the cancer cell uptake of photosensitizer-loaded nanoplatforms.63,64 Furthermore, mild hyperthermia could also accelerate blood flow and improve saturated oxygen concentration in blood vessels, thus further facilitating the production of ROS in oxygen-dependent type II photosensitizers.67,68 Therefore, 2D nanocomposites have been recognized as ideal multifunctional nanoplatforms for synergetic PTT–PDT to eradicate cancer cells.
There are two most common strategies for the combination of PTT and PDT with 2D nanomaterials. The first strategy is that 2D nanomaterials have both photothermal and photodynamic properties, such as 2D BP nanosheets, Ti3C2 nanodots, etc. The second strategy is to use 2D nanomaterials as drug carriers to load photosensitizers, so that they have both photothermal and photodynamic properties, which is also the most commonly used strategy. In recent years, numerous studies have reported that 2D nanomaterials, as simple but powerful nanoplatforms, have great potential to be used in combination with PTT/PDT to treat cancer.32 Graphene and GO were first reported by our research group to be used as drug carriers to load photosensitive molecules, thus realizing the combined treatment of PTT–PDT. Because of their good properties and application prospects, many 2D nanocomposites have also been developed for this application of PTT–PDT.69 Among them, TMD is the most studied type of 2D nanomaterial. For example, chlorin e6 (Ce6)-loaded MoS2-PEG nanosheets (MoS2-PEG/Ce6 NSs) have been reported for combined PTT–PDT against cancer in animal experiments.70 The MoS2 NSs were successfully prepared via the chemical exfoliation strategy and functionalized by LA-PEG. The as-obtained MoS2 NSs exhibited excellent stability in the physiological environment and can effectively load Ce6 through physical adsorption. In vitro experiments showed that the MoS2-PEG/Ce6 NSs remarkably enhanced cellular uptake compared with free Ce6, which can further promote cell uptake under mild hyperthermia to achieve more effective killing of tumor cells. After intravenous injection, photoacoustic (PA) imaging and biodistribution showed that MoS2-PEG/Ce6 NSs showed highly effective accumulation at the tumors. The combination of PTT and PDT is then performed, which can significantly enhance the growth inhibition of tumors compared with monotherapy. Similarly, Yang et al. fabricated Ce6-decorated black phosphorus nanosheets (BP NSs), which have been developed for synergistic therapy against cancer with PTT and PDT (Fig. 2a).71 Taking full advantage of their relatively large specific surface area, PEG-NH2-modified BP NSs (BP@PEG NSs) can be used to efficiently load Ce6. The prepared BP@PEG-Ce6 NSs not only possess excellent physiological stability, biocompatibility, and tumor accumulation ability, but also have an excellent PTCE of 43.6%. Moreover, BP@PEG-Ce6 NSs can efficiently produce ROS by releasing Ce6, which can be proved by in vitro studies. Experiments demonstrated that BP@PEG-Ce6 NSs could be used as ideal nanoplatforms for synergetic PTT–PDT cancer treatment, which significantly improves the therapeutic efficiency of cancer compared with monotherapy. It is particularly noteworthy that some BP nanosheets themselves can be used for PTT–PDT combination therapy of tumors. Moreover, Peng et al. reported pH-responsive nanoplatforms, toluidine blue O (TBO)-loaded MoS2 nanocomposites, which could be used for combined PTT–PDT against cancer (Fig. 2c).72 Experiments showed that fluorescence and photoinduced ROS production of TBO were significantly decreased by MoS2 NSs under normal conditions. While under acidic conditions, the pH-responsive nanoplatform showed high-efficiency antitumor performance and photoinduced ROS production, indicating great potential in synergistic cancer treatment.
 Fig. 2  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–PDT of cancer. (a) BP@PEG/Ce6 nanosheets,71 (b) Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites,73 and (c) MoS2-PEG-TBO nanocomposites have been developed for PTT and PDT synergistic therapy against cancer.72 Adapted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
It is noteworthy that the hypoxic nature of most solid tumors and the hydrophobicity of some photosensitizers severely limit the effectiveness of PDT.67,68 To overcome these limitations, Wei et al. designed Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites for high-efficiency PDT (Fig. 2b).73 In the nanocomposites, Pd@Pt-PEG nanoplates exhibited catalase-like activity and can decompose H2O2 to generate oxygen. Furthermore, Pd@Pt-PEG nanoplates were further conjugated with Ce6 to obtain Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites. The as-prepared nanocomposites not only had excellent biocompatibility and PTCE, but also exhibited a high tumor accumulation effect. Both in vitro and in vivo experimental results clearly demonstrated that Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites could effectively deliver Ce6 to cancer cells/tumor sites and trigger the decomposition of endogenous H2O2 to generate oxygen, resulting in a remarkably enhanced PDT efficacy. More importantly, the moderate photothermal effect of Pd@Pt nanoplates also strengthens the PDT efficiency of Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites. These results indicated that Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites had a moderate photothermal effect, excellent catalase-like activity, and high tumor enrichment, which could effectively regulate the tumor hypoxia and enhance the efficiency of PDT.
3.3 Combination of PTT with radiotherapy (RT)
RT, which uses ionizing radiation, including gamma rays, particle radiation, and X-rays, destroys cancer cells by inducing oxidative stress and/or destroying their DNA.74–76 However, the oxygen-deficient TME has been proved to reduce the sensitivity of tumor cells to X-ray/gamma radiation, thus rendering RT ineffective in the treatment of hypoxic solid tumors.67,77–79 To overcome these problems, PTT could be implemented before RT owing to the fact that hyperthermia, as a physical alternative, improves tumor oxygenation by increasing blood flow at the tumors.80 Together with the fact that hyperthermia could effectively inhibit the repair of the non-lethal damage caused by X-ray radiation, PTT and RT are combined to fabricate a NIR light-responsive nanoplatform composed of radioactive isotopes and/or 2D nanocomposites, which could produce remarkable synergistic effects via the enhancement of PTT on RT.81,82
There are two general ways to enhance the radiation sensitization of nanomaterials. The first strategy is to improve the effectiveness of ionizing radiation, such as the use of nanomaterials containing high-altitude atomic number elements (e.g. Bi, W and Au) with strong X-ray attenuation to increase energy deposition and facilitate the generation of ROS.45 Another strategy is to make cancer cells more susceptible to radiation by interfering with cellular homeostasis and regulating cellular pathways.22 For instance, the hyperthermia produced by PTT can directly destroy cancer cells and also play a sensitizing role in RT. Moreover, hyperthermia could cause the aggregation of related proteins and DNA double strand breakage, so it can effectively inhibit the repair of DNA damage, especially in the case of DNA damage caused by ionizing radiation.22,45 Therefore, 2D nanomaterials or 2D nanocomposites with high PTCE and strong X-ray energy attenuation ability have good application potential in the combined treatment of PTT and RT, which could significantly improve the treatment efficiency of RT.45 For example, our group firstly reported Gd-doped WS2 nanoflakes through a bottom-up solution-phase approach to achieve combined PTT and RT against tumors.83 In this nanostructure, the satisfactory NIR absorbance of WS2 nanoflakes enables it to be used in PTT and can effectively improve hypoxia at tumor sites, while Gd and W elements strongly weaken X-ray irradiation to enhance ROS production, thus significantly enhancing the therapeutic effect of RT. More importantly, both in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that Gd-doped WS2 nanoflake-induced PTT and RT had a significant synergistic effect on the killing of tumor cells, indicating that the combination with PTT and RT of 2D nanomaterials could effectively overcome the limitations of traditional RT, which could significantly improve the treatment efficiency of RT. Subsequently, our group also fabricated multifunctional 64Cu-labeled FeSe2/Bi2Se3-PEG nanocomposites via cation exchange for combined PTT–RT against cancer (Fig. 3a).84 Using the excellent NIR absorbance and satisfactory X-ray absorption properties of 64Cu-labeled FeSe2/Bi2Se3-PEG nanocomposites, the as-prepared nanocomposites had been found to achieve a remarkable synergistic tumor destruction effect. In addition, the hybridization of 2D nanomaterials with nanoparticles containing heavy Z atoms like Ba and Au may be another method to construct radiation sensitizers for improving RT by external X-ray radiation.24 For example, multifunctional Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites were synthesized by a seed-growth method and applied in the combination therapy of tumors (Fig. 3c).80 It is noteworthy that the presence of Au nanoparticles makes the Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites have strong X-ray attenuation ability, making the nanocomposites available for tumor RT. More interestingly, the as-prepared Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites exhibited superior optical absorbance in the NIR II region and better physiological stability compared to pure Ti3C2 nanosheets. In vitro and in vivo experimental data have shown that Ti2C3@Au nanocomposites have significant synergistic therapeutic effects through PTT-enhanced RT. Similarly, nanomaterials or nanocomposites based on 2D metal chalcogenides, such as MoS2/Bi2S3-PEG nanocomposites,85 WS2 quantum dots/nanosheets,83,86 MoS2 quantum dot@polyaniline nanohybrids,87 ReS2 nanosheets,88 ultrathin TeO2/(NH4)xWO3 nanoribbons,89 selenocysteine-modified Bi2Se3 nanoparticles,90 and black phosphorus/Bi2O3 heterostructures91 have been widely used in the combination therapy of PTT and RT, showing excellent synergistic anti-tumor effects (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–RT of cancer. (a) 64Cu-Labeled FeSe2/Bi2Se3-PEG84 and (b) Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites for multimodal imaging-guided combined PTT–RT therapy;80 (c) MoS2@PANI-PEG for combined PTT–RT cancer therapy.87 Adapted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, some nanocomposites based on radionuclide-2D nanomaterials have also been designed for PTT-internal RT (iRT) combined therapy. For example, our group fabricated 131I labeled, PEG-modified reduced GO (131I-RGO-PEG) nanocomposites for the treatment of metastatic tumors in combination with PTT–iRT. More importantly, the labeled 131I-radioactivity and the satisfactory NIR absorbance of 131I-RGO-PEG nanocomposites could result in remarkable synergistic therapeutic efficiency.92 In addition, 88Re-WS2-PEG nanocomposites were also synthesized for PTT-enhanced RT of tumors. Very interestingly, the W element could absorb the ionizing radiation produced from 188Re without external X-ray irradiation. Moreover, the self-sensitization behavior and outstanding photothermal properties of WS2 nanosheets make 88Re-WS2-PEG nanocomposites successfully enhance the synergistic effect of PTT/RT.93
3.4 Combination of PTT with gene therapy (GT)
GT, which could be defined as the use of genetic materials, such as small interfering RNA (siRNA) molecules or DNA to prevent or treat related diseases, has been used as an alternative to drug treatment for decades.94–96 For GT, the most important thing is to design and construct a highly efficient gene vector, which can protect oligonucleotides from enzymatic degradation, promote cell uptake with high transfection efficiency, and intelligently release oligonucleotides from the vectors. So far, numerous gene delivery nanoplatforms such as virus ions and PLGA97 have been developed with high transfection efficiency.98 2D nanomaterials or 2D nanocomposites with excellent biocompatibility and a large surface area also make them effective and safe gene vectors for cancer treatment.94 PTT combined with GT is another widely used strategy to realize combination therapy. When GT is combined with PTT, the hyperthermia generated by 2D nanomaterials under NIR irradiation could lead to higher-efficiency gene delivery by increasing the cell uptake. Furthermore, hyperthermia may trigger the transient disruption of the endoplasmic/lysosomal membrane to promote the endoplasmic escape of vectors and then accelerate the release of oligonucleotides from vectors.99 More importantly, GT could cooperatively enhance the efficacy of PTT by specifically inhibiting heat shock protein (HSP) expression or reducing the resistance of cancer cells against heat damage.96,100 Thus, the combination of PTT and GT can produce a remarkably synergistic effect.
For example, Wang et al. successfully fabricated polyethyleneimine (PEI) modified 2D BP nanosheets (BP-PEI) with excellent biocompatibility as gene nanoplatforms for siRNA delivery (Fig. 4a).101 It can be observed that BP-PEI nanosheets could effectively adsorb siRNA and protect siRNA from enzymatic degradation, thus enhancing the cellular uptake of siRNA and promoting the escape of siRNA from the endosomes. Moreover, the BP-PEI-siRNA nanocomposites could effectively enhance therapeutic effects at the tumors by combining with the satisfactory photothermal properties of BP nanosheets. More importantly, the BP nanosheets would gradually degrade into non-toxic phosphate ions in vivo. These extraordinary properties indicated that BP-based drug nanocarriers would be a promising tool for high-efficiency GT against cancer.
 Fig. 4  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–GT of cancer. (a) BP-PEI nanosheets,101 (b) WS2@PEI nanosheets102 and (c) NGO-PEG-PEI nanosheets could effectively load siRNA for synergistic PTT–GT cancer therapy.98 Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright from 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2017, Ivyspring. 
The hyperthermia caused by PTT can lead to the generation of thermal resistance due to the expression of HSP70, which limits the further application of PTT.99 A possible strategy was introduced by GT to overcome the problem by downregulating the expression of HSP70, which could significantly improve the efficiency of anticancer owing to the significant synergistic effect. For example, Zhang et al. fabricated a powerful nanoplatform based on WS2@polyetherimide (WS2@PEI) nanosheets for PTT–GT combined treatment against cancer under mild conditions (Fig. 4b).102 The as-obtained WS2@PEI nanosheets could not only act as high-efficiency nanoplatforms to deliver survivin-siRNA for GT, but also showed outstanding PTCE for PTT. On the one hand, the hyperthermia induced by WS2@PEI under NIR irradiation could enhance the cellular uptake due to the increase of the cell membrane permeability, thus remarkably enhancing the silencing efficiency of surviving. On the other hand, the silencing of survivin could reduce the heat resistance and increase the apoptosis of tumor cells by down-regulating HSP70, which greatly improved the sensitivity of tumor cells to PTT. As a result, compared to PTT or GT treatment alone, WS2@PEI mediated GT–PTT combined therapy significantly enhanced in vitro tumor cell damage and in vivo tumor elimination.
In order to further enable nanoplatforms with specific tumor cell targeting capabilities, Yin and co-workers reported the PEG/PEI-modified nano-GO conjugate (NGO-PEG-PEI) as the NIR light-responsive gene nanocarrier which exhibited excellent reduced cytotoxicity and gene transfection efficiency without serum interference compared to the free PEI or GO-PEI conjugate (Fig. 4c).98 Furthermore, the experimental results further showed that the mild hyperthermia generated by PTT could result in the increase of the cellular uptake of NGO-PEG-PEI nanocomposites due to the increased cell membrane permeability. The synergistic effect of PTT and gene silencing showed a significant anti-tumor effect, which can effectively destroy tumor cells in vitro and inhibit the growth of tumors in vivo. Similarly, many 2D nanocomposites, such as MoS2 nanosheets103 and 2D gold nanoplates,104 have been reported to be used in the synergistic treatment of PPT and GT, showing better anti-tumor effects than PTT or GT.
3.5 Combination of PTT with sonodynamic therapy (SDT)
Ultrasound (US) is a kind of non-toxic mechanical wave commonly used in clinical diagnostic imaging, which can also play a therapeutic role in tumor eradication. SDT is an efficient treatment method that utilizes the US to activate sonosensitizers to generate toxic ROS to eradicate tumor cells.105–107 Compared with traditional PDT, SDT has the greatest advantage that it has a strong penetration depth.108 Furthermore, SDT could focus US waves on targeted tumors by rapid ultrasonic energy deposition to destroy tumor blood vessels and cancer cells without any damage to the surrounding healthy tissues.105,106 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites are extensively used for enhancing SDT outcomes owing to their excellent PTCE, a large surface-to-volume ratio, and high electroconductivity. For example, Dai and co-workers reported on improving the sonocatalytic efficiency of semiconductor TiO2-based sonosensitizers for high-efficiency SDT through the integration of TiO2 sonosensitizers with 2D graphene (Fig. 5).109 Graphene has a high electrical conductivity, so electrons and holes can be separated to prevent them from recombining under ultrasonic radiation. In addition, graphene with high PTCE can synergistically improve the SDT effect under 808 nm laser irradiation. Their results demonstrated that the designed nanocomposites could achieve a higher inhibition rate of the tumor than single TiO2-based sonosensitizers. Similarly, Gao and co-workers have fabricated a multifunctional therapeutic agent based on Au@TiO2 nanocomposites with controllable shell thicknesses.110 By modifying the TiO2 shells onto the surfaces of 2D Au nanoplates, the Au@TiO2 nanocomposites showed a red shift from the NIR I to the NIR II region, displayed a high absorption at 1064 nm, and possessed an excellent PTCE of 42.05%. Furthermore, under US radiation, the as-prepared Au@TiO2 nanocomposites offered charge transfer channels at the metal–semiconductor interface, and the 2D Au nanoplates can significantly prevent the recombination of electron pairs and holes generated by TiO2, which results in enhanced ROS generation compared with pure TiO2 nanomaterials. It demonstrated that the Au@TiO2 nanocomposites have remarkable biocompatibility and the ability to produce intracellular ROS. More importantly, in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that Au@TiO2 nanocomposites could be used as therapeutic nanoagents in a combination of SDT with PTT for high-efficiency cancer therapy. In conclusion, SDT treatment has a strong penetration depth, which can overcome the limitation of deep penetration of PTT, and therefore has broad application prospects in tumor treatment. However, it is noteworthy that there are very few reports about the use of 2D nanomaterials in the combined treatment of PTT and SDT for tumors, which may be one of the directions for the future breakthroughs of 2D nanomaterials.
 Fig. 5  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–SDT of cancer. The synthetic procedure of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites and their application in combined PTT–SDT cancer treatment.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3.6 Combination of PTT with immunotherapy
It is well known that hyperthermia by PTT promotes the apoptosis and necrosis of cancer cells. Interestingly, tumor neoantigens were released from necrotic and apoptotic cancer cells, which could recruit antigen presenting cells (APC) like dendritic cells (DCs) and mobilize T cells to remove residual and metastatic tumor cells.111 However, CD8+ T cells were exhausted by the cancer cells after infiltrating the tumor. The aberrant expression of programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in cancer cells interacted with programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), leading to T cell exhaustion. Therefore, PTT combined with the checkpoint blockade by PD-1 or CTLA-4 antibodies could reinvigorate the exhausted CD8+ T cells, thus remarkably improving the antitumor effect. Our group demonstrated the combination of anti-CTLA-4 therapy with PTT using single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), and two metastasis models were used to prove that combined therapy resulted in the slow growth of untreated tumors.112 Another pioneering work is to use PLGA-ICG nanoplatforms with anti-CTLA-4 therapy, and relevant experimental results fully demonstrate the importance of complete regression of untreated distant tumors in different subcutaneous metastasis models.113 Recently, the use of 2D-based nanomaterials for PTT combination with the checkpoint blockade has been reported. For example, Mei and co-workers fabricated a BP quantum dot (BP QD) formulation to induce apoptosis and necrosis of tumor cells under NIR laser irradiation to mobilize the immune system to eradicate the metastatic and residual tumor cells (Fig. 6).114 The BPQD-RM nanovesicle (BPQD-RMNV) was prepared by modifying BP QDs with erythrocyte membranes (RMs), which could improve the circulation time and accumulation efficiency of tumors. The basal-like 4T1 tumor cells caused necrosis and apoptosis through PTT-induced hyperthermia, and can effectively recruit DCs to capture tumor antigens in vivo. Moreover, PD-1 was used to prevent the CD8+ T cells from exhaustion and in vivo experiments demonstrated that BPQD-RMNV-mediated PTT combined with aPD-1 treatment significantly inhibited metastatic and residual tumor growth in vivo. To further improve the therapeutic efficiency of tumors, indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibition (IDOi) has been introduced into immunotherapy. For example, Ma and co-workers fabricated multifunctional IDOi-loaded rGO nanosheets with excellent physicochemical properties, which could directly destroy cancer cells under 808 nm laser irradiation and in situ trigger antitumor immune response for combined PTT-immunotherapy against cancer (Fig. 7a).115 Furthermore, in vivo experiments further demonstrated that the IDOi and PD-L1 blockade could significantly promote the triggered immune response including CD8+ T cells, and the responses included the enhancement of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, including natural killer cells, CD45+ leukocytes, CD8+ T cells, and CD4+ T cells; the generation of INF-γ; and the inhibition of the immunosuppressive activity of regulator T cells. More importantly, the combination of PTT, IDOi, and PD-L1 blockade based on graphene could significantly inhibit the growth of irradiated tumors and the distal tumors without PTT treatment. Another common strategy is to use photothermal nanomaterials to transport immunostimulatory oligonucleotides to the tumor site, and to further enhance the immunostimulatory activity under near infrared laser irradiation to achieve photothermal-immunological synergistic treatment. For instance, Qu and co-workers fabricated immunostimulatory oligonucleotide-loaded GO nanocomposites for combined PTT–immunotherapy of tumors (Fig. 7b).116 Cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) has been widely employed as a trigger of the immune system, because the mammalian immune system could recognize it through toll like receptor 9 (TLR9), which consequently leads to the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α and IL-6). In this study, the dual-polymer functionalized GO is used as a high-efficiency CpG nanoplatform (GO-PEG-PEI-CpG) transporter into target cancer cells by avoiding intracellular degradation. Interestingly, hyperthermia generated by PTT could significantly improve the immunostimulatory activity of CpG, possibly owing to the fact that NIR light-induced hyperthermia could accelerate intracellular trafficking of nanoplatforms. In vivo experimental results demonstrated that the GO-PEG-PEI-CpG nanocomposites achieve remarkably synergistic photothermal and immunological effects under laser irradiation, and showed the highest efficiency compared to any monotherapy, which indicated the remarkable therapeutic efficacy of the GO-PEG-PEI-CpG nanocomposites in cancer treatment. Similarly, MoS2 nanosheets were reported as a multifunctional nanoplatform for photothermal-enhanced cancer immunotherapy.117 In conclusion, 2D nanomaterial or nanocomposite-mediated PTT combined with the immune checkpoint blockade antibody or immunostimulatory oligonucleotides could significantly improve the immunostimulatory effect at the tumors, which could produce an obviously synergistic anti-tumor effect and thus significantly improve the efficiency of immunotherapy.
 Fig. 6  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–immunotherapy of cancer. Schematic illustration of the preparation process of BPQD-RMNVs and synergistic tumor inhibition through combined PTT-immune cancer treatment mediated by BPQD-RMNVs and aPD-1.114 Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright from 2019, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 7  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–immunotherapy of cancer. (a) PEG-rGO-FA-IDOi nanosheet-mediated PTT therapy together with IDO inhibition and PD-L1 blockade for combined cancer therapy.115 (b) GO-PEG-PEI-CpG for synergistic PTT–immunotherapy against cancer.116 Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright from 2014, Elsevier. 
3.7 Other forms of synergistic cancer therapy
Although the different types of PTT-based bimodal synergistic therapies have shown a higher antitumor effect than any monotherapy, the therapeutic efficiency of cancer could be further improved by trimodal synergistic treatment built on the co-operative enhancement interactions among three therapies and through the integration of three kinds of therapeutic agents within a single nanostructure.118 In addition, another virtue of trimodal synergistic treatment is the realization of optimal treatment efficacy under much lower dosages of therapeutic agent administration, which is expected to further reduce the side effects.118 One strategy is to select 2D nanomaterials with photothermal and photodynamic properties to load drug molecules and so on to achieve trimodal synergistic therapy. For example, Liu and co-workers have fabricated a multifunctional nanoplatform based on Ti3C2 nanosheets for combined PTT–PDT-chemo therapy against cancer (Fig. 8a).119 Ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheets were prepared by the liquid exfoliation method, and the as-synthesized nanosheets showed a considerable mass extinction coefficient, a superior PTCE of 58.3%, and satisfactory ROS production under NIR laser irradiation. Ti3C2 can effectively load DOX with drug loading up to 84.2% and tumor-targeted hyaluronic acid to form Ti3C2–DOX–HA nanocomposites by the strategy of layer-by-layer adsorption owing to their large specific surface area. More importantly, in vitro and in vivo therapeutic experiments both demonstrated that Ti3C2–DOX–HA nanocomposites have excellent biocompatibility, stimuli-responsive drug release behavior, tumor accumulation ability, and could achieve high-efficiency cell killing and tumor tissue destruction through synergistic PTT–PDT-chemo therapy of cancer, which significantly improves the therapeutic efficacy of tumors. In addition, Chen and co-workers designed a multifunctional nanoplatform based on BP nanosheets for synergistic PTT–PDT-chemo therapy of cancer (Fig. 8b).81 Interestingly, BP nanosheets could hold higher amounts of DOX on the sheet surface (950% in weight) than the previously reported 2D nanomaterials. The as-prepared BP–DOX nanocomposites not only showed outstanding drug loading efficiency and pH/NIR light-responsive drug release, but could also effectively generate ROS and the photothermal effect to improve the therapeutic efficiency of DOX. The satisfactory in vitro cell killing and in vivo antitumor therapeutic outcome was realized after the synergistic PDT–PTT–chemotherapy with the BP–DOX nanocomposites. Another common strategy is that 2D nanomaterials are loaded with different photosensitizers, photothermal agents and drugs for PTT/PDT/chemotherapy combination therapy of tumors. For example, rare-earth (Gd3+ and Yb3+) co-doped LDH nanosheets via a facile “bottom-up” route could be used as drug nanocarriers to load 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN38) and indocyanine green (ICG) to achieve multimodal imaging-guided synergetic PTT–PDT-chemotherapy.120 Considering that the therapeutic effect of trimodal synergetic therapy is much better than that of bimodal therapy, it is believed that trimodal therapy based on 2D nanomaterials will be further developed in the future.
 Fig. 8  2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites for multimodal imaging. (a) Co9Se8 nanoplates134 and (b) Gd-WS2 nanoflakes were prepared for multimodal imaging-guided synergistic cancer therapy.83 Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.8 Multimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy
Multimodal imaging plays an important role in accurate biomedicine by providing information for disease diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluation of treatment response.9 Ideally, nanomaterial-based nanoplatforms used in nanomedicine should have multimodality both in imaging and treatment. In particular, precise temporal and spatial resolution is needed to monitor therapeutic agents in vivo and predict treatment outcomes, as it opens up a potential way to guide the treatment process, monitor therapeutic response, avoid damage to the surrounding healthy tissues and eventually remove the related side effects (Fig. 9).9 Because of their extraordinary physicochemical properties, especially optical properties, 2D nanomaterials could not only be used as photothermal agents, but also as nanoplatforms for PTT combined with other therapies to achieve synergistic treatment.21 Furthermore, the excellent NIR absorbance of 2D nanomaterials makes them an ideal choice for photoacoustic (PA) imaging, which has become a new emerging imaging technology with many advantages, including good spatial resolution and satisfactory penetration depth.43 Lots of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites such as MoS2 nanosheets,31 2D B,59 TiS2,121 graphene,122 BP,123,124 Ti3C2,125 Sb2Se3,126 NbC2,127 and TaS2128 were reported for efficient PA imaging. In addition, 2D nanomaterials containing elements with a high atomic number such as W, Au, Bi and Pd have outstanding X-ray absorption coefficients, so they are reported to be suitable for CT imaging contrast agents to provide high-resolution three-dimensional structural details of the whole body. For example, Bi2Se3 nanosheets129 and WS2 nanosheets130 exhibited strong X-ray attenuation and can be employed as contrast agents for enhanced X-ray CT imaging of tumor tissues.
 Fig. 9  Multimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy based on 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites. MR imaging;83 PA imaging;134 optical imaging;134 PET/SPET imaging;83 CT imaging.57 Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society;83 adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
However, it is noteworthy that no single-mode imaging technology is perfect, and each imaging technology has its own advantages and limitations. Therefore, multi-modal imaging has broad application prospects in the precise treatment of tumors because it combines the advantages of various imaging technologies. By using the excellent properties of 2D nanomaterials with outstanding NIR absorbance and X-ray absorption coefficients (large saturation magnetization value), bimodal imaging has been integrated into one nanoplatform, making full use of the advantages of the spatial resolution of PA imaging and the deep penetration of CT imaging (magnetic resonance imaging, MRI). For example, MoS2 nanosheets,87 WS2 nanosheets,131 ReS2 nanosheets,88 Bi2Se3 nanosheets,132 Ta4C3 nanosheets,133etc. have been reported for PA/CT bimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy. In addition, Co9Se8 nanosheets134 and VS2 nanoparticles135 were prepared for PA/MR imaging-guided combined PTT–chemotherapy against cancer (Fig. 10a).
 Fig. 10  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–PDT-chemotherapy of cancer. Multifunctional nanoplatforms based (a) Ti3C2 nanosheets119 or (b) BP nanosheets for synergistic PTT–PDT-chemo therapy of cancer.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright from 2017, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright from 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
To give 2D nanomaterials the ability of multimode imaging, functional components with other imaging properties can be used to modify 2D nanomaterials because of their outstanding feasibility and easy modification ability in surface chemistry. For example, our group fabricated Gd-doped WS2 nanoflakes that can be used for the synergetic treatment of PTT and RT guided by trimodal (PA/MR/CT) imaging (Fig. 10b).83 In addition, our group also reported 64Cu–FeSe2/Bi2Se3 nanocomposites by a chelator-free labeling method for tetra-modal (PA, CT, MR, and PET) imaging-guided combined PTT–RT therapy against cancer.84 Similarly, 64Cu-labeled MoS2–Fe3O4 nanocomposites,136 Pd@Au nanoplates,137 MoS2/Fe3O4 nanocomposites,138,139 WS2/Fe3O4 nanocomposites,140 MoS2/Bi2S3 nanocomposites,85 WS2@Fe3O4/sSiO2 nanocomposites,23 GO/bismuth selenide nanocomposites141etc. were also reported for multi-modal imaging-guided cancer treatment. These examples adequately illustrated that multifunctional nanotheranostics based on 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites have broad application prospects in imaging-based diagnosis, and offer a powerful nanoplatform for imaging-guided cancer treatment (Table 3).
Table 3 Summary of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites for cancer imaging




Modality
Image type
Materials
Ref.




Single-modal
PA
Graphene

174



GO

122



MoS2

62



TiS2

121



NbC2

127



TaS2

128



Sb2Se3

126



B

59



Antimonene

57



Ti3C2

125



BP

163



SPECT
WS2

93



CT
MoS2

175



WS2

130



Bi2Se3

129



MRI
Fe–Al doped LDH

147



Multimodal
PA/MRI
VS2

135



Co9Se8

134



MoS2/Fe3O4

138 and 139



Fe3O4/GO

176



T1/T2 MRI
Gd2O3/GO

177



PA/CT
Ta4C3

133



Bi2Se3

132



ReS2

88



WS2

131



MoS2

87



Pd@Au

137



GO/Bi2Se3

141



MoS2/Bi2S3

85



PA/MRI/PET

64Cu–MoS2–Fe3O4

136



PA/MRI/FI
WS2/Fe3O4

140



WS2@Fe3O4/sSiO2

23



PA/CT/MRI
Gd-Doped WS2

83



PA/CT/MRI/PET

64Cu-FeSe2/Bi2Se3

84





4. Conclusions and perspectives
The development of 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites for the photothermal-based combined therapy of cancer is very important and has broad application prospects, and compounds such as GO and MoS2 have been widely used in different applications owing to their extraordinary physicochemical properties, and great achievements have been made in the field of nanomedicine. This review systematically summarizes the latest advances in photothermal-based combination therapy of 2D nanocomposites. More importantly, 2D nanocomposites have some unique features such as multimodal imaging capabilities compared to other nanomaterials, which make them a novel and promising biomedical platform for multimodal imaging-guided combined therapy. Despite the unique properties and diverse biological activities of 2D nanocomposites, most 2D nanocomposites for cancer theranostic applications have emerged only recently and are still in their infancy.21 Based on this, there are still many unsolved key problems and challenges to be solved for future clinical translations.
Firstly, the biosafety of 2D nanocomposites should be paid enough attention in biomedical applications. A major obstacle to the clinical use of 2D nanocomposites is their systemic toxicity, the uncertainty of the elimination behavior or pathway, and the long-term effects on the human body.142 Although lots of studies have verified a short-term safety along with the biodistribution of 2D nanocomposites in vitro and in vivo, it is noteworthy that their long-term chronic toxic effects and potential accumulation have largely not been explored, which should attract our attention. Furthermore, it is largely unclear how they interact with the immune system and whether they may interfere with the reproductive system and affect the next generation. More systematic studies are still needed to determine the clinical safety of these 2D nanocomposites.
Secondly, the biodegradation and excretion of these 2D nanomaterials are considered one of the biggest challenges to be solved. It is well known that these 2D nanocomposites have good crystallinity, showing that their structures are highly integrated with few defects. Therefore, they are usually difficult to degrade in the physiological environment.21 It is also believed that the enhanced biodegradability of 2D nanocomposites may lead to the release of metal ions, which may cause potential toxicity to the human body due to the increased metal ion dosages. In order to solve this problem, a possible strategy is to reduce the size of these 2D nanomaterials to an extremely small range, which can easily be excreted through the kidney system after the treatment process. This strategy removes 2D nanocomposites from the body by specific pathways rather than traditional biodegradation, avoiding the high toxicity risk caused by the accumulation of nanosheets in the body and the release of metal ions.143 For example, 2D BP nanosheets are unstable in aqueous solution, which means that they may biodegrade under physiological conditions. However, the instability of such structures may lead to low photothermal stability and storage difficulties.21,144,145 Therefore, their structure should be reasonably tuned to balance photothermal performance, stability and biodegradability. However, the further clinical transformation of 2D nanomaterials strongly depends on their biosafety, biocompatibility, and biodegradability.143 It is generally believed that only biodegradable 2D nanomaterials with good biological safety could enter the clinical stage, such as metal oxides and BP nanosheets, even though these biological assessments are still in a very preliminary stage.
Thirdly, another important issue of 2D nanocomposites is the balance between the manufacturing scale-up and product quality.7,16 As mentioned earlier, the physicochemical properties of 2D nanocomposites are closely related to their size, thickness and surface chemistry. Therefore, standardized manufacturing protocols should be developed to greatly facilitate the clinical transformation of promising 2D nanocomposites in nanomedicine.
Lastly, it is still a huge challenge and of great significance to reasonably integrate the treatment modalities into 2D nanomaterial-based nanoplatforms for intelligent drug delivery and combined cancer treatment.36 Although several combination formulations have been successfully proposed and their remarkable therapeutic effects have been proved, the research related to the combination therapy based on 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites is still in an early stage, and many key problems need to be solved. For instance, in view of effective and successful cancer treatment, the designed and fabricated nanocomposites should have diagnostic and therapeutic functions. Only imaging guidance could provide a more accurate structure and location information for precise cancer treatment. In addition, it is noteworthy that 2D nanomaterials also show good potential in many emerging cancer therapies, such as microwave thermal therapy (MWT) and chemodynamic therapy (CDT). For example, layered MoS2 nanoflowers have been reported for the first time to be used in MWT to effectively eliminate tumors (Fig. 11a).146 This pioneering work opens the door to the application of 2D nanomaterials in MDT. In addition, Cao and co-workers designed and fabricated 2D PEG/Fe-LDH nanocatalysts through a novel and efficient solvent-free bottom-up method for CDT (Fig. 11b), which can effectively eliminate tumors with high therapeutic efficiency while exhibiting excellent biocompatibility in normal tissues.147 These emerging therapies can be combined with PTT and other therapies in the future to achieve a synergistic treatment of tumors, which can further enrich the application of 2D nanocomposites in nanomedicine.
 Fig. 11  2D nanomaterials for chemodynamic or microwave thermal therapy of cancer. (a) The preparation process, microstructure, and chemodynamic performance of 2D PEG/Fe-LDH nanosheets.147 (b) Layered MoS2 nanoflowers were prepared via a simple solvothermal method for microwave thermal therapy.146 Adapted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright from 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, the development of 2D nanocomposites is proceeding at a rapid rate, but so far it cannot meet the needs of clinical applications. More efforts are needed on unresolved issues to make more meaningful progress in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This article was partially supported by the National Research Programs of China (2016YFA0201200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51525203, 51761145041, 51572180), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, a Jiangsu Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (BK20170063), a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, and a Project Funded for Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (2019 SJKY19_2282). L. Cheng was supported by the Tang Scholar of Soochow University.
References
X. Zhuang, Y. Mai, D. Wu, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 403–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2584–2586 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. Zhang, W. Niu, C. Li, N. Yang, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6409–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Ji, C. Menard-Moyon and A. Bianco, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2019, 138, 211–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Chhowalla and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3015–3017 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Sun, S. Liu and H. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603446 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, H.-M. Cheng and P. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6009–6012 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1079–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne and Y. K. Gun'Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
C. Murugan, V. Sharma, R. K. Murugan, G. Malaimegu and A. Sundaramurthy, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 299, 1–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Luo and Y. Zhao, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 1214–1226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Shan, W. Zhang, S. Su, L. Yuwen and L. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602660 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kong and Y. Cui, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Chem, 2018, 4, 1284–1313 CAS .
Y. Guo, K. Xu, C. Wu, J. Zhao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 637–646 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
L. Gong, L. Yan, R. Zhou, J. Xie, W. Wu and Z. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1873–1895 RSC .
G. Yang, R. Zhang, C. Liang, H. Zhao, X. Yi, S. Shen, K. Yang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702664 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gu, S. Zhu, L. Yan, F. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1800662 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Zhou, L. Shi, Q. Chen and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4291–4312 RSC .
B. Liu and K. Zhou, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 100, 99–169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, T. Wang, Z. Han, L. Li and X. Wu, Nano, 2019, 14, 1930001 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6795–6823 RSC .
J. Xiong, J. Di, J. Xia, W. Zhu and H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801983 CrossRef .
V. Agarwal and K. Chatterjee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16365–16397 RSC .
T. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701158 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luo, T. Fan, Y. Zhou, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808306 CrossRef .
E. A. Hussein, M. M. Zagho, G. K. Nasrallah and A. A. Elzatahry, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 2897–2906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Motter, K. J. Koski and Y. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2313–2317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jayakumar, A. Surendranath and P. Mohanan, Int. J. Pharm., 2018, 551, 309–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, X. Zhang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7692–7712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, Y. B. Zheng, F. Zhao, S. Li, X. Gao, B. Xu, P. S. Weiss and Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 97–114 RSC .
F. Chen and N. J. Tao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 429–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bottari, M. Angeles Herranz, L. Wibmer, M. Volland, L. Rodriguez-Perez, D. M. Guldi, A. Hirsch, N. Martin, F. D'Souza and T. Torres, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4464–4500 RSC .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nikolaou, A. Pavlopoulou, A. G. Georgakilas and E. Kyrodimos, Clin. Exp. Metastasis, 2018, 35, 309–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shapira, Y. D. Livney, H. J. Broxterman and Y. G. Assaraf, Drug Resist. Updates, 2011, 14, 150–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Li, X. Yan, Y. Ma, Z.-H. Miao, L. Doug, H. Chen, Y. Lu and Z. Zha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41782–41793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Tian, W. Tian, J. Sun, S. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Ma, Z. Teng and G. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8578–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song, L. Cheng, Y. Chao, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700996 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, P. Bhattarai, Z. Dai and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2053–2108 RSC .
W. Yang, W. Guo, W. Le, G. Lv, F. Zhang, L. Shi, X. Wang, J. Wang, S. Wang and J. Chang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10245–10257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, W. Fan, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Zhou, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, E. Shao, G. Zhang, O. Jacobson, L. Shan, R. Tian, S. Cheng, L. Lin, Y. Dai, Z. Shen, G. Niu, J. Xie and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12269–12283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, Y. Ma, H. Zhou, S. Sun, X. Wang, H. Qian, Y. Xu, Z. Miao and Z. Zha, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 143–149 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, H. Chen, X. Wu, H. Qian, X. Yang and Z. Zha, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 152, 449–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, M. Guo, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Li, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, X. Liang, Q. Liu, M. Qu, Q. Zou, J. Li, H. Tan, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27631–27643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Wang, L. Feng, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10869–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Li, X. Chen, T. Wang, L. Li, Z. Su and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803815 CrossRef .
Z. Gu, S. Zhu, L. Yan, F. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800662 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, D. Lee, J. Kim, T.-I. Kim and W. J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6735–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Saw, W. Li, N. Kong, M. A. Islam, T. Gan, X. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Mahmoudi, G. J. Tearney and O. C. Farokhzad, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802061 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Feng, K. Li, X. Shi, M. Gao, J. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1261–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song, Q. Xiong, S. Shi, Z. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, L. Mei and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Ji, N. Kong, Y. Chen, M. Mahmoudi, X. Xu, L. Ding, W. Tao, T. Cai and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2922–2938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung, W. H. Kong, D. K. Sung, M.-Y. Lee, S. E. Beack, D. H. Keum, K. S. Kim, S. H. Yun and S. K. Hahn, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 260–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Shi, L. Feng, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, M. Zhang, Z. Tang, M. He and W. Bu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2502–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, N. Kwon, T. Guo, Z. Liu and J. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11522–11531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, D. Liu, S. Song, X. Wang and H. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 7715–7724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, H. Lin, L. Yu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2223–2235 CAS .
X. Yi, L. Chen, X. Zhong, R. Gao, Y. Qian, F. Wu, G. Song, Z. Chai, Z. Liu and K. Yang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3267–3278 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Z. Dong, T. Fu, J. Liu, Q. Chen, Y. Li, R. Zhu, L. Xu and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5490–5498 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, C. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Feng and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7000–7009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, W. Cui, H. Gong, C. Liang, X. Shi, Z. Li, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11219–11225 RSC .
X. Yang, D. Wang, Y. Shi, J. Zou, Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, J. Shao, X. Xie and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12431–12440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Peng, D.-W. Zheng, S.-B. Wang, S.-X. Cheng and X.-Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13965–13975 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, J. Li, D. Sun, Q. Li, J. Ma, X. Chen, X. Zhu and N. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706310 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Q. You, J. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, S. Yang, L. Yang, P. Li, Q. Lu, M. Yu and N. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6270–6284 RSC .
Y. Dou, Y. Guo, X. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, G. Lv, X. Zhang, H. Wang and X. Gong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2536–2548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Z. Cui, R. Song, B. Lv, Z. Tang, X. Meng, X. Chen, X. Zheng, J. Zhang and Z. Yao, Biomaterials, 2018, 155, 135–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song, C. Liang, X. Yi, Q. Zhao, L. Cheng, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2654–2654 CrossRef .
G. Song, Y. Chen, C. Liang, X. Yi, J. Liu, X. Sun, S. Shen, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7143–7148 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, Y. Chao, Y. Chen, C. Liang, X. Yi, G. Yang, K. Yang, L. Cheng, Q. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8243–8254 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, Z. Dong, R. Zhang, X. Yi, K. Yang, M. Jin, C. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 284–294 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Ouyang, H. Liu, M. Chen, K. Zeng, J. Sheng, Z. Liu, Y. Han, L. Wang, J. Li, L. Deng, Y.-N. Liu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603864 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dou, X. Li, W. Yang, Y. Guo, M. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Li, X. Zhang and J. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Yuan, S. Shen, X. Yi, H. Gong, K. Yang and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11090–11101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, S. Shen, S. Shi, Y. Yi, X. Wang, G. Song, K. Yang, G. Liu, T. E. Barnhart, W. Cai and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2185–2197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Chen, X. Cai, H. Yao, W. Gao, Y. Zheng, X. An, J. Shi and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2775–2782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yong, X. Cheng, T. Bao, M. Zu, L. Yan, W. Yin, C. Ge, D. Wang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12451–12463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Tan, X. Pang, L. Liu, F. Tan and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24331–24338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, Y. Chao, Z. Dong, G. Wang, X. Yi, G. Song, K. Yang, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700250 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, F. Yang, G. Xiang, K. Zhang, Y. Cao, D. Wang, H. Dong and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1179–1189 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Du, Z. Gu, L. Yan, Y. Yong, X. Yi, X. Zhang, J. Liu, R. Wu, C. Ge, C. Chen and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701268 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, L. He, W. Zhou, G. Qu, J. Wang, N. Yang, J. Gao, T. Chen, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Biomaterials, 2018, 171, 12–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Zhong, X. Yi, M. Huang, P. Ning, T. Liu, C. Ge, Z. Chai, Z. Liu and K. Yang, Biomaterials, 2015, 66, 21–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chao, G. Wang, C. Liang, X. Yi, X. Zhong, J. Liu, M. Gao, K. Yang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3967–3975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yin, B. Gu, Y. Lin, N. Panwar, S. C. Tjin, J. Qu, S. P. Lau and K.-T. Yong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 347, 77–97 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chu, E. Ren, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, H. Lin, X. Pang, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Qin, Y. Cheng, X. Wang, W. Li, X. Kong, X. Chen and G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 269–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Shu, X. Li, H. Chen, B. Zhang, H. Pan, T. Li, X. Gong, H. Wang and X. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802026 CrossRef .
A. Frede, B. Neuhaus, R. Klopfleisch, C. Walker, J. Buer, W. Müller, M. Epple and A. M. Westendorf, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 222, 86–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yin, K. Hu, Y. Chen, M. Yu, D. Wang, Q. Wang, K.-T. Yong, F. Lu, Y. Liang and Z. Li, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 1133–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. Wang, X.-F. Yu, J.-H. Wang, Z.-B. Li, P.-H. Li, H. Wang, L. Song, P. K. Chu and C. Li, Biomaterials, 2016, 78, 27–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. Jung, Y. K. Lee, J. Hong, H. Ghandehari and C.-O. Yun, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10533–10543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, X. Xu, C. Xing, M. Wang, S.-M. Bai, C.-H. Lu and H.-H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3142–3145 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. Yong, L. Song, X. Dong, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao and Z. Hu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2776–2787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Kim and W. J. Kim, Small, 2016, 12, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Everts, V. Saini, J. L. Leddon, R. J. Kok, M. Stoff-Khalili, M. A. Preuss, C. L. Millican, G. Perkins, J. M. Brown, H. Bagaria, D. E. Nikles, D. T. Johnson, V. P. Zharov and D. T. Curiel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 587–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, J. Huang, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4545–4555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, J. Wan, Y. Yang, P. Yuan, C. Yang, Z. Wang and L. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, e1801254–e1801254 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Zhu, Y. Ren, F. Cao, L. Zhu, L. Hou, H. Zhang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6108–6121 RSC .
F. Gong, L. Cheng, N. Yang, O. Betzer, L. Feng, Q. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Chen, R. Popovtzer and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900730 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dai, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, R. Wu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9467–9480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, G. He, H. Yin, J. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Lan, S. Zhang and B. Yang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2374–2384 RSC .
Q. Fan, Z. Chen, C. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802540 CrossRef .
C. Wang, L. Xu, C. Liang, J. Xiang, R. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8154–8162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Xu, C. Liang, C. Wang, R. Peng and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, X. Ye, C. Wang, C. Xing, Q. Miao, Z. Xie, X. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and L. Mei, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 296, 150–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Liu, H. Sun, C. Wang, D. Kong and G. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1876–1885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9963–9971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, X. Wang, X. Jia, S. Cai, W. Liang, Y. Qin, R. Yang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5927–5934 RSC .
W. Fan, B. Yung, P. Huang and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 13566–13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mei, J. Ma, X. Bai, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Liang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5630–5639 RSC .
X. Qian, S. Shen, T. Liu, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6380–6387 RSC .
Z. Sheng, L. Song, J. Zheng, D. Hu, M. He, M. Zheng, G. Gao, P. Gong, P. Zhang and Y. Ma, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 5236–5243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, L. Wen, J. Zeng, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, L. Deng, C. Zhao and Z. Li, Biomaterials, 2016, 91, 81–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Cui, Y. Zhou, W. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602896 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, X. Cai, H. Cui, S.-W. Lee, X.-F. Yu and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17859–17864 RSC .
L. Fan, D. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. Miao, Y. Ma, Q. Zhao and Z. Zha, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2805–2808 RSC .
X. Han, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, H. Ran, P. Li and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4491–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Ji, J. Liu, W. W. L. Tong, D. Askhatova and J. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703261 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, F. Jiang, B. Yang, X.-R. Song, Y. Liu, H.-H. Yang, D.-R. Cao, W.-R. Shi and G.-N. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1998 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-Z. Cui, Z.-G. Zhou, Y. Yang, J. Wei, J. Wang, M.-W. Wang, H. Yang, Y.-J. Zhang and S.-P. Yang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2015, 26, 749–754 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, J. Liu, X. Gu, H. Gong, X. Shi, T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Wang, G. Liu, H. Xing, W. Bu, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mao, L. Wen, C. Sun, S. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Zeng, Y. Wang, J. Ma, M. Gao and Z. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11145–11155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703284 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-R. Song, X. Wang, S.-X. Yu, J. Cao, S.-H. Li, J. Li, G. Liu, H.-H. Yang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3285–3291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, L. Cheng, Z. Dong, Y. Chao, H. Lei, H. Zhao, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12991–12996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, S. Shi, C. Liang, S. Shen, L. Cheng, C. Wang, X. Song, S. Goel, T. E. Barnhart, W. Cai and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 950–960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Tang, Z. Guo, X. Wang, S. Mo, X. Huang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, W. Yin, X. Zheng, G. Tian, X. Zhang, T. Bao, X. Dong, Z. Wang, Z. Gu, X. Ma and Y. Zhao, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 931–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, C. Li, G. Chen, B. Liu, X. Deng, Y. Wei, J. Xia, B. Xing, P. a. Ma and J. Lin, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600540 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Gong, T. Liu, X. Sun, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2015, 60, 62–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Wu, B. Zeng, Y. Zhang, Q. Tian and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1846–1855 RSC .
G. Reina, J. Miguel Gonzalez-Dominguez, A. Criado, E. Vazquez, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4400–4416 RSC .
G. Song, J. Hao, C. Liang, T. Liu, M. Gao, L. Cheng, J. Hu and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2122–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, H. Xie, H. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, Q. Xiao, X.-F. Yu, Y. Zhao and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Tong, Z. Li, N. Yang, H. Fu, L. Wu, H. Cui, W. Zhou, J. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7131–7139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Tan, P. Liang, T. Liu, J. Wang, C. Fu, J. Yu, J. Dou, H. Li and X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2133–2141 RSC .
Z. Cao, L. Zhang, K. Liang, S. Cheong, C. Boyer, J. J. Gooding, Y. Chen and Z. Gu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801155 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Neelgund and A. R. Oki, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 484, 135–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Miao, L. X. Lv, K. Li, P. Y. Liu, Z. Li, H. Yang, Q. Zhao, M. Chang, L. Zhen and C. Y. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703789 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kong, L. Xing, B. Zhou, L. Du and X. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15995–16005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yong, L. Zhou, Z. Gu, L. Yan, G. Tian, X. Zheng, X. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Shi and W. Cong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10394–10403 RSC .
L. He, T. Nie, X. Xia, T. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Wang and T. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1901240 CrossRef .
C. Wu, J. Liu, B. Liu, S. He, G. Dai, B. Xu and W. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3134–3142 RSC .
H. Zhu, Z. Lai, Y. Fang, X. Zhen, C. Tan, X. Qi, D. Ding, P. Chen, H. Zhang and K. Pu, Small, 2017, 13, 1604139 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526–11530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, J. Tang, W. Chen, G. Hao, N. Kurniawan, Z. Gu and Z. P. Xu, Biomaterials, 2018, 177, 40–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, N. Ge, T. Yang, F. Peng, Y. Qiao, Q. Li and X. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700782 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Zhang, H. Lin, M. Zhao, H. Yao, L. Zhang, W. Peng and Y. Chen, Biomaterials, 2018, 155, 54–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, J. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701394 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Jing, H. L. Dayan Yang, Z. Wang, H. Ran, P. Li and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. Zhang, J. Han, Y. Chen, H. Lin and T. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706981 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Zhu, X. Yu, X. Zeng, Q. Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Wang, J. Shi, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603276 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Fang, S. Tang, P. Liu, X. Fang, J. Gong and N. Zheng, Small, 2012, 8, 3816–3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Li, J. Wang, E. Ju, L. Zhou, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 522–529 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, J. Bai, Z. Ma and X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 269–278 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Hou, G. Yang, X. Fei, H. Zhao, Y. Guo, C. Su, Z. Wang and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25098–25106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, S. Shi, Y. Huang, S. Tang and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8878–8885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Kim, H. K. Na, S. Kim, H. Jang, S. J. Chang and D. H. Min, Small, 2015, 11, 2527–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, X. Yang, X. Shi, X. Tan, R. Peng, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Small, 2013, 9, 1989–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim and W. J. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 117–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chang, S. Li, F. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Shen and A. Xie, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2016, 32, 753–762 CrossRef .
F. Wo, R. Xu, Y. Shao, Z. Zhang, M. Chu, D. Shi and S. Liu, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 485–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Patel, H. Yang, P. L. Chiu, D. D. Mastrogiovanni, C. R. Flach, K. Savaram, L. Gomez, A. Hemnarine, R. Mendelsohn and E. Garfunkel, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8147–8157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, L. Yan, J. Yu, G. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, J. Li and Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6922–6933 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, S. Shi, L. Feng, F. Chen, S. A. Graves, E. B. Ehlerding, S. Goel, H. Sun, C. G. England and R. J. Nickles, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12683–12692 RSC .
F. Wang, K. Bae, Z. Huang and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5642–5649 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Xianwen Wang	Xianwen Wang received his B.S. degree in chemical engineering and technology from Anhui Normal University in 2015. He obtained his Master's degree in pharmaceutical engineering from the Hefei University of Technology in 2018. Since then, he has been a Ph.D. candidate under the guidance of Prof. Zhuang Liu at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) at Soochow University. His current research interest is the development of multifunctional nanomaterials for application in cancer theranostics.
Liang Cheng	Dr Liang Cheng received his PhD degree from the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) at Soochow University in 2012, and then joined Soochow University as a faculty member. He was promoted to an associate professor in 2014 and a full professor in 2018. His research work has been focused on the development of multifunctional nanomaterials for biomedical application.

 	Scheme 1  2D nanocomposites for photothermal-combined cancer therapy. PTT–chemotherapy;134 PTT–PDT;71 PTT–immunotherapy;116 PTT–RT;83 PTT–GT;102 PTT–SDT.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 116, Copyright from 2014, Elsevier; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

Graphene	25.9%	
148

Antimonene	41.8%	
57

2D boron	42.5%	
59

VS2	31.5%	
135

ReS2	79.2%	
149

MoS2	24.3%	
150

Ti3C2@Au	39.6%	
80

Ti3C2	28.3%	
79

Pd	52%	
151

Sb2Se3	40.56%	
126

WS2	32.83%	
152

MoSe2	54.3%	
153

NbSe2	24.1%	
154

Ta2NiS5	35%	
155

BP	28.4%	
156

Nb2C	28.6%	
127

TaS2	39%	
128

TeO2/(NH4)xWO3	43.6%	
89

Au@TiO2	42.05%	
110

GO–TiO2–MnOx	18.4%	
109

Cu-LDH	53.1%	
157

Au@LDH/B	21.7%	
158

MnO2	21.4%	
159


PTT/chemotherapy	rGO-BPEI-PEG-DOX	
56

NGO-PEG-DA/DOX	
58

GO-HA-DOX	
61

MoS2-PEG-FA/DOX	
62

WS2@Fe3O4-DOX	
140

Co9Se8	
134

Ti3C2-DOX	
160

Nb2C-DOX	
161

RGD-Ti3C2@mMSNs-DOX	
162

BP-DOX	
163

Antimonene/DOX	
57

Boron/DOX	
59

Pd-DOX	
151

HMSS–NH2/DOX@Pd	
164

Au@LDH/B	
158

Cu-Doped LDH	
157

PTT/PDT	GO-PEG-Ce6	
69

rGO-ZnO-HA	
165

UCNPs-NGO/ZnPc	
65

WSe2-MB	
166

WS2-MB	
152

MoS2-PEG/Ce6	
70

MoS2-PEG/TBO	
72

BP@PEG-Ce6	
71

RdB/PEG-BP	
167

Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6	
73

Pd-Ce6	
168

Au@GO-ZnPC	
169

PTT/RT	Gd:WS2	
83


64Cu-FeSe2/Bi2Se3	
84

Ti2C3@Au	
80

MoS2/Bi2S3	
85

WS2 QDs/WS2	
83 and 86

MoS2@polyaniline	
87

ReS2	
88

TeO2/(NH4)xWO3	
89

Bi2Se3	
90

BP/Bi2O3	
91


131I-RGO	
92


88Re-WS2	
93

PTT/GT	BP-PEI-siRNA	
101

WS2@PEI-siRNA	
102

MoS2-DNA	
103

NGO-PEG-PEI-siRNA	
170

GO-FA-siRNA	
98

PEG-BPEI-rGO-pDNA	
171

2D Au	
104

PTT/SDT	GO-TiO2-MnOx	
109

Au@TiO2	
110

PTT/immunotherapy	BPQD-RMNV &PD-L1	
114

IDOi-loaded rGO &PD-L1	
115

GO-PEG-PEI-CpG	
116

MoS2-CPG	
117

PTT/PDT/chemotherapy	Ti3C2-DOX-HA	
119

BP-DOX	
81

Gd3+ and Yb3+ co-doped LDH-ICG	
120

rGO-Au-spinach	
172

PTT/PDT/chemotherapy/MHT	GQD-Fe3O4/SiO2-liposome-DOX	
173


 	Fig. 1  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–chemotherapy of cancer. (a) AM-PEG/DOX,57 (b) B-PEG/DOX nanosheets,59 and (c) MoS2–PEG-FA/DOX nanocomposites could effectively load chemotherapeutic drugs to achieve combined PTT and PDT therapy against cancer.60 Adapted with permission from ref. 57, Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright from 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–PDT of cancer. (a) BP@PEG/Ce6 nanosheets,71 (b) Pd@Pt-PEG-Ce6 nanocomposites,73 and (c) MoS2-PEG-TBO nanocomposites have been developed for PTT and PDT synergistic therapy against cancer.72 Adapted with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–RT of cancer. (a) 64Cu-Labeled FeSe2/Bi2Se3-PEG84 and (b) Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites for multimodal imaging-guided combined PTT–RT therapy;80 (c) MoS2@PANI-PEG for combined PTT–RT cancer therapy.87 Adapted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–GT of cancer. (a) BP-PEI nanosheets,101 (b) WS2@PEI nanosheets102 and (c) NGO-PEG-PEI nanosheets could effectively load siRNA for synergistic PTT–GT cancer therapy.98 Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright from 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2017, Ivyspring.	 

 	Fig. 5  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–SDT of cancer. The synthetic procedure of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites and their application in combined PTT–SDT cancer treatment.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–immunotherapy of cancer. Schematic illustration of the preparation process of BPQD-RMNVs and synergistic tumor inhibition through combined PTT-immune cancer treatment mediated by BPQD-RMNVs and aPD-1.114 Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright from 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–immunotherapy of cancer. (a) PEG-rGO-FA-IDOi nanosheet-mediated PTT therapy together with IDO inhibition and PD-L1 blockade for combined cancer therapy.115 (b) GO-PEG-PEI-CpG for synergistic PTT–immunotherapy against cancer.116 Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright from 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites for multimodal imaging. (a) Co9Se8 nanoplates134 and (b) Gd-WS2 nanoflakes were prepared for multimodal imaging-guided synergistic cancer therapy.83 Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright from 2015, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Multimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy based on 2D nanomaterials or nanocomposites. MR imaging;83 PA imaging;134 optical imaging;134 PET/SPET imaging;83 CT imaging.57 Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright from 2016, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society;83 adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  2D nanocomposites for combined PTT–PDT-chemotherapy of cancer. Multifunctional nanoplatforms based (a) Ti3C2 nanosheets119 or (b) BP nanosheets for synergistic PTT–PDT-chemo therapy of cancer.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright from 2017, American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright from 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

Single-modal	PA	Graphene	
174

GO	
122

MoS2	
62

TiS2	
121

NbC2	
127

TaS2	
128

Sb2Se3	
126

B	
59

Antimonene	
57

Ti3C2	
125

BP	
163

SPECT	WS2	
93

CT	MoS2	
175

WS2	
130

Bi2Se3	
129

MRI	Fe–Al doped LDH	
147

Multimodal	PA/MRI	VS2	
135

Co9Se8	
134

MoS2/Fe3O4	
138 and 139

Fe3O4/GO	
176

T1/T2 MRI	Gd2O3/GO	
177

PA/CT	Ta4C3	
133

Bi2Se3	
132

ReS2	
88

WS2	
131

MoS2	
87

Pd@Au	
137

GO/Bi2Se3	
141

MoS2/Bi2S3	
85

PA/MRI/PET	
64Cu–MoS2–Fe3O4	
136

PA/MRI/FI	WS2/Fe3O4	
140

WS2@Fe3O4/sSiO2	
23

PA/CT/MRI	Gd-Doped WS2	
83

PA/CT/MRI/PET	
64Cu-FeSe2/Bi2Se3	
84


 	Fig. 11  2D nanomaterials for chemodynamic or microwave thermal therapy of cancer. (a) The preparation process, microstructure, and chemodynamic performance of 2D PEG/Fe-LDH nanosheets.147 (b) Layered MoS2 nanoflowers were prepared via a simple solvothermal method for microwave thermal therapy.146 Adapted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright from 2018, Wiley-VCH; adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright from 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
