Tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes for solar-driven water oxidation  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA07057K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA07057K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2783-2800Tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes for solar-driven water oxidation

        
          
            Chao 
            Zhen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Runze 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lianzhou 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hui-Ming 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      a
aShenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 72 Wenhua RD, Shenyang 110016, China. E-mail: gangliu@imr.ac.cn
bSchool of Material and Metallurgy, Northeastern University, 3-11 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110819, China
cNanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: l.wang@uq.edu.au
Received 
      5th September 2015
    , Accepted 21st October 2015First published on 13th November 2015AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a very promising process to produce hydrogen as a clean energy carrier. To achieve 10% solar to hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency required for practical applications, the current central task in PEC water splitting is the development of efficient photoelectrodes, particularly photoanodes for water oxidation, used in PEC cells. Tantalum (oxy)nitrides with bandgaps ranging from 2.5 to 1.9 eV, corresponding to theoretical STH efficiencies varying from 9.3% to 20.9%, are considered a class of attractive light adsorbers for use in photoanodes for PEC water oxidation and have attracted much recent research attention. In this review, the recent development of tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes is summarized. Special interest is focused on the synthesis methods of tantalum (oxy)nitride films and important approaches for improving PEC conversion efficiency and stability of these films as photoanodes. The future trends of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes are also discussed.Chao ZhenChao Zhen received his Bachelors degree in Materials Physics from the Jilin University in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science at the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2013. After graduation, he worked as an assistant professor of materials in IMR, and now he is an associate professor of materials in IMR. His current research interests focus on the highly efficient electrodes of photoelectrochemical cells for solar energy utilization.Runze ChenRunze Chen received his Bachelors and Masters degrees in Materials Science and Technology from the Northeastern University of China in 2012 and 2014. Now he is a PhD candidate in a joint PhD training program of the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Northeastern University of China. His current research is focused on photoelectrodes with a wide visible light response for water splitting under the supervision of Professor Gang Liu and Professor Hui-Ming Cheng.Lianzhou WangLianzhou Wang is currently a Professor and Australian Research Council Future Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering and Director of Nanomaterials Centre, the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1999. Before joining UQ in 2004, he worked at two national institutes (NIMS and AIST) of Japan for five years. Wang's research interests focus on the design and development of semiconductor nanomaterials for renewable energy conversion and storage applications including photocatalysis and new generation solar cells.Gang LiuGang Liu received his Bachelors degree in Materials Physics from the Jilin University in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science at the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2009. During his PhD study, he worked at Prof. G. Q. Max Lu's laboratory for one and a half years in Australia. He was the recipient of the T.S. Kê RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP founded by the Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science (SYNL), IMR CAS. Now he is a professor of materials in SYNL. His main research interests focus on solar-driven photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalytic materials for renewable energy.Hui-Ming ChengDr Hui-Ming Cheng is Professor and Director of Advanced Carbon Research Divisionof the Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research activities focus on the synthesis, properties and applications of carbon nanotubes, graphene, energy storage materials, photocatalytic semiconducting materials, and high-performance bulk carbon materials. He has published over 480 papers and is recognized as one of the Highly Cited Researchers in both materials science and chemistry fields by Thomson Reuters in 2014 and 2015. He was the Editor of Carbon from 2000 to 2015, Editor-in-Chief of New Carbon Materials from 1998 to 2015, and now is the Editor-in-Chief of Energy Storage Materials. He is also a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
1. Introduction
Converting the abundant solar energy into storable and transportable chemical fuels is one of the promising solutions to address energy storage and environmental pollution issues. Hydrogen (H2) has been recognized as a clean energy carrier. Production of H2 from photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting as an effective and renewable method to capture intermittent solar irradiation in the form of chemical fuels has drawn tremendous attention since the pioneering work on TiO2 photoanodes by Fujishima and Honda.2 Numerous semiconductors have been explored as light absorbers of photoelectrodes in PEC water splitting cells with the goal of developing low-cost and stable photoelectrodes with STH conversion efficiencies of over 10%.3–5 In order to achieve this goal, an ideal semiconductor light absorber should meet at least three basic requirements: (1) its bandgap should be narrow enough to effectively utilize sunlight and its band edge positions should straddle water redox potentials for spontaneously splitting water into H2 and O2; (2) it should have high carrier mobilities so as to enable rapid transport of photoexcited carriers from the bulk to the surface; (3) its surface structure should be active for the adsorption of water and subsequent reactions. Equally important, high stability, low-cost and environmental friendliness of photoelectrodes are also required.
A bandgap of over 2.0 eV is usually necessary for bias-free PEC water splitting by taking into account overpotential (∼0.4 eV) and thermal resistance loss (∼0.4 eV) plus the theoretical energy (1.23 eV) required for water splitting.1 Meanwhile, to fully utilize solar energy, a small bandgap of <2.5 eV is necessary. The theoretical STH conversion efficiency varies from ∼10% to 16% for materials with bandgaps ranging from 2.5 to 2.0 eV under AM 1.5G sunlight irradiation.1 Although semiconductors with such a bandgap have been extensively explored as light absorbers of photoelectrodes,5 the STH efficiency of these photoelectrodes is still much lower than their theoretical values. This could be partially explained by the small (or even negative) driving potentials of these semiconductors for redox reactions of water splitting so that an external bias is commonly used to assist water photo-splitting. In order to overcome the limitation of small driving potentials in a PEC cell with a single photoelectrode (Fig. 1a and b), a photovoltaic cell is introduced to connect with the photoelectrode in series forming tandem PEC cells (Fig. 1c and d),6,7 where the photovoltaic cell captures and converts the incident sunlight with a longer wavelength into electric power as the input bias to assist the photoelectrode in splitting water. Alternatively, a PEC cell with one photoanode and one photocathode is another desirable configuration for possibly achieving high efficiency (Fig. 1e). In this cell, the photoanode with a bandgap of >2.0 eV absorbing <610 nm sunlight induces water oxidation reaction with photoexcited holes, and the photocathode with a smaller bandgap absorbing >610 nm sunlight induces water reduction reaction with the photoexcited electrons. Meanwhile, the photoexcited electrons in the photoanode and photoexcited holes in the photocathode meet and recombine with each other in the external circuit.
 Fig. 1  Different PEC cell configurations under illumination: (a and b) conventional PEC cells consisting of a photoelectrode and a metal counter electrode; (c and d) tandem PEC cells consisting of a photoanode or photocathode and a metal counter electrode biased with an integrated PV cell; (e) a PEC cell consisting of one photoanode and one photocathode. 
To date, many p-type semiconductor photocathodes with high photocurrent densities (tens of mA cm−2) have been reported.8–11 In contrast, n-type semiconductor photoanodes usually exhibit much lower photocurrent densities (<8 mA cm−2) as a result of the more challenging four electrons involved in water oxidation to generate oxygen. It is worth noting that a photocurrent density of about 8 mA cm−2 should be obtained if 10% solar energy (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) is harvested and fully converted.12 Therefore, constructing high-performance photoanodes is a key in realizing a high-efficiency PEC water splitting process. Tantalum (oxy)nitrides, whose bandgap varies from 1.9 to 2.5 eV and band edges straddle over water redox potentials, are recognized as a class of very promising materials for constructing high-performance photoanodes. In recent years, tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes have experienced a rapid developmental stage and encouraging progress in terms of high STH conversion efficiency and/or long-term stability has been achieved. It is anticipated that lasting efforts in this field will lead to more exciting progress in developing stable and high-efficiency tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes for water oxidation in the near future. In this regard, a focused review on this important topic is therefore highly necessary and should promote the rational design and development of tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes. In this paper, we provide an up-to-date critical review on these promising tantalum (oxy)nitride materials, with focus on the recent progress in the synthesis of films and important strategies for improving conversion efficiency and stability of these films as photoanodes. An outlook for future development of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes is also proposed.
2. Tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes
TaON, Ta3N5 and Ba(Ca, Sr)TaO2N are the typical representatives of tantalum (oxy)nitrides. Among them, TaON and Ta3N5 have been intensively investigated as visible light responsive photocatalysts in water reduction and oxidation processes.13 Over 10% quantum yield in the water oxidation process has been achieved with TaON and Ta3N5 photocatalysts.14–16 The perovskite BaTaO2N demonstrated the ability of photocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen generation under visible light irradiation, particularly when some lattice Ta atoms were replaced with W or solid solution was formed with BaZrO3.17–19 Moreover, the very recent progress showed that a complex perovskite-type tantalum based oxynitride, LaMgxTa1−xO1+3xN2−3x (x > 1/3), can be employed for overall water splitting at wavelengths of up to 600 nm.20 This is the first photocatalyst for water splitting operable at up to 600 nm. All these results for tantalum (oxy)nitride photocatalysts strongly indicate the great potential of using tantalum (oxy)nitrides as light absorbers to construct high-efficiency bias-free photoanodes for water oxidation under visible light.
2.1 Electronic structures of tantalum (oxy)nitrides
Similar to semiconducting transition metal oxides, whose conduction and valence bands dominantly consist of d orbitals of cation metals and 2p orbitals of anion oxygen, respectively, tantalum (oxy)nitrides have their conduction and valence bands with Ta 5d orbitals and (O 2p)N 2p orbitals as the major electronic states, respectively. Electronic structures of TaON, Ta3N5 and Ba(Ca, Sr)TaO2N were theoretically studied on the basis of the framework of density functional theory.21,22 The calculations reported by Fang et al.21 showed that the valence band of TaON and Ta3N5 is composed mainly of the anion 2p orbitals hybridized with Ta 5d states. For TaON the top of the valence band is dominated by N 2p states. The bottom of the conduction band is mainly composed of Ta 5d states. Both TaON and Ta3N5 are semiconductors with indirect band gaps. In contrast, the calculations showed that BaTaO2N is a semiconductor with a direct bandgap.22 Similar to the case of TaON, the upper part of the valence band of BaTaO2N is dominated by N 2p states, while O 2p states are mainly present in the lower part. Its conduction band is dominated by Ta 5d states.
Due to the higher potential energy of N 2p than O 2p, tantalum (oxy)nitrides have a much smaller bandgap than tantalum oxides. The experimentally determined bandgaps of tantalum (oxy)nitrides vary from around 2.0 eV (Ta3N5) to 2.5 eV (TaON), allowing the utilization of most of the visible light with wavelength up to 600 nm in the solar spectrum.
The absolute position of the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum of semiconductors is one of the most crucial physical entities affecting the performance of these semiconductors used as the light absorbers of photocatalysts and photoelectrodes. The band edges can be experimentally determined usually by a combination of ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS)/X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy/electrochemical analyses with UV-visible absorption spectroscopy. Chun et al. studied the conduction and valence band edges for band gaps and Fermi levels of Ta2O5, TaON and Ta3N5 by UPS and electrochemical analyses.23 The results from the two methods consistently confirmed that the maxima of the valence bands are found to be shifted to higher potential energies in the order Ta2O5 < TaON < Ta3N5, whereas the minima of the conduction bands are very similar in the range −0.3 to −0.5 V (vs. NHE at pH = 0). Fig. 2 gives the diagram of the positions of the band edges of tantalum (oxy)nitrides relative to water redox potentials. The band edges of both TaON and Ta3N5 are suitable for water oxidation and reduction under visible light. Balaz et al.24 determined the absolute positions of the conduction and valence bands of four typical tantalum oxynitride perovskites ATaO2N (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) and PrTaON2. As shown in Fig. 3, all their conduction band minima lying above the reduction potential for water are suitable for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Except PrTaON2, the other three tantalum oxynitrides have their valence band maxima below the oxidation potential of water. The higher valence band of PrTaON2 is related to its higher atomic ratio of nitrogen to oxygen. The revealed band structure characteristics of these typical tantalum (oxy)nitrides together with the photocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen generation studies consistently confirm the great potential of using tantalum (oxy)nitrides to construct photoanodes working under solar light.
 Fig. 2  Band positions of Ta2O5, TaON, and Ta3N5 determined by electrochemical analysis and UPS measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. 
 Fig. 3  Energy-level diagrams of tantalum oxynitrides showing EC and EV as well as band gap (colored) and defect levels (•) obtained from XPS and DRCLS, EF (heavy lines) obtained from KPFM, and H2O redox potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. 
2.2 Influence of intrinsic defects on electronic structures
Intrinsic defects, which always exist in all solid materials, can greatly affect the optical absorption properties of semiconductors and thus their related performance. For tantalum (oxy)nitrides, two main kinds of intrinsic defects experimentally and theoretically identified are oxygen atoms occupying lattice sites of nitrogen atoms, and nitrogen vacancies and related reduced tantalum species (i.e., Ta4+, Ta3+). Experiments with the strict control of avoiding exposure to additional oxygen species during the preparation and characterization steps demonstrated the inevitability of the replacement of a small portion of nitrogen atoms with oxygen atoms in Ta3N5, prepared by the nitridation of Ta2O5.25–28 On the basis of both neutron diffraction analysis and theoretical calculations, it was revealed that the oxygen atoms prefer to occupy three coordinated nitrogen atoms in the irregular TaN6 octahedra that contain both three and four coordinated nitrogens of Ta3N5. In contrast, nitrogen vacancies with the lowest energy configuration formed at four coordinated sites were found to be more stable by 0.95 eV than that at three coordinated sites.26 Nurlaela et al. investigated the calculated electronic structures of Ta3N5 with substitutional oxygen for nitrogen (Ta3N4.83O0.17) and Ta3N5 with nitrogen vacancies (Ta3N4.83).27 It was suggested that the substitution of oxygen for nitrogen leads to the formation of delocalized donor metallic states located within the 0.7 eV range just below the bottom of the conduction band of pure Ta3N5, which is responsible for the n-type conductivity and new low-intensity broad absorption bands beyond the intrinsic absorption edge. While the nitrogen vacancies introduce not only similar donor metallic states below the conduction band edge but also additional localized states in the middle of the bandgap of pure Ta3N5. These localized states are considered to be the origin of the experimentally observed new absorption band with its peak at around 715 nm of Ta3N5 as shown in Fig. 3 (the black solid line). The theoretical result by Jing et al. further supported this conclusion.28 By studying the possible optical absorption initiated by the oxygen impurity and the nitrogen vacancy defect, Wang et al. proposed that the 720 nm sub-band-gap optical absorption of Ta3N5 may be ascribed to the electron transition from the nitrogen vacancy with a singly positive charge state to the nitrogen vacancy with a triply positive charge state.29
Wang et al. conducted a series of theoretical studies on the nature and effect of oxygen impurity and nitrogen vacancies on the electronic structures of Ta3N5.30–32 It was found that the nitrogen vacancies weaken the mechanical stability of Ta3N5 while the oxygen impurity is able to remedy the weakened mechanical stability of nitrogen deficient Ta3N5.30 This indicates the concomitant presence of oxygen impurity with nitrogen vacancy. Oxygen doping can change both the bandgap and band edges of Ta3N5.31 Compared with the pure Ta3N5, oxygen doping increased the bandgap first and then the bandgap decreased with the increase of oxygen. Oxygen doping lowered the conduction band edge but improved the valence band edge of Ta3N5, suggesting that oxygen impurity is one major factor limiting the photocatalytic activity of Ta3N5. Further theoretical results suggested that Ba–O codoping with charge compensation between them can improve the photocatalytic activity because the charge compensation induces the cathodic shift of the conduction band minimum of Ta3N5.32
Besides the intrinsic point defects, a surface crystalline layer with reduced Ta species (i.e., TaN) or an amorphous phase with a thickness of a few nanometers was also observed in tantalum nitrides. Nurlaela et al. studied the formation and structure of a surface TaN layer on Ta3N5 prepared from different precursor Ta2O5 powders.27 It was proposed that its formation might be related to the presence of a surface amorphous oxide layer of the Ta2O5 precursor, which tends to transform to TaN under harsh nitridation. The surface layer drastically affects the energy level picture of the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, which thus modulates the photocatalytic activity. Removal of the surface layer by chemical etching leads to a great decrease of the optical absorption sub-band at around 715 nm (Fig. 4). This consequently leads to an obvious change of photocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen generation. However, chemical etching cannot completely quench the absorption band due to the presence of anion vacancies and reduced Ta species in the bulk or on the surface. Alternatively, Maeda et al. developed an effective method of suppressing the generation of reduced Ta species by prior loading of ZrO2 nanoparticles on Ta2O5 particles before the nitridation of Ta2O5 to form TaON.33 Effective decrease in the background level of TaON upon modification with ZrO2 was realized. It was proposed that tantalum cations at the interface between Ta2O5 (and/or TaON) and the loaded ZrO2 interact with ZrO2 and thereby become more cationic. This ZrO2-modified TaON was successfully used to construct efficient Z-scheme photocatalyst systems for overall water splitting.
 Fig. 4  DR UV-vis spectra for as-prepared and etched Ta3N5 samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. 
Compared to particles, the influence of intrinsic defects on the optical properties of tantalum (oxy)nitride films is more complex due to the potential interaction between the tantalum nitride films and underlying substrates. Pinaud et al. examined the structure and optical properties of Ta3N5 films as a function of different underlying substrates (fused silica and Ta) and under a range of nitridation temperatures (850–1000 °C).34 It was revealed that, as a result of the diffusion of lattice N or Ta from the underlying Ta substrates, the textured impurity phase Ta2N was formed and located at the Ta3N5/Ta interface. The Ta2N layer related reduced Ta species exert great influence on the optical absorption of the films as well as on the particles. In contrast, no Ta2N phase was detected in the film supported on fused silica. On the other hand, Dabirian et al. demonstrated that, by using a reflecting Pt back-contact and appropriate Ta3N5 film thickness, the resonance frequency can be tuned to energies just above the bandgap to increase the absorbance. This results in a great improvement in the photon-to-current efficiency.35
2.3 Synthesis of tantalum (oxy)nitride films
Nitridation of tantalum oxide films is an effective method to prepare tantalum (oxy)nitride films. The transformation from tantalum oxides to tantalum (oxy)nitrides usually requires heat treatment at a temperature higher than 700 °C in a gaseous ammonia containing atmosphere. The substrates supporting tantalum oxide films need be tolerant to this rigorous process. Tantalum foil is an appropriate and widely used substrate with remarkable merits. It can not only bear the high temperature treatment in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere but also act as the tantalum resource for tantalum oxide growth. Tantalum foil supported tantalum oxide films can be prepared by different methods. These include the post-deposition of tantalum oxide particles on tantalum foils and direct oxidation (thermal oxidation, chemical oxidation and electrochemical oxidation) of the surface layer of tantalum foil. Thermal oxidation of tantalum foil in an air atmosphere is a straightforward method to produce tantalum oxide films with controllable thickness supported on tantalum foils. The thickness can be roughly tuned by changing the heating temperature and duration. This correspondingly controls the thickness of tantalum (oxy)nitride films during the subsequent thermal nitridation process.36,37 Although thick films of tantalum (oxy)nitride favor high absorbance, the challenge is the exfoliation of the film from the substrate during the nitridation of the thick Ta2O5 film because of the obvious volume shrinkage during the transformation from Ta2O5 to Ta3N5. The critical thickness of the Ta2O5 film was determined to be around 2.5 μm for the exfoliation.38
Pinaud et al. analyzed the advantages and disadvantages of four configurations of Ta3N5 films with different geometries and structures in terms of light absorption and photoexcited charge carrier transport, as shown in Fig. 5.36 The films made by depositing a powder (Fig. 5a) provide the advantages of short distances for the transport of minor carrier holes from the particle bulk to the solid–liquid surface as a result of a high surface area, and also high absorption as a result of controllable thickness. The disadvantage is a tortuous path for electron transport. Thick crystalline films (Fig. 5b) with good light absorption favor the transport of electrons but penalize that of holes, while thin crystalline films (Fig. 5c) with poor absorption favor the transport of both electrons and holes. Thick and rough crystalline films (Fig. 5d) integrate the advantages of good hole transport, medium electron transport and good absorption. Nanostructured films represent a typical version of this favorable film configuration.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematics showing the effect of film geometry and structure on electron and hole transport for supported Ta3N5 in the form of (a) powder films, (b) thick crystalline films, (c) thin crystalline films, and (d) thick, rough crystalline films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. 
Nanostructuring can greatly improve the PEC water splitting performance of photoelectrodes by increasing the light absorbance, suppressing the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes and also providing abundant surface reactive sites. Several kinds of nanostructures (nanotube arrays, nanorod arrays, porous structures) of tantalum (oxy)nitride films have been developed. The formation of nanostructures of tantalum (oxy)nitride films is on the basis of nanostructures of tantalum oxide films. Electrochemical anodization is a powerful method of producing nanostructured metal oxide films on various metal substrates including Ta foils.39–41 TaON nanotube and nanorod array films and Ta3N5 nanotube array films can be fabricated by nitriding the corresponding nanostructures of tantalum oxide films on Ta foils in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere. The oxide films are usually prepared by the electrochemical anodization of Ta foils in F− containing electrolytes.42–48 Li et al. fabricated vertically aligned Ta3N5 single crystal nanorod array films by nitriding Ta2O5 nanorod arrays with a uniform diameter, length, and distribution grown in situ on a Ta substrate by through-mask anodization.49–52Fig. 6 gives the typical scanning electron microscopy image of a Ta3N5 nanorod array.49
 Fig. 6  30°-tilted SEM image of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays. The nanorods are slightly tilted after nitridation. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. 
Besides the electrochemical anodization method, hydrothermal synthesis is another approach of synthesizing nanostructures of tantalum based oxide films. Under hydrothermal conditions, sodium tantalate cube array film was prepared by treating Ta foil in sodium hydroxide aqueous solution and tantalum oxide nanorod array film was prepared by treating Ta foil in hydrofluoric acid solution. Correspondingly, Ta3N5 mesoporous cube array films and nanorod array films were obtained after the subsequent high temperature nitridation process.53–55 In recent years, vapor-phase hydrothermal (VPH) process has emerged as an attractive method to prepare metal oxide nanostructures on the corresponding metal substrates.56–58 The most distinct difference in the VPH process from the liquid-phase hydrothermal process is the high localization of dissolution and structure formation on metal substrates as a result of mass transport limitation within a thin liquid-layer reaction zone on the substrates.57 In 2013, Zhen et al. reported the template-free synthesis of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays by a combination of an initial growth of tantalum oxide nanorod arrays on Ta foil using the VPH method and a subsequent thermal nitridation process,59 as shown in Fig. 7. After the report of Zhen et al., using very similar synthesis procedures, Hou et al. also prepared Ta3N5 films of nanorods.60
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the fabrication process of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays on a Ta substrate. SEM images of (b) the pristine surface, (c) F–Ta2O5 nanorod arrays and (d) Ta3N5 nanorod arrays on the Ta substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. 
Tantalum oxide nanostructure films can also be deposited on Ta foils by sputtering or chemical sol casting methods. Nanostructured Ta3N5 photoanodes were prepared by reactive ballistic deposition of nanoporous tantalum oxide film on Ta foil and a subsequent thermal nitridation process.61 The nanostructure film photoanode exhibited photocurrent density ca. 3 times higher than that of the dense film. Inverse opal crystal structure Ta3N5 films on tantalum foils were fabricated by the infiltration of a tantalum containing sol into close-packed templates of cross-linked polymer spheres and subsequent nitridation in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere to remove templates and crystallize the Ta3N5.62,63 A similar process was used to prepare Ta3N5 hollow sphere-nanofilms by adjusting the humidity during the sol drying process.63
High cost is a major limiting factor for using tantalum foils as substrates to support tantalum (oxy)nitride films for future massive application of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes. The commercial F:SnO2 (FTO) transparent conductive substrate is an ideal substrate to support tantalum (oxy)nitride films. Meanwhile, its transparent nature allows illumination from both front and back sides of the photoanodes. However, the fabrication of tantalum (oxy)nitride films on FTO substrates cannot allow the nitridation of FTO supported tantalum oxide films at high temperatures in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere because of the instability of FTO. Alternatively, FTO supported tantalum (oxy)nitride films as photoanodes were fabricated by the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) method.64–69 This method is a general approach for the deposition of various (oxy)nitrides. The thickness of these tantalum (oxy)nitride films can be flexibly controlled by tuning the EPD parameters (applied voltage, duration time, concentration of the powder in the electrolyte, particle size). Moreover, by controlling the morphology of tantalum (oxy)nitride particles in the powder, the microstructure of the films can be correspondingly changed. However, the mechanical adhesions among particles and between films and substrates in these EPD films are usually too weak to keep the films stable against immersion in aqueous solution. What's worse, the transport of photogenerated electrons and holes within the films and collection of charge carriers by conductive substrates are greatly hindered due to the weak adhesions. As a consequence, the as-prepared tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes fabricated by the EPD method usually show very low PEC water oxidation performance. To increase the adhesions, a necking step is highly necessary. This step involves the hydrolysis of several drops of TaCl5 ethanol solution within the tantalum (oxy)nitride films to form new tantalum oxide nanoparticles between the original particles and the subsequent transformation of these newly formed tantalum oxide nanoparticles to tantalum (oxy)nitride by heating the film in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere. The necked films offer significant improvement in PEC water oxidation, in particular after loading co-catalysts for O2 evolution. Drop casting is another simple method for the deposition of various (oxy)nitrides on FTO substrates, but the quality and thickness of the resultant films cannot be precisely controlled. A Ta3N5 photoanode composed of nanowire bundles was fabricated by the drop casting method and showed an improved stability in PEC water splitting in comparison with Ta3N5 particle photoanode.70
Magnetron sputtering deposition is an effective and widely used method of growing the films of various materials including metals, metal oxides, metal sulfides, metal nitrides and metal carbides.71 One remarkable advantage of this method is the low film growth temperature, even as low as room temperature so that the tantalum (oxy)nitride films can be deposited on any conductive substrates to construct photoanodes. This low temperature deposition process avoids the undesirable discontinuities (cracks and gaps) between the film and substrate, which are commonly observed in the tantalum (oxy)nitride films prepared by the high temperature nitridation method. Furthermore, the film thickness and composition, which are two important parameters affecting the photoelectrode activity, can be precisely controlled by adjusting the sputtering time, power and ambient atmosphere. The preparation of Ta3N5 and TaOxNy films by the sputtering deposition method has been reported by many studies.72–76 The optical, electrical, and mechanical properties of these Ta3N5 and TaOxNy films have been actively investigated in the past decades.72–74 Recently, sputtered Ta3N5 and TaOxNy films have been tested as photoanodes in PEC cells.75,76 Furthermore, the absorption coefficient, the lifetime and mobility of charge carriers of Ta3N5, by means of ultra-fast transient absorption spectroscopy and Hall effect measurements, have been measured on the basis of the sputtered films. The tested short carrier lifetime (<10 ps) was considered to be the main barrier for improving the PEC performance of Ta3N5 photoanodes.77 These results deepen the understanding of the intrinsic photophysical properties of Ta3N5 and provide important guidelines for the rational design of efficient tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes.
2.4 Strategies for improving the performance of the photoanodes
Similar to photocatalysis, PEC water splitting can also be divided into three mechanical steps, namely, light absorption, separation and transport of photogenerated electrons and holes, and surface catalysis transfer of charge carriers with adsorbed water molecules. The synergistic effect of these three steps is responsible for the activity of PEC water splitting. To improve the performance of tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes, many strategies including morphology and size control, doping and heterostructuring, and surface modifications have been actively used to strengthen the synergistic effect of the three basic steps.

2.4.1. Morphology and size control. 
Before reviewing the progress made in controlling the morphology and size of tantalum (oxy)nitride building blocks composed of films as photoanodes, it is useful to analyze their influence on light absorption, separation and transport of photogenerated charge carriers and surface catalysis transfer. Fig. 8 illustrates the difference in these basic processes between a compact bulk anode and a vertically aligned nanorod array anode. In the energy diagram of the compact bulk anode immersed in the electrolyte, a depletion region labelled as Region I in Fig. 8a is formed in the photoanode close to the solid–electrolyte interface due to the discrepancy between the Fermi level of the photoanode and the potential of the electrolyte, which is similar to a metal/semiconductor Schottky junction. The redistribution of charge leads to the formation of an electric field as a consequence of the difference in chemical potential across the interface. This built-in potential drop across the interface is denoted as Vbi. The width (W) of the depletion region is described by (1)where q is the unsigned charge on an electron, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, and ND is the donor density.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the energy diagram of a compact bulk photoanode immersed in an electrolyte and light absorption & transport of photogenerated charge carriers in the compact photoanode. (b) Schematic of light absorption & transport of photogenerated charge carriers in a vertically aligned nanorod array photoanode. 
With the assistance of the built-in electric field, the charge carriers in the depletion region are separated and the holes move towards the surface for water oxidation. The holes generated in the deeper region need to diffuse into the depletion region first and then drift to the surface. The diffusion length (LD) of the minority carriers is described by (2)where D is the diffusivity of the minority carriers, μ their mobility and τR their lifetime.
The region with its distance away from the depletion region but smaller than LD is denoted as region II in Fig. 8a. The holes generated in this region are capable of reaching the depletion region before recombination with electrons and then drift to the surface. The region with its distance larger than LD is denoted as region III in Fig. 8a, in which the carriers generated recombine with each other before reaching the depletion region. Therefore, the optimal film thickness for carrier collection is d (d = W + LD). On the other hand, the film thickness should be larger than the light absorption length α−1 to fully utilize the incident light. However, the light absorption length α−1 is usually larger than d. It means that there is a trade-off between the carrier collection and photon absorption in a compact bulk film photoanode. The influence of the morphology and thickness of Ta3N5 photoanodes fabricated by thermal oxidation and subsequent nitridation of Ta foils on PEC water oxidation performance has been systematically studied.36 In order to enhance light absorption in the compact bulk Ta3N5 film, a reflecting conductive back-contact Pt layer was deposited in advance. The resonance frequency of light can be tuned to energies just above the band gap of Ta3N5 by adjusting the film thickness. The resonance results in great improvement in the photoanode's incident photon-to-current efficiency.35
The trade-off between carrier collection and photon absorption in a compact bulk film originates from the same direction of incident light as that of carrier transport. Decoupling the direction of carrier transport with that of the incident light is an effective strategy to overcome the conflict. One dimensional (1D) nanostructures are considered to be ideal building blocks for energy harvesting devices.78,79 Taking a vertically aligned rod array film as an example (Fig. 8b), the photogenerated charge carriers in the rods diffuse toward the side surface along the rod radius direction. In this situation, the diffusion distance of charge carriers towards the surface is independent of the rod length (or the film thickness) but depends on the rod radius. Consequently, the sufficiently long rod is allowed to fully absorb incident sunlight without the cost of collection efficiency of photogenerated charge carriers.
TaON/Ta3N5 nanotube/nanorod array films, obtained by the nitridation of Ta2O5 nanotube/nanorod arrays, have been investigated as photoanodes. Banerjee et al. prepared TaON nanotube array film with 525 nm tube length and 60 ± 5 nm internal tube diameter by the nitridation of Ta2O5 nanotube arrays, which were obtained by the anodization of Ta foil.42 The arrays showed an unusual absorption range up to around 600 nm. Compared with the common TaON, its absorption edge was shifted by around 100 nm toward the long wavelength. The proposed possible reason for this shift was the presence of carbon trapped in the nanotubes or the 1D nature of the nanotubes. A photocurrent density of 2.6 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl in 1 M KOH solution was achieved on these TaON nanotube array based photoanodes under AM 1.5G irradiation and 47% of photocurrent density came from visible light contribution. This value was much higher than that of the selected reference photoanodes. Allam et al. demonstrated that a multilayer TaON nanorod array based photoanode exhibited slightly superior PEC water oxidation activity to the single layer nanorod array photoanode.43 The slight superiority could be attributed to the slightly higher absorbance of the multilayer film.
The transformation of Ta2O5 to Ta3N5 usually requires a relatively high temperature nitridation process, which may destroy the nanostructures. The thin walled amorphous nanotube array structure enables transformation from tantalum oxide to Ta3N5 to occur at relatively low temperatures.44 The Ta3N5 nanotube arrays with 250 nm tube length prepared at 700 °C as a photoanode displayed an IPCE value of 5.3% at 450 nm at a dc bias of 0.5 V in a 1 M KOH solution. The Ta2O5 nanotube arrays obtained from the anodization process usually have weak adhesion to the Ta foil substrate. In order to avoid serious cracking or peeling off of the array film in the following nitridation process, the nitridation temperature is usually lower than 800 °C and the nanotube length is controlled to be shorter than 1 μm, while a high temperature treatment is necessary to obtain Ta3N5 nanotubes with high crystallinity for fast charge carrier transport and long nanotube arrays have a high absorbance. 7.7 μm long Ta2O5 nanotube arrays with strong adhesion to the Ta substrate were fabricated by ultrafast anodization in only 2 s.48 The good adherence was ascribed to a similar effect observed in the rapid growth of TiO2 nanotube arrays.80,81 These long Ta2O5 nanotube arrays are stable against high temperature nitridation at 1000 °C. The resultant Ta3N5 nanotube arrays with a thickness of ca. 4.8 μm after loading cobalt phosphate (“Co-Pi”) as a co-catalyst displayed a photocurrent density of 5.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE under AM 1.5G sunlight simulator irradiation. The decrease in thickness was caused by the volume shrink effect during conversion from Ta2O5 to Ta5N5.
Each nanotube or nanorod in the Ta3N5 or TaON nanotube and nanorod array films presented above is polycrystalline. The grain boundaries in the nanotubes or rods can act as recombination centres for charge carriers. Producing single crystal nanostructures of tantalum (oxy)nitrides in photoanodes is an important way of suppressing the bulk recombination and improving the performance. Vertically aligned Ta3N5 single crystal nanorod arrays were fabricated by growing tantalum oxide single crystal nanorod arrays with a template assisted electrochemical anodization process of Ta foils followed by a heat treatment under ammonia.49–52 A polycrystalline interlayer inevitably exists between the single crystal nanorod arrays and Ta substrate. The component of the interlayer is dependent on the nitridation temperature. Under a relatively low nitridation temperature of 850 °C, the interlayer transformed from amorphous Ta2O5 into polycrystalline Ta3N5. By increasing the nitridation temperature to 1000 °C, the interlayer transformed into metallic Ta5N6 and Ta2N. The poor electric conductivity of the Ta3N5 interlayer limits the electron transfer from the nanorods to the Ta substrate, while the metallic Ta5N6 and Ta2N interlayers can facilitate electron transfer. As a consequence, the photocurrent density at 1.23 VRHE of the IrO2 loaded photoanode nitridated at 1000 °C is about 3.8 times higher than that of the photoanode nitridated at 850 °C.50 Introducing Ba atoms into the nanorods can effectively suppress the Ta5N6 component with a relatively low electrical conductivity in the interlayer, with Ta2N exhibiting a high electrical conductivity as the major component.51 Moreover, Ba doping itself can not only increase the electrical conductivity of Ta3N5 nanorods but also modify the flat band potential. Solar conversion efficiency in half-cell solar-to-hydrogen (HC-STH) of 1.56% was achieved for the “Co-Pi” co-catalyst loaded Ba doped Ta3N5 single crystal nanorod arrays. Zhen et al. reported the template-free synthesis of Ta3N5 single crystal nanorod arrays supported on the Ta substrate.59 The Co(OH)x modified nanorod array based photoanode exhibited a photocurrent density of 2.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE in 1 M NaOH solution under AM 1.5G sunlight simulator irradiation.
Besides the 1D nanostructure tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes, formation of a porous structure in the photoanodes can also address the compromise between light absorption and carrier collection. Zhao et al. demonstrated high charge separation efficiency in the porous structure films of BiVO4 by providing a quantitative analysis and visualized evidence for the charge separation.82 Inverse opal crystal structure films and hollow sphere-nanofilms of Ta3N5 (Fig. 9e and f) were fabricated by infiltration of a tantalum containing sol into close-packed templates of cross-linked PSAA spheres followed by heating under ammonia.63 The photocurrent of the resultant film used as the photoanode was found to be strongly dependent on the number of layers and nanostructures of Ta3N5 nanofilms. A maximum photocurrent density of ca. 17.9 mA cm−2 at 0.65 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) was detected at 4 layers of hollow sphere-nanofilm, which was 4.2 and 1.7 times higher than that of Ta3N5 thin films with the same thickness and the Ta3N5 inverse opal-nanofilms with the same layer number. The superiority was ascribed to the enhanced multiple reflection and scattering of light induced by gaps between hollow spheres and large interior voids of the porous hollow spheres in Ta3N5 hollow sphere-nanofilms.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays: (a) top view and (b) cross-sectional view. SEM images of tantalum nitride arrays: (c) top and (d) bottom views. SEM images of (e) Ta3N5 inverse opal-nanofilms and (f) Ta3N5 hollow sphere-nanofilms. Modified with permission from ref. 43, 50 and 63. 


2.4.2. Doping and heterostructuring. 
Doping is a basic and important strategy for modifying important semiconductor properties including electronic conductivity, energy band structure and surface structure. The narrowed band gap, enhanced electronic conductivity and implanted active surface structures, which favor light absorption, carrier bulk transport and carrier surface transfer, are the main purposes of doping in the case of photoanodes. As a result of doping, the PEC water oxidation activity of photoanodes, particularly Fe2O3 and BiVO4 based photoanodes, is greatly improved.83–90 Kado et al. systematically investigated alkaline metal (Na, K, Rb, Cs) doped Ta3N5 photoanodes, whose enhanced photocurrents were attributed to the reduced band gap and increased electronic conductivity by doping.46,47 Besides the electronic conductivity and band gap, the surface properties of Ta3N5 photoanodes can also be modified by doping. Li et al. discovered that, besides the improved electronic conductivity of both the nanorod arrays and the interlayer between the arrays and Ta substrate, the flat band potential of the Ta3N5 single crystal nanorod array photoanode cathodically shifted by 90 mV after Ba doping.51 The origin of this shift was the increase of surface hydroxyl groups with the incorporation of Ba that easily bonds with hydroxyl groups. To confirm the effect of Ba doping on the PEC activity enhancement of the nanorod arrays instead of NO3−, other metal nitrates (NaNO3, Mg(NO3)2 and Al(NO3)3) were also used as precursors to modify the nanorod arrays using the same procedure as that of Ba doping. Either negative or negligible positive effect on PEC activity was observed in these metal doped Ta3N5 nanorod arrays. In contrast, different barium salts (barium chloride and barium acetate) as Ba dopant precursors showed similar effects on enhancing the PEC activity. A Ba dopant was also introduced into a long Ta3N5 nanotube array photoanode and further surface modification with “Co-Pi” improved the photocurrent density from 5.9 mA cm−2 to 7.5 mA cm−2.48
Besides alkaline earth metal ion dopants, transition metal ion dopants were introduced into tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes to increase their PEC activity. Cobalt doped Ta3N5 photoanodes were fabricated by coating Ta5+ and Co2+ containing sols on Ta foils and subsequently heating in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere.91 The film with 10% Co dopant exhibited an improved photocurrent density 12 times higher than that of the undoped Ta3N5 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light. The improvement was attributed to the formation of conductive and magnetic CoxNy during thermal nitridation. CoxNy was considered to play three roles: (1) effectively collecting photogenerated holes and thus suppressing the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers; (2) shifting the flat potential (Efp) towards positive potential; (3) in situ formation of cobalt oxide acting as a co-catalyst for O2 evolution as a result of partial oxidation of CoxNy. Grigorescu et al. fabricated W doped Ta3N5 nanotube arrays by electrochemical anodization of W/Ta alloys and subsequent nitridation.92 Compared to the undoped photoanode, the W doped photoanode showed a narrowed band gap of 1.75 eV and ca. 33% photocurrent density improvement.
Feng et al. systematically studied the effect of different ion (Si, Ge, Ti, Zr, Hf, Mo, W) dopants on the PEC water splitting performance of Ta3N5.93 It was found that, among these dopants, Ge is the most efficient modifier to improve the photocurrent. Introducing 5% Ge improved the activity by a factor of 3.2 under simulated sunlight AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). The enhancement in activity was attributed to the improved electron transport in the Ge modified Ta3N5 photoanode with a decreased amount of N vacancies. It was proposed that the volatilization of Ge during the preparation of Ta3N5 reduced N vacancies by acting as a fluxing agent.
Constructing heterostructured photoanodes is another effective approach to improving PEC water oxidation activity by enhancing photon absorption and promoting separation of the photogenerated charge carriers. Various composite photoanodes such as WO3/BiVO4,94,95 WO3/Fe2O3,96 Si/Fe2O3,97 and Si/TiO298 were constructed and exhibited greatly improved PEC water oxidation activity compared to the single component photoanodes. Increasing effort focused on the tantalum oxynitride based heterostructure photoanodes. Amorphous TaOxNy thin layer decorated N doped TiO2 nanotube arrays (N-TNT-Ta) showed significantly improved both visible and UV activities for PEC water oxidation compared to N doped TiO2 nanotube arrays (N-TNT) as shown in Fig. 10a.99 The improved performance was attributed to the substantial role of the TaOxNy amorphous layer in rectifying the charge transfer at the heterojunction and passivating surface trap states of N-TNTs, as schematically shown in Fig. 10b. TaON with a bandgap of 2.5 eV can only absorb light with wavelength shorter than 500 nm, limiting solar energy utilization efficiency. It is an effective approach to widening its light responsive range and enhancing spatial separation of photogenerated charge carriers by constructing p–n junction photoanodes using p-type semiconductors with a narrower bandgap. CaFe2O4/TaON composite photoanodes constructed by Kim et al. exhibited enhanced PEC water oxidation with around 5 times higher photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE than the TaON photoanode.69Fig. 10c and d display the activity improvement and transfer mechanism of the photogenerated charge carriers in the CaFe2O4/TaON composite photoanodes. Similarly, p-type Cu2O decorated n-type TaON nanorod array photoanodes gave superior activity to the TaON nanorod arrays, particularly after wrapping an ultrathin graphitic carbon protection sheath. An IPCE of 59% at a wavelength of 400 nm was recorded and a photocurrent density of 3.06 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V (vs. RHE) was achieved under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. The heterostructured photoanode also showed good stability by retaining about 87.3% of the initial activity after a 60 min test.100
 Fig. 10  (a) IPCE spectra of N-TNT (triangle) and N-TNT-Ta (square) as a function of the incident light wavelength. Dotted lines represent the absorption spectra, (b) illustration of energy levels and charge transfer in N-TNT and the N-TNT-Ta hybrid, (c) IPCE of the TaON-treated electrode (triangles) and TaON-as deposited/CaFe2O4 electrode (diamonds). IPCE was measured in 0.5 M NaOH at 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl under monochromatic light irradiation. (d) Energy diagram and expected charge flow of the heterojunction photoanode. The conduction band and valence band of TaON and CaFe2O4 are presented with the redox potential of H+/H2 and O2/H2O. Modified with permission from ref. 69 and 99. 


2.4.3. Surface modifications. 
Both the high activity and stability of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes for PEC water oxidation are highly dependent on the efficient transfer of the photogenerated holes from the photoanodes to reactants (water molecules and/or ions) adsorbed on the surface to induce the oxidation reaction for oxygen evolution. Constructing active surface structures for water oxidation is highly desirable to promote surface charge transfer. The active surface structures should perform the functions of collecting photogenerated holes, enabling abundant adsorption of water molecules/ions and providing a low reaction kinetic barrier for water oxidation. The latter two functions are also required for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) from water oxidation by electrocatalysts. Loading OER electrocatalyst nanoparticles as oxidative co-catalysts for O2 evolution on the photoanode surface is a prevalent approach to improving the performance of photoanodes in PEC water oxidation and has been extensively investigated. Noble metals and their oxides such as Ir, IrO2, and RhO2 as traditional OER electrocatalysts were used to modify the surface of photoanodes.87,101,102 In recent years, some new types of low-cost OER electrocatalysts including iron, cobalt, and nickel based (hydro)oxides, layered double hydroxide and amorphous phosphate or borate, have been explored in the electrocatalysis water splitting area and were also used to modify the photoanodes.88–90,103–106
Tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes with surface modification of various co-catalysts for O2 evolution such as IrO2, CoOx and “Co-Pi”49–51,64–68 have been actively investigated. Abe et al. demonstrated that loading of IrO2·nH2O nanoparticles as a cocatalyst for water oxidation on the porous TaON film electrode can greatly improve the quantum efficiency (IPCE = ca. 76% at 400 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl) in an aqueous Na2SO4 solution. This is the first demonstration of photoelectrochemical water splitting on an oxynitride photoanode with an appreciable production of O2, besides a measured anodic photocurrent.65 Further studies also showed the effectiveness of IrO2·nH2O as a cocatalyst in improving the performance of Ta3N5 photoanodes.64 IPCE of ca. 31% at 500 nm at 1.15 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) was achieved on IrO2·nH2O loaded Ta3N5 photoanodes.64 In both cases, the stability of TaON and Ta3N5 based photoanodes was greatly extended from several minutes to the scale of 1 h by loading IrO2·nH2O to promote charge separation and transfer and suppress the self-oxidation of tantalum (oxy)nitrides to a large extent. However, due to the poor dispersion of IrO2·nH2O nanoparticles on the TaON/Ta3N5 surface, the self-oxidation issue cannot be fully resolved and leads to the gradual decay of the photocurrent during long periods of light irradiation.
To realize the high dispersion of the cocatalyst nanoparticles on the nitride particles, Higashi et al. developed a method of pre-depositing earth abundant CoOx nanoparticles on TaON particles by chemical impregnation prior to the electrophoretic deposition of TaON particles on the substrates.66 The TaON photoanode with highly dispersed CoOx nanoparticles displayed much superior stability to that with poorly dispersed IrOx nanoparticles, although its IPCE was not as high as that of the latter. This strategy was also used to improve the stability and photocurrent of the BaTaO2N photoanode by a combination of pre-loading of CoOx on the BaTaO2N particles and post-loading of RhOx.68 It was proposed that the RhOx species containing Rh3+/Rh4+ couples acted as a facilitator of hole transfer between the BaTaO2N surface and CoOx, while water oxidation dominantly proceeded on the CoOx surface. An IPCE of 10% at 600 nm at 1.2 V vs. RHE was obtained in a RhOx/CoOx co-loaded H2 treated BaTaO2N photoanode, which was the highest value among photoanode materials that can harvest light beyond 600 nm for water oxidation.68
Liao et al. compared the influence of different cocatalysts (Co(OH)x, Co3O4 and IrO2) and electrolytes (NaOH and Na2SO4) on the photocurrent and photostability of photoanodes consisting of particulate Ta3N5.67 It was demonstrated that the Co3O4 modified photoanode in NaOH electrolyte exhibited significantly improved photocurrent and photostability compared to the Co(OH)x modified photoanode in NaOH electrolyte and IrO2 modified photoanode in Na2SO4 as a result of two-fold favorable factors. One is the uniform distribution of Co3O4 nanoparticles on the Ta3N5 surface coupled with the abundant and compact nano-junctions formed between Co3O4 and Ta3N5. The other is the superiority of alkaline solution as the supporting solution to accept protons to neutral or acidic solution. These results shed light on the importance of accelerating water oxidation kinetics by simultaneously optimizing both the cocatalyst and electrolyte. Cong et al. also studied the PEC water oxidation of four electrocatalysts (IrO2, Co3O4, cobalt phosphate, and Pt nanoparticles) modified Ta3N5 nanotube arrays.45 The photocurrent of Ta3N5 modified with IrO2 and Co3O4 was ca. four times higher than that of unmodified Ta3N5. Cobalt phosphate also showed a positive improvement for PEC water oxidation on Ta3N5, whereas Pt was ineffective.
The above results suggest that the full and robust contact between co-catalysts and tantalum (oxy)nitrides is crucial for achieving high activity and stability of the photoanodes. Amorphous cobalt compounds, such as cobalt hydroxide and phosphate, have been widely investigated as OER electrocatalysts generally in the form of continuous films. Coating continuous amorphous cobalt compounds on tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes can improve PEC stability because the full coverage suppresses the self-oxidation of tantalum (oxy)nitrides. Cobalt phosphate (“Co-Pi”) modified Ta3N5 nanorod arrays showed very stable photocurrent for the 20 min test.50 In contrast, obvious photocurrent decay was observed for the IrO2 modified Ta3N5 photoanode and the photocurrent decreased to ca. 20% of its initial value after illuminating for 20 min. To further improve the performance of the Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode, Li et al. doped Ta3N5 nanorod arrays with Ba to modify both surface and bulk properties of Ta3N5 and also film texture.51 As shown in Fig. 11a, Ba doping led to greatly improved photocurrent. The photocurrent density reached an unprecedented value of 6.7 mA cm−2 at a water oxidation potential of 1.23 V versus RHE. The doped photoanode yields a maximum solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH of 1.56% at 0.87 V versus RHE (Fig. 11b), which was more than three times higher than that of state-of-the-art single-photon photoanodes. The doped photoanode showed very good photocurrent stability similar to the undoped one under light irradiation (Fig. 11c). Moreover, the Faraday efficiency for water splitting on the “Co-Pi” modified Ba doped Ta3N5 photoanode and the Pt counter electrode remained at almost unity for 100 min. The synergistic effects of enhanced interlayer conductivity, cathodically shifted flatband potential, and increased electron density in the nanorods are responsible for the improved PEC activity of the Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode after Ba doping.
 Fig. 11  (a) Current–potential curves for the Co-Pi/Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode and Co-Pi/Ba–Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode in the dark and under AM 1.5G-simulated sunlight. (b) Solar energy conversion efficiency of the photoanodes calculated from the current–potential curves in (a). (c) Steady-state photocurrent of the photoanodes held at 0.9 V versus RHE under AM 1.5G-simulated sunlight. (d) Wavelength dependence of IPCE for the Co-Pi/Ba–Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode at different applied potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. 
Similarly, amorphous Co(OH)x as a co-catalyst for water oxidation can improve both the stability and activity of Ta3N5 photoanodes,38,59 although it is not as effective as “Co-Pi “. One possible reason for the superiority of Co-Pi as a co-catalyst to Co(OH)x is the full coverage of “Co-Pi” on the Ta3N5 photoanode surface. Co(OH)x is usually loaded on the Ta3N5 photoanode surface by a co-precipitation method, and it is hard to realize the homogeneous distribution of Co(OH)x on the whole surface, while Co-Pi is usually deposited on the photoanode surface by an (photo)electrodeposition method. This method has the advantage of enabling the relatively homogeneous wrapping of Co-Pi on the whole surface of the photoanode. In recent years, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have been actively explored as OER electrocatalysts for water oxidation.107–109 They, in particular single layered LDHs obtained by a solution exfoliation method, showed superior OER activity and stability to commercial noble metal and noble metal oxide OER catalysts.107,109 LDHs were also used as OER co-catalysts to modify photoanodes for PEC performance improvement.103 A Ni–Fe LDH modified vertically aligned single crystal Ta3N5 nanorod array photoanode showed greatly improved stability. 90% of the initial photocurrent density value (ca. 2 mA cm−2) was retained even after 2 h light irradiation. The deposition of Co(OH)x and “Co-Pi” co-catalysts in sequence on the Ni–Fe LDH/Ta3N5 photoanode further improved the photocurrent density. A steady photocurrent of ca. 5 mA cm−2 (about 80% of the initial activity) was maintained over 2 h.52
Besides the catalytic activity of the OER co-catalyst itself, the interface structure between co-catalysts and tantalum (oxy)nitrides, which determines the hole extraction efficiency, is another major factor that affects the performance of the photoanodes and deserves concern. The interface structure can be tailored by changing the surface structure of tantalum (oxy)nitrides as demonstrated by Li et al.38 Ta3N5 photoanodes prepared by thermal oxidation of Ta foils and subsequent high temperature nitridation usually possess a compact surface passivation layer, which is rich in Ta vacancies and O impurities acting as recombination centers of charge carriers. The presence of such a surface passivation layer greatly impaired the effectiveness of the co-catalyst in improving the activity. However, the photocurrent density was significantly improved for the Co(OH)x modified photoanode by the mechanical or thermal exfoliation of the surface passivation layer, as shown in Fig. 12. The optimum performance obtained by the thermal exfoliation of the surface recombination layer and subsequent Co(OH)x co-catalyst loading reached a photocurrent density of 5.5 mA cm−2 produced at 1.23 V versus RHE in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution. This was the highest photocurrent density reported for the Ta3N5 based photoanodes at that time.38 Another strategy for tailoring the interface structure is introducing the transition layer as the hole storage layer between the co-catalyst and tantalum (oxy)nitride to boost the hole extraction efficiency, which was developed by Liu et al.53 Ferrihydrite was demonstrated to be an effective hole storage layer. The presence of a ferrihydrite layer between the Co3O4 co-catalyst and Ta3N5 permits sustainable water oxidation at the photoanode for at least 6 h with a benchmark photocurrent over 5 mA cm−2, whereas the bare photoanode rapidly degrades within minutes (Fig. 13). It was proposed that the function of the hole storage layer is to rapidly capture the photogenerated holes from tantalum nitride and subsequently store them in the layer. The efficient extraction of holes from Ta3N5 can effectively suppress the undesirable self-oxidation of nitride by holes. On the basis of this concept, Liu et al. further developed a highly stable Ta3N5 photoanode modified with the Ni(OH)x/MoO3 bilayer, where MoO3 acts as a hole-storage layer to efficiently harvest and store holes from Ta3N5.54 This photoanode has the capability of at least 24 h of sustained water oxidation at the otherwise unstable Ta3N5 electrode. Moreover, a large cathodic shift of ca. 600 mV in the onset potential of the Ta3N5 electrode with the Ni(OH)x/MoO3 bilayer was observed.
 Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of photocurrent improvement after surface thermal and mechanical exfoliation, (b) photocurrent–potential curves of the samples at 570 °C, with and without Co(OH)x loading, before and after surface exfoliation, 1 M NaOH, AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. The photocurrent here is the difference value between the photocurrent and the dark current. (c) Measured AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) photocurrent–potential curves of bare Ta3N5/Ta and the Co(OH)x-loaded Ta3N5/Ta electrodes at 610 °C, 1 M NaOH, scan rate: 10 mV s−1. Modified with permission from ref. 38. 
 Fig. 13  (a) Representation of the hole storage layer approach for solar water splitting, (b) chronoamperometry measurements of Ta3N5, Fh/Ta3N5, Co3O4/Ta3N5, and Co3O4/Fh/Ta3N5 photoanodes at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution. Modified with permission from ref. 53. 

2.5 Performance of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes
PEC water oxidation is a complex process involving the generation, separation and transport, and catalytic transfer of charge carriers. A stable and high-efficiency photoanode for PEC water oxidation requires the synergistic effects of these steps. To improve the efficiency of each step in tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes, past efforts have mainly focused on morphology control, doping and heterostructuring, and surface modification as discussed above. Relevant studies are summarized and compared in Table 1. It is worth noting that the maximum solar energy conversion efficiency of 1.56% was obtained for a cobalt phosphate-modified barium-doped tantalum nitride nanorod photoanode, in which the three strategies including morphology control, doping and surface modification were used together to improve the electrode.
Table 1 PEC performance of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes




Photoanode
Morphology
Dopant/composite
Surface modification
Test condition
Performance (Jph, IPCE, and gas yields)
Ref.




Ta3N5
Compact film
—
Loading IrO2
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 8.5), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm

ca. 2.3 mA cm−2 @ 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl

76



Ta3N5
Particle film
—
Loading Co3O4
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G
3.1 mA cm−2 @ 1.2 VRHE

67



Ta3N5
Particle film
—
Loading IrO2
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm
IPCE (500 nm) = 31% @ 1.15 VRHE; H2 (11.2 μmol), O2 (5.2 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 3 h (6 cm−2)

64



TaON
Particle film
—
Loading IrO2
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm
IPCE (400 nm) = 76% @ 1.15 VRHE; H2 (65 μmol), O2 (32.2 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 3 h (6 cm−2)

64



TaON
Particle film
—
Loading CoOx
0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH = 8), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm
IPCE (400 nm) = 42% @ 1.2 VRHE; H2 (336 μmol), O2 (167 μmol) @ 1.07 VRHE for 150 min (6 cm−2)

66



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
—
Loading Co3O4 (or IrO2)
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 11)
IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 10% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl

45



TaON
Particle film
—
Loading IrO2
1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm
IPCE (400 nm) = 76% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl; H2 (51.3 μmol), O2 (24 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 2 h (6 cm−2)

65



BaTaO2N
Particle film
Anion defect
Loading RhOx/CoOx
0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH = 8), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm
IPCE (600 nm) = 10% @ 1.2 VRHE; H2 (41 μmol), O2 (20.9 μmol) @ 0.8 V vs. Cr2O3/Pt for 150 min (6 cm−2)

68



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
—
Loading IrO2
0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G
3.1 mA cm−2, IPCE (440 nm) = 41.3% @ 1.23 VRHE

50



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
—
Loading “Co-Pi”
0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G
2.9 mA cm−2 @ 1 VRHE; solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH = 0.69%

49



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
Ba
Loading “Co-Pi”
0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G
6.7 mA cm−2, IPCE (500–400 nm) = 55–86% @ 1.23 VRHE; solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH = 1.56%; H2 (130 μmol), O2 (63.5 μmol) @ 0.9 VRHE for 100 min (1 cm−2); faradaic efficiency = 98% (H2), 96% (O2)

51



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
Na
—
1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6)
IPCE (580 nm) ≈ 1% @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl

46



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
Na, K, Rb, Cs
—
0.1 mM [Fe(CN)6]3− and 0.1 M [Fe(CN)6]4−
IPCE (500 nm) = 8.0–9.5% @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl

47



TaON
Nanotube arrays
—
—
1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
2.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl

42



Ta3N5
Particle film
Co
—
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 11)
IPCE (450 nm) = 25% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl

91



Ta3N5
Porous film


Co2+
1 M KOH (pH = 13.6)
IPCE (500 nm) ≈ 9% @ 0.2 VAg/AgCl

61



Ta3N5
Inverse opal film
—
Loading IrO2
0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 100 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm (100 mW cm−2)

ca. 10 mA cm−2 @ 0.65 VAg/AgCl

63



Ta3N5
Hollow sphere-nanofilm
—
Loading IrO2
0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 100 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm 100 mW cm−2
17.9 mA cm−2, 0.65 VAg/AgCl; IPCE (470 nm) = 43.5% @ 1.21 VRHE

63



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
—
—
1 M KOH (pH = 13.6)
IPCE (450 nm) = 5.3% @ 0.5 V dc bias

44



Ta3N5
Particle film
—
Exfoliating surface layer loading Co(OH)x
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G
5.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE; faradaic efficiency = 85% (H2), 74% (O2)

38



Ta3N5
Particle film
—
—
0.1 M KOH (pH = 13.3), 1000 W Xe lamp
IPCE (540 nm) ≈ 5% @ 1.57 VRHE

36



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
—
Loading Co(OH)x
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G
2.8 mA cm−2, IPCE (480 nm) = 37.8% @ 1.23 VRHE; H2 (274.6 μmol h−1 cm−2) @ 1.23 VRHE

59



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
—
Loading Co3O4/Co(OH)2
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G
3.64 mA cm−2, IPCE (440 nm) = 39.5% @ 1.23 VRHE

60



TaON
Layered nanorod arrays
—
—
1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
IPCE (400–450 nm) ≈ 7.5% @ 0.6 V dc bias

43



Ta3N5
Nanorod arrays
—
Loading Fe–Ni LDH/Co(OH)x/”Co-Pi”
1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
6.3 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE

52



Ta3N5
Particle film
Ge
Loading Co(OH)x
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
2.4 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 20% @ 1.23 VRHE

93



TaON
Particle film
CaFe2O4
—
0.5 M NaOH (pH = 13.7), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm
1.26 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 30% @ 1.23 VRHE

69



TaON
Nanorod arrays
Carbon/Cu2O
—
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
3.06 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) = 59% @ 1.0 VRHE; faradaic efficiency = 93% (H2), 90% (O2)

100



TaON
Nanotube arrays
N–TiO2
—
0.1 M KOH (pH = 13), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 320 nm, (300 mW cm−2)
2.45 mA cm−2, IPCE (maximum) = 25% @ 0.9 VAg/AgCl; faradaic efficiency = 98% (H2), 70% (O2)

99



Ta3N5
Cube array film
—
Depositing ferrihydrite/Co3O4
1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G
5.2 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE

53



Ta3N5
Cube array film
—
Depositing MoO3/Ni(OH)x
1 M LiOH (pH = 12), 1 sun AM 1.5G

ca. 1.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE

54



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
W
Loading Co(OH)x
1 M KOH (pH = 13.7), 1 sun AM 1.5G
0.85 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE; IPCE (430 nm) = 25% @ 0.4 VAg/AgCl

92



Ta3N5
Nanotube arrays
Ba
Loading “Co-Pi”
1 M KOH (pH = 13.7), 1 sun AM 1.5G
7.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE

48





3. Summary and outlook
Tantalum (oxy)nitrides with both appropriate bandgaps for visible light harvesting and band edge positions straddling over water redox potentials are considered as a class of very promising solar-driven photoanode candidates for PEC water oxidation. Much effort has been devoted to fabricating tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanodes with desirable properties for water oxidation. Some synthesis methods including sputtering, thermal oxidation and nitridation of Ta foils, and electrophoretic deposition of the corresponding powders have been developed to prepare the photoanodes with different morphologies. In order to obtain efficient tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes, strategies including morphology control, doping and heterostructuring, and surface modifications, as briefly summarized in Fig. 14, have been used to promote the generation, separation and transport, and catalytic transfer of charge carriers in the electrodes. The photocurrent and solar energy conversion efficiency have been improved significantly. Equally important, the instability of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes, arising from the photogenerated hole induced self-oxidation, has been resolved, to a large extent, by promoting the extraction of photogenerated holes from tantalum (oxy)nitrides with co-catalyst or hole storage layer modification. Specifically, a maximum solar energy conversion efficiency of 1.56% at 0.87 V versus RHE was obtained for the “Co-Pi” modified Ba doped Ta3N5 nanorod array photoanode. By introducing a hole storage layer of MoO3 between Ta3N5 and Ni(OH)x, the photoanode shows ultrahigh stability of at least 24 h of sustained PEC water oxidation. These encouraging progresses in improving the activity and stability of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes have further stimulated increasing research interest of the scientific community and also established the important position of tantalum (oxy)nitrides in developing high-efficiency photoanodes. Compared with the photoanodes of other popular visible light responsive materials such as Fe2O3 and BiVO4, the tantalum nitride based photoanode has achieved the highest photocurrent density of 6.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE and competitive conversion efficiency of 1.56% (Table 2). However, it is clear that there is still a long road to go before the realization of targeted solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency of over 10% in a stable tantalum (oxy)nitride photoanode.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of key factors controlling the efficiency of each step in the photoelectrode for PEC water splitting: light absorption, separation and catalytic transfer of photoexcited charge carriers. 
Table 2 Comparison of the best photoelectrochmical water oxidation performances of Ta3N5, Fe2O3, and BiVO4 photoanodes achieved to date, to the best of our knowledge




Photoanode
Photocurrent density @ 1.23 VRHE/mA cm−2
Solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH/%
Ref.




Ta3N5
6.7
1.56

51



Fe2O3
4.32
0.6

110



BiVO4
∼4.3
1.75

111





To further improve the performance of tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes, the following key aspects need to be considered in future studies. (1) Controlling defects in both the surface and bulk of (oxy)nitrides: as presented in Section 3.2, both oxygen occupying lattice nitrogen and nitrogen vacancies can exert great influence on the electronic structure and transport of photogenerated charge carriers. It is believed that most defects, particularly in the bulk, act as the recombination centers for charge carriers and impair their transport. Reducing the number of undesirable defects in tantalum (oxy)nitride is therefore highly necessary yet very challenging. A main challenge is the harsh nitridation process (high temperature heating in a gaseous ammonia atmosphere) required in the preparation of Ta3N5 to facilitate easy generation of anion vacancies in a reducing atmosphere of ammonia. On the other hand, the complete removal of oxygen impurity from Ta3N5 seems to be impossible on the basis of the theoretically revealed trend of coexistence of oxygen impurity with nitrogen vacancies and also the detected oxygen in Ta3N5 products. Innovative strategies to address the negative effect of these defects on photocatalytic and PEC activities are greatly welcome. (2) Morphology and texture control: the morphology and texture of photoelectrodes can play an important role in optimizing light absorbance, bulk transport of charge carriers and surface reactive sites. Nanostructuring, which has been actively used in designing various photoelectrodes, represents an important aspect of tailoring the morphology. Furthermore, by controlling the morphology, the distribution of co-catalysts on tantalum (oxy)nitride electrodes can be further modulated. The texture of tantalum nitride electrodes, particularly prepared by oxidation and nitridation of Ta foils, is quite complex and usually consists of a major Ta3N5 phase and also other phases of tantalum nitrides with reduced tantalum species. The presence of the other phases between Ta3N5 and Ta could affect the transfer of charge carriers from Ta3N5 to Ta. Controlling the species and thickness of these phases could provide room for increasing the performance of tantalum nitride photoanodes. (3) Co-catalyst control and design: bare tantalum (oxy)nitrides suffer from serious self-oxidation induced by the photogenerated holes as a result of poor extraction of holes from the nitrides. So far, loading co-catalysts is demonstrated to be the most effective way of suppressing the self-oxidation by promoting the extraction of holes and providing catalytic active sites for water oxidation. Various electrocatalysts for water oxidation have been attempted as co-catalysts of tantalum (oxy)nitrides. By controlling the species, structure and even spatial distribution of co-catalysts, both the stability and activity of nitride photoanodes have been greatly enhanced. However, it seems that there is a compromise between the stability and activity of co-catalyst modified photoanodes. This might be explained by the fact that good stability usually requires the formation of continuous co-catalyst layer(s) with a certain thickness, which could impair the transfer of holes. Precise control of the thickness and structure of co-catalyst layer(s) by an advanced process (for example, atomic layer deposition) provides a good chance for weakening the compromise effect. (4) Interface tailoring: the co-catalyst(s) modified Ta3N5 photoanodes consist of different interfaces including substrate–nitride, nitride–co-catalyst, co-catalyst–electrolyte and nitride–electrolyte interfaces. High-quality interfaces with matching atomic structures and electronic structures are crucial for the efficient transfer of charge carriers across the interfaces.
In summary, in the past few years, tantalum (oxy)nitride based photoanodes have experienced a rapid development in terms of both the stability and activity of PEC water oxidation. Continuous efforts in this field are anticipated to lead to greater success toward practical applications. Moreover, the knowledge and understanding of the mechanism, accumulated by studying this class of photoanodes, will pave a solid path for the development of other types of effective photoanodes.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2014CB239401) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51402306, 51422210, 513228201) is acknowledged.
Notes and references
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Li, W. J. Luo, M. L. Zhang, J. Y. Feng and Z. G. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 Search PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 Search PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y. L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. J. Zhang and J. L. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4395–4422 RSC .
M. Hara, G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Catal. Today, 2003, 78, 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1698–1699 RSC .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 736–737 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matoba, K. Maeda and K. Domen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14731–14735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9865–9869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, D. L. Lu and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6488–6491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Fang, E. Orhan, G. A. de Wijs, H. T. Hintzen, R. A. de Groot, R. Marchand, J. Y. Saillard and G. de With, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1248–1252 RSC .
C. M. Fang, G. A. de Wijs, E. Orhan, G. de With, R. A. de Groot, H. T. Hintzen and R. Marchand, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2003, 64, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balaz, S. H. Porter, P. M. Woodward and L. J. Brinson, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3337–3343 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, E. Chiba, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13441–13445 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Henderson and A. L. Hector, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 3518–3524 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nurlaela, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Harb, S. del Gobbo, M. Aouine, E. Puzenat, P. Sautet, K. Domen, J. M. Basset and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4812–4825 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jing, Y. Dai, X. C. Ma, W. Wei and B. B. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 59390–59397 RSC .
J. J. Wang, A. B. Ma, Z. S. Li, J. H. Jiang, J. Y. Feng and Z. G. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8166–8171 RSC .
J. J. Wang, J. Y. Feng, L. Zhang, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15375–15380 RSC .
J. J. Wang, T. Fang, L. Zhang, J. Y. Feng, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, J. Catal., 2014, 309, 291–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, A. B. Ma, Z. S. Li, J. H. Jiang, J. Y. Feng and Z. G. Zou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55615–55621 RSC .
K. Maeda, H. Terashima, K. Kase, M. Higashi, M. Tabata and K. Domen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2008, 81, 927–937 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, A. Vailionis and T. F. Jaramillo, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1576–1582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dabirian and R. van de Krol, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 033905 CrossRef .
B. A. Pinaud, P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15918–15924 CAS .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11049–11053 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Li, W. J. Luo, D. P. Cao, X. Zhao, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11016–11020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. El-Sayed and V. I. Birss, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1350–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Allam, X. J. Feng and C. A. Grimes, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6477–6481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra and M. Misra, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7137–7139 RSC .
N. K. Allam, B. S. Shaheen and A. M. Hafez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4609–4615 CAS .
X. J. Feng, T. J. LaTempa, J. I. Basham, G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 948–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Cong, H. S. Park, S. J. Wang, H. X. Dang, F. R. F. Fan, C. B. Mullins and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14541–14550 CAS .
Y. Kado, R. Hahn, C. Y. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 17, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kado, C. Y. Lee, K. Lee, J. Muller, M. Moll, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8685–8687 RSC .
Z. X. Su, S. Grigorescu, L. Wang, K. Y. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 50, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Nagato, J. J. Delaunay, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 014013 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2566 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, F. Dionigi, N. T. Nguyen, R. Kirchgeorg, M. Gliech, S. Grigorescu, P. Strasse and P. Schmuki, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2360–2366 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Liu, J. Y. Shi, F. X. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. F. Han, C. M. Ding, S. S. Chen, Z. L. Wang, H. X. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7295–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Liu, P. Fu, L. Y. Zhou, P. L. Yan, C. M. Ding, J. Y. Shi and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9624–9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Su, L. Wang, S. Grigorescu, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15561–15564 RSC .
X. F. Yang, J. L. Zhuang, X. Y. Li, D. H. Chen, G. F. Ouyang, Z. Q. Mao, Y. X. Han, Z. H. He, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and J. C. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Liu, H. M. Zhang, H. W. Liu, Y. Wang, X. D. Yao, G. S. Zhu, S. Q. Zhang and H. J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19032–19035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhang, Y. B. Li, P. R. Liu, Y. Li, D. J. Yang, H. G. Yang and H. J. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5165–5169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhen, L. Z. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3019–3021 RSC .
J. G. Hou, Z. Wang, C. Yang, H. J. Cheng, S. Q. Jiao and H. M. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3322–3330 CAS .
H. X. Dang, N. T. Hahn, H. S. Park, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19225–19232 CAS .
C. F. Mallinson, B. M. Gray, A. L. Hector, M. A. McLachlan and J. R. Owen, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9994–9999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, L. F. Li, M. Chen and L. Wu, Small, 2014, 10, 3038–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4138–4147 CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6968–6971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Liao, J. Y. Feng, W. J. Luo, Z. Q. Wang, J. Y. Zhang, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3066–3074 CrossRef CAS .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10238–10241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kim, N. Nishimura, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. Jun, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5375–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Wu, C. Hahn, S. B. Khan, A. M. Asiri, S. M. Bawaked and P. D. Yang, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 2354–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Kelly and R. D. Arnell, Vacuum, 2000, 56, 159–172 CrossRef CAS .
H. le Dréo, O. Banakh, H. Keppner, P. A. Steinmann, D. Briand and N. F. de Rooij, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 952–956 CrossRef .
D. Cristea, D. Constantin, A. Crisan, C. S. Abreu, J. R. Gomes, N. P. Barradas, E. Alves, C. Moura, F. Vaz and L. Cunha, Vacuum, 2013, 98, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bousquet, F. Zoubian, J. Cellier, T. Sauvage and E. Tomasella, Plasma Processes Polym., 2013, 10, 990–998 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Leroy, R. Sanjines, K. Sivula, M. Cornuz, N. Xanthopoulos, V. Laporte and M. Grätzel, Energy Procedia, 2012, 22, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, H. Hashiguchi, K. Maeda, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, R. Abe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ziani, E. Nurlaela, D. S. Dhawale, D. A. Silva, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and K. Takanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2670–2677 RSC .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. D. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. So, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11316–11318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. So, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2966–2970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, W. J. Luo, J. Y. Feng, M. X. Li, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301785 Search PubMed .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. G. Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Ling, G. M. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi, B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 634–642 CAS .
W. J. Luo, Z. S. Yang, Z. S. Li, J. Y. Zhang, J. G. Liu, Z. Y. Zhao, Z. Q. Wang, S. C. Yan, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046–4051 CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jo, J. W. Jang, K. J. Kong, H. J. Kang, J. Y. Kim, H. Jun, K. P. S. Parmar and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Cong, H. S. Park, H. X. Dang, F. R. F. Fan, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 579–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grigorescu, B. Barhausen, L. Wang, A. Mazare, J. E. Yoo, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 51, 85–88 CAS .
J. Y. Feng, D. P. Cao, Z. Q. Wang, W. J. Luo, J. J. Wang, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16384–16390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Rao, L. L. Cai, C. Liu, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, J. M. Weisse, P. D. Yang and X. L. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Su, L. J. Guo, N. Z. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410–415 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Kim, D. Monllor-Satoca, W. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 247–257 CAS .
J. G. Hou, C. Yang, H. J. Cheng, S. Q. Jiao, O. Takeda and H. M. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3758–3768 CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duhnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Spurgeon, J. M. Velazquez and M. T. McDowell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3623–3631 RSC .
M. F. Shao, F. Y. Ning, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 580–586 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K. S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song and X. L. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CAS .
X. Zou, A. Goswami and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17242–17245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J. W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 Search PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Chao Zhen	Chao Zhen received his Bachelors degree in Materials Physics from the Jilin University in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science at the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2013. After graduation, he worked as an assistant professor of materials in IMR, and now he is an associate professor of materials in IMR. His current research interests focus on the highly efficient electrodes of photoelectrochemical cells for solar energy utilization.
Runze Chen	Runze Chen received his Bachelors and Masters degrees in Materials Science and Technology from the Northeastern University of China in 2012 and 2014. Now he is a PhD candidate in a joint PhD training program of the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Northeastern University of China. His current research is focused on photoelectrodes with a wide visible light response for water splitting under the supervision of Professor Gang Liu and Professor Hui-Ming Cheng.
Lianzhou Wang	Lianzhou Wang is currently a Professor and Australian Research Council Future Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering and Director of Nanomaterials Centre, the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1999. Before joining UQ in 2004, he worked at two national institutes (NIMS and AIST) of Japan for five years. Wang's research interests focus on the design and development of semiconductor nanomaterials for renewable energy conversion and storage applications including photocatalysis and new generation solar cells.
Gang Liu	Gang Liu received his Bachelors degree in Materials Physics from the Jilin University in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science at the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2009. During his PhD study, he worked at Prof. G. Q. Max Lu's laboratory for one and a half years in Australia. He was the recipient of the T.S. Kê RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP founded by the Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science (SYNL), IMR CAS. Now he is a professor of materials in SYNL. His main research interests focus on solar-driven photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalytic materials for renewable energy.
Hui-Ming Cheng	Dr Hui-Ming Cheng is Professor and Director of Advanced Carbon Research Divisionof the Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research activities focus on the synthesis, properties and applications of carbon nanotubes, graphene, energy storage materials, photocatalytic semiconducting materials, and high-performance bulk carbon materials. He has published over 480 papers and is recognized as one of the Highly Cited Researchers in both materials science and chemistry fields by Thomson Reuters in 2014 and 2015. He was the Editor of Carbon from 2000 to 2015, Editor-in-Chief of New Carbon Materials from 1998 to 2015, and now is the Editor-in-Chief of Energy Storage Materials. He is also a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

 	Fig. 1  Different PEC cell configurations under illumination: (a and b) conventional PEC cells consisting of a photoelectrode and a metal counter electrode; (c and d) tandem PEC cells consisting of a photoanode or photocathode and a metal counter electrode biased with an integrated PV cell; (e) a PEC cell consisting of one photoanode and one photocathode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band positions of Ta2O5, TaON, and Ta3N5 determined by electrochemical analysis and UPS measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy-level diagrams of tantalum oxynitrides showing EC and EV as well as band gap (colored) and defect levels (•) obtained from XPS and DRCLS, EF (heavy lines) obtained from KPFM, and H2O redox potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24.	 

 	Fig. 4  DR UV-vis spectra for as-prepared and etched Ta3N5 samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematics showing the effect of film geometry and structure on electron and hole transport for supported Ta3N5 in the form of (a) powder films, (b) thick crystalline films, (c) thin crystalline films, and (d) thick, rough crystalline films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 6  30°-tilted SEM image of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays. The nanorods are slightly tilted after nitridation. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the fabrication process of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays on a Ta substrate. SEM images of (b) the pristine surface, (c) F–Ta2O5 nanorod arrays and (d) Ta3N5 nanorod arrays on the Ta substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the energy diagram of a compact bulk photoanode immersed in an electrolyte and light absorption & transport of photogenerated charge carriers in the compact photoanode. (b) Schematic of light absorption & transport of photogenerated charge carriers in a vertically aligned nanorod array photoanode.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of Ta3N5 nanorod arrays: (a) top view and (b) cross-sectional view. SEM images of tantalum nitride arrays: (c) top and (d) bottom views. SEM images of (e) Ta3N5 inverse opal-nanofilms and (f) Ta3N5 hollow sphere-nanofilms. Modified with permission from ref. 43, 50 and 63.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) IPCE spectra of N-TNT (triangle) and N-TNT-Ta (square) as a function of the incident light wavelength. Dotted lines represent the absorption spectra, (b) illustration of energy levels and charge transfer in N-TNT and the N-TNT-Ta hybrid, (c) IPCE of the TaON-treated electrode (triangles) and TaON-as deposited/CaFe2O4 electrode (diamonds). IPCE was measured in 0.5 M NaOH at 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl under monochromatic light irradiation. (d) Energy diagram and expected charge flow of the heterojunction photoanode. The conduction band and valence band of TaON and CaFe2O4 are presented with the redox potential of H+/H2 and O2/H2O. Modified with permission from ref. 69 and 99.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Current–potential curves for the Co-Pi/Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode and Co-Pi/Ba–Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode in the dark and under AM 1.5G-simulated sunlight. (b) Solar energy conversion efficiency of the photoanodes calculated from the current–potential curves in (a). (c) Steady-state photocurrent of the photoanodes held at 0.9 V versus RHE under AM 1.5G-simulated sunlight. (d) Wavelength dependence of IPCE for the Co-Pi/Ba–Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode at different applied potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of photocurrent improvement after surface thermal and mechanical exfoliation, (b) photocurrent–potential curves of the samples at 570 °C, with and without Co(OH)x loading, before and after surface exfoliation, 1 M NaOH, AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. The photocurrent here is the difference value between the photocurrent and the dark current. (c) Measured AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) photocurrent–potential curves of bare Ta3N5/Ta and the Co(OH)x-loaded Ta3N5/Ta electrodes at 610 °C, 1 M NaOH, scan rate: 10 mV s−1. Modified with permission from ref. 38.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Representation of the hole storage layer approach for solar water splitting, (b) chronoamperometry measurements of Ta3N5, Fh/Ta3N5, Co3O4/Ta3N5, and Co3O4/Fh/Ta3N5 photoanodes at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution. Modified with permission from ref. 53.	 

Ta3N5	Compact film	—	Loading IrO2	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 8.5), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm	
ca. 2.3 mA cm−2 @ 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
76

Ta3N5	Particle film	—	Loading Co3O4	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G	3.1 mA cm−2 @ 1.2 VRHE	
67

Ta3N5	Particle film	—	Loading IrO2	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm	IPCE (500 nm) = 31% @ 1.15 VRHE; H2 (11.2 μmol), O2 (5.2 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 3 h (6 cm−2)	
64

TaON	Particle film	—	Loading IrO2	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm	IPCE (400 nm) = 76% @ 1.15 VRHE; H2 (65 μmol), O2 (32.2 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 3 h (6 cm−2)	
64

TaON	Particle film	—	Loading CoOx	0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH = 8), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm	IPCE (400 nm) = 42% @ 1.2 VRHE; H2 (336 μmol), O2 (167 μmol) @ 1.07 VRHE for 150 min (6 cm−2)	
66

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	—	Loading Co3O4 (or IrO2)	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 11)	IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 10% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl	
45

TaON	Particle film	—	Loading IrO2	1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm	IPCE (400 nm) = 76% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl; H2 (51.3 μmol), O2 (24 μmol) @ 1 V vs. Pt for 2 h (6 cm−2)	
65

BaTaO2N	Particle film	Anion defect	Loading RhOx/CoOx	0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH = 8), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 400 nm	IPCE (600 nm) = 10% @ 1.2 VRHE; H2 (41 μmol), O2 (20.9 μmol) @ 0.8 V vs. Cr2O3/Pt for 150 min (6 cm−2)	
68

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	—	Loading IrO2	0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G	3.1 mA cm−2, IPCE (440 nm) = 41.3% @ 1.23 VRHE	
50

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	—	Loading “Co-Pi”	0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G	2.9 mA cm−2 @ 1 VRHE; solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH = 0.69%	
49

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	Ba	Loading “Co-Pi”	0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH = 13), 1 sun AM 1.5G	6.7 mA cm−2, IPCE (500–400 nm) = 55–86% @ 1.23 VRHE; solar conversion efficiency in HC-STH = 1.56%; H2 (130 μmol), O2 (63.5 μmol) @ 0.9 VRHE for 100 min (1 cm−2); faradaic efficiency = 98% (H2), 96% (O2)	
51

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	Na	—	1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 6)	IPCE (580 nm) ≈ 1% @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl	
46

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	Na, K, Rb, Cs	—	0.1 mM [Fe(CN)6]3− and 0.1 M [Fe(CN)6]4−	IPCE (500 nm) = 8.0–9.5% @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl	
47

TaON	Nanotube arrays	—	—	1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	2.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.5 VAg/AgCl	
42

Ta3N5	Particle film	Co	—	0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 11)	IPCE (450 nm) = 25% @ 0.6 VAg/AgCl	
91

Ta3N5	Porous film	
	Co2+	1 M KOH (pH = 13.6)	IPCE (500 nm) ≈ 9% @ 0.2 VAg/AgCl	
61

Ta3N5	Inverse opal film	—	Loading IrO2	0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 100 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm (100 mW cm−2)	
ca. 10 mA cm−2 @ 0.65 VAg/AgCl	
63

Ta3N5	Hollow sphere-nanofilm	—	Loading IrO2	0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 13), 100 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm 100 mW cm−2	17.9 mA cm−2, 0.65 VAg/AgCl; IPCE (470 nm) = 43.5% @ 1.21 VRHE	
63

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	—	—	1 M KOH (pH = 13.6)	IPCE (450 nm) = 5.3% @ 0.5 V dc bias	
44

Ta3N5	Particle film	—	Exfoliating surface layer loading Co(OH)x	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G	5.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE; faradaic efficiency = 85% (H2), 74% (O2)	
38

Ta3N5	Particle film	—	—	0.1 M KOH (pH = 13.3), 1000 W Xe lamp	IPCE (540 nm) ≈ 5% @ 1.57 VRHE	
36

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	—	Loading Co(OH)x	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G	2.8 mA cm−2, IPCE (480 nm) = 37.8% @ 1.23 VRHE; H2 (274.6 μmol h−1 cm−2) @ 1.23 VRHE	
59

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	—	Loading Co3O4/Co(OH)2	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.8), 1 sun AM 1.5G	3.64 mA cm−2, IPCE (440 nm) = 39.5% @ 1.23 VRHE	
60

TaON	Layered nanorod arrays	—	—	1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	IPCE (400–450 nm) ≈ 7.5% @ 0.6 V dc bias	
43

Ta3N5	Nanorod arrays	—	Loading Fe–Ni LDH/Co(OH)x/”Co-Pi”	1 M KOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	6.3 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE	
52

Ta3N5	Particle film	Ge	Loading Co(OH)x	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	2.4 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 20% @ 1.23 VRHE	
93

TaON	Particle film	CaFe2O4	—	0.5 M NaOH (pH = 13.7), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 420 nm	1.26 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) ≈ 30% @ 1.23 VRHE	
69

TaON	Nanorod arrays	Carbon/Cu2O	—	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	3.06 mA cm−2, IPCE (400 nm) = 59% @ 1.0 VRHE; faradaic efficiency = 93% (H2), 90% (O2)	
100

TaON	Nanotube arrays	N–TiO2	—	0.1 M KOH (pH = 13), 300 W Xe lamp, λ ≥ 320 nm, (300 mW cm−2)	2.45 mA cm−2, IPCE (maximum) = 25% @ 0.9 VAg/AgCl; faradaic efficiency = 98% (H2), 70% (O2)	
99

Ta3N5	Cube array film	—	Depositing ferrihydrite/Co3O4	1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6), 1 sun AM 1.5G	5.2 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE	
53

Ta3N5	Cube array film	—	Depositing MoO3/Ni(OH)x	1 M LiOH (pH = 12), 1 sun AM 1.5G	
ca. 1.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE	
54

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	W	Loading Co(OH)x	1 M KOH (pH = 13.7), 1 sun AM 1.5G	0.85 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE; IPCE (430 nm) = 25% @ 0.4 VAg/AgCl	
92

Ta3N5	Nanotube arrays	Ba	Loading “Co-Pi”	1 M KOH (pH = 13.7), 1 sun AM 1.5G	7.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.23 VRHE	
48


 	Fig. 14  Schematic of key factors controlling the efficiency of each step in the photoelectrode for PEC water splitting: light absorption, separation and catalytic transfer of photoexcited charge carriers.	 

Ta3N5	6.7	1.56	
51

Fe2O3	4.32	0.6	
110

BiVO4	∼4.3	1.75	
111


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
