Advancing photoreforming of organics: highlights on photocatalyst and system designs for selective oxidation reactions  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03116J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03116J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1140-1175Advancing photoreforming of organics: highlights on photocatalyst and system designs for selective oxidation reactions

        
          
            Cui Ying 
            Toe
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Constantine 
            Tsounis
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiajun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hassan 
            Masood
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Denny 
            Gunawan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jason 
            Scott
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
        
      *
      Particles and Catalysis Research Group, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: r.amal@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      28th September 2020
    , Accepted 11th February 2021First published on 16th February 2021AbstractPhotoreforming is a process that harnesses the redox ability of photocatalysts upon illumination, to simultaneously drive the reduction of H+ into hydrogen gas and oxidation of organic compounds. Over the past few decades, significant effort has been devoted to improving the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency, while substantially less focus has been directed towards the oxidation reactions. More recently, the realization of the potential for simultaneous hydrogen production with value-added organics has inspired researchers to use photooxidation pathways to tune the selectivity of oxidized products. As a distinct benefit, the less energetically demanding organic reforming is highly favorable when compared to the slow kinetics of oxygen evolution which negates the need for expensive and/or harmful hole scavengers. Photocatalyst modifications, such as secondary component deposition, doping, defect, phase and morphology engineering, have been the main strategies adopted to tune the photooxidation pathways and oxidation products. Direct control of the process conditions, including pH, temperature and reactant concentration, and favorable reactor designs can further improve the selectivity towards desired products. While other published reviews focus on the types of photocatalysts or feedstocks used to enhance the hydrogen evolution efficiency, this review highlights the importance of controlling the selectivity of the photoreforming reaction, particularly as an alternative path for waste abatement or valorization for industry. This review links the strategies used to improve the selectivity of photoreforming of organic waste into high-value and desirable chemicals, as well as offers an outlook on the future research direction required to deliver highly selective photocatalyst. A holistic strategy that comprises photocatalyst and system designs, appropriate characterizations and implementation of artificial intelligence has also been proposed and discussed to further aid establishment of the structure–mechanism–function relationship, thereby accelerating the discovery of optimum selective photoreforming systems.
Cui Ying Toe
Cui Ying Toe received her PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia in 2018 and Bachelor degree from Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM), Malaysia in 2014. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Particles and Catalysis Research Group (PartCat), UNSW. Her major research interests are heterogeneous photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis for various energy-related applications.
Constantine Tsounis
Constantine Tsounis completed his bachelor's degree in chemical engineering with honours at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 2018. He is currently undertaking a PhD in the Particles and Catalysis Research group, UNSW, supervised by Professor Rose Amal, in collaboration with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). His research interests revolve around the fundamental development and application of photo- and electro-catalysts for various energy conversion reactions.
Jiajun Zhang
Mr Jiajun Zhang received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2015. He is currently a PhD student in the School of Chemical Engineering, the University of New South Wales. His current research interest is photocatalytic reforming of organics.
Hassan Masood
Dr Hassan Masood is a Research Associate working in Particles and Catalysis Research Laboratory at the University of New South Wales. He received his PhD in 2019 on computational fluid dynamics at School of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales. Currently, his research interests include machine learning for heterogeneous catalysis applications and plasma catalysis for CO2 conversion and ammonia synthesis systems.
Denny Gunawan
Denny Gunawan received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Surabaya, Indonesia in 2017. He is now a PhD candidate in the School of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia under the supervision of Prof. Rose Amal, Assoc. Prof. Jason Scott, and Dr Cui Ying Toe. His research is currently focusing on the development of visible light active photocatalysts for combined hydrogen generation and selective organic oxidation.
Jason Scott
Jason Scott received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of New South Wales in 2002. He then joined the ARC Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials in a postdoctoral position. He is currently the Deputy Leader of and an Associate Professor within Particles and Catalysis Research Group at the University of New South Wales. His research interests encompass particle synthesis, heterogeneous catalysis, and photocatalysis for environmental remediation and energy application.

Broader context
Selective photoreforming has emerged as an alternative method for the simultaneous generation of hydrogen fuel and valuable organic products, while serving as a waste abatement strategy. This entrenches photoreforming as a promising power-to-X framework, where solar energy is used directly to generate chemical fuels and feedstocks, severing our reliance on traditional energy sources and chemical manufacturing which are carbon and resource intensive. Over past decades, tremendous effort has been devoted to enhancing the photocatalytic hydrogen production rate. In more recent years though, increasing attention has been directed toward controlling the selectivity of the photooxidation reaction to prevent the generation of undesirable organic substances while simultaneously attaining desired organic molecules at a higher rate and selectivity. To aid development of the selective photoreforming reaction, this review appraises recent literature and provides guidelines for the rational design of promising photocatalysts, as well as optimization of reactor design and operating conditions. In addition, the importance of employing various dynamic material characterization techniques for a comprehensive understanding of the structure–mechanism–function relationship is illustrated. Finally, to further advance the field of selective photoreforming reactions, a holistic strategy that encompasses machine learning and theoretical calculations for photocatalyst design and selection is proposed.

1. Introduction
As the world transitions toward renewable and decarbonized energy sources, hydrogen is becoming an increasingly important medium as a versatile energy carrier. Hydrogen can be used directly as a fuel to produce heat, reconverted back into electricity through a fuel cell, or as a chemical feedstock for producing other fuels (such as methanol, and methane) and chemicals (such as ammonia, and urea). Consequently, a thorough research effort into cheap and environmentally benign methods of hydrogen production has been prominent in recent years. Although photocatalytic hydrogen production through overall water splitting using a photocatalyst with renewable energy inputs (though direct sunlight or artificial light sources powered through renewable energy generation) has gained much traction as a carbon-neutral method, it faces a range of challenges. Firstly, limitations in photocatalyst advances and high thermodynamic barriers for overall water splitting result in the requirement for a large energy input (in the form of high intensity light sources, or high energy photons), and the possible requirement of a hole scavenger. Various strategies have been proposed to improve photocatalyst design for enhanced photocatalytic efficiency,1–5 which can be broadly categorized into structural modifications,6 morphological tuning,7 and secondary component introductions,8,9 mainly implemented to achieve better charge generation and transfer efficiencies. However, significant efforts are still required to further boost the performance due to the low quantum efficiency (typically <5%), hindering its implementation for high-yield production from a technical standpoint. In addition, the scarcity and geographic segregation of clean water required for the traditional water spitting process introduces competing interests as to the most appropriate use of potable water sources. Therefore, as an approach to addressing these challenges, photocatalytic hydrogen production with simultaneous organic reforming (known as photoreforming) is an attractive alternative.
The benefits of photoreforming when compared to photocatalytic water splitting include: (i) less energetically demanding reactions replace the sluggish oxygen evolution reaction enabling a higher hydrogen evolution efficiency; (ii) organic waste/biomass is utilized; (iii) waste is converted into valuable organics or other benign waste products; and (iv) the H2 and O2 back reaction during photocatalytic water splitting is prevented.10,11 The presence of organic molecules during photocatalytic hydrogen production offers an alternative catalytic pathway, whereby the highly endergonic nature and large energy requirement of water oxidation (ΔG0 = +237 kJ mol−1) can be replaced with the oxidation of organic molecules (organic reforming).12 These oxidative reactions typically possess a lower Gibb's free energy of reaction (decreasing the thermodynamic energy barrier), lowering the overall energy input required to drive hydrogen production at reasonable rates. In addition, a significant portion of high enthalpy and renewable biomass waste, for example, from industries such as food and beverage, agricultural, and biofuel production, offer possible chemical feedstocks to facilitate the reactions. From an oxidation viewpoint, selective oxidation for photocatalytic organic synthesis and/or biomass degradation has also been extensively investigated in the past decade, whereby some in-depth mechanistic studies have been performed.13 While most works focus solely on either improving the performance of hydrogen evolution or enhancing the oxidation selectivity, coupling hydrogen generation with selective organic chemical synthesis will undoubtedly provide further economic benefits.14 At the current time, the existing literature for hydrogen generation and selective organic synthesis remains disjointed. Many studies have postulated the reaction mechanism based simply on the improved photocatalytic hydrogen generation efficiency, without considering the contribution of the oxidation process.15 This can lead to misinterpretation of the origin of the hydrogen and an overestimation of conversion efficiency. Therefore, understanding the complete story (both reduction and oxidation mechanisms) behind a photoreforming reaction is crucial to realize the full potential of selective photoreforming in generating solar fuels and valuable organics.
In this context, to realize the application of photoreforming on an industrial scale, reaction selectivity plays a central role as it forms the basis of the creation of valuable organic chemicals (e.g. partial oxidation of glycerol to produce glyceraldehyde, glycolic acid, glyceric acid, etc.), while preventing the generation of other forms of organic waste (e.g. complete organic oxidation that produces CO2). Therefore, photoreforming not only becomes a method to produce hydrogen economically via waste abatement processes; if reaction selectivity can be controlled through rational design of the photocatalyst and reaction system, it may serve as a viable method for desired organic molecule synthesis while simultaneously reducing our reliance on fossil fuels, as illustrated in the photoreforming plant of Fig. 1. As mentioned in the recent review article of solid waste photoreforming, organic conversion efficiency of at least 50% per day with an ideal selectivity of close to 100% are necessary to make the process industrially viable.16 Recent exploration within the photoreforming domain has demonstrated the capacity for tuning organic oxidation selectivity via photocatalyst modifications, controlling the reaction conditions and reactor designs. In addition, the vast availability of knowledge from photocatalytic hydrogen generation and selective organic synthesis should be appropriately exploited and transferred to provide useful insights into selective photoreforming reactions.17,18 Xia et al. recently published a relevant review article from a mechanistic viewpoint, with an emphasis on C–H activation and C–C couplings, which is important for achieving high selectivity and activity during photoreforming.19 A complete understanding of both the reduction and oxidation mechanisms is critical for establishing the catalyst property–activity–selectivity relationship. With the increasing number of studies in this area, it is crucial to compile a review (not limited to C–H activation and C–C coupling), assembling the strategies to optimize the proficiencies of photocatalysts, process conditions and reactor designs. In addition, this review highlights the importance of basic and advanced characterizations, as well as computational techniques (such as theoretical calculations and machine learning), presenting a holistic framework for future selective photoreforming studies. The former is essential for in-depth investigations on intrinsic catalyst properties and reaction intermediates, while the later could further assist with providing rational postulations and elucidating reaction mechanisms on the photocatalyst surfaces. The present review puts forward the existing approaches used to enhance selective photoreforming (based on photocatalyst design, process conditions and reactor design, characterizations and computational techniques), as well as integrates our own viewpoints to provide further insights towards the catalyst property–activity–selectivity relationships.
 Fig. 1  Schematic depicting the selective photoreforming process where organic wastes are converted into hydrogen fuels, valuable organic feedstocks and chemical fuels. 
2. Non-selective photoreforming for hydrogen production

Fig. 2 summarizes the similarities and differences of the photoreforming reaction when compared to photocatalytic water splitting and organic photooxidation reactions. While photocatalytic water splitting requires photocatalysts with conduction and valence band potentials energetic enough for H+ reduction and water oxidation, photocatalysts used in photoreforming reactions could have a relatively lower valence band energy, depending on the organic oxidation reaction pathways. On the other hand, an anoxic environment is required for photoreforming reaction to prevent the formation of superoxide radicals (˙O2−), which compete with the H+ reduction reaction. In the absence of oxygen, the oxidation reaction occurs through two oxidation pathways, either via direct hole transfer or formation of highly oxidizing hydroxyl radicals (˙OH).
 Fig. 2  Photoreforming: integration of photocatalytic hydrogen generation and organic photooxidation. The similarities and differences of the photoreforming reaction when compared to photocatalytic water splitting and organic photooxidation reactions. 
In the past, focus has been devoted to non-selective photoreforming, which is known to benefit from using organic waste as the sacrificial reagent, commonly known as the hole scavenger. The most commonly used alcohol feedstocks/hole scavengers include methanol, ethanol and glycerol. Methanol is the simplest form of alcohol and has often been employed as the model feedstock. The flexibility in using an aqueous ethanol solution at various concentrations (instead of pure ethanol) is another merit as it is challenging to obtain pure ethanol from an ethanol–water azeotropic mixture. The benefits of using glycerol in photoreforming are more significant as it is one of the by-products from biodiesel production and is readily available (10 w/w% with respect to biodiesel produced).20,21 In addition to alcohol, the ability to reform both industrial and domestic solid waste products has presented additional economic benefits and enabled sustainable carbon neutral photoreforming system.16 Saccharides (e.g. monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides), which are the building block/monomer of structural biomacromolecules, have been successfully decomposed to generate clean hydrogen via a photoreforming reaction.10 Lignocellulose, the main constituent of industry agricultural biomass that composes of carbohydrates (cellulose/hemicellulose) and lignin, has also been reformed into hydrogen gas, despite its robust structure and low solubility.22,23 Food wastes, paper and cardboard, as well as plastics wastes are the main composition of domestic solid waste (∼75%), which can be employed in biomass photoreforming reaction.24 As such, plastic wastes (i.e. polylactic acid, polyethylene terephthalate, polyurethane) were successfully degraded by CdS- and C3N4-based photocatalysts via solar illumination at room temperature to produce H2, which is an alternative path to solving current environmental issues caused by plastic debris.25,26
Although the above examples illustrate the benefits of the non-selective photoreforming reaction for waste abatement, further gains can be achieved if it is paired with selective photoreforming. Despite the proven ability of hole scavengers in enhancing the overall photocatalytic activity, the unforeseeable side effects have not been thoroughly addressed. This includes: (i) over-oxidation of organic compounds which generates undesirable CO, CO2, CH4 or C2H4 greenhouse gases; (ii) production of a cocktail of organic products that requires complex separation processes; and (iii) potential production of hazardous chemicals that could be harmful to the ecosystem. The well-established photocatalyst, TiO2, has been frequently employed for non-selective photoreforming,27,28 despites being UV-active (only absorbing approximately 4% of the solar spectrum). This is due to its outstanding chemical and photostability and most importantly, the very energetic valence band that enables efficient oxidation of various organic compounds which delivers an enhanced hydrogen production rate. Nonetheless, it has also been demonstrated that the deep valence band of TiO2 leads to the generation ˙OH (a highly oxidizing radical species) that enable non-selective oxidation reactions. These species cause the uncontrollable over-oxidation of organic compounds, generating greenhouse gases and various organic liquid products. Thus, more efforts are required to improve the overall efficiency and selectivity of a photocatalyst for selective photoreforming reactions. To date, the common organic substrates used in selective photoreforming and their corresponding targeted products are provided in Table 1. Utilization of more complex organic substrates increases the complexity of the oxidation pathway as the products are highly dependent on the initial structure of the substrate. For instance, lignocellulose photoreforming typically involves more than a single step, in which the substrate will be broken down into different fragments (e.g. lignin, cellulose or hemicellulose) before photooxidation.29,30
Table 1 Organic substrates used for selective photoreforming studies with their corresponding targeted products




Organic substrate
Targeted products




Methanol
Formaldehyde, formic acid, methyl formate, ethylene glycol


Ethanol
Acetaldehyde, acetic acid, 1,1-diethoxyethane, 2,3-butanediol


Glycerol
Dihydroxyacetone (DHA), glyceraldehyde, glyceric acid


Furfuryl alcohol
Furfural, furoic acid


Benzyl alcohol
Benzaldehyde, benzoic acid, hydrobenzoin, 2-phenylacetophenone, benzil


5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF)
2,5-Diformylfuran (DFF), 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA)


Lignin
Various phenols, ketones, oxygenates




3. Selective photoreforming
3.1 Challenges of selective photoreforming
In previous years, the addition of hole scavengers or electron donors during photocatalytic hydrogen evolution was predominantly designed to improve the charge separation efficiency and overall photocatalytic performance.13 More recently, various organic biomass types have been employed to both scavenge holes for improved hydrogen production efficiency and attain more valuable hydrocarbon products. Apart from attaining the desired products, proper tuning of the selectivity prevents the creation of more hazardous/invaluable compounds.
Despite all the benefits mentioned above, practical application of selective photoreforming of biomass remains ambiguous due to poor product selectivity which typically produces a mixture of organic products. The poor selectivity during the photoreforming reaction is attributed to: (i) the uncontrollable formation of highly oxidizing radical species (i.e. ˙OH); (ii) the undesirable adsorption/desorption of reactants/products on the surface of the photocatalysts; and (iii) saturation of the product leading to over-oxidation.13,31,32 As the aims of selective photoreforming of biomass are to simultaneously generate high purity and large amounts of hydrogen gas (reduction) and at the same time selectively oxidize organic biomass into value-added liquid products (oxidation), the over-oxidation of organic biomass into gaseous products (such as CO and CO2) decreases H2 purity in the gas stream and reduces the concentration of liquid carbon products. Strategies to improve selectivity toward light-induced organic transformation have long been recognized within the photocatalysis community. Nonetheless, most of the photocatalytic selective organic oxidation studies have been performed under an aerobic condition (in the presence of air or oxygen), where the reduction of oxygen to ˙O2− radicals also facilitates the oxidation reaction. Although knowledge regarding selectivity tuning can be adapted from photocatalytic aerobic oxidation; there exist differences between anoxic photoreforming and aerobic photocatalytic oxidation reactions. For anoxic photoreforming reactions, tuning of the oxidation selectivity is considered alongside with the hydrogen evolution efficiency (reduction ability). Additional aspects, such as photocatalyst conduction band energy, selection of a reduction co-catalyst and H+ adsorption ability, need to be considered in conjunction with the common attributes of photocatalytic selective organic transformation (i.e. valence band potential, organic reactant adsorption ability and reaction mechanism).
Various strategies have been used to improve the selectivity of photoreforming organic oxidation, including photocatalyst and system designs (i.e. process condition and reactor designs). Most of the existing strategies employed in the literature are based on photocatalyst design, such as integration of secondary components (i.e. co-catalyst loading, heterojunction formation, carbo-based material integration and surface sensitization) and chemical/physical modifications (i.e. doping, defect engineering, phase and morphology tuning), which is crucial to enable selectivity tuning. Less effort has been devoted to process condition selection and reactor design in previous studies, although these aspects should not be neglected to fully realize the potential industrial applications of photoreforming in the future. The following section will thoroughly review the various strategies used to improve the selectivity of organic oxidation during the photoreforming reaction.
3.2 Strategies to tune the selectivity of photoreforming

3.2.1 Photocatalyst design. 
Activity, stability and selectivity are the most important aspects to be considered during photocatalyst design. While numerous strategies have been employed to improve the activity of the photoreforming reaction (i.e. enhance the hydrogen evolution efficiency), catalyst design should also consider tuning the photooxidation selectivity to promote the generation of valuable chemicals. The overall photoreforming performance strongly depends on three basic charge kinetics: (i) charge excitation/generation; (ii) charge separation and migration; and (iii) charge consumption. Therefore, an ideal photocatalyst should possess a relatively narrow bandgap for efficient solar light absorption, superior intrinsic charge properties and desirable band energies as well as favorable surface active sites. Selective organic oxidation takes into account all the above-mentioned aspects, with an emphasis on tuning the photocatalyst valence band potential and surface active sites, which influence the product selectivity by regulating ˙OH radical formation and surface adsorption/desorption ability, respectively. To achieve both high activity and selectivity, visible-light active photocatalysts with a narrow band gap, appropriate valence band potential and preferable active sites are required. Various strategies have been used to suppress ˙OH radical formation and improve the surface adsorption and desorption kinetics to improve the selectivity of the photoreforming reaction, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The subsequent sections review each strategy and clarify their corresponding roles in tuning the reaction pathway and enhancing the selectivity of organic oxidation in the photoreforming reaction.
 Fig. 3  Strategies to improve selectivity of organic oxidation: suppress ˙OH formation and control surface adsorption and desorption. 
3.2.1.1 Deposition of secondary components. 
(a) Co-catalyst deposition. 
Depositing a metal or metal oxide co-catalyst has been shown to suppress charge recombination and improve charge separation efficiency, thereby enhancing the overall photoactivity.33 In some cases, the presence of plasmonic co-catalysts (e.g. Au, Ag or Cu) also improved the photoabsorption of the photocatalyst via localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). Apart from enhancing photoabsorption, the plasmon-generated electron has the ability to bind with the adsorbate (reactant) on the surface of the plasmonic co-catalyst, changing the reduction reaction pathway. This phenomenon was observed when Au–H species with different reduction powers were formed on the surface of Au-deposited CeO2 upon illumination with light of different wavelengths. For the selective organic photoreforming reaction, focus should be directed to the oxidation reaction pathways, since the reduction pathway will preferentially be the hydrogen evolution reaction. Co-catalyst deposition could also favor the adsorption of a targeted reactant on its surface. Having a co-catalyst distributed on the surface of the photocatalyst changes the surface active sites during the reaction. By engineering the surface anchoring sites, the reactant or product adsorption and desorption ability could be regulated, and the reduction or oxidation reaction pathways could be changed. Hamid et al. have demonstrated the distinct capability of different co-catalysts (with different work functions) loaded on TiO2 in shifting the hydrogen and hydrocarbon product distributions.34
Many other studies (included photomineralization or photocatalytic synthesis) have reported that co-catalyst-loaded semiconductors exhibited enhanced selectivity when compared to their bare counterparts. For the selective photoreforming reaction, Au loaded TiO2 has been shown to feature enhanced hydrogen evolution activity and selectivity towards acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) production when compared to pristine TiO2 during ethanol photoreforming.35 In that study, greater than 99% hydrogen purity could be attained in the presence of an Au–TiO2 photocatalyst, with only a minimal amount of gaseous carbon species produced (e.g. CO, CO2, CH4, C2H4 and C2H6), due to the lower degree of hydroxylation. A similar phenomenon was observed by Zhang et al.,36 in which Au deposited on TiO2 with a high Ti3+ defect concentration demonstrated improved hydrogen purity (>99%) and over-oxidation of ethanol into gaseous carbon species was inhibited. This was further verified by the equal stoichiometric amount of acetaldehyde detected as the liquid product in the Au–TiO2 system. In a separate study, depositing an Au and Pd bimetallic alloy on TiO2 was shown to suppress CO production and significantly increase the amount of hydrogen evolved during the formic acid photoreforming reaction.37 Although the amount of CO2 or liquid carbon product (i.e. formate) were not analyzed in that study, the substantially increased in ratio of H2 to CO produced by the bimetallic AuPd/TiO2 sample, when compared to single metal or bare TiO2, proved that AuPd co-catalyst deposition altered the formic acid oxidation pathways. As illustrated in Fig. 4a,38 the suppression of CO production indicates that formic acid oxidation was directed towards a direct or formate pathway that forms CO2. Distinct carbon product distributions were also observed by Halasi et al. during the photoreforming of ethanol, whereby Ag/TiO2 produced a negligible amount of CO2 while being more selective to acetaldehyde when compared to Rh/TiO2, despite its lower conversion.39
 Fig. 4  (a) Reaction pathways for formic acid oxidation: direct, formate and indirect pathways. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright © 2006 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Reaction scheme depicting benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation and hydrogenolysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
An interesting study by Ruberu et al. reported that Pt and Pd deposited CdS photocatalysts utilize two distinct reaction pathways (i.e. dehydrogenation and hydrogenolysis, respectively) during the photocatalytic conversion of benzyl alcohol (Fig. 4b).40 According to the two step-reaction scheme in Fig. 4b, it was proposed that the presence of Pd facilitated the hydrogenolysis of benzaldehyde (PhCHO) to toluene (PhCH3) by consuming the hydrogen generated from the first step (dehydrogenation). This was attributed to the strong adsorption of hydrogen to form Pd–H reduction sites on the CdS–Pd photocatalyst, enabling further reduction of benzaldehyde. Similarly, g-C3N4 loaded with Pt has shown high selectivity towards benzaldehyde (up to 90%) via the dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol during the 20 h photoreforming reaction.41 The studies demonstrate the ability of the Pt co-catalyst in facilitating the dehydrogenation reaction and suppressing the consumption of hydrogen for further reduction. A facile synthesis method was used to fabricate an Ag/CdS photocatalyst for selective ethanol photoreforming which produced hydrogen and acetaldehyde.42 It was demonstrated that ethoxy radicals could attached on the Ag co-catalyst, forming Ag–CH2CH2OH before dissociating to acetaldehyde and Ag–H.
With the current movement away from utilizing high-cost noble metals, research has demonstrated the capacity for using transition metal co-catalysts to enhance the photoreforming product selectivity. Albeit Cu co-catalysts have been widely used to improve the performance of photocatalytic water splitting and hydrogen evolution reactions, the most commonly used transition metal co-catalyst that exhibits enhanced organic oxidation selectivity is Ni/NiO, where the nickel species were also shown to be a good electrocatalyst for selective electrochemical oxidation. Chai et al. reported high activity and selectivity for photocatalytic alcohol dehydrogenation using a noble-metal-free photocatalyst (Ni/CdS).43 The Ni/CdS catalyst splits the alcohols into hydrogen and aldehydes or ketones (Fig. 5a), following the proposed mechanism of: (i) alcohol adsorption on the Ni catalyst; (ii) electron transfer to the Ni upon CdS illumination; (iii) formation of Ni–H hydride and an alkoxide anion; (iv) oxidation of the alkoxide anion via C–H and O–H dissociation; and (v) generation of hydrogen via two N–H hydrides. Apart from simple alcohols, the study also established that the Ni/CdS photocatalytic system performed well in the presence of aromatic alcohols (with high conversion and excellent selectivity) and long chain aliphatic alcohols (with high selectivity despite a low conversion efficiency). Likewise, Zhang et al. demonstrated improved selectivity towards benzaldehyde during benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation on a Ni/Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution, due to the cleavage of α-C–H bond in the presence of the Ni co-catalyst.44 Very recently, Ni-modified ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst was found capable of activating the α-H bond for enhanced benzaldehyde production from the photoreforming of benzyl alcohol when compared to bare ZnIn2S4 (Fig. 5b).45 Interestingly, another study indicated that high conversion of biomass (i.e. furfural alcohol and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF)) to value-added intermediate products (i.e. furfural and 2,5-diformylfuran (DFF)) can be achieved by a 2D NiO/CdS nanosheet photocatalyst upon visible light irradiation (Fig. 5c and d), even though generating these intermediates was challenging by electrocatalysis.46 In a similar Ni/CdS system, furoic acid and 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) were also generated under a strong alkali condition. All the above-mentioned examples highlight the ability of a Ni co-catalyst, in particular, Ni on a sulfide-based photocatalyst, to boost photocatalytic oxidation selectivity during the photoreforming reaction. This is supported in the study by Han et al., where Ni/CdS was shown to have the best performance for hydrogen generation and alcohol oxidation when compared to most other first-row transition metal co-catalysts.47 Although these studies demonstrate improved activity and selectivity for the photoreforming reaction upon using a Ni co-catalyst, the property–selectivity relationship has not been established, indicating the need for further in-depth investigations.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of alcohol photoreforming reaction to give hydrogen and aldehydes/ketones on a Ni/CdS photocatalyst surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Product generation, conversion and selectivity of hydrogen and benzaldehyde (BAD) production from ZnIn2S4 (ZIS) and different loadings of Ni-modified ZnIn2S4 (Ni:ZIS). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagram of ultrathin Ni/CdS nanosheets for simultaneous hydrogen production and biomass valorization. (d) Oxidation pathways of furfural alcohol and HMF to their corresponding aldehydes and acids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Despite the significant potential of the Cu-based co-catalyst for the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, only a limited number of studies have shown its capability in enhancing the organic selectivity during the photoreforming reaction, where its potential for selectivity tuning organic oxidation remains vague. In most cases, attention has been placed on enhancing hydrogen generation, neglecting the potential for making valuable chemicals via organic oxidation. Given that copper species are unstable and suffer from severe photocorrosion, the observation of dynamic changes to the copper oxidation state during the reaction is important. During the photoreforming of acetic acid, Imizcoz and Puga noticed different reaction pathways for Cu/TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 during the first two hours of reaction.48 Cu/TiO2 had preferentially followed the decarboxylation pathway (formation of CH4 and CO2), while Pt/TiO2 pursued dehydrogenation (photoreforming to produce H2 and CH4). The difference in reaction pathway was due to the formation of a CuO passivation layer on Cu species that led to the unavoidable in situ photoreduction of CuO to Cu, consuming photogenerated electrons. After a certain induction period where CuO was completely reduced to Cu, gradual H2 formation was observed from Cu/TiO2. In addition, the preferential dehydrogenation pathway for the Pt co-catalyst is consistent with the above-discussed literature.40
In addition to metal co-catalysts, oxide, sulfide and phosphide co-catalysts have been extensively employed in photoreforming reactions. A NixSy co-catalyst was coupled with ZnS to selectively oxidize benzyl alcohol into benzaldehyde under anaerobic conditions, as illustrated in the proposed reaction mechanism (Fig. 6a).49 The selectivity increased from 8.1% (for bare ZnS) to 90.5% with a concurrent improvement in hydrogen generation efficiency. Uekert et al. has also shown the capacity for using an inexpensive carbon nitride photocatalyst loaded with Ni2P to breakdown non-recyclable plastic waste to hydrogen and other organic chemicals.25 Although Ni2P was loaded to facilitate the hydrogen evolution reaction, some organic products (i.e. glyoxal, acetate and formate) were also detected from the photoreforming of poly(ethylene terephthalate), while no CO2 was detected. The CNx/Ni2P system successfully generated hydrogen from plastic wastes, however, the efficiency was still significantly lower than the CdS/CdOx system studied within the same research group.26 CdS/CdOx is a highly-active photocatalyst that has been used in other studies to reform raw lignocellulose biomass such as grass, paper and wood, upon visible light illumination.23 The study indicated that Cd–O–R bond formation aided C–C bond cleavage and lead to step by step polyol oxidation. The ability to selectively break down a lignin structure into desired ketones was also reported by Bosque et al.50 The selective fragmentation of β-O-4 bonds within the lignin structure (making up ∼45–60% of all the bonds) was achieved at room temperature via a combination of electrocatalytic oxidation and photocatalytic bond cleavage (Fig. 6b). The study also provided a detailed product analysis and a comprehensive investigation of the reaction pathways, offering useful insights on the selective photoreforming of lignocellulose biomass.
 Fig. 6  (a) Proposed reaction mechanism of photocatalytic benzyl alcohol conversion over a ZnS–NixSy photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Lignin depolymerisation approach via a combination of electrocatalytic oxidation and photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
A comprehensive study performed by Xie et al. has shown the ability of MoS2–CdS nanorods to convert methanol into ethylene glycol via C–H activation and C–C coupling with high conversion efficiency and selectivity.51 The study employed various advanced characterization techniques and computational studies to support the postulated C–H activation and C–C coupling reaction pathways (refer to more details in Section 4), which compete with the typical alcohol O–H activation pathway that produces aldehyde. Depositing typical metal co-catalysts enhanced the overall efficiency while reducing the selectivity towards ethylene glycol, whereas loading a MoS2 co-catalyst delivered concurrent acceleration of hydrogen and ethylene glycol production (optimum loading = 5 wt%). More recently, the deposition of CoP on a Zn2In2S5 photocatalyst was shown to enhance ethylene glycol production from methanol photoreforming under both visible light and AM 1.5 light irradiation (Fig. 7a).52 On the contrary, Pt and Pd were observed to further increase the hydrogen evolution rate but promote the generation of formaldehyde as these co-catalysts are likely to facilitate O–H bond cleavage, a competing reaction to C–H activation on methanol. Similar reaction mechanisms regarding C–H bond activation followed by C–C coupling were proposed in the study, as illustrated in Fig. 7b. Upon α-C–H bond activation in the ethanol, the effective desorption of generated α-hydroxyethyl radicals (˙CH(OH)CH3) from the photocatalyst surface is important to enable C–C coupling to form 2,3-butanediol. More importantly, this was the first study to demonstrate the capability of converting ethanol into hydrogen and value-added 2,3-butanediol under visible or solar light irradiation using a Zn2In2S5 photocatalytic system.
 Fig. 7  (a) Methanol photoreforming performance by Zn2In2S5 and 0.25 wt% CoP/Zn2In2S5 under visible light and AM 1.5 light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic conversion of methanol and ethanol into diols over a CoP/Zn2In2S5 photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. ref. 52. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. (c) Calculated energy barrier for methyl activation of acetone by different single metal atom co-catalysts. (d) 2,5-Hexanedione (HDN) production rate and selectivity from acetone photoreforming by different metal co-catalysts (single atom, SA, or nanoparticle, NP) on various semiconductors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
In terms of reaction mechanisms, Zhou et al. recently demonstrated that selectivity towards valuable 2,5 hexanedione (HDN) from acetone photoreforming is highly dependent on the rate of methyl activation, which generates an elevated concentration of free ˙CH3COCH2 radicals (two of which combine to form a HDN molecule).53 Different single metal co-catalysts loaded on TiO2 were shown to possess distinctive methyl activation energy barriers for acetone oxidation, which influenced the selectivity towards HDN, a C–C coupling product. As shown in Fig. 7c and d, TiO2 loaded with Pt single atom (PtSA) possessed the lowest reaction barrier for acetone dehydrogenation, thereby demonstrating high activity and selectivity. In addition to co-catalyst type, the selectivity of acetone photoreforming was affected by the co-catalyst size. Pt nanoparticles (PtNP) exhibited lower selectivity towards 2,5-hexanedione when compared to PtSA, which was mainly attributed to the effective methyl activation of acetone on PtSA.
Collectively, from the point of view of selectivity tuning, co-catalyst deposition on the surface of a photocatalyst plays an important role in introducing new active sites (adsorption sites) for the reactant. The change in surface affinity toward reactants or products after metal deposition could alter the reaction mechanisms/pathways. Apart from its widely known benefit in enhancing charge separation efficiency, selecting a co-catalyst which also simultaneously improves the surface adsorption ability towards the reactant is important. Furthermore, considering that co-catalyst deposition mainly alters the surface properties without introducing additional band potentials, choosing an appropriate core photocatalyst that could minimize the formation of highly oxidizing ˙OH radicals is also essential to realize the benefit of this strategy.
(b) Heterojunction formation. 
Heterojunctions are formed when two photocatalysts with distinct band structures are integrated, forming an interface for efficient charge transfer. Heterojunction formation, particularly the type II staggered-gap heterojunction which enables the transfer of photoexcited electrons and holes in opposite directions (towards the different photocatalysts, as illustrated by the band alignment in Fig. 8), has been shown to successfully suppress charge recombination for enhanced charge separation efficiency. Heterojunction construction was also developed to improve the light absorption of UV-active semiconductors to extend the absorption spectrum into visible light range by incorporating a narrow bandgap semiconductor. For photocatalytic hydrogen generation, visible light-active TiO2-based heterojunction photocatalysts are constructed by combining TiO2 with other visible-light active hydrogen evolving photocatalysts, such as CdS, Cu2O and C3N4.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of band alignment for heterojunction photocatalysts with enhanced charge separation. (a) CdS/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) CdS/g-C3N4 systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Referring to Fig. 8, heterojunction construction could potentially enable the suppression of ˙OH radical formation (to avoid over-oxidation) and enhance surface adsorption ability, to improve organic oxidation selectivity. Liu et al. synthesized a one-dimensional CdS/TiO2 core–shell structure for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde in the presence of oxygen (without hydrogen generation).54 The low valence band potential of CdS is not energetic enough to form ˙OH radicals, thus the over-oxidation benzyl alcohol was prevented. Placing a TiO2 shell on CdS nanorods further improved the conversion rate of alcohol to aldehyde, due to impeded hole transfer from the CdS to the TiO2 particles for surface reaction (Fig. 8a). In the CdS/TiO2 system, benzyl alcohol was converted to aldehyde by consuming ˙O2−, where the oxidation reaction was driven by ˙O2− and direct hole transfer from the CdS to alcohol in the absence of a TiO2 outer layer. Nonetheless, the study raises a question on the role of accumulated holes within the CdS nanorods (for the CdS/TiO2 system), if they weren’t consumed for alcohol oxidation or didn’t recombine with the generated electrons. The most likely possibility would be self-oxidation/photocorrosion, which is a common phenomenon for sulfide-based photocatalysts.55,56
CdS and C3N4 are two of the most studied visible light-active photocatalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and photoreforming reactions.58,59 Select studies have reported that combining these two highly reducing photocatalysts (CdS/g-C3N4) improved the hydrogen evolution efficiency while simultaneously suppressing the self-photooxidation of CdS.57,60 The benefits arose from an appropriate band alignment (Fig. 8b) that allowed for efficient charge separation and transfer of photoinduced holes from the photo-unstable CdS to the more robust g-C3N4. Similar to CdS, the valence band of C3N4 was not suitable for ˙OH radical generation, enabling better control over product selectivity during organic oxidation. For example, a CdS/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalyst displayed both high activity and selectivity (up to 95%) during selective toluene photooxidation to benzaldehyde when compared to bare CdS (high selectivity with very low conversion) and g-C3N4 (low selectivity and conversion).61 In addition, CdS/g-C3N4 exhibited selective aromatic alcohol oxidation into aromatic aldehydes and nitrobenzene reduction into aniline by direct hole oxidation and electron reduction, respectively.62 High selectivity was also observed by a CuOx/TiO2 photocatalyst during the ethanol photoreforming reaction, generating significant amounts of hydrogen with more than 90% selectivity towards acetaldehyde.63 It was also demonstrated that a gas-phase CuOx/TiO2 system provided higher hydrogen generation activity and better selectivity towards acetaldehyde than a liquid-phase system. In a separate study, ZnIn2S4 loaded with an optimized 8 wt% Nb2O5 was shown to give the highest photoactivity and selectivity to DFF during HMF photoreforming.64 Interestingly, Luo et al. also shown that, on tuning the Zn:In ratio in a ZnxIn2S3+x photocatalyst, benzyl alcohol photooxidation will proceed by different reaction pathways, leading to either deoxybenzoin or benzoin production.65 By increasing the Zn:In ratio, the intermediate (hydrobenzoin) was preferentially dehydrated into deoxybenzoin.
Despite the capability of heterojunction photocatalysts in suppressing ˙OH radical formation and tuning the surface adsorption ability, there have been only limited studies focusing on improving the selectivity of organic photoreforming using this strategy. Most studies continue to focus on using this strategy solely for improving hydrogen evolution efficiency. While utilizing photocatalysts with an energetic conduction band, there exist various possibilities for tuning selectivity via construction of a heterojunction (or Z-scheme) system using both reduction and oxidation photocatalysts (such as bismuth-based photocatalysts). The approach offers the advantage of flexibility in tuning the valence band potential of the oxidation photocatalyst for selective organic oxidation.66
(c) Carbon-based materials. 
g-C3N4 has emerged as the most popular metal-free semiconductor for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Its unique properties (i.e. visible-light activity, energetic conduction band and high photostability) have made it one of the most promising semiconductors for the photoreforming reaction. The very energetic conduction band and less powerful valence band also make it an ideal semiconductor for controlling organic selectivity during the photoreforming reaction. The former enables it to generate a significant amount of hydrogen, while the latter could suppress the highly oxidizing ˙OH radicals to prevent the over-oxidation of organic products. Further to the C3N4 examples mentioned above, Battula et al. demonstrated that Pt-loaded porous C3N4 exhibited >99% selectivity to DFF during HMF oxidation over a 48 hour photoreforming timeframe.67 This was attributed to the appropriate valence band energy level of C3N4 which inhibited ˙OH radical generation (Fig. 9a–c). Apart from C3N4, carbon dots that were synthesized by cellulose calcination have recently been used as the light absorbers to convert biomass-derived substrates into H2 and various organic products.68 Interestingly, loading a nickel bis(diphosphine) (NiP) co-catalyst on the homogeneous cellulose-derived carbon dots enabled the production of a significant amount of H2 alongside the oxidation of α-cellulose to produce C6H12O6 and C6H10O5 compounds as the predominant liquid organic products. Other complex biomass-derived compounds, such as lignin and xylan, have also been successfully reformed in the presence of the NiP-loaded carbon dot photocatalyst. Despite the push for selective photoreforming, significant challenges in delivering highly selective organic products from the photoreforming of complex biomass substrates remain, thereby requiring more effort in exploring the reaction mechanisms in detail.
 Fig. 9  (a) Valence band spectrum and (b) band energy diagram of porous C3N4, (c) time-dependent conversion, selectivity and DFF yield during photoreforming of HMF. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019. 
Similar to co-catalyst deposition, highly conductive graphitic-based materials have often been integrated into a photocatalytic system, to improve charge transfer and suppress charge recombination within the photocatalyst. For instance, manipulating graphene, reduced graphene oxide and carbon nanotubes to construct noble metal-free photocatalysts has gained significant attention, due to their high electrical conductivity.69,70 In addition, graphitic materials often improve the organic adsorption ability, while rational functionalization of the graphitic materials can further alter the reaction pathway and improve product selectivity. CdS incorporated with graphene prepared by a facile one-step hydrothermal reaction possessed better activity and selectivity towards aldehyde formation (achieving almost 100% selectivity) when compared to bare CdS under an oxygen-saturated environment.71
More recently, unique carbon-based materials, such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent–organic frameworks (COFs), have been developed for photocatalytic applications.72 The structural controllability of MOFs and COFs make them good candidates to be used as a semiconductor or integrated with other active photocatalysts. The specific active sites present within the MOF or COF materials can be flexibly tuned according to the desired reaction pathways and products, enabling enhanced organic selectivity. Furthermore, their high porosity can invoke high photoactivity. Despite the benefits of these materials, limited studies have demonstrated the use of MOFs and COFs to tune organic selectivity within photoreforming reactions. The use of a core–shell CdS/ZIF-8 structure for formic acid photoreforming to produce hydrogen delivered improved organic selectivity upon illumination.73 The complex design of MOFs (e.g. its affinity towards the organic, intermediate or products, the adsorption and desorption of the organics, its pore diameter etc.) in achieving selective oxidation has limited its applicability. Nevertheless, MOFs and COFs are undeniably promising materials for selectivity tuning. This can be evinced by their increasing use in various other applications, particularly, the selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.74
(d) Surface sensitization. 
Photosensitization involves the use of organic dyes or metal complexes to optimize the solar capturing efficiency of the system and allow photoexcited electron transfer from the sensitizer to the conduction band of the semiconductor. Over the past few years, numerous studies have shown an improved selectivity for aerobic photooxidation (e.g. thioanisole to methyl phenyl sulfoxide,75 benzyl ethers to benzoates,76 alcohol to aldehydes or ketones77 and amines to imines78) using a dye sensitized TiO2 system. In these studies, visible light irradiation promotes excitation and charge generation within the dye molecules, instead of the TiO2. This is followed by transfer of the electrons from the dye molecules to the TiO2 conduction band, generating dye radicals that can selectively oxidize the organic into desired products. Likewise, metal complexes have been used for selective aerobic oxidation upon visible light illumination.79 For anaerobic photoreforming reactions, surface sensitization has also been employed to improve the hydrogen evolution efficiency.80,81
In addition to TiO2 semiconductors, the surface sensitization of carbon nitride via covalent grafting of molecular catalysts has been reported. Compared to heterogeneous nanoparticles, molecular catalysts anchored on carbon nitride offered certain advantages, such as a wide light harvesting ability (photosensitization) and efficient intramolecular charge transfer that lead to exceptional catalytic activity and selectivity.82 Zhen et al. demonstrated that oxime–Ni2+ complex immobilized a on carbon nitride surface can effectively capture photogenerated electrons and serve as active sites for proton reduction into H2 in the presence of triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial reagent, as illustrated in Fig. 10a.83 Anchoring metal complexes on carbon nitride has been shown as capable of promoting both the reduction and oxidation reactions. For instance, cobalt–oxo cubane complex motifs on pyridine-functionalized carbon nitride exhibited improved photocatalytic activity for water oxidation due to the role of the cobalt complex in promoting charge carrier separation and serving as an efficient active site (Fig. 10b).84 However, for anaerobic organic oxidation (which is the focus of this review), studies which have investigated the reaction mechanism and potential for selectivity enhancement are limited. A comprehensive mechanistic study was conducted on a photoreforming system that integrated a molecular nickel(II) bis(diphosphine) complex with cyanamide surface functionalized melon-liked carbon nitride (NCNCNx) for enhanced hydrogen production and organic selectivity.85 In this study, 4-methylbenzyl alcohol was selectively oxidized into 4-methylbenzaldehyde under solar illumination at ambient temperature and pressure (Fig. 10c and d). The cyanamide functionalization and presence of the NiP molecular catalyst were demonstrated to improve the overall charge transfer efficiency, while using NiP as electron acceptor also further hampered the oxidation of 4-methylbenzaldehyde to carboxylic acid (70% selectivity towards 4-methylbenzoic acid was detected when NiP was replaced by air). The NCNCNx–NiP system facilitated the generation of almost an ideal 1:1 ratio of gaseous hydrogen and liquid aldehyde products.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of reaction mechanism for H2 evolution on oxime–Ni2+ immobilized on carbon nitride. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Diagram of reaction mechanism for water oxidation on cobalt–oxo cubane complex motifs on pyridine-functionalized carbon nitride. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic representation and (d) time-dependent photocatalytic reforming of 4-methylbenzyl alcohol to hydrogen and 4-methylbenzaldehyde in a NCNCNx–NiP system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Although surface sensitization was shown to improve the selectivity of organic oxidation (by tuning the radical formation pathways), this strategy is not widely employed due to the complex synthesis methods that are often expensive and time-consuming. Besides, how the organic dyes or metal complexes influence the organic oxidation mechanisms including the bond activation and adsorption–desorption of organic species on the photocatalyst surface remains unclear. More effort could be devoted to systematically studying the reaction pathways and mechanisms when organic dyes or metal complexes are used in photoreforming reactions, to determine the overall feasibility of this strategy in enhancing the organic selectivity.
3.2.1.2 Chemical and physical modifications. 
(a) Metal or non-metal dopants. 
Introducing dopants into photoactive materials alters the optical and electronic properties of the photocatalyst. In general, doping with metal atoms creates new sub-bands near the original conduction band, while non-metal atoms introduce sub-bands close to the valence band. Sub-band formation improves light absorption and influences charge carrier separation. In many cases, doping allows UV-active semiconductors to attain visible-light activation. With a suitable amount of dopant, charge carrier recombination can also be suppressed. Consequently, doping is a very common method employed to improve the photocatalytic performance of semiconductor. As for selectivity enhancement, surface doping can play a significant role, given that photooxidation reactions occur on the surface of the photocatalyst.
Doping often alters both the bulk and surface properties of a catalyst whereby different selectivities can be achieved. F-doped Pt/TiO2 employed for methanol photoreforming exhibited higher selectivity towards CO2 (complete methanol oxidation reaction) compared to the F-free sample.86 The calculated H2/CO2 product ratio for a 5 at% F doped sample (2:1) was much lower than the bare sample (up to 40:1), indicating that fluorinated TiO2 surfaces possess an increased amount of surface hydroxyl moieties which favor the indirect hydroxyl-mediated complete oxidation reaction. While the above does not aim for high organic selectivity (the focus was predominantly on enhancing the hydrogen evolution reaction), it provided useful mechanistic understanding and insight for future implementation. C-doped TiO2 was fabricated via a one-step sol-microwave method and employed for the photocatalytic glycerol conversion reaction.87 Different microwave treatment durations and cellulose loadings allowed for the density of the carbon dopant to be tuned. Under visible light irradiation, the optimized C-doped TiO2 achieved a high glycerol conversion rate with high yields of glyceraldehyde (GAL, 10.0%), dihydroxyacetone (DHA, 7.4%), formic acid (FA, 49.0%) and acetic acid (AA, 1.8%). In the presence of H2O2, the ˙OH radical was the main oxidizing species as proposed in the glycerol oxidation reaction pathways (Fig. 11). The results demonstrated that, at the optimum dopant density, FA selectivity was significantly increased along with an enhanced glycerol conversion rate. While this study did not justify the relationship between carbon doping and selectivity improvement, the proposed mechanism was useful for the research community interested in glycerol and other polyhydric alcohol reforming. It is important to note the inherent difficulties associated with improving the selectivity towards GAL, given that it can readily undergo further oxidation into glyceric acid or ethylene glycol.
 Fig. 11  Proposed pathway model for the photocatalytic conversion of glycerol to GAL, DHA, FA and AA over C-doped TiO2 photocatalyst in water under visible-light illumination. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. 
Doping with nitrogen has been widely employed in photocatalysis (particularly TiO2) to induce defect states within the bandgap and invoke visible light absorption. A study on Au loaded N-doped TiO2 for the photodecomposition of formic acid and methyl formate demonstrated distinct product selectivity variations toward H2, CO, CO2, and methanol upon UV and visible light illumination.88 N-doping bare TiO2 increased selectivity toward methanol during methyl formate conversion. In contrast, a decreased methanol selectivity was observed for N-doped Au/TiO2 when compared to Au/TiO2. The decreased methanol selectivity for N-doped Au/TiO2 was attributed to the presence of Au active sites which favor C–H bond breaking, leading to the production of formaldehyde (instead of methanol) from the methoxy group (Fig. 12a). The rationale behind the improved C–H bond breaking capability of N-doped Au/TiO2 was further supported by an ensuing study on methanol and ethanol photoreforming reactions.89 A higher selectivity towards gaseous carbon products (CO and CO2) and a lower selectivity towards liquid carbon products (methyl formate and acetaldehyde) was observed for N-doped Au/TiO2 compared to its neat counterpart (Fig. 12b and c), due to the efficient C–H bond cleavage. It is also important to note that the complete consumption of ethanol after the first 100 min further prompted acetaldehyde oxidation into CO, as illustrated by the decreased amount of acetaldehyde (Fig. 12b). Most of the above studies highlight the detrimental effect N-doping has on Au/TiO2 in terms of providing a higher selectivity towards value-added organic products (favoring CO or CO2 instead). In contrast, Rh-loaded N-doped TiO2 was found to produce CO-free hydrogen (for use in a hydrogen fuel cell) during formic acid photodecomposition,90 while small amount of CO was detected from Rh-loaded TiO2. Although the reaction produced CO2, the ability to produce CO-free hydrogen is important to prevent catalyst poisoning in the hydrogen fuel cell. Zhang et al. successfully demonstrated the ability to tune the valence band level of N-doped TiO2 by regulating the N content to deliver a high selectivity towards benzaldehydes during the benzyl alcohol photoreforming reaction.91 Knowledge from these studies has underlined the potential of N-doping for tuning the reaction pathway, although a better understanding of the relationship between doping, photocatalyst properties and reaction mechanism are important to fully unveil the benefits.
 Fig. 12  (a) Possible reaction pathway for methyl formate conversion, (b and c) conversion and amount of products formed from the photoreforming of ethanol by Au/TiO2 and N-doped Au/TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. (d) Potential reaction scheme for ethanol photoreforming reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 
Beyond non-metal doping, metal doping has also been examined in photoreforming studies. Ru-doped ZnIn2S4 exhibited the ability to photocatalytically convert lignocellulose-derived methylfurans into diesel precursors, arising from an accelerated C–H activation process in the presence of the Ru dopants.93 In a Co-doped TiO2 system, an optimum hydrogen production rate was achieved by 2 wt% Co doping for glycerol photoreforming, while the selectivity towards liquid carbon products increased with an increasing amount of Co dopant.94 Although glycerol conversion and selectivity results were not provided in the study, an increasing H2:CO2 product ratio (independent of the overall photoactivity) acts as an indicator for selectivity enhancement. The higher the H2:CO2 ratio, the lower the tendency for CO2 production with respect to hydrogen (indicative of a lower rate of over-oxidation/complete oxidation), which also signals a higher production rate of intermediate liquid organic products. In a separate study, Cu-doped and Au-doped TiO2 were compared for gas phase ethanol photoreforming.92 Hydrogen (>95% in the gas stream) and acetaldehyde were identified as the main products for both Cu-doped and Au-doped samples with small amounts of carbon products (CH4, CO, CO2) also generated. Au-doped TiO2 produced more hydrogen, whereas Cu-doped TiO2 offered better selectivity towards acetaldehyde. The reaction scheme proposed from the work (Fig. 12d) is useful for ensuing studies on selectivity control in the ethanol reforming reaction.
As a commonly employed strategy, doping photoactive materials with either metal or non-metal elements is a amenable approach for regulating selectivity during organic photoreforming. Although much of the research focus has been directed towards the hydrogen evolution performance, some studies have started to consider the photooxidation products and identify the possible reaction pathways, which are crucial for realizing selective photoreforming systems.
(b) Defect engineering. 
Defect/vacancy formation, which essentially is the removal of intrinsic atoms from a material matrix, can also be considered as a self-doping approach. Similar to atom doping, introducing vacancies induces additional band potentials which alter the light absorption ability and charge separation efficiency of the photocatalyst. In some cases, co-catalyst addition, heterojunction formation or doping will also introduce defects into the photocatalyst crystal structure. While bulk defects are generally regarded as a charge recombination center (detrimental to the photoactivity), surface defects have demonstrated potential for improving photoactivity and tuning the selectivity.
Surface oxygen vacancies (Ov), which are commonly formed under an inert or reducing environment, are the most widely-employed defect in TiO2 for photo-related applications.95 Many studies have demonstrated that, with an appropriate amount of surface Ov, TiO2 can exhibit enhanced adsorption and charge separation capabilities which improve the overall efficiency. For instance, during the selective oxidation of benzylamine to imine, regulating the concentration of surface Ov was shown to activate O2 to form either superoxide (˙O2−) or singlet oxygen (1O2) species.96 The ability to tune the generation of these reactive oxygen species contributed to the enhanced selectivity towards imine. While improved selectivity was achieved under an aerobic environment, the defected TiO2 sample also elevated the hydrogen production rate in an anaerobic atmosphere. In principle, the presence of Ov in a TiO2 crystal structure leads to the formation of Ti3+ (existence of unpaired electron when oxygen from the lattice is removed). Nevertheless, there exists differences between Ti3+ and Ov, as illustrated by the evolution of Ov to Ti3+ during hydrothermal synthesis.97 Furthermore, various types of Ov, such as F0-, F+-, and F2+-centers, can also contribute differently given their different energy levels;98,99 however, they remain poorly understood due to the limited studies available.
Integrating defect engineering with a co-catalyst presence is another prospective strategy for tuning selectivity. A very recent study demonstrated that Cu deposited on defected titanium oxide nanorods (Cu/TNRs) was an effective photocatalyst for converting glycerol into syngas (H2, CO) and liquid product (methanol).100 An increase in gas product selectivity towards CO and methanol (instead of CO2) was achieved by altering the Cu/TNR band structure. According to Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations and experimental results, oxygen vacancies in the TNRs facilitated polyol dissociative adsorption and activation; while water content and Cu loading were the main factors that improved CO selectivity. A series of photocatalysts was also screened for the glycerol photoreforming reaction under the same experimental conditions, as illustrated in Fig. 13a. Most of the photocatalysts did not generate significant amount of products, while Pt-loaded commercial TiO2 (P25) imparted a high overall activity with negligible selectivity towards methanol. The ability of Cu/TNR to produce methanol and syngas was again demonstrated by replacing glycerol with various other oxygenates (Fig. 13b) and polyols (Fig. 13c), respectively. Similarly, Au-loaded, defected TNRs were synthesized using NaBH4 as the reducing agent and assessed for ethanol photoreforming. The activity and selectivity of the catalysts increased as the defect site concentration increased. A high selectivity towards acetaldehyde and high purity hydrogen as gas products with negligible amounts of by-products (CO2 and CH4) was observed for the Au/TNRs containing the highest defect concentration. The defected Au/TNRs were proposed to improve ethanol activation by providing more active sites, comprising oxygen vacancies close to the Au co-catalyst deposits, while simultaneously suppressing carbon–carbon bond cleavage to form CO2 and CH4.36
 Fig. 13  (a) Photocatalyst screening results for the glycerol photoreforming reaction. Photoreforming performance by Cu/TNRs for different (b) oxygenates and (c) polyols. Reaction conditions: 10 mg photocatalyst, 10 mg organic solvent, 0.8 mL acetonitrile as co-solvent, 0.2 mL water, 365 nm 18 W LED with light intensity of 55 mW cm−2.100 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature. 
The formation of defect states within the band gap can also enable energy band re-positioning and invoke greater oxidation reaction selectivity, as illustrated in Fig. 14.101 Introducing Ti3+ defect states in a TiO2/g-C3N4 photocatalyst reconstructed the typical type-II heterojunction configuration into a Z-scheme system. The generated Z-scheme configuration was proposed to induce a strong reductive ability, arising from the very energetic conduction band of g-C3N4 and, more importantly, the strong oxidizing power of holes in the TiO2 valence band. Efficient photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde and naphthol was then accomplished by the highly oxidizing photogenerated holes. As a consequence of the high hole oxidizing potential, complete oxidation of the organics produced a higher concentration of CO2. While complete oxidation is unfavorable for the selective organic oxidation reaction, the findings allowed for greater understanding on the contribution of defects to photocatalyst design in terms of tuning band alignment. Overall, inducing defects in a photocatalyst can be adopted to manipulate photoreforming selectivity with the potential to also be used in harmony with a co-catalyst. Attention has to be paid to the nature of the defects and their oxidizing power to ensure they benefit the reaction instead of being to its detriment.
 Fig. 14  Schematic depicting photoinduced charge carrier separation and transfer in defected-TiO2/g-C3N4 composite. Adapted from ref. 101 with permission. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. 
More recently, defects in the form of terminal functional groups in carbon nitride have been exploited as the active sites for organic photoreforming. As described earlier, Kasap et al. demonstrated that cyanamide defects in carbon nitride can improve 4-methylbenzyl alcohol photoreforming activity and selectivity.85 This was mainly attributed to the favorable hydrogen bonding interactions between anionic cyanamide defects and 4-methylbenzyl alcohol, which enhanced the reactant adsorption. The role of functional group defects in carbon nitride has also been studied by Liu et al. where the replacement of terminal amino groups with ethyl alcohol groups lead to the more favorable adsorption of organic compounds and eventually promoted the visible-light driven photoreforming of several monosaccharides into H2 and their corresponding oxidized products.102 Controlling edge functional group in carbon nitride has opened a new avenue to engineer the photocatalysts on a structural level. As these defect types in carbon nitride can act as the active sites, careful selection of terminal functional groups and modulation of the degree of functionalization may alter the organic photoreforming reaction pathway, which in turn will influence product selectivity.
(c) Crystal phase and morphology engineering. 
Different photocatalyst crystal phases have been reported to exhibit different photoactivities for hydrogen generation and organic degradation reactions. Variations to crystal structure can alter electronic band structures. Taking TiO2 as an example, the typical crystal phases of anatase, rutile and brookite feature distinct band gaps of 3.2, 3.0 and 3.3 eV, respectively. The contrasting band structures invoke dissimilar light absorption abilities, charge separation efficiencies and, most importantly, photocatalytic reduction and oxidation capabilities. In addition, anatase often possesses a larger surface area/smaller crystallite size than rutile, favoring reactant adsorption. The difference in the physical traits of the crystal polymorphs commonly originates from the calcination temperature, whereby anatase forms at a lower temperature than rutile. Beyond the three conventional crystallographic forms of TiO2, monoclinic TiO2(B) has also shown to be active for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, displaying an ∼20% higher photocatalytic performance than P25.103,104 Although the TiO2 crystal phase is well known to significantly impact on overall photocatalytic efficiency, its effect on organic selectivity is yet to be widely studied. For example, a higher H2/CO2 ratio was observed over brookite phase-rich TiO2 during glycerol photoreforming, suggesting that this polymorph is less active for complete mineralization of the organic compound.105
Lu et al. have demonstrated that tuning the P25 anatase/rutile ratio can enhance selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol during ethanol photoreforming.106 Interestingly, the results showed that a higher rutile composition resulted in a higher selectivity. Commercial P25 photocatalyst with an anatase/rutile ratio of 80:20 exhibited a negligible selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol, while P25–900–8 h (anatase/rutile ratio: 0:100) gave a selectivity as high as 96.6%. Interestingly, the change in selectivity can also be correlated to the density of surface hydroxyl groups on the anatase and rutile phases. Specifically, the rutile phase with less surface hydroxyl groups gave higher 2,3-butanediol selectivity as radical intermediates bind strongly to the surface hydroxyl groups, which is detrimental for subsequent C–C coupling. As mentioned earlier, for the C–C coupling reaction to form glycol from alcohol, the alcohol needs to first undergo C–H activation to form α-C radicals (i.e. ˙CH(OH)CH3) and the rapid desorption of α-C radicals induces the C–C coupling reaction (Fig. 15a).107 If the α-C radicals are not desorbed and released into the solution, the competitive oxidation reaction to form aldehyde will take place. On this basis, porosity within a TiO2 structure has been shown to hinder 2,3-butanediol formation due to the decrease in ˙CH(OH)CH3 diffusion into the bulk solution for the coupling reaction (Fig. 15b).106 The C–C coupling phenomenon was further explained in an ensuing work which provided a comprehensive data analysis and mechanistic explanation of the process.108 The study again proved the capacity for inducing the C–C coupling reaction to form 2,3-butanediol by regulating the TiO2 phases and structures. The enhanced selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol from bioethanol by Pt/rutile was clearly illustrated (Fig. 15c). It was also revealed that the C–C coupling reaction was inversely related to the TiO2 surface –OH groups. Modifying the TiO2 with NaF (F-modified Pt/TiO2) reduced the surface –OH groups which gave a higher selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol (from 2.6% to 65%) when compared to the neat TiO2. Although the F-modified Pt/TiO2 was employed as a control sample to further understand the reaction mechanism, the study indirectly identified the importance of surface modification for tuning photocatalyst selectivity. While all the studies illustrated the ability to improve the selectivity of C–C coupling reaction, the enhanced selectivity generally came at the expense of overall photoactivity. As observed by Lu et al., the overall ethanol conversion efficiency of 44.8% by commercial P25 (80% anatase) was significantly higher than the 7.8% conversion provided by rutile TiO2. Similarly, a higher selectivity towards pinacol from isopropanol photoreforming was obtained for a graphene oxide-based photocatalytic system when compared to P25 (P25 generated more acetone and CO2), although a lower conversion was observed due to the lower amount of ˙OH generated.109 The studies indicate that it is critical to consider the trade-off between activity and selectivity to achieve the optimal organic photoreforming performance.
 Fig. 15  (a) Postulated reaction pathways of H+ reduction into hydrogen and alcohol oxidation to aldehyde and glycol. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. (b) Schematic depicting the pore effect of TiO2 in controlling the diffusivity of ˙CH(OH)CH3 and the selectivity of ethanol oxidation. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011. (c) 2,3-Butanediol selectivity from ethanol photoreforming and the over-oxidation products with respect to the crystal phases of Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts. Commercial P25, anatase, brookite and rutile TiO2 are indicated as P25-TiO2, A-TiO2, B-TiO2 and R-TiO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Numerous recent studies have also shown that crystal facet-engineering is a powerful strategy to regulate the spatial charge separation toward different exposed faces.7 Many studies have demonstrated the ability to designed anisotropic photocatalysts with more than one facet, typically electron-dominated and hole-dominated facets, for reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively.110–112 Engineering exposed facets can potentially allow for different sites to simultaneously produce hydrogen and value-added chemicals from biomass photoreforming. The contribution of crystal facet engineering to photoreforming was examined for hydrogen evolution from a formic acid feedstock, where different ratios of exposed {101} and {001} anatase TiO2 facets (20%, 40% and 90%) were prepared. The reductive ability of the {101} facet bolstered hydrogen production as well as complete formic acid oxidation. The result indicated that, while the activity increased with a higher {101} presence, the selectivity was not significantly varied.113 The lack of influence of crystal facet ratio on photoreforming selectivity in this case may derive from the photocatalyst and reaction combination considered not being responsive to the effect. Xie et al. have demonstrated the effects of CdS morphology on methanol photoreforming selectivity,51 where CdS nanorods displayed higher selectivity towards ethylene glycol production when compared to the CdS nanoparticles, nanospheres, and nanosheets. Although the reason for the change in selectivity was not discussed, the difference in dominant exposed crystal facet is likely to play a significant role as this can affect the adsorption energy of radical intermediates. To the best of our knowledge, no study has specifically implemented or demonstrated crystal facet engineering as a means of tuning the selectivity of organic products for photoreforming despite the potential. Considerable possibility exists given facet-dependent properties such as surface adsorption capacity, strength and molecule orientation can alter the reaction pathway.


3.2.2 Key considerations for photocatalyst design. 
Associating both the photocatalyst requirements for hydrogen evolution and selective oxidation is essential to uncover photocatalysts suited to the selective photoreforming reaction. Apart from selecting photocatalysts that exhibit a good hydrogen evolution efficiency (typically possessing an energetic conduction band and favorable surface active sites for H+ adsorption), additional considerations based on selective oxidation are crucial to simultaneously obtain value-added organic products. Studies to date have predominantly focused on improving the hydrogen production rate. Apart from TiO2, other metal oxides, such as ZnO (possessing a similar band structure to TiO2) and Cu2O (band gap of ∼2.2 eV), have demonstrated an ability to generate hydrogen via photoreforming of aldehydes, carboxylic acids and alcohols.114,115 Regardless of the comparatively shallower valence band of Cu2O, hydrogen has been generated from organic reforming due to its very energetic conduction band and visible-light activity.116 However, the poor photostability of Cu2O continues to be the key hurdle in it retaining its photoactivity over a long reaction time-frame.117,118 Titanate mixed metal oxides is another group of photocatalysts that has great potential for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, in spite of its large bandgap that hinders visible light absorption.119 Select alkaline-earth titanates have also been successfully fabricated, for instance by Zielinska et al. who found that SrTiO3 was the most active photocatalyst for organic photoreforming reactions.120
Other than common considerations to design highly active photocatalysts, attention must also be paid to modulating the selectivity of the organic oxidation half-reaction. Even though there is no one distinct relationship between photocatalyst design strategy and selectivity (as design is highly dependent on catalyst type, reactants, products and reaction pathways), there are several key considerations for achieving high selectivity based on the currently available photoreforming studies. Preventing the formation of highly oxidizing ˙OH radicals (which promote unselective oxidation) to restrict CO2 generation is the general requirement for all selective organic oxidations. Accordingly, a photocatalyst should have suitable conduction band (for hydrogen generation), valence band (for selective oxidation). For instance, the well-established TiO2 which is known to be active for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, may not be a suitable photocatalyst for selective oxidation due to its energetic valence band potential that promotes ˙OH radical generation.91 However, due to its high stability and high quantum yield, it remains an exemplary photocatalyst. Modifying TiO2 using a combination of strategies discussed above could, for instance, change the oxidation pathway to direct hole transfer (instead of ˙OH radical oxidation) while retaining the overall conversion efficiency and potentially unveil the capability of TiO2-based photocatalysts for selective photoreforming. In addition, to avoid ˙OH radical formation, a suitable valence band energy is still required to enable effective direct hole oxidation of the organic feedstock to give the desired intermediate products. Photocatalysts with a less energetic valence band potential (but high conduction band potential), such as g-C3N4, CdS and ZnIn2S4 represent potential photocatalyst alternatives. As illustrated in Fig. 16, they possess appropriate conduction and valence band positions that enable H+ reduction and the oxidation of various organic compounds, while suppressing the oxidation of H2O into ˙OH radicals.13 Bearing in mind that it is challenging to make direct quantitative comparisons of hydrogen production rates across different studies, sulfide photocatalysts (e.g. CdS and ZnIn2S4) represent more active visible-light active photocatalysts despite their photocorrosion problems. They can attain high hydrogen production rates (up to mmol h−1 g−1) when compared to C3N4 and Cu2O (typically μmol h−1 g−1).52,121–123
 Fig. 16  Band positions of various photocatalysts as well as selected redox potentials. Bandgap information extracted from ref. 124 and 125. 
Beyond avoiding over-oxidation into undesirable CO2, steering the reaction pathway to selectively produce different desired target products is crucial. For alcohol photoreforming, which has been thoroughly discussed in earlier sections, the two dominant oxidation reaction pathways are towards aldehydes or glycols, as illustrated in Fig. 17. Careful investigation shows that bond activation, adsorption–desorption, and mass transfer processes are some of the key steps which should be taken into consideration when designing selective photocatalysts. These catalytic steps take place on the photocatalyst surface; thus, engineering the surface properties specific to the desired reaction mechanism is a pivotal strategy to alter the reaction mechanism. From Fig. 17, C–H activation followed by C–C coupling are two essential steps to produce glycol instead of aldehyde. As discussed above, several photocatalyst modifications, such as the presence of secondary components, the engineering of surface functional groups and morphologies (chemical/physical modifications), have been implemented to tweak O–H and C–H bond activation energy barriers as well as adsorption energies and diffusivity of α-C radical intermediates. Pt and Pd co-catalysts loaded on Zn2In2S5 were shown to catalyze O–H bond scission leading to aldehyde generation while metal phosphide and sulfide co-catalysts invoked a higher rate of C–H activation and C–C coupling, attributed to the less competitive O–H activation.52 Suitable surface functional groups with preferential C–H activation and weak adsorption of α-C radical intermediates can also boost the reactions to produce more glycols. Surface OH on TiO2, for example, was found to be detrimental for C–H activation and C–C coupling of alcohols. Consequently, decreasing surface OH density by changing the TiO2 phase into rutile and/or doping with F anions could subsequently improve glycol selectivity.106,108 Surface thiol groups on sulfide semiconductors have also been demonstrated to be the active sites for alcohol C–H activation and promotors for the subsequent C–C coupling reaction.52 In terms of morphology, non-porous structures were found to drive selectivity towards glycols due to the rapid diffusion of α-C radicals away from the photocatalyst surface, preventing further oxidation of radical intermediates into aldehyde.106
 Fig. 17  Reaction mechanism for alcohol photoreforming via bond activation, adsorption–desorption and mass transfer steps, which are dependent on the type of secondary component (e.g. co-catalyst loading), surface functional groups, crystal phase and morphology. 
From the above summary and discussion, correlating the photocatalyst properties derived from the various design strategies with the reaction mechanism as well as selectivity has opened the door to alter the reaction pathway during alcohol oxidation. However, it is important to note that this relationship cannot be generalized for all photoreforming reactions as the prerequisite properties are dependent on the organic substrates, target products, and reaction mechanism. Nevertheless, the key point that surface properties can influence the pivotal catalytic steps (i.e. bond activation, adsorption–desorption, and mass transfer) is universally applicable in most cases of selective organic photoreforming.


3.2.3 Process conditions and reactor designs. 
Although photocatalyst properties are known to be critical in defining the activity and selectivity for photoreforming reactions, the contribution of reaction environment and process parameters should not be neglected. Given the number of studies focusing on these aspects is limited, it is important take operational conditions (e.g. concentration and type of feedstock, temperature, pH of the solution and reaction environment) and reactor design parameters (which affect the mass transport and light exposure) into consideration.47 As such, these parameters influence both the reaction rate and change the reaction pathways.126 Mechanistic studies based on ultra-high vacuum (UHV) systems and suspension systems have drawn similar conclusions in that the present of water changes the main reactive species and shifts the reaction pathway.108,127 In suspension systems, increasing the ethanol volume fraction in water improved the selectivity toward 2,3-butanediol, as detailed below.108 For the photoreforming of alcohol, production of higher value esters or methyl formate was shown to be possible with good temperature control.128 Bazyar and Hosseini-Sarvari demonstrated that by changing the reaction environment (i.e. controlling aerobic/anaerobic conditions) during carboxylic acid oxidation, the reaction pathway can be controlled.129 Decarboxylation (forming various alkanes/arenes) or oxidation (forming various ketone/aldehyde products) reaction were shown to occur in oxygen-free or oxygen-rich atmospheres, respectively, in the presence of an Au@ZnO core–shell photocatalyst. Given the focus of this review is on simultaneous hydrogen production and selective organic oxidation (often performed under anaerobic conditions to prevent competition between H+ and O2 reduction), the following sections only outline the effect of modulating the reaction medium concentration/type, temperature or pH on organic selectivity. Select important aspects of reactor design are also included to aid with understanding the optimization of selective photoreforming systems.
3.2.3.1 Process conditions. 
The concentration of dissolved organic species in the photoreforming reaction is significant in determining the photocatalytic hydrogen generation efficiency. The optimum concentration is typically defined as when the photocatalyst surface is saturated with one monolayer of the reactant.130 Varying the dissolved organic species concentration, which regulates the surface adsorption ability, can also be correlated to the specific kinetics of the reaction oxidation pathway, thereby determining the oxidation selectivity. A few studies have shown that the polarity of a mono-hydric alcohol can affect its dissociative adsorption kinetics on a TiO2 surface whereby reaction selectivity can be altered by varying its concentration.131–133 Expanding on this idea, Yang et al. demonstrated that 30 v/v% of aqueous ethanol for a TiO2 system was the optimum ethanol concentration that provided the highest selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol.108 As explained above (Section 3.2.1), 2,3-butanediol is generated via α-C–C coupling of ˙CH(OH)CH3 radicals, which competes with the typical ethanol to acetaldehyde oxidation pathway. The over-oxidation of ˙CH(OH)CH3 radicals into acetaldehyde can readily happen when the intermediate ˙CH(OH)CH3 is strongly bounded to the photocatalyst surface. The presence of water, which can be controlled by varying the organic concentration in the reaction mixture, was shown to greatly improve the selectivity towards 2,3-butanediol when compared to pure ethanol. Arising from the preferential adsorption of water on TiO2, which promotes ˙CH(OH)CH3 desorption, over-oxidation to aldehyde can be prevented. Consequently, when higher ethanol concentrations are used (higher than 30 v/v%), 2,3-butanediol formation is impeded.126
While the presence of water appears to be beneficial according to the above study, potential competition between water oxidation and organic oxidation is another important aspect to be considered. Increasing the product selectivity by elevating the water content may be compensated by the decreased in overall organic oxidation conversion. For instance, with a 10-fold lower initial concentration of glycerol (200 mM vs. 20 mM, Fig. 18a), the surface of a RhCrOx/SrTiO3–Al photocatalyst favored the water oxidation reaction in place of glycerol oxidation due to a proportional decrease in adsorbed glycerol on the catalyst surface.119 The presence of different oxygenate types will also lead to different water oxidation tendencies (Fig. 18b). In contrast, catalysts that are not able to catalyze water oxidation follow Langmuir-type kinetics, whereby the hydrogen evolution and organic oxidation rates are highly dependent on the organic concentration.134,135 Regulating the initial organic concentration may improve selectivity, although an optimum performance comprising high conversion efficiency and good selectivity will not be achieved without the right photocatalyst that contains suitable active sites and chemical properties.
 Fig. 18  Selectivity towards O2 evolution/water oxidation (green) and organic oxidation (orange) exhibited by RhCrOx/STO–Al photocatalyst in the presence of different (a) glycerol concentrations and (b) oxygenate types. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Regarding temperature control, Kollmannsberger et al. showed that precise control of the reaction temperature can regulate intermediate species stability.128 For example, the selectivity of methanol reforming to formaldehyde on a Pt/TiO2-based single crystal increased at a higher temperature (240–300 K) as formaldehyde desorption was promoted, preventing over-oxidation into CO2. During oxidative-coupling reactions for methanol reforming, methyl-formate production (a side reaction in the case of formaldehyde production) has also been found to be highly temperature dependent and is correlated to the residence time of formaldehyde remaining on the TiO2 surface. As the formaldehyde desorption rate increases, the increasingly diminishing formaldehyde residence time impedes the oxidative-coupling reaction, preventing methyl-formate formation. The study demonstrated that changes to the reaction temperature can alter the selectivity towards different oxidation reaction pathways (between formaldehyde and methyl-formate production). Almeida et al. demonstrated that, for the oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanone on TiO2, increasing temperature gave an increased product yield, however, reaction selectivity was decreased.136 They postulated that, at higher temperatures (50 °C), the increased cyclohexane conversion was due to decreased competitive surface hydration and improved cyclohexane adsorption More recently, Courtois and co-workers have demonstrated that the selectivity of isobutanol oxidation on a TiO2(110) surface can be controlled by regulating the reaction temperature.137 At room temperature, the isobutanol is primarily oxidized to isobutanal, while at lower temperature (240 K), propane becomes the major oxidation product. It was shown that the decreased in temperature hindered the desorption of isobutanal on the TiO2 surface, which facilitated a subsequent oxidation reaction, converting the isobutanal to propane. At room temperatures, the rapid thermal desorption prevents further oxidation of the aldehyde, resulting in isobutanal being the primary oxidation product. The findings from these works indicated that temperature regulation is an important parameter for defining the adsorption energy of intermediate species which can be used to tune reaction selectivity.
Within oxidation reactions, pH has also been shown to impact the reaction rate and selectivity towards the oxidation products. In some cases, a basic condition is favorable for alcohol oxidation by promoting the formation of an alkoxy-intermediate and eliminating the beta-hydride intermediate (often regarded as the rate limiting step). The resulting alkoxy species could then be further converted into its corresponding oxidation product, such as an aldehyde.138–141 Conversely, using a C3N4-based system, Long et al. demonstrated that the selective organic oxidation of barbituric acid into its corresponding aldehyde was significantly enhanced at lower pH, with the yield increasing from 14% to 49% when the pH was adjusted from 7 to 0.138 They hypothesized that beta-hydride elimination derived from a proton-coupling reaction as observed at the conduction band and a corresponding rapid electron donation process from the alcohol at the valence band, immediately eliminating the beta-hydride. Controlling the solution pH is a means by which intermediate formation and transformation can be regulated and can be used to direct the reaction along a desirable pathway to provide improved selectivity during photooxidative reactions.
3.2.3.2 Reactor design. 
Akin to other heterogeneous catalytic reactions, selective photoreforming is also governed by the adsorption of reactants and transient species on the photocatalyst surface. Once adsorbed, a sequence of reactions is initiated upon irradiation depending on a range of attributes, including photoabsorption, charge separation and surface charge consumption efficacies. Photocatalytic reactors are critical to the process and should be carefully designed to optimize the light exposure on the photocatalyst surface and facilitate efficient mass transport. Other key aspects to consider are irradiation penetration, product recovery and scale-up prospects.142,143 There are few studies focusing on reactor design to accelerate the generation rate of selective products due to the high dependency of selectivity on photocatalyst design and process conditions, albeit reactor design and configuration can add value by mitigating photon utilization and mass transfer bottlenecks. The catalyst imposes favorable band potentials and adsorption sites for selective reactions to occur, while the photoreactor offers tools for intensifying the kinetics of associated elementary steps.
Two reactor systems typically employed in photoreforming applications are: (i) reactors where the photocatalyst particles are suspended in a mobile phase (slurry-type); and (ii) reactors where the photocatalyst is immobilized onto an inert transparent support such as a packed bed or a thin film.144–146 The former is more prevalent in liquid phase processes, and variants exist for batch and semi-batch multiphase flow systems.25,147 In most cases, top-down illumination is preferred when working with a solar spectrum.148 The power source for these configurations is typically a Xe-lamp, solar simulator or actual sunlight. UV lamps are also common where the choice depends primarily on the semiconductor bandgap and the desired oxidation pathway. The excitation wavelength (UV or visible light) can stimulate preferential enhancement during photocatalytic oxidation towards selective products. The irradiation wavelength absorbed at the catalyst surface may vary depending on the reactor material which represents an intermediate absorption medium located between the illumination source and the catalyst surface. In a study on the photolytic oxidation of cyclohexane, switching between various reactor materials (i.e. quartz, Vycor or Pyrex) changed the illumination wavelength incident upon the catalyst. The selectivity to cyclohexanone was shifted with the Pyrex yielding optimal activity and selectivity.149 Similarly, Ke et al. demonstrated the capacity to tune the Au/CeO2 reduction power by manipulating the irradiation wavelength. At wavelengths >600 nm, only azobenzene reduction occurred as the excited electrons were not sufficiently energetic to induce the reduction of acetophenone and styrene oxide.
As well as incident wavelength, the uniformity and depth of light penetration into the reaction media are important. It is known that light propagation in aqueous media is slower compared to the gas phase, as supported by the difference in refractive index (refractive index of water in liquid phase is 1.34 for 361 nm wavelength at 20 °C, while it is close to 1.0 in vapor phase).150 Likewise, distinct product selectivity can be obtained in gas-phase and liquid-phase photocatalytic systems. In a study on photocatalytic methanol steam reforming, Chiarello et al. attained 30% higher reaction rates in the gas phase when compared to the liquid phase counterpart. The difference was attributed to the absence of mass transfer limitations and improvement in photon efficiency.151 In addition to activity enhancement, the only intermediate species detected in the vapor phase was formaldehyde, compared to a distribution of products in the liquid phase, suggesting a variance in selectivity.
Reactors involving immobilized catalysts in a packed bed enable continuous operation and catalyst recovery although they typically exhibit low performance due to the restricted exposure of active sites per unit volume as well as mass-transfer limitations. Further, photocatalyst films are constrained by their thickness which affects internal mass transfer as access to active sites at the catalyst–support interface is blocked.152 In contrast, slurry reactors provide a good irradiation pattern of photon flux distribution and optimal interaction between the photons and reactant molecules. However, slurry reactors require additional downstream complexity in the form of catalyst separation from the aqueous medium, where steps such as coagulation, flocculation, and sedimentation are needed.
In addition to solving light exposure and mass transfer challenges, high level complexity stems from targeted adsorption/desorption of reactant, intermediate and product species as well as over-oxidation into undesirable products. The latter is known to reduce selectivity at high conversions, whereby simultaneous improvements to conversion and selectivity is challenging.153 Batch reactors are particularly prone to over-oxidation due to a negative conversion–selectivity correlation. In contrast, flow reactors facilitate continuous removal of the product ensuring maximum conversion of reactant species into the desired product. Consequently, careful consideration of reactor design is important for selective photoreforming applications.
Given that photocatalyst design and the selection of reaction conditions impact on both the activity and selectivity of the photoreforming process, the strong link between the intrinsic properties of a catalyst and reactor performance makes the entire process even more intricate.154 Needless to say, additional work is still needed to understand and optimize photocatalytic reactor designs so as to enhance photoreforming activity and selectivity. Other design aspects, such as the constant separation of desired products to prevent over-oxidation, can be employed to assist overall process selectivity, particularly if scaling up is needed. For instance, a process-intensified reaction system was designed to enhance ethylene glycol production (relative to other products) using simultaneous separation during the reaction, as indicated in Fig. 19a and b.51 The findings showed that, even though direct impact of reactor on selectivity was not apparent, preferential generation of one product over another was possible by altering the reaction environment. When hydrogen production is desired and carbon dioxide is one of the organic oxidation by-products, an appropriate alkaline solution can help to sequester the latter as carbonate, as demonstrated in a study by Wakerley et al. on the solar-driven reforming of lignocellulose.23 They demonstrated that it is possible to obtain a CO2 rich solution after photoreforming, which can subsequently be utilized for the liquid-phase photoreduction of CO2. At present, there is lack of understanding on the coupling between reaction conditions, such as light intensity and source, reaction media and reactor design/configuration. More studies are required to attain this knowledge, which is essential for scaling up selective photoreforming processes towards future industrialization.
 Fig. 19  Process intensification for ethylene glycol (EG) production. (a) Conventional reaction mode without separation and process-intensified mode with separation. (b) Selectivity of EG as a function of time with and without separation (denoted by red stars) and yield of all products (represented by bars).51 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. 


3.2.4 Key considerations for process conditions and reactor design. 
As demonstrated, there is an underlying relationship between selectivity and reaction conditions (concentration, pH, temperature), with an underlying (and ideally amplifying) effect from the reaction vessel. Controlling the reactant concentration influences the extent of organic adsorption on the catalyst surface, and in some cases where there is competing adsorption, it can also alter the strength of the adsorbed organic. This parameter should be optimized according to the most desirable reaction pathway, where product yield and required downstream product separation should also be considered. The pH can be adjusted to best facilitate expected intermediate reaction pathways and influence the catalyst's affinity to the proton coupling reaction, as discussed above. Related to this, the point of zero charge pH (pHPZC) of the catalyst surface should also be considered, which determines the relative surface charge of hydrated surfaces according to variations in pH. For instance, the pHPZC of TiO2 is approximately 6.9, where above this pH value, the TiO2 surface tends to be negatively charged, and below this value positively charged.155 In this regard, adjusting the pH could be rationalized to achieve desirable reaction pathways based on relative charges between surface and intermediate species. However, in general, changing the reaction pH also alters a host of other properties that will affect the reaction selectivity such as band potentials, adsorption and dissociation kinetics, and physio-chemical properties, making pH effects on reaction selectivity increasingly complex.156 Altering the reaction temperature can be used to adjust reaction rates, however this parameter can also be exploited to investigate possible changes in reaction selectivity where intermediate desorption tendencies can be weighed against further reaction of intermediates to define the product. Increasing the temperature generally decreases the activation energy of the hydrogen production reaction and typically expedite the oxidation of organics.157 In addition to those process conditions which can regulate the reaction pathway, the reactor design must also be considered as a means to amplify these effects, so as to provide high yield, selective photooxidative reactions. The incident photon flux, photon energy, and residence time can be controlled by selection of the reactor material, shape and size, as well as the light source. In some reaction schemes, there are benefits associated with the constant removal of the reaction products to prevent over-oxidation or to increase the relative concentration of the reactant on the catalyst surface. As such, more effort should be devoted to investigating the effect of reactor design on reaction mechanisms as well as considering suitable methods for in situ product removal.

4. Advanced characterization strategies for structure–mechanism–function relationships
While the above outlined the importance of photocatalyst design, process condition selection and reactor array for enhancing activity and selective during photoreforming, a high-performance system can only be realized if a clear understanding of the reaction mechanism in relation to the photocatalyst properties is established. A lack of attention towards the organic oxidation component in many existing photoreforming studies needs to be emphasized.15 In most cases, oxidized products were not identified, which may have seen knowledge on the potential for harmful organic by-product production being missed. Two possible reasons for not identifying and/or quantifying all existing products from earlier studies may have been: (i) system complexity; and (ii) a lack of suitable facilities and expertise for thorough intermediate and final product quantification (gas chromatography for gas products and liquid chromatography or nuclear magnetic resonance for liquid products). Although greater attention has recently been directed to appreciating the importance of both reductive and oxidative processes in a photocatalytic reaction, understanding the reaction mechanism remains relatively challenging. As well as product identification and quantification, in-depth characterization of chemical, optical and electronic properties of a photocatalyst is essential to obtain further insights into the reaction mechanisms and establish structure–function relationships. Details on a selection of the characterization methods commonly employed to study photocatalyst properties, surface active sites, and intermediate/product species are provided below.
4.1 X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)
XAS is a synchrotron-based characterization technique broadly separated into the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) absorption regions. These techniques can reveal structural information (such as coordination environment, centrosymmetry and atomic distances) as well as electronic properties (such as valence states, spin states and ligand field) of catalytic materials, in either in situ or ex situ conditions.158–160 Xie et al. demonstrated that ex situ EXAFS measurements are useful for understanding photoreforming reaction pathways, particularly for the oxidation of methanol to ethylene glycol.51 By comparing a MoS2 foam and a MoS2 sheet catalyst, both supported on CdS, the k2-weighted EXAFS spectra revealed a decrease in Mo–Mo coordination in the foam supported sample (Fig. 20a), due to the abundance of sheet-edges that acted as hydrogen evolving sites. Combined with a longer electron lifetime, measured via time-resolved photoluminescence, and a more intimate contact between the CdS and MoS2 foam, observed via HAADF-STEM, the improved photogenerated charge separation induced by the MoS2 foam/CdS catalyst benefitted the selectivity and performance for ethylene glycol production.
 Fig. 20  (a) The k2-weighted EXAFS spectrum of MoS2 foam/CdS versus that of MoS2 sheet/CdS.51 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (b) In situ XANES spectra of Cu–Ru–UiO-67(bpy) as a function of LED illumination time. Enlarged region I and II (edge feature and above-edge oscillations, as illustrated in the insets) show the change in Co oxidation state and structure during photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Regarding the hydrogen production component of a photocatalyst, by employing in situ XAS characterization, Huang et al. identified that the key active site on an Cu–Ru–UiO-67 MOF-based photocatalyst was the Co(I) intermediate species (Fig. 20b).161 Activating the intermediate by ultra-fast electron injection from the photosensitizing organic linker further revealed that the rate limiting step was protonation of the Co(I) species. Understanding the true active site of a photo-reforming catalysts is pertinent for developing highly active and selective active species. In the same vein, Luo et al. developed a highly active Ru-doped ZnIn2S4 catalyst for simultaneous hydrogen evolution and lignocellulose-derived methylfuran oxidation to generate a diesel precursor.93 It was found that Ru species, which were initially proposed to substitute In atoms, are reduced to form small Ru clusters on the catalyst surface using an in operando XANES/EXAFS technique. The in situ XANES findings indicated that Ru species were responsible for the organic dehydrocoupling reactions, while Ru clusters were more active toward hydrogen evolution and less effective for C–H activation and coupling.
4.2 X-Ray diffraction (XRD)
XRD enables visualization of the bulk crystalline structure of a photocatalyst both in ex situ and in situ conditions, depending on the measurement apparatus. Combined with other characterization techniques, which are able to reveal the known chemical properties of certain crystallite states, XRD can provide understanding on the structural phases and their contribution to reaction selectivity.162 For example, XRD was used as secondary supporting evidence to confirm the adsorption of a Co thioporphyrazine catalyst on graphitic carbon nitride, which was used to selectively convert HMF to FDCA with high yield and stability.163In situ XRD techniques can quantify dynamic changes to crystalline structures and parameters during photo-active conditions. Although, to our knowledge, in situ XRD has not been used to identify dynamic bulk crystalline changes and their role in altering reaction selectivity, it has been used for other light-induced applications. Lou et al. revealed that, for a solar-rechargeable battery, the photo-intercalation process during charging under solar irradiation followed a two-step structural dynamic change, whereby MoO3 was initially converted into Na0.33MoO3 followed by further intercalation to produce NaxMoO3 (0.33 < x < 1.1).164 Ma et al. also used in situ XRD experiments to demonstrate that the relative bulk structure and oxidation states of Cu2O electrocatalyst species could be controlled by specific interaction with defects in a carbon support.165 The study showed that enhanced selectivity towards electrochemical CO2 reduction was achieved by maintaining the Cu2O phase due to the support interaction. As dynamic crystalline changes can be observed using the in situ XRD technique, insights regarding the reaction mechanisms can be further developed based on structural rearrangement during photoactive conditions. A similar approach can be used for unstable or easily oxidized photocatalysts (e.g. Cu2O, CdS or ZnO) or co-catalysts (Cu, Ni or Co species), whereby the actual oxidation states and/or phases of the semiconductor/metal species during the reactions (which could be favorable active sites) could be probed using in situ XRD techniques.
4.3 Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy can divulge information on the photon–crystal interaction of an infrared incident wave, revealing additional information when compared to XRD spectra on specific molecular symmetry and other optical processes. For organic photoreforming reactions, Zhang and co-works used Raman spectroscopy to provide supporting evidence on the presence of Ti3+ states and associated oxygen vacancies in a TiO2-based material by observing a shift in the Ti–O bond (Eg) vibrational band.36 The oxygen vacancies on the defect-rich TiO2 were shown to improve ethanol adsorption and oxidation for the selective production of acetaldehyde. When applied in situ, Raman spectroscopy provides an opportunity to identify the surface structure of the catalyst which can potentially provide information on the surface adsorbed organic species and their chemical reaction environment. Such information can then be used to support identification of the reaction mechanism on the catalyst surface. The vibrational modes of molecules can be specifically excited to reveal information on species type, intermediates, and dynamic catalyst surface changes.166 Guo et al. developed an in situ Raman technique to understand the photocorrosion process of CdS nanorods under atmospheric and inert environments during photocatalytic hydrogen generation, which is not easily probed by ex situ characterization methods.167 Raman spectroscopy was able to resolve lattice stress from A1, E1 and E2 symmetry modes induced through interaction between the CdS and adsorbed oxygen, which was revealed to be the driving force for the photocorrosion process. Raman spectroscopy was also shown to be a powerful tool for revealing insights into defect type and density in metal oxide-based materials.168 Defects such as oxygen vacancies, grain boundaries and crystalline growth are able to influence intermediate species formation on the catalyst surface.169,170 Moreover, in situ Raman spectroscopy can be used to reveal information on the dynamic surface state and functional groups of a catalyst which is useful for further designing and optimizing reaction performance and selectivity. For example, oxygen vacancies induced by light pre-treatment of a CeO2 photocatalyst were able to promote the formation of reactive oxygen species, hydroxyl groups, and hydroxyl radicals on the catalyst surface.170 These functional groups were found to be beneficial for degrading organic molecules, allowing for the rational control of catalyst defects to alter reaction pathway.171 Raman spectroscopy can be used to identify the nature of active sites, as well as the interaction between these active sites and intermediate species which defines reaction selectivity.
4.4 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is a spectroscopic technique to probe paramagnetic entities, such as active surface sites, reactive oxygen species, and organic radicals, which are involved in photoreforming reactions. In situ EPR measurements can also be undertaken for dynamic monitoring of metal co-catalyst oxidation states and the formation of active surface sites during the photoreforming reaction. In addition to surface-bound species, transient radical intermediates in the bulk solution, such as reactive oxygen species (e.g. hydroxyl and superoxide radicals) and organic radicals (e.g. alkoxy and carbon-centered radicals) can be detected as well.52,172 Regarding C–H activation on toluene, in situ EPR was used to identify and confirm a direct metal-to-cluster charge transfer (MCCT) pathway, which enabled the reaction on a Zr–oxo cluster with Fe3+ in a MOF-based photocatalyst (UiO-66).173 The EPR spectra specifically highlighted the changing oxidation state of Fe, the presence of oxygen-centered active sites and superoxide radicals during toluene oxidation. Taken with other control experiments, electron transfer pathways from Fe3+ to Zr–oxo clusters (MCCT) were demonstrated. The ability to monitor catalyst active sites and short-lived species under real-time reaction conditions can provide detailed mechanistic information and assist with modifying the catalyst properties to promote desirable product formation.
4.5 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful characterization method that enables organic products to be identified/quantified and has been widely used to identify oxidized liquid products from photoreforming reactions. Unlike the other characterization methods detailed above, in situ NMR enables the identification of reaction intermediates both on the catalyst surface and within the liquid phase during the reaction, elucidating crucial information on the reaction pathway. Using an in situ NMR technique, Pilkenton et al. was able to more specifically interpret the ethanol oxidation pathway on a TiO2-based catalyst system.174 They found that, under high ethanol coverage conditions, a 1,1-diethoxyethane intermediate was formed. Further, it was found that two distinct absorption arrangements could be identified whereby hydrogen-bound ethanol and ethoxide bound surface species could be produced during the reaction. The latter adsorption arrangement was attributed to facilitating fast reacting intermediates, thereby improving the photocatalytic ethanol oxidation performance. More importantly, the in situ NMR method revealed that competitive adsorption between water and ethanol occurred, whereby water preferentially occupied the reactively undercoordinated Ti3+ sites, which are active for ethanol oxidation, resulting in tuned reaction selectivity. In study on methanol photoreforming by Wang et al., in situ13C and 1H NMR were performed on a photocatalytic Au–Pt/TiO2 system.175 They observed a gradual increase in methanediol and methoxymethanol species as a function of time from the in situ NMR 13C and 1H spectra (Fig. 21a and b). The presence of these intermediate species strongly supported the postulated reaction pathways where methanol oxidation followed a two-electron dissociative pathway to form formaldehyde (as well as succeeding hydrolysis and methanolysis products; methanediol and methoxymethanol), as opposed to a four-electron oxidation pathway that produces formic acid (Fig. 21c). The benefits of using in situ NMR for studying selective organic oxidations is clear as organic intermediates can be identified and quantified to aid with understanding reaction mechanisms. The ability to decipher varying reaction pathways under in situ conditions can then encourage the rational design of photocatalysts with favorable active sites, which promote desired reaction pathways with the simultaneous production of hydrogen.
 Fig. 21  
In situ (a) 13C NMR and (b) 1H NMR of Au–Pt/TiO2 during photocatalytic hydrogen production with selective methanol oxidation (in a D2O and 13CH3OH/12CH3OH solution). (c) Schematic depicting methanol dissociation on an Au–Pt/TiO2 system during photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. 
4.6 Chromatography analysis
Chromatography has been widely used to analyze the organic products generated from photoreforming, enabling reactant conversion, selectivity and information on the reaction mechanism to be established. Apart from being used as a tool for H2 quantification, gas chromatography (GC) is ideal for quantifying volatile and semi-volatile organics. A GC equipped with flame ionization detector (GC-FID), is often used to analyze liquid products from methanol, ethanol, and glycerol photoreforming. For more complex organic structures, in which the reference compounds are difficult to find (e.g. products from the photoreforming of methyl furans into long-chain diesel precursors),93 GC combined with mass spectroscopy (GC-MS) is preferred, where the organic products can potentially be identified as well as quantified. Liquid chromatography (LC), including high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), is regularly applied to detect non-volatile organic compounds (in some cases LC can also be used for the determination of volatile and semi-volatile organics, such as methanol photoreforming products).52 Under most circumstances, LC is often coupled to an absorbance detector (e.g. UV, visible, and photodiode array), refractive index (RI) detector, and mass spectrometer (MS). HPLC has been demonstrated to accurately quantify organic products and intermediates including FDCA, DFF, 5-formyl-2-furancarboxylic acid (FFCA) and 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furancarboxylic acid (HMFCA) during the photoreforming of HMF.46 The incorporation of MS with LC and HPLC has been implemented for organic oxidation product determination from photoreforming of plastic waste (e.g. terephthalate, lactate, and some oligomer fragments) and lignocellulosic biomass (e.g. glucose, 2,5-anhydro-D-mannofuranose isomers, 2,3,4,5,6-pentahydroxyhexanoate along with other oligosaccharides).25,68
Looking ahead, the development of automated online chromatography analysis will become more attractive for rapid and accurate data collection. As well as the development of artificial intelligence (refer to Section 5 for more details), implementation of an automated system will contribute to accelerating the discovery of photocatalysts for selective organic photoreforming. To date, integration of an automated analysis system with artificial intelligence (AI) comprising a GC (as the main activity indicator) with a multichannel photoreactor has been developed by Burger et al. for optimizing photocatalytic hydrogen generation.176 Further development of the automated system for selective organic photoreforming could be a promising way to ultimately improve the conversion and selectivity as well as construct reasonable reaction pathways for a multitude of organics.
4.7 Time-resolved characterizations
The time resolved characterization of photocatalysts can unveil insights into the nature and lifetime of photo generated charge carriers, and their interaction with surface adsorbates. While the charge dynamics cannot be directly linked to the reaction mechanism, careful analysis of changes in charge carrier dynamics can divulge information on various surface- and deeply-trapped states, which may be an underlying reason for the performance and selectivity of photocatalytic materials.177 By using various techniques to probe the charge dynamics, it is possible to rationally design catalysts with desired defect levels, active sites, and crystal structures with optimal charge properties for selective oxidation reactions and hydrogen production.
As well as from defining the relative rate of charge recombination, photoluminescence spectroscopy allows for information on electron trap states from defects, oxygen vacancies and work-function-driven charge migration to be derived.178,179 Links between the photocatalytic activity and selectivity are more closely related to attributes of the PL signal rather than the absolute intensity of the signal, which only reveals the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs.180 By probing the underlying mechanism that produces different features in a PL spectrum, Liu et al. demonstrated that the photoluminescence spectra of defective ZnO nanosheets displayed blue photoemission, which they attributed to electron recombination from shallow local defects to holes trapped in the VB. Green emission spectra was attributed to radiative transition from shallow donor levels to oxygen vacancies in deeply trapped holes.181 A higher surface to bulk defect ratio has been identified as an important attribute for enhancing photocatalytic performance, similar to the phenomenon observed by Chen at al. for the selective photooxidation of benzylamine into imine.96 Time resolved PL spectra revealed the existence of long-living photogenerated electrons (>tens of nanoseconds) in F-doped TiO2 samples, which were found to increase photocatalytic performance as a result of the formation of defective sites.182 It was proposed that if the charge trapping occurred at specific surface defect sites, the increased lifetime could increase the probability of interaction with adsorbed species, resulting in promotion of the ensuing reaction mechanism. Electron lifetime as well as surface and bulk trap states can be used to probe underlying material characteristics (such as defective sites/characteristics), which result in changes to reaction selectivity and performance, allowing for improved material design.
Transient absorption spectroscopy is another time-resolved method used to investigate the charge transfer kinetics in semiconducting materials. This technique also indirectly uncovers information on the decay kinetics of trapped electrons and properties of the defect states.183–186 Deeply trapped electrons and holes give rise to characteristic absorption peaks in the visible and near infra-red absorption region while shallowly trapped electrons from mid-gap states or free states give rise to a broad absorption band in the mid-IR region.187 Luo et al. used this approach to demonstrate that the promoted charge lifetime of Ru-doped ZnIn2S4 was attributable to defects induced by Ru-doping in the ZnIn2S4 structure, which acted as trap sites for holes.93 The defects were shown to promote the oxidative ability of the ZnIn2S4 catalyst to generate a diesel precursor from methylfurans. In a separate work on the selective oxidation of 4-methylbenzyl alcohol to aldehydes, transient absorption spectroscopy combined with titration experiments revealed that cyanamide surface-functionalized melon-type carbon nitride (NCNCNx) coupled with a molecular nickel(II) bis(diphosphine) catalyst (NiP) underwent a reductive quenching like mechanism (Fig. 22a and b).85 Upon light excitation, the 4-methylbenyzl alcohol quenched photoexcited holes in the NCNCNx resulting in its oxidation to aldehydes, while accumulated photoexcited electrons in the NiP catalyst resulted in the reduction of protons to generate hydrogen. It was also revealed that in the deeply trapped electrons with extended electron lifetimes (in the micro-second regime) were unable to participate in the photooxidation mechanism. Transient absorption spectroscopy is a technique that invokes understanding on the manner by which various trap states (which may also correspond to surface and bulk defects, as discussed earlier in photocatalyst design) affect electron lifetime and, in turn, reaction performance an can also assist with determining photoreforming reaction pathways.
 Fig. 22  Transient absorption spectra for (a) various CNx and (b) NCNCNx suspensions in the presence of various concentration of 4-MBA recorded at 750 nm following 355 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. 
4.8 Key considerations for characterization
The proposed relationships between catalyst properties and the reaction mechanism provide useful insights to assist with understanding active sites, favorable reaction pathways and potential intermediates. With this knowledge, a photocatalyst can be accordingly designed to supply a specific organic oxidation product, thus rationalizing the photocatalyst design process. A combination of characterization techniques is needed to gain a comprehensive appreciation of the nature of the active species, the role of the co-catalysts or photocatalysts and the potential reaction pathways. As mentioned above, thorough reaction mechanisms have been proposed for the selective photoreforming of 2,5-dimethylfuran and 2-methylfuran into hydrogen and diesel fuel precursors using a metal-doped ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst.93 The acquired insights were possible only by applying in situ techniques such as XAS, Raman, and XRD where dynamic changes in the electronic and structural properties of the active sites can be probed and linked to reaction selectivity. NMR and product analysis techniques also contribute to understanding reaction mechanisms, especially if online techniques are used to identify intermediate species. Finally, time resolved characterization can complement the understanding by linking changes in chemical and physical properties with photoelectron nature (deep- or shallow-trapped), trap states and lifetime, a property which can govern activity, stability and selectivity in photocatalysts.
5. Computational approaches
From a chemical engineering viewpoint, photocatalysis involves adsorption/desorption mechanics (governed by surface properties) and charge dynamics (governed by optical properties), which leads to chemical reactions on the photocatalyst surface. The use of computational modelling to design new photocatalytic materials has been of continuing interest, particularly with ongoing advances in digital technologies in the materials simulation domain. Solving the Schrodinger equation has always been a demanding task, where a fundamental modelling package, DFT was developed to deliver an approximate solution. The simulations allow estimation of indicators that dictate photocatalyst activity, such as band structure, photogenerated charge recombination behavior, and adsorption mechanisms on active surfaces. Moving beyond the conventional paradigm, the future of photocatalysis is envisaged to be impacted by developments in artificial intelligence and big data.188 At the forefront of these developments in the material science domain are machine learning tools for robust exploration of the materials space as well as scientific repositories of computational materials.189 Irrefutably, important features of merit in photocatalysis are activity, stability and selectivity – the last being the focal point of this review. Discussions presented in the review to this point entail catalyst design principles (Section 3.2) pertaining to selectivity tuning and probing information to facilitate selective photoreforming via mainstream structural characterizations (Section 4). The pressing need is to understand the link between the property–selectivity matrix, driven by materials insights and defining areas where machine learning tools can be tapped to assist develop of highly selective photocatalytic materials.
5.1 Aiding photocatalyst design
Using machine learning to map the physical attributes of a photocatalyst and process conditions to predict reaction performance has been previously demonstrated. Estahbanati et al. used machine learning to predict hydrogen production rates in the photocatalytic reforming of glycerol via process parameters and photo/co-catalyst loadings.190 Photocatalytic water splitting over perovskites and photocatalytic ozonation systems over titania have also been extensively assessed by machine learning.191 Their studies utilized multi-layered neural networks for nonlinear function approximation in an automated manner using the backpropagation learning algorithm, which is highly effective provided enough data is available. Once the function is approximated, high value photocatalysis problems can be readily solved. Specifically, estimating catalytic activity given relevant process or catalyst features, and quantification of relative importance of inputs can be achieved. Despite vanilla machine learning and deep learning models (such as support vector machines, neural networks etc.) being inherently black-box and regularly criticized within the scientific community on interpretability grounds,192 their capacity for on-the-go prediction of reaction selectivity could bring substantial value in the context of catalyst screening across the property–selectivity space. Machine learning has shown considerable potential to establish an understanding of photocatalyst properties which can greatly excel photocatalyst design efforts, albeit applications towards selective photoreforming are largely unexplored.
5.2 Property predictions
As mentioned earlier, the band structure of a semiconductor is an essential feature for defining photocatalytic activity and product selectivity. The band gap can determine the light absorption ability, while the conduction band and valence band positions govern efficiency and selectivity toward hydrogen generation and organic oxidation, respectively. Measuring these attributes by experimental/analytical techniques is slow and laborious when a large number of photocatalysts require evaluation. Bandgap approximation via DFT calculations is possible but local-density approximations or generalized gradient approximation levels lead to significant underestimation of the electronic bandgap.193 In contrast, hybrid functionals,194 time-dependent DFT or GW-based electronic structure calculations are relatively accurate but computationally strenuous.195 Fortunately, multi-purpose open-access repositories such as Materials Project,196 Citrination etc. offer a rich resource of band gaps from ab initio calculations.197 These databases can be tapped into using machine learning algorithms for robust interpolative predictions of computational bandgaps of unknown materials after careful representation and selection of descriptors. A range of machine learning tools, such as neural networks, linear regressors, random forests, or support vector machines enable development and training of these predictive models in a fraction of the time compared to computational calculations. Some examples of bandgap predictions using a range of machine learning algorithms are shown in Fig. 23a–c. Other than band gap, DFT, as a total energy theory, provides considerable insights on the band structures including band-edge positions of materials. Several efforts have been made to predict electronic structures and band edge positions of the rutile and anatase phases of TiO2,198 as well as doped TiO2,199 with reasonable computational resources. The conduction and valence band positions are important features (apart from surface active sites that will be discussed in Section 5.3) to be considered to further understand the reaction mechanism and selectivity. For instance, photocatalysts with an optimal valence band potential could help in curbing the uncontrollable formation of hydroxyl radicals, which causes over-oxidation of organic species and suppresses the formation of desired products. Mining such information from available resources could be potentially beneficial to discover suitable photocatalytic semiconductor candidates for selective photoreforming reactions.
 Fig. 23  Machine learning predictions of bandgaps for (a) inorganic materials using a gradient boosting decision tree algorithm from ICSD and AFLOW repositories, (b) dielectric polymers using a kernel ridge regression model and (c) insulating double perovskite oxides using LASSO-selected descriptors.195 Copyright © 2019 IOP Publishing Ltd. 
5.3 Understanding photocatalyst surface
Being a subset of heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalyst systems are also governed by the nature and distribution of active sites on the surface of particles, with photon-enabled charge transfers being the predominant initiator. Photocatalyst nanoparticles often exhibit non-homogeneous atomic configurations due to different synthesis protocols which prompt defect formation at various length scales in the bulk as well as on the surface of each photocatalyst semiconductor. These defects could range from oxygen vacancies, other anionic or cationic deficiencies, interstitial defects, line defects, defects at the grain boundaries, to twinning defects.188 The former, in particular, can yield active adsorption site to facilitate certain reactions and may promote or demote intrinsic charge transfer by presenting trapping sites. Establishing the type and concentration of defects is highly intricate but utilizing advanced in situ characterizations can be potentially looked upon for this purpose (Section 4). The concept of machine learning for elucidating reactivity of various facets on an electrocatalyst alloy surface can be leveraged and tuned to suit photocatalyst-related problems.200,201 For instance, once a fundamental understanding of the photocatalyst surface is established, ML can explain the correlation between facet-dependent properties of the catalyst and corresponding photoactivity/selectivity. Specifically, information such as surface electronic structure and atomic coordination environment can be used to generate geometric fingerprints to be propagated through machine learning models in conjunction with relevant photoactivity descriptors, reaction environment and/or synthesis protocols. Such models mapping intricate qualitative and quantitative indicators could evaluate the efficiency and selectivity of photocatalytic materials and be further evolved to develop new insights into significant characteristics affecting reaction selectivity.
5.4 Elucidating reaction mechanism
Determining the probable reaction mechanism can give insights on the selectivity of photocatalytic systems. Hypothesizing possible pathways and kinetic rates for production and consumption of intermediates can be exceedingly arduous. Aligning valence and conduction band potentials relative to reaction potentials further adds to the complexity. In photocatalytic literature, DFT is often used to develop detailed insights into the reaction intermediates and the bond-activation modes. For instance, a study on methanol transformation on CdS and TiO2 highlighted differences in product distributions, the former providing ethylene glycol as a major product and the latter producing HCHO.51 Preferential cleavage of the C–H bond in methanol on CdS surfaces was attributed to formation energies of ˙CH2OH and CH3O˙, as well as the surface coordination environment. The use of machine learning in photocatalysis is largely oriented towards predictive models for performance optimization.190,191,202 Beyond photocatalysis, machine learning has proven to be resourceful in identifying the most likely reaction mechanism for specific products by easing the computational load of DFT.203 An interesting example is the work by Ulissi et al. where machine learning, on amalgamation with DFT calculations, iteratively increased the knowledge of the reaction mechanism for syngas thermal reactions on Rh(111) having over two thousand potential pathways. This was achieved by guiding the DFT calculation towards uncertainty reduction in the most relevant portions of the reaction network. The developments pose an open question one could investigate, i.e. leveraging prevalent concepts and integrating with photocatalysis fundamentals liaised with machine learning to deconvolute reaction mechanisms. Elucidating mechanisms could potentially pave the way towards tuning photocatalyst/co-catalyst surfaces to restrict undesirable adsorption/desorption of reactants/products reducing catalyst poisoning probability and/or formation of byproducts. Doing so will provide both considerable value to photocatalysis informatics and drive the knowledge forward to optimizing reaction selectivity.
5.5 Advanced characterization interpretation
The importance of advanced spectroscopy techniques, such as synchrotron-based XAS, Raman, solid-state NMR, in situ XRD etc., for establishing insights on photocatalytic systems and extracting fundamental knowledge to optimize reaction selectivity was extensively discussed in Section 3.3. Interpretation of these spectra though is extremely challenging. For instance, interpreting XANES spectra requires proposing a model of the structure as an initial guess followed by computing the spectra for the proposed model, and finally comparing the predicted and measured spectra until a reasonable agreement is attained. Machine learning fits in to this paradigm by solving the inverse problem, i.e. predicting the underlying structure given the experimentally measured spectra, as detailed in the several studies by Timoshenko and co-workers.204–206 Once rapid estimation of the structure is complete, reaction mechanisms can be inferred on the surface. In another study, Stein et al. presented an approach to combine optical absorption spectroscopy information for near infrared to near UV light absorbance, composition and processing properties of metal oxides with machine learning.207 This led to development of predictive models to determine the optical properties of materials with a given composition and processing parameters subsiding experimental holdups.
5.6 Key considerations for computational approaches
Computational approaches have exhibited promising potential in tasks such as facilitating catalyst designs, property/performance predictions, active site determination, insights on reaction mechanisms and spectra-structure mapping. The current need is to leverage the reported knowledge and concepts to achieve extensive understanding of photocatalysis chemistry, which could enable the design of new photocatalysts to selectively drive the generation of certain products. While machine learning workflows and schemes can be conveniently transferred between disciplines, data relevant to the problem as well as problem description may be substantially different. For instance, the nature of databases needed to predict activities of electrocatalysts and photocatalysts could be unalike as features adequately describing these materials would be different. Similarly, the sources of data, volume and quality of information may vary. If a correct photocatalyst description is available, the machine learning and deep learning models described earlier can be effectively utilized to predict selectivity of the reaction as a function of photocatalyst attributes. If surface attributes, such as active sites and coordination environment, are fingerprinted into the models then a holistic understanding of the photocatalyst surface leading to specific reaction mechanisms and products can be established. Previously, DFT and active machine learning have been successfully employed in unification to determine probable reaction mechanisms with high certainty.208 Additionally, machine learning-assisted structural prediction from relevant spectra obtained from advanced characterization techniques can help to provide further meaningful information on reaction mechanisms. However, using such an approach for photocatalysis for complex organic substrates, such as biomass or polymers, could be challenging as DFT-calculated adsorption energies of various intermediates over different surfaces, as well as determining the active sites, will be the potential bottlenecks.
6. Outlook
To achieve viable photocatalytic hydrogen generation from renewable biomass, the selectivity of the organic oxidation half reaction must be carefully controlled, to prevent the production of more harmful organic waste products and to promote the formation of value-added chemicals. While the majority of the photoreforming papers focus on enhancing the efficiency of hydrogen gas production, analysis of all the generated carbon products (both in gas and liquid phases) is essential to complete the understanding of the reaction mechanism. This review provided an overview of selectivity tuning for the organic photoreforming reaction, highlighting the importance of parameters for simultaneous hydrogen generation and selective oxidation reactions. The capacity to improve the selectivity of organic photoreforming systems is significant and will involve the design of better photocatalytic materials, proper control of the reaction conditions and feasible design of the reactors. Understanding the overall reaction mechanism and establishing the property–activity–selectivity relationships via a combination of different characterization techniques are the keys to accelerating the processes. Current studies have demonstrated successful tuning of organic selectivity into value-added products; however, it is often offset by a decrease in overall hydrogen production rate and organic conversion efficiency. Although there are some excellent and comprehensive studies that illustrate the capability to simultaneously attain high hydrogen production rate and good selectivity towards desired organic products, the overall efficiency remains well below the commercialization stage (target of at least 10% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency).
Beyond the typical trial and error catalyst design approaches, advanced characterization and computational studies could offer distinct advantages to defining reliable and accurate reaction mechanisms. The photocatalyst design strategies reviewed above could have significant potential in enhancing the overall conversion efficiency and selectivity of photoreforming reactions, although having clear insights on the reaction mechanism and being able to establish the catalyst structure–mechanism–function relationship (i.e. property–reaction mechanism–activity/selectivity) can further accelerate the process. Using advanced characterization and computational approaches to progress selective photoreforming represents a holistic approach for achieving high activity and selectivity. As illustrated in Fig. 24, photocatalyst and system designs can be continuously improved based on the collective understanding attained from the photoreforming studies. A greater number of mechanistic studies with assistance from advanced characterization techniques and first principles calculations are required to deliver greater insights into the reaction mechanism. Concurrently, machine learning offers accelerative methods as non-trivial solutions to screen a large search space, which could potentially assist with the design and discovery of suitable photocatalysts and system parameters for selective photoreforming reactions. Ultimately, selective photoreforming could offer great opportunity to effectively utilize renewable feedstocks, store solar energy in chemical bonds (hydrogen) and produce potentially valuable chemicals in an integrated waste abatement strategy.
 Fig. 24  Proposed holistic approach for selective photoreforming studies. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16498–16521 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
N. Fajrina and M. Tahir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 540–577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Zhang, M. Sun, L. Yang, S. Luo and J. C. Crittenden, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9811–9840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, R. Shi, G. I. Waterhouse, J. Tang and T. Zhang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 34, 78–91 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, C. Y. Jimmy, G. Q. M. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
S. J. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
K. Lee, H. Yoon, C. Ahn, J. Park and S. Jeon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 11, 7025–7040 RSC .
A. V. Puga, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 315, 1–66 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimura and H. Yoshida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2467–2481 RSC .
R. Navarro, M. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. Alvarez-Galvan, F. Del Valle and J. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35–54 RSC .
J. Kou, C. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Xu and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1445–1514 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3656–3657 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat and S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 622–623 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uekert, C. M. Pichler, T. Schubert and E. Reisner, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 157–170 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xia, Y. Zhang, B. Shi, J. Ran, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000063 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pagliaro, R. Ciriminna, H. Kimura, M. Rossi and C. Della Pina, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4434–4440 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Quispe, C. J. Coronado and J. A. Carvalho Jr, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 475–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kuehnel and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3290–3296 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wakerley, M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. H. Ly, T. E. Rosser and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17021 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kaza, L. Yao, P. Bhada-Tata and F. Van Woerden, What a waste 2.0: a global snapshot of solid waste management to 2050, World Bank Publications,  2018 Search PubMed .
T. Uekert, H. Kasap and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15201–15210 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uekert, M. F. Kuehnel, D. W. Wakerley and E. Reisner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2853–2857 RSC .
L. Clarizia, D. Spasiano, I. Di Somma, R. Marotta, R. Andreozzi and D. D. Dionysiou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16812–16831 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yasuda, T. Matsumoto and T. Yamashita, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1627–1635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang and B.-J. Ni, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4266–4289 RSC .
X. Wu, N. Luo, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .

          E. I. García-López, G. Marcì, M. Bellardita and L. Palmisano, Current Developments in Photocatalysis and Photocatalytic Materials, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 437–455 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, Q. Jia, C. Tao and B. Han, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 238, 116402 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hamid, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12792–12809 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Puga, A. Forneli, H. García and A. Corma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Luo, R. Yun, M. Pu, B. Zhang and X. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13856–13864 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S.-W. Cao, Y. Liao and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Chen, M. Heinen, Z. Jusys and R. J. Behm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 981–985 CrossRef CAS .
G. Halasi, I. Ugrai and F. Solymosi, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. A. Ruberu, N. C. Nelson, I. I. Slowing and J. Vela, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2798–2802 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Wang, J. Du, Y. Zhu, C. Xu and L. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Du, Q. Zhao, C. Zhou and S. Yang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 102, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chai, T. T. Zeng, Q. Li, L. Q. Lu, W. J. Xiao and D. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10128–10131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Jiang, R. M. Irfan, S. Tang, X. Chen and P. Du, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 30, 71–77 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, Y.-H. Li, M.-Y. Qi, J.-Y. Li, Z.-R. Tang, M. Anpo, Y. M. Yamada and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 271, 118946 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, Y. H. Jin, R. A. Burgess, N. E. Dickenson, X. M. Cao and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15584–15587 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, T. Yan, W. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, D. Y. Lee, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11341–11349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Imizcoz and A. V. Puga, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 1098–1102 RSC .
H. Hao, L. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Qiao and X. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10501–10508 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bosque, G. Magallanes, M. Rigoulet, M. D. Kärkäs and C. R. Stephenson, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 621–628 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Z. Shen, J. Deng, P. Guo, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Ma, Z. Jiang, J. Cheng and D. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–7 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, S. Xie, J. Hu, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1776 RSC .
P. Zhou, Y. Chao, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Zhou, H. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Li and Q. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9109–9114 CrossRef .
S. Liu, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6378–6385 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fermin, E. Ponomarev and L. Peter, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1999, 473, 192–203 CrossRef .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14072–14081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Y. Toe, F. Ji, W. Chen, X. Wen, R. J. Wong, J. Seidel, J. A. Scott, J. N. Hart and Y. H. Ng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8324–8332 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, F. Zuo, J. Liu, Q. Ma, C. Wang, D. Sun, L. Bartels and P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13708–13714 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, F. Liu, H. Ding, S. Chen, L. Chen, Y.-J. Li, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 252, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, M. Xie, S. Meng, X. Fu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158–159, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ampelli, R. Passalacqua, C. Genovese, S. Perathoner, G. Centi, T. Montini, V. Gombac, J. J. D. Jaen and P. Fornasiero, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21776–21788 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Kong, M. Jiang, F. Zhang and X. Lei, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 437–446 RSC .
N. Luo, T. Hou, S. Liu, B. Zeng, J. Lu, J. Zhang, H. Li and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 762–769 CrossRef .
X. Wu, C. Y. Toe, C. Su, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and J. Scott, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15302–15318 RSC .
V. R. Battula, A. Jaryal and K. Kailasam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5643–5649 RSC .
D. S. Achilleos, W. Yang, H. Kasap, A. Savateev, Y. Markushyna, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 18341–18345 CrossRef .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501–23511 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng, Z. Chai, X. Deng, Q. Li, S. Feng, J. Wang and D. Xu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2729–2734 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, Y.-Q. Zhang, J. Li and P. Wang, J. Mol. Struct., 2015, 1083, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, J. Zhao and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4697–4700 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, M.-M. Yang, C.-H. Tung, L.-Z. Wu and H. Cong, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8134–8138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J.-L. Shi, H. Hao and X. Lang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and X. Lang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 404–409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Füldner, R. Mild, H. I. Siegmund, J. A. Schroeder, M. Gruber and B. König, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 400–406 RSC .
Y.-X. Zhang, P. Zeng, Y.-X. Yu and W.-D. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Peng and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 RSC .
W. Zhen and C. Xue, Sol. RRL, 2020, 2000440 Search PubMed .
W. Zhen, X. Yuan, X. Ning, X. Gong and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 868–876 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhen, X. Yuan, X. Shi and C. Xue, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2480–2486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasap, C. A. Caputo, B. C. Martindale, R. Godin, V. W.-h. Lau, B. V. Lotsch, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9183–9192 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Chiarello, M. V. Dozzi, M. Scavini, J.-D. Grunwaldt and E. Selli, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160, 144–151 CrossRef .
J. Payormhorm and R. Idem, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 590, 117362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gazsi, G. Schubert, P. Pusztai and F. Solymosi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 7756–7766 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gazsi, G. Schubert, T. Bansagi and F. Solymosi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2013, 271, 45–55 CrossRef CAS .
G. Halasi, G. Schubert and F. Solymosi, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 218–223 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Luo, Z. Yang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, X. Wang and X. Fu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7215–7218 RSC .
C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, R. Passalacqua, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 70, 1270–1275 CrossRef CAS .
N. Luo, T. Montini, J. Zhang, P. Fornasiero, E. Fonda, T. Hou, W. Nie, J. Lu, J. Liu, M. Heggen, L. Lin, C. Ma, M. Wang, F. Fan, S. Jin and F. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 575–584 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sadanandam, K. Lalitha, V. D. Kumari, M. V. Shankar and M. Subrahmanyam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9655–9664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC .
Q. Chen, H. Wang, C. Wang, R. Guan, R. Duan, Y. Fang and X. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Ma, X. Li, W. Li, M. Wu and X. Bao, Chemosphere, 2003, 50, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
F. Spadavecchia, G. Cappelletti, S. Ardizzone, C. L. Bianchi, S. Cappelli, C. Oliva, P. Scardi, M. Leoni and P. Fermo, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 314–322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L.-B. Lin and F.-Q. Jing, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2001, 62, 1257–1262 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. J. Liu, J. M. Lu and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Kong, X. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Xu, X. Du and L. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 288–296 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, L. Wei, Q. Xi, Y. Lei and F. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123792 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, C.-H. Lee, J.-H. Chao, C.-Y. Kuo, Y.-C. Cheng, W.-N. Huang, H.-W. Chang, Y.-M. Huang and M.-K. Shih, Catal. Lett., 2004, 98, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Kuo, C.-Y. Kuo, C.-H. Liu, J.-H. Chao and C.-H. Lin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 113, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beltram, I. Romero-Ocaña, J. Josè Delgado Jaen, T. Montini and P. Fornasiero, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, J. Zhao, L. Li, L. Gong, J. Zheng, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang and Z. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3384–3388 RSC .
J. Wang, P. Yang, B. Cao, J. Zhao and Z. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 325, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, J. Zhao, B. Cao, L. Li, Z. Wang, X. Tian, S. Jia and Z. Zhu, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2384–2390 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, Y. Yu, S. Xu, J. Qu, G. Gao, H. Li, N. Gao, Y. Ren and C. Zhou, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1936–1942 RSC .
J. Pan, X. Wu, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. M. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8361–8363 RSC .
H. L. Tan, X. Wen, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. H. Ng, L. Wang, Y. Du, S. X. Dou, R. Amal and J. Scott, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8117–8124 RSC .
F. Pellegrino, F. Sordello, L. Mino, C. Minero, V. D. Hodoroaba, G. Martra and V. Maurino, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6692–6697 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Sampaio, J. W. Oliveira, C. I. Sombrio, D. L. Baptista, S. R. Teixeira, S. A. Carabineiro, C. G. Silva and J. L. Faria, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, J. Zhang, R. Wang and M. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 172, 1–6 CrossRef .
S. Kakuta and T. Abe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2707–2710 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Toe, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2019, 40, 191–211 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 13801–13805 CrossRef .
K. E. Sanwald, T. F. Berto, A. Jentys, D. M. Camaioni, O. Y. Gutiérrez and J. A. Lercher, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2902–2913 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zieliñska, E. Borowiak-Palen and R. J. Kalenczuk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1797–1802 CrossRef .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrović, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Döblinger, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, Q. Xiang, Y. Liao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1362–1391 RSC .
X. Lu, J. N. Hart, Y. Yao, C. Y. Toe, J. Scott and Y. H. Ng, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16, 100422 CrossRef .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
S. Shen, L. Zhao, Z. Zhou and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16148–16155 CrossRef CAS .
F. Varas-Concha, D. Guzmán, M. Isaacs and C. Sáez-Navarrete, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 1871–1884 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Walenta, S. L. Kollmannsberger, J. Kiermaier, A. Winbauer, M. Tschurl and U. Heiz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22809–22814 RSC .
S. L. Kollmannsberger, C. A. Walenta, C. Courtois, M. Tschurl and U. Heiz, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11076–11084 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bazyar and M. Hosseini-Sarvari, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 13503–13515 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Al-Mazroai, M. Bowker, P. Davies, A. Dickinson, J. Greaves, D. James and L. Millard, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. N. Al-Azri, W.-T. Chen, A. Chan, V. Jovic, T. Ina, H. Idriss and G. I. N. Waterhouse, J. Catal., 2015, 329, 355–367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Yang, C. H. Chang and H. Idriss, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 67, 217–222 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Christoforidis and P. Fornasiero, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1523–1544 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, J. Long, X. Wang, D. Y. Leung, Z. Ding, L. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and X. Fu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6484–6491 CrossRef CAS .
P. Panagiotopoulou, E. E. Karamerou and D. I. Kondarides, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Almeida, R. Berger, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1345–1355 RSC .
C. Courtois, C. A. Walenta, M. Tschurl, U. Heiz and C. M. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13072–13080 CrossRef CAS .
B. Long, Z. Ding and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2074–2078 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mueller, C. P. Goller and M. S. Sigman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9724–9734 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su, S. C. Mathew, G. Lipner, X. Fu, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16299–16301 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Guram, X. Bei and H. W. Turner, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 2485–2487 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saien and A. R. Soleymani, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2012, 18, 1683–1688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Speltini, M. Sturini, F. Maraschi, D. Dondi, A. Serra, A. Profumo, A. Buttafava and A. Albini, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 11433–11440 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kampouri and K. C. Stylianou, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4247–4270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Caravaca, H. Daly, M. Smith, A. Mills, S. Chansai and C. Hardacre, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 649–657 RSC .
R. Shwetharani, H. Chandan, M. Sakar, G. R. Balakrishna, K. R. Reddy and A. V. Raghu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 45, 18289–18308 CrossRef .
K. Mehrotra, G. S. Yablonsky and A. K. Ray, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 2273–2281 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. L. Tan, C. Y. Toe, J. Scott, L. Wang, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904717 CrossRef .
P. Du, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, J. Catal., 2006, 238, 342–352 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Green and M. Z. SouthardPerry’s chemical engineers’ handbook, McGraw-Hill Education,  2019 Search PubMed.
G. L. Chiarello, L. Forni and E. Selli, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
C. McCullagh, N. Skillen, M. Adams and P. K. Robertson, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 1002–1017 CrossRef CAS .
L. Granone, F. Sieland, N. Zheng, R. Dillert and D. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1169–1192 RSC .
A. Visan, J. R. van Ommen, M. T. Kreutzer and R. G. Lammertink, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5349–5357 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shankar, K. Cheralathan, B. Arabindoo, M. Palanichamy and V. Murugesan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 223, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Matos, A. Garcia, T. Cordero, J.-M. Chovelon and C. Ferronato, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Velázquez, R. Fernández-González, L. Díaz, E. P. Melián, V. Rodríguez and P. Núñez, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 721, 405–410 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
A. Fernandez, A. Caballero, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. M. Herrmann, H. Dexpert and F. Villain, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 3303–3309 CrossRef CAS .

          D. C. Koningsberger, X-ray absorption: principles, applications, techniques of EXAFS, SEXAFS, and XANES, John Wiley and Sons, United States,  1988 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, B. Pattengale, S. Lee and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 532–539 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Li, T. Zhang, C.-Y. Mou and J.-F. Lee, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 288–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, P. Zhou, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, B. Zhang, K. Deng, S. Bottle and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14775–14782 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Lou, N. Sharma, D. Goonetilleke, W. H. Saputera, T. M. Leoni, P. Brockbank, S. Lim, D.-W. Wang, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700545 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, C. Tsounis, P. V. Kumar, Z. Han, R. J. Wong, C. Y. Toe, S. Zhou, N. M. Bedford, L. Thomsen and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910118 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hollmann, F. Gärtner, R. Ludwig, E. Barsch, H. Junge, M. Blug, S. Hoch, M. Beller and A. Brückner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10246–10250 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, M. Liu, D. Jing and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5701–5707 RSC .
J. Yan, G. Wu, N. Guan, L. Li, Z. Li and X. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10978–10988 RSC .
B. Choudhury, P. Chetri and A. Choudhury, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4663–4671 RSC .
A. A. Esmailpour, S. Moradi, J. Yun, J. Scott and R. Amal, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5979–5990 RSC .
F. Nawaz, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, H. Cao, Z. A. Ghazi, Z. Guo and Y. Chen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7875–7884 RSC .
D. Dvoranová, Z. Barbieriková and V. Brezová, Molecules, 2014, 19, 17279–17304 CrossRef .
C. Xu, Y. Pan, G. Wan, H. Liu, L. Wang, H. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19110–19117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pilkenton, S.-J. Hwang and D. Raftery, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 11152–11160 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Jiang, D. J. Lawes, G. E. Ball, C. Zhou, Z. Liu and R. Amal, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3924–3931 CrossRef CAS .
B. Burger, P. M. Maffettone, V. V. Gusev, C. M. Aitchison, Y. Bai, X. Wang, X. Li, B. M. Alston, B. Li and R. Clowes, Nature, 2020, 583, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, F. F. Abdi and Y. H. Ng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1255–1271 RSC .
R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1290–1298 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Wong, C. Tsounis, J. Scott, G. K.-C. Low and R. Amal, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liqiang, Q. Yichun, W. Baiqi, L. Shudan, J. Baojiang, Y. Libin, F. Wei, F. Honggang and S. Jiazhong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1773–1787 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Y. Lv, M. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15377–15388 RSC .
M. V. Dozzi, C. D’Andrea, B. Ohtani, G. Valentini and E. Selli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25586–25595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamakata, T.-a. Ishibashi and H. Onishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 7258–7262 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kuriki, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, Y. Yamazaki, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16795–16802 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsounis, R. Kuriki, K. Shibata, J. J. M. Vequizo, D. Lu, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani, R. Amal and K. Maeda, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15333–15340 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shibata, K. Kato, C. Tsounis, T. Kanazawa, D. Lu, S. Nozawa, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900461 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamakata, T.-a. Ishibashi and H. Onishi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 333, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Masood, C. Y. Toe, W. Y. Teoh, V. Sethu and R. Amal, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11774–11787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schlexer Lamoureux, K. T. Winther, J. A. Garrido Torres, V. Streibel, M. Zhao, M. Bajdich, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. Bligaard, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 3581–3601 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Estahbanati, M. Feilizadeh and M. C. Iliuta, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 483–492 CrossRef CAS .
E. Can and R. Yildirim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 267–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rudin, Nat. Mach. Intell., 2019, 1, 206–215 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew and K. Schmidt, AIP Conf. Proc., 2001, 577, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerosa, C. Bottani, C. Di Valentin, G. Onida and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 30, 044003 CrossRef .
G. R. Schleder, A. C. Padilha, C. M. Acosta, M. Costa and A. Fazzio, J. Phys. Mater., 2019, 2, 032001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner and G. Ceder, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .

          J. Hill, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, R. Ramprasad and B. Meredig, Computational Materials System Design, Springer,  2018, pp. 193–225 Search PubMed .
W. J. Kim, M. H. Han, S. Lebègue, E. K. Lee and H. Kim, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, X. Wang, M. Yao and X. Yao, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2013, 23, 402–407 CrossRef .
R. Jinnouchi and R. Asahi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4279–4283 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Ulissi, M. T. Tang, J. Xiao, X. Liu, D. A. Torelli, M. Karamad, K. Cummins, C. Hahn, N. S. Lewis and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6600–6608 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fathinia, A. Khataee, S. Aber and A. Naseri, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 270–284 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 230 CrossRef .
J. Timoshenko, D. Lu, Y. Lin and A. I. Frenkel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5091–5098 CrossRef .
J. Timoshenko, A. Anspoks, A. Cintins, A. Kuzmin, J. Purans and A. I. Frenkel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 225502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Timoshenko and A. I. Frenkel, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10192–10211 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Stein, E. Soedarmadji, P. F. Newhouse, D. Guevarra and J. M. Gregoire, Sci. Data, 2019, 6, 1–5 CrossRef .
Z. W. Ulissi, A. J. Medford, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Cui Ying Toe
	Cui Ying Toe received her PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia in 2018 and Bachelor degree from Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM), Malaysia in 2014. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Particles and Catalysis Research Group (PartCat), UNSW. Her major research interests are heterogeneous photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis for various energy-related applications.

Constantine Tsounis
	Constantine Tsounis completed his bachelor's degree in chemical engineering with honours at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 2018. He is currently undertaking a PhD in the Particles and Catalysis Research group, UNSW, supervised by Professor Rose Amal, in collaboration with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). His research interests revolve around the fundamental development and application of photo- and electro-catalysts for various energy conversion reactions.

Jiajun Zhang
	Mr Jiajun Zhang received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2015. He is currently a PhD student in the School of Chemical Engineering, the University of New South Wales. His current research interest is photocatalytic reforming of organics.

Hassan Masood
	Dr Hassan Masood is a Research Associate working in Particles and Catalysis Research Laboratory at the University of New South Wales. He received his PhD in 2019 on computational fluid dynamics at School of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales. Currently, his research interests include machine learning for heterogeneous catalysis applications and plasma catalysis for CO2 conversion and ammonia synthesis systems.

Denny Gunawan
	Denny Gunawan received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Surabaya, Indonesia in 2017. He is now a PhD candidate in the School of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia under the supervision of Prof. Rose Amal, Assoc. Prof. Jason Scott, and Dr Cui Ying Toe. His research is currently focusing on the development of visible light active photocatalysts for combined hydrogen generation and selective organic oxidation.

Jason Scott
	Jason Scott received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of New South Wales in 2002. He then joined the ARC Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials in a postdoctoral position. He is currently the Deputy Leader of and an Associate Professor within Particles and Catalysis Research Group at the University of New South Wales. His research interests encompass particle synthesis, heterogeneous catalysis, and photocatalysis for environmental remediation and energy application.

Broader context
Selective photoreforming has emerged as an alternative method for the simultaneous generation of hydrogen fuel and valuable organic products, while serving as a waste abatement strategy. This entrenches photoreforming as a promising power-to-X framework, where solar energy is used directly to generate chemical fuels and feedstocks, severing our reliance on traditional energy sources and chemical manufacturing which are carbon and resource intensive. Over past decades, tremendous effort has been devoted to enhancing the photocatalytic hydrogen production rate. In more recent years though, increasing attention has been directed toward controlling the selectivity of the photooxidation reaction to prevent the generation of undesirable organic substances while simultaneously attaining desired organic molecules at a higher rate and selectivity. To aid development of the selective photoreforming reaction, this review appraises recent literature and provides guidelines for the rational design of promising photocatalysts, as well as optimization of reactor design and operating conditions. In addition, the importance of employing various dynamic material characterization techniques for a comprehensive understanding of the structure–mechanism–function relationship is illustrated. Finally, to further advance the field of selective photoreforming reactions, a holistic strategy that encompasses machine learning and theoretical calculations for photocatalyst design and selection is proposed.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic depicting the selective photoreforming process where organic wastes are converted into hydrogen fuels, valuable organic feedstocks and chemical fuels.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoreforming: integration of photocatalytic hydrogen generation and organic photooxidation. The similarities and differences of the photoreforming reaction when compared to photocatalytic water splitting and organic photooxidation reactions.	 

Methanol	Formaldehyde, formic acid, methyl formate, ethylene glycol
Ethanol	Acetaldehyde, acetic acid, 1,1-diethoxyethane, 2,3-butanediol
Glycerol	Dihydroxyacetone (DHA), glyceraldehyde, glyceric acid
Furfuryl alcohol	Furfural, furoic acid
Benzyl alcohol	Benzaldehyde, benzoic acid, hydrobenzoin, 2-phenylacetophenone, benzil
5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF)	2,5-Diformylfuran (DFF), 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA)
Lignin	Various phenols, ketones, oxygenates

 	Fig. 3  Strategies to improve selectivity of organic oxidation: suppress ˙OH formation and control surface adsorption and desorption.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Reaction pathways for formic acid oxidation: direct, formate and indirect pathways. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright © 2006 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Reaction scheme depicting benzyl alcohol dehydrogenation and hydrogenolysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of alcohol photoreforming reaction to give hydrogen and aldehydes/ketones on a Ni/CdS photocatalyst surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Product generation, conversion and selectivity of hydrogen and benzaldehyde (BAD) production from ZnIn2S4 (ZIS) and different loadings of Ni-modified ZnIn2S4 (Ni:ZIS). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic diagram of ultrathin Ni/CdS nanosheets for simultaneous hydrogen production and biomass valorization. (d) Oxidation pathways of furfural alcohol and HMF to their corresponding aldehydes and acids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Proposed reaction mechanism of photocatalytic benzyl alcohol conversion over a ZnS–NixSy photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Lignin depolymerisation approach via a combination of electrocatalytic oxidation and photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Methanol photoreforming performance by Zn2In2S5 and 0.25 wt% CoP/Zn2In2S5 under visible light and AM 1.5 light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic conversion of methanol and ethanol into diols over a CoP/Zn2In2S5 photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. ref. 52. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. (c) Calculated energy barrier for methyl activation of acetone by different single metal atom co-catalysts. (d) 2,5-Hexanedione (HDN) production rate and selectivity from acetone photoreforming by different metal co-catalysts (single atom, SA, or nanoparticle, NP) on various semiconductors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of band alignment for heterojunction photocatalysts with enhanced charge separation. (a) CdS/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) CdS/g-C3N4 systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Valence band spectrum and (b) band energy diagram of porous C3N4, (c) time-dependent conversion, selectivity and DFF yield during photoreforming of HMF. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of reaction mechanism for H2 evolution on oxime–Ni2+ immobilized on carbon nitride. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Diagram of reaction mechanism for water oxidation on cobalt–oxo cubane complex motifs on pyridine-functionalized carbon nitride. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic representation and (d) time-dependent photocatalytic reforming of 4-methylbenzyl alcohol to hydrogen and 4-methylbenzaldehyde in a NCNCNx–NiP system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Proposed pathway model for the photocatalytic conversion of glycerol to GAL, DHA, FA and AA over C-doped TiO2 photocatalyst in water under visible-light illumination. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Possible reaction pathway for methyl formate conversion, (b and c) conversion and amount of products formed from the photoreforming of ethanol by Au/TiO2 and N-doped Au/TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. (d) Potential reaction scheme for ethanol photoreforming reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photocatalyst screening results for the glycerol photoreforming reaction. Photoreforming performance by Cu/TNRs for different (b) oxygenates and (c) polyols. Reaction conditions: 10 mg photocatalyst, 10 mg organic solvent, 0.8 mL acetonitrile as co-solvent, 0.2 mL water, 365 nm 18 W LED with light intensity of 55 mW cm−2.100 Copyright © 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic depicting photoinduced charge carrier separation and transfer in defected-TiO2/g-C3N4 composite. Adapted from ref. 101 with permission. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Postulated reaction pathways of H+ reduction into hydrogen and alcohol oxidation to aldehyde and glycol. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. (b) Schematic depicting the pore effect of TiO2 in controlling the diffusivity of ˙CH(OH)CH3 and the selectivity of ethanol oxidation. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission. Copyright © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011. (c) 2,3-Butanediol selectivity from ethanol photoreforming and the over-oxidation products with respect to the crystal phases of Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts. Commercial P25, anatase, brookite and rutile TiO2 are indicated as P25-TiO2, A-TiO2, B-TiO2 and R-TiO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  Band positions of various photocatalysts as well as selected redox potentials. Bandgap information extracted from ref. 124 and 125.	 

 	Fig. 17  Reaction mechanism for alcohol photoreforming via bond activation, adsorption–desorption and mass transfer steps, which are dependent on the type of secondary component (e.g. co-catalyst loading), surface functional groups, crystal phase and morphology.	 

 	Fig. 18  Selectivity towards O2 evolution/water oxidation (green) and organic oxidation (orange) exhibited by RhCrOx/STO–Al photocatalyst in the presence of different (a) glycerol concentrations and (b) oxygenate types. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Process intensification for ethylene glycol (EG) production. (a) Conventional reaction mode without separation and process-intensified mode with separation. (b) Selectivity of EG as a function of time with and without separation (denoted by red stars) and yield of all products (represented by bars).51 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The k2-weighted EXAFS spectrum of MoS2 foam/CdS versus that of MoS2 sheet/CdS.51 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (b) In situ XANES spectra of Cu–Ru–UiO-67(bpy) as a function of LED illumination time. Enlarged region I and II (edge feature and above-edge oscillations, as illustrated in the insets) show the change in Co oxidation state and structure during photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  
In situ (a) 13C NMR and (b) 1H NMR of Au–Pt/TiO2 during photocatalytic hydrogen production with selective methanol oxidation (in a D2O and 13CH3OH/12CH3OH solution). (c) Schematic depicting methanol dissociation on an Au–Pt/TiO2 system during photocatalytic hydrogen production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Transient absorption spectra for (a) various CNx and (b) NCNCNx suspensions in the presence of various concentration of 4-MBA recorded at 750 nm following 355 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Machine learning predictions of bandgaps for (a) inorganic materials using a gradient boosting decision tree algorithm from ICSD and AFLOW repositories, (b) dielectric polymers using a kernel ridge regression model and (c) insulating double perovskite oxides using LASSO-selected descriptors.195 Copyright © 2019 IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 24  Proposed holistic approach for selective photoreforming studies.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
