A review on the recent advances in hybrid supercapacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02505H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02505H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15880-15918A review on the recent advances in hybrid supercapacitors

        
          
            Dhruba P. 
            Chatterjee
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Arun K. 
            Nandi
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Presidency University, 86/1 College Street, Kolkata-700 073, India. E-mail: dhruba.chem@presiuniv.ac.in
bPolymer Science Unit, School of Materials Science, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata-700 032, India. E-mail: psuakn@iacs.res.in
Received 
      25th March 2021
    , Accepted 1st July 2021First published on 2nd July 2021AbstractPresently, supercapacitors have gained an important space in energy storage modules due to their extraordinarily high power density, although they lag behind the energy density of batteries and fuel cells. This review covers recent approaches to not only increase the power density, rate capability, cyclic stability, etc. of supercapacitors, but also to increase their energy density using hybrid architectures. Electrodes are the most important component of a supercapacitor cell, and thus this review primarily deals with the design of hybrid supercapacitor electrodes offering a high specific capacitance, together with the elucidation of the mechanisms involved therein. The electrode performance significantly depends on the available surface area, porosity and conductivity of the component materials, and thus nano-structuring of the electrode is an elegant approach, which is discussed in the subsections for 0-, 1-, 2-, 3-dimensional hybrid materials, including some miscellaneous hybrids. The fabrication of different hybrid materials using metal oxides, metal sulfides, carbon materials, etc. with conducting polymers such as polyaniline and polypyrrole and their characterization are delineated from the literature data. Here, we primarily focus on the mechanism of energy storage by non-faradic electrical double-layer capacitance and faradaic pseudo-capacitance, discussing the contributions of different component mechanisms towards the total capacitance. In the hybrids, the impact of the component concentration operating via different mechanisms for charge storage on their final electrochemical performance is discussed. The specific capacitance, volumetric capacitance, charge–discharge cycles, Ragone plot, etc. of hybrid supercapacitors are described. Besides household and heavy-duty applications, the state-of-the-art future applications of supercapacitors in robotics, renewable and sustainable energy devices, wearable and self-healing supercapacitors, and biotechnology and their challenges in real-world applications with the scope of future work are elucidated.Dhruba P. ChatterjeeDr Dhruba P. Chatterjee is presently working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry Presidency University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He received his Ph.D. from Jadavpur University in 2006 working under the supervision of Prof. B. M. Mandal at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata in the field of controlled polymer synthesis and characterization. His present research interest includes the design and controlled synthesis vinyl polymers and conducting polymers for the preparation of hybrid materials with inorganic/organic quantum dots for energy-related applications, bio-applications and membrane applications.Dhruba P. ChatterjeeProf. Arun K. Nandi obtained his PhD degree on “Thermodynamics of Polymer–Polymer and Polymer–Solvent Mixing” and joined the Chemistry Department, North Bengal University, Darjeeling. He did post-doctoral work at the Florida State University with Prof. L. Mandelkern in the crystallization of polymers. In 1992, he joined the Polymer Science Unit of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS) and he retired from the Senior Professor position in February, 2019. Presently, he is an Emeritus Scientist (CSIR) at IACS. His research interests focus on polymer blends, polymer crystallization, polymer and supramolecular gels, polymer nanocomposites, polymer synthesis, biomolecular hybrids, supercapacitors and polymer photovoltaics. He is the author of 238 papers and has supervised 35 PhD students to date.
1. Introduction
The global energy consumption is increasing in an alarming rate together with remarkable development in electronics and of course population explosion.1,2 The energy consumption in a standard U.S. home has already doubled since 1980 (ref. 3) and the International Energy Agency (IEA) has projected that it will double again by 2022 and triple by 2030.4 This situation is becoming increasingly worse with the depleting level of stored fossil fuels.1 However, currently, the alternative avenues for energy generation from wind, solar power and other renewable resources are not good enough to cope up the ever-increasing energy demand. Furthermore, most of these energy generation/conversion routes are intermittent, and therefore to become an alternative to fossil fuels they require proper storage systems. This has triggered intensive research efforts in last three decades, which have resulted in the advent of modern electrochemical energy storage systems such as batteries and supercapacitors.5–8 Batteries have come a long way (∼2 centuries) since Volta's inventive discovery to modern day lithium-ion technology. Similarly capacitors also have traversed a long way from the discovery of electrophysical parallel plate electrolytic capacitors to the present electrochemical capacitors, ultracapacitors and supercapacitors.7 Commercial batteries can store much greater energy (energy density of ∼180 W h kg−1) compared to commercial supercapacitors (energy density of ∼10 W h kg−1).9,10 However, supercapacitors can deliver significantly higher power and exhibit much higher cycle life (in the order of millions) compared to batteries (cycle life in thousands only).10 Therefore, batteries are effective for applications requiring long-time energy supply. Conversely, a faster rate of charging/discharging enables supercapacitor applications, where a large amount of energy is required to be stored or delivered quickly. This includes energy harvesting in seaports,11 regenerative braking,12 pulse power in communication devices,13 power grids,14 application in the emergency door of airplanes (Airbus A380).10 In addition, the shorter time required for charging is convenient for applications in portable devices and hybrid vehicles.5
In battery electrodes, electrolyte ions intercalate through the channels or gaps present in the electrode material and become distributed throughout the bulk of the electrode. This is followed by faradaic charge transfer processes to generate the energy capacity (mA h kg−1). Thus, capacity development in battery electrodes, which is limited by solid-state ion diffusion, exhibits relatively poor kinetics; however, the use of the entire bulk of the electrode for charge storage leads to very high energy density.5,7 Conversely, capacitance generation in supercapacitors occurs either due to the formation of an electrical double layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface due to purely electrostatic interaction (electrical double layer capacitance, EDLC) or surface/near-surface faradaic charge transfer processes between the electrolyte ions and electrode materials (pseudocapacitance) (Scheme 1). Therefore, charge storage occurs very fast in supercapacitors (unlike battery electrodes) because they are not being limited by solid-state ion diffusion; however, due to the use of the electrode surface or near-surface only, their charge storage and energy density are rather poor. Nevertheless, supercapacitors, which are built with typically environmentally green components, exhibit very high charging/discharging rates and offer a nearly maintenance-free extraordinarily long life. These features promise their significant potential for future applications together with batteries; however, the energy density of supercapacitors needs significant improvement.
 Scheme 1  Classification of various electrochemical energy storage systems. 
High conductivity and large exposed surface area together with desired porosity are the fundamental requirements of high-performance EDLC-based electrodes, where instantaneous polarization occurs at the electrode/electrolyte interface.10 This leads to very high rate of charging–discharging; however, given the practical aspects of electrode fabrication, it becomes difficult to maintain a high exposed electrode surface area in the packed cell configuration. Therefore, a high energy density cannot be achieved. In this respect, materials involving faradaic charge transfer processes are much more attractive given that they offer significantly higher capacity/capacitance, and hence high energy storage. However, these materials (metal oxides, phosphates, sulfides, nitrides, oxynitrides, etc.) are often associated with a phase change during charge storage/release or have poor conductivity, which affects the kinetics of the process.5,15 Increasing the conductivity of battery electrode materials by compositing with highly conducting carbon materials has already shortened the charging time in commercially available faster Li-ion batteries. Based on this, the claim of building a high energy supercapacitor without a higher charge/discharge time (in the order of 10 min or more) becomes less convincing, given that the principal difference between batteries and supercapacitors is the faster operation (charging/discharging) of the latter.16 A comparison of the specific energy density versus charging time for a commercial high-power Li+ ion battery and EDLC-based supercapacitor device is presented in Fig. 1(a). The plot shows that the specific energy density of Li+ ion battery remains constant during discharging for a timescale of >10 min; however, it sharply decreases for a shorter timescale (down to 10 s or less). The observed decrease in specific energy density on a shorter timescale is attributed to the various resistive losses originating from the sluggish ion and electronic conductivity in battery electrodes, which may create serious safety problems such as thermal runway during high-rate operation.5 Conversely, EDLC-based supercapacitors offer much inferior energy density, but it remains constant at various timescales of discharging. Thus, batteries are suitable for providing higher energy over a longer timescale. Alternatively, supercapacitors are best suited for high power applications on a lower timescale (<10 s). Pseudocapacitors are expected to provide their best performance within an interim time domain.
 Fig. 1  (a) Energy vs. charging time for an EDLC and lithium-ion battery. (b) Ragone plot of different energy storage devices (reprinted with permission from ref. 5 and 18, respectively). 
The high energy capacity of materials operating via surface or bulk faradaic processes is highly desirable to build high-energy devices. Therefore, the generation of hybrid materials as electrodes or fabrication of hybrid cell configurations consisting of faradaic and non-faradaic material components has become the most unique and obvious strategy for the development of high energy and high-power supercapacitor devices (i.e., going through the diagonal of the Ragone plot7 in Fig. 1(b)). A hybrid supercapacitor cell comprising two different electrodes operating via faradaic and non-faradaic processes (asymmetric electrode configuration) is a very good approach for having the combined features of high energy storage (faradaic electrode) and high rate (non-faradaic) in a single device. However, these devices often fail to reach their expected energy density level, particularly when battery electrodes are used, due to the significant mismatch in the rate of charging between non-faradaic (EDLC) and battery electrodes.7 Further advancement in this direction is the use of the double hybridization approach, i.e., using the asymmetric cell configuration, where one will be an EDLC-based electrode and the other should be and EDLC/battery or pseudocapacitor hybrid electrode (Fig. 2).7 The fabrication of a true EDLC/battery hybrid composites extracting the synergistic performance of each component should overcome the difficulty related to the possible lower rate of the faradaic component.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of different possible hybridization approaches between supercapacitor and battery electrodes and materials (reprinted with permission from ref. 7). 
Accordingly, the advent of nanomaterials has been revolutionary, where besides providing increased surface area, nano-structuring of electrode materials offers decreased diffusion paths and restricts phase changes, which are conducive for achieving a high rate even in faradaic charge transfer-operated electrode materials. Furthermore, nano-structuring allows atomic-level or molecular-level connection between the components of a hybrid material, and hence, ensures exchange of their chemistry to result in improved synergistic properties. This helps the combination to behave as a truly hybrid material instead of a macroscopic composite. In the present review, we give a brief account of different hybrid supercapacitor systems consisting of nano-structured pure or hybrid materials as electrodes. A dimension-based classification of the nano-structured electrode materials is presented to clearly understand the dimensional effect on electrochemical properties of electrode materials, and hence consolidated performance of the entire supercapacitor cell. In addition, the mechanism for charge storage in different electrode types is discussed in detail. The distinctive features of battery and supercapacitor electrodes are presented clearly, which we believe should be helpful to reduce the unwarranted claims for newly developed faster battery electrodes as high energy density supercapacitor electrodes.16
2. Non-faradaic processes
The first patent based on the principle of electrochemical double layer capacitance was filed in 1957 by Becker;12 however, the concept of these capacitors was introduced much earlier by Hermann von Helmholtz in 1879.19 In the proposed model, when an electrified surface is placed in an electrolyte, an immobile oppositely charged ion layer is formed over the surface based on purely electrostatic interactions. The as-formed electrical double layer is responsible for energy storage following the principle of a typical parallel plate capacitor. In the early 1900s, Gouy and Chapman proposed the existence of a diffused layer of oppositely charged ions instead of a surface-adsorbed immobile layer, considering counter-balancing the thermal energy (diffusion) of the ions with electrostatic interactions.20–22 The ion concentration changes exponentially over the diffused double-layer thickness. However, this model considers the ions as point charges, and therefore they have no limitation in approaching the surface.23 Furthermore, this model fails in the case of a highly charged surface or high electrolyte concentration. In 1920, Stern combined these two models and proposed an electrical double layer (EDL) comprising two different layers of charges, where the first is a stationery layer of de-solvated ions adsorbed as close as possible to the surface (Stern Layer, SL) and the second is a diffused layer (DL) of solvated ions nearest to the surface.20,23 In 1957, Grahame further refined this model by dividing it into two sub-regions: (i) inner Helmholtz plane (IHP), which passes through the center of specifically adsorbed ions and (ii) outer Helmholtz plane (OHP), passing through the center of the solvated ions closest to the surface (Fig. 3).24 The double-layer capacitance as described by Helmholtz may be presented as follows:10 (i)where εr is the dielectric constant of the electrolyte, ε0 is the dielectric constant of the vacuum, ‘d’ is the effective thickness of the double layer and ‘A’ is the electrode surface area. Now, in a typical electrochemical capacitor cell, there are two electrodes, each of which can be treated as a single capacitor having capacitance C1 and C2. Therefore, the total capacitance of the cell may be represented as follows:25 (ii)
 Fig. 3  Representation of EDLC structure: Gouy–Chapman–Stern model (reprinted with permission from ref. 22). 
As apparent from eqn (i), the electrolyte plays a major role in determining the capacitance of a cell. Aqueous-based electrolytes and organic electrolytes are both typically used during the construction of capacitor cells, where the former show higher capacitance than the latter due to its greater dielectric constant. The energy density (E) and power density (P) of a cell are represented as follows:10 (iii)C is the specific capacitance of the cell and V is the potential window. (iv)Rs represents the equivalent series resistance.
Therefore, together with a greater capacitance, a higher operating voltage window is beneficial for providing a higher energy/power density. Organic solvents typically allow a higher operational voltage (up to 2.7 V in a symmetric electrode system)10 compared to water (maximum 1.23 V due to the decomposition of water),26 and hence organic solvent-based electrolytes or ionic liquids are attracting increasing attention for application in commercial electrochemical capacitors.10 In the EDLC, charge adsorption/desorption during the charging/discharging cycles occur on the electrode surface purely by electrostatic interactions. This results in a significantly high rate capability and cyclic stability from EDLC-based devices, with the necessity of a higher specific surface area (SSA) for greater charge storage. Carbon-based materials produced from different sources and different techniques such as activated, templated and carbide-derived carbon,27 carbon fabrics, fibers, fullerenes,28,29 nanotubes,30 nano-onions,31 and nanohorns32 have been applied as electrodes.25,33 Qiu and coworkers prepared porous carbon materials by templating with MgO or ZnO nanostructures via the carbonization of coal-tar, petroleum pitch, etc.34–37 The improved capacitive performance of electrochemical capacitors over the typical parallel plate electrolytic capacitors stem from the increased electrode surface area ‘A’ and decreased electrode surface-electrolyte ion distance ‘d’ in eqn (i). In electrochemical capacitors, ‘d’ is typically in the range of 1–10 nm.7 Therefore, an increased SSA should be the key to achieving a higher capacitance. Activated carbons have received significant attention as electrode materials due to their large SSA, abundant porosity, conductivity and moderate production cost from naturally occurring carbonaceous precursors. However, it has been observed that despite having a very high SSA (∼3000 m2 g−1), activated carbons exhibit unexpectedly poor specific capacitance (<10 μF cm−2). This indicates that besides a high SSA, an increase in capacitance also depends on other parameters such as pore size distribution, pore shape/structure, accessibility of the pores by electrolyte ions, and conductivity of the electrode.38 Accordingly, initial research in this field was devoted to developing activated carbons having increased pore volume and SSA by refining the activation process. The impact of porosity or the pore size range of the electrode materials on the capacitance or rate capability has been critically addressed in the literature. Earlier studies suggested that mesoporous surfaces having pore sizes in the range of (2–5) nm, more than twice the size of the solvated ions, are preferable for achieving optimum capacitance and rate capability.10 It was further suggested that pore sizes in the sub-nanometer range (<0.5 nm) were inaccessible to hydrated/solvated ions39,40 and pore sizes less than 1 nm were too small to be accessed by organic electrolyte ions, which typically have sizes greater than 1 nm.41 However, even after using finely tuned mesoporous carbon electrode surfaces, appreciably high specific capacitances could not be achieved (100–120 F g−1 in organic electrolyte and 150–200 F g−1 in aqueous electrolyte).42,43 On the contrary, microporous carbon surfaces resulted in an appreciable enhancement in capacitance value.44 Experiments with carbon cloths having a combination of both mesopores (2–50 nm) and micropores (<2 nm) resulted in appreciably high capacitance.45–47 An activated coal-based microporous (<1.5 nm) material resulted in a high capacitance value of 120 F g−1 or 80 F cm−3 using organic electrolytes.48–50 Carbide-derived carbon (CDC) having an exclusively microporous nature (0.6 nm to 1.1 nm) exhibited about 50–80% increase in capacitance value,51 which was stable (with respect to current density variation), compared to that of conventional activated carbons39,40,52 using organic electrolytes [1 M Et4NBF4 in acetonitrile] having sizes 1.3 and 1.16 nm for solvated cations and anions, respectively. The variation in capacitance with pore size in CDC exhibited that the capacitance value gradually decreased as the average pore size approached 1 nm. However, upon a further decrease in pore size, the capacitance value sharply increased and shows the maximum near a pore size close to the electrolyte ion size [Fig. 4(i)].51,53,54 These results definitely indicate that partial or complete removal of the solvent shell over the ions must have occurred for them to access the micropores.55 Chmiola and coworkers showed the linear dependence of change of capacitance with (1/b) (here ‘b’ is the pore radius) as the sub-nanometer pore size range is approached.51 This result indicates that as the pore size decreases, the distance between the ion and carbon surface (d) decreases, accounting for the increase in capacitance. In another very interesting study on CDC as an electrode material with a solvent-free ionic liquid [EMI+TFSI−] as the electrolyte (having an ion size of 0.7 nm for both the cation and anion), the maximum capacitance value was observed at around a pore size of 0.7 nm [Fig. 4(i)].56,57 This further ensures that micropores having sub-nanometer sizes yield the maximum capacitance when accessed by completely desolvated ions. In a very interesting work, Kaskel and coworkers reported high energy storage capacity from an asymmetric capacitor cell composed of size-selective microporous carbon (w < 0.9 nm) in one electrode and ordered mesoporous carbon (w > 2 nm) in the other.58 The microporous electrode allowed electrosorption of only the small-sized BF4− anions, excluding the large-sized tetrabutylammonium cation (TBA+) or tetrapropylammonium (TPA+) cations, while the mesoporous electrode allowed the sorption of both cations and anions. Thus, the designed asymmetric supercapacitor showed unidirectional charging with a high rectification ratio (RR = 12), representing a novel capacitor analogue of semiconductor-based diodes (“CAPode”).
 Fig. 4  (i) Normalized capacitance change as a function of the pore size of carbon derived-carbide samples. Samples were prepared at different temperatures in ethyl-methylimidazolium/trifluoro-methane-sulphonylimide (EMI-TFSI) ionic liquid at 60 °C. Inset shows the structure and size of the EMI and TFSI ions. The maximum capacitance was obtained when the pore size was in the same range as the maximum ion dimensions (reprinted with permission from ref. 56). Schematic diagrams of (ii) negatively charged mesopore with solvated cations approaching the pore wall to form an electric double-cylinder capacitor (EDCC) with radii ‘b’ and ‘a’ for the outer and inner cylinders, respectively, separated by a distance ‘d’ and (iii) negatively charged micropore of radius ‘b’ with solvated cations of radius a0 lining up to form an electric wire-in-cylinder capacitor (EWCC). EWCC is also possible with desolvated ions (reprinted with permission from ref. 59). 
The increase in capacitance in the sub-nanometer region warrants the typical double layer charge storage model to be reconsidered, given that in the sub-nanometer level, neither the formation of a Helmholtz layer and nor a diffused layer (DL) should occur. Based on their theoretical analysis, Huang and coworkers presented various models to account for the anomalous capacitance observed in the micro/mesoporous region. Considering pore curvature, they proposed that counter ions enter and adsorb near the pore walls to form an electric double cylinder capacitor (EDCC) model [Fig. 4(ii)].59 The capacitance in the double cylinder model is given as follows: (v)and (vi)
In the micropores, instead of the formation of a double cylinder, the counter ions line up to generate an electric wire in the cylinder capacitor (EWCC) model [Fig. 4(iii)]. The capacitance in this model may be presented as follows:59 (vii)
In macropores (pore size > 50 nm), the pore sizes are much larger, and thus the effect of pore curvature may be ignored. Accordingly, the typical EDLC model may be considered, and the capacitance should follow eqn (i). The above-mentioned models and capacitance equations well account for the variation in capacitance with pore size in different regions.59
In a very recent report, Khademi and Barz proposed that the EDL should be more accurately considered as a combination of an SL (layer of specifically adsorbed desolvated ions) and DL (layer of solvated ions closest to the electrode surface).60,61 Therefore, the capacitance from the EDL should originate from the capacitance of these two layers. They proposed a suitable circuit diagram to represent this situation, where evidently CSL should be much higher than CDL due to the expected greater permittivity of the Stern layer (SL)62 together with the much lower distance for charge separation (Fig. 5).60 According to this model, the capacitance of each electrode should be presented as (1/Celectrode = 1/CSL + 1/CDL), where the electrode capacitance should depend more on the layer showing a lower capacitance value. Hence, within the micropores where the diffused layer is absent, the electrode capacitance should be higher than in the mesopores. Besides increasing the electrode surface area or shift in the mechanism of charge adsorption, pores are also useful in the case of ion transport. In graphene or reduced graphene electrodes, the electrolyte ions transport charges between the graphene sheets after travelling a relatively longer ion-transport path. In this case, Duan and coworkers synthesized a hierarchically structured 3D hole-containing graphene electrode, which exhibited a significantly improved specific capacitance, energy and power density.63 This improvement compared conventional graphene electrodes was ascribed to the presence of holes, where ion transfer may occur through the holes, reducing the ion transport path (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 5  Supercapacitor model showing capacitive contribution from different layers and corresponding circuit diagram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. 
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of graphene and holey graphene foams. Initial 3D macroporous (a) graphene foam and (b) holey graphene foam. Compressed films of (c) graphene foam and (d) holey graphene foam. Close-up view of (e) graphene and (f) holey graphene films. The arrows highlight the ion transport pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. 
Besides improving the SSA, heteroatom doping on carbon-based materials has resulted in a significant improvement in electrochemical properties, which has been ascribed to the improved electrical conductivity and increase in active sites on the carbon surface.64–71 Oxygen grafting on the carbon surface has been reported to increase the specific capacitance due to the involvement of faradaic charge transfer processes. However, this strategy is detrimental to the cyclic stability.10,64 The principal advantages of EDL-based capacitors are their high rate performance (faster charge/discharge) and tremendous cyclic stability (in the order of millions!), both of which originate from reversible electrostatic charge adsorption/desorption.10 However, despite these advantages, EDLC-based capacitors significantly lag behind batteries with respect to their energy storage ability, where energy storage occurs by faradaic (redox) electron transfer processes. Commercial EDLC-based charge storage devices offer energy densities in the range of 3–6 W h kg−1.12
3. Faradaic processes
Faradaic processes refer to an alternative mode where energy storage occurs due to charge transfer originating from redox reactions when electrolyte ions contact the electrode material at their interfaces.5,7,15,18 Therefore, this mode is fundamentally electrochemical in nature, in contrast to the electrophysical charge storage observed in electrolytic capacitors or similar mechanisms observed in the previous section.7 This mode of charge storage is typically observed in various commercialized rechargeable (secondary) metal-ion batteries. In lithium-ion (Li+) batteries, the insertion of Li+ ions in the bulk electrode materials such as Li4Ti5O12 and LiFeO4 leads to a redox reaction, and hence charge transfer.5,7,15 The charge storage in battery electrodes occur within the bulk of the electrode material instead of only the electrode surface as in double layer capacitors. This leads to remarkably higher charge storage capacity for batteries compared to double-layer capacitors. The insertion of ions within the battery electrodes generate strain, which is subsequently relieved by volume expansion to open up the crystallographic path. This is often accompanied by a crystallographic phase change in battery electrodes during the charging/discharging cycles. Therefore, ion insertion in battery electrodes is limited by semi-infinite diffusion originating from the slow solid-state diffusion of the charge-compensating ions (i.e., Li+ and Na+ ions) in the electrode material and non-martensitic phase transformation of the electrode materials.15 This has emerged as one of the principal shortcomings of battery electrodes, leading to poor charge/discharge kinetics compared to double-layer capacitors. The cyclic voltammograms of battery electrodes show well-separated (>0.1 to 0.2 V) intense peaks corresponding to the oxidation and reduction reactions, unlike double-layer capacitance, where instantaneous polarization makes the current (I) and hence capacitance (C) constant for the entire scanned voltage range [following C = (dV/dt)I].5,10,16 The phase change is further apparent from the presence of a long plateau (at the redox reaction potential) in the constant current charge/discharge experiment of battery electrodes, unlike the constantly sloping charge/discharge plot in capacitors (Fig. 7).5,15 The difference in the rate performance between battery and capacitive processes is apparent from the following relation of the current response (i) with the scan rate during CV analysis: i = aνb(viii)where a and b are constants. b = 0.5 for diffusion-controlled charge storage in battery electrodes and b = 1 for surface charge storage during capacitive processes.16 The significant volume change in the battery electrodes associated with the phase change during ion intercalation/de-intercalation affects the long-term integrity of electrodes, and hence their cycle life (in the order of thousands only).10,15 In comparison, double-layer capacitance shows a much improved cycle life in the order of millions.10 An example is the LiMn2O4 electrode, where the insertion–deinsertion of Li+ ions between the spinel LiMn2O4 and metastable spinel λ-MnO2 is responsible for about 7.6% of the overall unit cell volume change.81 Simultaneously, these phase changes are slow and non-thoroughly reversible, which usually affect the charge storage capability with an increase in cycle number, resulting in hysteresis between charging and discharging, i.e., lower energy/coulombic efficiency. This is sharply in contrast with the double-layer capacitance, where instantaneous polarization at the electrode surface without any phase change neither affects the cycle life nor the energy efficiency. Nevertheless, an improved cycle life may be found when the phase change is accompanied with minimum electrode volume changes as in Li4Ti5O12 electrodes, where <0.2% volume change occurs between Li4Ti5O12 and the fully lithiated Li7Ti5O12 phase.82,83 Therefore, for the design of a device having both high capacity and faster energy storage and delivery rate, the successful union of complementary battery (faradaic processes) and capacitive electrodes are desirable. This further suggests the exploration of electrode materials operating via surface or bulk charge storage, not limited by the solid-state diffusion of the charge-compensating ions.
 Fig. 7  Faradaic and capacitive energy storage. Summary of the characteristic metrics such as cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic profiles, key mechanism descriptions and typical systems that are known to utilize the mentioned charge storage mechanisms: (a) double-layer capacitor (examples: porous carbons (carbide-derived carbon,51 activated carbon,39 graphene,72 carbon onions73 and nanotubes74), (b) surface redox pseudocapacitance due to adsorption and/or fast intercalation of ions (examples: hydrated RuO2,75 birnessite MnO2,76 and MXene Ti3C2 (ref. 77)), (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance (example: T-Nb2O5 (ref. 78)) and (d) batteries (examples: LiCoO2,79 Si-37 and LiFePO4 (ref. 80)). i = current and v = sweep rate. Crystal structures were plotted in Vesta. Different colors in the plots indicate different storage mechanisms (reprinted with permission from ref. 15.). 
In 1971 Trasatti and Buzzanca discovered a new phenomenon in a hydrous RuO2 thin film electrode, which exhibited an interplay of these two complementary modes of operation, i.e., charge storage occurring through redox transitions between the various available oxidation states of ruthenium, while keeping the capacitive electrochemical signatures.84 The faradaic charge transfer reactions are triggered when the adsorption of protons from the electrolyte occurs on the electrode surface as follows:  
The relationship between the potential (E) and extent of total surface coverage (X, both including the ‘outer’ and ‘inner’ surfaces of the electrode materials) in these faradaic processes may be represented by the following Nernst-like relationship: (ix)where R is the ideal gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), T is the temperature (K), n is the number of electrons and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1). In the above-mentioned relation, the capacitance may be defined in the regions where E and X vary linearly, i.e., (x)however, linearity is not always observed, unlike capacitors. Therefore, capacitance here is not always constant, and thus is called pseudocapacitance.85 Improved capacitive charge storage together with a rectangular CV plot is observed with porous hydrous RuO2 instead of the bulk single-crystal form (Fig. 8), which further indicates the impact of the structural water and nanoscale architecture of the electrode materials on pseudocapacitance.86 The appreciably high theoretical capacitance (∼1450 F g−1) of RuO2 has been attributed to the (a) redox behavior of Ru4+ cations, (b) high conductivity of RuO2, allowing rapid electron transport, (c) the presence of structural water, facilitating ion transport in the ‘inner structure’ of the electrodes, and (d) high ‘outer surface’ area due to nano-structuring.5Pseudocapacitance was originally defined as a faradaic process that simultaneously has a capacitive signature, which is a quasi-rectangular CV response proportional to the scan rate.87–89 Conway reported different faradaic processes that adhere to the above-mentioned definition as (1) underpotential deposition, where metal ions form an adsorbed monolayer on different metal surfaces well over their redox potential such as lead on the surface of a gold electrode;90 (2) redox pseudocapacitance, where ions are adsorbed on the surface or near the surface accompanied by faradaic charge transfer and (3) intercalation pseudocapacitance, where ions intercalate within the tunnels or in between layers of redox-active electrode materials accompanied by faradaic charge transfer without causing any phase change (Fig. 9).5 Despite the similarity in their charge storage mechanism, battery and pseudocapacitive electrode materials differ in their kinetics and morphology during the charging/discharging cycles. The principle of intercalation pseudocapacitance is particularly very similar to that of battery electrodes; however, in case of the former, the kinetics of ion/electron transport is much faster and not diffusion controlled, which is apparent from their proportionality with scan rate (ν). Another distinctive feature of pseudocapacitors is their constantly sloping discharge curve without the appearance of plateaus (Fig. 7(c) and (d)), which is typically observed in battery electrodes. The above discussion makes it apparent that besides using only the exposed surface area (‘outer surface’), the pseudocapacitance phenomenon may also use the ‘inner surface’, and hence the bulk electrode material, without showing diffusion rate limitations. Therefore, pseudocapacitors store much higher energy than EDLC electrodes both on account of faradaic charge transfer and that involving the bulk of the electrode material. Similarly, the absence of diffusion limitations guarantee a much-improved rate performance than batteries. The characteristic features of pseudocapacitors that distinguish from battery electrodes are as follows: (1) quasi-rectangular CV response or presence of closely separated broad oxidation and reduction peaks (surface redox); (2) the current response is proportional to the scan speed (ν); (3) steadily sloping discharge curve (instead of plateaus in batteries with little hysteresis); and (4) impedance plot with a phase angle of 90° or slight deviation (less).5,16 Understanding the nature of energy storage by a particular electrode material (either battery or pseudocapacitive electrode) is of great significance to eliminate unwarranted claims regarding the energy storage or power ability of a newly developed electrode material.16 The charge storage ability in capacitors is expressed as specific capacitance after dividing the capacitance value (expressed in Farad) by mass, area or volume of the electrode. Conversely, due to the existence of a plateau region in the discharge curve, the capacitance (ΔQ/ΔE) of battery electrodes cannot be determined in every stage. Hence, their charge storage ability is expressed as capacity (mA h g−1). The energy density in capacitors is measured using eqn (iii), and in the case of batteries, it should be done by integrating the area under the specific capacity vs. potential plot. It should be further mentioned here that the calculation of the energy density of batteries following eqn (iii) may involve up to an order of error.91 To achieve an acceptable cycle life, relatively thick electrodes with a high mass loading should be used during the fabrication of supercapacitor cells. However, this may deplete the conductivity and affect the nano-structuring of the electrode materials due to agglomeration. In this case, the application of a lower scan speed may result in a higher specific capacitance and higher energy density. However, these claims may be inappropriate given that supercapacitor devices are particularly designed to have rapid charging (within minutes if not seconds)/discharging rates. The relevance of this comes from the fact that modern advanced lithium batteries may be charged in just over 10 min.5,7,16,91
 Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammetry at 40 mV s−1 of an RuO2 thin film (top) and single crystal (bottom) in 1 M HClO4. This was the first investigation on the unique behavior of RuO2 films to demonstrate how redox reactions at the surface can give rise to electrochemical features of capacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. 
 Fig. 9  Different types of reversible redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance: (a) underpotential deposition, (b) redox pseudocapacitance, and (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. 
Conductivity, porosity and nanostructure are three very important features, irrespective of faradaic or non-faradaic mode of electrode operation. Improved electrode conductivity helps instantaneous polarization across the electrode surface, which permits greater access of the electrolyte ions within a short time, resulting in an improved energy and power density together with a rectangular CV curve in non-faradaic processes. Similarly, higher electrode conductivity results in improved conduction of the transferred charges during faradaic processes. This is particularly significant during pseudocapacitive processes, which show electron transfer to the surface or near-surface active centers by the electrolyte ions. In the case of high electrode conductivity, both the surface and near-surface charge storage should be sufficiently fast. The poor electrical conductivity of MnO2 (depending on its crystal structure, the conductivity of MnO2 ranges from 10−7 to 10−3 S cm−1)5,76 restricts the charge storage to only a thin layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Thus, the gravimetric specific capacitance of MnO2 or Mn3O4 (spinel structure) electrodes show a much lower value than the theoretically predicted specific capacitance when the electrodes are fabricated with a practically usable thickness.92,93 This limits the emergence of MnO2-based electrodes as a viable alternative to the appreciably conducting RuO2 (conductivity 104 S cm−1 for bulk single crystal)5-based electrodes, despite the much lower cost and environmentally benign nature of the former. Incorporating MnO2 into a graphene scaffold or compositing with highly conducting CNTs improves the electrode conductivity; however, despite the improvement in rate capability, there is a decrease in the gravimetric capacitance due to the mass of the carbon materials used.94 faradaic charge transfer processes benefit from electrode porosity in two ways: (1) greater access of the charge transfer active sites and (2) easier ion conduction through the electrode. Ghodbane and coworkers demonstrated the impact of wide and interconnected crystallographic pathways using MnO2 electrodes with various dimensions (1D, 2D and 3D).76 Their work also indicated that an increase in the BET surface area of the electrode has a marginal effect on its charge storage properties, whereas ion conduction exerts a very important effect. In the very interesting and detailed work by Brezesinski, Dunn, Tolbert and coworkers, they demonstrated that the development of porosity results in the development of significant electrochemical properties in otherwise poor pseudocapacitive ceria (CeO2) electrodes.95 In their work, mesoporous CeO2 with crystalline pore walls was generated by polymer templating with poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (also known as KLE). Generally, when an electrode material is brought into contact with an electrolyte, the following phenomenon may occur: (a) the electrolyte may adsorb electrostatically on the electrode surface, (b) ions may react chemically with the active sites in the bulk electrode with concomitant electron transfer after intercalation into the channels or interlayer spaces, which may or may not be associated with a phase change (as in battery or intercalation pseudocapacitive materials), and (c) ions may be adsorbed electrochemically on the electrode surface, accompanied by charge transfer (surface redox processes in pseudocapacitors). Thus, energy storage by a particular electrode material usually involves of the simultaneous operation of different charge storage mechanisms. For example, conducting polymer electrodes with a large surface area show a combination of both double-layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance. Similarly, heteroatom-doped or functionalized carbon materials usually show improved specific capacitance due to the simultaneous operation of charge transfer capacitance (by the functional groups or heteroatom centers) and double-layer capacitance.26 Therefore, it is very important to analyze the various charge transfer contributions present in single-component or multi-component (composite) electrode materials for better understanding of the charge storage mechanism, and subsequent application of this knowledge during electrode fabrication. According to Conway,96 the current response including both diffusion-controlled and non-diffusion-controlled processes may be represented as follows: i(V) = k1ν + k2ν½(xi)where k1 and k2 represent the contributions from the capacitive and diffusion-controlled components. Trasatti and coworkers97 reported the relation of total capacitance with the contribution to surface and diffusion-controlled processes as follows: Q = Qν=infinity + constant (ν−½)(xii)
The capacitance originating from surface processes should be independent of the sweep rate, whereas the diffusion-controlled capacitance should vary with ν−½. This analysis was then applied to estimate the capacitance contribution of a thin NiCo2O4 coating on Ti with an interlayer of RuO2. The capacitance originating from the surface processes could be found from the Y-axis intercept of the total capacitance vs. ν−½ plot. The result showed about 62% contribution from the surface processes towards the total capacitance of this electrode material.98 The surface processes here refer to the complete outer surface charge storage processes originating from non-faradaic double layer capacitance and surface redox processes.
To further separate the total capacitance into double-layer and pseudocapacitance components, impedance analysis is of significant value. The distinction between these components may be achieved by analyzing the impedance data over a wide range of frequencies [0.1 Hz to 100 kHz] and then fitting the data with the appropriate equivalent circuit model. A vertical line (phase angle 90°) in the lower frequency region of the Nyquist plot usually refers to ideal capacitive behavior, which can be well fitted in a circuit model for simple capacitors.5 However, for pseudocapacitors, the plot often deviates from a vertical nature, and a phase angle of less than 90° is often encountered. In this case, fitting of the data in a circuit model with a constant phase element (ZCPE) is better than fitting in a simple capacitor model. ZCPE may be represented by the following equation: ZCPE = [B(iω)n]−1(xiii)where B and n (0 < n < 1) are the frequency independent proportionality constants,99ω is the frequency, and n tends to 1 for ideal capacitors and shows a value of 0.5 for diffusion-controlled processes.100 Brezesinski, Dunn, Tolbert and coworkers successfully deconvoluted various charge storage components in mesoporous CeO2 in a non-aqueous electrolyte, i.e., LiClO4 in propylene carbonate solvent.95 The sweep rate-dependent charge storage analysis from CV indicated a uniform contribution from the capacitive processes, irrespective of the sweep rate (0.5 mV s−1 or 10 mV s−1). However, charge storage by intercalation processes shows a significant sweep rate dependence, having a much higher value at a lower sweep rate. Here, it may be noted that charge storage capacitive processes include both the effects of the electrostatic double layer and surface redox processes. Conversely, the impedance result for the same cell configuration may be best fitted with the circuit model introducing a constant phase element. Here, the non-faradaic current is parallel with the charge transfer resistance (RF), which is again in series with the current due to faradaic charge transfer processes. This analysis separately gives the capacitance due to double layer and pseudocapacitance, where the latter shows significant voltage dependence for mesoporous CeO2 electrodes (Fig. 10). The major contributor in the total capacitance is the pseudocapacitance, and the latter shows significant voltage dependence up to 2.5 V compared to double-layer capacitance. This analysis led them to conclude that the development of mesoporosity in CeO2 electrodes generates significant intercalation pseudocapacitance, resulting in a higher total specific capacitance compared to non-porous CeO2, which gives a much poorer pseudocapacitive response. A very interesting comparison of the impedance analysis between mesoporous CeO2 and hydrous RuO2 shows almost comparable vertical lines in the Nyquist plot for the latter in the entire voltage region of 0.2 V to 1.2 V.5 This voltage independent impedance behavior of hydrous RuO2 electrodes indicates the operation of entirely surface charge storage processes (both faradaic and non-faradaic) instead of intercalation charge storage.
 Fig. 10  (a) Dependence of the specific capacitance on applied potential for KLE-templated CeO2 films. (b) Circuit model describing the impedance behavior of CeO2 thin-film electrodes in non-aqueous electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. 
3.1 Nanostructured electrodes
Nano-structuring of electrode materials is gradually increasing with improved significance in the case of both batteries and supercapacitors. All the desirable features such as energy storage, power density and cyclic stability of energy storage systems (such as batteries and supercapacitors) benefit from nano-structuring. The reduced domain sizes in nano-structured electrodes help increase the surface area, increase the access of the electrode surface by electrolyte ions, reduce the diffusion length, and hence increase the capacitance even under a high applied potential, i.e., increased rate capability and shorter diffusion length enhance the electrode surface utilization, thus reducing cyclic degradation.101,102 The use of nano-structured and highly conducting carbon-based electrodes (hybrid systems) has already begun in commercial lithium-ion batteries to increase their charge/discharge rate, while retaining high energy density.10 Nano-structuring blurs the distinction in the operation of batteries and pseudocapacitor electrodes. The above discussion makes it apparent that the main distinction between pseudocapacitive and battery electrodes lies in their rate performance. The slower charge/discharge rate in battery electrodes originate from the sluggish solid-state ion diffusion within the electrodes and associated phase change. In contrast, nano-structuring of battery electrodes increases the surface redox processes and also suppresses the phase change phenomenon.5 Therefore, nano-structured battery electrodes become operationally similar to pseudocapacitive electrodes. Simon and Dunn gave the name ‘extrinsic’ pseudocapacitors to battery electrode materials that behave as pseudocapacitors upon nano-structuring. The LiCoO2 electrode is an example of an extrinsic pseudocapacitor, where the battery-like plateau region in the charge/discharge plot gradually disappears upon a decrease in domain size, and finally results in a constantly sloping curve (typical of capacitive charge storage) when the domain size becomes 6 nm (Fig. 11).103 The improved kinetics of charge storage/delivery may also be apparent with an increase in the ‘b’ value in eqn (viii) upon nano-structuring, which finally tends towards b = 1. However, care should be exercised that only based on the value of ‘b’ (i.e., b = 1), but also one should not be convinced of the pseudocapacitive nature of a typical battery electrode material unless other characteristic capacitive features are not met.16 In this regard, it may be mentioned that lithium ion insertion in the Li4Ti5O12 electrode to fully lithiated Li7Ti5O12 suffers very little electrode volume change (∼0.2%), and thus any strain, exhibiting an improved rate of ion diffusion. Despite the rate improvement, the other features of this electrode are similar to that of the battery electrode.5 Therefore, an increase in the value of ‘b’ for improved rate battery materials should be considered as an effect.18 Conversely, ‘intrinsic’ pseudocapacitors retain their characteristic features irrespective of their size in the bulk state and nano-structured state. A few examples of intrinsic pseudocapacitors are MnO2, RuO2 and Nb2O5 electrodes.5 Nano-structuring of EDLC or intrinsically pseudocapacitive electrode materials is very effective considering the increase in surface area and decrease in diffusion path, which boost both the energy storage and rate capability of the electrodes. Particularly, in pseudocapacitance, which is a surface/near-surface phenomenon, nano-structuring helps to use the materials underneath the near-surface domain, and hence increases the energy storage along with power density. This may be observed is Fig. 7(c), where upon going to the nano domains from the bulk stage, the charge storage efficiency of the pseudocapacitive electrode materials increases. However, it is notable that although a significant improvement in the rate performance occurs, the coulombic efficiency decreases in the case of battery electrodes after nano-structuring (Fig. 7(d)). Therefore, unique strategies need to be designed for the kinetic improvement of battery electrodes retaining their intercalation bulk storage. A possible strategy is to widen the crystallographic pathways for ion transport, increasing the conductivity of the intercalation channels by conductive carbon or metal coating or formation of a composite with highly conducting EDLC or pseudocapacitive (surface active) materials.
 Fig. 11  Effect of crystallite size on the lithiation (discharge) curve of LiCoO2 measured for 1 h charge–discharge. For small crystallite sizes, the plateau region decreased and was replaced by a completely sloping voltage profile. For 6 nm crystallites, the voltage profile was almost linear in shape, which is due to the increased contribution of the surface lithium-ion storage sites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. 
The characterization of hybrid electrode materials is usually performed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).104 Specifically, the morphology of electrode materials is observed via SEM, the elemental composition is obtained from EDS, the XRD pattern of the electrode material displays the characteristic diffraction peaks corresponding to the different crystal planes matching the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) and the Raman spectrum of the electrode materials characterizes the vibrational features of the functional groups present, and also characterizes the presence of carbon traces based on the D (∼1346 cm) and G (1587 cm−1) peaks, indicating the amount of disordered graphitic carbon present. The XPS spectrum of electrode materials indicates the presence of different elements, their composition, and valance states.
4. Hybrid electrochemical capacitors (HEC)
Hybridization of different types of materials is archetypical of materials science; however, it should also be noted that the hybridization of materials should allow proper exchange of the chemistries between various components rather than a macroscopic mixture. Therefore, prudent design of the nanostructure or microstructure of various components should be done to extract their optimum performance. Electrochemical capacitors having different electrode configurations with respect to mass, volume and material type are called asymmetric electrode systems, which are also a type of hybrid capacitor.15 Hybrid electrochemical capacitors having individual electrodes following different energy storage mechanisms such as EDLC//pseudocapacitive, EDLC//battery electrode are very effective with improved electrochemical performances given that these devices allow the realization of improved kinetics of EDLC materials, in addition to improved energy storage performance of pseudocapacitive or battery electrode materials.6,7 Representative CV and GCD plots of similar hybrid electrochemical capacitors are presented in Fig. 12, where the pseudocapacitive WO3 electrode against KI-reduced GO (capacitive) (Fig. 12(a)–(c))105 and Fe3O4–C battery electrode against capacitive CNT electrode (Fig. 12(d)–(f))106 are used. Asymmetric electrode devices are also attractive for having an increased operational cell voltage, combining the different voltage windows of the component electrodes (Fig. 12), and minimized self-discharging of the capacitor cell. The potential window of an asymmetric supercapacitor is given by the equation E = E0 + ΔE1 + ΔE2 = 1/F(ωβ − ωα)NA + ΔE1 + ΔE2, where ωα and ωβ are the work functions of the positive and negative electrodes, respectively, NA is Avogadro's number, F stands for 1 Faraday (96485 coulomb), and ΔE1 and ΔE2 are the surface dipole potentials of the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. Therefore, the selection of a proper electrode material in an asymmetric cell having the largest difference in work function (typically found in metal oxide electrodes) and proper charge balance of the positive and negative electrodes should allow extension of the voltage window.16,107 The electrolyte used poses another concern in achieving extended cell potential considering its electro-degradation. Aqueous electrolytes are desirable considering their low cost, high specific heat, high conductivity and environmentally benign character compared to organic- and ionic liquid-based electrolytes having associated environmental concerns and viscosity issues restricting ionic mobility despite offering much higher potential windows (∼3.6–4 V). The major difficulty associated with aqueous-based electrolytes is that water splits into oxygen (O2) at roughly 1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode or 1.23 V vs. SHE)26 and hydrogen (H2) at ∼−0.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl or −0.08 V vs. SHE). Therefore, only a limited potential range (0–1.2 V) can be employed for the operation of aqueous-based electrolyte supercapacitors.108 This problem may be alleviated by the suitable choice of electrodes having an overpotential for the evolution of either or both oxygen and hydrogen gases in an asymmetric supercapacitor cell.10,107,108 For example, the classic lead–acid battery, which works in a voltage window of ∼2.2 V in concentrated H2SO4 or supercapacitor cell having a carbon-based negative electrode and MnO2-based positive electrode in neutral aqueous Na2SO4 operating in the potential window of ∼2 V.108Table 1 summarizes the examples of some other faradaic material-based electrodes showing a similar water decomposition overpotential in the asymmetric cell configuration together with their improved electrochemical performances.
 Fig. 12  (a) CV plots of WO3 and KG (KI reduced graphene oxide) electrodes at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (b and c) CV curves at different scan rates and GCD curves at different current densities, respectively, of the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device (reprinted with permission from ref. 105). (d) Comparative CV curves of Fe3O4–C anode and CNT cathode measured in a three-electrode cell in 3 M KOH. (e and f) CV curves and discharge curves of aqueous CNTs‖Fe3O4–C hybrid (BSH) devices, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 106). 
Table 1 Electrochemical properties of different hybrid supercapacitor cells showing an aqueous decomposition overpotential




Sl no.
Faradaic materials/composites
Potential window (aq.)
Cell configuration
Electrolyte
Potential window
Sp. capacitance (F g−1)
Energy density (max)
Power density (max)
Ref.




1
MnO2
0.8 V
MnO2‖graphene
1 (M) Na2SO4
2 V
37
25.2 W h kg−1
100 W kg−1

109



2
RuO2-IL-CMG
1.0 V
RuO2-ILCMG‖IL-CMG
PVA–H2SO4 gel
1.8 V
175
19.7 W h kg−1
6800 W kg−1

110



3
Ni(OH)2/AC/CNT
0.4 V
Ni(OH)2/AC/CNT‖AC
6 (M) KOH
1.6 V
82.1
32.3 W h kg−1
504.8 W kg−1

111



4
NiO-CFP
0.45 V
NiO-CFP‖Fe2O3-CFP
2 (M) KOH
1.8 V
240
105 W h kg−1
12700 W kg−1

112



5
Fe2O3-CF
1.0 V
MnO2-CF‖Fe2O3-CF
PVA–LiClO4 gel
2.0 V
74
33.1 W h kg−1
1320 W kg−1

113



6
Mn2O3/C composite
0.8 V
Mn2O3/C composite‖AC
1 (M) Na2SO4
1.8 V
45
54.9 W h kg−1
22600 W kg−1

114



7
NiCo2O4@GQDs
0.6 V
NiCo2O4@GQDs‖AC
2 (M) KOH
1.6 V
95
38 W h kg−1
800 W kg−1

115



8
Gr-MoO3
1.0 V
GrMnO2‖GrMoO3
1 (M) Na2SO4
2.0 V
307
42.6 W h kg−1
276 W kg−1

107



9
NiCo2O4@PPy NWA
0.7 V
NiCo2O4@PPy NWA‖AC
PVA–KOH gel
1.6 V
102.5
58.8 W h kg−1
10200 W kg−1

116



10
α-Fe2O3-PANI
1.0 V
PANI‖α-Fe2O3-PANI
PVA–LiCl gel
1.8 V
112.6
0.31 mW h cm−3
67.1 mW cm−3

117



11
NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT
0.4 V
NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT‖ CMK-3
PVA–KOH gel
1.5 V
31.6 mF cm−2
0.011 mW h cm−2
0.33 mW cm−2

118





In addition to the two electrodes, the electrolyte residing inside the separator and inside the electrode material layers is the most important electrochemical cell (ES) component. The specific requirements for an electrolyte are wide voltage window, high electrochemical stability, high ionic concentration, low solvated ionic radius, low resistivity, low volatility, low viscosity, low cost, low toxicity, and accessibility at high purity.102 These electrolytes can be classified into three categories as follows: (i) aqueous electrolyte, (ii) organic electrolyte, and (iii) ionic liquids (ILs). An important disadvantage of aqueous electrolytes is their small voltage window, e.g., ∼1.2 V, which is much lower than that of organic electrolytes, e.g., ∼3.5 V. ILs can exist in liquid form at desired temperatures having low vapor pressure, high chemical and thermal stability, low flammability, conductivity of ∼10 mS cm−1, and wide voltage window of ∼4.5 V. Here it is necessary to mention that the use of a gel/polymer electrolyte eliminates the necessity for a separator and enhances the mechanical properties of the device. The chemical inertness and compatibility of the electrolytes with the electrodes are also important characteristics for developing efficient electrochemical cells.119
Besides the necessity of the increased cell operating voltage, the other concern associated with electrochemical capacitors is their self-discharging property, which severely limits their electrochemical performance.120 Self-discharging refers to the spontaneous loss of cell potential (and hence stored energy) over a period when kept in open circuit condition.121,122 There are three possible mechanisms proposed to account for self-discharging in supercapacitor devices as follows: (1) ohmic leakage, which takes place through the internal resistance present in the device, (2) charge redistribution through the diffusion of ions observed at the electrode surface, and (3) faradaic charge transfer reactions caused by local over charging or due to impurities.122,123 Several methods have been used to suppress the self-discharging of supercapacitors, which include tailoring of the electrode,124 introducing additives to the electrolyte125–127 and using ion-exchange membranes or chemically active separation materials, which can trap impurities.123,126 The rate of self-charging in batteries is much lower than that in supercapacitors, where in the case of the former, ions are intercalated within the bulk of the electrode materials, whereas in the latter, electrostatically surface-adsorbed ions can redistribute via diffusion. Therefore, as expected, in asymmetric supercapacitors utilizing intercalation or conversion electrodes, the problem of self-discharging should be minimized. A remarkable development in this respect was achieved by Zhi and coworkers in the form of a Zn-ion hybrid capacitor, where the Zn metal was typically used as the anode and MXene (Ti3C2) or TiN as the cathode (Fig. 13).128,129 In this regard, they proposed a very interesting ‘static electricity-immune mechanism’, which refers to breaking the electrostatic adsorption, i.e., the conversion of Zn2+ ions into electroneutral Zn atoms, and subsequently is anchors tightly on the anodic surface during charging, which will not transfer to the cathodic region under the open circuit state due to the ‘broken’ electrostatic adsorption imposed by SO42− ions (Fig. 13(b)).128 Thus, the mechanism proposed warrants general implication for other similar hybrid capacitors having different metal anodes. In another very interesting report, they demonstrated the role of the anion (SO42−) in improving the electrochemical and anti-self-discharging property employing TiN as the cathode.129 Here they have proposed a double-lock mechanism over charge redistribution between the electrodes given that Zn would not spontaneously convert to Zn2+ ions (anodic lock) and the strong adsorption interaction between the TiN and SO42− ions imposes another lock (cathodic lock) to inhibit the self-diffusion behaviour of the anions towards the anodic region under open circuit condition (Fig. 13(c) and (d)). A schematic diagram representing a typical hybrid asymmetric supercapacitor having a battery/pseudocapacitive material in one electrode and carbon-based EDLC materials in the other electrode is presented in Fig. 14(i).7 The concept of a hybrid device was first proposed by Amatucci and coworkers in 2001, where they used a negative Li4Ti5O12 (battery) electrode against a positive activated carbon (capacitive) electrode in organic electrolyte.130 Subsequently, the application of a pre-lithiated graphite as the negative electrode was also demonstrated, which further increased the operating voltage.131 These hybrid devices resulted in the remarkable development of the energy and power density together with extended cycle life at high rates.132 Commercialized Li+ ion hybrid ECs show a gravimetric energy density in the range of 20–30 W h kg−1, which is about 3–5 times higher than that of commercialized EDLCs using activated carbon in both electrodes.15 A remarkable development in environment-friendly commercialized hybrid device technology is the introduction of the ‘Aquion battery’, which uses a combination of a capacitive activated carbon electrode against spinel-MnO2 as the positive faradaic electrode in aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte.133 This technology provides excellent performance, having an energy density of ∼20 W h kg−1 with no capacitance degradation, even over 10000 cycles while the cell operates in a potential window of 1.6 V in aqueous electrolyte.32,134 It should be further mentioned that hybrid device technology has also led to significant improvement in the performance (power density is doubled and cycle life is extended by a factor of three) of next-generation Pb–acid batteries, where one of the Pb plates has been replaced by an activated carbon electrode.135 However, there is an inherent problem related to the dissimilar charge/discharge kinetics of individual electrodes, i.e., faster charging/discharging rate of EDLC electrodes compared to battery electrodes, which restricts the full use of the storage capacity of the battery electrodes. Therefore, a balance in charge storage/release kinetics of two different electrodes is desirable. In this case, the best strategy should be to use an EDLC and battery electrode material hybrid (composite) in a single electrode against an EDLC-based counter electrode (i.e., a double hybrid system) (Fig. 2).7 However, to realize full utilization of this strategy, the composite components should have proper contact, otherwise during charging, due to the faster kinetics of the EDLC component, the potential will rise fast, and thus the relatively sluggish faradaic charge storage component would not be able to use its full charge storage capacity. Nano-structuring of composite components may be very effective in this case. In a well-connected composite electrode containing EDLC and battery materials, in the initial stage, charge storage should occur in the EDLC component until the redox potential for the faradaic component is reached, and then charge storage of the battery electrode material should occur, maintaining a steady potential. After the charge storage capacity of the battery material is exhausted, charging of the EDLC component should occur again to reach the fully charged cell potential.7 Therefore, it should be commented here that composite electrodes having an EDLC component with faradaic component in one electrode should be more effective compared to another EDLC electrode during cell construction [Fig. 14(ii)].136 This was well demonstrated by Naoi and coworkers, where an Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticle-anchored carbon nanofiber (CNF) electrode137 against an activated carbon electrode (double hybridization approach) resulted in extraordinary energy storage capacity at very high rates.138 The conductivity of the non-faradaic components above their redox potential becomes very poor;95 therefore, it is apparent from the above discussion that in composites of only non-faradaic components, complete charging of the various components may not be possible. Simultaneously, the issue of reduced conductivity for any of the composite components may also hamper the rate performance of the device, particularly in the initial stages of discharging. Furthermore, in nano-structured hybrid electrode materials composed of EDLC and faradaic components, electrostatically stored energy in the EDLC component should enhance the electron transfer in the faradaic component. Thus, the synergistic effect between the composite components would help enhance the electron transfer reaction at higher rates in the faradaic component compared to purely faradaic electrodes (battery or pseudocapacitor electrodes individually).
 Fig. 13  (a) Self-discharge examination combining GCD and OCV test. The inset exhibits the continuous monitoring of OCV over 72 h. (b) Schematic illustration of the static electricity-immune mechanism for excellent anti-self-discharge performance (reprinted with permission from ref. 128). (c) Curves of Zn–TiN capacitors in different electrolytes after charging to 1.9 V. (d) Schematic illustration of the different self-discharge behaviors of zinc-ion capacitors with different electrolytes, where the yellow, blue and red balloons represent SO42−, Cl− and Ac−, respectively; the wind indicates the self-discharge trend; and the brown wires represent the attraction between the TiN and anions (reprinted with permission from ref. 129). 
 Fig. 14  Schematic representation of (i) a single electrode system (a) capacitor, (b) battery, and (c) asymmetric capacitor system with an aqueous electrolyte according to the charge–potential profile with corresponding equations for energy storage. (ii) Hybrid combination of a hybrid electrode (hybridized battery and capacitor components) and a capacitor electrode according to the charge–potential profile with corresponding equations for energy storage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. 
There are numerous reports and several reviews presenting the synthesis and electrochemical properties of multi-component composite materials.6–8,72,139–144 The present work reviews some architecturally diverse and very interesting reports regarding the synthesis of non-faradaic/faradaic-based hybrid materials and their performance in hybrid supercapacitors.
4.1 0D nano structured materials
0D nano-structures refer particularly to spherical particles (solid or hollow) having dimensions constrained to the nanoscale (1–100 nm). 0D nano-structures offer several advantages, which originate from their constrained nature and spherical shapes, for example, activated carbon (AC) shows a large surface area (up to 3000 m2 g−1), wide pore size range (micro, meso and macropores), low density, high surface to volume ratio (in hollow 0D nano structures), shortened pathways for mass and charge transportation, and of course, low degree of agglomeration.6 Carbon materials and transition metal oxides (oxides of Mn, Ni, and Fe) have been widely fabricated as 0D nano-structured electrode materials. A fascinating example is the nanoporous Au/MnO2 supercapacitor electrode, which was fabricated by growing nano-crystalline MnO2 grains (∼5 nm) within the nanopores created by de-alloying Ag65Au35 using HNO3. The remarkably high specific capacitance of ∼1145 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 was attributed to the faradaic reactions by the MnO2 nanoparticles, where nano-porous gold contributed via improved mass and charge transport.145 Double-shelled NiO nanospheres exhibited a remarkably high specific capacitance of 612.5 F g−1 [Fig. 15(i)].146 The core shell 0D nano-structures offer considerable advantages of enhanced electrical conductivity, low agglomeration, robust chemical and mechanical stability, etc.147–150 Zhao and coworkers coated PANI on hollow carbon spheres, which showed an improved specific capacitance of 525 F g−1 with the optimized PANI content [Fig. 15(ii)].147 They reported the formation of an MnO2 shell over graphitic hollow carbon spheres prepared by heating graphitic hollow carbon spheres with KMnO4 solution at 70 °C. The synthesized core–shell nanostructure electrode exhibited a specific capacitance of 190 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 with 64 wt% of MnO2 [Fig. 15(ii)].148 Chatterjee and coworkers reported the synthesis of covalently attached core–shell carbon nanodot@PANI particles, where a uniform and nanostructured coating of PANI chains was created using oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization (OICP) of aniline on the surface of carbon nanodots [Fig. 15(iii)].151 The covalently attached nanocomposite exhibited a very high specific capacitance of 945 F g−1 with cyclic stability of 92% after 2000 charging/discharging cycles. The observed improved electrochemical properties were attributed to the non-agglomerated discrete core–shell morphology and covalently attached PANI chains on the CND surface. Onion-like carbon is another very interesting class of 0D carbon nanomaterials first prepared by Gogotsi and Simon by annealing nano-diamond powder at 1800 °C.73,152 Although the carbon onion exhibited a relatively low specific surface area (500 m2 g−1) compared to AC, due to its concentric shell structure, its surface was well accessed by the electrolyte ions, which is responsible for its much improved electrochemical properties [Fig. 15(iv)].74 Jin et al. reported the high specific capacitance of 350 F g−1 with excellent capacitance retention of 99% after 10000 cycles from porous carbon nano-onions (CNO) extracted from rice husk.153 There are several reports on nano-composite electrodes of carbon nano-onions with MnO2 having moderate to appreciably high energy storage capability.154–156 CNO/SDS/PPy nanocomposite electrodes were found to exhibit an extremely high specific capacitance of ∼800 F g−1 and bi-layered CNO/PPy delivered an even higher specific capacitance of ∼1300 F g−1.157
 Fig. 15  (i) (a) Schematic showing the synthesis of multishelled NiO hollow nanospheres using LBL self-assembly. TEM images show NiO hollow nanospheres with (b) single-shell, (c) double-shells, and (d) triple shells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. (ii) (a) FESEM and (b) TEM images of HCS–PANI. (c) FESEM and (d) TEM images of GHCS–MnO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147 and 148, respectively. (iii) Core–shell carbon nanodot@PANI grown from candle soot-derived carbon nanodot surface by oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization (OICP) of aniline. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (iv) (a) Cross-section of a charged 0D onion-like carbon capacitor. (b) TEM image of a carbon onion with a lattice spacing close to 0.35 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. 
4.2 1D nanostructured materials
1D nanostructured materials (both homo- and hetero-structures) have been extensively applied as supercapacitor electrode materials due to their superior chemical and physical properties.158–163 The longitudinal axis of these materials is beneficial for mass and charge transport, and furthermore, they retain the benefits of 0D nanostructures in two nanoscale dimensions. Nano-rods/nano-pillars, nano-wires/nano-fibers, nano-ribbons and nano-tubes (hollow) are examples of some 1D nanostructured materials. Different template-assisted and template-free methods such as hydrothermal synthesis, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and electrodeposition have been employed for the synthesis of these materials.6 The excellent electrochemical properties of these materials originate from their distinct morphological characteristics, for example, nano-wires with high aspect ratio (length/diameter) possess a very high surface area. Conversely, nano rods/nano pillars possess a relatively poor surface area (aspect ratio < 10), but vertically aligned nano-pillars on conducting surfaces show lower chances of collapse on neighboring nanostructures, and hence, allow better percolation of ions, which increases the access of the electrode surface by ions. Thomas and coworkers reported a very interesting template-assisted synthetic strategy for the fabrication of well-ordered carbon nanopillars.164 They used a less time-consuming and cost-effective spin on nanoimprinting (SNAP) technique, where a solution of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was initially fabricated into arrays of nanopillars after curing in a template and peeling off the polymer from the template. In the subsequent stage, stabilization and carbonization resulted in well-ordered carbon nano-pillars. In the beautiful nanostructure (Fig. 16) of carbon nano-pillar arrays, the height and diameter of the individual nano-pillars were ∼95 nm and ∼200 nm, respectively. The remarkable enhancement in the specific capacitance of the nano pillar arrays (3.4 mF cm−2) in comparison to only ∼0.05 mF cm−2 for a planar carbon film showed the effectiveness of the nano-structured morphology. It is worth mentioning that the benefit of these developed nanostructures is not only restricted to the improved electrochemical properties of the homo-structures, given that further improvement may be achieved by coating these nanostructures with suitable pseudocapacitive or battery electrode materials. A similar approach was reported by Thomas and coworkers, where AuPd sputtered on SNAP generated PAN nano-pillars, on which MnO2 was conformally coated to have AuPd@MnO2 core–shell nano-pillars, exhibiting a much-improved specific capacitance (603 F g−1) with more than two-fold increase compared to that of the AuPd–MnO2 planer electrode.165 Nanowires with a high aspect ratio offer a large surface area for charge storage and efficient pathway for charge transportation. Li and coworkers synthesized PANI nanowires via electrodeposition on an anodized alumina oxide (AAO) template.166 The synthesized PANI nanowires exhibited a very high specific capacitance of 1142 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1, with 95% cyclic stability (500 cycles). Wei and coworkers reported a template-free direct electrodeposition technique for the fabrication of a PANI nanowire array electrode, exhibiting a specific capacitance of 950 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with 84% cyclic stability (500 cycles).167Spinel NiCo2O4 has attracted significant attention as an electrode material because of its high conductivity (∼62 S cm−1) and availability of multiple oxidation states of its metal ions, which enable improved redox charge transfer.168 In fact, NiCo2O4 exhibits reversible redox charge transfer with a phase change (battery like) when oxyhydroxide derivatives of nickel and cobalt are produced, and then fast reversible pseudocapacitive charge transfer with the conversion of cobalt oxide hydroxide as follows:168  
 Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication of carbon nanostructures via SNAP method. (b) SEM images of top-view and side-view (inset) of polymer nanopillars. (c) SEM images of top-view and side-view (inset) of carbon nanopillars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. 
Thus, a combination of battery-like and pseudocapacitive charge transfer enable this electrode material to have improved charge storage. Lou and coworkers reported an array of NiCo2O4 nanoneedles grown on a conductive surface as a supercapacitor electrode.169 This electrode showed a remarkably high specific capacitance of 1118.6 F g−1 with ∼10.6% loss in capacitance over 2000 cycles. Nanotubes offer several advantages over solid 1D nano-structures considering their increased surface area and low mass utilization, which normally results in the production of a high gravimetric capacitance. Furthermore, conduction in nanotubes occur via ballistic transport, which means charge carriers get a high mean free path without scattering. Therefore, no Joule heating takes place, which is a genuine problem in other conductors.8 Nanotube-based core–shell hetero-structures have been widely used as electrode materials. Currently, among the different combinations of core–shell hetero-structures: (1) EDLC@pseudocapacitor and (2) pseudocapacitor@pseudocapacitor have attracted major attention.6,7 The EDLC core offers several advantages in these materials owing to its high cyclic stability, and hence robust backbone structure. Also, the high conductivity of EDLC materials offers better electronic conduction, in addition to the high specific capacitance of the pseudocapacitive shell materials, which may offset the poor specific capacitance of the EDLC backbone, hence giving appreciably high energy storage by the heterostructure electrode. Conversely, pseudocapacitive@pseudocapacitive core–shell materials offer a significantly high specific capacitance. CNTs have been mostly used as the EDLC core material in the type (1) heterostructure. CNT@PPy-MnO2, CNT@PEDOT–MnO2 and CNT@PANI–MnO2 with moderate to appreciably high specific capacitance were well reported in the literature by Zhai and coworkers.170–172 Ajayan and coworkers reported that CNT@MnO2 showed appreciable improvement in specific capacitance (∼2 times) compared to pure MnO2 and remarkable mechanical and cyclic stability even after 1000 cycles, indicating its robust nature.173,174
Similarly, the reported type-2 heterostructures include Co3O4@MnO2,175 CoO@NiHON,176 Co3O4@NiO,177 CoO@TiO2,178 and Co3O4@PEDOT–MnO2 (ref. 179) as electrodes. Evidently, the combinations using pseudocapacitor/pseudocapacitor or pseudocapacitor/battery electrodes result in appreciably high charge storage. Liu and coworkers reported an improved specific capacitance of ∼1500 F g−1 with the rate performance of ∼67% retention at 90 mA cm−2 using an NiCo2O4@MnO2 electrode.180 This enhancement is apparently due to the NiCo2O4 battery electrode material and the rate performance contributed from the synergistic effect of the pseudocapacitive MnO2 shell. Metal oxide electrodes such as V2O5, MnO2, and Co3O4 suffer from the problem of dissolution in the electrolyte solution, which gradually erodes the electrochemically active electrode material, resulting in poor cyclic and mechanical stability of the electrodes. Thus, to alleviate this problem, a conductive polymer coating over the metal oxide electrodes is very effective. The conductive polymer shell here plays a dual role as follows: (1) contributes to the electrochemical performance of the electrode by redox charge transfer reactions and increased conductivity and (2) protects the metal oxide electrode materials from dissolution/de-lamination. Wu and coworkers, in a very interesting work, prepared a V2O5@PPy core–shell nano structured electrode by coating PPy over V2O5 nanoribbons. Subsequently, they fabricated a hybrid supercapacitor cell with the V2O5@PPy anode against activated carbon (AC), which demonstrated only 5% capacitance fading after 10000 cycles compared to that of 17.5% under similar conditions using the V2O5 electrode without PPy coating.181 There are many reports in which conducting polymers other than PPy were also used for the same purpose such as MnO2@PEDOT–PSS,182,183 Co3O4@PANI,184 and V2O5@PEDOT–MnO2.185 The combination of 0D and 1D nanomaterials has also attracted significant attention as supercapacitor electrode materials. Gu and coworkers reported the synthesis of a composite of vertically aligned CNT arrays with MnO2 nanoflowers via electrochemical deposition. The MnO2/CNT nanocomposite showed an appreciably high specific capacitance of 199 F g−1 with only 3% capacitance fading after 20000 cycles.186 Lee and coworkers loaded well-dispersed MnO2 nanoparticles onto PEDOT nanowires.187 The MnO2/PEDOT composite exhibited a specific capacitance of ∼250 F g−1 and a remarkable rate capability of ∼80% from 5 to 25 mA cm−2. Now, among the carbon-based 0D nanomaterials, GQDs exhibit novel physical properties, including 3D nanoconfinement, good carrier mobility, and electrical conductivity, which are beneficial for energy storage-related applications. Similarly, abundant edge defects or opportunity for better surface grafting are beneficial during the formation of heterostructures. Yan and coworkers reported the fabrication of a hybrid (asymmetric) micro-supercapacitor with improved charge storage and rate capability using graphene quantum dots (GQDs) as the negative electrode and PANI fibers as the positive electrode. The same electrode combination was also used for the fabrication of an all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor containing H3PO4–PVA gel electrolyte, which exhibited desirable electrochemical properties.188 In another very interesting work, Malik and coworkers reported the synthesis of a GQD/PANI nanocomposite electrode, where GQDs were used as a dopant during the oxidative polymerization of aniline (Fig. 17(a)).189 The in situ-formed nanocomposite material exhibited beautiful PANI hollow nanofibers (nanotubes) having a distinct inner and outer diameter (Fig. 17(b) and (c)). The synthesized nanocomposite material exhibited an excellent specific capacitance of ∼1044 F g−1 with ∼20% capacitance fading after 3000 capacitive charge/discharge cycles. Tang and coworkers synthesized an Ni(OH)2/AC/CNT composite via a microwave-assisted method and used this as a positive electrode in front of an AC negative electrode, which allowed a wide potential window of 1.6 V, resulting in an appreciably high energy density of 32.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 504.8 W kg−1 with 83.5% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles.190 Similarly, Das and coworkers191 established an asymmetric supercapacitor device with an energy density as high as 85.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 11.2 kW kg−1 employing NiO–CNT as the positive electrodes and AC as the negative electrode. The utility of CNT-based supercapacitors is further apparent from the exceptionally high energy and power density reported in some systems. Shao-Horn and coworkers reported oxidized CNT as an electrode material, achieving an energy density of ∼200 W h kg−1 and power density of ∼10 kW kg−1.192 In another report, a CNT/PANI free-standing electrode delivered high energy and power density values of 131 W h kg−1 and 62.5 kW kg−1, respectively.193
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of in situ GOQD-doped PANI (GQDP) composite. (b) HRTEM images of GQDP composites having different aniline to GQD weight ratios, producing different inner and outer diameters, where the numerical after the sample name refers to the amount of GO used (in mg) with 100 mg of aniline during oxidative polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. 
4.3 2D nanostructured materials
Improved rate capability and cyclic stability, which are the signature electrochemical properties of supercapacitors, require a decrease in diffusion length, increased conductivity of the electrode material and increased surface area. These properties also increase the usage of the electrode surface, which is responsible for an improvement in energy storage property. The requirement of an increased electrode–electrolyte contact area for improved supercapacitor electrode performance is likely to be best satisfied with 2D nanomaterials, which offer only surface area (i.e., no bulk volume). Graphene nanosheets (GNSs) have been the most successful carbon-based 2D nanomaterial owing to their high theoretical surface area (∼2630 m2 g−1), conductivity, high charge carrier mobility, and mechanical and chemical stability.6 Furthermore, graphene sheets possess intrinsically structured accessible pores and interlayer spaces, which allow better accessibility to ions.194,195 The use of transition metal oxides and chalcogenides such as RuO2, MnO2, NiO, Co2O3, V2O5, MoO2, MoS2, and WS2 in the form of 2D electrodes is the main focus for the development of high-performance hybrid supercapacitors. Kang and coworkers demonstrated the suitability of 2D MnO2 (2 nm thick) as a highly stable cathode, which exhibited a specific capacitance as high as 774 F g−1 for up to 10000 cycles196 in Ca(NO3)2–SiO2 gel electrolyte. Similarly, RuO2 thin film electrodes showed a high specific capacitance of 730 F g−1.197,198 In a very interesting report, Dai and coworkers synthesized a capacitor-like RuO2-graphene electrode and battery-like Ni(OH)2 nanoplate attached to graphene sheets as electrodes. Subsequently, these electrodes were combined to fabricate an asymmetric supercapacitor cell to achieve attractive energy and power densities.199 Wei and coworkers reported a facile method for the preparation of a high-performance graphene–MnO2 electrode, exhibiting 310 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 (228 F g−1 at 500 mV s−1) and 95% cyclic stability even after 15000 cycles.200 Nandi and coworkers reported the synthesis of a hydrogen tungsten oxide-decorated reduced graphene oxide (HxWO3@rGO) composite using WS2 and GO as precursor materials. The synthesized electrode material exhibited a high aerial capacitance of 409 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, which retained 61.4% of its specific capacitance at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. The synthesized hybrid material was subsequently drop-casted onto a graphite layer coated on Scotch tape to design a flexible supercapacitor having a volumetric capacitance of 3.56 F cm−3 with an ultra-high energy density of 1.6 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 1469.43 mW cm−3.201 In another report, the same group developed a facile and new synthetic method for the formation of a 2D WO3 electrode material (flower-like aggregated nano-sized WO3 plates) from WS2 as the precursor material (Fig. 18). The synthesized electrode material established its superiority as a negative electrode material by showing a high range of electrochemical properties such as specific capacitance of 508 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 97% capacitance stability after 1000 cycles. The synthesized material was also used as a negative electrode in front of a mildly reduced GO positive electrode in an asymmetric supercapacitor cell, which exhibited a high energy density of 218.3 mW h cm−2 and exceptionally high power density of 17500 mW cm−2.105 In this respect, a comparison of 2D GO sheets with 1D CNTs may be very interesting, given that the latter also offer similar properties such as high surface area and conductivity; however, it has appreciably high contact resistance with the current collector substrate unlike the former. Hybrid 2D electrodes prepared by combining MoS2 or WS2 with rGO exhibited encouraging the energy density of 63 W h kg−1 or ∼50 W h kg−1, respectively, with minimal loss in capacitance (<10%) even after 1000 cycles.202 In the MoS2–rGO composite, the components were found to remain covalently attached due to the formation of an Mo–O–C bond. This may explain the very high cyclic stability of this electrode material. The similar benefit of covalently attached composite components was also reported by Baek and coworkers or Xie and coworkers in covalently attached PANI–rGO or PANI–GO composites.203,204 In another very interesting work, Han, Wei and coworkers reported the controlled growth of an ordered array of PANI nanocylinders on GO sheets. The composite was formed in situ during the oxidative polymerization of aniline, where control of the growth of the PANI nanocylinders was achieved only when a rather lower concentration of aniline [<0.05 (M)] was used (Fig. 19).205 The synthesized composite material showed an appreciably high specific capacitance of 555 F g−1 in a symmetric electrode configuration together with high cyclic stability (92% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles). The improved electrochemical properties were attributed to the formation of an ordered nano-structured PANI and low interfacial contact resistance at the PANI/GO interface due to the good contact between the 2D GO sheet surface and p-linked PANI chains.
 Fig. 18  (i) Synthesis of WO3 from WS2. (ii) (a–c) FESEM images of WS2, WO3·H2O, and WO3, respectively. (d–f) TEM images of WS2, WO3·H2O, and WO3, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. 
 Fig. 19  (i) Schematic illustration of the nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowires: (a) heterogeneous nucleation on GO nanosheets and (b) homogeneous nucleation in bulk solution. (ii) SEM images of PANI–GO nanocomposites with different concentrations of aniline: (a and b) 0.05 M and (c and d) 0.06 M. Other conditions: aniline/APS = 1.5 (molar ratio), HClO4 = 1 M, GO = 0.36 mg mL−1, and the reaction was carried out at −10 °C for 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. 
Recently, MXenes have been developed as a new class of highly conductive 2D layered carbide and carbonitride materials.206–208 These materials are derived via the selective etching of A from a hexagonal layered ‘MAX’ precursor, where ‘M’ represents an early transition metal (Ti, V, Cr, Nb, etc.), ‘A’ represents a group element (Al, Si, Sn, In, etc.) and ‘X’ represents C and/or N. These materials offer a high specific capacitance (over 300 F cm−3) via the intercalation of cations of various charges and sizes such as Mg2+, K+, Na+, Al3+, NH4+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Cs+, and Li+. Interestingly, the cation intercalation rates are unusually high in these materials. TiC3Cx is an example of an MXene material, which is derived via the selective etching of Ti3AlC2 (MAX) by HF (Fig. 20).209 The derived MXene material showed high flexibility and volumetric capacitance (as high as 350 F cm−3) in aqueous NaOH.206 The MXene-based hybrid composite material Nb2O5/C/Nb2CTx showed a high specific capacitance of 660 mF cm−2 with an appreciably fast rate of charging/discharging in an LiClO4-based organic electrolyte when a 50 μm-thick electrode with a mass loading of 2.4 mg cm−2 was used, which is the standard in commercial device electrodes.210 Furthermore, an Nb2CTx/CNT film electrode was paired in different combinations with a battery-like negative electrode (graphite) or battery-like positive electrode (LiFePO4) for the construction of Li+-ion supercapacitors. These Li+-ion supercapacitors have been applied in an extended voltage window (3 V), resulting in appreciable electrochemical properties.211
 Fig. 20  Schematic of the fabrication of MXene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. 
4.4. 3D nanostructured materials
3D nanostructured materials have attracted significant interest as supercapacitor electrodes owing to their high surface area (increased charge storage), interconnected pore structure facilitating fast and efficient access by the electrode ions (conducive both for increase in charge storage and delivery), and high mechanical strength (greater cyclic stability). Increased energy delivery and cyclic stability are the signature features of supercapacitors, which coupled with the development of higher energy density should allow them to compete with commercial batteries or even to replace them. Greater cyclic stability and energy density require the fabrication of thicker electrodes with a high mass loading held by a non-conducting adhesive and use of supplementary conducting fillers. However, this mode of fabrication depletes the kinetic performance of the resulting electrodes. Agglomeration of the active material during the fabrication of thick electrodes deteriorates the electrochemical performance of the nano-structured electrode materials. This issue has been well addressed in the literature, for example, a nano-structured MoO2 supercapacitor electrode was shown to undergo a decrease in ‘b’ value towards b = 0.5 when a higher MoO2 mass loading was employed.212 In this respect, electrodes fabricated using 3D nanostructured materials with increased mechanical stability and interconnected porosity should be very effective. Metal foam and various carbon-based 3D porous materials are typically used as templates for the active material or as active material themselves in this respect. Metal foams are attractive considering their high conductivity and mechanical strength, but they possess a higher density and lower surface area compared to carbon-based 3D materials. Highly porous and conductive Ni foam has been used for the deposition of various carbon-based EDLC (graphene, CNT, etc.) and pseudocapacitive materials such as metal oxides and conductive polymers.213–218 In a very interesting report, bimetallic Co/Ni hydroxide precursors were deposited on Ni foam, and subsequently pyrolysed to form NixCo(1−x) oxides. Different spinel arrangements of Ni or Co were tuned just by managing the Co/Ni ratio in the precursor material. Considering that the spinel structure itself has a porous 3D microstructure, coupled with the 3D nanostructured Ni foam, the fabricated material should have high ionic/electronic conductivity. This was well reflected in the remarkably high specific capacitance of 1523 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 and ∼95% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles. The hybrid electrochemical cell fabricated using this as a positive electrode against activated carbon as the negative electrode delivered an energy density of 36.46 W h kg−1 at a power density of 142 W kg−1.214 In another work, electrode fabrication was carried out by growing well-aligned mesoporous CoO nanowires on Ni foam, which were subsequently coated with a thin layer of PPy. This electrode exhibited an extremely high specific capacitance of 2223 F g−1, good rate capability and tremendous cyclic stability with 99.8% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles. This hybrid material was used as a positive electrode in front of an activated carbon film as the negative electrode, which resulted in a very high energy density (∼43.5 W h kg−1) and maximum power density of ∼5500 W h kg−1 at 11.8 W h kg−1 and outstanding cyclic stability (∼20000 cycles with 91.5% capacitance retention).218 Ni foam was also used for the deposition of graphene/CNT followed by the deposition of RuO2 nanoparticles on CNT. The hierarchical porous structure allowed efficient access of the electrode materials by the electrolyte ions and provided the high energy and power density of 39.28 W h kg−1 and 128.01 kW kg−1 with remarkably high cyclic stability (106% retention after 8100 cycles).213 The high surface area and interconnected architecture of 3D carbon materials result in a good conductive network, and therefore they have been widely applied for fabrication of hybrid electrodes via the deposition of pseudocapacitive materials. Mesoporous carbon, carbon fibers, carbon cloth and carbon aerogels are various examples of 3D carbon materials. There are several reports in which pseudocapacitive materials such as MnO2 and PANI have been deposited on mesoporous carbon (MC) to form binary or ternary composites, exhibiting improved electrochemical performances.219–223 Li and coworkers deposited needle-like PANI nanostructures on MC, which resulted improved electrochemical performance with the optimal PANI loading (517 F g−1 with 60% w/w PANI deposition).222 The specific capacitance was further improved to 695 F g−1 in the PANI–CMK-3–MnO2 ternary composite, where PANI and MnO2 were co-electrodeposited on MC.223 Xia and coworkers grew whisker-like PANI nanostructures on the surface of MC, showing a specific capacitance as high as 900 F g−1 (5% capacitance fading after 3000 cycles). The observed electrochemical properties were attributed to the generation of well-controlled nano-sized domains, resulting in a low diffusion path for electrolyte ions.101 Electrodes fabricated by coating carbon fibers (diameter of several micrometers) with PANI/PEDOT or deposition of PEDOT nanoflowers exhibited significantly improved electrochemical properties.224,225 Similarly, carbon cloths, which are composed of networks of carbon fibers and widely used in the field of free standing/conducting substrate electrodes, were coated with a well-ordered PPy nanowire array, resulting in a high specific capacitance of 699 F g−1 (1 A g−1) with an excellent rate capability and 81.5% capacitance retention at 20 A g−1.226 Zhao and coworkers fabricated a conducting polymer–porous carbon composite electrode by depositing a thin layer of PANI on the surface of 3D highly ordered macroporous carbon (3DOM carbon) [Fig. 21(i)]. The 3DOM carbon skeleton favored the diffusion of the electrolyte and prevents the agglomeration of PANI.227 In a very interesting synthetic approach, Chen and coworkers prepared a 3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy composite by incorporating PPy in highly conductive and stable nanotubular graphene.228 The nanotubular graphene was synthesized via the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique using nanoporous Ni (np-Ni), and subsequently a thin layer of PPy was electrodeposited on the 3D core–shell np-Ni@graphene. Finally, the np-Ni template was etched by acid [Fig. 21(ii)]. The composite electrode showed a maximum energy density of 21.6 W h kg−1 at a power density of 32.7 kW kg−1. Graphene aerogel (GA) has received significant attention as an electrode material owing to its open 3D network structure, which restricts the aggregation of graphene nanosheets and facilitates effective electrolyte transportation. Although the structure of GA is conducive for greater access to the electrochemically active sites by electrolyte ions compared to pristine graphene nanosheets, the conductivity of GA is lower than that of pristine graphene due to the formation of defect sites during the oxidation–reduction processes.229 Thus, to alleviate this problem, Thomas and coworkers reported a Pd nanoparticle-incorporated GA electrode, which showed reduced electrical resistivity and improved specific capacitance compared to pristine GA.230 An improvement in conductance was also attempted by doping graphene nanosheets with boron or nitrogen atoms.64 In a very unique approach, 3D macroporous electrodes composed of chemically modified graphene (CMG) were fabricated using colloidal polystyrene particles as a sacrificial template. A thin layer of MnO2 was deposited on the porous electrode to further improve its capacitance. The use of CMG helped to retain high electrical conductivity together with favorable ionic transport within the electrode material. A hybrid (asymmetric) supercapacitor cell was fabricated using MnO2/CMG as the positive electrode in front of a negative CMG electrode, which exhibited a high energy density of 44 W h kg−1 and power density of 25 kW kg−1 with excellent cycle life.231 A hybrid material composed of graphene nanosheets with vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VA-CNT) was explored as a supercapacitor electrode material considering their controlled pore size and distribution and high conductivity.232–235 Dai and coworkers prepared a VA-CNT–graphene hybrid material via the intercalated growth of CNT into thermally expanded highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (Fig. 22). The as-prepared VA-CNT–graphene
was further coated with the battery material Ni(OH)2. This composite exhibited a very high specific capacitance and charging rate capability of 1065 F g−1 at a current density of 22.1 A g−1.233 In another report, Cheng and coworkers coated PANI nanocones onto a graphene/CNT composite and assembled this ternary composite electrode in front of a graphene/CNT electrode to achieve a high specific energy density.235 Liu and coworkers prepared a 3D GNR–CNT–PANI ternary hybrid material via the in situ polymerization of aniline on a GNR–CNT hybrid. A symmetrical two-electrode configuration was fabricated with PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte, resulting in a high specific capacitance of 890 F g−1 with 89% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles.236 The excellent capacitance reported in these works was attributed to the large surface area of 3D graphene/CNT network structure together with increased electrical conductivity due to the presence of CNTs.
 Fig. 21  (i) Preparation of 3DOM carbon and 3DOM carbon–PANI composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. (ii) Schematic of the preparation steps for nanotubular graphene/PPy composite. (a) Nanoporous graphene@np-Ni prepared by chemical vapor deposition. (b) Nanoporous nickel/graphene/PPy prepared by electrodeposition of PPy on the surface of graphene@np-Ni ligaments. (c) Nanotubular graphene/PPy composite after removing np-Ni template by chemical etching. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. 
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of a 3D pillared VA-CNT–graphene nanostructure. (b) SEM image of the thermally expanded graphene layers intercalated with VA-CNTs for 10 min pyrolysis time. (c and d) SEM images of CNTs grown on graphene using urea as the carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232–234, respectively. 
4.5 Miscellaneous electrode configurations
Besides the abovementioned strategies, numerous approaches have been reported where electroactive materials of various dimensions were logically integrated to develop novel electrode materials with much improved performances. Metal oxide/hydroxide electrodes occupy the middle ground, given that they offer higher energy density (combination of surface and intercalation charge storage) compared to carbon-based electrodes and better cyclic stability than bulk conducting polymer electrodes. Hybrid electrodes obtained by the combination of battery-type oxide/hydroxide materials and conducting polymers have exhibited improved performances due to the synergistic effects of their components. Conductive polymers provide a highly conducting medium and prevent the agglomeration or restacking of metal oxide/hydroxide particles through the space steric hindrance and electrostatic effect, which allow the metal oxide/hydroxide particles to be uniformly dispersed in the conducting polymer matrix.26,237 This effect is particularly valuable for battery-like oxide/hydroxide materials, where a continuous phase change occurs during repetitive charging/discharging cycles and unwanted agglomeration may lead to permanent passivation of the materials. Conversely, interaction with metal oxides/hydroxides leads to nanoconfinement of the polymer domains, and hence buffers the volume change during repeated redox cycles, leading to an increase in cycle life. MoS2 offers excellent capacitive properties owing to its double-layer charge storage and availability of various oxidation state of Mo, between the +2 and +6 states. Liu and coworkers grew vertically aligned PANI nanowire arrays from the internal and external surfaces of 3D tubular MoS2, which served as both the active material for electrochemical reaction and provided a framework to provide pathways for ion insertion–extraction. The as-prepared MoS2/PANI composite exhibited an appreciable high specific capacitance of 552 F g−1 together with excellent rate capability, where 82% of the specific capacitance was retained even after increasing the current density from 0.5 A g−1 to 30 A g−1.238 Conversely, Xu and coworkers prepared an MoS2/PANI@C hierarchical nanocomposite by directly depositing PANI on an MoS2 monolayer, which was subsequently coated with carbon (Fig. 23).239 The high electrical conductivity, surface area and active electrochemical surface of the octahedral 1T phase of MoS2 make it an ideal candidate for the synthesis of nanocomposites with conductive polymers. The prepared nanocomposite exhibited an enhanced specific capacitance of 678 F g−1 and remarkable cyclic stability of 80% capacitance retention even after 10000 repetitive charge/discharge cycles. The improved electrochemical properties were attributed to the multiple synergistic effects among PANI, MoS2 and highly the conductive carbon coating. Zhao and coworkers reported the in situ generation of PANI–NiO nanostructures on Ni foam as a binder-free electrode, which achieved a specific capacitance of 2565 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and maintained 70% of the capacitance even after an increase in current density by 10 times.240 Hu and coworkers fabricated a porous NiO/Ni(OH)2 (PNC) composite encapsulated in PEDOT nanoflowers on metal wires (Cu–Ni alloy) via an electrochemical route. Here, the PEDOT coating provided high conductivity and structural stability to the composite material. This 3D flower-like nanostructured electrode achieved a high specific capacitance of 404.1 mF cm−2 at a current density of 4 mA cm−2 with cyclic stability and about 82% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles. Furthermore, a fiber-shaped all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor was fabricated with the as-prepared NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT composite as the positive electrode and ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) as the negative electrode with a suitable polymer gel as the electrolyte. The cell delivered a high output voltage of 1.5 V, high specific capacitance of 31.6 mF cm−2 and high specific energy density of 0.011 mW h cm−2.118 Li and coworkers fabricated a high-performance asymmetric supercapacitor with highly ordered 3Dα-Fe2O3@PANI core–shell nanowire arrays as the anode against PANI nanorod–carbon cloth as the cathode. The supercapacitor cell exhibited a high volumetric capacitance of 2.02 mF cm−2 and excellent cycle life with ∼96% capacitance retention even after 10000 cycles.241 Similarly, well-aligned CoO@PPy nanowire arrays grown on 3D nickel foam electrode exhibited a very high specific capacitance of 2223 F g−1 and outstanding cycle stability in a suitable asymmetric supercapacitor module.242 The improved electrochemical properties were attributed to the shortened ion diffusion channel and highly conducting nanowire arrays. Cheng and coworkers prepared 3D NiCo2O4@PPy coaxial nanowire arrays on carbon textile, where NiCo2O4 behaved as a highly capacitive core and PPy a highly conductive shell (Fig. 24). A flexible asymmetric supercapacitor device was successfully fabricated using the prepared NiCo2O4@PPy as the positive electrode and activated carbon as the negative electrode, which exhibited a high energy density of 58.8 W h kg−1 at 365 W kg−1 and outstanding cycle life with ∼83% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles.116 Given that pseudocapacitance is a near-surface phenomenon, the access of the electrolyte ions to the active centers is more important than having a higher surface area of the electrode materials as in EDLC. This fact was nicely demonstrated by three different nanostructured NiO electrodes including flower like, slice like and particle like.243 It was observed that despite its minimum surface area and large pore structure, NiO having a flower-like nanostructure exhibited the best electrochemical properties, which was attributed to the porous and 3D network structure of the electrode, facilitating the access of the electrolyte ions. Similarly, an improved performance from urchin-like Co3O4 and MnO2 electrodes was also reported.244,245 Chatterjee and coworkers recently reported the synthesis of GO-g-PANI, where covalently attached PANI chains were grown from the surface of GO via the oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization (OICP) of aniline (Fig. 25).246 The morphological analysis indicated the development of well-aligned vertical PANI nanorods on the surface of GO. This work demonstrated that based on the nature of the electrode casting solvent, an interesting urchin-like morphology of GO-g-PANI may be produced, which was attributed to the interplay among various supramolecular interactions. Electrochemical analysis indicated a significant improvement in energy storage and other electrochemical features when a highly macroporous and urchin-like open 3D morphology compared to PANI nanorods was grown the 2D GO morphology. Despite its insignificant surface area, the remarkable improvement in the electrochemical properties of the urchin-like GO-g-PANI electrodes was attributed to the improved access of the electrolyte ions to the electrochemically active sites. Improved intercalation faradaic processes were further apparent from the broad peaks in the CV curve and analysis of the scan speed-dependent specific capacitance.
 Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of the process for the synthesis of carbon-encapsulated PANI based on MoS2 monolayer nanosheets, MoS2/PANI@C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. 
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of hierarchical mesoporous NiCo2O4@PPy NWAs on carbon textile. (b) Schematic representation of rechargeable supercapacitor based on NiCo2O4@PPy NWAs on carbon textile. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. 
 Fig. 25  Schematic representing the formation of urchin-like GO-g-PANI composite via oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization of aniline and its improved electrochemical property compared to non-covalently grafted uncontrolled GO/PANI composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. 
5. Applications
5.1 General applications ranging from household to heavy duty
As discussed previously, high power deliverability and maintenance-free long life are the principal advantages of supercapacitors compared to batteries, whereas poor energy density is their main drawback. Accordingly, applications requiring a higher energy burst within a shorter period with repetitive cycles of operations suit supercapacitors more than batteries. Currently, different applications ranging from products with easy operation to heavy duty operation increasingly rely on supercapacitors (Fig. 26).17,141 Devices requiring an intermittent supply of high power but relatively low energy and frequent charging such as the cordless screwdriver developed by Coleman Company Inc. and power drills developed by DeWalt Industrial Tool Company use supercapacitors only for their functioning.141,247 It is undeniable that supercapacitor-driven cordless screwdrivers can only perform with half the lifetime compared to their rechargeable battery-driven analogue, but their charging requires only 90 s and they can retain the charge when not in use.248 Similarly, supercapacitors are used in digital cameras to provide flashlights, and recently Sam Beck (Blueshift) developed portable speakers with an in-built supercapacitor assembly, which exhibited a playback time of up to 6 h on full volume after being charged for only ∼5 min.249 A hybrid supercapacitor containing an asymmetric electrode configuration with a lead oxide positive electrode and an activated carbon negative electrode250 (energy density ∼ 20 W h kg−1) is used for storing off peak electricity from the utility grid at night, when it is abundant and low cost, for supplying at the time of shortage (and costlier), which is usually in the day time. Supercapacitors are also effective for use in heavy hybrid vehicles such as city transit buses requiring stop and go driving250 and trash trucks, which can experience as many as a thousand start/stop cycles a day. Aowei Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China) developed e-buses run by Ni(OH)2-activated carbon hybrid supercapacitors, which require a charging time of only 90 s for a distance range of 7.9 km attained at a maximum and average speed of 44.8 km h−1 and 22 km h−1, respectively, with an acceleration of (0–40) km h−1 in 16.5 s. Hybrid supercapacitors are also used in the emergency door operation and eviction slide operation in the Airbus A380 jumbo jet.10 The requirement of high current in a short duration during the charging of electric/hybrid electric vehicles is supplied most suitably by hybrid supercapacitors. Examples of automobiles using hybrid supercapacitors are Toyota and Mazda.141,251 Supercapacitors perform multi-tasking operation such as ignition, start up, security, transmission and lighting in automobiles driven by an internal combustion engine. In addition, compatibility with respect to the life span between hybrid supercapacitors and thermal motors compared to lead–acid batteries lowers the maintenance cost. The ability for quick storage and faster cycling rate of supercapacitors make them useful in regenerative braking (in heavy vehicles) and capturing and regeneration of energy during load lowering and raising the next load, respectively, in rubber tired gantry cranes used for loading-unloading of container ships at major seaports in the Far East.252 In these applications, supercapacitors capture the energy that would otherwise be wasted as heat either during repetitious up and down movement of heavy shipping containers (in rubber tired gantry cranes) or during stopping of large vehicles (buses, trucks, trams, etc.) or during a halt time while the engine is running. The captured energy (converted in electrical energy) stored in hybrid supercapacitors is subsequently provided for further operation of diesel engines such as load raising, ignition or speeding up. This results in up to 30% energy saving.
 Fig. 26  Hybrid supercapacitors in various applications. (a) Capacitor-powered screwdriver that is fully charged in 90 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. (b) Power drill developed by DeWalt using supercapacitors. Reprinted from ref. 141. (c) Wind turbines using supercapacitors, (d) supercapacitor use in the power grid, (e and f) hybrid city transit bus that uses an electrochemical capacitor energy storage system, (g and h) use of supercapacitors in emergency door of Airbus A380, and (i) hybrid diesel/electric rubber tired gantry crane with an electrochemical capacitor energy storage system (photo courtesy of Nippon-Chemi-Con Corporation). 
5.2 Wearable and self-healing supercapacitors
Besides offering high specific capacitance and improved delamination property, the structural flexibility and appreciable conductivity of conducting polymer electrodes make them suitable for the construction of wearable or stretchable hybrid supercapacitor devices.26,237 There are several reports in this regard; however, it often becomes difficult to achieve multiple stretchability with these devices while retaining their electrochemical properties. This may be attributed to the interlayer slippage, delamination and crease formation of typical 3-layer supercapacitors under deformation. Zhi and coworkers indicated that in most cases these failures originate from the poor elasticity in part of the typically used hydrogel-based electrolyte layers.253 Accordingly, they fabricated a highly elastic double network (DN) hydrogel composed of agar/hydrophobic polyacrylamide (HPAAM). Here, the H-bonded agar gel formed the first network and the hydrophobically associated polyacrylamide gel formed the second network. The electrode layers were composed of a pure polypyrrole (PPy) film, and its conductivity was increased by annealing (Fig. 27(a) and (b)). In this all-polymer supercapacitor, the PPy layers remained tightly adhered to the gel electrolyte layers possibly by H-bonding interactions between pyrrole ‘N’ and H-bond donor groups of the agar gel. The fabricated supercapacitor showed a high capacitance of 79.7 mF cm−2 (from 138.3 mF cm−2 initially) even after 1000 stretching cycles, suffering only 10.2% residual deformation of the device (Fig. 27(b)). In another very interesting work, the same group fabricated a self-healing stretchable supercapacitor device, where the electrolyte layer used was a supramolecular hydrogel containing two types of β-CD host–guest inclusion complexes (Fig. 27(c)).254 The β-CD moieties were anchored on polyacrylic acid (PAA) and silk fibroin chains. Moreover, the PPy electrode film interacted by H-bonding and covalent interactions with the amino acid moieties (Lys and Tyr) present in the silk fibroin, and thus a device having an all-in-one configuration could have been created, avoiding laminated multilayer configuration. The device showed a remarkable self-healing efficiency of ∼95.8% even after 30 cutting/healing cycles and an aerial capacitance of 0.37 F cm−2 with a volumetric energy density of 0.082 mW h cm−3, which were retained by over 85.2% even after 5 cut/healing cycles (Fig. 27(d)).
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of stretchable all-polymer supercapacitor. (b) (i) Capacitance retention at different strains and (ii) capacitance retention at different stretching cycles. (c) (i) Self-healing experiments of the supramolecular hydrogels via host–guest interactions. When two cut edges of cylindrical hydrogel pieces are contacted under wet conditions, the pieces healed completely within 1 h and (ii) competitive guest of AdCANa solution is spread on one of the cut surfaces, resulting in no healing effect. (d) Digital photographs of the in-series supercapacitor circuit to power an electronic watch under the cut/healed condition ([i] pristine; [ii] cut; and [iii] healed). [iv] Demonstration of the self-healed supercapacitor to support a 500 g mass after cyclic cutting-healing operation. [v] Electrochemical performance of the healed supercapacitor during cutting–healing cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253 and 254. 
5.3 The state-of-the-art future applications of supercapacitors

5.3.1 Powering small robots. 
The complementary features of supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries make their hybrid power system suitable for powering robots. The advantages of supercapacitors include their significantly higher power density (10000 W kg−1) compared to lithium-ion batteries (2000–3000 W kg−1), remarkably high cyclic stability (>105 cycles) and ability to store regenerative energy when a mobile robot is braking or going downhill. Small robots or micro-swarm robots may be powered by supercapacitors only while charging with renewable solar energy source. Artal and coworkers reported an autonomous mobile robot “MBot” (serving logistic application), which was converted from a Pb–acid or lithium-ion battery to a supercapacitor as the power source (Fig. 28).255 Furthermore, stretchable and wearable supercapacitors developed from graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNT) or hydrogel-based electrodes have emerged as a more efficient power storage solution that can be used to power soft robots.256
 Fig. 28  (a) MBot's prototype developed in the proximities of an intersection in the logistic application and (b) MBot moving a small object to the destination station. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. 


5.3.2. In soft-robotics. 
The high stretchability, elasticity (elastic moduli in the range of 1 kPa to 100 kPa or more), high conductivity and transparency of hydrogels make them ideal candidates in ionotronic devices as artificial muscles, artificial skins, artificial axons, etc. for application in wearable electronics for humans and robots and implantable human–machine interfaces.257 The basic construction of these devices is similar, where the hydrogel electrode layers remain insulated by a stretchable and transparent elastomeric layer in a sandwich configuration. The hydrogel electrodes (soaked with electrolyte ions) further remain in contact with the metal surface, which connects either to an external power source or load. In this configuration, electrical double layers (EDL) are formed in the metal–hydrogel interface and hydrogel–elastomer interfaces and these capacitors remain in series (Fig. 29). In the case of artificial muscles, as a voltage is applied from external sources, movement of electrons/ions starts towards or away from the interfaces, and hence, at a higher voltage, significant polarization occurs in the hydrogel–elastomer interfaces, which exerts electrostatic attraction, leading to squeezing of the elastomeric actuator. This further increases the surface area of the elastomer, and hence, the capacitance across the hydrogel–elastomer interfaces. A similar mechanism operates in the case of a transparent loudspeaker (iTunes) (Fig. 29(a)). In the case of artificial skins, the hydrogel layers remain connected to a capacitive meter via a metallic wire and whenever the dielectric layer is stretched or pressure applied to it, the total capacitance of the system changes, which is reflected in the meter. Thus, it works as a self-powered pressure sensor. This hydrogel-based ionotronic artificial skins can sense single touch events, while remaining functional in the deformed state,258 and can sense multiple touches and also self-heal (Fig. 29(b)).259–261 Conversely, in the case of artificial axons, two hydrogel layers remain separated by a similar elastomeric layer. Here, one hydrogel layer acts as the input part remaining connected with the external power source, whereas the other layer acts as the output part, remaining connected to load Z (Fig. 29(c)). In the case where a time-dependent signal is applied, the artificial axon can transmit the signal from the input part to the output part. The highly stretchable, transparent262 artificial axon remains functional despite being stretched several times to its original length, which makes artificial axons applicable as interconnects for wearable, implantable devices and soft robots.263,264
 Fig. 29  Artificial muscle, skin and axon. (a) An artificial muscle consisting of an elastomer sandwiched between two hydrogels, connected to a source of electrical power by metallic wires. The interface between the metal and the hydrogel forms an electrical double layer (EDL). To realize an artificial muscle, a sheet of elastomer is radially pre-stretched and fixed to a circular rigid frame. In the centre of the elastomer, thin layers of hydrogels are attached to both sides of the elastomer. Each layer of hydrogel is connected to a metallic electrode. For example, a hydrogel ionotronic loudspeaker is transparent and plays music (ionic music or iTunes). (b) Artificial skin consisting of an elastomer sandwiched between two hydrogels, connected to a capacitor meter, c, by two metallic wires. Pressure or stretching causes the elastomer to change shape and capacitance. An array of these pressure sensors (ionic skin, iTouch or iPad) can be attached to the back of the hand. (c) In an artificial axon (ionic cable), two hydrogel layers are insulated by a layer of elastomer. The input port connects to a source of time-varying voltage, V, and the output port connects to a load of impedance, Z (reprinted with permission from ref. 257). 

5.4 Supercapacitors in renewable and sustainable energy devices
Clean and renewable energy sources such as solar, wind and tidal energies are expected to be used in a large scale in the future. However, due to their intermittent nature, corresponding power generators are required to be coupled with energy storage devices such as batteries/supercapacitors to ensure a continuous and uninterrupted power supply in an integrated standalone power supply system. Modern batteries, which are capable of large-scale energy storage, are still the first choice as main source of electricity supply in electric vehicles (EV).265 However, despite their high charge density, high current discharge and energy efficiency, batteries suffer with unique problems such as short cycling life and poor power density.266 These drawbacks make them unsuitable in an integrated device with the above-mentioned energy generation systems, given that these applications require frequent charging/discharging cycles and undergo high voltage fluctuations.267,268 Thus, the introduction of battery–supercapacitor hybrid energy systems should be very effective for these applications given that supercapacitors can provide the required dynamic response. Supercapacitor–battery combinations or supercapacitors alone fed by solar cells or other energy generation systems such as fuel cells have already received a number of applications in powering electric vehicles and wireless sensors in medical applications to measure blood pressure, echocardiograms, oxygen measurement, etc.269–271 Furthermore, supercapacitors have also been combined with diesel engines during heavy duty applications to increase the efficiency and life of these devices. In all of these combined devices, supercapacitors are sized to meet the peak power demand, and thus help to reduce the size of diesel engines or batteries to operate at an average power level. Thus, these hybrid operating systems substantially reduce emissions and increase the fuel efficiency or life (in case of batteries) of these devices.17 Supercapacitors are further useful for storing regenerative braking energy, which eliminates the exposure of batteries to the peak current. In addition, supercapacitors can be fully charged in 1–10 s, whereas the latest version of lithium-ion batteries are charged up to 70% of their full capacity in the order of minutes.266 In a very interesting work, Hou, Lu and coworkers reported an integrated system composed of an Si/H solar cell as an energy conversion device, NiCo2O4‖AC battery–supercapacitor hybrid cell as an energy storage device and light-emitting diodes as the energy utilization device (Fig. 30). The designed battery–supercapacitor hybrid cell showed an energy density of 16.6 W h kg−1, power density of 7285 W kg−1, long-term stability of 100% capacitance retention even after 15000 cycles and low self-discharge. The designed hybrid cell could be charged to 1.6 V in 1 s by the solar cell and performed well as a reliable source for powering the LEDs. The integrated system showed an overall efficiency of 8.1% with a storage efficiency of 74.24%.272 The combination of solar energy with supercapacitors as energy storage units was used to provide eco-friendly street lighting (LED lamps) in Japan by three Japanese companies, Nippon-Chemi-Con, in 2010.273
 Fig. 30  Schematic of an integrated system consisting of a-Si/H solar cells, NiCo2O4//AC BSHs, and LEDs as the energy conversion, storage and utilization devices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. 
5.5 Challenges of supercapacitors in real-world applications
Despite the above-stated wide range of applications, there are various challenges that restrict the real-world application of supercapacitors. The major technical problem with supercapacitors is their much lower energy density compared to batteries, which restricts their application as single energy storage devices capable of prolonged energy supply in various applications. The lower operating voltage of a single supercapacitor cell requires the series combination of a large number of cells. This leads to a giant volume to meet the energy output, which limits their practical application.272 The relatively high rate of self-discharge (discussed previously) is another very important concern for supercapacitors. The current–voltage proportionality is a major drawback of supercapacitors, unlike batteries, which leads to a steady decrease in the potential of the former whenever energy is delivered.121 Furthermore, the use of a large number of series-connected supercapacitor cells or application of organic/ionic electrolytes for increasing the operative voltage window increases the cost/performance ratio together with environmental concerns, which also work against their real-world applications. Besides these inherent technical problems, Zhao and coworkers mentioned several other challenges related to an electrical parameter model, consistency detection and industrial standard,274 which are required to be addressed by collective efforts prior to achieving the desired performance of supercapacitors in real-world applications.
6. Conclusion and outlook
In bridging the gap between batteries and traditional capacitors, supercapacitors play a crucial role because battery technologies have some drawbacks of increasingly punitive performance for industrial application, where higher power density is required. The delivery of power ranging from small-scale energy consumption to the industrial scale is achieved through appropriate hybrid supercapacitors, which can be varied by changing their electrode materials, electrolytes, and configuration with different nanoparticles and conducting polymers and also by changing their configuration from symmetric to asymmetric. Certainly, it is not possible to achieve all the required properties in a single material, and hence significant research has been documented on conducting polymer nanocomposites to improve both the power density and energy density. The dependence of the hybrid supercapacitor performance on the surface area, porosity and conductivity of its component materials was discussed, where nanostructured metallic oxides, sulphides and carbon nanomaterials play an important role in hybrid supercapacitor electrodes. The review covered all the 0-, 1-, 2- and 3-dimensional nanomaterials and their hybrids for improving the hybrid supercapacitor performance. The charge storage mechanism was discussed for both the faradaic (pseudo capacitance) and non-faradaic (EDLC) mechanisms based on cyclic voltammetry (CV) data analysis both for the symmetric and asymmetric configuration. Also, this review discussed the capacitive property compared to the battery property present in nanohybrids based on the analysis of CV data.
Hybrid supercapacitors are now widely used for powering portable devices to industrial power devices. The main market of supercapacitors in the coming decades will be transportation, including hybrid electric vehicles and metro trains. Also, there is the prime possibility that supercapacitors can be applied in self-power robots, self-power sensors, biotechnology, renewable and sustainable energy storage devices, etc. A hybrid energy storage system overcomes the drawbacks of each single energy storage device. Thus, future focus should be intensified on developing hybrid supercapacitors using battery-like electrodes and pseudocapacitive electrodes given that they afford high capacitance, high energy density and high longevity. For the high specific power of supercapacitors, coupling supercapacitors with batteries can reduce the strain on the battery pack and improve the acceleration and hill climbing performance. The internal serial hybrid of a battery electrode with a supercapacitor electrode (BSH) may yield high energy, high power, safety, and environmental-friendliness, and would be an attractive energy supplier for future devices. BSH devices can simultaneously have high energy and power densities, and thus they are necessary to power future portable/smart/wireless electronics or optoelectronics. Thus, future research should aim to in-depth study developing multifunctional BSHs having flexible, stretchable, bendable, and transparent properties with sensing functions to the ambient environment. To date, only a few flexible Li-ion and alkaline BSH devices have been reported, and their performance mechanism has not yet been fully explored. Further, for high longevity, the charging of hybrid supercapacitors by solar cells in the day, and the subsequent discharge of current in the dark is another important area of future research. Solar cell hybrid supercapacitor devices will be able to run portable electronics, light LEDs, etc. for a long time. Thus, the scope of future research on hybrid supercapacitors is to improve both fundamental and technological perspectives to meet the different power demands in diverse fields in a greener way. To accomplish these goals, not only extensive experimental research on hybrid supercapacitors, but also theoretical studies relating to modeling and simulation are highly desirable as future work. This computational research can afford guidance for the selection of electrode materials and electrolytes, and for designing ideal cell architectures to cope with the required need.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge CSIR New Delhi (ES grant 21(1055)/18-EMR-II) for financial support.
References
H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–555 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen and L. Dai, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Fanara, R. Clark, R. Duff and M. Polad, How Small Devices are Having a Big Impact on U.S. Utility Bills, Environmental Protection Agency and ICF International: Washington, DC,  2006 Search PubMed .

Global and regional trends in residential electricity consumption. Gadgets and Gigawatts,  2009, https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/gigawatts2009.pdf, accessed December 24, 2015 Search PubMed.
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
S. Najib and E. Erdem, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 2817–2827 RSC .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Springer, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kotz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Huggins, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 134, 179–195 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and A. F. Burke, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
H. Helmholtz, Studien über electrische Grenzschichten, Ann. Phys., 1879, 243, 337–382 CrossRef .
J. R. Macdonald, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 223, 25–50 CrossRef CAS .
R. Burt, G. Birkett and X. S. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6519–6538 RSC .
S. Balasubramanium, A. Mohanty, S. K. Balasingam, S. J. Kim and A. Ramadoss, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 85 CrossRef .

          R. J. Hunter, Foundations of colloid science, Oxford University Press,  2001, p. 806 Search PubMed .
D. C. Grahame, Chem. Rev., 1947, 41, 441–501 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1774–1785 RSC .
A. M. Bryan, L. M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya and J. M. D'Arcy, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5989–5998 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Kyotani, J. Chmiola and Y. Gogotsi, in Carbon Materials for Electrochemical Energy Storage Systems, ed. F. Beguin and E. Frackowiak, CRC/Taylor and Francis, ch. 13,  2009, in the press Search PubMed .
P. Bairi, S. Maji, J. P. Hill, J. H. Kim, K. Ariga and L. K. Shrestha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12654–12660 RSC .
P. Bairi, T. Tsuruoka, S. Acharya, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi and L. K. Shrestha, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 285–290 RSC .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Portet, J. Chmiola, Y. Gogotsi, S. Park and K. Lian, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7675–7680 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Yang, Y.-J. Kim, M. Endo, H. Kanoh, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 20–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ke and J. Wang, J. Materiomics, 2016, 2, 37–54 CrossRef .
X. He, H. Ma, J. Wang, Y. Xie, N. Xiao and J. Qiu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 357, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Li, N. Xiao and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19633–19640 RSC .
X. He, N. Zhang, X. Shao, M. Wu and J. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 297, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 821–825 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu and H. Shi, J. Power Sources, 1998, 74, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, Y. Horie, S. Ozaki, Y. Matsuzawa, H. Suezaki, C. Kim, N. Miyashita and M. Endo, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jurewicz, C. Vix-Guterl, E. Frackowiak, S. Saadallah, M. Reda, J. Parmentier, J. Patarin and F. Beguin, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Fernandez, T. Morishita, M. Toyoda, M. Inagaki, F. Stoeckli and T. A. Centeno, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 675–679 CrossRef CAS .
G. Salitra, A. Soffer, L. Eliad, Y. Cohen and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2486–2493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vix-Guterl, E. Frackowiak, K. Jurewicz, M. Friebe and J. Parmentier, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS .
L. Eliad, G. Salitra, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3198–3202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Eliad, E. Pollak, N. Levy, G. Salitra, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, Appl. Phys. A, 2006, 82, 607–613 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arulepp, J. Leis, M. Latt, F. Miller, K. Rumma, E. Lust and A. F. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1460–1466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arulepp, L. Permann, J. Leis, A. Perkson, K. Rumma, A. Janes and E. Lust, J. Power Sources, 2004, 133, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .
E. Raymundo-Pinero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2498–2507 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gamby, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, J. F. Fauvarque and M. Chesneau, J. Power Sources, 2001, 101, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi, A. Nikitin, H. Ye, W. Zhou, J. E. Fischer, B. Y. Henry, C. Foley and M. W. Barsoum, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 591–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3392–3395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Yang, Y.-J. Kim, M. Endo, H. Kanoh, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 20–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogtsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Futamura, T. Iiyama, Y. Takasaki, Y. Gogotsi, M. J. Biggs, M. Salanne, J. Ségalini, P. Simon and K. Kaneko, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhang, N. Fulik, G.-P. Hao, H.-Y. Zhang, K. Kaneko, L. Borchardt, E. Brunner and S. Kaskel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13060–13065 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 6614–6626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khademi and D. P. J. Barz, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 4250–4260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Lyklema, H. P. van Leeuwen, T. van Vliet, A. M. A.-M. Cazabat, A. de Keizer, B. H. Bijsterbosch, G. J. G. J. Fleer and M. A. Cohen Stuart, Fundamentals of interface and colloid science, Volume II: Solid-liquid interfaces, Academic Press,  1995 Search PubMed .

          J. Bockris, M. Devanathan and K. Müller, Electrochemistry, Elsevier,  1965, pp. 832–863 Search PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, R. Paul and L. Dai, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 453–489 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Xiang, T. Jing, G. Xin and A. N. Bai-Gang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2013, 29, 111–116 Search PubMed .
D. Gueon and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20083–20089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, L. L. Zhang, S. Lee, J. Oh, K.-S. Lee, J. R. Potts, J. Ji, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 19–26 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Sun, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, P. Wan and J. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14912–14919 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bairi, K. Sardar, K. Chanda, M. Samanta, S. Thakur, K. Panigrahi, S. Sarkar, T. Paul and K. K. Chattopadhyay, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5984–5992 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tian, J. Wang, L. Cao, W. Yang, W. Guo, S. Liu, W. Li, F. Wang, X. Li, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2421–2423 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ghodbane, J.-L. Pascal and F. Favier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1130–1139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P.-L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. B. Abruna, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou and I. Honma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7444–7452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1997, 25, 1–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Ohzuku and N. Yamamota, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1431–1435 CrossRef .
Z. Choi, D. Kramer and R. Mönig, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti and G. Buzzanca, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 29, A1–A5 CrossRef .
B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1249–1258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 29, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, V. Birss and J. Wojtowicz, J. Power Sources, 1997, 66, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
E. Herrero, L. J. Buller and H. D. Abruña, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1897–1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2081–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Bélanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, D. S. Dhawale, R. R. Salunkhe, S. M. Pawar and C. D. Lokhande, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 4411–4416 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, A. S. Hall, J. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1158–1164 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, R. Senter, K. Brezesinski, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 967–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-C. Liu, W. G. Pell, B. E. Conway and S. L. Roberson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1882–1888 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardizzone, G. Fregonara and S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1989, 35, 263–267 CrossRef .
D. Baronetto, N. Krstajic and S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 2359–2362 CrossRef CAS .

          C. M. A. Brett and A. M. O. Brett, Electrochemistry: Principles, Methods, and Applications, Oxford University Press, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
J. M. Miller and B. Dunn, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 799–806 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Wang, H.-Q. Li and Y.-Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2619–2623 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou and I. Honma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7444–7452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Rantho, M. J. Madito, K. O. Oyedotun, D. J. Tarimo and N. Manyala, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 065113 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mandal, P. Routh and A. K. Nandi, Small, 2017, 14, 1702881 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Wang, C. Zhou, C. Wang, X. Ba, Y. Li, X. Huang and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5384–5394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, M. Jin, F. Yao, T. H. Kim, V. T. Le, H. Yue, F. Gunes, B. Li, A. Ghosh, S. Xie and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5074–5083 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 173–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, J.-H. Ouyang, D. Jia and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 689, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, S.-J. Chang, H.-W. Kang, C. P. Park, H. J. Kim, W. H. Hong, S. G. Lee and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4983–4988 RSC .
L. Sui, S. Tang, Y. Chen, Z. Dai, H. Huangfu, Z. Zhu, X. Qin, Y. Deng and G. M. Haarberg, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, W. Wang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6662–6670 RSC .
S. Cho, B. Patil, S. Yu, S. Ahn, J. Hwang, C. Park, K. Do and H. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 499–508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagamuthu and K.-S. Ryu, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 1442–1451 RSC .
J. Luo, J. Wang, S. Liu, W. Wu, T. Jia, Z. Yang, S. Mu and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2019, 146, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, W. Ren, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Huang and H. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21334–21346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Tang, J. Ye, D. Shi, S. Liu and M. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1774–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, M. A. Bissett and R. A. W. Dryfe, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1700–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lewandowski, P. Jakobczyk, M. Galinski and M. Biegun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8692–8699 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Chu, Z. Xu, H. Su, C. Yan, F. Liu, B. Gu, H. Huang, D. Xiong, H. Zhang, W. Deng, H. Zhang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8633–8640 RSC .
T. Tevi, H. Yaghoubi, J. Wang and A. Takshi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 241, 589–596 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xia, J. Nie, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, H. Bai, Z. Huang and L. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1750–1759 RSC .
K. Fic, G. Lota and E. Frackowiak, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7484–7488 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Z. Huang, X. Li, Z. Liu, H. Li, G. Liang, D. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Zhang, S. Chen and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8275–8283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, T. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, G. Liang, D. Wang, Q. Yang, Z. Chen, L. Ma, Z. Liu, B. Gao, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 1011–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Amatucci, F. Badway, A. Du Pasquier and T. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A930–A939 CrossRef CAS .
V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Pinero and F. Beguin, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Lam and R. Louey, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1140–1148 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi and C. R. Park, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 825–833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, J. I. Miyamoto and W. Naoi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9363–9373 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 48, 6816–6854 RSC .
J. M. Gonçalves, M. I. da Silva, H. E. Toma, L. Angnes, P. R. Martins and K. Araki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10534–10570 RSC .
A. Muzaffara, M. B. Ahameda, K. Deshmukha and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, W. Hu, E. Paek and D. Mitlin, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6457–6498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, F. Xu, W. Zhang, Z. Mei, B. Pei and X. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, Z. Chen and X. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19867–19874 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 153–160 RSC .
L. Fan, L. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Yao and R. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16376–16381 RSC .
Z.-C. Yang, C.-H. Tang, H. Gong, X. Li and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 713–720 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ghosh, R. Ghosh, U. Basak, S. Majumdar, R. Ball, D. Mandal, A. K. Nandi and D. P. Chatterjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6476–6492 RSC .
C. Portet, G. Yushin and Y. Gogotsi, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2511–2518 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, S. Wu, T. Li, Y. Bai, X. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Xu, C. Kong and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 488, 593–599 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borgohain, J. P. Selegue and Y. T. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20367–20373 RSC .
Y. Wang, S. F. Yu, C. Y. Sun, T. J. Zhu and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17584–17588 RSC .
K. Ozoemena, K. Makgopa, C. Jafta, V. Presser, M. Zeiger, P. Ejikeme and K. Raju, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3480–3490 RSC .
O. Mykhailiv, M. Imierska, M. Petelczyc, L. Echegoyen and M. E. Plonska-Brzezinska, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 5783–5793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, J. Gan, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1690–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, D. Zheng, T. Zhai, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Xie and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2915–2921 RSC .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Li, P. Qiang, M. Ebrahimi, W. Mai, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 731–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, J. Moore, J. Lorenzo, C. Li and J. Thomas, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, J. Moore, B. Duong, C. Li and J. Thomas, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
B. Duong, Z. Yu, P. Gangopadhyay, S. Seraphin, N. Peyghambarian and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300014 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, B. Duong, D. Abbitt and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3302–3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Y. Zhao and H.-L. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 110, 590–594 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Huang and Z. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8062–8067 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, J. Li, L. Hou, J. Lin, G. Pang, L. Zhang, L. Lian and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18573–18578 RSC .
G. Q. Zhang, H. B. Wu, H. E. Hoster, M.
B. Chan-Park and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9453–9456 RSC .
R. K. Sharma, A. Karakoti, S. Seal and L. Zhai, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1256–1262 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma and L. Zhai, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 7148–7155 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. Liu, J. Zou, A. Chunder, Y. Chen and L. Zhai, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 565–572 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1002–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 658–663 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, C. Cheng, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, J. Liu, C. Cheng, H. Li, X. Li, W. Zhou, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4496–4499 RSC .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X.-b. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, X. Xia, N. Meng, Z. Zeng, X. Cao, C. Soci, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9085–9090 RSC .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Z. Fan, C. Guan, X. Cao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, D. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, Z. L. Wang and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3135–3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, Y. Zhu, X. Gao and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 950–955 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2942–2943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duay, E. Gillette, R. Liu and S. B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3329–3337 RSC .
X. Xia, D. Chao, X. Qi, Q. Xiong, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mai, F. Dong, X. Xu, Y. Luo, Q. An, Y. Zhao, J. Pan and J. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 740–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4299–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, X. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Feng and Q. Xue, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6053–6062 RSC .
S. Mondal, U. Rana and S. Malik, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12365–12368 RSC .
L. Sui, S. Tang, Y. Chen, Z. Dai, H. Huangfu, Z. Zhu, X. Qin, Y. Deng and G. M. Haarberg, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, A. Ray, S. Saha, M. Ghosh, T. Das, B. Satpati, M. Nandi and S. Das, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 327–337 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, B. M. Gallant, Y. Lee, N. Yoshida, D. Y. Kim, Y. Yamada, S. Noda, A. Yamada and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(1), 5437–5444 RSC .
Z. Niu, P. Luan, Q. Shao, H. Dong, J. Li, J. Chen, D. Zhao, L. Cai, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(9), 8726–8733 RSC .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu and F. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2598 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Gujar, V. R. Shinde, C. D. Lokhande, W.-Y. Kim, K.-D. Jung and O.-S. Joo, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 504–510 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. Casalongue and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mandal, P. Routh, A. K. Mahato and A. K. Nandi, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5136–5148 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. da Silveira Firmiano, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N. Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira, W. H. Schreiner and E. R. Leite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301380 CrossRef .
N. A. Kumar, H.-J. Choi, Y. R. Shin, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1715–1723 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Stanciu and J. Xie, Carbon, 2014, 71, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S.-Z. Zu, B.-H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Levi, M.
R. Lukatskaya, S. Sigalov, M. Beidaghi, N. Shpigel, L. Daikhin, D. Aurbach, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 1400815 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Beidaghi, M. Naguib, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, B. Dyatkin, K. M. Cook, S. J. Kim, B. Eng, X. Xiao, D. Long, W. Qiao, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byeon, A. M. Glushenkov, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, B. W. Byles, B. Blake, K. L. Van Aken, S. Kota, E. Pomerantseva, J. W. Lee, Y. Chen and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mandal, P. Routh and A. K. Nandi, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13, 3871–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Guo, I. Lee, K. Ahmed, J. Zhong, Z. Favors, F. Zaera, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4452 CrossRef .
Y.-M. Wang, X. Zhang, C.-Y. Guo, Y.-Q. Zhao, C.-L. Xu and H.-L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13290–13300 RSC .
T. Zhai, F. Wang, M. Yu, S. Xie, C. Liang, C. Li, F. Xiao, R. Tang, Q. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6790–6796 RSC .
M.-J. Deng, P.-J. Ho, C.-Z. Song, S.-A. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-M. Chen and K.-T. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2178–2185 RSC .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and X. B. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22662–22668 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, L. Zheng, Y. Ma, L. Lei, Q. Li, Y. Li, H. Luo, H. Feng and Y. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2657–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, J. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 42, 135–145 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, W. Shen, J. Gu, L. Xiong, Y. Zhu, H. Li and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6015–6019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, Q. Cheng, Z. Zhu, V. Pavlinek, P. Saha and C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 544–550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Q. Cheng, V. Pavlinek, P. Saha and C. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou and X.-F. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anothumakkool, A. T. A. Torris, S. N. Bhange, M. V. Badiger and S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5944–5952 RSC .
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1774–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, S. Li, J. T. Zhang, P. Z. Guo, J. T. Zheng and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1195–1202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kashani, L. Y. Chen, Y. Ito, J. H. Han, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, M. McInnis, J. Calderon, S. Seal, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 611–620 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, M. H. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis and G. E. Froudakis, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3166–3170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. Ganguli, V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Yang, Y.-F. Zhao, Q.-Q. Xiao, Y.-X. Zhang, L. Jing, Y.-M. Yan and K.-N. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8497–8504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, N. Shinya and L. C. Qin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 241, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Liu, Y. E. Miao, C. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, Z. B. Yang, H. S. Peng and T. X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7312–7320 RSC .
J. Yang, Y. Liu, S. Liu, L. Li, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 251–268 RSC .
L. Ren, G. Zhang, Y. Zhe, L. Kang, X. Hua, S. Feng, Z. Lei and Z. H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28294–28302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, Z. X. Chen, I. Shakir, Y. X. Xu and H. B. Lu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 951–962 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, X. He, X. Leng, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao, H. Suo and C. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43959–43963 RSC .
X.-F. Lu, X.-Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14843–14850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-I. Kim, J.-S. Lee, H.-J. Ahn, H.-K. Song and J.-H. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1596–1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, S. Liu, F. Li, A. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Fang and D. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4052–4059 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, X. Zhang, D. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Ma, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 528–533 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ghosh, U. Basak, P. Bairi, R. Ghosh, M. Pakhira, R. Ball, B. Biswas and D. P. Chatterjee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .

          http://toolmonger.com/2007/11/05/ultracapacitors-the-next-source-for-powerful-cordless-tools/
         .
C. G. Cameron, ECS Trans., 2012, 41, 121–132 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Dennison, M. Beidaghi, K. B. Hatzell, J. W. Campos, Y. Gogotsi and E. C. Kumbur, J. Power Sources, 2014, 24, 489–496 CrossRef .

          I. Gyuk, Supercapacitors for Electric Storage—Scope and Projects, Proc. Advanced Capacitor World Summit 2004, Washington, DC, paper 17,  July 14–16, 2004 Search PubMed .
W. Bian, S. Zhu, M. Qi, L. Xiao, Z. Liu and J. Zhan, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 459–464 RSC .

          T. Furukawa, Energy Storage System Multiple Applications and the Cell Reliability/Safety Issues, Proc. Advanced Capacitor World Summit 2006, San Diego, CA,  July 17–19, 2006 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Du, Q. Chen and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15707–15711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mo, Q. Li, G. Liang, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. wei and C. Zhi, Adv. Sci., 2021, 2100072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Artal, R. Bandres and G. Fernandez, Renew. Energy Power Qual. J., 2011, 1(9), 1105–1110 CrossRef .
Z. Bao and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4177–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang and Z. Suo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 125–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Sun, C. Keplinger, G. M. Whitesides and Z. Suo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7608–7614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Sarwar, Y. Dobashi, C. Preston, J. K. M. Wyss, S. Mirabbasi and J. D. Wyndham, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602200 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lei, Q. Wang, S. Sun, W. Zhu and P. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700321 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lei and P. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1134 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Yang, B. Chen, J. J. Lu, J. H. Yang, J. Zhou, Y. M. Chen and Z. Suo, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2015, 3, 59–65 CrossRef .
K. Tian, J. Bae, S. E. Bakarich, C. Yang, R. D. Gately, G. M. Spinks, M. Panhuis, Z. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604827 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yuan-Hui and S. Gregory, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1974, 38, 703–714 CrossRef .
F. Tazerart, Z. Mokrani, D. Rekioua and T. Rekioua, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 13827–13838 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cabrane, D. Batool, J. Kim, K. Yoo, Z. Cabrane, D. Batool, J. Kim and K. Yoo, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 32, 101943 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Hong, K. Y. Park, H. Kim, S. W. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11788–11827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Santhanagopalan, Q. Guo, P. Ramadass and R. E. White, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 620–628 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djerdir, K. Elkadri and A. Miraoui, J. Renew. Energy, 2006, 9(2), 63–74 Search PubMed .
C. Bergonzini, D. Brunelli and L. Benini, Microelectron. J., 2010, 41, 766–777 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hande, T. Polk, W. Walker and D. Bhatia, Microprocess. Microsyst., 2007, 31, 420–432 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, Y. Lu, B.-E. Jia, H. Tang, L. Chen, Y.-J. Zeng, Y. Hou, Q. Zhang, Q. He, L. Jiao, J. Leng, Z. Ye and J. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Münchgesang, P. Meisner and G. Yushin, AIP Conf. Proc., 2014, 1597, 196–203 CrossRef .
S. Huang, X. Zhu, S. Sarkar and Y. Zhao, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 100901 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Dhruba P. Chatterjee	Dr Dhruba P. Chatterjee is presently working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry Presidency University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He received his Ph.D. from Jadavpur University in 2006 working under the supervision of Prof. B. M. Mandal at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata in the field of controlled polymer synthesis and characterization. His present research interest includes the design and controlled synthesis vinyl polymers and conducting polymers for the preparation of hybrid materials with inorganic/organic quantum dots for energy-related applications, bio-applications and membrane applications.
Dhruba P. Chatterjee	Prof. Arun K. Nandi obtained his PhD degree on “Thermodynamics of Polymer–Polymer and Polymer–Solvent Mixing” and joined the Chemistry Department, North Bengal University, Darjeeling. He did post-doctoral work at the Florida State University with Prof. L. Mandelkern in the crystallization of polymers. In 1992, he joined the Polymer Science Unit of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS) and he retired from the Senior Professor position in February, 2019. Presently, he is an Emeritus Scientist (CSIR) at IACS. His research interests focus on polymer blends, polymer crystallization, polymer and supramolecular gels, polymer nanocomposites, polymer synthesis, biomolecular hybrids, supercapacitors and polymer photovoltaics. He is the author of 238 papers and has supervised 35 PhD students to date.

 	Scheme 1  Classification of various electrochemical energy storage systems.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Energy vs. charging time for an EDLC and lithium-ion battery. (b) Ragone plot of different energy storage devices (reprinted with permission from ref. 5 and 18, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of different possible hybridization approaches between supercapacitor and battery electrodes and materials (reprinted with permission from ref. 7).	 
	(i)
	(ii)

 	Fig. 3  Representation of EDLC structure: Gouy–Chapman–Stern model (reprinted with permission from ref. 22).	 
	(iii)
	(iv)

 	Fig. 4  (i) Normalized capacitance change as a function of the pore size of carbon derived-carbide samples. Samples were prepared at different temperatures in ethyl-methylimidazolium/trifluoro-methane-sulphonylimide (EMI-TFSI) ionic liquid at 60 °C. Inset shows the structure and size of the EMI and TFSI ions. The maximum capacitance was obtained when the pore size was in the same range as the maximum ion dimensions (reprinted with permission from ref. 56). Schematic diagrams of (ii) negatively charged mesopore with solvated cations approaching the pore wall to form an electric double-cylinder capacitor (EDCC) with radii ‘b’ and ‘a’ for the outer and inner cylinders, respectively, separated by a distance ‘d’ and (iii) negatively charged micropore of radius ‘b’ with solvated cations of radius a0 lining up to form an electric wire-in-cylinder capacitor (EWCC). EWCC is also possible with desolvated ions (reprinted with permission from ref. 59).	 
	(v)
	(vi)
	(vii)

 	Fig. 5  Supercapacitor model showing capacitive contribution from different layers and corresponding circuit diagram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of graphene and holey graphene foams. Initial 3D macroporous (a) graphene foam and (b) holey graphene foam. Compressed films of (c) graphene foam and (d) holey graphene foam. Close-up view of (e) graphene and (f) holey graphene films. The arrows highlight the ion transport pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63.	 
i = aνb	(viii)

 	Fig. 7  Faradaic and capacitive energy storage. Summary of the characteristic metrics such as cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic profiles, key mechanism descriptions and typical systems that are known to utilize the mentioned charge storage mechanisms: (a) double-layer capacitor (examples: porous carbons (carbide-derived carbon,51 activated carbon,39 graphene,72 carbon onions73 and nanotubes74), (b) surface redox pseudocapacitance due to adsorption and/or fast intercalation of ions (examples: hydrated RuO2,75 birnessite MnO2,76 and MXene Ti3C2 (ref. 77)), (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance (example: T-Nb2O5 (ref. 78)) and (d) batteries (examples: LiCoO2,79 Si-37 and LiFePO4 (ref. 80)). i = current and v = sweep rate. Crystal structures were plotted in Vesta. Different colors in the plots indicate different storage mechanisms (reprinted with permission from ref. 15.).	 

 		 
	(ix)
	(x)

 	Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammetry at 40 mV s−1 of an RuO2 thin film (top) and single crystal (bottom) in 1 M HClO4. This was the first investigation on the unique behavior of RuO2 films to demonstrate how redox reactions at the surface can give rise to electrochemical features of capacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 9  Different types of reversible redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance: (a) underpotential deposition, (b) redox pseudocapacitance, and (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5.	 
i(V) = k1ν + k2ν½	(xi)
Q = Qν=infinity + constant (ν−½)	(xii)
ZCPE = [B(iω)n]−1	(xiii)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Dependence of the specific capacitance on applied potential for KLE-templated CeO2 films. (b) Circuit model describing the impedance behavior of CeO2 thin-film electrodes in non-aqueous electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 11  Effect of crystallite size on the lithiation (discharge) curve of LiCoO2 measured for 1 h charge–discharge. For small crystallite sizes, the plateau region decreased and was replaced by a completely sloping voltage profile. For 6 nm crystallites, the voltage profile was almost linear in shape, which is due to the increased contribution of the surface lithium-ion storage sites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) CV plots of WO3 and KG (KI reduced graphene oxide) electrodes at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (b and c) CV curves at different scan rates and GCD curves at different current densities, respectively, of the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device (reprinted with permission from ref. 105). (d) Comparative CV curves of Fe3O4–C anode and CNT cathode measured in a three-electrode cell in 3 M KOH. (e and f) CV curves and discharge curves of aqueous CNTs‖Fe3O4–C hybrid (BSH) devices, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 106).	 

1	MnO2	0.8 V	MnO2‖graphene	1 (M) Na2SO4	2 V	37	25.2 W h kg−1	100 W kg−1	
109

2	RuO2-IL-CMG	1.0 V	RuO2-ILCMG‖IL-CMG	PVA–H2SO4 gel	1.8 V	175	19.7 W h kg−1	6800 W kg−1	
110

3	Ni(OH)2/AC/CNT	0.4 V	Ni(OH)2/AC/CNT‖AC	6 (M) KOH	1.6 V	82.1	32.3 W h kg−1	504.8 W kg−1	
111

4	NiO-CFP	0.45 V	NiO-CFP‖Fe2O3-CFP	2 (M) KOH	1.8 V	240	105 W h kg−1	12700 W kg−1	
112

5	Fe2O3-CF	1.0 V	MnO2-CF‖Fe2O3-CF	PVA–LiClO4 gel	2.0 V	74	33.1 W h kg−1	1320 W kg−1	
113

6	Mn2O3/C composite	0.8 V	Mn2O3/C composite‖AC	1 (M) Na2SO4	1.8 V	45	54.9 W h kg−1	22600 W kg−1	
114

7	NiCo2O4@GQDs	0.6 V	NiCo2O4@GQDs‖AC	2 (M) KOH	1.6 V	95	38 W h kg−1	800 W kg−1	
115

8	Gr-MoO3	1.0 V	GrMnO2‖GrMoO3	1 (M) Na2SO4	2.0 V	307	42.6 W h kg−1	276 W kg−1	
107

9	NiCo2O4@PPy NWA	0.7 V	NiCo2O4@PPy NWA‖AC	PVA–KOH gel	1.6 V	102.5	58.8 W h kg−1	10200 W kg−1	
116

10	α-Fe2O3-PANI	1.0 V	PANI‖α-Fe2O3-PANI	PVA–LiCl gel	1.8 V	112.6	0.31 mW h cm−3	67.1 mW cm−3	
117

11	NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT	0.4 V	NiO/Ni(OH)2/PEDOT‖ CMK-3	PVA–KOH gel	1.5 V	31.6 mF cm−2	0.011 mW h cm−2	0.33 mW cm−2	
118


 	Fig. 13  (a) Self-discharge examination combining GCD and OCV test. The inset exhibits the continuous monitoring of OCV over 72 h. (b) Schematic illustration of the static electricity-immune mechanism for excellent anti-self-discharge performance (reprinted with permission from ref. 128). (c) Curves of Zn–TiN capacitors in different electrolytes after charging to 1.9 V. (d) Schematic illustration of the different self-discharge behaviors of zinc-ion capacitors with different electrolytes, where the yellow, blue and red balloons represent SO42−, Cl− and Ac−, respectively; the wind indicates the self-discharge trend; and the brown wires represent the attraction between the TiN and anions (reprinted with permission from ref. 129).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of (i) a single electrode system (a) capacitor, (b) battery, and (c) asymmetric capacitor system with an aqueous electrolyte according to the charge–potential profile with corresponding equations for energy storage. (ii) Hybrid combination of a hybrid electrode (hybridized battery and capacitor components) and a capacitor electrode according to the charge–potential profile with corresponding equations for energy storage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7.	 

 	Fig. 15  (i) (a) Schematic showing the synthesis of multishelled NiO hollow nanospheres using LBL self-assembly. TEM images show NiO hollow nanospheres with (b) single-shell, (c) double-shells, and (d) triple shells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. (ii) (a) FESEM and (b) TEM images of HCS–PANI. (c) FESEM and (d) TEM images of GHCS–MnO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147 and 148, respectively. (iii) Core–shell carbon nanodot@PANI grown from candle soot-derived carbon nanodot surface by oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization (OICP) of aniline. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (iv) (a) Cross-section of a charged 0D onion-like carbon capacitor. (b) TEM image of a carbon onion with a lattice spacing close to 0.35 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication of carbon nanostructures via SNAP method. (b) SEM images of top-view and side-view (inset) of polymer nanopillars. (c) SEM images of top-view and side-view (inset) of carbon nanopillars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of in situ GOQD-doped PANI (GQDP) composite. (b) HRTEM images of GQDP composites having different aniline to GQD weight ratios, producing different inner and outer diameters, where the numerical after the sample name refers to the amount of GO used (in mg) with 100 mg of aniline during oxidative polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189.	 

 	Fig. 18  (i) Synthesis of WO3 from WS2. (ii) (a–c) FESEM images of WS2, WO3·H2O, and WO3, respectively. (d–f) TEM images of WS2, WO3·H2O, and WO3, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105.	 

 	Fig. 19  (i) Schematic illustration of the nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowires: (a) heterogeneous nucleation on GO nanosheets and (b) homogeneous nucleation in bulk solution. (ii) SEM images of PANI–GO nanocomposites with different concentrations of aniline: (a and b) 0.05 M and (c and d) 0.06 M. Other conditions: aniline/APS = 1.5 (molar ratio), HClO4 = 1 M, GO = 0.36 mg mL−1, and the reaction was carried out at −10 °C for 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic of the fabrication of MXene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209.	 

 	Fig. 21  (i) Preparation of 3DOM carbon and 3DOM carbon–PANI composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. (ii) Schematic of the preparation steps for nanotubular graphene/PPy composite. (a) Nanoporous graphene@np-Ni prepared by chemical vapor deposition. (b) Nanoporous nickel/graphene/PPy prepared by electrodeposition of PPy on the surface of graphene@np-Ni ligaments. (c) Nanotubular graphene/PPy composite after removing np-Ni template by chemical etching. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of a 3D pillared VA-CNT–graphene nanostructure. (b) SEM image of the thermally expanded graphene layers intercalated with VA-CNTs for 10 min pyrolysis time. (c and d) SEM images of CNTs grown on graphene using urea as the carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232–234, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of the process for the synthesis of carbon-encapsulated PANI based on MoS2 monolayer nanosheets, MoS2/PANI@C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of hierarchical mesoporous NiCo2O4@PPy NWAs on carbon textile. (b) Schematic representation of rechargeable supercapacitor based on NiCo2O4@PPy NWAs on carbon textile. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic representing the formation of urchin-like GO-g-PANI composite via oligomer-initiated controlled polymerization of aniline and its improved electrochemical property compared to non-covalently grafted uncontrolled GO/PANI composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246.	 

 	Fig. 26  Hybrid supercapacitors in various applications. (a) Capacitor-powered screwdriver that is fully charged in 90 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. (b) Power drill developed by DeWalt using supercapacitors. Reprinted from ref. 141. (c) Wind turbines using supercapacitors, (d) supercapacitor use in the power grid, (e and f) hybrid city transit bus that uses an electrochemical capacitor energy storage system, (g and h) use of supercapacitors in emergency door of Airbus A380, and (i) hybrid diesel/electric rubber tired gantry crane with an electrochemical capacitor energy storage system (photo courtesy of Nippon-Chemi-Con Corporation).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of stretchable all-polymer supercapacitor. (b) (i) Capacitance retention at different strains and (ii) capacitance retention at different stretching cycles. (c) (i) Self-healing experiments of the supramolecular hydrogels via host–guest interactions. When two cut edges of cylindrical hydrogel pieces are contacted under wet conditions, the pieces healed completely within 1 h and (ii) competitive guest of AdCANa solution is spread on one of the cut surfaces, resulting in no healing effect. (d) Digital photographs of the in-series supercapacitor circuit to power an electronic watch under the cut/healed condition ([i] pristine; [ii] cut; and [iii] healed). [iv] Demonstration of the self-healed supercapacitor to support a 500 g mass after cyclic cutting-healing operation. [v] Electrochemical performance of the healed supercapacitor during cutting–healing cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253 and 254.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) MBot's prototype developed in the proximities of an intersection in the logistic application and (b) MBot moving a small object to the destination station. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255.	 

 	Fig. 29  Artificial muscle, skin and axon. (a) An artificial muscle consisting of an elastomer sandwiched between two hydrogels, connected to a source of electrical power by metallic wires. The interface between the metal and the hydrogel forms an electrical double layer (EDL). To realize an artificial muscle, a sheet of elastomer is radially pre-stretched and fixed to a circular rigid frame. In the centre of the elastomer, thin layers of hydrogels are attached to both sides of the elastomer. Each layer of hydrogel is connected to a metallic electrode. For example, a hydrogel ionotronic loudspeaker is transparent and plays music (ionic music or iTunes). (b) Artificial skin consisting of an elastomer sandwiched between two hydrogels, connected to a capacitor meter, c, by two metallic wires. Pressure or stretching causes the elastomer to change shape and capacitance. An array of these pressure sensors (ionic skin, iTouch or iPad) can be attached to the back of the hand. (c) In an artificial axon (ionic cable), two hydrogel layers are insulated by a layer of elastomer. The input port connects to a source of time-varying voltage, V, and the output port connects to a load of impedance, Z (reprinted with permission from ref. 257).	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic of an integrated system consisting of a-Si/H solar cells, NiCo2O4//AC BSHs, and LEDs as the energy conversion, storage and utilization devices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
