Recent advances in focused ion beam nanofabrication for nanostructures and devices: fundamentals and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR07539F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07539F
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1529-1565Recent advances in focused ion beam nanofabrication for nanostructures and devices: fundamentals and applications

        
          
            Ping 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Siyu 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Houfu 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengmei 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiquan 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yasi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiqin 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenqiang 
            Peng
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Wubin 
            Shan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Huigao 
            Duan
          
        
      *ab
aNational Engineering Research Centre for High Efficiency Grinding, College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: duanhg@hnu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China
cCollege of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, P. R. China
Received 
      20th October 2020
    , Accepted 25th November 2020First published on 10th December 2020AbstractThe past few decades have witnessed growing research interest in developing powerful nanofabrication technologies for three-dimensional (3D) structures and devices to achieve nano-scale and nano-precision manufacturing. Among the various fabrication techniques, focused ion beam (FIB) nanofabrication has been established as a well-suited and promising technique in nearly all fields of nanotechnology for the fabrication of 3D nanostructures and devices because of increasing demands from industry and research. In this article, a series of FIB nanofabrication factors related to the fabrication of 3D nanostructures and devices, including mechanisms, instruments, processes, and typical applications of FIB nanofabrication, are systematically summarized and analyzed in detail. Additionally, current challenges and future development trends of FIB nanofabrication in this field are also given. This work intends to provide guidance for practitioners, researchers, or engineers who wish to learn more about the FIB nanofabrication technology that is driving the revolution in 3D nanostructures and devices.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapidly increasing research interest in functional nanostructures and devices with configurations from 0D to 3D. Owing to their unique structural features and excellent physical properties, functional nanostructures and devices are of great significance for a broad range of applications, such as the information industry, optoelectronics, micro/nano electromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS), biomedical, and micro-energy.1–4 The white paper “Nanoscience and Technology: Status and Prospects 2019” predicts that the expected annual global economic impact of nanotechnology closely related to nanostructures and devices, by 2024, will contribute more than $125 billion US dollars.
For decades, continuous research efforts have been devoted to the development of novel nano-manufacturing technologies that enable the precise fabrication of nanostructures and devices consistent with rational design. To be precise, nanostructures and devices are dependent on nanofabrication techniques to structure matter with nanoscale (refers to the range from 1 to 100 nm) features and nanoscale or even sub-nanometer accuracy. Up to now, a multitude of nano-manufacturing technologies, including optical/electron-beam lithography, nanoimprint lithography (NIL), self-assembly, atomic layer deposition (ALD), chemical mechanical polishing (CMP), laser nanopatterning, 3D printing, and nanotransfer printing (nTP), have demonstrated distinct advantages and revealed enormous potential for the flexible fabrication of nanostructures and devices.3,5–7 However, all these nanofabrication technologies have encountered insurmountable problems in the fabrication of arbitrary and high-resolution 3D nanostructures and devices. For instance, lithography techniques have been widely employed for fabricating 2D patterns that can accurately and reproducibly be generated in a specialized layer of material called the resist; nonetheless, those patterns then need to be transferred to another functional layer to achieve 3D fabrication, which is an arduous process.1 For bottom-up nanofabrication, self-assembly provides a controllable avenue to construct 2D/3D nanostructures with fabrication accuracy at the atomic or molecular level, but it is only applicable to a small number of organic materials and the assembly process cannot be predesigned freely.8 To realize atomic or close-to-atomic scale manufacturing, ALD has been widely adopted as a kind of advanced deposition technology with controllable film thickness and excellent shape retention. However, nanostructures and devices with complex configurations cannot be prepared directly through the miniaturization of systems.9 Similarly, CMP is an extremely versatile nanotechnology that could help the semiconductor industry to extend optical lithography and invent novel approaches, such as damascene interconnects, to achieve a smooth surface of 3D nanostructures at the atomic level, but this process also cannot directly form multi-dimensional nanostructures and inherent shear stress may be detrimental to delicate nanostructures.10 Recently, the successful development of laser nanopatterning, including 2D nanowriting, 3D nonlinear nanowriting, and laser-induced forward transfer, has produced a flexible nanofabrication tool for the writing of surface features, internal features, or complete 3D nanostructures via photopolymerization. Nevertheless, the resolution of feature sizes and the roughness of nanostructures remain unsatisfactory owing to the mass diffusion effect during the fabrication process.1,11 Additionally, 3D printing enables a balance between personalized manufacturing and high-throughput processing to be obtained and achieves microscale level resolution, but the fabrication of nanomaterials and nanostructures has not yet been achieved.12 Furthermore, nTP technology can generate powerful 3D nanostructures in a low-cost and high-throughput mode, but the incorporation of surface patterns of replica stamps during transfer printing often limits the manufacturing yield and quality of transferred nanostructures.13 Nowadays, with increasing requirements for the designable nanofabrication and integration of complex 3D nanostructures and devices in the development of nanosystems, existing nano-manufacturing technologies still face enormous challenges.
In comparison, focused ion beam (FIB) has emerged as a critical and powerful machining tool for the designable nanofabrication of nanostructures and devices on the surface of practically any solid sample materials since its successful application in the semiconductor industry from the 1980s.14 Unlike a conventional projection ion beam that uses a rather broad beam of ions to irradiate the sample through some sort of mask, FIB uses a closely focused beam of ions to form a scanning ion probe, the position and timing of which are controlled by a pattern generator, which has the technical characteristics of maskless machining capability, design capability of arbitrary complicated structures, spatial resolution of several nanometers, easy integration capacity, etc.4,5,15–18 Although manufacturing throughput may be low and controversial due to the serial nature of the direct writing process, machining efficiency is not necessarily a problem in those FIB applications that use small ion doses.15 To date, a large number of reviews and books on FIB nanotechnology and their applications in micro- and nanofabrication have been published.4,14,15,17–25 These works extensively discussed and summarized the basic principles of ion-sample interactions, the major approaches and process parameters used, the basic components of the FIB system, and the applications of FIBs in the study of materials’ properties and structures. It cannot be denied that they are sufficient to constitute a series of quick reference guides and comprehensive tutorials for many interested readers. Nevertheless, some works have been published for a long time while others lack a systematic and progressive review of the 3D nanostructures and devices prepared by FIBs, especially with the rapid development of FIB technology and the continuous expansion of application fields.
Over the past decade, considerable achievements have been made in the fabrication and integration of 3D nanostructures and devices owing to the advancement of FIB nanofabrication, which has greatly promoted the rapid development of a series of scientific fields. In this review, we will provide a representative, although not exhaustive, overview of recent advances in the fundamentals of the FIB and its applications (see Fig. 1), as well as commenting on existing challenges and future prospects. To utilize nanofabrication strategies effectively for nanostructures and devices, one must clearly understand the physical and chemical properties of FIB nanofabrication, including the ion–matter interaction mechanism, size effects at the nano- and atomic scales, the differences compared with charged particles such as an electron beam, and the powerful Monte Carlo simulation tools, so following this introduction, we first give a detailed overview of the mechanism of FIB nanofabrication in section 2. This is followed by a brief review of FIB instruments’ evolution in section 3, focusing on the current development of ion sources. Section 4 is dedicated to introducing a set of FIB nanofabrication strategies for patterning based on those that are destructive, constructive, modifying, etc. with particular emphasis on the analysis of new processes for manufacturing 3D nanostructures and devices. Select application examples are discussed in section 5, where the application of 3D nanostructures and devices involved in each process technology in different fields will be introduced separately. Finally, an outlook on existing challenges and future development trends is provided.
 Fig. 1  An overview of the fundamentals of FIB nanofabrication and its application in the preparation of nanostructures and devices. The fundamentals of FIB nanofabrication include the nanofabrication mechanism, equipment technology, and process technology. The resulting nanostructures and devices based on different FIB nanofabrication processes (such as etching, irradiation, deposition, and implantation) have compelling applications in various fields. 
2. Mechanism of FIB nanofabrication
2.1. Basic principles and functions of FIB
The powerful capabilities of FIB nanofabrication depend critically on the nature of ion–solid interactions, involving many disciplines such as physics, chemistry, mechanics, materials, and thermodynamics.15,23,26,27 When the ion beam bombards the surface of a solid material, the interaction between the energetic ions and the nucleus or electrons of the solid material can produce a variety of physical and chemical phenomena. Consequently, a series of effects may occur that not only result in solid atoms being sputtered out, but also in events such as backscattering, implantation, excitation, amorphization, sample heating, and chemical reactions taking place, as shown in Fig. 2(a).25,27 Thus, understanding the basics of ion–solid interactions may greatly enhance the ability to prepare high-quality nanostructured surfaces using FIB nanofabrication technology.18
 Fig. 2  (a) The basic interaction mechanism between the ion beam and solid material. (b)–(f) Schematic diagrams of the microscopic interaction mechanism between ions and atoms or molecules in (b) imaging, (c) etching, (d) irradiation, (e) deposition, (f) implantation and (g) lithography. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
In general, the occurrence of the above ion–solid interactions can be regarded as a collection of elastic collision and inelastic collision events from the perspective of ion energy, and as a result, the following interesting aspects can be observed in Fig. 2(a). Incident ions are reflected to form backscattered ions when an elastic collision occurs between an incident ion and a target atom within a collision cascade region. However, when an inelastic collision occurs, part of the energy of the incident ions is transferred to the collided atoms to generate secondary electrons (SEs) and X-rays, and the target atoms are excited and ionized to generate visible light, ultraviolet light, and infrared light. Also, when the incident ions bombard the solid surface, the solid material surface can also emit secondary ions (see Fig. 2(b)). These phenomena can achieve functions such as ion beam imaging and spectral analysis.19,28 If the kinetic energy delivered by the ions is large enough to exceed the surface binding energy, the collision process can cause the target atoms of the solid lattice to become off-site atoms, which may pass through the lattice gap and be ejected as sputtered particles from the surface of the material (see Fig. 2(c)). This physical sputtering is the major mechanism for material removal and its efficiency is normally represented by the sputter yield.17,18 Remarkably, the collision of high energy ions with the solid surface can produce a certain thermal effect when the target material is under the action of low-dose irradiation, thereby causing an explosion that results in boiling and local shrinkage of the material. At the same time, ion implantation and material amorphization are introduced into the target material to generate stress or strain, which may also cause the structure of the target material to deform (see Fig. 2(d)).14,29 Although undesirable defects induced by the FIB have long been considered as problems for applications such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) sample preparation and diagnosis, such “undesirable” defects have recently been utilized to develop a novel nanofabrication method (i.e. FIB nano-kirigami) to manufacture functional nanostructures and devices.14,30
On the other hand, when the energy delivered by the ions is less than the surface binding energy, ion beam deposition can be performed by introducing external conditions such as gas molecules (see Fig. 2(e)).31–33 Also, if the energy of the incident ions is not high, the energy of the ions is gradually lost and the ions are embedded in the solid material when the ions collide with the electrons and target atoms. There may also be another case where the incident ions transfer energy and momentum to the atoms attached to the surface of the solid material, causing the atoms to enter deeper into the solid material. These two physical collisions are the main mechanisms of ion implantation, and they both change the surface properties of the material (see Fig. 2(f)).17,34 In particular, if the irradiated material is a compound, elastic collision or inelastic collision can also initiate chemical reactions in the solids, and the latter plays a leading role in such chemical reactions (see Fig. 2(g)).19,28
Although the various circumstances of ion–solid interactions diversify the functions involved in the FIB technology, because FIB imaging is only used as a material observation method rather than as a processing means, and FIB lithography is mainly oriented to the fabrication of 2D patterns like optical/electron-beam lithography rather than 3D nanostructures, this work will focus on the FIB functions that enable the nano-manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices, including the processes of etching, irradiation, deposition, and implantation.
2.2. Nanoscale effects in FIB nanofabrication
To understand the underlying mechanism of FIB nanofabrication, the effects of parameters, including scanning parameters, ion beam parameters, and processing parameters, have been investigated by researchers.18 The scanning parameters include the scan strategy/routine, single or multiple scans, scan speed, scan width, scan area, aperture size, pixel size, and fabrication strategy. The ion beam parameters include the ion species, ion dose, ion energy, and ion current. The processing parameters include the dwell time, incidence angle, beam overlap, retrace time, refresh time, etch depth, slice number, astigmatism and defocus, working distance, loop number, target temperature, and precursor gases (such as flux distribution, gas flux, gas molecule species, and nozzle position). The results of investigations into these parameters show that there are several nanoscale effects affecting different process parameters, such as material redeposition, ion implantation damage, vacancy and dislocation, amorphization, swelling, rippled nanostructure, deformation damage caused by elevated temperature, and gas contamination.18,35,36
Generally, sputtered atoms (neutral atoms and ions) ejected from the solid material's surface into the gas phase cannot be completely removed by the vacuum system and are not at thermodynamic equilibrium.17 Hence, they tend to condense back into the solid phase when colliding with any nearby solid material, and some the ejected atoms may hit the already sputtered surface and redeposit on it, as shown in Fig. 3(a). For instance, De Winter et al.37 observed the redeposition of the inner wall of a circular hole using an ion beam to etch a circular hole in the lamella (see Fig. 3(b)). Bhavsar et al.38 also observed significant redeposition on the edge of the trench when milling the trench on the steel surface, and the amount of redeposition gradually decreased as the distance from the trench increased (see Fig. 3(c)). In fact, besides the effects of the parameters, redeposition is also affected by other factors, such as the geometry of the designed structure, the dynamics of the ejected atoms, and the adhesion coefficient of the target material.17 In the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices, redeposition not only reduces the aspect ratio and processing efficiency of the structure, but also makes it difficult to measure accurately the rate of material removal and to predict visually the final geometry. Therefore, it is particularly significant to effectively reduce or even eliminate redeposition. In section 4, several novel solutions developed in recent years will be highlighted.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the redeposition effect. (b) A lamella created with several separate measuring holes. Red/blue color coded side view overlay images of the hole. Red refers to premilling and blue to the postmilling condition. The dark-blue area around the hole is the redeposited material. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2007, American Vacuum Society. (c) Surface topography changes due to redeposition close to a trench. The top part shows a secondary electron image of the FIB-milled trench. The bottom part reports the AFM height profile measured over the above line, showing redeposition outside the trench. Reproduced with permission.38,51 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of ion implantation damage. (e) Left: bright-field image of a cross-sectional TEM sample prepared by FIB, showing small dislocation loops and long dislocations. Right: bright-field image of long dislocations generated during the deposition of Al films. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2004, American Institute of Physics. (f) The thickness of the amorphous layer is irradiated with 50 keV Ar+ under different fluences. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (g) Schematic diagram of the rippled nanostructure. (h) SEM images of 3 mm × 2 mm in size from Si samples irradiated with 10 keV Xe+ ions at 70° at different fluences. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2013, American Physical Society. (i) AFM morphologies after Ar+ irradiation of Si (100). All the images are obtained for a constant fluence of 5 × 1017 ions per cm2, ion flux of 0.3 mA cm−2, ion energy E = 700 eV, and at different angles of incidence. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (j) Schematic diagram of the principle of the channel effect. (k) Rough surface formation under the channel effect (left) and smooth surface generation after doping treatment (right). Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2001, American Vacuum Society. 
If the energy or dose level of incident ions is insufficient for sputtering, ion implantation damage may occur in the bombardment zone of the crystalline substrate. Ion implantation damage is a ubiquitous phenomenon that causes the creation of crystallographic defects such as vacancies and dislocations or even amorphization and swelling, as shown in Fig. 3(d). A typical example is that Ga+ ions are implanted when chromium or other masking material is etched away during the photomask repair process, which can greatly reduce optical transmission through the underlying quartz.31 Similarly, there are different forms of ion implantation damage when manufacturing 3D structures on other target materials. For example, Park et al.39 found that ion implantation damage occurred in both the depth direction and the lateral direction of the ion beam incident during the ion beam trimming of the electrode. Idrissi et al.40 observed small dislocation loops and long dislocations generated during the deposition of Al films (see Fig. 3(e)). Rajsiri et al.41 observed amorphization on the top and sidewall of silicon materials during ion beam milling of square trenches. Kumar et al.42 studied the effect of different ion fluences on the thickness of the amorphous layer. The results showed that the thickness of the amorphous layer increased with an increase of the ion fluence (see Fig. 3(f)). Normally, a large number of lattice defects are implanted on the interface between the amorphous layer and the crystal, which becomes the source of crack growth under the action of stress and strain and significantly weakens the strength of the material. Previous investigations have shown that the influence and relative volume fraction of this amorphous layer became more significant with decreasing size to the nanoscale.43 Besides, the characterization of damage caused by ion implantation is also extremely significant. Kiener et al.44 pointed out that the degree of damage could be clearly presented by the form of damage density. Their experimental results showed that there was a huge difference in the damage density between the area after processing by Ga+ ion beam etching and the unprocessed area. Moreover, swelling is largely induced by density changes or amorphization, and the magnitude of swelling because of amorphization may be as high as several tens of nanometers, which can greatly reduce the dimensional accuracy of the designed structure.17 Therefore, amorphization and swelling are the critical factors that must be closely considered and quantitatively evaluated in the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices.
Recently, the rippled nanostructure induced by FIB nanofabrication has attracted increasing attention, as shown in Fig. 3(g). For example, Hofsäss et al.45 studied the effect of different ion fluences on the rippled nanostructure during Xe+ ion beam etching of a silicon surface and revealed the propagation mechanism of a rippled nanostructure under different ion fluence conditions (see Fig. 3(h)). Munoz-Garcia et al.35 revealed that the silicon surface was prone to the formation of “parallel” ripples above a certain critical angle of incidence (about 48° to the target normal) when etched by an Ar+ ion beam (see Fig. 3(i)). The results of Brown et al.46 showed that parameters such as sputtering time, ion flux, ion energy, and sample temperature had a significant influence on the formation of the rippled nanostructure. More recent studies have been reported by Liao et al.47,48 based on the theory of ion sputtering and the principle of surface diffusion. In their studies, a mathematical model was established for the generation of rippled nanostructures in the etching of optical glass and the formation mechanism of such nanostructures was revealed. From the above reviews, it can be seen that the rippled nanostructure is an interesting nanoscale effect that may occur under any inappropriate parameter conditions and has a greatly adverse effect on the surface morphology and dimensional accuracy of the designed structure. Therefore, the rippled nanostructures have to be focused on to be successfully diminished or controlled in the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices.
In addition to the nanoscale effects caused by the process parameters, it is worth noting that the physicochemical effects of ion–solid interactions also depend on the type and state of the target material. When the target material of the incident ion beam is crystalline, the “channel effect” can occur if the direction of the incident ions corresponds to the direction of a crystal axis or crystal surface, as shown in Fig. 3(j).49 Generally, the channel effect tends to cause the sputtering surface to be uneven, that is, the surface is roughened.5,50 In the case of copper, its surface morphology after sputtering by the FIB is shown on the left side of Fig. 3(k). Fortunately, the lattice orientation can be artificially damaged by surface atom doping to eliminate the channel of ion motion, so that surface sputtering tends to be uniform (see the right side of Fig. 3(k)). However, the channel effect is inevitable in practical applications, and eventually some ions are scattered into the crystal surface, resulting in the trailing of the Gaussian distribution.23,26 Therefore, it is significant to minimize the surface roughness induced by the channel effect as much as possible in the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices oriented to crystalline materials.
2.3. Comparison of nanofabrication mechanisms for the ion beam and electron beam
From the point of view of charged particles, the interaction mechanism between the ion beam and solid material is similar to that of the electron beam. However, the nanofabrication mechanism for each beam is obviously different because the mass of ions is much larger than that of electrons. First of all, ions penetrate to a shallower depth in solids than electrons (see Fig. 4(a)), but a series of physical and chemical reactions can occur due to high-energy ions being sufficient to cause cascading collisions of atoms near solid surfaces, thereby realizing the purpose of FIB nanofabrication. In particular, there is no proximity effect for exposure processing because the scattering range of an ion beam in the photoresist is extremely small, and the helium ion beam nanofabrication method developed in recent years has higher resolution and a weaker proximity effect than electron beam exposure.52,53
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of penetration depths of an ion beam and electron beam in solid materials. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (b)–(e) Schematics showing the influence of (b), (c) crystal orientation, (d) atomic mass, and (e) surface geometry on 30 keV Ga+ collision cascades and ISE image contrast formation. The orange atoms in (d) are more massive than the yellow atoms in (b), (c), and (e). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2007, Materials Research Society. (f) SE and (g) ISE images of a FIB-cut cross section in brass. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2007, Materials Research Society. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (h) SE and (i) ISE images of German silver. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (j) and (k) Mechanism of precursor gas induced processing. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2008, American Vacuum Society. (j) Scheme of interactions of primary electrons generating an emitted flux of SEs and backscattered electrons. All electrons can dissociate surface adsorbed molecules via electronic excitation. (k) Scheme of interactions of primary ions generating SEs and a collision cascade of substrate atoms. 
Secondly, the SE signals excited during FIB imaging are extremely different from electron beam imaging for solid materials with different crystal orientations, atomic masses, and surface morphology (see Fig. 4(b)–(e)),28 although the imaging resolution is lower than that of electron microscopy. However, the image obtained by ion imaging has the advantage of actually reflecting the surface topography of the material, rather than the scanning electron microscope (SEM) (see Fig. 4(f)–(i)),28,49,54 which provides a powerful in situ inspection tool for the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices.
Thirdly, electron beam nanofabrication without using a photoresist requires the use of a precursor gas, but FIB nanofabrication can perform functions such as etching, irradiation, and implantation without depending on the precursor gas. Remarkably, FIB nanofabrication can also be combined with a gaseous precursor source to achieve fixed-point and high-precision deposition or auxiliary etching of various materials. As shown in Fig. 4(j) and (k),31 the electron beam or ion beam induced nanofabrication mechanism is related to the chemical reaction between the precursor molecules and the material's atoms, and the primary particles, secondary ions and secondary solid atoms (e.g. sputtering or excitation) can cause the surface reaction. Due to the large difference in mass between electrons and ions, the secondary atoms, ions, and molecules are hardly generated during electron beam induced processing. In contrast, ion beam induced processing can not only produce these particles, but also cause more SE emissions. Therefore, the microscopic mechanism of induced processing between the electron beam and the ion beam is also quite different.1,31
In summary, when the energetic ions hit the target, although a variety of ion–solid interactions different from those resulting from electron–solid interactions may cause various nanoscale effects, the FIB has many unparalleled advantages over electron beam nanofabrication of high current density, including the capability of very fine focusing, the choice of a wide variety of ion masses, and shorter penetration depths in a solid.18
2.4. Monte Carlo simulation of FIB nanofabrication
Due to the high cost of FIB nanofabrication in terms of equipment complexity, operation, maintenance prices, etc., it is necessary to optimize the entire process to achieve the highest possible resolution and process range in a short processing time. Generally speaking, this challenging goal can only be achieved through fast, accurate, and user-friendly software tools, especially in the nanoscale manufacturing regime.1 In the past few decades, several tools have been developed by the academic community, and some of them have matured into commercial products. The most typical of these products is the Monte Carlo methodology, which provides critical quantitative information that cannot be obtained from experiments in some cases and has long been used to simulate the damage and interaction of various energetic particles in matter, such as neutrons and electrons. Additionally, Monte Carlo simulations are often used as a powerful tool for understanding the behavior and applications of the FIB nanofabrication. Stanford et al.22 pointed out that the ubiquity of this method in simulating the interaction between energetic ions and solids was due to the combination of speed and simplicity that they possess. Notably, the Monte Carlo method does not solve the underlying equations of motion, as in molecular dynamics simulations, but divides the ion stopping process into discrete random steps to reproduce the statistical behavior of the system.
Probably, the most famous ion–solid Monte Carlo code is that called stopping and range of ions in matter (SRIM) developed by Ziegler et al., which has been widely used for describing ion–solid interactions for many ions over a wide range of energies.18,56 Importantly, SRIM can perform general simulations of many different ion species and target compositions (including various common compound targets).22 It can predict not only the yield, but also the distribution of ions and kinetic phenomena associated with the ions’ energy loss, including target damage, phonon production, ionization, ion reflection, implantation, and sputtering.18,57–59Fig. 5(a) shows a typical cross-section view of 10000 ion trajectories (left image) and the histogram of the final z-position (right image) in the substrate by means of a SRIM style Monte Carlo method.59 Although SRIM can gain an insight into the behavior of high-energy ions interacting with targets and has several advantages for a myriad of applications, it also has some obvious shortcomings. For example, since substrate evolution during sputtering cannot be captured, research on nanoscale evolution related to FIB nanofabrication is still lagging.25 Additionally, SRIM lacks the ability to simulate the two key functions of FIB, namely secondary electron (SE) production and cumulative sputtering necessary to understand the surface sputtering profiles during etching.22
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section view of 10000 25 keV He+ ion trajectories in a flat tungsten substrate and a histogram of the final depth of the helium ion (note the backscattered ion coefficient is approximately 32%). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (b) Simulation output of 30 million simulated 25 keV He+ ions grown in the mass transport limited regime. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (c) and (d) Trajectories of 10000 ions for helium and neon simulations. The color bars in each plot represent the energies of ion trajectories in keV. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (e) Trajectories of ten neon ions and recoil atoms at a beam energy of 10 keV. The trajectories at aluminum and tungsten are presented on the left and right respectively. The ion trajectories (bold lines) have different colors based on energy, but the recoil trajectories have the same color (green) as shown in the figure. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (f) Neon ion simulated nanostructures with different beam energies at a beam diameter of 1 nm. The nanostructures of aluminum and tungsten are presented in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The horizontal and vertical lines represent the FWHM and the maximum depths of the structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (g) Simulated via structures of Cu at three different doses, 1.5 × 1018 ions per cm2 (left part), 3 × 1018 ions per cm2 (middle part) and 6 × 1018 ions per cm2 (right part). Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (h) Nuclear energy loss density at the Cu target with 702000 neon ions (a dose of 3.12 × 1017 Ne+ cm−2) of 20 keV. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (i) Development of a via from a FWHM = 1 nm Gaussian Ne+ beam in a Cu target for different numbers of ions. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. (j) Simulated nuclear energy loss (left) and the resultant helium implant concentrations (on right) are compared to the experimental TEM micrograph exposed to 30 keV at a dose of 2 × 1017 He+ per cm2. In (k), the same as in (j), but for 30 keV Ne+ per cm2. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2014, American Vacuum Society. 
Recently, a three dimensional Monte Carlo simulator, called the EnvizION simulator, was initially developed by Smith et al. to study FIB induced deposition.59 Actually, the simulator integrates three parts, namely the trajectory calculation routines and the electron and nuclear energy loss routines of the SRIM/TRIM simulator, the secondary electron routines of the IONiSE simulator, and the precursor gas processing routines of the EBID (electron beam induced deposition) simulator.56,60,61 In the work of Smith et al., they first introduced the details of a Monte Carlo helium ion beam induced deposition simulation and then presented initial results for reaction rate and mass transport limited growth regimes.59Fig. 5(b) shows the results of the reaction rate limited parameter set running for 30 million primary ions, where the left image is a 3D rendering of the deposited tungsten structure, and the right image is an expanded cross-sectional slice of the top of the deposited structure. In addition, Timilsina et al.62,63 developed the necessary procedures for heavy ions and conducted research on PtC5 deposition induced by neon ion beams. Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the trajectories of helium and neon ions for ten thousand ions at 25 keV on the PtC5 target. The results show that neon trajectories have smaller scattering steps and they terminate at shallower depths as compared to helium ion trajectories because neon trajectories undergo greater energy loss per distance compared to helium, indicating that the neon ion is suitable for sputtering purposes rather than helium. Thus, more studies are expected in the future because gas-field neon ion sources are now available.
With the further development of the simulator, other functions such as physical sputtering, gas-assisted etching, energy loss and implant concentration calculations, secondary electron and recoil atom re-entries in vias, etc., have also been expanded. For example, to clarify a series of events, including the distribution of implanted ions, calculation of sputtered yield, evolution of nanostructured vias, and temporal behavior of sputtered and redeposited that are relative to the number of incident ions, Timilsina et al.64 investigated the sputtering simulation by impinging neon ions on aluminum and tungsten targets. Fig. 5(e) shows the trajectories of ten neon ions at 10 keV beam energy with recoils for aluminum and tungsten. Fig. 5(f) illustrates the resultant sputtered nanostructures of aluminum (top) and tungsten (bottom) after exposure to 100000 neon ions at various beam energies with a constant beam diameter of 1 nm (full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian beam). The simulated nanostructures reveal that, in both materials, with increasing beam energy, the depth and aspect ratio increases. The nanostructure depths are greater for aluminum at all beam energies as compared to tungsten because aluminum has a comparatively higher sputter yield relative to tungsten. Additionally, Timilsina et al.65 conducted a simulation study by using the EnvizION simulator to provide nanomachining information related to neon ion beam interactions with copper. The simulation results for copper are shown in Fig. 5(g) with the middle slices at three different doses, which can be used to understand evolution of the nanostructure. These results from the simulations are in reasonable agreement with experiments. Due to the resolution-limiting and sputtering-limiting effects in FIB technology, Timilsina et al. also commented on those two effects by performing a neon ion beam sputtering simulation on copper. Fig. 5(h) shows the resolution-limiting effects that can be illustrated by comparing a simulation of the sputter profile and the resultant energy loss density. More recently, Mahady et al.66 investigated the evolution of a via, sputtered by a Ne+ beam in a Cu target, with a FWHM = 1 nm Gaussian profile. The results show that for small numbers of ions (1000–10000 ions) the via deepens rapidly, while after a certain depth the depth increases more slowly (10000–50000 ions) (see Fig. 5(i)).
The simulator has the ability to simulate not only single elemental materials (Al, W, Cu, etc.) but also compound target materials such as SiO2 and a stack of different materials.67–70 For example, Mahady et al.69 presented a Monte Carlo simulation model that used a voxel-based substrate to simulate FIB sputtering in targets composed of SiO2. This model considers both dynamic substrate evolution as well as the implantation of ion species. Subsequently, they proposed a computational method that was incorporated into the EnvizION simulation for simulating gas-assisted ion beam etching, especially to study XeF2 assisted FIB induced etching of SiO2.67 Furthermore, Gonzalez et al.70 used the gas field ion microscope to investigate helium and neon ion beam induced etching of nickel as a candidate technique for extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography mask editing. The experimental results of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed subsurface damage to the underlying Mo–Si multilayer EUV mirror. To further understand helium and neon damage, the authors simulated the ion–solid interactions with the EnvizION Monte-Carlo model, which reasonably correlated the observed damage and bubble formation to nuclear energy loss and the implanted inert gas concentration, respectively. Fig. 5(j) and (k) separately depict the volumetric nuclear energy loss and final concentrations with the actual TEM cross section micrographs at 30 keV for helium and neon simulations. The results show that although the EnvizION simulations do not show a discernible etching of nickel with helium at 30 keV, it can be observed while using neon ions.64,65 For the neon simulation, it is notable that a high nuclear energy loss region extends beyond the nickel layer into the Mo/Si multilayer. In addition, the research results have estimated a critical nuclear energy density loss of ∼80 eV nm−3 and critical implant concentration of ∼2.5 × 1020 atoms per cm3 for damage generation in the multilayer structure.
3. FIB nanofabrication instrument
The term “FIB nanofabrication instrument” is a general term that includes a single instrument that provides a wide range of analysis and patterning functions on a multi-functional platform in the field of fundamental research, the specialized instrument used in valuable work at semiconductor companies to assist the operation of their production line, and the personalized instrument that provides advanced manufacturing capabilities with optimized hardware and software components.15 Bruchhaus et al.4 revealed that recent technology breakthroughs to improve instrument performance for FIB nanofabrication have mainly focused on the development of ion sources (such as liquid metal ion sources (LMIS), gas field ion sources (GFIS), and plasma sources), (single) FIB implantation and dedicated nanofabrication instruments based upon an electron beam writer instrument architecture. In other words, the FIB nanofabrication instrument not only reflects the complete equipment, but also includes the ion source and other key functional components. Hence, it is of great significance to generate knowledge of FIB nanofabrication instruments that can be used to prepare high-quality and high-yielding nanostructures and devices. These subsystems will be discussed in detail in the following subsections.
3.1. The development status of FIB equipment
FIB technology was mainly developed during the late 1970s and the early 1980s, and the first commercial instruments were introduced in the late 20th century.19 Afterwards, a large number of FIB systems were developed and tested with different performances.55 Currently, the number of FIB instruments engaged in R&D application services worldwide has reached approximately 2000 and it is still on the rise. Meanwhile, the number of scientific publications reporting nanofabrication using various advanced FIB instruments is also steadily increasing year by year.15
The vast majority of FIB instruments currently on the market are derived from the “cross” or “dual beam” architecture developed in the early 1980s.55 In this setup, the FIB column and SEM are integrated on a platform, and the two optical axes converge at the same point on the sample surface, enabling efficient in situ observation, non-destructive control, and real-time monitoring of the FIB manufacturing process. This means that the use of a FIB combined with SEM allows for immediate inspection and refinement steps in the patterning process to assure the desired fidelity.71 A typical company is FEI, which is an innovator and leading supplier of solutions for the global nanotechnology community, and the first company to release FIB-SEM dual-beam tools in 1993.21 In the past two decades, different updates from various companies have been released continuously, such as Helios NanoLab™ 600i, NVision 40 CrossBeam®, and Zeiss 1540 XB cross-beam instruments.38,53,55,72–75 Due to its unparalleled performance, most FIB manufacturers so far have recommended this type of instrument. In 2012, Hitachi High-tech successfully launched a real-time 3D structural analysis product, model NX9000 FIB-SEM, through the acquisition of Seiko Nano Technology Co., Ltd, which has received a good historical evaluation. In addition, Tescan aims to update the FIB system through the integration of new functions including secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and Raman.21 For example, Stevie et al.76 provided a cost-effective FIB-SEM dual-beam upgrade device that could realize SIMS chemical mapping based on a time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). The biggest advantage of this device is that users can perform SIMS analysis immediately after preparing the required nanostructures, thereby achieving nanostructures with better horizontal and vertical spatial resolution. Soon thereafter, Tescan managed to integrate a Raman spectrometer into the FIB-SEM to create a microscope with both confocal Raman imaging and scanning electron (RISE) capabilities.77 The microscope can capture the most comprehensive sample characterization including surface nanostructures and chemical composition, and realize the correlation between ultrastructure and chemical information. This novel RISE microscope can be used in many applications, such as nanotechnology, materials science, life science, and geology.
Since gaseous ion sources can reduce harmful implantation damage and pollution related to the heavy gallium FIB to a certain extent, the application of gas source ion beams makes it possible to develop new FIB tools. Because of its high brightness, this tool can not only achieve nano-resolution imaging, but also has the functions of etching, deposition and lithography.59 Based on this, many scholars predict that He+ FIB machining may gradually replace Ga+ FIB machining as the preliminary tool for milling nanostructures, due to its smaller probe size in the sub-nanometer range, lower damage caused by the ion beam, and no additional deposition.7,25 In 2007, Carl Zeiss introduced the first-generation helium ion microscope (HIM) to the market, which was designed to perform ultra-high resolution imaging.21 For example, a commercial helium ion microscope (ORION) equipped with a graphics generator from Carl Zeiss has been used as a focused helium ion beam system (ORION Plus) that enables exposure, etching, and other processes.78–82 Since then, some researchers have further developed a multi-ion-beam platform including a neon beam that shares the same gun and column with a helium ion beam, which shows great application value in life sciences and materials science. In addition, to further enhance the processing capacity of the FIB, Carl Zeiss realized a FIB system integrating Ga, Ne, and He ion sources.24,83 For example, the ORION NanoFab microscope combines three focused ion beams to seamlessly switch between gallium, neon and helium ion beams for ultra-high precision machining of sub-10 nm nanostructures.24,83 At present, the system has realized the processing of surface plasma antennas with a tip gap of 4 nm and Pt nano-pillars with a diameter of 35 nm.84
3.2. Advanced ion source development
As early as 1973, a FIB instrument composed of an ion source with a diameter of 3 μm could be used as a tool for micro/nano-processing.31 However, due to the limited brightness of this light source and low current density, the processing efficiency is very low, which greatly limits the application range of the FIB. Fortunately, the invention of a liquid gallium metal ion source opened up the real application of the FIB.85 It can be said that the most commonly used ion source today is the liquid metal ion source, which has very high brightness, typically about ∼106 A cm−2 sr.31 Usually, it consists of a liquid metal reservoir that feeds liquid metal into a sharp tungsten needle.
Recently, to enrich the singularity of the Ga ion source, Raith developed a series of new ion sources, such as gold, silicon, germanium, and other liquid ion sources, which could better ensure the long-time stability of ion beams, and improve the life of ion sources.86 Gierak et al.87 described in detail the operating characteristics of metal ion sources capable of emitting metal projectiles ranging from atomic ions with different charge states to polyatomic ions and to large metal clusters with sizes up to a few nanometers. In addition, for specific purposes like high resolution FIB implantation or FIB induced ion mixing, other ions like liquid metal alloy ion sources (LMAIS) have been developed and commercialized, such as AuSi, AuSiB, PdAs, PdAsB, NiB and NiAs.49,87 LMAIS represent a promising alternative to expand the FIB application fields, besides all other source concepts. For example, a promising candidate is a Ga35Bi60Li5 based LMAIS, which operates stably for more than 1000 μA h. This LMAIS has several applications in mass-filtered FIB like implantation, high rate sputtering, surface patterning, ion lithography, or as a primary ion for secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS).88 To meet the rising demand for light ions, Bischoff et al.89 investigated different boron containing alloys and they found a promising solution in a Co31Nd64B5 based LMAIS.
Nowadays, even though most FIB nanofabrication instruments use Ga+ as the main ion source and the maximum beam current for Ga+ FIB can be about 100 nA, it still cannot meet the requirements of high-efficiency processing, especially in the field of semiconductor packaging, solder bumps, and through silicon vias (TSVs), which have length scales of ∼100 μm.21,90 Under these circumstances, plasma sources were introduced to the FIB nanofabrication instruments in 2010, which could allow the fabrication of a nanostructure with a material removal rate of ∼100 times faster than a traditional Ga+ source FIB.90,91 From the perspective of its development history, the plasma FIB is a relatively new and developing technology, but it is growing rapidly to respond to the increasing demands of applications.92 As shown in Fig. 6(a), the plasma FIB is a broad source with high angular intensity, while the LMIS used in the Ga+ FIB is a point source with low angular intensity, which indicates that the emission mechanism for the plasma source and Ga+ source is different.90Fig. 6(b) shows that the processed volumes of the Xe plasma FIB is approximately 69 times that of the Ga+ FIB. This means that when the beam current is greater than 1 μA, the milling time of Xe plasma can be reduced to minutes instead of hours compared to a traditional Ga+ FIB.91 During the past several years, although the plasma FIB has been established as a routine technique in semiconductor failure analysis and materials science, the larger spot size may result in a decrease in cross-sectional quality and the maximum beam current currently available still cannot meet some applications that require higher beam currents.93
 Fig. 6  (a) Comparison of the Xe plasma FIB and LMIS Ga+ FIB. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2010, Microscopy Society of America. (b) Machining ability comparison between the Xe plasma FIB and LMIS Ga+ FIB. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2012, Microscopy Society of America. (c) Simulations using TRIM software comparing (Left figure) 30 kV Ga ions and (Middle figure) 30 kV He ions for range and trajectory in graphene layers on SiO2 on silicon substrate. (Right figure) Range and trajectory of 30 kV He ions through a suspended graphene layer over vacuum, SiO2 and silicon substrate. (Insets) schematic comparison between Ga+ ion and He+ ion interaction with graphene samples from molecular dynamics simulations. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (d)–(h) The comparative size and shape of the interaction volumes for H+, He+, Ne+, Ar+, and Ga+ in molybdenum at an energy of 40 kV. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic of the Zeiss ORION helium ion microscope column. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (j) Schematic of the main system of the helium ion microscope (HIM) as presented in the vacuum user interface. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (k) Structure of the quick-response platform for a sub-nanometer optical surface. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2015, Optical Society of America. 
On the other hand, gaseous ion sources have provided new possibilities for the nanofabrication of materials and structures with higher spatial resolution.24,25 At present, the smallest structure for induced deposition processing using a helium ion beam is a 13 nm wide line and a 6 nm wide trench.79 The newly developed He+/Ne+ gas field ion source microscope shows that the resolution of the He+/Ne+ sources is as high as 0.25 nm and the minimum feature size is less than 5 nm.4,25 It is worth noting that although a helium gas field ion source has been demonstrated to be capable of realizing higher milling resolution relative to liquid gallium ion sources, one drawback is that the helium ion mass is prohibitively low for reasonable sputtering rates of bulk materials, requiring a dosage that may lead to significant subsurface damage.94 Fortunately, great progress has been made in stabilizing the neon GFIS in the past few years, and recently the neon ion microscope (NIM) produced a sputter rate on the order of 1–4 atoms per incident neon ion at normal incidence, which is about half of what a traditional gallium based FIB provides.65
To clarify the differences in the interaction between gaseous ion sources and liquid ion sources with a sample, many scholars have conducted in-depth studies on some typical materials based on simulation tools.24,95Fig. 6(c) shows the simulation results for a comparison of gallium and helium ion beam propagation into graphene on a Si/SiO2 substrate.95 It can be concluded that the Ga+ beam is suitable for bulk milling with higher efficiency but with lower resolution, while He+ has a higher machining resolution with potentially smaller milling feature sizes. Fig. 6(d)–(h) compare the size and shape of the interaction volumes at an incident beam energy of 40 kV and for five different ions (H+, He+, Ne+, Ar+, and Ga+) irradiating a molybdenum target. The lightest ion (H+) has an interaction volume that almost entirely extends forward and the depth of the downward extension from the entrance surface is about 500 nm. However, the heaviest ion (Ga+) has a maximum penetration of only about 80 nm and is no longer predominantly directed downward but shows significant backscattering.24 Compared with gallium metal ions, the helium ion source has a smaller beam spot diameter (as small as 0.75 nm), a greater penetration depth in PMMA, and no contamination and surface modification problems after implanting the substrate material.96,97
3.3. Other key functional components
In addition to the ion source, other basic components of a FIB nanofabrication instrument consist of ion optics, a substrate stage, and a vacuum chamber with auxiliary equipment.17 Firstly, optical column systems are essential for FIB nanofabrication equipment.23,26,49 Taking the gallium ion beam widely used in recent years as an example, the structural diagram of the ion optical column system is shown in Fig. 6(i). The ion source emits an ion beam into the ion optical column, undergoes ion beam shaping and mass analysis, and finally focuses on the surface of the workpiece. The main components of the ion optical column include a beam drawing system and a graphics generator; the former can realize the movement of ions in the direction of X–Y on the surface of the workpiece.19,95 Currently, the general pattern generators appearing as commodities are all of the vector scan type. Over the past few decades, several companies have provided commodity graphics generators, for example, the improved graphics generator developed by the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), the NPGS graphics generator produced by J. C. Nabity exposure systems in the United States, and the high-end Elphy-Plus graphics generator produced by Raith in Germany.23,26
Generally, the development trend of optical column technology is to obtain higher resolution, wider beam energy range and beam current range, as well as compatibility with various types of samples.19 Furthermore, in the advanced ion column, more technologies are integrated into the system, including the two ion getter pumps (IGP) that help to obtain a sharper beam and smaller nanostructures; the peripheral interface adaptor (PIA) board with a 16-bit number to control the beam with a smaller beam step size in the FIB direct writing process; the time of flight (TOF) correction unit, which makes the beam scan profile more accurate; and the rocking platform, where a sample can be rocked ±10° simultaneously during rough milling to improve the surface quality.21
Another important component is the workbench system, which can not only carry the workpiece to be machined, but also accurately move and position it in the X/Y direction.99 The dynamic characteristics of the workbench system and the positioning accuracy of the motion axis determine the accurate implementation of the FIB nanofabrication residence time, and thus it is necessary to use a linear motor or a direct drive motor to realize the movement.100,101 At the same time, the dual-frequency laser interferometer can be used to detect the positioning accuracy of the motion axis of the system.98Fig. 6(j) shows a quick-response platform that consists of a five-axis ion source with accurate positioning capability, and the X and Y axes are driven by linear motors to achieve a better acceleration performance.
Usually, a vacuum pump system is required to maintain the vacuum inside the column and the work chamber, and all components are placed in a low-pressure chamber pumped to 1 × 10−7 Torr.19 The main purpose of this is to increase the mean free path of the ions without reducing the beam intensity due to interference from particles in the chamber.17 However, because the loading or unloading of samples easily damages the vacuum environment inside the work chamber, this seriously affects the efficiency of FIB nano-manufacturing, especially when multiple FIB nano-manufacturing processes (such as etching, sputtering deposition, cleaning, and correction polishing) are involved. Therefore, designing the vacuum chamber as a multi-vacuum chamber may be an advanced solution. In this situation, multiple pumps are required for the multiple chambers separated by differential pumping apertures, since the emitter must be maintained under extremely high vacuum conditions, while the sample chamber must accept the frequent loading and unloading of samples, as shown in Fig. 6(k).25
4. FIB nanofabrication processes
As mentioned in section 2.1, FIB technology based on complex ion–solid interactions can achieve multiple functions. When fabricating structures with specifically designed features, these functions reflect the specific realization of different FIB processes. This section concentrates on several FIB nanofabrication processes, including FIB etching, FIB irradiation, FIB deposition, and FIB implantation, to discuss their characteristics and new developments in the fabrication of 3D nanostructures and devices.
4.1. FIB etching
FIB etching is a typical material removal process that requires a high current ion beam.19 Broadly speaking, FIB etching can be roughly cataloged as ion beam sputtering etching (IBSE), reactive ion beam etching (RIBE), and plasma etching (PE).6 In view of the problem of cross-scale fabrication and integration of semiconductor nanostructures and devices, deep-reactive ion etching (DRIE) has been developed and applied as a maskless etching method for high aspect ratio and large-area nanostructures.102,103 In addition, chemically assisted ion beam etching (CAIBE) has been further developed on the basis of RIBE. CAIBE can further reduce material damage, while ensuring similar RIBE etching efficiency, and has better flexibility and controllability. In comparison, a plasma source is relatively new technology (as described in section 3.2), so PE can accurately and controllably remove materials at a certain depth from the surface of the workpiece by means of ion sputtering, chemical reactions, and auxiliary energy ions (or electrons).104,105 In recent years, a variety of high-density plasma etching technologies have been developed on the basis of PE, such as inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching,106–108 electron cyclotron resonance plasma etching (ECRE),109 and helicon plasma etching (HPE).110 In addition, related assistive technologies have been developed with the increasing application of high-density plasma etching technology to further improve the etching efficiency, such as electrostatic chuck technology, Bosch process technology, and low temperature etching technology.6,111
The important process targets of FIB etching are sputtering yield and surface topography, which depend on the combined effect of many parameters, such as ion energy, ion dose, beam current, angle of incidence, dwell time, scan routine, and scan width.18,112,113 Theoretically, the material begins to sputter when the incident ion energy is greater than the sputtering threshold energy, and as the incident ion energy increases, the sputtering yield increases. However, the sputtering yield shows an inflection point when the incident ion energy is 10 keV, at which point the ion implantation effect begins to increase.23,26 Ion dose (ion fluence and flux) is a common term that represents the impacted and absorbed quantities of ions onto the substrate through a defined area (ions per cm2 or nC mm−2). As another significant ion beam parameter, the beam current measured in amperes (pA or nA) is a parameter related to the beam diameter (spot size: nm) and current density (A cm−2). Many researchers have studied the effects of ion beam parameters on the fabrication of various nanostructures from different materials, such as Si(100), deposited TiNi thin film, and heterogeneous structures (Ti/GaAs).58,114–117 For example, Xie et al.115 investigated the Ga+ FIB etching characteristics of TiNi thin films. Their experimental results showed that the etched depth depended linearly on the ion fluence per area with a slope of 0.28 μm3 nC−1 (see Fig. 7(a)), while the etching rate decreased with increasing ion beam current (see Fig. 7(b)). Additionally, the surface roughness changes nonlinearly with ion fluence with a minimum RMS of about 4.3 nm at a fluence of about 3.1 × 1017 ions per cm2 (see Fig. 7(c)), but it decreases with increasing ion beam current due to its periodical rippled surface structure (see Fig. 7(d)).
 Fig. 7  (a)–(d) The effects of scan widths on the etched depth and surface roughness. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (e) Relationship between sputtering yield and incident angle under different beam energies.5,118–121 Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2006, AIP Publishing. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 1997, AIP Publishing. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, Tsinghua Tongfang. (f) A SEM plan view image of trenches in amorphous Ni78B14Si8 produced by a FIB with a constant exposure time of 90 s and various numbers of scan loops. (g) Sputtering yield as a function of scan speed for trenches. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. Hole arrays milled using (h) raster scanning and (i) spiral scanning. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing. The effects of ion beam parameters on the (j) sidewall angle and (k) etching depth of trenches. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing. 
Next, we continue to review the influence of processing parameters and scanning parameters on material removal. When an ion beam bombards the surface of a solid material, the incident angle of the ion beam has a significant effect on material removal. A large number of experimental studies have shown that the ion sputtering yield increases with the incident angle of the ion beam, reaching a maximum at around 75–80°, and then decreases rapidly toward zero as the incident angle approaches 90° (see Fig. 7(e)).5,118–121 In addition, the microscopic morphology and surface roughness under different incident angles are also significantly different, and various microstructures are produced in the corresponding angular range.35,122 The dwell time, also called the scan speed, defines the exposure time of each pixel. Li et al.117 prepared the trenches by adjusting the dwell time on the amorphous Ni78B14Si8 substrate. It was found that the sidewall angle and surface roughness improved as the dwell time was decreased (see Fig. 7(f)), while the sputtering yield was decreased but there was a non-monotonic scan speed dependency (see Fig. 7(g)). Several scan routines have been applied in FIB etching, including serpentine, raster, radial, and spiral.57,123 Hopman et al.123 compared the pros and cons between the raster scan and spiral scan during the etching of “bulk” silicon (Si) and silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrates, and the results showed that raster scanning made thinner interhole sidewalls and the angles were worse than those of spiral scanning on average (see Fig. 7(h) and (i)). For the case of the scan width, Surpi et al.124 studied the sidewall angle and etching depth of trenches with different scan widths on a nickel substrate. The results showed that the trench width had no critical effect on the sidewall angle (see Fig. 7(j)) and the maximum milling depth increased linearly with the trench size (see Fig. 7(k)).
The manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices, however, raised many challenges, because of the technological difficulties induced by FIB etching. The most significant challenge may be the redeposition effect during FIB etching, which seriously affects the sputtering yield and quality of the pattern structures.38 Researchers have made considerable efforts in this area to develop various novel strategies, such as establishing a sputter etching process model,121 controlling the ion beam dwell time23,125–130 and scan path,123,126,131,132 selecting the appropriate auxiliary gas,133 developing new processes (such as the “umbrella” method,51 the composite manufacturing method,94,134–136 and the “sketch and peel” strategy137–139). For example, FIB induced etching (FIBIE), which utilizes chemical assistance, has been demonstrated with several primary ion beams. Precursor gases including XeF2, Cl2, O2, H2O, NH3, Br2, and I2 have been used to chemically aid in material removal. Stanford et al.134,135 compared and contrasted different He+ milling and etching processes of a titanium thin film, including standard He+ sputter milling, in situ laser-assisted He+ milling, FIBIE with XeF2, and pulsed laser-assisted FIBIE (LA-FIBIE), as shown in Fig. 8(a). The results showed that these He+ induced nanopatterning techniques improved the material removal rate, in comparison to standard He+ sputtering. They also demonstrated that competitive ion beam-induced deposition from residual carbonaceous contamination could be thermally mitigated via pulsed laser-assisted He+ milling.94 Additionally, to precisely process hard and brittle materials such as silicon carbide and diamond, a general-purpose technology combining femtosecond laser modification with subsequent ion beam etching was proposed by Liu et al. (see Fig. 8(b)), which could deliver the manufacturing of nano-smooth microlens arrays.136 As shown in Fig. 8(c), the “sketch and peel” processing technology only needs to process the target contour, which can minimize redeposition in FIB etching.137–139 The “sketch and peel” process solved the problem of the low efficiency of FIB etching for nano-particle structures and avoided large-area substrate damage caused by high-energy ion bombardment, especially for focused helium ion beam technology. Remarkably, the novel process is not only suitable for FIB etching, but can also be effectively applied in electron beam lithography, which greatly expands the processing range and application requirements of charged particle beam patterning.140,141
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of (i) a He+ milling process of Ti, (ii) a FIBIE process with XeF2 chemical assistance, and (iii) a laser-assisted FIBIE process. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of a microlens on hard materials by the femtosecond laser followed by IBE. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) The “sketch and peel” process, in which only a narrow trench is required to be milled to obtain a particle by selectively peeling off the majority of the metal film. (d) Mechanism analysis of the “sketch and peel” FIB milling process. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Multilayered structures created at three different process flows by the redeposition of different materials. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (f) Amorphous layer thickness under different ion beam energies. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (g) Patterning method of concave 3D structures on a diamond surface using FIB sputtering and heat treatment. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
It is worth noting that the redeposition effect is not an absolutely harmful phenomenon. For example, although the main purpose of the “sketch and peel” process is to minimize redeposition, FIB etching inevitably overetches the substrate, resulting in a layer of redeposited base material on the sidewalls of the final structure. Therefore, the stripping mechanism of the “sketch and peel” process effectively utilizes the redeposition effect from the opposite perspective (see Fig. 8(d)).137 In addition, Renaud et al.142,143 proposed a novel fabrication method based on the local sputtering of photoresist sidewalls and redeposition effect during ion beam etching (see Fig. 8(e)). This method allows for the manufacture of 3D multi-material nanostructures at the wafer scale in only four process steps. Features of various shapes and profiles can be prepared with sub-100 nm dimensions with unprecedented freedom in material choice.
As with the redeposition effect, amorphous phenomena produced during FIB etching can also deteriorate the dimensional accuracy and properties of nanostructures.144,145 The thickness of the amorphous layer can be effectively reduced by a reduction of the ion beam energy. As shown in Fig. 8(f), the thicknesses of the amorphous layer obtained with ion beam nanofabrication energies of 2 kV and 5 kV in the process of fabricating the TEM sample are 1.4 nm and 4.6 nm, respectively.146 Fortunately, Kawasegi et al.147 cleverly applied the damage characteristics of FIB sputtering materials to the fabrication of complex 3D structures (see Fig. 8(g)).
4.2. FIB irradiation
The interaction between the ion beam and the solid target material changes from etching to explosive boiling when the ion flux reaches a certain critical value, causing ion beam irradiation deformation.29 FIB irradiation technology in this paper focuses on FIB-based deformation, which is usually regarded as a nanofabrication method based on so-called “undesirable” strain and stress drawbacks. As illustrated in Fig. 9(a), when the sample area is exposed to ion irradiation, two kinds of stress are generated simultaneously, namely tensile stress due to the surface sputtering effect and compressive stress due to the ion implantation effect. These two stresses occur simultaneously at a depth of about 20 nm into the gold film (Fig. 9(b) and (c)), and their combination determines the total stress affected by the ion beam.30 Therefore, Liu et al.30 simplified the free-standing gold film in their case into a bilayer model, i.e. the top amorphous layer with tensile stress and the bottom layer with deformation stress. In this simplified model, the suspension structures can be fixed at one end or fixed at both boundaries, which can cause the suspension structures to show upward or downward 3D structures under the topography-guided stress equilibrium (see the schematic diagram in Fig. 9(d)). As shown in Fig. 9(d), the tongue-shaped structure with only one end connected to the gold film curls upward after being scanned by the ion beam, while the artificial mesh structure with all sides connected to the gold film sags downward when the stress balance is reached. By making good use of this “undesirable” residual stress balance induced by FIB irradiation on the independent target material, various 3D shape transformations such as upward buckling, downward bending, complex rotation, and twisting of nanostructures, can be accurately realized.14,148
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the residual stress distribution of a gold nanofilm under global ion beam irradiation. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) and (c) Simulated distributions of (b) gallium ion concentration and (c) vacancy density versus the depth of the nanofilm using SRIM software under FIB irradiation with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of two typical structural deformations when only one or two ends (indicated by the red squares) of the suspended structures are fixed. Tongue-shaped structure connected at one end and an artificial mesh structure connected all around. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) and (f) Local irradiation of the suspended cantilevers under line-scanning along the dashed line with the FIB and global irradiation of the suspended cantilevers under frame-scanning over the suspended area with the FIB. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, AIP Publishing. (g)–(j) Ion beam dosage test. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (k) Schematic diagrams illustrating the steps in the fabrication of spatially oriented 3D nanostructures by FIB irradiation combined with FIB etching. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (l) Ion-beam irradiation-induced folding of in-plane Au nanostructures. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
The scanning strategy of FIB irradiation greatly affects structural deformation, which is usually divided into local line scanning and global scanning. A large number of studies have shown that local line scanning is suitable for the irradiation strain processing of self-supporting films with the characteristics of flexibility, high precision, real-time observation, and dynamic controllability (see Fig. 9(e)).149,150 However, the local line scanning mode does not form the nanowires that are bent toward the incident direction of the ion beam, while global irradiation can achieve controllable and flexible irradiation strains of nanowires (such as Si,151 ZnO,152 and PtSi153) (see Fig. 9(f)). In addition, the process parameters of FIB irradiation, such as the ion beam dose, the acceleration voltage, and the length of the suspended stripes, also influence the structural deformations dramatically.30,148 As shown in Fig. 9(g) and (h), the upward folding angle increases with an increase of the Ga+ beam dose after local irradiation, and the greater the acceleration voltage, the faster the upward folding angle changes in the early stage.30 The same trend can also be found when the strip increases the ion beam dose under global FIB irradiation, and the longer the length of the suspended strip, the more obvious the bending effect, as shown in Fig. 9(i) and (j).30
It should be mentioned that FIB radiation deformation often needs to be combined with FIB etching to give it the processing characteristics of a large area, flexibility, and controllability.154 Actually, FIB irradiation and FIB etching use the same FIB system, but their doses and selected scanning areas are different. Therefore, the two processes can be combined into one through programming, which is more conducive to easily realize online monitoring, adding, and changing functions. Based on this characteristic, Cui et al.148 proposed a 3D nanofabrication process, which was used to construct complex substrate-free 3D plasmonic nanostructures (see Fig. 9(k)). To demonstrate that this method provides such flexibility, they not only revealed that the bending angle was almost linearly proportional to the ion-beam dose, but also presented several types of Au film 3D nanostructures that were readily achieved, including staircase-like structures, a composite U-shape structure, boxes with U-shaped walls and boxes with U-shaped holes on the walls (see Fig. 9(l)). Interestingly, these 3D nanostructures can be sorted into two types from the viewpoint of topological classifications in multibody dynamics, i.e. tree-type folding/bending with the FIB and more advanced FIB-based close-loop nano-kirigami, which have extremely promising applications in the field of photonics.14,30
4.3. FIB deposition
FIB deposition, more precisely called FIB induced deposition (FIBID), is a constructive process technology that initiates and locates chemical vapor deposition (CVD) at a specific position to achieve material addition on the surface of a substrate. That is to say, the FIBID needs to introduce a metal organic gas (inducing gas) in the incident region of the ion beam, which causes the metal organic matter to decompose to form a metal deposit (see Fig. 2(e)). At the same time, the remaining substances produced by the decomposition reaction are usually volatile and can be finally removed from the vacuum chamber by pumping equipment.17 Hence, the equipment setup for FIBID is similar to that for FIBIE, but the precursor gas is different. For example, many types of precursor gases, including WF6/W(CO)6, C7H7F6O2Au, (CH3)3NAlH3, and C9H16Pt, have been used to generate W, Au, Al, and Pt, respectively, to prepare a variety of 3D nanostructures.18
In the past few decades, various 3D nanostructures have been prepared by FIBID due to its advantages of high processing precision, excellent repeatability, and high controllability. Compared with other nano-processing technologies, one advantage of FIBID deposition is that this method can prepare delicate and high aspect ratio 3D nanostructures with excellent mechanical strengths.21 Nevertheless, material deposition in FIBID has two aspects that are particularly noteworthy.18 On one hand, the purity of the deposited material may not be absolute, because organic pollutants and ions of the source species are always retained in the deposited film.155 For instance, when the metal material is deposited by the FIBID method, impurity elements such as C and O in the induced gas and Ga element in the incident ion beam are easily carried into the metal deposit, resulting in the conductivity of the metal structure being lower than that of the homogeneous metal. Researchers proposed some methods to avoid carbon incorporation. For example, the carbon element can be decomposed by the workpiece material heating method in the case of depositing gold and copper, thereby improving the conductivity of the deposited metal. In addition, some carbon-free induction gases such as WF6 can be used to deposit pure W metal. Furthermore, the deposition of conductive and insulating materials using He and Ne not only does not cause Ga+ contamination problems, but also facilitates the fabrication of structures smaller than the Ga+ deposition feature size and effectively avoids proximity effects.156 On the other hand, like FIB etching, sputtering and deposition are performed at the same time, which may affect the efficiency of deposition. However, sputtering on the substrate can be suppressed nearly perfectly during the deposition process by appropriately controlling the parameters (such as scanning, ion beam, and processing).31,58 For example, the successful dissociation of precursor molecules in FIB deposition requires extremely short dwell times, so that large amounts of deposits are not sputtered. In addition, the scanning between two depositions needs to be repeated with a small delay (waiting time), or the beam current below the critical current density is selected to re-concentrate the continuously flowing processing gas on the surface.15
Contrary to the top-down preparation of 3D nanostructures by FIB etching, FIBID can realize the down-top preparation of 3D nanostructures, and these structures are unique in their complex 3D shapes with overhanging features. The key to this technique is that it can deposit features beyond the existing or previously deposited structure below it. For overhanging depositions, there is a clear trade-off between accuracy and cleanliness, on one hand, and processing efficiency, on the other.19 Hence, many researchers have conducted some fundamental experiments to master the rules controlling the process parameters. First, the dwell time is considered to be a key parameter that can control the occurrence of deposition.58 Fu et al.157 used a 207 pA ion beam with a diameter of 25 nm (about 40 A cm−2) to study the relationship between the deposition of W(CO)6 and the dwell time. The experimental results show that if it is necessary to ensure that the process is deposition rather than sputtering, the residence time should be less than 1 μs, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Only in this case is the relationship between the thickness of the deposited film and the dwell time approximately linear (see Fig. 10(b)). Similarly, as to whether deposition or sputtering occurs, the ion current is also decisive (see Fig. 10(c) and (d)). This means that when the current density exceeds 10 A cm−2, deposition changes to material removal.58 In a further analogy, for the ion dose, if it is so high that it exceeds a certain order, the deposition rate will inevitably decrease and even sputter removal will occur. Conversely, if the dose level is too low, deposition will not occur. Hence, if the ions are provided in the same order near a certain number of ions (around 1017 ions in Fig. 10(e)), in this case, the deposition efficiency can show a positive correlation with the increase of the ion dose.158 In addition, the refresh time, which is defined as the time interval for replenishing gas molecules in each scanning cycle, is another important time-related processing parameter that affects deposition efficiency. In theory, an appropriate increase in the refresh time is beneficial to increase the deposition yield, and the deposition yield can reach a saturation value when the refresh time is increased to a certain extent (see Fig. 10(f)).58 However, the research results of Fu et al.157 on tungsten deposition show that as the refresh time increases, the film thickness of tungsten decreases (see Fig. 10(g)), which may be due to the increase in the refresh time reducing the density of gas molecules in the local area. Obviously, this is an experimental phenomenon contrary to conventional results, because it deviates from the original intention of applying a refresh time to supplement gas molecules.
 Fig. 10  (a) Tungsten deposited by the FIB with different dwell times from 0.1 to 2.5 μm, and the same ion dose of 6 nC μm−2; refresh time of 1000 μs; X and Y step sizes of 0.071 and 0.068 μm, respectively; and beam spot size of 25 nm. (b) Dwell time vs. mean film thickness (measured by AFM) under an ion dose of 3 nC μm−2, spot size of 25 nm, and current of 207 pA. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (c) AFM images of a rectangular pattern deposited for different current densities. (d) Deposition yield dependence on the ion-beam current. Dwell time, 0.6 μs. Cycle time, 5 ms. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (e) Film thickness deposited from styrene at 2.2 torr as a function of ion dose. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 1988, AIP Publishing. (f) Deposition rate as a function of cycle time. Current density, 7.8 A cm−2. Dwell time, 0.4 μs. Gas flux was estimated to be 7 × 1016 molecules per cm. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (g) Cycle time (refresh time) vs. mean film thickness (measured by AFM) under an ion dose of 3 nC μm−2, spot size of 25 nm, and current of 207 pA. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (h) and (i) The 3D spiral structure and its array generated by ion beam induced deposition. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the fundamental experiments of process parameters, some studies on the effect of parameters directly targeting 3D nanostructures have also been carried out. For example, in 2014, Esposito et al.159,160 successfully prepared 3D spiral structures (see Fig. 10(h)) by using FIBID. By changing the processing parameters (acceleration voltage, graphics settings, etc.) and material parameters (substrate type, deposit type, etc.), the diameter, pitch, width, number of cycles, etc. of the spiral structures could be modulated, and the 3D spiral structure array could be grown (see Fig. 10(i)).
4.4. FIB implantation
FIB implantation (FIBI) is a robust and well-established FIB nanofabrication technology to modify the properties of the near-surface region of materials by inserting selected ions within a target volume, and the implantation depth can reach an average of 10 nm to 10 μm.16,161 Compared to other surface treatment technologies, such as painting, physical or chemical vapor deposition, modified materials after ion implantation have higher stability, higher geometric accuracy and longer service life, which is beneficial for the mass production of devices and integrated circuits.162,163
Although ion implantation cannot directly realize the processing of 3D nanostructures, it has become an efficient and convenient way to manufacture 3D nanostructures when combined with etching processes. For example, as early as the end of the 20th century, a combination of FIB implantation and dry or wet etching was used to prepare a nanoscale structure on a Si (100) substrate.17,19 Utilizing a similar procedure to that described above, namely, implantation combined with etching, Xu et al.164 proposed a flexible and efficient nanofabrication technology that combined FIB implantation and FIB XeF2 gas-assisted etching (FIB-GAE). As shown in Fig. 11(a), if the ion dose is higher than 1.4 × 1017 ions cm−2 in Si, the ion-doped Si layer can be used as an etch stop or a mask in subsequent FIB-GAE for nanostructure fabrication. The FIB-GAE can locally etch the non-irradiated area without removing the implanted region to create nanostructures of different shapes.164,165 Compared with FIB milling methods, this technology has better form accuracy and a larger amplitude value, because the redeposition effect is smaller than in the previous process (see Fig. 11(b)). Additionally, the buried graphite layer can be produced by high dose implantation of several hundred keV or MeV into a single crystal of diamond and subsequent annealing. Hence, in this process, the graphite layer can be selectively etched by a wet acid solution or by heating in an oxygen environment. Based on this method, Olivero et al.166 proposed a process that could produce free-standing 3D structures for MEMS and photonics applications (see Fig. 11(c)–(f)).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic images showing the structures prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent FIB XeF2-assisted etching (FIB-GAE). (b) Illustration of redeposited material removal during the FIB-GAE process. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (c)–(f) Microfabrication process of a cantilever structure in single-crystal diamond: (c) MeV ion implantation (optical image of the 100 μm × 100 μm implanted regions) is followed by (d) FIB-micromachining (scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the patterned trenches), thermal annealing, and (e) chemical etching (optical image of the structure after subsequent etching steps progressively undercutting the cantilever). (f) A SEM image of the final cantilever structure. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic of the two-step ion implantation and pulsed laser annealing graphitization process. (h) SEM (scale bar = 10 μm) of a PLA spot indicating graphitization. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (i) Patterning method on a diamond surface using FIB and DUV irradiation. (j) AFM image of the line structures prepared by FIB and DUV irradiation. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Nano-indentation surface topology: (k) normal silicon and (l) implanted silicon. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (m) Diamond cutting of micro-structures on brittle material assisted by multi-implantation. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In addition to recombining ion implantation and subsequent etching processes, the recombination of ion implantation and other technologies has also been greatly developed. For example, Lemaitre et al.167 presented a nanoscale patterning process to produce few-layer graphene structures on SiC by ion implantation and pulsed laser annealing (see Fig. 11(g) and (h)). Their research confirmed that ion implantation combined with pulsed laser annealing offered an approach for the rapid synthesis of few-layer graphene and provided great flexibility for the study of the mechanisms of SiC graphitization. Kawasegi et al.147 presented a texture fabrication process of nanopolycrystalline diamond using a combination of FIB implantation and heat treatment. Shortly after, this group also demonstrated another method for the patterning of the surface of single crystalline diamond at the sub-micrometer scale with a combination of FIB implantation and deep ultraviolet laser irradiation (see Fig. 11(i) and (j)).168 Both composite processes could selectively machine the surface area of diamond implanted by the FIB, while the non-FIB-implanted area was hardly machined. Recently, Fang et al.169 proposed a novel method to modify the surface properties of single crystal silicon by ion implantation and used it for subsequent diamond cutting, which provided the possibility of prolonging the tool's life, reducing surface fracturing and increase the efficiency of the silicon machining process. Observation of the surface morphology after nano-indentation by SEM (see Fig. 11(k) and (l)) found that, after ion implantation, the pressure mark exhibited a smoother surface and the indenting area showed less brittle cracking after indentation. Nevertheless, this is difficult for the single-implantation method previously studied, because a modified layer that is thick enough to be processed is always preferred. To solve this problem, Wang et al.170 proposed a multi-implantation process used for diamond cutting to prepare a micro-structure array on silicon (see Fig. 11(m)). The novel method used in their study showed distinct flexibility in the design of process parameters, as well as an obvious improvement in the cutting efficiency.
5. Typical applications of FIB nanofabrication
FIB nanofabrication has become an important and widely used technical tool in the manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices. Based on the analysis of the above mechanisms, instruments, and processes, we will systematically summarize the specific application fields and typical nanostructures and devices of various process technologies reported in recent years (see Table 1), and then conduct a detailed analysis. It should be noted that the fabrication of any kinds of 3D nanostructures and devices may involve multiple FIB nanofabrication processes simultaneously in practical applications.
Table 1 A summary of FIB nanofabrication applications for the manufacture of 3D nanostructures and devices




FIB nano-processes
Application fields
Typical components




Etching
IBSE: LMIS
Semiconductor devices and large-scale integrated circuits, sample detection, high-power solid-state laser, renewable energy, nano-optics, single molecule detection, high-resolution X-ray imaging, biosensing, nano-electromechanical, holographic, water desalination, DNA sequencing
Optical mask,5,49 transistor,49 chip,171 TEM samples,104,172–177 crack detection,178 micro-sensor,179 optical component,48,180 digital micromirror,16,26 ultra-thin optical polarization converters,16,26 microdiffractive optical element,16,26,181 Fresnel zone plates,182 nano-photomasks,131 plasmonic structures,75,137,183 plasmonic devices,71,97 nano-kirigami,30 microlens arrays,184 nanostep arrays,185,186 freeform surfaces,129,130 2D materials nanobelt,135 microfluidic component,187 nanowires and nanorods,188–190 nanosensors,191 nanoantennas,84,192,193 nanorod electrodes,192,194,195 nanogap electrodes,194 nanopore electrode arrays,196,197 Ti electrode arrays,198 nano-scale Ti honeycombs,199 nano-cutting tools,200 spintronic devices,127 engineered microsphere,201–203 diamond hemispherical array,204 mid-infrared device,205 chiral metamaterials,206–211 nanoporous graphene membranes.212,213


IBSE: GFIS
Sample detection, integrated circuits, MEMS, nano-optics, optoelectronic devices, molecular devices, Raman spectroscopy, electrochemical, biomedical, single molecule detection, and micro-energy
Gold electrodes,214 monolayer graphene,94,215 plasmonic nanoantennas,84 plasmonic nanoslit cavities,216 plasmonic nanodimer,139 h-BN (hexagonal boron nitride) grating,217 third-generation DNA sequencers,218 functional graphene nanoconductors,219 microlens arrays,136,220 advanced extreme ultraviolet lithography mask repair,70 superconducting tunnel junctions.221


RIBE
Electrical, optical, optoelectronic platform, magnetic, medical diagnosis, MEMS, solar–thermal energy harvesting system, micro-energy, bio-chip manufacturing
Resonator,34 Fresnel zone plates,3,222,223 silicon tip array,224 polystyrene nano-cone array,225 chiral structure array,226 cross nano-aluminum hole pixel array,227 2D cylindrical cavity array,228 multifeature shaped 3-dimensional nanostructures,229 silicon nano-line structure,230 ordered nano-textured surface,231–233 surface optical functional texture of crystalline silicon cells,234–236 LSO photonic crystal,237 micro-motor,5 multipolar modulated metasurfaces filter device,107 high-density magnetic storage device,179 terahertz segmented slow-wave structure,103,238–240 single crystal diamond micro-disk resonators,241 nanoelectrodes,242 nonlinear nano-resonant dielectric metasurfaces,243 hydrophilic–hydrophobic femtolitre-well arrays,244 nano-channels,245 nanotubes.246


PE
Electrical, magnetic, microfluidic, optical, optoelectronic, MEMS, quantum technologies and biotechnology, micro-energy, water desalination
Air bridge microstructure,247 microcantilever,248 graphene nanopore and nanobelt,249–251 microfluidic device (such as microfluidic channel, micropump, microvalve, microheater and microsensor),252,253 metalens,254 ultra-aspect ratio GaN microstructure,109 perovskite liquid crystal display devices,255 subwavelength nanostructures,256 diamond lenses and diamond bridge shape,257,258 diamond nanoimprint die,104 diamond nanopillar matrix,105 graphene-based membranes,259 MoS2 inverter.260


Irradiation


Nanoelectronics, plasmonics, nanophotonics, optomechanics, MEMS/NEMS, architecture, performance-specific devices (such as mechanical, biological and optical), DNA nano-cutting and folding, on-chip devices and integration
SRR array,148,261 EOT-SRR,262,263 3D pinwheel structure,30,264 binary grating,150 superconducting nanowires,265 Ni film polygon in a 3D polyhedral structure,149 transparent SiNx film,266 metamaterial optics, biological devices, optoelectronic devices and sensors, vibrational molecular spectroscopy, high efficiency fuel cells, and nano-scale plasmonic devices.2,267–269


Deposition


Integrated circuit, nano-optics, nanoplasmonics, electronics, nanosensing, microelectrode system, microfluidics, semiconductors and nanosuperconductor, complex surface structures
Optical masks, X-ray masks, and optical phase masks, ohmic contact layer, connection line,26,49,78 diffraction grating,270 carbon nanotubes, nanowires, DNA molecular chains, graphene,5,63,190,271 nanochannels and hollow nanowires,272–277 micro-hemispheres, parabolic and sinusoidal microstructures, nanohelical structures, miniature Fresnel lenses, nano-biological experimental networks,49,200,278,279 3D flying tungsten structure,280 nanomechanical switch,281 field electron emitter,282 chiral plasmonic nanohelices,159 nano-scale pickup loop,283 nanopillars and nanocantilever,279 Pt-deposited protection layer,49 bio-nanotools,284,285 nano-rotor,286 paired platinum wires.156


Implantation


Nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, plasmonics, sensing, biomedical, circuitry, semiconductor, surface modification, nano-cutting, device performance regulation, size analysis, and new device production
Nanocantilevers, nanocups, and nanogroove arrays,17,19 sinusoidal structures, nano-gratings, and nano-electrode,164 optical waveguide,166 nanochannels, freestanding bridges and cantilevers,287 resonators,288 suspended beams,289 silicon-based nanostructures,290 micro-pyramid anti-reflection layer,291 micro-pillar array,170 InGaZnO thin-film transistors,292 thin circuitry.293




5.1. Applications of FIB etching
Since the birth of IBSE, it has been widely used to prepare various 3D nanostructures and devices. For liquid metal ion sources, the most well-known conventional applications include pattern etching of integrated circuits, stripping and repair of excess chromium defects in optical masks, and the preparation of electron microscope samples (see Fig. 12(a)–(c)).5,49,104,172–177 For instance, multiple spots on the ground surfaces were selected to be milled via the FIB, where subsurface cracks were exposed and captured through SEM.178 This detection method has a higher detection accuracy than traditional grinding and polishing methods.294–297 With the development of FIB etching, the spatial resolution of IBSE process is gradually better than 10 nm or even 5 nm, which strongly promotes the applications of low-dimensional and extremely small sized components in nano-optics,298,299 nano-medicine,195,300–302 and nano-electromechanical,3,57,200,298,303–308 as shown in Fig. 12(d)–(g). Nano-scale pores can also be easily prepared in 2D materials or nanofilms using IBSE, and these 2D materials with nanopores have significant application prospects in membrane separation technologies, including gas separation, water desalination, and DNA sequencing.163,212,309,310
 Fig. 12  Typical and new applications of ion beam etching. (a) Debugged part of an integrated circuit chip correction by the FIB. (b) Illustration and repair of optical mask defects. (c) TEM sample prepared by controlled FIB sputtering. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Top SEM image of the prepared 3D gap-plasmon antenna milled by a Ga-ion beam. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (e) AFM 3D nanostep array image of the FIB pattern. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2007, ResearchGate GmbH. (f) SEM image of nanogap electrode fabrication through the break of a single GB junction milled by the FIB. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (g) SEM image of the FIB prepared hemi-spherical micro-tool. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2010, The Optical Society. (h) SEM images of the prepared metasurface hologram. Reproduced with permission.311 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i)–(k) Original 2D object compared with simulated and experimentally reconstructed color holographic images. Reproduced with permission.311 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Original object of “RGB” colored letters. (j) Simulated color holographic images. The central desired images are well separated spatially from the side images. (k) Experimentally reconstructed color holographic images from the prepared metasurface hologram shown in (h), with unwanted side images automatically filtered out by an objective lens with a certain NA. (l) Plasmonic bullseye structure: SEM/FIB images of the bullseye/nanopore structures, respectively, milled into the gold side of the free-standing membrane. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (m) Experimental setup schematic showing laser irradiation and electrical detection. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (n) Focused helium ion beam creating a Josephson junction in the YBCO film. The red lines indicate where the helium ion beam was scanned to create the junctions. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (o) SEM image of the prepared nano-cone structure, and the inset shows an enlarged view of the nanocone, and photographs of 35 nm-thick tungsten deposited on the photoresist coated silicon substrate (left) and nanocone structure (right). Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (p) SEM image of the multi-dielectric nanostructure and the structural design of the multi-dielectric metasurface under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (q) A typical cross-sectional SEM image of an array of >10 μm tall micropillars obtained after 60 min of etching. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, American Vacuum Society. (r) Schematic view of the c-Si metalens and the portion of the metalens that shows the profile and sidewalls of the nanobricks. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, IBSE has obvious advantages in realizing complex 3D structures, especially in the processing of 3D curved surfaces and high aspect ratio structures. For example, Jiang et al.204 used IBSE to etch a single crystal diamond hemispherical array with a smooth surface radius of 5 μm, and they found that the single-photon luminous efficiency was tenfold enhanced. Hou et al.205 used IBSE to accurately etch 3D structures at different angles on the output cavity surface of the mid-infrared device. It could be used in the development of chips with super-radiation and broad-spectrum light sources in the mid-infrared band. Yang et al.311 reported the design and realization of ultrathin plasmonic metasurface holograms made of subwavelength nanoslits using the IBSE process for reconstructing both 2D and 3D full-color holographic images. Fig. 12(h) and (i) show SEM images of the prepared meta-hologram for “RGB (red green blue)” colored letters and the reconstructed color holographic images, respectively. Notably, the prepared meta-hologram has a compact microscopic size of less than 100 μm. The subwavelength features of the nanoslits ensure high spatial resolution for the hologram even with the microscopic size, which is significant for many holographic applications such as high-density imaging processing and big data storage holographic images. Based on this process, they used the inclined etching function to realize the fabrication of chiral metamaterials with different shapes (namely a split ring resonator, L-shaped, and rectangular) on the Au film.206–211 Their research results are beneficial for promoting various holographic applications.
On the other hand, the IBSE based on a gaseous ion source has demonstrated a superior processing capability to that of the LMIS etching technology.1,52,53,312 This technology not only has significant applications in traditional fields, but also is favored in the fields of nano-optics, biomedical and micro-energy, as shown in Fig. 12(l)–(n). For example, Crick et al.313 milled a nanopore with a diameter of 20 nm using a He ion beam, and they believed that the utilization of He ions was essential for delivering these small features on the delicate free-standing membranes. As shown in Fig. 12(l) and (m), the nanopore is surrounded by a plasmonic bullseye structure and provides targeted and controllable heating via laser irradiation.313 The novel device architecture was investigated using multiwavelength laser heating experiments and individual DNA molecules were detected under heating conditions. Cybart et al.221 demonstrated that Josephson superconducting tunnel junctions were created by using a 500-pm-diameter focused beam of helium ions to directly write tunnel barriers into YBa2Cu3O7−δ (YBCO) thin films, as shown in Fig. 12(n). This technology provides a reliable and reproducible pathway for scaling up quantum-mechanical circuits operating at liquid–nitrogen temperatures, as well as an avenue to conduct novel planar superconducting tunnelling studies for basic science. It is worth noting that the sputter yield of this IBSE based on GFIS is low and the maximum beam current of the available equipment is limited. This is undesirable for many applications and limits the effectiveness of the FIB as a nanofabrication candidate.134
RIBE and PE processes are also widely used in electrical, optical, magnetic, micro-energy, and other fields. For example, Wang et al.225 reported a broadband tungsten absorber based on a nanocone metallic resonant structure in the photoresist prepared by RIE (see Fig. 12(o)). In their experimental demonstration, the prepared absorber had more than 90% average absorption efficiency and showed superior angular tolerance over the entire visible and near-infrared spectral region. Yang et al.107 proposed a new design strategy for multipolar-modulated metasurfaces with multi-dielectric stacked layers to realize the deep modulation of multipolar modes, and the multi-layer nanoblocks were etched by inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etching using CHF3 gas (see Fig. 12(p)). They anticipated that the proposed multipolar-modulated metasurfaces would be promising for expanding the color range for high-end and advanced display applications. Harrison et al.109 investigated ultra-deep (≥5 μm) electron cyclotron resonance plasma etching of GaN micropillars (see Fig. 12(q)). Their results provide a promising route for the fabrication of ultra-deep GaN microstructures for use in electronic and optoelectronic device applications. Liang et al.254 introduced and demonstrated a metalens with a high NA and high transmission in the visible range, and a patterned sample of the metalens was etched in a plasma tool with HBr chemistry (see Fig. 12(r)). Their research is expected to push metasurfaces into practical applications such as high resolution, low-cost confocal microscopy, and achromatic lenses.
5.2. Applications of FIB irradiation
Because FIB irradiation technology can apply stress at fixed points quantitatively and excite the deformation from two-dimensional patterns to 3D structures, it greatly enriches and expands the types of structures that can be processed at the microscopic scale. Hence, the technology can build up novel platforms for versatile functional nanostructures and be helpful for establishing new areas in plasmonics, nanophotonics, optomechanics, MEMS/NEMS, etc.14 Cui et al.148 used FIB irradiation-induced folding to prepare a 3D U-shaped SRR array that was composed of a vertical split ring resonator (SRR) along one edge of the planar metallic hole (see Fig. 13(a)–(c)). These 3D nanostructures exhibited clear Fano-type asymmetric line shapes at both low and high frequencies under unconventional excitation (see Fig. 13(d)), and these results were further confirmed by numerical simulations using a 3D FDTD method (see Fig. 13(e)). Afterwards, Liu et al.262 also designed and prepared a structure (extraordinary optical transmission-split ring resonator, EOT-SRR) based on FIB irradiation deformation (see Fig. 13(f) and (g)). They successfully observed prominent Fano resonances and revealed their physical origin, and then demonstrated the advantages of 3D conductive coupling over traditional capacity coupling in plasmonic systems. Interestingly, the use of vertical SRRs can introduce a Fano resonance similar to that of vertical plates (see Fig. 13(h) and (i)). More importantly, by breaking the symmetry of the EOT-SRR structure, they obtained triple Fano resonances in an asymmetric SRR structure (EOT-aSRR), as shown in Fig. 13(j)–(m).263 The feature of this structure is that the wavelength of the corresponding Fano resonance can be tuned by changing the height of one arm of the aSRR structure. As a result, a strong anti-crossing phenomenon, which originates from the strong coupling between Fano resonances, is clearly observed. Moreover, Yang et al.261 prepared a terahertz metamaterial composed of a mirror symmetry-breaking double-split resonant ring array (see Fig. 13(n)–(p)), which achieved multiple ultra-high quality factor resonance responses.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the MH-VSRR structure. (b) and (c) SEM images of the prepared MH-VSRRs. (d) As-measured transmission spectra of the MH-VSRRs shown in (c) under normal incidence with the electric field polarized along the x- and y-directions, respectively. (e) Simulated transmission spectra of the MH-VSRRs corresponding to (d). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the unit cell of a 3D MM. Side-view SEM images of the prepared 3D MMs with (g) vertical SRRs and (h) vertical plates. (i) Measured transmission spectra of the structures in (f) and (g) under y-polarized light excitation. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (j) Schematic of the fabrication process with a home-developed ion-beam irradiation-induced folding technique. (k) Side-view SEM image of the prepared 3D structure. Scale bar: 2 μm. (l) Side-view SEM images of the prepared SRR. The scale bar is 1 μm. (m) Measured transmission spectra of the prepared structure with HArm1 = 1.2 μm and different HArm2 as noted. Each spectrum from bottom to top is vertically shifted by one unit compared to that below it. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (n)–(p) Design and preparation of 3D toroidal metamaterials, as well as the toroidal responses of the 3D metamaterial. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (q)–(v) Giant optical chirality. SEM images of (q) 2D and (r) 3D pinwheel arrays with a periodicity of 1.45 mm. The height of the 3D pinwheels is about 380 nm. (s) Top-view SEM images of LH and RH 3D pinwheel arrays. The scale bar is 1 μm. (t) Measured CD in transmission versus wavelength for 2D LH, 3D LH, and 3D RH pinwheels. a.u., arbitrary units. (u) Measured (circular points) and calculated (solid lines) linear polarization rotation angle (θ) versus wavelength for 3D and 2D LH pinwheels. (v) Polar plot of experimental transmission versus detection polarization angle at specific wavelengths under x-polarized incidence for the 3D LH pinwheels. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (w) Top-view and side-view SEM images of a circular grating with a radiation separation of Δr = 1.45 μm. (x) CCD camera images of transmitted light with np, xp, and yp detection under x-polarized incidence at wavelengths of 1.45, 1.55, and 1.68 μm, respectively. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, AIP Publishing. (y) Free-space tungsten nanostructures formed based on FIB-grown tungsten nanowires. The scale bar is 1 μm. (z) The temperature-dependent normalized resistivity of a free-space tungsten nanostructure prepared by FIB-induced deformation of FIB-grown tungsten nanopillars (red triangle) and that of the as-deposited nanopillar without deformation (black circle). The inset shows the SEM side view image of the corresponding nanostructure. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. 
Based on the characteristics of a global irradiation based close-loop nano-kirigami, more complex structures and more unique applications are easily available. For example, Liu et al.30 designed and prepared an exotic 3D pinwheel structure with exotic twisting and rotation geometric features (see Fig. 13(q)–(s)). The induced electric moment and magnetic moment are parallel or antiparallel in structures with different handedness, which induce giant optical chiral responses (see Fig. 13(t)–(v)). Consequently, the 3D pinwheels exhibit strong circular birefringence, which is equivalent to 310000° mm−1 (in units of polarization rotation per unit thickness) at 1.95 μm, and is much larger than the chiral metamaterials and planar structures reported in the literature.264 A direct application of polarization rotation is to build ultra-thin polarization conversion devices. Subsequently, considering the special phase difference of cross-polarized transmission between left-handed (LH) and right-handed (RH) 3D pinwheel structures, a binary grating is formed through alternately patterning pinwheels with different handedness (see Fig. 13(w)).150Fig. 13(x) shows the experimental results of circular binary gratings at different wavelengths and receiving polarization. Benefitting from the intrinsic and uniaxial property of the pinwheels, the binary grating can work on arbitrary orientation angles and form an ultrathin radial diffraction grating. Furthermore, nano-kirigami technology based on FIB irradiation deformation has been developed in many areas in combination with the tremendous advances in contemporary materials and manufacturing, including solar windsurfing folding technology for outer space vehicles, MEMS/NEMS, deformation architecture, performance-specific devices (such as mechanical, biological and optical), and even DNA nano-cutting and folding technology.30
In addition to the significant applications of 3D nanostructures composed of nanoscale surfaces based on FIB irradiation deformation, 3D nanostructures assembled from nanowires also have special applications. For example, in 2012, Cui et al.265 used FIB irradiation to further develop a processing method that could freely control the spacing of self-supporting superconducting nanowires, as shown in Fig. 13(y). Meanwhile, they achieved superconducting properties of a superconducting coil at low temperature (its superconducting transition temperature is 5.1 K) and confirmed that FIB irradiation did not change the low temperature conductivity of the nanowire (see Fig. 13(z)). Such structures can be integrated with conventional superconducting quantum interference devices to detect magnetic fields both parallel and normal to the substrate, and the integrated structures have excellent application potential in the areas of on-chip devices and integration.
5.3. Applications of FIB deposition
FIB deposition has the function of depositing metal films, alloy films, and compound films; this has significant applications in integrated circuit fabrication.23,26,49,78 For example, metal defects in optical masks can be repaired by the direct deposition of metals such as Pt, W, and Au. Fig. 14(a) shows the repair of a 3D microstructure to bridge the missing lines of an integrated circuit. Based on the similarity of patterns, Sadki et al.314 found that deposits produced by FIB deposition under the condition of tungsten carboxyl gas were superconducting, and the critical temperature of the wire was 5.2 K (see Fig. 14(b) and (c)). Furthermore, electrical and mechanical properties such as resistivity, the Young's modulus, and resonant frequency can be investigated for certain functional deposited structures.18
 Fig. 14  Various nanostructures and devices prepared by FIB deposition. (a) IC chip modification by FIB deposition. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a superconducting wire, synthesized by IBID, in a four-point contact configuration for transport measurements. Its dimensions are 10 μm, 300, and 120 nm, in length, width, and thickness, respectively. The scale bar is 2 μm. (c) Resistivity versus temperature for magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the superconducting wire from 0 to 5 Tesla. Reproduced with permission.314 Copyright 2004, AIP Publishing. (d) Diffraction grating formed by Pt wires grown by FIBID on polycarbonate (PC) substrates and the diffraction pattern in transmission mode created by such a grating. Reproduced with permission.270 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Vertical growth of a WC hollow nanowire using a He+ FIB focused to ∼1 nm and the HR (S)TEM image of a cross-sectional view of the WC nanowire. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of the single 3D flying tungsten structure. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing. (g) Scanning ion microscopy (SIM) micrograph of inductance, resistance, and capacitor structures. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2004, American Vacuum Society. (h) SEM image of a field electron emitter with a DLC tip as the cold cathode prepared on a glass capillary. Reproduced with permission.282 Copyright 2006, IOP Publishing. (i) Array of 20 × 20 3D chiral plasmonic nanohelices. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (j) SEM image of the freestanding tungsten pickup loop. Reproduced with permission.283 Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. (k) A nanocantilever of carbon made by the FIB after coating the inside portion with Pt through scattered ion-induced deposition. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (l) SIM image of a nano-net holding three microspheres after capture. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (m) SEM image of a cell wall cutting tool (CWCT) prepared by FIB-CVD. Reproduced with permission.285 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (n) 3D nano-rotor fabrication by focused-ion-beam chemical-vapor-deposition. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. 
In addition to applications in the traditional integrated circuit and electromechanical industries, FIB deposition has the following significant applications. Firstly, indium tin oxide (ITO) film produced by the method is widely applied in the field of displays, nano-optics, flexible electronics, and nanosensing.5,49,270Fig. 14(d) shows a diffraction grating pattern prepared on a transparent polycarbonate substrate by FIBID.270 Secondly, a microelectrode system prepared by this technology is used to measure various properties of carbon nanotubes, nanowires, DNA molecular chains, and graphene.5,190,271 Thirdly, nanochannels and hollow nanowires produced by this process have novel applications in the fields of microfluidics, semiconductors, and nanosuperconductors.272–277 For example, the nanochannels not only achieve high-sensitivity detection of biomolecules and high-efficiency photoelectric conversion of solar cells, but can also be used to study basic properties such as transportability, fluidity, and mutual reaction of various molecules in a limited space. The 3D superconducting hollow nanowires have great potential applications in nanoelectronics and quantum computing (see Fig. 14(e)).277
Note that besides FIB etching, FIB deposition might also be used to produce or alter complex surface structures with high flexibility and nano-resolution (see Fig. 14(f)–(n)).49,156,159,279–286,315 For example, FIBID is successfully employed for the realization of nanohelices showing a large circular dichroism factor in the near infrared spectral region (see Fig. 14(i)).159 This approach allows nanosystems of any shape and size to be realized by a single technological step with highly precise spatial localization directly on a substrate and control of the 3D evolution of planar structures.
5.4. Applications of FIB implantation
In the field of surface modification processing, it is possible to change the mechanical properties and etching resistance of the material by implanting ions to realize selective processing and the construction of a 3D structure. At the end of the 20th century, FIB implantation and dry or wet etching combined nanofabrication technology was able to stably produce various 3D nanostructures and devices, such as nanocantilevers, nanocups, and nanogroove arrays.17,19 Fang et al.164 used FIB implantation and subsequent FIB-GAE to create different micro/nano-structures, such as sinusoidal structures, nano-gratings, and nano-electrode (see Fig. 15(a)–(d)). Olivero et al.166 used the FIB assisted lift-off technique to demonstrate, for the first time, an optical waveguide through a single crystal diamond structure, as shown is Fig. 15(e)–(i). This method also has great potential in the production of microresonators, beams for integration in MEMS with waveguide sensing, and whole classes of new high-performance devices. In the report of Sievilä et al.,287 patterned Ga implantation by a FIB was used to create a mask for wet etching on silicon. This method was used to generate various types of 3D nanostructures, including nanochannels separated by thin vertical sidewalls with aspect ratios up to 1:30, ultra-narrow (approx. 25 nm) freestanding bridges and cantilevers, and gratings with a resolution of 20 lines μm−1 (see Fig. 15(j)–(n)). More recently, Llobet et al.288 presented the fabrication of silicon nanowire (SiNW) mechanical resonators by a resistless process based on FIB local gallium implantation, selective silicon etching, and diffusive boron doping. Suspended, doubly clamped SiNWs prepared by this process present good electrical conductivity, which enables the electrical read-out of the SiNW's oscillation (see Fig. 15(o) and (p)).
 Fig. 15  (a) Micro-sinusoidal structure pattern prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent XeF2 gas-assisted etching. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 50 pA and 120 s for each sine structure, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 10 kV, 23 pA and 15 s. (b) Nano-gratings prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent FIB-GAE. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 40 s, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 2 s. (c) and (d) Nano-electrode made by FIB implantation and subsequent XeF2 gas-assisted etching. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 210 s, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 8 s. The added nanowire in image (d) is Pt nanowire resulting from FIB deposition. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (e) SEM image of a micrometer-scale bridge structure machined in single-crystal diamond; the ∼400 nm thick gap below the freestanding bridge is visible. (f)–(i) Schematics of (f) the input/output light-collection system and (g) coupling to the waveguide structure; (h) optical images of the incoming and outgoing 532 nm laser light between pairs of 45° mirrors facing each other in the bulk and (i) coupled through the bridge structure. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. Grating structures on 〈100〉 silicon: (j) cross section of a varying period of 210–245 nm and (k) cross section of a constant period of 100 nm. (l) A series of freestanding cantilevers on 〈100〉 Si substrate. (m) A series of 2 μm long freestanding bridges. The widths range from 25 to 145 nm. (n) Nanochannels separated by vertical sidewalls on the 〈100〉 Si substrate. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (o) A SEM image of a suspended, doubly clamped silicon nanowire mechanical resonator prepared by FIB implantation, wet chemical etching and a high temperature annealing/doping process. (p) Electrical measurement of the mechanical response of the silicon nanowire using a down-mixing method based on frequency modulation. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (q) A SEM image of 3-layer structures. (r) A SEM image of lines of widths as small as 33 nm, patterned in a deposited layer. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (s) A SEM image of blazed gratings with an altered angle of slope across the structure; the parameters are period 300 nm and height 70 nm. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.290 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (t) An optical micrograph of a standard WSe2 FET device and transfer curves for exposed FETs with V DS = −1.1 V. The scale bar is 10 μm. (u) Transfer curves for exposed FETs with V DS = −1.1 V. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (v) A SEM image of a subwavelength antireflective MP grating prepared on GaP crystals. (w) THz output power as a function of pump power from a 3 mm GaP crystal generated from areas with and without AR gratings (Λ = 60 μm, θ = 45° and 55.5°) on the exit surface. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2013, Optical Society of America. 3D measurement (x) and topology in detail (y) of the machined structures. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Additionally, in the case of combination of ion implantation and other processing technologies, there are also many examples of 3D nanostructures and devices being manufactured. For example, based on alternating steps of CVD of silicon and local implantation of gallium ions by FIB writing, Fischer et al.289 reported a method for additive layer-by-layer fabrication of arbitrarily shaped 3D silicon micro/nanostructures and prepared 3D structures made of two and three silicon layers, including suspended beams that were 40 nm thick, 500 nm wide, and 4 μm long, and patterned lines that were 33 nm wide (see Fig. 15(q) and (r)). Erdmanis et al.290 reported on the applicability of FIB implantation for fine grayscale lithography, which yielded surface profiles that were customized at the nanoscale for silicon-based nanostructures (see Fig. 15(s)). These nanostructures are of great importance for nanophotonics, plasmonics, sensing, micro- and nanofluidics, and biomedical applications. Stanford et al.293 used a focused He+ beam to introduce defects into single layer WSe2 and found that a dose of 1 × 1016 He+ cm−2 induced metallic-like behavior in WSe2 with transport properties independent of the gate voltage (see Fig. 15(t) and (u)). Their results demonstrated a strategy for generating atomically thin circuitry and showed the potential for large scale processing via standard ion implantation or plasma exposure.
More interestingly, Fang et al.169,170,291 carried out a large number of optical crystal material ion implantation nano-cutting experiments and found that the brittle-plastic transition thickness of an optical crystal material was increased to varying degrees after ion implantation (some materials even increased more than ten times), thus verifying the universality of the ion implantation nano-cutting method. They successfully applied this technology to the processing of a GaP crystal micro-pyramid anti-reflection layer to enhance the output efficiency of terahertz waves, and finally increased the output efficiency of THz waves by 16% (see Fig. 15(v) and (w)).291 Then, to solve the shortcomings of the single-implantation method, their group used a multi-implantation process combined with diamond cutting to successfully fabricate a micro-pillar array, and a ductile surface and sharp pillar edges without fracturing were achieved (see Fig. 15(x) and (y)).170
6. Summary and outlook
In this paper, we have presented a general overview of the research status of the mechanism, equipment, and process of FIB nanofabrication and its typical applications in the manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices. The physical and chemical nature of FIB nanofabrication based on ion–solid interactions was introduced, and these physical and chemical phenomena were linked with their functions in the fabrication process. We then reviewed the various nanoscale effects, differences compared with the electron beam, and Monte Carlo simulation tools to understand the underlying mechanism of FIB nanofabrication. In addition, we summarized the development history of FIB nanofabrication instruments and focused on analyzing the development of advanced ion sources, as well as briefly reviewing other accessories, including ion optics, a substrate stage, and a vacuum chamber. Furthermore, we have extensively discussed FIB etching, irradiation, deposition, and implantation processes and obtained a series of universal laws. In particular, many newly developed FIB nanofabrication methods are analyzed. Correspondingly, different FIB nanofabrication processes have demonstrated their powerful manufacturing capabilities for 3D nanostructures and devices, which are widely used in the fields of electricity, optics, acoustics, magnetism, and surface engineering.
Compared with many other nano-manufacturing technologies, although FIB nanofabrication technology has numerous unparalleled advantages in the manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices (see the Introduction), it also has obvious disadvantages, such as requiring expensive processing equipment and a harsh processing environment (it needs to be carried out under vacuum conditions), professional operators, low processing efficiency, high total manufacturing cost, and limited substrate size (not suitable for large-area device production), which seriously restrict the application, expansion and mass production of this technology in 3D nanostructures and devices. Therefore, research on the mechanisms, instruments, processes, and applications of FIB nanofabrication technology in 3D nanostructures and devices still needs the investment of sufficient manpower, material resources, and financial resources. Due to the interdisciplinary complexity and extremes of manufacturing factors, however, FIB nanofabrication has many problems to be solved for many aspects, such as mechanism exploration, equipment development, process optimization, and application extension, before its widespread application. Firstly, with the development of FIB nanofabrication and the emergence of some new FIB combination technologies, the FIB nanofabrication mechanism will become extremely complicated. At the same time, with the significant application of FIB nanofabrication and related technologies in the fields of biomedical, new energy, advanced information, quantum science, etc., solid materials under the action of the FIB will result in a series of new phenomena, new laws, and new properties.163 Therefore, basic research to strengthen the mechanism of FIB nanofabrication needs to seek new breakthroughs. Secondly, to maintain the high resolution, high controllability, and high flexibility of nanostructures and devices, the development of FIB nanofabrication equipment will face great challenges, including the development of high-performance ion sources, optimization of the performance of the ion optical column structure, and the improvement of workbench and chemical feeding devices. Thirdly, based on the characteristics of “top-down” and “bottom-up” processes, FIB nanofabrication could be combined with laser beam, chemical growth, and physical self-assembly technology to build a composite manufacturing process platform, including multi-energy, multi-method, multi-material, and multi-structure factors, which would provide an efficient and reliable nanofabrication method for complex, cross-scale, large and high aspect ratio 3D nanostructures and devices. Finally, with the increasing application of 3D nanostructures and devices in the major fields of science and engineering, emerging industries, and military and civilian needs, FIB nanofabrication still has great research potential, and its huge market and application value will gradually become prominent.
In summary, in modern nanofabrication technologies, FIB technologies have revolutionized the research, development, and production of nanostructures and devices.25 With the development of nanoscience and technology, however, people are increasingly demanding the integration, miniaturization, and lighter weight of functional nanostructures and devices, which is bound to pose increasingly severe challenges to the high precision, high efficiency, high stability, and multi-dimensional processing of FIB nanofabrication. But, at the same time, due to the comprehensive advantages of FIB nanofabrication in terms of flexibility, resolution, and accuracy, and its combined ability for material removal, addition and modification, we have sound reason to believe that FIB nanofabrication will play an increasingly significant role in the manufacturing of 3D nanostructures and devices.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
P. Li and S. Y. Chen contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 51722503, U1930114, 11574078 and 52075538), the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (Grant No. 2018JJ3105) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019M650185). This work is also supported in part by the Science and Technology Bureau Foundation of Changsha City (kh1904005).
References

          M. Stepanova and S. Dew, Nanofabrication: techniques and principles, Springer Science & Business Media, GER,  2011 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, A. Cui, J. Li and C. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802211 CrossRef .
F. Z. Fang, X. D. Zhang, W. Gao, Y. B. Guo, G. Byrne and H. N. Hansen, CIRP Ann., 2017, 66, 683–705 CrossRef .
L. Bruchhaus, P. Mazarov, L. Bischoff, J. Gierak, A. D. Wieck and H. Hövel, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011302 Search PubMed .

          Z. Cui, Nanofabrication: principles, capabilities and limits, Springer, GER,  2017 Search PubMed .

          C. Z. Gu, Micro-nano processing and its applications in the research of nano-materials and devices, Science Press, Beijing, CHN,  2013 Search PubMed .
F. Fang, N. Zhang, D. Guo, K. Ehmann, B. Cheung, K. Liu and K. Yamamura, Int. J. Extreme Manuf., 2019, 1, 012001 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, Z. T. Song, B. Liu, L. Y. Wang and S. L. Feng, Electron. Lett., 2008, 44, 322–323 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-C. Ma, Y.-L. Zhang, B. Han, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Small Methods, 2018, 1700413,  DOI:10.1002/smtd.201700413 .
T. D. Ngo, A. Kashani, G. Imbalzano, K. T. Q. Nguyen and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2018, 143, 172–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng, Y. Shen, M. Liu, W. Liu, S. Wu and C. Jin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5583–5590 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and Z. Liu, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 1637–1650 CAS .
A. Joshi-Imre and S. Bauerdick, J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 2014, 170415 Search PubMed .

          R. Hellborg, H. J. Whitlow and Y. Zhang, Ion beams in Nanoscience and Technology, Springer Science & Business Media, GER,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. A. Tseng, Small, 2005, 1, 924–939 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Kim, S.-H. Ahn and D.-Y. Jang, Vacuum, 2012, 86, 1014–1035 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reyntjens and R. Puers, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2001, 11, 287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hlawacek, V. Veligura, R. van Gastel and B. Poelsema, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2014, 32, 020801 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, W. Han, D. Wei, H. Jiao and H. Gao, Curr. Nanosci., 2016, 12, 696–711 CrossRef CAS   (616).
M. Stanford, B. Lewis, K. Mahady, J. Fowlkes and P. Rack, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2017, 35, 030802 Search PubMed .

          I. Utke, S. Moshkalev and P. Russell, Nanofabrication using focused ion and electron beams: principles and applications, Oxford University Press, UK,  2012 Search PubMed .

          D. C. Joy, Helium Ion Microscopy: Principles and Applications, Springer, GER,  2013 Search PubMed .

          G. Hlawacek and A. Gölzhäuser, Helium Ion Microscopy, Springer, GER,  2016 Search PubMed .

          W. Gu, X. Ma and W. Li, Micro-nano processing technology with focused ion beam, Beijing University of Technology Press, Beijing, CHN,  2006 Search PubMed .
I. Jain and G. Agarwal, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 77–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Volkert and A. M. Minor, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 389–399 CrossRef CAS .
K. Das, J. Freund and H. Johnson, Nanotechnology, 2013, 25, 035303 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Du, J. Li, L. Lu, Z.-Y. Li and N. X. Fang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat4436 CrossRef .
I. Utke, P. Hoffmann and J. Melngailis, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2008, 26, 1197–1276 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Kim, H.-J. Kim, S.-H. Ahn and D.-Y. Jang, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 972–976 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Kim, S.-H. Ahn and D.-Y. Jang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5177–5182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Iltanen, N. Chekurov, K. Grigoras and I. Tittonen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 175304 CrossRef .
J. Munoz-Garcia, L. Vazquez, M. Castro, R. Gago, A. Redondo-Cubero, A. Moreno-Barrado and R. Cuerno, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2014, 86, 1–44 CrossRef .
R. M. Bradley and H. Hofsäss, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 074302 CrossRef .
D. De Winter and J. Mulders, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2007, 25, 2215–2218 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Bhavsar, S. Aravindan and P. V. Rao, Precis. Eng., 2012, 36, 408–413 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park, J. Bain, T. Clinton, P. Van der Heijden and T. Klemmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3331–3333 CrossRef CAS .
H. Idrissi, S. Turner, M. Mitsuhara, B. Wang, S. Hata, M. Coulombier, J.-P. Raskin, T. Pardoen, G. Van Tendeloo and D. Schryvers, Microsc. Microanal., 2011, 17, 983–990 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rajsiri, B. Kempshall, S. Schwarz and L. Giannuzzi, Microsc. Microanal., 2002, 8, 50–51 CrossRef .
T. Kumar, A. Kumar, D. C. Agarwal, N. P. Lalla and D. Kanjilal, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 336 CrossRef .
M. Chen, L. Pethö, A. S. Sologubenko, H. Ma, J. Michler, R. Spolenak and J. M. Wheeler, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2681 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kiener, C. Motz, M. Rester, M. Jenko and G. Dehm, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 459, 262–272 CrossRef .
H. Hofsäss, K. Zhang, H. Gehrke and C. Brüsewitz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 88, 075426 CrossRef .
A.-D. Brown and J. Erlebacher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 72, 075350 CrossRef .
W. Liao, Y. Dai, X. Xie and L. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 377–386 CrossRef .
W. Liao, Y. Dai, X. Xie and L. Zhou, Appl. Opt., 2014, 53, 2487–2493 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Y. Nee, Handbook of manufacturing engineering and technology, Springer, GER,  2015 Search PubMed .
B. Kempshall, S. Schwarz, B. Prenitzer, L. Giannuzzi, R. Irwin and F. Stevie, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2001, 19, 749–754 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vermeij, E. Plancher and C. C. Tasan, Ultramicroscopy, 2018, 186, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Boden, Z. Moktadir, D. M. Bagnall, H. Mizuta and H. N. Rutt, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 2452–2455 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hlawacek, V. Veligura, R. van Gastel and B. Poelsema, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2014, 32, 020801 Search PubMed .
T. Ishitani, Y. Madokoro, M. Nakagawa and K. Ohya, Microscopy, 2002, 51, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierak, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2009, 24, 043001 CrossRef .
J. F. Ziegler, M. D. Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2010, 268, 1818–1823 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tseng, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2004, 14, R15 CrossRef CAS .
L. Frey, C. Lehrer and H. Ryssel, Appl. Phys. A, 2003, 76, 1017–1023 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Smith, D. C. Joy and P. D. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 175302 CrossRef .
R. Ramachandra, B. Griffin and D. Joy, Ultramicroscopy, 2009, 109, 748–757 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fowlkes and P. D. Rack, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1619–1629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Timilsina, D. A. Smith and P. D. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 115302 CrossRef .
H. Wu, L. Stern, J. Chen, M. Huth, C. Schwalb, M. Winhold, F. Porrati, C. Gonzalez, R. Timilsina and P. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 175302 CrossRef CAS .
R. Timilsina and P. D. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 495303 CrossRef .
R. Timilsina, S. Tan, R. Livengood and P. D. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 485704 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahady, S. Tan, Y. Greenzweig, R. Livengood, A. Raveh and P. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2016, 28, 045305 CrossRef .
K. T. Mahady, S. Tan, Y. Greenzweig, A. Raveh and P. D. Rack, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3584–3596 RSC .
K. Mahady, S. Tan, Y. Greenzweig, R. Livengood, A. Raveh, J. D. Fowlkes and P. Rack, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2017, 35, 041805 Search PubMed .
K. T. Mahady, S. Tan, Y. Greenzweig, A. Raveh and P. D. Rack, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 495301 CrossRef .
C. Gonzalez, R. Timilsina, G. Li, G. Duscher, P. Rack, W. Slingenbergh, W. Van Dorp, J. T. M. De Hosson, K. Klein, H. Wu and L. Stern, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2014, 32, 021602–021602 Search PubMed .
D. Elswick, M. Ananth, L. Stern, J. Marshman, D. Ferranti and C. Huynh, Microsc. Microanal., 2013, 19, 1304–1305 CrossRef .
P. Sudraud, G. Ben Assayag and M. Bon, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1988, 6, 234–238 CrossRef .
M. Maleki, J. Cugnoni and J. Botsis, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 103–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Burdet, J. Vannod, A. Hessler-Wyser, M. Rappaz and M. Cantoni, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 3090–3098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Fu, X. Zhou, Z. Xu, F. Fang and X. Hu, Plasmonics, 2011, 6, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stevie, L. Sedlacek, P. Bábor, J. Jiruše, E. Principe and K. Klosova, Surf. Interface Anal., 2014, 46 Search PubMed .
J. Jiruše, M. Hanicinec, M. Havelka, O. Hollricher, W. Ibach and P. Spizig, Microsc. Microanal., 2014, 20, 990–991 CrossRef .
H. Wu, L. A. Stern, D. Xia, D. Ferranti, B. Thompson, K. L. Klein, C. M. Gonzalez and P. D. Rack, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 587–595 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Maas, E. van Veldhoven, P. Chen, V. Sidorkin, H. Salemink, E. van der Drift and P. Alkemade, Nanofabrication with a helium ion microscope, in Metrology, Inspection, and Process Control for Microlithography XXIV, International Society for Optics and Photonics,  2010, vol. 7638, pp. 763814 Search PubMed .

          D. Pickard and L. Scipioni, Graphene nano-ribbon patterning in the ORION® PLUS, Zeiss application note,  20091–4 Search PubMed.

          X. Shi and S. A. Boden, in Frontiers of Nanoscience, Elsevier, NL,  2016, vol. 11, pp. 563–594 Search PubMed .

          X. Shi, Helium ion beam lithography, University of Southampton,  2018 Search PubMed .
T. Wirtz, O. De Castro, J.-N. Audinot and P. Philipp, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 12, 523–543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kollmann, X. Piao, M. Esmann, S. F. Becker, D. Hou, C. Huynh, L.-O. Kautschor, G. Bösker, H. Vieker, A. Beyer, A. Gölzhäuser, N. Park, R. Vogelgesang, M. Silies and C. Lienau, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4778–4784 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bischoff, P. Mazarov, L. Bruchhaus and J. Gierak, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 021101 Search PubMed .
G. Seniutinas, A. Balčytis, Y. Nishijima, A. Nadzeyka, S. Bauerdick and S. Juodkazis, Appl. Phys. A, 2016, 122, 383 CrossRef .
J. Gierak, P. Mazarov, L. Bruchhaus, R. Jede and L. Bischoff, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2018, 36, 06J101 Search PubMed .
W. Pilz, N. Klingner, L. Bischoff, P. Mazarov and S. Bauerdick, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2019, 37, 021802 Search PubMed .

          L. Bischoff, N. Klingner, P. Mazarov, W. Pilz and F. Meyer, Boron Liquid Metal Alloy Ion Sources For Special FIB Applications,  2020 Search PubMed .
S. M. Kellogg, R. Schampers, S. Y. Zhang, A. A. Graupera, T. Miller, W. Laur and A. B. Dirriwachter, Microsc. Microanal., 2010, 16, 222–223 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Hrncir, A. Delobbe, O. Salord, F. Lopour, M. Zadrazil and P. Sudraud, Novel Plasma FIB/SEM for High Speed Failure Analysis and Real Time Imaging of Large Volume Removal,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. Garnier, G. Filoni, T. Hrncir and L. Hladík, Microelectron. Reliab., 2015, 55, 2135–2141 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hrnčíř, D. Nešpor, Z. Radi, J. Jiruše, L. Hladík, O. Salord and A. Delobbe, Microsc. Microanal., 2020, 1–2,  DOI:10.1017/S1431927620014580 .
C. Zhang, O. Dyck, D. Garfinkel, M. Stanford, A. Belianinov, J. Fowlkes, S. Jesse and P. Rack, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1394 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Bell, M. C. Lemme, L. A. Stern, J. R. Williams and C. M. Marcus, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455301 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sidorkin, E. van Veldhoven, E. van der Drift, P. Alkemade, H. Salemink and D. Maas, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2009, 27, L18–L20 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, W. Cai, W. Luo, Y. Xiang, N. Zhang, M. Ren, X. Zhang and J. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 385205 CrossRef .
M. Xu, Y. Dai, X. Xie, L. Zhou and W. Liao, Appl. Opt., 2015, 54, 8055–8061 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Deng, X. Yin, W. Tang, D. Xue and X. Zhang, Research on ion beam figuring system with five-axis hybrid mechanism for complex optical surface, SPIE,  2019 Search PubMed .
D. Huo, K. Cheng and F. Wardle, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2010, 47, 879–890 CrossRef .
D. Huo, K. Cheng and F. Wardle, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2010, 47, 867–877 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Q. Di, F. Zhu, G. Sun and H. Zhang, Micro Nano Lett., 2011, 6, 947–950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengele, H. Jiang, J. Booske, C. Kory, D. van der Weide and R. Ives, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2009, 56, 732–737 Search PubMed .
W. McKenzie, J. Pethica and G. Cross, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2011, 20, 707–710 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Tripathi, D. Scanlan, N. O'Hara, A. Nadzeyka, S. Bauerdick, L. Peto and G. L. Cross, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2012, 22, 055005 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Chen, X. Zhu, M. Zheng, F. Dong, P. Chen, L. Xu, W. Chu, K. Chen and H. Duan, Opt. Mater. Express, 2018, 8, 503–510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, W. Liu, Z. Li, H. Cheng, D.-Y. Choi, S. Chen and J. Tian, Nano Lett., 2019, 107, 4221–4228 CrossRef .
Z. Dai, X. Xie, H. Chen and L. Zhou, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2018, 38, 443–459 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Harrison, L. F. Voss, A. M. Torres, C. D. Frye, Q. Shao and R. J. Nikolić, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2017, 35, 061303 CrossRef .
A. Smyrnakis, P. Dimitrakis and E. Gogolides, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 455101 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Chen, X. Zhu, M. Zheng, F. Dong, P. Chen, L. Xu, W. Chu and H. Duan, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 365302 CrossRef .
E. Iacob, R. Dell'Anna, D. Giubertoni, E. Demenev, M. Secchi, R. Böttger and G. Pepponi, Microelectron. Eng., 2016, 155, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chowdhury and D. Ghose, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2017, 409, 197–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lugstein, B. Basnar, J. Smoliner and E. Bertagnolli, Appl. Phys. A, 2003, 76, 545–548 CrossRef CAS .
D. Z. Xie, B. K. A. Ngoi, Y. Q. Fu, A. S. Ong and B. H. Lim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 225, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. Catalano, A. Taurino, M. Lomascolo, A. Schertel and A. Orchowski, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1758 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, R. Minev, S. Dimov and G. Lalev, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 5404–5410 CrossRef CAS .
L. Frey, C. Lehrer and H. Ryssel, Appl. Phys. A, 2003, 76, 1017–1023 CrossRef CAS .
D. Adams and M. Vasile, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2006, 24, 836–844 CrossRef CAS .
D. Santamore, K. Edinger, J. Orloff and J. Melngailis, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1997, 15, 2346–2349 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, X. Yan and Q. Xiaoli, Chin. J. Mech. Eng., 2016, 52, 101–106 Search PubMed .

          T. Som and D. Kanjilal, Nanofabrication by ion-beam sputtering: Fundamentals and applications,  2012 Search PubMed .
W. C. Hopman, F. Ay, W. Hu, V. J. Gadgil, L. Kuipers, M. Pollnau and R. M. de Ridder, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 195305 CrossRef .
A. Surpi, S. Valizadeh, K. Leifer and S. Lagomarsino, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2007, 17, 617 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, P. Li, A. Jin, L. Chen, H. Yang, L. Li, W. Tang and Z. Cui, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 78, 29–33 CrossRef .
D. De Felicis, M. Z. Mughal and E. Bemporad, Micron, 2017, 101, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Urbánek, V. Uhlíř, P. Bábor, E. Kolíbalová, T. Hrnčíř, J. Spousta and T. Šikola, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 145304 CrossRef .
D. Axinte and J. Billingham, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 5341–5343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bilbao-Guillerna, R. Eachambadi, G. Cadot, D. Axinte, J. Billingham, F. Stumpf, S. Beuer and M. Rommel, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2018, 252, 636–642 CrossRef .
D. Axinte, J. Billingham and A. B. Guillerna, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701201 CrossRef .
F. Fang, Z. Xu, X. Hu, C. Wang, X. Luo and Y. Fu, CIRP Ann., 2010, 59, 543–546 CrossRef .
H.-S. Yoon, C.-S. Kim, H.-T. Lee and S.-H. Ahn, Vacuum, 2017, 143, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Yao, Focused ion beam systems: basics and applications, Cambridge University Press, UK,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. Stanford, K. Mahady, B. Lewis, J. Fowlkes, S. Tan, R. Livengood, G. Magel, T. Moore and P. Rack, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29155–29162 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Stanford, P. R. Pudasaini, N. Cross, K. Mahady, A. N. Hoffman, D. G. Mandrus, G. Duscher, M. F. Chisholm and P. D. Rack, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1600060 CrossRef .
X. Q. Liu, L. Yu, S. N. Yang, Q. D. Chen, L. Wang, S. Juodkazis and H. B. Sun, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1800272 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, K. Bi, Q. Wang, M. Zheng, Q. Liu, Y. Han, J. Yang, S. Chang, G. Zhang and H. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11228–11236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gittinger, K. Höflich, V. Smirnov, H. Kollmann, C. Lienau and M. Silies, Nanophotonics, 2019, 9, 401–412 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Zhao, Y. Deng, Z. Wang, X. Cheng, D. Lei and Y. Deng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000642,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202000642 .
Y. Chen, Q. Xiang, Z. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Meng and H. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3253–3259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, G.-C. Li, Y. Chen, X. Zhu, S.-D. Liu, D. Y. Lei and H. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11105–11114 CrossRef CAS .
B. Desbiolles, A. Bertsch and P. Renaud, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2019, 5, 11 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. E. Desbiolles, E. de Coulon, A. Bertsch, S. Rohr and P. Renaud, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6173–6181 CrossRef CAS .
E. Salvati, L. Brandt, C. Papadaki, H. Zhang, S. Mousavi, D. Wermeille and A. Korsunsky, Mater. Lett., 2018, 213, 346–349 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong and X. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 347, 727–735 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pastewka, R. Salzer, A. Graff, F. Altmann and M. Moseler, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2009, 267, 3072–3075 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kawasegi, S. Kuroda, N. Morita, K. Nishimura, M. Yamaguchi and N. Takano, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2016, 70, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cui, Z. Liu, J. Li, T. H. Shen, X. Xia, Z. Li, Z. Gong, H. Li, B. Wang and J. Li, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai and J.-H. Cho, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3655–3660 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Du, Z.-Y. Li, N. Fang and J. Li, APL Photonics, 2018, 3, 100803 CrossRef .
A. Johannes, S. Noack, W. Wesch, M. Glaser, A. Lugstein and C. Ronning, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3800–3807 CrossRef CAS .
C. Borschel, S. Spindler, D. Lerose, A. Bochmann, S. H. Christiansen, S. Nietzsche, M. Oertel and C. Ronning, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 185307 CrossRef .
K. Jun, J. Joo and J. M. Jacobson, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2009, 27, 3043–3047 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Rajput, A. Banerjee and H. Verma, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 485302 CrossRef .
S. Reyntjens and R. Puers, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2000, 10, 181 CrossRef CAS .
L. Scipioni, C. Sanford, E. van Veldhoven and D. Maas, Microsc. Today, 2011, 19, 22–26 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, N. K. A. Bryan and O. N. Shing, Sens. Actuators, A, 2001, 88, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Harriott and M. J. Vasile, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1988, 6, 1035–1038 CrossRef CAS .
M. Esposito, V. Tasco, M. Cuscunà, F. Todisco, A. Benedetti, I. Tarantini, M. D. Giorgi, D. Sanvitto and A. Passaseo, ACS Photonics, 2014, 2, 105–114 CrossRef .
M. Esposito, V. Tasco, F. Todisco, A. Benedetti, D. Sanvitto and A. Passaseo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 154–161 CrossRef .
Z. Li and F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011103 Search PubMed .
R. G. Elliman and J. S. Williams, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2015, 19, 49–67 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, X. Zhan, X. Song, S. Si, R. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Wang, J. He and X. Xiao, Small, 2019, 1901820 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, F. Fang, Y. Fu, S. Zhang, T. Han and J. Li, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 054003 CrossRef .
H. Qian, W. Zhou, J. Miao, L. Lim and X. Zeng, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2008, 18, 035003 CrossRef .
P. Olivero, S. Rubanov, P. Reichart, B. Gibson, S. T. Huntington, J. Rabeau, A. Greentree, J. Salzman, D. Moore, D. Jamieson and S. Prawer, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2427–2430 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Lemaitre, S. Tongay, X. Wang, D. K. Venkatachalam, J. Fridmann, B. P. Gila, A. F. Hebard, F. Ren, R. G. Elliman and B. R. Appleton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193105 CrossRef .
N. Kawasegi, M. Yamaguchi, T. Kozu, N. Morita and K. Nishimura, Precis. Eng., 2017, 50, 337–343 CrossRef .
F. Fang, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Hu and G. Zhang, CIRP Ann., 2011, 60, 527–530 CrossRef .
J. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Fang and R. Chen, Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf., 2018, 137, 58–66 CrossRef .
K. Nikawa, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1991, 9, 2566–2577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mayer, L. A. Giannuzzi, T. Kamino and J. Michael, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 400–407 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roediger, H. D. Wanzenboeck, S. Waid, G. Hochleitner and E. Bertagnolli, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 235302 CrossRef CAS .
K. O'Shea, D. McGrouther, C. Ferguson, M. Jungbauer, S. Hühn, V. Moshnyaga and D. MacLaren, Micron, 2014, 66, 9–15 CrossRef .
L.-H. Lee, C.-H. Yu, C.-Y. Wei, P.-C. Lee, J.-S. Huang and C.-Y. Wen, Ultramicroscopy, 2019, 197, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, G. Habler, L. C. Baldwin and R. Abart, Ultramicroscopy, 2018, 184, 310–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Nagao, P. Sofronis and I. M. Robertson, Acta Mater., 2019, 174, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Z. Wan, W. Wang, X. Huang, X. Ding and Z. Jiang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 40, 4202–4216 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, J. Rothman, M. Klaui, L. Lopez-Diaz, C. Vaz and J. Bland, Microelectron. Eng., 2002, 61, 577–583 CrossRef .

          S. Li and Y. Dai, Large and middle-scale aperture aspheric surfaces: lapping, polishing and measurement, John Wiley & Sons, USA,  2017 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu and B. K. Ngoi, Opt. Eng., 2000, 39, 3008 CrossRef .
K. Keskinbora, C. Grévent, U. Eigenthaler, M. Weigand and G. Schütz, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9788–9797 CrossRef CAS .
H.-E. Joe, W.-S. Lee, M. B. Jun, N.-C. Park and B.-K. Min, Ultramicroscopy, 2018, 184, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Q. Fu, N. Kok and A. Bryan, Microelectron. Eng., 2000, 54, 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luches, A. Di Bona, S. F. Contri, G. C. Gazzadi, P. Vavassori, F. Albertini, F. Casoli, L. Nasi, S. Fabbrici and S. Valeri, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2007, 112, 1297 CrossRef .
C. Y. Wang, W. X. Jing, Y. J. Zhang, M. Liu, Q. J. Lin and Z. D. Jiang, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2017, 870, 114–119 Search PubMed .
S.-W. Youn, C. Okuyama, M. Takahashi and R. Maeda, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2008, 201, 548–553 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, L. Zhao, Y. Mao, W. Wu and J. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8236 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, D. Weber, F. Neubrech, I. Yamada, M. Mitome, Y. Bando, A. Pucci and T. Nagao, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 275202 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. De Teresa and R. Córdoba, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3788–3795 CrossRef CAS .
O. Wilhelmi, S. Reyntjens, C. Mitterbauer, L. Roussel, D. J. Stokes and D. H. Hubert, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 5010 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Kim, H. Sim, S. J. Yoon, S.-H. Gong, C. W. Ahn, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4102–4107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schlauderer, C. Lange, S. Baierl, T. Ebnet, C. Schmid, D. Valovcin, A. Zvezdin, A. Kimel, R. Mikhaylovskiy and R. Huber, Nature, 2019, 569, 383 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cui, Z. Liu, H. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Zhen, W. Li, J. Li, C. Gu and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3002–3006 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Spitzberg, A. Zrehen, X. F. van Kooten and A. Meller, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900422 CrossRef .
M. J. Kim, M. Wanunu, D. C. Bell and A. Meller, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3149–3153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lanyon, G. De Marzi, Y. E. Watson, A. J. Quinn, J. P. Gleeson, G. Redmond and D. W. Arrigan, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santschi, M. Jenke, P. Hoffmann and J. Brugger, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2722–2729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hosokawa, K. Shimojima, Y. Chino, Y. Yamada, C. Wen and M. Mabuchi, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2003, 344, 365–367 CrossRef .
Z. W. Xu, F. Z. Fang, S. J. Zhang, X. D. Zhang, X. T. Hu, Y. Q. Fu and L. Li, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 8025–8032 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Li and M. Hong, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 021304 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, R. Chen, J. Ling, Z. Chen, X. Chen, R. Ji and M. Hong, Opt. Lett., 2017, 42, 1444–1447 CrossRef .
M. Wu, R. Chen, J. Soh, Y. Shen, L. Jiao, J. Wu, X. Chen, R. Ji and M. Hong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31637 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, D. Liu, G. Liu, Y. Chang, W. Li, X. Pan and C. Gu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 044308 CrossRef .
C.-C. Hou, H.-M. Chen, J.-C. Zhang, N. Zhuo, Y.-Q. Huang, R. A. Hogg, D. T. Childs, J.-Q. Ning, Z.-G. Wang and F.-Q. Liu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 17170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Gao and X. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 18, 520–527 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Yang and J. Gao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800646 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Gao and X. Yang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800198 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Yang and J. Gao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 84 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Yang and J. Gao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 45 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Gao and X. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1801467 CrossRef .
K. Celebi, J. Buchheim, R. M. Wyss, A. Droudian, P. Gasser, I. Shorubalko, J.-I. Kye, C. Lee and H. G. Park, Science, 2014, 344, 289–292 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith, S. Dai and S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 459 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ahrens, M. Zander, D. Hirsch, U. Hasse, H. Wulff, F. Frost and F. Scholz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 832, 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stanford, B. Lewis, V. Iberi, J. Fowlkes, S. Tan, R. Livengood and P. Rack, Small, 2016, 12, 1779–1787 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, G. Razinskas, H. Vieker, H. Gross, X. Wu, A. Beyer, A. Gölzhäuser and B. Hecht, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17148–17155 RSC .
J. J. López, A. Ambrosio, S. Dai, C. Huynh, D. C. Bell, X. Lin, N. Rivera, S. Huang, Q. Ma and S. Eyhusen, Small, 2018, 14, 1800072 CrossRef .
J. Yang, D. C. Ferranti, L. A. Stern, C. A. Sanford, J. Huang, Z. Ren, L.-C. Qin and A. R. Hall, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 285310 CrossRef .
V. Iberi, I. Vlassiouk, X.-G. Zhang, B. Matola, A. Linn, D. C. Joy and A. J. Rondinone, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11952 CrossRef .
S. Gorelick and A. De Marco, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 13647–13655 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Cybart, E. Cho, T. Wong, B. H. Wehlin, M. K. Ma, C. Huynh and R. Dynes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 598 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, Z. Zhang, D. Xue, L. Li, R. Wang, X. Zhou, F. Zhang and X. Zhang, Opt. Commun., 2018, 407, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Guo, R. Wang, H. Hu, X. Zhou, T. Liu, D. Xue, X. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 33676–33687 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tao, Y. Chen, A. Malik, L. Wang, X. Zhao, H. Li and Z. Cui, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 78, 147–151 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Liang, P. Huo, D. Wang, J. Tan and T. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 251102 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Tao, X. Zhao, Z. Cui, A. S. Schwanecke and N. I. Zheludev, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 78, 612–617 CrossRef .
Z. Li, A. W. Clark and J. M. Cooper, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 492–498 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Koenig, L. Wang, J. Pellegrino and J. S. Bunch, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 728 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Jeon, H. S. Jeong, Y. H. Kim, W.-B. Jung, J. Y. Kim and H.-T. Jung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Welch, A. Goodyear, T. Wahlbrink, M. C. Lemme and T. Mollenhauer, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83, 1170–1173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, J. Huang, Y. Zeng, L.-X. Sun, F. Geng, H.-J. Liu, F.-R. Wang, X.-D. Jiang, W.-D. Wu and W.-G. Zheng, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 291 CrossRef .
X. Ye, J. Huang, F. Geng, L. Sun, H. Liu, X. Jiang, W. Wu, X. Zu and W. Zheng, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Ye, J. Huang, F. Geng, H. Liu, L. Sun, L. Yan, X. Jiang, W. Wu and W. Zheng, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 265104 CrossRef .
A. Rahman, A. Ashraf, H. Xin, X. Tong, P. Sutter, M. D. Eisaman and C. T. Black, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5963 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoo, G. Yu and J. Yi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Nguyen, P. Basset, F. Marty, Y. Leprince-Wang and T. Bourouina, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 194903 CrossRef .
P. Lecoq, E. Auffray and A. Knapitsch, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2013, 60, 1653–1657 CAS .

          M. A. Basten, J. C. Tucek, D. A. Gallagher, K. E. Kreischer and R. Mihailovich, A 0.85 THz vacuum-based power amplifier, in IVEC 2012, IEEE 2012, pp. 39–40 Search PubMed .

          C. Baik, S. Y. Jun, H. Y. Ahn, S. Hong, J. H. Lee, Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Yu and J. Kim, Return loss measurement of a microfabricated slow-wave structure for backward-wave oscillation, in 35th International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves,  2010, p. 1 Search PubMed .
W. Chunya, G. Chuangqiang, P. Xudong, W. Tingzhang, C. Ni and C. Mingjun, Chin. J. Mech. Eng., 2019, 55, 187–198 Search PubMed .
T. Graziosi, S. Mi, M. Kiss and N. Quack, APL Photonics, 2018, 3, 126101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rommel, M. Rumler, A. Haas, A. Bauer and L. Frey, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 110, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Wang, A. Boulesbaa, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, A. Puretzky, D. Geohegan and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7388–7393 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zandi Shafagh, D. Decrop, K. Ven, A. Vanderbeke, R. Hanusa, J. Breukers, G. Pardon, T. Haraldsson, J. Lammertyn and W. van der Wijngaart, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2019, 5, 25 CrossRef .
S. Azimi, Z. Dang, K. Ansari and M. Breese, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 375301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Liu, J. Wang, I. Rozen, S. He, C. Chen, H. G. Kim, H. J. Lee, H. B. R. Lee and S. H. Kwon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700598 CrossRef .
M. A. Gritz, M. Metzler, J. Moser, D. Spencer and G. D. Boreman, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2003, 21, 332–334 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Cui, J.-S. Hong, E. P. McErlean, R. B. Greed and D. C. Voyce, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83, 1418–1420 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, A. S. Childress, M. Karakaya, S. Dandeliya, A. Srivastava, Y. Lin, A. M. Rao and R. Podila, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7185–7192 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan, H. Yamada, M. Karakaya, R. Podila, A. M. Rao and P. R. Bandaru, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3067–3072 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, B. Wang, D. Gong, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604118 CrossRef .
A. Gavriilidis, P. Angeli, E. Cao, K. Yeong and Y. Wan, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2002, 80, 3–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanimu, S. Jaenicke and K. Alhooshani, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 792–821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, Q. Lin, X. Xie, Q. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, L. Liu, X. Yu, J. Zhou, T. F. Krauss and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4460–4466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Harwell, J. Burch, A. Fikouras, M. C. Gather, A. Di Falco and I. D. W. Samuel, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3823–3829 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, T. Shao, L. Sun, J. Wu, F. Wang, J. He, X. Jiang, W.-D. Wu and W. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13851–13859 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Hicks, A. C. Pakpour-Tabrizi and R. B. Jackman, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2019, 97, 107424 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Golovanov, V. S. Bormashov, N. V. Luparev, S. A. Tarelkin, S. Y. Troschiev, S. G. Buga and V. D. Blank, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2018, 215, 1800273 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Yang, L. Liang, Y. Gao, H. Cheng, X. Li, M. Zou, R. Ma, Q. Yuan and X. Duan, Science, 2019, 364, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stanford, Y.-C. Lin, M. G. Sales, A. Hoffman, C. Nelson, K. Xiao, S. McDonnell and P. Rack, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 13 CrossRef .
S. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Jin, W. Li, S. Zhang, J. Li and C. Gu, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2650–2658 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Li, W. Li, J. Li, C. Gu and Z.-Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27817 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Li, Z. Liu, W. Li, J. Li, C. Gu and Z.-Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 8010 CrossRef .
A. Y. Zhu, W. T. Chen, A. Zaidi, Y.-W. Huang, M. Khorasaninejad, V. Sanjeev, C.-W. Qiu and F. Capasso, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 17158–17158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cui, W. Li, Q. Luo, Z. Liu and C. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 143106 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, S. Du, A. Cui, Z. Li, Y. Fan, S. Chen, W. Li, J. Li and C. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606298 CrossRef .
X. Cen and K. van Benthem, Ultramicroscopy, 2018, 186, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, K. Agarwal and J.-H. Cho, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10251–10261 CrossRef CAS .
K. Agarwal, C. Dai, D. Joung and J.-H. Cho, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1050–1059 CAS .
P. Peinado, S. Sangiao and J. M. De Teresa, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6139–6146 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Barton, J. Parpia and H. G. Craighead, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2011, 29, 050801 Search PubMed .
S.-J. Li, J. Li, K. Wang, C. Wang, J.-J. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, X.-H. Xia and Q. Huo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6417–6424 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Li, Y. Zhao and Y. Song, in nanofibers, InTech,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Taghipoor, A. Bertsch and P. Renaud, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18799–18804 RSC .
F. I. Uba, S. R. Pullagurla, N. Sirasunthorn, J. Wu, S. Park, R. Chantiwas, Y.-K. Cho, H. Shin and S. A. Soper, Analyst, 2015, 140, 113–126 RSC .
Z. Sun, C. Han, M. Song, L. Wen, D. Tian, H. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
R. Córdoba, A. Ibarra, D. Mailly and J. M. De Teresa, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1379–1386 CrossRef .
R. Kometani, T. Hoshino, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, T. Kaito, J.-I. Fujita, M. Ishida, Y. Ochiai and S. Matsui, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 232, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Tripathi, N. Shukla and V. N. Kulkarni, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075304 CrossRef .
W. Li and P. Warburton, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 485305 CrossRef .
T. Morita, K.-I. Nakamatsu, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, K. Kondo, T. Hoshino, T. Kaito, J.-I. Fujita, T. Ichihashi and M. Ishida, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2004, 22, 3137–3142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kometani, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, T. Kaito and S. Matsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L711 CrossRef CAS .
E. Romans, E. Osley, L. Young, P. Warburton and W. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 222506 CrossRef .
R. Kometani, T. Hoshino, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, T. Kaito, J.-I. Fujita, M. Ishida, Y. Ochiai and S. Matsui, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 232, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kometani, R. Funabiki, T. Hoshino, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, T. Kaito, J.-I. Fujita, Y. Ochiai and S. Matsui, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83, 1642–1645 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Igaki, R. Kometani, K.-I. Nakamatsu, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, Y. Ochiai, J.-I. Fujita, T. Kaito and S. Matsui, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83, 1221–1224 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sievilä and N. Chekurov, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 145301 CrossRef .
J. Llobet, M. Sansa, M. Gerbolés, N. Mestres, J. Arbiol, X. Borrisé and F. Pérez-Murano, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 135302 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fischer, L. M. Belova, Y. G. Rikers, B. G. Malm, H. H. Radamson, M. Kolahdouz, K. B. Gylfason, G. Stemme and F. Niklaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4004–4008 CrossRef CAS .
M. Erdmanis and I. Tittonen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 073118 CrossRef .
X. Hu, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Li, J. Li, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Chai, C. Wang and A. B. Fedotov, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 2053–2055 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Stanford, J. H. Noh, K. Mahady, A. V. Ievlev, P. Maksymovych, O. S. Ovchinnikova and P. D. Rack, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35125–35132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stanford, P. R. Pudasaini, E. T. Gallmeier, N. Cross, L. Liang, G. Duscher, M. Mahjouri-Samani, K. Wang, K. Xiao, D. Geohegan, A. Belianinov, B. Sumpter and P. Rack, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702829 CrossRef .
P. Li, S. Chen, H. Xiao, Z. Chen, M. Qu, H. Dai and T. Jin, Int. J. Mech. Sci., 2020, 182, 105737 CrossRef .
P. Li, T. Jin, H. Xiao, Z. Chen, M. Qu, H. Dai and S. Chen, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 17717–17728 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, T. Jin, H. Xiao, Z. Chen, M. Qu, H. Dai and S. Chen, Tribol. Int., 2020, 151, 106453 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, S. Chen, T. Jin, J. Yi, W. Liu, Q. Wu, W. Peng and H. Dai, Ceram. Int., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.10.033 .
G. Seniutinas, G. Gervinskas, J. Anguita, D. Hakobyan, E. Brasselet and S. Juodkazis, Nanofabrication, 2016, 2, 54–62 Search PubMed .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Chen, H. Yang, J. Li, P. Yu, H. Cheng, C. Gu, H.-T. Chen and J. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, S. Link and N. J. Halas, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 641 CrossRef CAS .
K. Narayan and S. Subramaniam, Nat. Methods, 2015, 12, 1021 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sivis, M. Duwe, B. Abel and C. Ropers, Nature, 2012, 485, E1 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, W. Wang and Q. Xie, Biomicrofluidics, 2013, 7, 026501 CrossRef .
E. Bellini, A. Taurino, M. Catalano, M. Lomascolo, A. Passaseo and L. Vasanelli, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 255306 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dubois, S. J. Bleiker, G. Stemme and F. Niklaus, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801124 CrossRef .
L. D. Menard and J. M. Ramsey, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 512–517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Gu and J. Li, Small, 2019, 15, 1804177 CrossRef .
S. C. O'Hern, D. Jang, S. Bose, J.-C. Idrobo, Y. Song, T. Laoui, J. Kong and R. Karnik, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3254–3260 CrossRef .
J. Feng, K. Liu, R. D. Bulushev, S. Khlybov, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, J. Gao and X. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10671–10680 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Ocola, C. Rue and D. Maas, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 336–341 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Crick, P. Albella, H.-J. Kim, A. P. Ivanov, K.-B. Kim, S. A. Maier and J. B. Edel, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2835–2842 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. H. Sadki, S. Ooi and K. Hirata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kometani, T. Hoshino, K. Kondo, K. Kanda, Y. Haruyama, T. Kaito, J.-I. Fujita, M. Ishida, Y. Ochiai and S. Matsui, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2005, 23, 298–301 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  An overview of the fundamentals of FIB nanofabrication and its application in the preparation of nanostructures and devices. The fundamentals of FIB nanofabrication include the nanofabrication mechanism, equipment technology, and process technology. The resulting nanostructures and devices based on different FIB nanofabrication processes (such as etching, irradiation, deposition, and implantation) have compelling applications in various fields.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The basic interaction mechanism between the ion beam and solid material. (b)–(f) Schematic diagrams of the microscopic interaction mechanism between ions and atoms or molecules in (b) imaging, (c) etching, (d) irradiation, (e) deposition, (f) implantation and (g) lithography. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the redeposition effect. (b) A lamella created with several separate measuring holes. Red/blue color coded side view overlay images of the hole. Red refers to premilling and blue to the postmilling condition. The dark-blue area around the hole is the redeposited material. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2007, American Vacuum Society. (c) Surface topography changes due to redeposition close to a trench. The top part shows a secondary electron image of the FIB-milled trench. The bottom part reports the AFM height profile measured over the above line, showing redeposition outside the trench. Reproduced with permission.38,51 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of ion implantation damage. (e) Left: bright-field image of a cross-sectional TEM sample prepared by FIB, showing small dislocation loops and long dislocations. Right: bright-field image of long dislocations generated during the deposition of Al films. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2004, American Institute of Physics. (f) The thickness of the amorphous layer is irradiated with 50 keV Ar+ under different fluences. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (g) Schematic diagram of the rippled nanostructure. (h) SEM images of 3 mm × 2 mm in size from Si samples irradiated with 10 keV Xe+ ions at 70° at different fluences. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2013, American Physical Society. (i) AFM morphologies after Ar+ irradiation of Si (100). All the images are obtained for a constant fluence of 5 × 1017 ions per cm2, ion flux of 0.3 mA cm−2, ion energy E = 700 eV, and at different angles of incidence. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (j) Schematic diagram of the principle of the channel effect. (k) Rough surface formation under the channel effect (left) and smooth surface generation after doping treatment (right). Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2001, American Vacuum Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of penetration depths of an ion beam and electron beam in solid materials. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (b)–(e) Schematics showing the influence of (b), (c) crystal orientation, (d) atomic mass, and (e) surface geometry on 30 keV Ga+ collision cascades and ISE image contrast formation. The orange atoms in (d) are more massive than the yellow atoms in (b), (c), and (e). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2007, Materials Research Society. (f) SE and (g) ISE images of a FIB-cut cross section in brass. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2007, Materials Research Society. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (h) SE and (i) ISE images of German silver. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (j) and (k) Mechanism of precursor gas induced processing. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2008, American Vacuum Society. (j) Scheme of interactions of primary electrons generating an emitted flux of SEs and backscattered electrons. All electrons can dissociate surface adsorbed molecules via electronic excitation. (k) Scheme of interactions of primary ions generating SEs and a collision cascade of substrate atoms.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section view of 10000 25 keV He+ ion trajectories in a flat tungsten substrate and a histogram of the final depth of the helium ion (note the backscattered ion coefficient is approximately 32%). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (b) Simulation output of 30 million simulated 25 keV He+ ions grown in the mass transport limited regime. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (c) and (d) Trajectories of 10000 ions for helium and neon simulations. The color bars in each plot represent the energies of ion trajectories in keV. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (e) Trajectories of ten neon ions and recoil atoms at a beam energy of 10 keV. The trajectories at aluminum and tungsten are presented on the left and right respectively. The ion trajectories (bold lines) have different colors based on energy, but the recoil trajectories have the same color (green) as shown in the figure. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (f) Neon ion simulated nanostructures with different beam energies at a beam diameter of 1 nm. The nanostructures of aluminum and tungsten are presented in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The horizontal and vertical lines represent the FWHM and the maximum depths of the structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (g) Simulated via structures of Cu at three different doses, 1.5 × 1018 ions per cm2 (left part), 3 × 1018 ions per cm2 (middle part) and 6 × 1018 ions per cm2 (right part). Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (h) Nuclear energy loss density at the Cu target with 702000 neon ions (a dose of 3.12 × 1017 Ne+ cm−2) of 20 keV. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (i) Development of a via from a FWHM = 1 nm Gaussian Ne+ beam in a Cu target for different numbers of ions. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. (j) Simulated nuclear energy loss (left) and the resultant helium implant concentrations (on right) are compared to the experimental TEM micrograph exposed to 30 keV at a dose of 2 × 1017 He+ per cm2. In (k), the same as in (j), but for 30 keV Ne+ per cm2. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2014, American Vacuum Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Comparison of the Xe plasma FIB and LMIS Ga+ FIB. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2010, Microscopy Society of America. (b) Machining ability comparison between the Xe plasma FIB and LMIS Ga+ FIB. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2012, Microscopy Society of America. (c) Simulations using TRIM software comparing (Left figure) 30 kV Ga ions and (Middle figure) 30 kV He ions for range and trajectory in graphene layers on SiO2 on silicon substrate. (Right figure) Range and trajectory of 30 kV He ions through a suspended graphene layer over vacuum, SiO2 and silicon substrate. (Insets) schematic comparison between Ga+ ion and He+ ion interaction with graphene samples from molecular dynamics simulations. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (d)–(h) The comparative size and shape of the interaction volumes for H+, He+, Ne+, Ar+, and Ga+ in molybdenum at an energy of 40 kV. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic of the Zeiss ORION helium ion microscope column. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (j) Schematic of the main system of the helium ion microscope (HIM) as presented in the vacuum user interface. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (k) Structure of the quick-response platform for a sub-nanometer optical surface. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2015, Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a)–(d) The effects of scan widths on the etched depth and surface roughness. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (e) Relationship between sputtering yield and incident angle under different beam energies.5,118–121 Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2006, AIP Publishing. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 1997, AIP Publishing. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, Tsinghua Tongfang. (f) A SEM plan view image of trenches in amorphous Ni78B14Si8 produced by a FIB with a constant exposure time of 90 s and various numbers of scan loops. (g) Sputtering yield as a function of scan speed for trenches. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. Hole arrays milled using (h) raster scanning and (i) spiral scanning. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing. The effects of ion beam parameters on the (j) sidewall angle and (k) etching depth of trenches. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of (i) a He+ milling process of Ti, (ii) a FIBIE process with XeF2 chemical assistance, and (iii) a laser-assisted FIBIE process. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of a microlens on hard materials by the femtosecond laser followed by IBE. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) The “sketch and peel” process, in which only a narrow trench is required to be milled to obtain a particle by selectively peeling off the majority of the metal film. (d) Mechanism analysis of the “sketch and peel” FIB milling process. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Multilayered structures created at three different process flows by the redeposition of different materials. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (f) Amorphous layer thickness under different ion beam energies. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. (g) Patterning method of concave 3D structures on a diamond surface using FIB sputtering and heat treatment. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the residual stress distribution of a gold nanofilm under global ion beam irradiation. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) and (c) Simulated distributions of (b) gallium ion concentration and (c) vacancy density versus the depth of the nanofilm using SRIM software under FIB irradiation with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of two typical structural deformations when only one or two ends (indicated by the red squares) of the suspended structures are fixed. Tongue-shaped structure connected at one end and an artificial mesh structure connected all around. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) and (f) Local irradiation of the suspended cantilevers under line-scanning along the dashed line with the FIB and global irradiation of the suspended cantilevers under frame-scanning over the suspended area with the FIB. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, AIP Publishing. (g)–(j) Ion beam dosage test. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (k) Schematic diagrams illustrating the steps in the fabrication of spatially oriented 3D nanostructures by FIB irradiation combined with FIB etching. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (l) Ion-beam irradiation-induced folding of in-plane Au nanostructures. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Tungsten deposited by the FIB with different dwell times from 0.1 to 2.5 μm, and the same ion dose of 6 nC μm−2; refresh time of 1000 μs; X and Y step sizes of 0.071 and 0.068 μm, respectively; and beam spot size of 25 nm. (b) Dwell time vs. mean film thickness (measured by AFM) under an ion dose of 3 nC μm−2, spot size of 25 nm, and current of 207 pA. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (c) AFM images of a rectangular pattern deposited for different current densities. (d) Deposition yield dependence on the ion-beam current. Dwell time, 0.6 μs. Cycle time, 5 ms. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (e) Film thickness deposited from styrene at 2.2 torr as a function of ion dose. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 1988, AIP Publishing. (f) Deposition rate as a function of cycle time. Current density, 7.8 A cm−2. Dwell time, 0.4 μs. Gas flux was estimated to be 7 × 1016 molecules per cm. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (g) Cycle time (refresh time) vs. mean film thickness (measured by AFM) under an ion dose of 3 nC μm−2, spot size of 25 nm, and current of 207 pA. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. (h) and (i) The 3D spiral structure and its array generated by ion beam induced deposition. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic images showing the structures prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent FIB XeF2-assisted etching (FIB-GAE). (b) Illustration of redeposited material removal during the FIB-GAE process. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (c)–(f) Microfabrication process of a cantilever structure in single-crystal diamond: (c) MeV ion implantation (optical image of the 100 μm × 100 μm implanted regions) is followed by (d) FIB-micromachining (scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the patterned trenches), thermal annealing, and (e) chemical etching (optical image of the structure after subsequent etching steps progressively undercutting the cantilever). (f) A SEM image of the final cantilever structure. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic of the two-step ion implantation and pulsed laser annealing graphitization process. (h) SEM (scale bar = 10 μm) of a PLA spot indicating graphitization. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (i) Patterning method on a diamond surface using FIB and DUV irradiation. (j) AFM image of the line structures prepared by FIB and DUV irradiation. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Nano-indentation surface topology: (k) normal silicon and (l) implanted silicon. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (m) Diamond cutting of micro-structures on brittle material assisted by multi-implantation. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

Etching	IBSE: LMIS	Semiconductor devices and large-scale integrated circuits, sample detection, high-power solid-state laser, renewable energy, nano-optics, single molecule detection, high-resolution X-ray imaging, biosensing, nano-electromechanical, holographic, water desalination, DNA sequencing	Optical mask,5,49 transistor,49 chip,171 TEM samples,104,172–177 crack detection,178 micro-sensor,179 optical component,48,180 digital micromirror,16,26 ultra-thin optical polarization converters,16,26 microdiffractive optical element,16,26,181 Fresnel zone plates,182 nano-photomasks,131 plasmonic structures,75,137,183 plasmonic devices,71,97 nano-kirigami,30 microlens arrays,184 nanostep arrays,185,186 freeform surfaces,129,130 2D materials nanobelt,135 microfluidic component,187 nanowires and nanorods,188–190 nanosensors,191 nanoantennas,84,192,193 nanorod electrodes,192,194,195 nanogap electrodes,194 nanopore electrode arrays,196,197 Ti electrode arrays,198 nano-scale Ti honeycombs,199 nano-cutting tools,200 spintronic devices,127 engineered microsphere,201–203 diamond hemispherical array,204 mid-infrared device,205 chiral metamaterials,206–211 nanoporous graphene membranes.212,213
IBSE: GFIS	Sample detection, integrated circuits, MEMS, nano-optics, optoelectronic devices, molecular devices, Raman spectroscopy, electrochemical, biomedical, single molecule detection, and micro-energy	Gold electrodes,214 monolayer graphene,94,215 plasmonic nanoantennas,84 plasmonic nanoslit cavities,216 plasmonic nanodimer,139 h-BN (hexagonal boron nitride) grating,217 third-generation DNA sequencers,218 functional graphene nanoconductors,219 microlens arrays,136,220 advanced extreme ultraviolet lithography mask repair,70 superconducting tunnel junctions.221
RIBE	Electrical, optical, optoelectronic platform, magnetic, medical diagnosis, MEMS, solar–thermal energy harvesting system, micro-energy, bio-chip manufacturing	Resonator,34 Fresnel zone plates,3,222,223 silicon tip array,224 polystyrene nano-cone array,225 chiral structure array,226 cross nano-aluminum hole pixel array,227 2D cylindrical cavity array,228 multifeature shaped 3-dimensional nanostructures,229 silicon nano-line structure,230 ordered nano-textured surface,231–233 surface optical functional texture of crystalline silicon cells,234–236 LSO photonic crystal,237 micro-motor,5 multipolar modulated metasurfaces filter device,107 high-density magnetic storage device,179 terahertz segmented slow-wave structure,103,238–240 single crystal diamond micro-disk resonators,241 nanoelectrodes,242 nonlinear nano-resonant dielectric metasurfaces,243 hydrophilic–hydrophobic femtolitre-well arrays,244 nano-channels,245 nanotubes.246
PE	Electrical, magnetic, microfluidic, optical, optoelectronic, MEMS, quantum technologies and biotechnology, micro-energy, water desalination	Air bridge microstructure,247 microcantilever,248 graphene nanopore and nanobelt,249–251 microfluidic device (such as microfluidic channel, micropump, microvalve, microheater and microsensor),252,253 metalens,254 ultra-aspect ratio GaN microstructure,109 perovskite liquid crystal display devices,255 subwavelength nanostructures,256 diamond lenses and diamond bridge shape,257,258 diamond nanoimprint die,104 diamond nanopillar matrix,105 graphene-based membranes,259 MoS2 inverter.260
Irradiation	
	Nanoelectronics, plasmonics, nanophotonics, optomechanics, MEMS/NEMS, architecture, performance-specific devices (such as mechanical, biological and optical), DNA nano-cutting and folding, on-chip devices and integration	SRR array,148,261 EOT-SRR,262,263 3D pinwheel structure,30,264 binary grating,150 superconducting nanowires,265 Ni film polygon in a 3D polyhedral structure,149 transparent SiNx film,266 metamaterial optics, biological devices, optoelectronic devices and sensors, vibrational molecular spectroscopy, high efficiency fuel cells, and nano-scale plasmonic devices.2,267–269
Deposition	
	Integrated circuit, nano-optics, nanoplasmonics, electronics, nanosensing, microelectrode system, microfluidics, semiconductors and nanosuperconductor, complex surface structures	Optical masks, X-ray masks, and optical phase masks, ohmic contact layer, connection line,26,49,78 diffraction grating,270 carbon nanotubes, nanowires, DNA molecular chains, graphene,5,63,190,271 nanochannels and hollow nanowires,272–277 micro-hemispheres, parabolic and sinusoidal microstructures, nanohelical structures, miniature Fresnel lenses, nano-biological experimental networks,49,200,278,279 3D flying tungsten structure,280 nanomechanical switch,281 field electron emitter,282 chiral plasmonic nanohelices,159 nano-scale pickup loop,283 nanopillars and nanocantilever,279 Pt-deposited protection layer,49 bio-nanotools,284,285 nano-rotor,286 paired platinum wires.156
Implantation	
	Nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, plasmonics, sensing, biomedical, circuitry, semiconductor, surface modification, nano-cutting, device performance regulation, size analysis, and new device production	Nanocantilevers, nanocups, and nanogroove arrays,17,19 sinusoidal structures, nano-gratings, and nano-electrode,164 optical waveguide,166 nanochannels, freestanding bridges and cantilevers,287 resonators,288 suspended beams,289 silicon-based nanostructures,290 micro-pyramid anti-reflection layer,291 micro-pillar array,170 InGaZnO thin-film transistors,292 thin circuitry.293

 	Fig. 12  Typical and new applications of ion beam etching. (a) Debugged part of an integrated circuit chip correction by the FIB. (b) Illustration and repair of optical mask defects. (c) TEM sample prepared by controlled FIB sputtering. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Top SEM image of the prepared 3D gap-plasmon antenna milled by a Ga-ion beam. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (e) AFM 3D nanostep array image of the FIB pattern. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2007, ResearchGate GmbH. (f) SEM image of nanogap electrode fabrication through the break of a single GB junction milled by the FIB. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (g) SEM image of the FIB prepared hemi-spherical micro-tool. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2010, The Optical Society. (h) SEM images of the prepared metasurface hologram. Reproduced with permission.311 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i)–(k) Original 2D object compared with simulated and experimentally reconstructed color holographic images. Reproduced with permission.311 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Original object of “RGB” colored letters. (j) Simulated color holographic images. The central desired images are well separated spatially from the side images. (k) Experimentally reconstructed color holographic images from the prepared metasurface hologram shown in (h), with unwanted side images automatically filtered out by an objective lens with a certain NA. (l) Plasmonic bullseye structure: SEM/FIB images of the bullseye/nanopore structures, respectively, milled into the gold side of the free-standing membrane. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (m) Experimental setup schematic showing laser irradiation and electrical detection. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (n) Focused helium ion beam creating a Josephson junction in the YBCO film. The red lines indicate where the helium ion beam was scanned to create the junctions. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (o) SEM image of the prepared nano-cone structure, and the inset shows an enlarged view of the nanocone, and photographs of 35 nm-thick tungsten deposited on the photoresist coated silicon substrate (left) and nanocone structure (right). Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (p) SEM image of the multi-dielectric nanostructure and the structural design of the multi-dielectric metasurface under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (q) A typical cross-sectional SEM image of an array of >10 μm tall micropillars obtained after 60 min of etching. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, American Vacuum Society. (r) Schematic view of the c-Si metalens and the portion of the metalens that shows the profile and sidewalls of the nanobricks. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the MH-VSRR structure. (b) and (c) SEM images of the prepared MH-VSRRs. (d) As-measured transmission spectra of the MH-VSRRs shown in (c) under normal incidence with the electric field polarized along the x- and y-directions, respectively. (e) Simulated transmission spectra of the MH-VSRRs corresponding to (d). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the unit cell of a 3D MM. Side-view SEM images of the prepared 3D MMs with (g) vertical SRRs and (h) vertical plates. (i) Measured transmission spectra of the structures in (f) and (g) under y-polarized light excitation. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (j) Schematic of the fabrication process with a home-developed ion-beam irradiation-induced folding technique. (k) Side-view SEM image of the prepared 3D structure. Scale bar: 2 μm. (l) Side-view SEM images of the prepared SRR. The scale bar is 1 μm. (m) Measured transmission spectra of the prepared structure with HArm1 = 1.2 μm and different HArm2 as noted. Each spectrum from bottom to top is vertically shifted by one unit compared to that below it. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (n)–(p) Design and preparation of 3D toroidal metamaterials, as well as the toroidal responses of the 3D metamaterial. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (q)–(v) Giant optical chirality. SEM images of (q) 2D and (r) 3D pinwheel arrays with a periodicity of 1.45 mm. The height of the 3D pinwheels is about 380 nm. (s) Top-view SEM images of LH and RH 3D pinwheel arrays. The scale bar is 1 μm. (t) Measured CD in transmission versus wavelength for 2D LH, 3D LH, and 3D RH pinwheels. a.u., arbitrary units. (u) Measured (circular points) and calculated (solid lines) linear polarization rotation angle (θ) versus wavelength for 3D and 2D LH pinwheels. (v) Polar plot of experimental transmission versus detection polarization angle at specific wavelengths under x-polarized incidence for the 3D LH pinwheels. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (w) Top-view and side-view SEM images of a circular grating with a radiation separation of Δr = 1.45 μm. (x) CCD camera images of transmitted light with np, xp, and yp detection under x-polarized incidence at wavelengths of 1.45, 1.55, and 1.68 μm, respectively. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, AIP Publishing. (y) Free-space tungsten nanostructures formed based on FIB-grown tungsten nanowires. The scale bar is 1 μm. (z) The temperature-dependent normalized resistivity of a free-space tungsten nanostructure prepared by FIB-induced deformation of FIB-grown tungsten nanopillars (red triangle) and that of the as-deposited nanopillar without deformation (black circle). The inset shows the SEM side view image of the corresponding nanostructure. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 14  Various nanostructures and devices prepared by FIB deposition. (a) IC chip modification by FIB deposition. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a superconducting wire, synthesized by IBID, in a four-point contact configuration for transport measurements. Its dimensions are 10 μm, 300, and 120 nm, in length, width, and thickness, respectively. The scale bar is 2 μm. (c) Resistivity versus temperature for magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the superconducting wire from 0 to 5 Tesla. Reproduced with permission.314 Copyright 2004, AIP Publishing. (d) Diffraction grating formed by Pt wires grown by FIBID on polycarbonate (PC) substrates and the diffraction pattern in transmission mode created by such a grating. Reproduced with permission.270 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Vertical growth of a WC hollow nanowire using a He+ FIB focused to ∼1 nm and the HR (S)TEM image of a cross-sectional view of the WC nanowire. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of the single 3D flying tungsten structure. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2007, IOP Publishing. (g) Scanning ion microscopy (SIM) micrograph of inductance, resistance, and capacitor structures. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2004, American Vacuum Society. (h) SEM image of a field electron emitter with a DLC tip as the cold cathode prepared on a glass capillary. Reproduced with permission.282 Copyright 2006, IOP Publishing. (i) Array of 20 × 20 3D chiral plasmonic nanohelices. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (j) SEM image of the freestanding tungsten pickup loop. Reproduced with permission.283 Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. (k) A nanocantilever of carbon made by the FIB after coating the inside portion with Pt through scattered ion-induced deposition. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (l) SIM image of a nano-net holding three microspheres after capture. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2005, Elsevier. (m) SEM image of a cell wall cutting tool (CWCT) prepared by FIB-CVD. Reproduced with permission.285 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (n) 3D nano-rotor fabrication by focused-ion-beam chemical-vapor-deposition. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2006, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Micro-sinusoidal structure pattern prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent XeF2 gas-assisted etching. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 50 pA and 120 s for each sine structure, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 10 kV, 23 pA and 15 s. (b) Nano-gratings prepared by FIB implantation and subsequent FIB-GAE. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 40 s, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 2 s. (c) and (d) Nano-electrode made by FIB implantation and subsequent XeF2 gas-assisted etching. The FIB implantation parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 210 s, and the FIB-GAE parameters are 30 kV, 30 pA and 8 s. The added nanowire in image (d) is Pt nanowire resulting from FIB deposition. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2009, IOP Publishing. (e) SEM image of a micrometer-scale bridge structure machined in single-crystal diamond; the ∼400 nm thick gap below the freestanding bridge is visible. (f)–(i) Schematics of (f) the input/output light-collection system and (g) coupling to the waveguide structure; (h) optical images of the incoming and outgoing 532 nm laser light between pairs of 45° mirrors facing each other in the bulk and (i) coupled through the bridge structure. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. Grating structures on 〈100〉 silicon: (j) cross section of a varying period of 210–245 nm and (k) cross section of a constant period of 100 nm. (l) A series of freestanding cantilevers on 〈100〉 Si substrate. (m) A series of 2 μm long freestanding bridges. The widths range from 25 to 145 nm. (n) Nanochannels separated by vertical sidewalls on the 〈100〉 Si substrate. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. (o) A SEM image of a suspended, doubly clamped silicon nanowire mechanical resonator prepared by FIB implantation, wet chemical etching and a high temperature annealing/doping process. (p) Electrical measurement of the mechanical response of the silicon nanowire using a down-mixing method based on frequency modulation. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing. (q) A SEM image of 3-layer structures. (r) A SEM image of lines of widths as small as 33 nm, patterned in a deposited layer. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (s) A SEM image of blazed gratings with an altered angle of slope across the structure; the parameters are period 300 nm and height 70 nm. The scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.290 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (t) An optical micrograph of a standard WSe2 FET device and transfer curves for exposed FETs with V DS = −1.1 V. The scale bar is 10 μm. (u) Transfer curves for exposed FETs with V DS = −1.1 V. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (v) A SEM image of a subwavelength antireflective MP grating prepared on GaP crystals. (w) THz output power as a function of pump power from a 3 mm GaP crystal generated from areas with and without AR gratings (Λ = 60 μm, θ = 45° and 55.5°) on the exit surface. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2013, Optical Society of America. 3D measurement (x) and topology in detail (y) of the machined structures. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
