Microfluidic redox battery  - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3LC50499A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3LC50499A
(Communication)
Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 2504-2507Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMicrofluidic redox battery

        
          
            Jin Wook 
            Lee†
, 
      
        
          
            Marc-Antoni 
            Goulet†
 and 

        
          
            Erik 
            Kjeang
          
        
      *
      School of Mechatronic Systems Engineering, Simon Fraser University, 250-13450 102 Avenue, Surrey, BC V3T 0A3, Canada. E-mail: ekjeang@sfu.ca;  Fax: +1 (778) 782-7514;   Tel: +1 (778) 782-8791
Received 
      20th April 2013
    , Accepted 8th May 2013First published on 10th May 2013AbstractA miniaturized microfluidic battery is proposed, which is the first membraneless redox battery demonstrated to date. This unique concept capitalizes on dual-pass flow-through porous electrodes combined with stratified, co-laminar flow to generate electrical power on-chip. The fluidic design is symmetric to allow for both charging and discharging operations in forward, reverse, and recirculation modes. The proof-of-concept device fabricated using low-cost materials integrated in a microfluidic chip is shown to produce competitive power levels when operated on a vanadium redox electrolyte. A complete charge/discharge cycle is performed to demonstrate its operation as a rechargeable battery, which is an important step towards providing sustainable power to lab-on-a-chip and microelectronic applications.
As an efficient and environmentally safe energy storage system, redox flow batteries (RFBs) have gained increased attention over the past years for utility grid-scale stationary applications. RFBs are electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices whose overall components are similar to those of polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells.1 A key distinctive characteristic of RFBs compared to conventional battery technologies is the ability to separate power generation from energy storage.2 The discharged electrolytes can be recharged in situ, or if necessary, entire storage tanks can be replaced with fresh electrolyte tanks for instant recharge. Vanadium RFBs, which were commercialized in the late 90s, demonstrated several advantages over Li-ion batteries in terms of long-term durability, high round-trip efficiency, and low capital cost.3 Miniaturization of RFBs is however a major challenge due to the stacked architecture with multiple functional layers.
In the realm of low-power, off-grid applications, wireless sensor networks are frequently employed to meet sensing demands from various customers, including military, industrial, commercial, and medical applications. The wireless sensors and signal transmitters in remote areas typically require long-lasting, durable power sources with low maintenance cost.4 The main motivation for miniaturizing power supply units, such as fuel cells or batteries, includes its potential for high energy efficiency, robustness, and compactness. Therefore, lab-on-a-chip (LOC) and microfluidic cells have several advantages in this context, such as high surface-to-volume ratio, on-chip integration capability, and ease of miniaturization with relatively low material cost. Over the past decade, significant advances have been made on air-breathing5 and all-liquid6,7 microfluidic fuel cells that utilize microscale stratified flow control to eliminate the membrane and reduce cost.8,9 More recently, a paper-based microfluidic galvanic cell directly integrated with functional devices was reported by Thom et al.10 However, none of the microfluidic power sources presented to date are capable of in situ recharging.
The main goal of the present work is to develop and demonstrate a laminar flow-based microfluidic redox battery (MRB) that is fully capable of in situ recharging and cyclic operation. For this purpose, a novel symmetric architecture employing dual-pass flow-through porous electrodes11 is proposed, fabricated, and benchmarked experimentally. Similar to miniaturized membraneless fuel cells,8,9 the proposed redox battery is designed to eliminate the membrane by utilizing predictable co-laminar flow at low Reynolds numbers with minimal convective mixing. Removal of the membrane also eludes membrane degradation issues and may potentially enhance durability. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first membraneless MRB employing a single layer LOC architecture reported to date. Manufactured from inexpensive materials with scalable methods, the proposed battery can potentially be used as an integrated power source for low-power applications, such as micro-sensors and actuators and a host of other LOC functions.12 In addition, if incorporated with an energy harvesting system or solar photovoltaic cell, the proposed device can be employed as a low-cost, durable power source for wireless sensor networks.
Graphical illustrations of the proposed MRB design are provided in Fig. 1. Geometrically symmetric in transversal and longitudinal directions, the present MRB device is designed to be compatible with dual electrolyte flow in forward, reverse, and recirculation modes for maximum versatility. The layout consists of four fluid ports (two inlets and two outlets) and two porous electrodes positioned in parallel. The two inlets allow the input of anolyte and catholyte streams directed to flow through the first portion of the electrodes (Section 1 in Fig. 1(b)) where the electrochemical reactions take place. The two streams then enter the central channel where they turn downstream and flow in parallel in a symmetric, co-laminar fashion with minimal mixing between the streams. In Section 2, the two streams make another turn and flow in the opposite direction through the porous electrodes where the same electrochemical reactions take place. Finally, the fluid-containing products of the reactions exit the device through the two outlet ports. The MRB is interfaced electrically by two wires bonded to each end of the porous electrodes using a conductive epoxy. In the middle of the device, a 4 mm long wall is intended to seal the electrode tangentially to minimize unwanted bypass of fresh electrolyte.
 Fig. 1  A schematic representation of the proposed microfluidic redox battery with dual-pass flow-through porous electrodes: (a) an exploded view; and (b) the top view. 
The prototype MRB cells were fabricated by standard soft lithography in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).13 After insertion of the porous electrodes, the PDMS microchannel structure was sealed with a substrate layer (glass slide) using a corona treater (BD-20AC, Electro-Technic Products). The master was 150 μm high to ensure that the porous electrodes (180 μm thick) were slightly compressed for uniform flow distributions when assembled. For evaluation purposes, the MRB was operated on commonly employed vanadium redox electrolyte comprising of four different vanadium ions: V2+/V3+ and VO2+/VO2+, denoted here as V(II), V(III), V(IV), and V(V), respectively.7 The theoretical standard cell potential is 1.246 V and can be increased up to 1.5 V depending on the state of charge. 1.7 M of vanadium redox electrolyte solutions were prepared from a stock electrolyte in 4 M sulphuric acid base according to a previously described procedure.7 Carbon nanofoam (Type I, MarkeTech) was selected as the porous electrodes for the MRB due to its rapid electrochemical kinetics,14 high porosity, extremely high surface area, and ultrafine pore sizes (less than 50 nm).15
First, a high state-of-charge (SOC) anolyte (93% V(II)) and catholyte (85% V(V)) supplied in a single pass forward mode by a dual syringe pump were used to benchmark the MRB discharge performance with respect to previously reported microfluidic fuel cell devices.14 An annotated image of the actual device operated in discharge mode is provided in Fig. 2, where the distinct colours of the different reactants and products can be observed. The measured polarization and power density curves of the MRB at a flow rate of 10 μL min−1 are presented in Fig. 3. The open circuit cell voltage was 1.5 V. Notably, no abrupt potential drops were observed in the activation overpotential region, in contrast to cells with regular carbon paper electrodes known to exhibit more severe activation loss characteristics.16 This favourable observation, which is particularly encouraging for battery operation at high voltage efficiency, is a consequence of the rapid electrochemical kinetics of the vanadium redox reactions on the carbon nanofoam electrode material.14 The overall discharge performance achieved by the MRB, indicated by current densities up to 0.6 A cm−2 and a peak power density in excess of 0.3 W cm−2, is on the same order of magnitude as recently reported, state-of-the-art miniaturized fuel cells.7,14 The corresponding peak power density is 3 W cm−3, if normalized by the single electrode volume (1 cm × 0.015 cm × 0.1 cm).
 Fig. 2  An annotated image of a microfluidic redox battery operating in discharge mode at 10 μL min−1 flow rate. The dotted lines indicate the positions of the porous electrodes. 
 Fig. 3  The discharging performance of the microfluidic redox battery at 10 μL min−1 flow rate. A linear potential sweep from 1.5 to 0.1 V at 3 mV s−1 was performed using a potentiostat (Reference 3000, Gamry Instruments). The current densities and power densities reported here were normalized by the net flow area normal to the main flow direction, 0.015 cm2 (1 cm × 0.015 cm). 
The in situ charging mode operation was conducted in a single pass forward mode using low SOC electrolytes (10%) at a low flow rate of 1 μL min−1. The flow rates at the inlets were controlled by a syringe pump applying a positive pressure, while the two outlet flow rates were set by a negative pressure from another syringe pump operating simultaneously. A constant potential of 1.7 V was applied by a potentiostat in order to reach the highest charging overpotential possible, while avoiding side reactions and hydrogen evolution that may occur at high cell potentials. As shown in Fig. 4, a steady-state charging current of 0.85 ± 0.02 mA was reached. It is worth noting that the characteristic charging curves of the MRB under single pass operation at a fixed cell potential are essentially flat, in contrast to the unsteady curves obtained under electrolyte recirculation (not shown here). The product electrolytes of the charging process were collected in separate syringes and their SOC was measured to be roughly 35% for V(II) and 45% for V(V). The slight asymmetry between the charging of V(II) and V(V) can be attributed to asymmetric crossover of the reactant species, but may also be due to side reactions and/or the uncertainty inherent to the potentiometric SOC measurements. Although only a moderate SOC was reached for this particular cycle, higher SOC levels up to 70% were observed at other operating conditions with this device. Upon completion of a single pass of charging, the flow was reversed to operate the device again in discharge mode to verify the feasibility of cyclic battery operation. An operating point of 1.0 V at 1 μL min−1, which resulted in a flat discharge profile with an average current of 0.29 ± 0.02 mA, also shown in Fig. 4, was observed to produce a SOC as close as possible to the initial 10%. The overall round-trip energy efficiency of the obtained in situ charge-discharge cycle was estimated by calculating the ratio of the energy furnished by the battery during the discharge to the energy supplied during the charge. For this particular run, the energy efficiency was found to be around 20%. By comparison, the typical round-trip efficiency of a hydrogen electrolyzer/fuel cell combination is also ∼20%.17 As a proof-of-concept, the present MRB device performs reasonably well, although higher round-trip efficiencies exceeding 30% are expected at lower power operating conditions and/or with electrolyte recirculation. Optimization of the battery design and flow management with respect to the operating voltage and power density will be the subject of a future study.
 Fig. 4  Proof-of-concept operation of the microfluidic redox battery in a complete charge-discharge cycle. The current during charging at 1 μL min−1 and 1.7 V and discharging at 1 μL min−1 and 1.0 V is shown. The bars indicate the state of charge of V(V) measured at the initial, post-charge, and post-discharge conditions. 
Conclusions
For the first time, a membraneless microfluidic redox battery was demonstrated. Prototypes of the proposed microfluidic battery architecture with unique dual-pass flow-through porous electrodes were designed, fabricated, and tested experimentally. The discharging power density of the battery was found to be equivalent to previously developed microfluidic fuel cells, with a peak power density of 0.3 W cm−2. In addition, the battery device successfully demonstrated in situ charging of vanadium redox electrolytes from 10 to 45% state of charge, followed by the discharge of the same electrolytes back to the initial state of charge to complete a full charge-discharge cycle. In the present study, the device demonstrated that the concept of laminar flow-based microfluidic fuel cells can be extended to rechargeable and therefore reusable microfluidic redox batteries, which is a significant breakthrough towards providing sustainable power to lab-on-a-chip applications. The overall battery architecture is compatible with most liquid phase redox chemistries and can facilitate integration with biological and physiological systems for a wide range of on-chip utilities.
Acknowledgements
Funding for this research provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Western Economic Diversification Canada, Canada Foundation for Innovation, British Columbia Knowledge Development Fund, and Simon Fraser University (SFU) is highly appreciated. We also acknowledge Mr. Andy Klassen at Prudent Energy for experimental support and advice.
References

          J. Larminie and A. Dicks, Fuel Cell Systems Explained,  2003, John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, 2nd edn, p. 5 Search PubMed .
A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. H. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreiber, M. Harrer, A. Whitehead, H. Bucsich, M. Dragschitz, E. Seifert and P. Tymciw, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Petersen, P. Doyle, S. Vatland, C. S. Aasland, T. M. Andersen and D. Sjong, 12th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2007, 1–3, 219 Search PubMed .
R. S. Jayashree, L. Gancs, E. R. Choban, A. Primak, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16758 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrigno, A. D. Stroock, T. D. Clark, M. Mayer and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12930 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kjeang, R. Michel, D. A. Harrington, N. Djilali and D. Sinton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4000 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kjeang, N. Djilali and D. Sinton, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 353 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. M. Shaegh, N. T. Nguyen and S. H. Chan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5675 CrossRef .
N. K. Thom, K. Yeung, M. B. Pillion and S. T. Phillips, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 1768 RSC .

          E. Kjeang, D. Sinton and N. Djilali, US Patent Application 20090092882,  2009 Search PubMed .
S. Pennathur, J. C. T. Eijkel and A. van den Berg, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 1234 RSC .
J. W. Lee and E. Kjeang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9359 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee and E. Kjeang, J. Power Sources, 2013 Search PubMed  , (under review).
R. W. Pekala, J. C. Farmer, C. T. Alviso, T. D. Tran, S. T. Mayer, J. M. Miller and B. Dunn, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 74 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, J. K. Hong and E. Kjeang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yilanci, I. Dincer and H. K. Ozturk, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2009, 35, 231 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† JWL and MAG contributed equally to this work. EK conceived the concept and overall device architecture. JWL and MAG conducted the experiments and analyzed the data. JWL, MAG, and EK wrote the article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic representation of the proposed microfluidic redox battery with dual-pass flow-through porous electrodes: (a) an exploded view; and (b) the top view.	 

 	Fig. 2  An annotated image of a microfluidic redox battery operating in discharge mode at 10 μL min−1 flow rate. The dotted lines indicate the positions of the porous electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 3  The discharging performance of the microfluidic redox battery at 10 μL min−1 flow rate. A linear potential sweep from 1.5 to 0.1 V at 3 mV s−1 was performed using a potentiostat (Reference 3000, Gamry Instruments). The current densities and power densities reported here were normalized by the net flow area normal to the main flow direction, 0.015 cm2 (1 cm × 0.015 cm).	 

 	Fig. 4  Proof-of-concept operation of the microfluidic redox battery in a complete charge-discharge cycle. The current during charging at 1 μL min−1 and 1.7 V and discharging at 1 μL min−1 and 1.0 V is shown. The bars indicate the state of charge of V(V) measured at the initial, post-charge, and post-discharge conditions.	 
Footnote
† JWL and MAG contributed equally to this work. EK conceived the concept and overall device architecture. JWL and MAG conducted the experiments and analyzed the data. JWL, MAG, and EK wrote the article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
