Impact of donor halogenation on reorganization energies and voltage losses in bulk-heterojunction solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00174A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00174A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1277-1290Impact of donor halogenation on reorganization energies and voltage losses in bulk-heterojunction solar cells†

        
          
            Hongbo 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zaifei 
            Ma
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mengyang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ailing 
            Tang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Erjun 
            Zhou
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Wen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanming 
            Sun
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Tress
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jógvan Magnus Haugaard 
            Olsen
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Simone 
            Meloni
          
        
      *g, 
      
        
          
            Zhishan 
            Bo
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zheng 
            Tang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Center for Advanced Low-dimension Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, 201620 Shanghai, P. R. China. E-mail: mazaifei@dhu.edu.cn; ztang@dhu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, 100875, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: zsbo@bnu.edu.cn
cCAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, 100190 Beijing, P. R. China
dSchool of Chemistry, Beihang University, 100191 Beijing, P. R. China
eInstitute of Computational Physics, Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Wildbachstr. 21, 8401 Winterthur, Switzerland
fDTU Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
gDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Farmaceutiche e Agrarie – DOCPAS, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: mlnsmn@unife.it
Received 
      17th January 2023
    , Accepted 15th February 2023First published on 16th February 2023AbstractDonor halogenation is a common molecular design strategy used to reduce voltage losses (ΔVloss) and improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells. Here, the impact of donor halogenation on the performance of organic donor–acceptor (DA) solar cells based on over 30 different materials systems is investigated, and the main reason for the improved performance of solar cells after donor halogenation is ascribed to the increased energy of the charge transfer (CT) state, and the reduced reorganization energy of the CT states (λCT). Also, the impact of donor halogenation on λCT is found to be stronger for the solar cells using the Y-series acceptors (Y5, Y6, etc.) than those using the non-Y-series acceptors (fullerene, ITIC, etc.), which is conducive to achieving lower ΔVloss in organic solar cells. Finally, the impact of donor halogenation on the solar cell performance is demonstrated to be dependent on the halogen substitution position, as well as the number of halogen atoms added to the donor molecule: Halogen substitution on the side groups of the donor molecule is found to be more effective than substitution at the backbone in reducing ΔVloss. These results suggest that future molecular design strategies focusing on the reduction of materials reorganization energy will be of great importance for further improving the performance of organic solar cells.

Broader context
Organic solar cells (OSCs) are an attractive alternative to silicon photovoltaics due to their low production cost, light weight, and solution processability. In recent years, significant efforts have been made to improve their performance, resulting in remarkable progress. For example, the development of non-fullerene acceptors like ITIC and Y6 has allowed for power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 10%. Further advancements, such as the structural fine-tuning of donor or acceptor molecules and the optimization of the donor/acceptor interfaces, have pushed PCEs beyond 19%. Halogenation is a common strategy for structural fine-tuning, particularly of the donor materials. Chlorine or fluorine substitution in typical donor molecules often results in reduced photovoltage losses and improved device performance. However, the reason for the reduced voltage losses remains unclear. A better understanding of the origin of these losses is crucial for designing more efficient organic photovoltaic materials. Here, we investigate the impact of donor halogenation on voltage losses in OSCs using both experimental and theoretical methods. We find that the reduced voltage loss is partly due to a decrease in the charge transfer state energy and more significantly due to a reduction in the reorganization energy associated with the structural change of the donor-acceptor interfaces.

1. Introduction
The performance of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells has been improving rapidly over the past years, and the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of the most efficient organic solar cells are now over 19%,1–6 owing to the development of highly efficient donor and acceptor materials via tailored molecular design strategies.7–10 One important method to improve the optoelectronic properties of the active materials is to employ the halogenation strategy.11–15 It has been demonstrated that using halogenated donor materials,13,16,17 instead of non-halogenated ones, results in better aligned energy levels of the donor–acceptor (DA) blend systems, giving rise to higher photovoltaic quantum efficiency.18,19 Furthermore, solar cells constructed using halogenated donors were also observed to have significantly lower non-radiative recombination voltage loss (ΔVnr), associated with higher external quantum efficiency of electroluminescence (EQEEL).20–23 Consequently, the overall voltage loss (ΔVloss) is lower,21,23 and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) is higher in organic solar cells based on halogenated donors, as compared to those based on non-halogenated donors.
ΔVnr in organic solar cells originates from strong vibrational coupling between the ground state and the charge transfer (CT) states formed at the DA interfaces,24–26 which in a simplified model linearly reduces with increasing energy of the CT state (ECT), following the so-called energy gap law.24,27 Thus, the lower ΔVnr in the solar cells based on halogenated donors can partly be attributed to the higher ECT,24 resulting from the lowering of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level. However, the reduction in ΔVnr in organic solar cells after donor halogenation is often considerably higher than what is predicted by the energy gap law, especially in the case of solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors like Y5,28 Y6,29 and Y7:30 ΔVnr of the BHJ devices based on fluorinated donor PM6 or chlorinated donor PM7,31,32 mixed with Y6, was only about 0.25 V,33 and thus significantly lower than that based on the non-halogenated PBDB-T:Y6 system (0.35 V),34 although the difference in ECT was less than 0.05 eV (ECT of the blends based on PM6:Y6 and PBDB-T:Y6 were found to be 1.31 and 1.33 eV, respectively).35
Later, it was found that reducing the energetic driving force, defined as the difference between ECT and the energy of the singlet excited state (S1) of the pristine donor or acceptor, could lead to a hybridization between the CT and the S1 state. The hybridization gives rise to an increased CT to ground transition dipole moment and increased EQEEL.36 Thus, the smaller driving force, due to the higher ECT of the blend systems based on halogenated donors, could be an additional reason for the increased EQEEL and reduced ΔVnr. However, in this case, the reduced ΔVnr should be associated with increased radiative recombination voltage loss (ΔVr).24,35,36 This is contrary to that observed for the solar cells after donor halogenation: both ΔVnr and ΔVr are lower in the solar cells based on halogenated donors, compared to those based on non-halogenated donors.22,23 Therefore, the origin of the impact of donor halogenation on the performance, especially voltage losses in organic solar cells, is still not fully understood. Understanding the reason behind the reduction in ΔVloss after donor halogenation is expected to be of great importance for the development of molecular design strategies for more efficient organic photovoltaic materials, and thus, for breaking through the performance bottleneck of organic solar cells.
In this study, over 30 DA systems were analyzed and it was found that the reduction in ΔVloss in solar cells after donor halogenation is attributed to the suppressed geometric reorganization of the organic blend materials, resulting in a lower CT state reorganization energy (λCT). Additionally, the reduction in ΔVloss was shown to be restricted in blend systems using non-Y series acceptors (such as ITIC,37 IT4F,38 IT4Cl,39etc.). Because donor halogenation, despite being able to reduce the reorganization energy of the donor (λD), leads to an increased reorganization energy of acceptor (λA) for the blends based on the non-Y series acceptors. On the other hand, for the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors (Y5, Y6, Y7, etc.), donor halogenation reduces the λD without affecting λA. This explains the more significant impact of donor halogenation on ΔVloss for the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors, as compared to those based on the non-Y-series acceptors. Finally, the impact of the donor halogenation strategy on λCT, as well as ΔVloss of the solar cells, is found to be dependent on the number of halogen atoms added and the halogen substitution position on the donor molecule. These results not only shed light on the mechanism behind the reduction in ΔVloss in BHJ solar cells after donor halogenation, but also highlight the critical role played by molecular reorganization in determining the Voc of these solar cells. As voltage losses are the main obstacle to achieving higher PCEs in organic solar cells, minimizing this issue through molecular structural engineering to reduce the reorganization energy is a promising direction for future research aimed at enhancing the performance of organic solar cells.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Analysis of voltage losses in organic solar cells based on halogenated and non-halogenated donors
To evaluate the impact of donor halogenation on voltage losses, we first constructed solar cells based on a non-halogenated donor, namely, PBDB-T,40 and halogenated donors including PM6 and PM7.31,32 Different acceptor materials were used, and the device architecture was ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag. Chemical structures of the active materials used are provided in Fig. S1 (Note S1, ESI†). First, the absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the acceptors are measured to determine their bandgap energy (Eg),41 as shown in Fig. S2 (Note S2, ESI†). The Eg values of the acceptor materials are used as the representative Eg of the blend active layers, since the bandgap of the acceptor is always smaller than that of the donor in the blends studied in this work. Then, current density–voltage (J–V) measurements are performed to determine the basic photovoltaic performance parameters of the solar cells. The results are shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1 (Note S3, ESI†). Sensitive photovoltaic external quantum efficiency (EQEPV) measurements (Fig. S4, ESI†) are also conducted on these solar cells to calculate Voc,rad, the radiative limit for Voc (details regarding the determination of Voc,rad are provided in Note S4, ESI†). Fig. 1a illustrates the overall voltage losses (ΔVloss), defined as the difference between  and Voc (where q is the elementary charge), plotted as a function of Voc,rad, for the solar cells based on the Y-series (Y5, Y6, Y7), as well as the non-Y series acceptors (fullerene, ITIC, etc.). From Fig. 1a, the first thing noted is that the Voc,rad of the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors are generally lower than that based on the non-Y-series acceptors. This is mainly due to the smaller Eg of the Y-series acceptors (<1.45 eV), giving rise to a much higher value for the ideal dark saturation current density (J0,rad, details are provided in Note S4, ESI†). More importantly, ΔVloss is found to be generally lower in solar cells based on halogenated donors, regardless of the acceptor used (Fig. 1a), with the degree of reduction in ΔVloss in solar cells based on Y-series acceptors being about 17–26%, which is higher than that based on non-Y-series acceptors (about 10–20%).
 Fig. 1  (a) ΔVloss (defined as ) as a function of Voc,rad, (b) ΔVnr (defined as Voc,rad − Voc) as a function of Voc,rad, (c) EQEEL as a function of Voc,rad, (d) ΔVr (defined as ΔVloss − ΔVnr) as a function of Voc,rad, (e) EQEEL as a function of transient photovoltage decay lifetime for the solar cells based on non-halogenated (open symbols) and halogenated (filled symbols) donors, mixed with the Y-series (red) and the non-Y-series (green) acceptors. (f) ΔVnr as a function of ECT for the solar cells based on the non-halogenated PBDB-T and the halogenated PM6, PM7, mixed with IT4F, ITIC, IT4Cl, PC71BM, and ICBA. A summary of the voltage loss values for the solar cells is provided in Table S3 (Note S5, ESI†). 
From the above results, both ΔVnr and ΔVr of the solar cells are expected to reduce after donor halogenation, and the impact of the donor halogenation strategy on ΔVloss is expected to be stronger for the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors.
Then, ΔVr and ΔVnr are determined using the following equations (1) ΔVnr = Voc,rad − Voc(2)As shown in Fig. 1b, ΔVnr of the solar cells are indeed considerably lower in the solar cells based on halogenated donors. The reduced ΔVnr suggests that EQEEL increases after donor halogenation,42 since (3)where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature. This is confirmed by the measurements of EQEEL: the emission efficiency of the solar cells based on halogenated donors is much higher, by as much as two orders of magnitude, compared to that based on non-halogenated donors, as shown in Fig. 1c. The increase in EQEEL leads to a reduction in ΔVnr, and the ΔVnr values derived from EQEEL agree well with those determined from Voc,rad. Furthermore, ΔVr of the solar cells based on halogenated donors is also found to be lower (Fig. 1d), which suggests that the radiative decay rate of CT state (kr) is reduced after donor halogenation,25 since in organic solar cells, ΔVr reduces with reducing kr,24,43,44 (4)where α is related to the generation rate of CT states. Accordingly, the increased EQEEL and thus the reduced ΔVnr, after donor halogenation, must mainly be a result of reduced non-radiative decay rate of CT state (knr).24,26,45,46
To verify that the higher EQEEL in the solar cells based on halogenated donors is indeed due to lower knr, transient photovoltage (TPV) decay measurements are performed. As expected, the transient photovoltage decay lifetime (Fig. 1e), i.e., the lifetime of photo-generated charge carriers, closely related to the non-radiative decay dynamics of CT states,43,47 is considerably longer in the solar cells based on halogenated donors, suggesting that knr is lower in the solar cells based on halogenated donors. Details regarding the TPV measurements are provided in Note S6 (ESI†).
As discussed above, in organic solar cells, knr is generally high because of the strong vibrational coupling between CT and ground state.24 Since the degree of coupling is dependent on ECT, knr is expected to exponentially increase with reducing ECT, following the so-called energy gap law, i.e., ΔVnr linearly increases with reducing ECT.24 To evaluate whether the increased ECT after donor halogenation could be the reason for the reduced knr, highly sensitive EQEPV and electroluminescence (EL) measurements are performed on semitransparent solar cells (to avoid interference of the spectra due to optics) with ITO as the bottom electrode and a 3 nm thick transparent Ag layer as the top electrode.48,49 The results are shown in Note S7 (ESI†). From the EL spectra (Fig. S6, Note S7, ESI†), we notice that for most of the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors, the device emission is dominated by the S1 state of the pure acceptor, due to the very small energetic driving force.50 On the contrary, for the solar cells based on the non-Y series acceptors, including ITIC, IT4F, IT4Cl, PC71BM, ICBA, mixed with halogenated or non-halogenated donors, the device emission is dominated by the CT state with photon energy lower than both the donor and the acceptor S1 state energy (except for PM6:ITIC and PM7:ITIC). The presence of CT state emission allows us to derive the CT state properties, including ECT, from the sensitive EQEPV spectra (Fig. S7, Note S7, ESI†), using the method described in the literature.51 As summarized in Fig. 1f, donor halogenation is confirmed to lead to increased ECT, contributing to the reduction in knr and ΔVnr in organic solar cells. However, the degree of reduction in ΔVnr is in fact much higher than what was predicted by the energy gap law relation.24 This indicates that the increased ECT alone cannot explain the rapid decrease in knr and ΔVnr in the solar cells after donor halogenation, and there must be an additional reason for the reduced knr and ΔVnr.
In the framework of Marcus theory,52 transfer rate between two states (ket) can be expressed as53 ket ∝ V2FCWD(g)(5)where V is electronic coupling matrix element, related to the transition dipole moment, which is primarily determined by the transition oscillator strength. FCWD(g) is the Frank–Condon weighted density of states, exponentially dependent on the energy difference between the two states (g), as well as the reorganization energy associated with the transition. Thus, for CT state recombination in BHJ solar cells, apart from ECT, the absorption oscillator strength of the CT state (fOSC), the density of CT complex (NCTC), and λCT are the most important parameters determining knr.25 However, reducing fOSC or NCTC can lead to a reduction in both kr and knr,25,54 meaning that EQEEL of the solar cell does not necessarily change. Therefore, we conclude that the most likely reason for the reduced knr and ΔVnr in the solar cells after donor halogenation is the reduced λCT. This will be discussed in more detail in the next section of this paper.
2.2. Impact of donor halogenation on the reorganization energies
To explain the reason for the reduced knr and ΔVnr in the solar cells after donor halogenation, we focus on investigating the role that the donor halogenation strategy plays in determining the reorganization energy of the DA systems. For organic photovoltaic materials, there are two types of reorganization, namely, the high-frequency and the low-frequency reorganization. The high-frequency reorganization energy (λH) is attributed to the energy cost associated with the geometry change of the organic molecules from the optimized geometry in the ground state and the optimized geometry in the excited state.25,55,56 The low-frequency reorganization energy (λL), on the other hand, is associated with the reorganization of the nuclear and dielectric environment to accommodate the charge-transfer processes. Thus, both λH and λL are highly critical in determining knr and ΔVnr in organic solar cells.25 A schematic illustration for the optical transitions between the excited and the ground states in organic materials is shown in Fig. 2a and b. Accordingly, an expression for FCWD(0) can be derived and put in eqn (5) to obtain the non-radiative recombination rate constant,25,55,57 (6)where λLCT is the low-frequency reorganization energy of the CT states in the blend system, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, V is the electronic coupling between the CT and the ground state, S = λHCT/ħΩ is the Huang–Rhys factor,58λHCT is the high-frequency reorganization energy of the CT state, Ω is the harmonic frequency of the quantized high-frequency mode, t and w represent the quantum number of the vibrational modes of the CT and the ground state, respectively, Lw–tt(S) is the generalized Laguerre polynomial at degree of t.
 Fig. 2  (a) Excited and ground state energy diagram for an organic semiconductor with discrete vibrational levels (v′ = 0, 1, 2, …). (b) Absorption and emission spectra of the organic semiconductor. The emission spectrum consists of a number of sub-peaks corresponding to different vibrational transitions. λL is related to the width of the sub-peaks, and λH is related to the ratio between the area of the 0-0 transition peak and the area of the full spectrum. (c) PL spectra of the thin films of neat non-halogenated PBDB-T, and halogenated PM6 and PM7, deconvoluted into discrete vibrational peaks that originate from the transitions from the relaxed excited state (v′ = 0) to the different vibrational states in the ground state (v = 0, 1, 2, …). (d) ΔVnr as a function of λCT. λCT values are determined from the sensitive EQEPV spectra for the solar cells based on different active materials systems. 
The overall CT state reorganization energies, λCT, of the DA blend systems depend on the reorganization energies of the neat materials.59 Thus, the impact of donor halogenation on the reorganization energy of the model donor materials (λD), namely, the non-halogenated PBDB-T, and the halogenated PM6, PM7, is studied by performing PL measurements on the neat films. As shown in Fig. 2c, the PL spectra of the films based on PBDB-T, as well as its halogenated derivatives, PM6 and PM7, can be deconvoluted into 4 peaks. Each peak corresponds to a specific transition from the vibrationally relaxed excited state to the ground state.41 To evaluate the impact of donor halogenation on λD, the high intensity peaks (0-0 transitions) in the PL spectra are fitted using a Gaussian function, following the method described in the literature.41 The Gaussian widths, corresponding to the low-frequency reorganization energy of the donor material (λLD), were found to be similar for all of the films based on both halogenated and non-halogenated donors. More importantly, the ratio between the integrated area of the 0-0 transition peak and the integrated area of the complete spectrum (R00) was determined to be higher for the films based on halogenated donors. The R00 ratios were 0.406, 0.319, and 0.274 for chlorinated PM7, fluorinated PM6, and non-halogenated PBDB-T, respectively. Because the 0-0 transition corresponds to the direct transition from the lowest vibrational level of the excited state to that of the ground state with minimum high-frequency molecular relaxation, a larger R00 indicates a smaller high-frequency reorganization energy of the donor material (λHD). Thus, the λHD is much lower in the films of the halogenated donors, as compared to that of the non-halogenated donor.
Accordingly, λD, and thus λCT for the blend active layer should also reduce after the donor halogenation. Indeed, when closely examining the fit parameters used for determining the ECT of the solar cells (based on the DA systems with a large energetic driving force, see Fig. S7, Note S7, ESI†), we find that λCT for the BHJ systems based on halogenated donors is generally lower, by as much as 0.1–0.3 eV, compared to that based on non-halogenated donors (Fig. 2d). The above results confirm that the lower knr in the solar cells based on halogenated donors is associated with lower reorganization energy.
To better understand the effect of halogenation on the CT state and on the recombination rate, we built a theoretical model of the PBDB-T:ITIC interface and its chlorinated counterpart, PM7:ITIC. The computational model of the PBDB-T and PM7 polymers consisted of a three-monomers oligomer. We remark that for PBDB-T and PM7 we used a simplified model that does not include the large paraffinic groups decorating the donor monomer (see Fig. 3a). This simplification was necessary to make the problem computationally treatable (more details are provided in the experimental section). The PBDB-T and PM7 oligomers were put in contact with three ITIC molecules in a face-on configurations and the geometry of the system has been optimized at a density functional theory (DFT) level as described in detail in the experimental section. Starting from the ground state configurations, we optimized the geometry of the systems in the CT state at the same level of theory, i.e., based on time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) using the same exchange and correlation functional and basis set. This approach is computationally expensive, beyond the complexity of calculations recently appeared in the literature,27 but it guarantees a coherent and reliable evaluation of the CT characteristics. In Fig. 3a, we show the electronic density difference between the ground and first excited state of the interface systems, illustrating the CT nature of the latter electronic state.
 Fig. 3  (a) The electronic density difference between the ground and first excited state of the interface system. Red denotes an electronic density defect, and blue denotes an excess. This panel shows that the first excited state is, indeed, a charge transfer state. (b) Configuration of the PBDB-T:ITIC (left) and the PM7:ITIC (right) interfaces in the ground (blue) and CT (red) states. The figures have been drawn after alignment of the ground and CT state structures of the two interfaces. In the Note S8 (ESI†), we shown an analogous figure illustrating the structural differences between the ground and CT states of PBDB-T:ITIC and the PM7:ITIC focusing on individual molecules, after their alignment. 
In qualitative agreement with the experiments (Fig. S7, Note S7, ESI†), calculations predict a 0.16 eV higher energy of the CT of the chlorinated system with respect to the reference one, with absolute values of 1.52 eV for the PM7:ITIC interface vs. 1.36 eV for PBDB-T:ITIC. Chlorination, however, has also an effect on the reorganization of the structure upon excitation in the CT state. Here, the reorganization energy of the non-radiative relaxation process is computed as the energy variation of the interface systems along the structural relaxation from the geometry corresponding to the vertical transition to the minimum energy in the arrival electronic state. In other words, λCT = EGS − ECT, where the subscript denotes the geometry in which the energy has been computed under CT state electronic level, GS standing for the optimal geometry in the electronic ground state and CT for the minimum energy geometry in the CT state. The advantage of computing the reorganization energy in the interface system, a more computationally expensive approach with respect to the standard one which is typically based on the GS and CT energetics of the individual molecules, is that it allows to consider possible constraints on structural changes upon electronic excitation or relaxation due to the intermolecular interactions between the donor and acceptor. Our results are in agreement with experimental data, with a 0.09 eV reduction of the reorganization energy in PM7:ITIC (0.14 eV) with respect to PBDB-T:ITIC (0.23 eV).
The reduction of the reorganization energy arises from a minor distortion of both the donor and acceptor upon electronic excitation. An intuitive argument explaining the relation between molecular distortions upon non-radiative recombination, non-radiative recombination rate and the corresponding voltage losses can be drawn considering that the only non-negligible terms in the double sum of eqn (6) are those associated to energy preserving vibronic transition. This implies that w > t, typically w ≫ t, which, according to the Fermi Golden rule and Frank–Condon theory, make transition between different vibrational states forbidden. Thus, structural distortions upon transition between the CT and ground electronic states make the Frank–Condon factor and the overlap integral between the initial and final vibration states non-zero, and the non-radiative recombination process possible (or more likely).
The difference of distortions between the two interfaces is shown in Fig. 3b, in which we report the structure of the ground (blue) and CT (red) states of PBDB-T:ITIC and PM7:ITIC. The (minimalistic) stick representation is used to better highlight the differences. One notices that for the PM7:ITIC interface the ground and CT structures largely overlap, while in the PBDB-T:ITIC case one observes sizable differences between the two structures. To quantify these distortions we computed the root mean square displacement (RMSD) between the optimized structures of the ground and CT states of the PBDB-T:ITIC and PM7:ITIC interfaces, the average displacement of atoms in the configuration minima between the two electronic states. The RMSD of PBDB-T:ITIC is 0.75 Å, to be compared with a value of 0.28 Å of PM7:ITIC, which is consistent with the reduced reorganization energy of the interface including the halogenated donor. It is interesting to investigate the origin of this different RMSD. To this end, we computed the RMSD of the four molecules composing the computational sample, the donor oligomer and three molecules of the acceptor. To focus on the intramolecular distortions, we computed RMSD after the alignment of the individual molecules, i.e., after minimizing the RMSD between the ground state and CT geometry of each molecule upon their rotation/translation (see Fig. S8, Note S8, ESI†). The RMSD of the individual molecules are reported in Table 1 and show that while the value of the PBDB-T:ITIC interface is still larger than that of the PM7:ITIC counterpart, this difference is largely reduced with respect the overall value. Recalling that the difference between the overall and molecule-by-molecule RMSD is in the alignment, which is performed on the entire system in the first case, and individually for each molecule in the second, one must conclude that halogenation also reduces the distortion of the intermolecular arrangement of the interface upon electronic transition between the ground and CT states.
Table 1 Total and partial RMSD of the PBDB-T:ITIC and PM7:ITIC interfaces






PBDB-T:ITIC (Å)
PM7:ITIC (Å)




Total
0.75
0.28


Donor
0.45
0.27


Acceptor 1
0.49
0.19


Acceptor 2
0.23
0.09


Acceptor 3
0.12
0.16




2.3. Origin of the different impact of the donor halogenation strategy on solar cells based on the Y-series and the non-Y-series acceptors
To comprehend the reason for the greater impact of the donor halogenation strategy on ΔVnr of the solar cells based on the Y-series acceptors, as compared to that based on the non-Y-series acceptors, the effect of donor halogenation on the reorganization energy of the acceptor (λA) in the blends is also studied. First, the PL spectra of the blend films based on halogenated and non-halogenated donors mixed with the Y-series and the non-Y-series acceptors are measured. As shown in Fig. S9 (Note S9, ESI†), the PL spectra of the blends based on the Y-series acceptors are dominated by the acceptor S1 state emission, regardless of the donor used. This allows us to evaluate both the high-frequency (λHA) and the low-frequency reorganization energy of the acceptor (λLA) in the blends based on the Y-series acceptors (using the same method used for analyzing λHD and λLD of the neat donor materials). Using PBDB-T:Y6 as an example (Fig. 4a), the λLA of Y6 was found to be about 0.09 eV, similar to the λLA in the blends based on the halogenated donors (0.10 and 0.11 eV for PM6:Y6 and PM7:Y6, respectively). Furthermore, R00 for the blend based on PBDB-T (0.67) was similar to that based on the halogenated donors (0.67 and 0.71 for PM6:Y6 and PM7:Y6, respectively). This suggests that λHA of Y6 are similar in these blends. Accordingly, both λHA and λLA of Y6 in the blends, and thus, the packing properties of Y6 are hardly affected by the donor halogenation strategy.
 Fig. 4  PL spectra of the blends films based on (a) PBDB-T:Y6, PM6:Y6, and PM7:Y6, and (b) PBDB-T:IT4F, PM6:IT4F, and PM7:IT4F. The PL spectra are dominated by the emission from the acceptors for these blend systems, and they are deconvoluted into a number of sub-peaks for the evaluation of λHA and λLA of the acceptors in the blend films. 
On the contrary, for the blend films based on the non-Y-series acceptors, the PL emission spectra of most of the blends consist of both the donor and the acceptor S1 state emission, except that for the blend based on IT4F. Thus, we deconvoluted the PL spectrum of PBDB-T:IT4F (Fig. 4b), and determined λLA for IT4F, which is 0.071 eV, similar to that in the blends based on the halogenated donors (0.073 and 0.079 eV for PM6:IT4F and PM7:IT4F, respectively). However, R00 is higher in the blend based on PBDB-T (0.58), compared to that based on the halogenated donors (0.50 and 0.51 for PM6:IT4F and PM7:IT4F, respectively). The lower R00 for the blends based on the halogenated donors indicate that λHA of IT4F in the blends is increased by the halogenation of the donor. Therefore, λA of the blend is increased after donor halogenation.
For the blends based on IT4F, donor halogenation leads to reduced λD but increased λA. The degree of reduction in λCT after donor halogenation is likely limited. For the blends based on Y6, donor halogenation reduces λD, but it does not affect λA. Thus, the degree of reduction in λCT after donor halogenation is expected to be higher for the blend based on Y6, compared to that based on IT4F. Therefore, we ascribe the greater impact of donor halogenation on ΔVnr of the solar cells based on Y6, and by extension the Y-series acceptors, as compared to that based on the non-Y-series acceptors, to the higher degree of reduction in λCT.
2.4. The position of halogen substitution and its impact of ΔVnr of organic solar cells
In theory, the position of halogenation plays a critically important role in determining the reorganization energy of organic systems.60 To gain a better understanding of the optimal position for halogen substitution, the active material systems based on the model donors PBDB-T and PM7 (with chlorine substitution on the side thiophene units) were compared to the systems based on non-halogenated PBT1-C and chlorine-substituted PBT1-C-2Cl (with chlorine substitution done on the polymer backbone).61,62
The chemical structures of these materials are shown in Fig. 5a. To achieve sufficiently high energetic driving force for the reliable determination of the CT state properties, including λCT and ECT, IT4F is used as the acceptor for constructing semitransparent solar cells. The sensitive EQEPV spectra are shown in Fig. 5b. The λCT of the blend based on PBT1-C:IT4F does reduce after the backbone halogenation of the donor (Fig. 6a). Nevertheless, the degree of reduction in λCT is considerably lower (from 0.40 to 0.33 eV), as compared to that realized for the systems based on PBDB-T (from 0.51 to 0.29 eV). Meanwhile, the backbone halogenation leads to significantly increased ECT (from 1.40 to 1.49 eV) (Fig. 6b). As a result, the reduced ΔVnr in the solar cell after the backbone halogenation is primarily assigned to the increased ECT. Similarly, for the solar cell based on PBDTT:IT4F (chemical structure shown in Fig. 5a), the λCT is slightly reduced (0.44 to 0.42 eV) after the backbone halogenation (Fig. 5b). Also, the reduced ΔVnr is mainly due to the increase of ECT from 1.24 to 1.37 eV (Fig. 6b). Therefore, the origin of the reduced ΔVloss for the solar cells after the backbone halogenation is very different from that for the solar cells after the side unit halogenation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of the donor materials PBDB-T, PM7, PBT1-C, PBT1-C-2Cl, PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl. (b) Normalized sensitive EQEPV and EL spectra for the solar cells based on the blend systems of PBDB-T, PM7, PBT1-C, PBT1-C-2Cl, PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl, mixed with IT4F. 
 Fig. 6  (a) ΔVnr as a function of λCT, and (b) ΔVnr as a function of ECT, derived from the sensitive EQEPV spectra of the solar cells. 
The impact of the side unit halogenation and the backbone halogenation is also investigated using molecular dynamic (MD) simulations, from which the radial distribution functions (g(r)) for the distances between centroids of conjugated structures of the donor and the acceptor materials are derived. More specifically, we use the centroids of the 1,3-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-5,7-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo-[1,2-c:4,5-c] dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDD) units of the donor material to represent the donor molecule, as the steric hinderance of the alkyl side chains on the 2-alkylthiophene-substituted benzo [1,2-b:4,5-b′] dithiophene (BDT) units of the donor molecules prevents close stacking between the BDT units and the acceptor molecules.63 Details regarding the MD simulations are provided in Note S10 (ESI†). As shown in Fig. 7, the closest distance between the donor and the acceptor molecules in the blend of PBDB-T:IT4F is estimated to be 5.50 Å, which is similar to that of PM7:IT4F with donor halogenation done on the side units. On the other hand, the distance of PBT-1-C:IT4F is 4.78 Å, which significantly increases (6.48 Å) after the backbone halogenation. It has been demonstrated that increasing the distance between the donor and the acceptor molecules could give rise to increased ECT of the donor–acceptor blend.64,65 Thus, the higher degree of increase in ECT for the blend after the backbone halogenation, as compared to that after the halogenation of the side unit, is ascribed to the increased donor–acceptor distance.
 Fig. 7  Radial distribution functions of the distances between the donor and acceptor molecules (represented by the centroids of the molecules) for the blends of (a) PBDB-T:IT4F and PM7:IT4F, (b) PBT1-C:IT4F and PBT1-C-2Cl:IT4F, and (c) PBDTT:IT4F, PBDTT-1Cl:IT4F, and PBDTT-2Cl:IT4F, determined from MD simulations. 
Finally, we study the solar cells based on PBDTT-2Cl, with 2 chlorine atoms attached to the backbone of the donor, and we find that λCT is further reduced (Fig. 6a), as compared to that of the non-halogenated donor PBDTT or the PBDTT-1Cl with one chlorine atom on the backbone. However, the addition of the chlorine atom also increases ECT, being the main reason for the reduced ΔVnr. MD simulations (Fig. 7c) reveal that the DA distance does increase with the increasing number of chlorine atoms on the backbone. Therefore, it is concluded that the backbone halogenation of the donor mostly leads to increased ECT, and the side unit halogenation of the donor is a more desired method to selectively reduce λCT, and thus, reduce ΔVloss of organic solar cells.
3. Conclusion
In this work, over 30 donor–acceptor systems were investigated. The origin of the reduced voltage losses and improved device performance of organic solar cells after donor halogenation was partly attributed to the increased ECT, and more importantly, to the reduced reorganization energy of the CT state. We demonstrated that for the blend systems based on non-Y-series acceptors, donor halogenation reduced the reorganization energy of the donor material, but increased the reorganization energy of the acceptor material. Nevertheless, the overall reorganization energy of the CT state was reduced after donor halogenation, leading to reduced ΔVnr, and ΔVloss. On the other hand, for the blend systems based on Y-series acceptors, donor halogenation also led to reduced reorganization energy of the donor, but it did not lead to increased acceptor reorganization energy. As a result, the degree of reduction in ΔVnr after donor halogenation was higher for the solar cells based on Y-series acceptors, compared to those based on non-Y-series acceptors. This could be the main reason for the generally lower voltage loss and better performance of the solar cells based on halogenated donors mixed with Y-series acceptors. Additionally, we showed that the impact of the donor halogenation strategy on the reorganization energy of the CT state was dependent on the halogen substitution position, as well as the number of halogen atoms added to the donor molecule. Halogenation of the side units of the donor material could lead to significantly reduced reorganization energy of the CT state, but halogenation of the backbone mainly resulted in increased ECT of the blend. As a result, halogenation of the side unit was found to be a more effective strategy for reducing the reorganization energy of the CT state. It is important to note that high ΔVloss is currently a bottleneck in state-of-the-art organic solar cells, limiting their performance. Therefore, reducing ΔVloss by reducing the reorganization energy of the CT state, as demonstrated in this work, is expected to be of great importance for further improved performance of organic solar cells.
4. Experiments and methods
4.1 Materials
Polymer donors PBDB-T, PM6, and PM7, the non-Y series acceptors ITIC, IT4Cl, IT4F, and the Y-series acceptors Y5, Y6, Y7 were purchased from Solarmer materials Inc (China). PC71BM and ICBA were purchased from Solenne materials Inc. PBT1-C, PBT1-C-2Cl, PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, PBDTT-2Cl and BTA3 were synthesized according to the literature.62,66,67 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), chlorobenzene (CB), and chloroform (CF) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
4.2 Fabrication of solar cells
Organic solar cells with an inverted device architecture of ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag were constructed in this work. The ITO glass substrates were cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol solvent in sequence by an ultrasonic cleaner. Then, the surface of ITO substrates was treated by oxygen plasma for 10 minutes. ZnO precursor solution, prepared by the sol-gel method reported in the literature,68 was deposited on the cleaned ITO substrates by spin-coating at 4000 rpm 60 s, the substrates were thermal annealed at 200 °C for 30 min. The thickness of the ZnO layers is about 30 nm, determined by a surface profilometer (KLA, Tencor P-7 Stylus Profiler).
The blend active layers based on the Y-series acceptors (Y5, Y6, Y7) (donor:acceptor weight ratio 1:1.2) were deposited on the ZnO coated substrates from chloroform solutions (with 0.5 vol% CN) in a nitrogen filled glovebox. The solutions were stirred on a hot plate (IKA RCT digital) at 55 °C for 4 hours prior to use. The concentration of the solutions was 16 mg mL−1. The active layers were annealed at 90 °C for 5 min. The thickness of the active layers was about 90 nm, measured by a surface profilometer. The blend active layers based on the non-Y series acceptors (ITIC, IT4Cl, IT4F, and BTA3) (donor:acceptor weight ratio 1:1) were deposited on the ZnO coated substrates from chlorobenzene solutions (with 1 vol% DIO) in a nitrogen filled glovebox. The solutions were stirred on a hot plate (IKA RCT digital) at 80 °C for 4 hours, prior to use. The concentration of the solutions was 22 mg mL−1. The active layers were annealed at 110 °C for 10 min. The thickness of the active layers was about 110 nm. The blend active layers based on the fullerene acceptors (PC71BM, ICBA) (donor:acceptor weight ratio 1:1.2) were deposited on the ZnO coated substrates from chlorobenzene solutions (with 3 vol% DIO) in a nitrogen filled glovebox. The solutions were stirred on a hot plate (IKA RCT digital) at 90 °C for 6 hours, prior to use. The concentration of the solutions was 25 mg mL−1. The active layers were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The thickness of the active layers was about 110 nm. Then, the active layers were moved into a vacuum chamber (Mbraum), in which a 15 nm of MoO3 and a 100 nm Ag layer were evaporated onto the active layers under a vacuum pressure of 10−6 mbar. The active area of the solar cells was 0.04 cm2. For the semitransparent solar cells constructed in this work, a 15 nm MoO3 and a 3 nm Ag layer are used as the top electrode.
4.3 Characterizations


J–V characterization. 
The performance parameters of the solar cells were acquired by using a Keithley 2400 source meter and simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by a solar simulator (Newport Oriel VeraSol-2™ Class AAA). The solar simulator was calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell and a set of low-pass filters.


Highly sensitive EQEPV measurement. 
Sensitive EQEPV spectra were measured by using monochromatic light from a halogen lamp light source (LSH-75, Newport) and a monochromator (CS260-RG-3-MC-A, Newport). A series of long-pass optical filters (600 nm, 900 nm, 1100 nm) were employed to eliminate the overtone wavelengths from the monochromator. The monochromatic light was chopped at a frequency of 173 Hz by an optical chopper (3502 Optical Chopper, Newport). A front-end current amplifier (SR570, Stanford Instrument) and a phase-locked amplifier (SR830, Stanford Instrument) were used to record the current signal from the solar cells. A Si detector (Hamamatsu s1337-1010BR) was used to calibrate the lamp intensity. The illuminated area is about 0.5 mm2.


EQEEL measurement. 
The EQEEL measurements were done using a Keithley 2400 digital source meter to inject electrical current into the solar cells kept in dark. Emitted photons were recorded by a Si detector (Hamamatsu s1337-1010BR) and a Keithley 6482 Picoammeter.


EL measurement. 
Electroluminescence measurements were performed by injecting electric current (1 mA) into the device using a source meter (Keithley 2400). An optical fiber (BFL200LS02, Thorlab) was placed in front of the device to collect the photons emitted by the device. The emission spectra were recorded by a fluorescence spectrometer (KYMERA-328I-B2, Andor Technology) consists of two sets of gratings for the visible and the near-infrared spectral range. A Si EMCCD detector (DU970P-BVF, Andor Technology) and an InGaAs detector (DU491A-1.7, Andor Technology) were used for recording the luminescence spectral ranges of 400–1000 nm and 900–1600 nm, respectively. The optical losses in the optical fiber, the spectrometer, and the detectors were corrected by a standard light source (Newport).


PL measurement. 
A super-continuous white laser (SuperK EXU-6, NKT photonics) and a laser narrowband filter (SR-VIS-HP8, NKT photonics) were used to excite the thin films. The excitation wavelength was 500 nm. Fluorescence signals from the organic films were recorded using the same setup used for the EL measurements.


TPV decay measurement. 
TPV measurement systems were done using a LED for the background illumination. The LED was controlled by a Keithley 2450. Another LED driven by an arbitrary function generator (AFG3022C, Tektronix) was used to generated pulsed illumination. The transient photovoltage signals of the devices were recorded by an oscilloscope (Tektronix, MDO4104C). The time interval between two adjacent pulses was set to be 5 microseconds. More specifically, the devices were placed under the bias LED illumination for the generation of the bias photovoltage close to the Voc of the device under simulated AM 1.5G illumination. Then, the pulsed LED illumination was added to generate an additional transient voltage in the device. The transient signal was set to be about 5% higher than the bias photovoltage, via controlling the intensity of pulsed illumination. To determine the transient photovoltage lifetime values for the devices under different illumination intensities, different injection currents were used to drive the bias LED.



Ab initio calculations. 
The two face-on model interfaces were prepared starting from the PBDB-T trimer and three ITIC molecules in their minimum energy configuration at a PBE0/D4 level of theory using a pcseg-1 basis set.69–71 The overall PBDB-T:ITIC interface is further optimized and the same is done for the PM7:ITIC analogue, obtained by substituting selected hydrogen with chlorine atoms. Based on recent literature, the reorganization energy has been computed using the range separated revM11 exchange and correlation functional,72 which is suitable to handle the energetics of long-range correlated systems.56,73 Calculations have been performed using LSDalton and ORCA software.74,75

Author contributions
H. W., W. T., and Z. T. conceived the project. H. W. and M. L. fabricated and characterized the solar cells. H. W. and J. W. carried out the MD simulation. J. M. H. O. and S. M. performed DFT calculations. H. W. and M. L. performed the photoluminescence and transient photovoltage decay measurements. A. T. and E. Z. synthesized the acceptor BTA3. Y. S. synthesized the polymer donors PBT1-C and PBT1-C-2Cl. H. L. and Z. B. synthesized the polymer donors PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl, and fabricated the devices based on PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl. H. W., Z. M., W. T., J. M. H. O., S. M., and Z. T. wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the finalizing of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 51933001, 51973031, 52073056), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (Grant No. 22ZR1401900), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2232022A13, 2232021A09). S. M. acknowledges support from University of Ferrara “Fondo per l'Incentivazione alla Ricerca”. J. M. H. O acknowledges financial support from VILLUM FONDEN (Grant No. 29478). W. T. acknowledges funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 851676 (ERC StGrt).
References
J. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Zu, Y. Wang, X. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102787 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Zhang, J. Xu, C. Li, J. Yan, G. Zhou, W. Zhong, T. Hao, J. Song, X. Xue, Z. Zhou, R. Zeng, H. Zhu, C.-C. Chen, R. C. I. MacKenzie, Y. Zou, J. Nelson, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun and F. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 656–663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Xu, H. Yao, P. Bi, L. Hong, J. Zhang, Y. Zu, T. Zhang, J. Qin, J. Ren, Z. Chen, C. He, X. Hao, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102420 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sun, Y. Wu, X. Yang, Y. Gao, Z. Chen, K. Li, J. Qiao, T. Wang, J. Guo, C. Liu, X. Hao, H. Zhu and J. Min, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, J. Wang, P. Bi, J. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Joule, 2022, 6, 171–184 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Y. Pan, Y. Ouyang, Q. Shen, Y. Gao, K. Yan, J. Fang, Y. Chen, C.-Q. Ma, J. Min, C. Zhang, L. Zuo and H. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2537–2544 RSC .
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei, G. Han, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, H. Yan, F. Gao, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, H. Yao, L. Ye, Y. Xu, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 115–130 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, W. Liu, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, D. Qian, J. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Xu, C. Yang, F. Gao, H. Zhu, F. Liu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, N. Qiu, H. Feng, H. Gao, B. Kan, Y. Ma, C. Li, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702870 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, J. Qu and F. He, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000509 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meng, Y. Li, B. Pang, Y. Li, Y. Xiang, L. Guo, X. Li, C. Zhan and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2733–2742 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, X. Zhang, C. Guo, Y. Zhuang, L. Wang, D. Li, D. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102189 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, T. Liu, Z. Luo, Q. Guo, Y. Xiao, Y. Chen, X. Li, S. Luo, X. Lu, M. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Yan, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 325–330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oh, K. Kranthiraja, C. Lee, K. Gunasekar, S. Kim, B. Ma, B. J. Kim and S.-H. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10016–10023 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Guo, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Stuart, J. R. Tumbleston, H. Zhou, W. Li, S. Liu, H. Ade and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, M. Li, H. Wu, J. Wang, Z. Ma and Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19770–19777 RSC .
N. An, Y. Cai, H. Wu, A. Tang, K. Zhang, X. Hao, Z. Ma, Q. Guo, H. S. Ryu, H. Y. Woo, Y. Sun and E. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lenaerts, D. Devisscher, G. Pirotte, S. Gielen, S. Mertens, T. Cardeynaels, B. Champagne, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, P. Adriaensens, P. Verstappen, K. Vandewal and W. Maes, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 181, 108577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tang, W. Song, B. Xiao, J. Guo, J. Min, Z. Ge, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3941–3947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Benduhn, K. Tvingstedt, F. Piersimoni, S. Ullbrich, Y. Fan, M. Tropiano, K. A. McGarry, O. Zeika, M. K. Riede, C. J. Douglas, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, D. Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17053 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azzouzi, J. Yan, T. Kirchartz, K. Liu, J. Wang, H. Wu and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. X, 2018, 8, 031055 CAS .
X. Chen and J. Brédas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702227 CrossRef .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X.-K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, W. M. Chen, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Zhang, T. Lau, G. Zhang, X. Lu, H. Yip, S. K. So, S. Beaupré, M. Mainville, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, H. Chen, H. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807577 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Shao, R. Ma, Z. Luo, Y. Xiao, T. Yang, X. Lu, Z. Yuan, H. Yan, Y. Chen and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Guo, W. Ma, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4655–4660 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800868 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, X.-K. Chen, J. Xiao, P. C. Y. Chow, M. Ren, G. Kupgan, X. Jiao, C. C. S. Chan, X. Du, R. Xia, Z. Chen, J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zou, H. Yan, K. S. Wong, V. Coropceanu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, J.-L. Bredas, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3943 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, D. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Kirchartz, W. Tress, H. Yao, J. Yuan, M. Hülsbeck, M. Zhang, Y. Zou, Y. Sun, Y. Li, J. Hou, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas and F. Gao, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 799–806 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karki, J. Vollbrecht, A. L. Dixon, N. Schopp, M. Schrock, G. N. M. Reddy and T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903868 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Eisner, M. Azzouzi, Z. Fei, X. Hou, T. D. Anthopoulos, T. J. S. Dennis, M. Heeney and J. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6362–6374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Hou, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li, R. Yu, B. Gao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800613 CrossRef .
D. Qian, L. Ye, M. Zhang, Y. Liang, L. Li, Y. Huang, X. Guo, S. Zhang, Z. Tan and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9611–9617 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, J. Benduhn and V. C. Nikolis, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 538–544 RSC .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 113–133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking, G. F. Burkhard, A. Sellinger, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. Amassian, M. K. Riede, M. D. McGehee, D. Neher and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, M. K. Ravva, H. Li, S. M. Ryno and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601325 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Li, K. Ding and S. Forrest, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 11, 024060 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Sandberg and A. Armin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 15590–15598 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schwab, S. Schubert, L. Müller-Meskamp, K. Leo and M. C. Gather, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 921–925 CrossRef .
A. Armin, N. Zarrabi, O. J. Sandberg, C. Kaiser, S. Zeiske, W. Li and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001828 CrossRef CAS .
L. Perdigón-Toro, L. Q. Phuong, S. Zeiske, K. Vandewal, A. Armin, S. Shoaee and D. Neher, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 557–564 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125204 CrossRef .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Gould, D. Noukakis, L. Gomez-Jahn, R. H. Young, J. L. Goodman and S. Farid, Chem. Phys., 1993, 176, 439–456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, J. Widmer, T. Heumueller, C. J. Brabec, M. D. McGehee, K. Leo, M. Riede and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3839–3843 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Barbara, T. J. Meyer and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148–13168 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, X.-K. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Zheng and J.-L. Brédas, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 689–707 CrossRef .
J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 4860–4867 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang and R. Avril, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1950, 204, 406–423 CAS .
K. Vandewal, J. Benduhn, K. S. Schellhammer, T. Vangerven, J. E. Rückert, F. Piersimoni, R. Scholz, O. Zeika, Y. Fan, S. Barlow, D. Neher, S. R. Marder, J. Manca, D. Spoltore, G. Cuniberti and F. Ortmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1699–1704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geng, Y. Niu, Q. Peng, Z. Shuai, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 104703 CrossRef .
T. Liu, L. Huo, S. Chandrabose, K. Chen, G. Han, F. Qi, X. Meng, D. Xie, W. Ma, Y. Yi, J. M. Hodgkiss, F. Liu, J. Wang, C. Yang and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707353 CrossRef .
L. Ye, Y. Xie, K. Weng, H. S. Ryu, C. Li, Y. Cai, H. Fu, D. Wei, H. Y. Woo, S. Tan and Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, Y. Guo, X. Ma and Y. Yi, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800190 CrossRef .
J. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Wu, G. Feng, H. Wu, J. Li, Y. Yi, X. Feng, Z. Ma, W. Li, K. Vandewal and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6679 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zhang, P. Bao and Y. Yi, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 843–851 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, Q. Zhang, G. Li, X. Wang and E. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34427–34434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Lu, Y. Chen, G. Ran, A. Zhang, D. Li, N. Yu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Xu, W. Zhang, Q. Bao, Z. Tang and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2105483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS .
E. Caldeweyher, S. Ehlert, A. Hansen, H. Neugebauer, S. Spicher, C. Bannwarth and S. Grimme, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 154122 CrossRef .
E. Caldeweyher, C. Bannwarth and S. Grimme, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 147, 034112 CrossRef .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 6158–6170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, Y. Wang, S. Ghosh, X. He and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 2966–2990 CrossRef CAS .
L. Benatto, M. de, J. Bassi, L. C. W. de Menezes, L. S. Roman and M. Koehler, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8755–8769 RSC .
F. Neese, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2012, 2, 73–78 CAS .
F. Neese, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 8, e1327 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00174aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Organic solar cells (OSCs) are an attractive alternative to silicon photovoltaics due to their low production cost, light weight, and solution processability. In recent years, significant efforts have been made to improve their performance, resulting in remarkable progress. For example, the development of non-fullerene acceptors like ITIC and Y6 has allowed for power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 10%. Further advancements, such as the structural fine-tuning of donor or acceptor molecules and the optimization of the donor/acceptor interfaces, have pushed PCEs beyond 19%. Halogenation is a common strategy for structural fine-tuning, particularly of the donor materials. Chlorine or fluorine substitution in typical donor molecules often results in reduced photovoltage losses and improved device performance. However, the reason for the reduced voltage losses remains unclear. A better understanding of the origin of these losses is crucial for designing more efficient organic photovoltaic materials. Here, we investigate the impact of donor halogenation on voltage losses in OSCs using both experimental and theoretical methods. We find that the reduced voltage loss is partly due to a decrease in the charge transfer state energy and more significantly due to a reduction in the reorganization energy associated with the structural change of the donor-acceptor interfaces.


 	Fig. 1  (a) ΔVloss (defined as ) as a function of Voc,rad, (b) ΔVnr (defined as Voc,rad − Voc) as a function of Voc,rad, (c) EQEEL as a function of Voc,rad, (d) ΔVr (defined as ΔVloss − ΔVnr) as a function of Voc,rad, (e) EQEEL as a function of transient photovoltage decay lifetime for the solar cells based on non-halogenated (open symbols) and halogenated (filled symbols) donors, mixed with the Y-series (red) and the non-Y-series (green) acceptors. (f) ΔVnr as a function of ECT for the solar cells based on the non-halogenated PBDB-T and the halogenated PM6, PM7, mixed with IT4F, ITIC, IT4Cl, PC71BM, and ICBA. A summary of the voltage loss values for the solar cells is provided in Table S3 (Note S5, ESI†).	 
	(1)
ΔVnr = Voc,rad − Voc	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
ket ∝ V2FCWD(g)	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Excited and ground state energy diagram for an organic semiconductor with discrete vibrational levels (v′ = 0, 1, 2, …). (b) Absorption and emission spectra of the organic semiconductor. The emission spectrum consists of a number of sub-peaks corresponding to different vibrational transitions. λL is related to the width of the sub-peaks, and λH is related to the ratio between the area of the 0-0 transition peak and the area of the full spectrum. (c) PL spectra of the thin films of neat non-halogenated PBDB-T, and halogenated PM6 and PM7, deconvoluted into discrete vibrational peaks that originate from the transitions from the relaxed excited state (v′ = 0) to the different vibrational states in the ground state (v = 0, 1, 2, …). (d) ΔVnr as a function of λCT. λCT values are determined from the sensitive EQEPV spectra for the solar cells based on different active materials systems.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The electronic density difference between the ground and first excited state of the interface system. Red denotes an electronic density defect, and blue denotes an excess. This panel shows that the first excited state is, indeed, a charge transfer state. (b) Configuration of the PBDB-T:ITIC (left) and the PM7:ITIC (right) interfaces in the ground (blue) and CT (red) states. The figures have been drawn after alignment of the ground and CT state structures of the two interfaces. In the Note S8 (ESI†), we shown an analogous figure illustrating the structural differences between the ground and CT states of PBDB-T:ITIC and the PM7:ITIC focusing on individual molecules, after their alignment.	 

Total	0.75	0.28
Donor	0.45	0.27
Acceptor 1	0.49	0.19
Acceptor 2	0.23	0.09
Acceptor 3	0.12	0.16

 	Fig. 4  PL spectra of the blends films based on (a) PBDB-T:Y6, PM6:Y6, and PM7:Y6, and (b) PBDB-T:IT4F, PM6:IT4F, and PM7:IT4F. The PL spectra are dominated by the emission from the acceptors for these blend systems, and they are deconvoluted into a number of sub-peaks for the evaluation of λHA and λLA of the acceptors in the blend films.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of the donor materials PBDB-T, PM7, PBT1-C, PBT1-C-2Cl, PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl. (b) Normalized sensitive EQEPV and EL spectra for the solar cells based on the blend systems of PBDB-T, PM7, PBT1-C, PBT1-C-2Cl, PBDTT, PBDTT-1Cl, and PBDTT-2Cl, mixed with IT4F.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) ΔVnr as a function of λCT, and (b) ΔVnr as a function of ECT, derived from the sensitive EQEPV spectra of the solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 7  Radial distribution functions of the distances between the donor and acceptor molecules (represented by the centroids of the molecules) for the blends of (a) PBDB-T:IT4F and PM7:IT4F, (b) PBT1-C:IT4F and PBT1-C-2Cl:IT4F, and (c) PBDTT:IT4F, PBDTT-1Cl:IT4F, and PBDTT-2Cl:IT4F, determined from MD simulations.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00174a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
