Light induced formation of a surface heterojunction in photocharged CuWO 4 photoanodes   - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8FD00179K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8FD00179K
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 175-191Light induced formation of a surface heterojunction in photocharged CuWO4 photoanodes†

        
          
            Anirudh 
            Venugopal
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wilson A. 
            Smith
          
        
      *
      Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage (MECS), Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2629HZ, The Netherlands. E-mail: w.smith@tudelft.nl
Received 
      16th November 2018
    , Accepted 7th December 2018First published on 7th December 2018AbstractPhotocharging has recently shown the ability to significantly improve the performance of several metal oxide photoanodes, similar to the enhancements achieved with co-catalysts and passivation overlayers. Herein, we demonstrate the effect of photocharging on CuWO4 photoanodes for the first time, with prolonged AM 1.5 illumination under open-circuit conditions. The photocharging treatment on CuWO4 samples doubled the photocurrent obtained at 1.23 VRHE. This enhancement is attributed to the light induced formation of a surface bound copper complex with the solution anion species in the electrolyte. This thin semiconducting copper borate layer forms a heterojunction with the CuWO4, improving the charge separation near the surface and thus suppressing the recombination of charge carriers in the space charge region. The striking similarities in photocharging of different metal oxide semiconductors highlights that the metal oxide semiconductor–electrolyte interface is more complex than previously understood. The formation of this time-dependent light induced surface layer should therefore be considered in all experimental studies on photo-electrochemistry with metal oxide semiconductor photoanodes.
Introduction
A shift to a renewable energy-based society is necessary to contain or limit the catastrophic effects of global climate change.1 Producing electricity from renewable energy sources could be a way to tackle this problem, but this transition is currently facing a roadblock in dealing with the intermittency of these resources. Current energy storage techniques are not sufficient to tackle the discrepancy between the energy demand and energy production timelines. The viability of a terawatt scale renewable energy society will need this intermittency problem to be dealt with. One way to address this challenge is to (photo-)electrochemically produce commercially valuable chemicals or fuels, that have a good market demand, from the excess renewable electricity. This way the economics of the technology can be balanced, making it self-sustainable and attracting further investments and expansions. (Photo-)electrochemical pathways to produce valuable chemicals such as hydrogen from earth-abundant raw materials, i.e. water, is one such way to do so.2
(Photo-)electrochemical water oxidation is an important (half-)reaction of interest within electrochemistry, as it acts as a proton source for more valuable electrochemical (half-)reactions such as hydrogen evolution, CO2 reduction and ammonia synthesis. Metal oxides have received significant attention in the past as a prospective photoanode material due to their suitable opto-electronic properties, higher stability compared to low bandgap semiconductors and their raw material abundance. However, these metal oxide photoanodes have been severely underperforming, majorly as a result of the complexity involving the multi-electron (4e−/4h+) oxygen evolution reaction and the existence of different loss mechanisms such as bulk recombination and surface recombination of photo-generated charge carriers at the semiconductor|electrolyte interface (SEI). The latter issue could be dealt with, to an extent, with the addition of catalytic and passivating overlayers such as Co–Pi.3,4 Unfortunately, these overlayers often result in parasitic light absorption that decrease the overall performance of the composite device.5
Recently, the “photocharging” process was introduced as a way to suppress the losses at the SEI of several metal oxide photoanodes (BiVO4, Fe2O3, WO3) without the addition of an overlayer, resulting in an improvement in the overall performance.6–12 This photocharging treatment led to an increase in the photocurrent and an appreciable cathodic shift in the onset potential in some cases. This was first demonstrated in bismuth vanadate by Trześniewski et al.,11 improving the performance of BiVO4 tremendously and making its performance comparable to that of BiVO4 with catalytic overlayers. This photocharging treatment was performed by illuminating the metal oxide semiconductor for a prolonged time under open-circuit conditions in a phosphate buffer electrolyte. Li et al.7 also demonstrated a similar effect on tungsten doped BiVO4, by prolonged illumination of the W:BiVO4 sample in air with UV light, in a procedure they call the UV-curing process. Trześniewski et al.10 later went on to show the dramatic effect of the [OH−] concentration in the electrolyte on the degree of suppression of the losses at the SEI, i.e. at more alkaline conditions the photocharging treatment worked better. Liu et al.9 made use of intensity modulated photoelectron spectroscopy (IMPS) to quantitatively study the kinetics of the photocharged BiVO4 and show that the enhancement from photocharging is both in the bulk and the surface of the BiVO4 photoanode. Favaro et al.6 used in situ HAXPES to demonstrate that the light-induced suppression of surface losses resulting from the photocharging process in BiVO4, in a phosphate buffer solution, could be a result of the formation of a thin BiPO4 overlayer as a result of the illumination. Li et al.8 further demonstrated the effect of the UV curing process on WO3 photoanodes, showing that this light-induced performance enhancement was not confined to only BiVO4. Xie et al.12 recently demonstrated a similar enhancement on titanium doped hematite photoanodes, by photocharging the Ti:Fe2O3 with prolonged illumination under an applied anodic potential.
Copper tungstate (CuWO4) is another n-type metal oxide semiconductor that has been extensively researched for photo-electrochemical water oxidation.13–18 The bandgap energy of ∼2.25 eV allows it to achieve a theoretical photocurrent density upwards of 10 mA cm−2.13 The ability of CuWO4 photoanodes to selectively oxidize water over chloride ions in the solution is also an added advantage, opening possibilities for direct water oxidation from sea water.18 Herein, we demonstrate that copper tungstate also shows an improvement in performance with the photocharging treatment. We show that this photocharging process of CuWO4 results in doubling of the photocurrent of the untreated sample at 1.23 VRHE, with only a negligible anodic shift in the onset potential. We also show that this effect is reversible under dark conditions, as also seen with BiVO4. More importantly, these results raise the question of whether the photocharging treatment is universal to all metal oxide semiconductors, and what the implications of this treatment may hold for general SEI’s. Gaining more fundamental understanding of the photocharging process will help to gain more insight into the dynamic behaviour of the metal oxide SEI under illumination. In this article, we would like to briefly discuss the features of the photocharging process of CuWO4 and the similarities with the photocharging process of other metal oxide semiconductors. We highlight that the metal oxide semiconductor–electrolyte interface is much more complex than what is previously understood.
Experimental
Preparation of CuWO4 thin films
CuWO4 thin films of ∼1.2 μm were deposited onto a conductive FTO coated glass substrate (TEC-15, Hartford Glass Co.) by the spray pyrolysis technique. The precursor solution was prepared by mixing equimolar aqueous solutions of CuSO4·5H2O (99.995% trace metal basis, Sigma-Aldrich) and Na2WO4·2H2O (BioUltra, ≧99.0% (T), Sigma-Aldrich), resulting in the precipitation of CuWO4. The solution was further diluted with Milli-Q water to make the concentrations of Cu2+ and W6+ at 0.01 M in the final precursor solution. The CuWO4 precipitate was dissolved using 25% aqueous NH3 solution (ammonium hydroxide solution, puriss. p.a., reag. ISO, reag. Ph. Eur., ≧25% NH3 basis, Sigma-Aldrich) and the final pH of the precursor solution was made up to 11.5. The FTO substrate was cleaned with laboratory grade soap solution followed by Milli-Q water, acetone and isopropanol and eventually dried off using nitrogen gas. This was followed by a 45 minute UV/ozone cleaning step at 60 °C (Novascan UV Ozone cleaner – PSD Pro series). The cleaned substrate was placed on a ceramic heating plate and the plate was slowly heated to 300 °C. The spray deposition was carried out using an automated spray setup, spraying at 1 minute cycles with 1 second spray and 59 seconds delay time, for 100 cycles driven by an overpressure of 0.8 MPa of nitrogen gas. The nozzle substrate distance was fixed at 40 cm and the precursor solution was placed 33 cm below the nozzle and was fed via the siphoning effect of the nitrogen flow. After the deposition, the samples were annealed in a tube oven at 500 °C for 5 hours at a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1 with an airflow of 80 cm3 min−1.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
The CuWO4 photoanodes were photoelectrochemically tested using a potentiostat (VersaSTAT 3, Princeton Applied Research) in a three electrode arrangement, with a coiled platinum wire as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl (XR300, saturated KCl and AgCl solution, Radiometer Analytical) reference electrode. The electrolyte used was an aqueous 0.3 M borate buffer (99.97% trace metal basis Boric acid, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1 M sodium perchlorate (ACS reagent, ≧ 98.0%, Sigma-Aldrich) and the pH of this solution was corrected to 7.5 using a concentrated NaOH (pellets, ≧98% Assay, Baker analysed ACS, J.T. Baker, Avantor performance materials) solution. The voltammetric scans were performed at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 unless specified otherwise. A Newport Sol3A Class AAA (type 94023A-SR3) solar simulator, with a 450 W xenon short arc lamp, was used to provide the simulated solar illumination for the photocurrent measurements at the standard AM 1.5 illumination intensity (100 mW cm−2). The samples were illuminated in the back illumination mode. The electrolyte inside the photoelectrochemical cell was constantly stirred using a magnetic stirrer and was purged with nitrogen gas to constantly remove any dissolved gasses in the electrolyte. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed using a 200 W quartz–tungsten halogen lamp coupled with a grating monochromator (Acton SpectraPro 150i) and electronic shutter system (Uniblitz LS6). The illumination intensities of the tungsten halogen lamp were measured using a Newport high performance handheld optical power meter (1919-R) coupled with a UV-enhanced silicon photodetector (918-UV-OD3R). The IPCE measurements were performed at an applied potential of 1.23 VRHE. The CuWO4 photoanodes were photocharged by illuminating the sample (with AM 1.5 light) in a photoelectrochemical cell under open-circuit conditions, for prolonged hours. The catalytic efficiency of the CuWO4 photoanodes was tested using methanol as a hole scavenger, by mixing it with the electrolyte used for the voltammetry measurements in a 50% v/v ratio. Using this experiment, we probe the photocurrent generated in the presence of a hole scavenging electrolyte, which assumes near unity transfer of holes to oxidize a compound that is more easily oxidized than water, and use the ratio of these photocurrents to estimate the ‘ideal’ hole transfer rate if it drives a reaction that does not have a major rate-limiting step. Mott–Schottky plots were obtained for the CuWO4 samples in the dark, in the fixed frequency mode (10 kHz) with a 15 mV amplitude of perturbation. These measurements were performed without any stirring or nitrogen bubbling.
Material characterization
UV-Vis absorption measurements of the CuWO4 samples were obtained using a PerkinElmer Lambda 900 UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer. The measurements were performed inside an integration sphere, in transmittance mode (% T), with a sample tilt of 15 degrees to minimize reflection of the incident beam from the sample. The transmittance data was converted to absorption data (% A) using the formula % A = 100 − % T. The measurements were performed between 750 nm and 300 nm, at a scan rate of 250 nm min−1 with an integration time of 0.2 s. Absorption coefficient and Tauc plot were calculated from the above obtained transmittance data.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer powered with a Co Kα X-ray source (I = 1.78897 Å). The samples were scanned at a scan speed of 0.4 seconds per step, with each step being 0.02 degrees, with no rotation.
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images to study the surface morphology of the CuWO4 samples were obtained using a Joel JSM-6010LA analytical SEM machine. The measurements were performed at a working distance of ∼10 mm at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Thermo Scientific Kα XPS system with an aluminium Kα X-ray source. The measurements were performed with a spot size of 400 μm, pass energy of 50 eV, energy step size of 0.1 eV and a dwell time of 50 ms, along with a flood gun for charge compensation. 10 scans were performed for each of C 1s, O 1s, and W 4f, 300 scans for B 1s, 50 scans for the valence band and 25 scans were performed for the Cu 2p, around their respective binding energies, to obtain the final spectrum. The valence band scans were performed at a pass energy of 100 eV. Measurements were performed for three different spots in each sample and the data was averaged over these three spots, expect for B 1s, where the data was averaged over two different spots. All data presented in this work are corrected for the C 1s peak shifts, using 284.8 eV as the reference point for the C 1s peaks. The data presented in the paper is after background subtraction. A U 2 Tougaard background spectra with a C parameter of −3450 was used in each case. Samples were rinsed with Milli-Q water and dried under N2 stream, to remove any salt deposits at the surface, before loading to the XPS system.
Results
Voltammetric scans were performed to evaluate the photoelectrochemical performance of untreated (UT) and photocharged (PC) CuWO4 substrates. The potential sweeps were performed between 0 V vs. open-circuit potential (OCP) and 1.4 VRHE to obtain the current–voltage plots. Fig. 1 shows the measured photocurrent density of the UT-CuWO4 samples (solid blue line) against the applied potential. A photocurrent density of ∼30 μA cm−2 was measured at 1.23 VRHE for the UT-CuWO4 sample, with an onset potential of ∼0.7 VRHE. The lower slope at potentials less than 0.9 VRHE, compared to the slope of the curve above this potential, would suggest that there could be other non-faradaic processes occurring apart from water oxidation at these low potentials. In fact, similar observations were made in other reports on CuWO4 (ref. 13) and WO3,19,20 where they attribute it to the de-intercalation of protons or alkali cations from the CuWO4 or WO3 lattice. After analysing the properties of the UT-CuWO4, these samples were then subjected to the photocharging treatment for 15 hours. Fig. 1(a) also shows the improvement in the photocurrent of the PC-CuWO4 sample (solid green line), compared with the untreated sample (solid blue line). The photocurrent at 1.23 VRHE of the photocharged sample is, at most, two times that of the untreated sample, with only a negligible anodic shift in the onset potential. The increase in photocurrent after the photocharging treatment may be a result of light-induced surface passivation, improvement in the kinetics or catalytic properties, improvement in the bulk charge transport or charge separation properties, or a combination of some or all of these factors. The latter was true in the case of BiVO4, where a comprehensive set of investigations has been performed since the discovery of this photocharging effect.6,7,9–11 The evolution of photocurrent with the photocharging time is shown in Fig. S1.†
 Fig. 1  (a) Voltammetric scans (in light and dark) of UT- and PC-CuWO4 in the back illumination mode. Measurements were performed with and without a hole scavenger. (b) Voltammetric scans demonstrating the decay and re-photocharging of the PC-CuWO4 substrates. 
To get a better understanding of the reason behind the improvement in performance of the CuWO4 samples from photocharging, a hole scavenger was used before and after photocharging and the results were compared to the case without a hole scavenger. Hole scavengers have a much lower theoretical redox potential and, as a result, can be more easily oxidized than water. The catalytic efficiency in the presence of such hole scavengers is assumed to be near 100%, with a complete suppression of all surface losses. Methanol, which is typically used as a hole scavenger in photoelectrochemical studies,21 was used in a 50% v/v ratio with the aqueous electrolyte to perform the voltammetric scans. Fig. 1(a) also shows the improvement in performance of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 sample, when a hole scavenger is used (dash dot light blue and light green lines, respectively). The performance of the UT-CuWO4 improved when a hole scavenger is used (dash dot light blue line), as expected. This result suggests that the UT-CuWO4 was suffering from surface recombination losses and/or poor water oxidation kinetics. Comparing the performance of UT-CuWO4 with hole scavenger and that of PC-CuWO4 without the hole scavenger suggests that the improvement in performance of the PC-CuWO4 sample could be a result of improvement in catalytic efficiency. Interestingly, the PC-CuWO4 samples also showed an improvement (dash dot light green line) in photocurrent density across a large potential range when the hole scavenger was used. If the performance enhancement of CuWO4 due to photocharging was purely due to an improvement in catalytic efficiency or suppression of surface recombination losses, the performance of UT- and PC-CuWO4 with hole scavenger would have been similar. Therefore, the improvement in performance of PC-CuWO4 compared to UT-CuWO4 in the presence of a hole scavenger suggests that there is a “bulk” component in the performance enhancement due to the photocharging effect, similar to what was found for BiVO4.9
The improvement in performance of the PC-CuWO4 was also seen to be reversible under dark conditions. Herein, the sample was first photocharged for 15 hours and then left in the electrolyte under dark OCP conditions for 5 hours. The performance of this “discharged” sample was further evaluated with another voltammetric scan, as seen in Fig. 1(b) (dashed blue line). The sample has indeed discharged, as evident from the decrease in the measured photocurrent. However, the performance of this decayed sample was still better than the untreated CuWO4 sample (solid blue line), suggesting a slow decay process or a permanent modification of the CuWO4 sample. This decaying of the photocharging effect was also seen in BiVO4 by Trześniewski et al.,11 albeit at a much faster rate at a similar pH, suggesting that there are some similarities and some differences in the mechanism(s) for the photocharging effect in these two materials. The decayed CuWO4 samples could also be re-photocharged in a similar fashion (dashed green line).
To try and understand if this “bulk” component in performance enhancement after photocharging is related to the improvement in optical characteristics of CuWO4, the absorption spectra of CuWO4 before and after photocharging were measured. As seen in Fig. 2(a), the as-deposited CuWO4 samples had an absorption onset of ∼550 nm, with a slow increase in the absorption between 550 nm and 420 nm. This characteristic is attributed to an indirect bandgap within CuWO4, which is also seen with some other metal oxide semiconductors.22 The other characteristic feature in this figure is the absorption above 700 nm. This is attributed to the d–d transitions in copper due to the Jahn–Teller distortion in the copper octahedra (CuO6) when copper exists in the Cu2+ state, as in the case of CuWO4.23,24 The absorption spectra of the PC-CuWO4 was also measured in a similar fashion and the absorption within the bandgap was seen to be unchanged. Interestingly, the absorption close to the bandgap onset and above the bandgap decreased after the photocharging treatment. This above bandgap absorption could be a result of the combination of multiple factors. One possibility is the change in the absorption onset of the d–d transitions in the Cu 3d orbital. Another is the stray reflection of the incoming light beam during the transmittance measurements, from the complex morphology of the spray deposited CuWO4, while the change in the absorption from any mid-bandgap states originating from the defects within the material may also play a role. To see if this decrease in absorption is related to a change in the optical properties of the material due to the photocharging effect, a Tauc plot was constructed from the absorption data collected before and after photocharging. As seen in Fig. 2(b), the bandgap of the as-deposited and photocharged CuWO4 remained the same at 2.25 eV, similar to other reports in the literature.13,17
 Fig. 2  (a) Absorption spectra of as-deposited and photocharged CuWO4. (b) Tauc plot constructed from the absorption data for the as-deposited and photocharged CuWO4. 
Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed on the UT- and PC-CuWO4 to determine if this change in absorption at the onset and above the bandgap has altered the wavelength dependent quantum efficiency of CuWO4 due to the photocharging treatment. Fig. 3(a) shows the IPCE of UT- and PC-CuWO4 plotted against the wavelength of the incoming photons. Both the UT- and PC-CuWO4 had a similar onset of the photocurrent, at ∼550 nm, suggesting that the change in the absorption near the bandgap onset and above the bandgap does not contribute to the improved performance due to photocharging. The quantum efficiency within the bandgap improved significantly post photocharging. To understand this improvement, the IPCE data was corrected for the absorption to obtain the absorbed photon to current efficiency (APCE). The APCE reflects the losses due to recombination of the photo-generated carriers within the semiconductor. The APCE, in Fig. 3(b), also shows a similar enhancement due to photocharging of CuWO4, suggesting that the photocharging treatment has resulted in the suppression of recombination losses within the semiconductor.
 Fig. 3  (a) Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 substrates. (b) Absorbed photo to current efficiency (APCE) of the UT- and PC-CuWO4. 
To investigate if the improvement in performance due to photocharging is a result of some photo-induced morphology change, as suggested in some reports,7,8 the morphology of UT- and PC-CuWO4 was analysed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the surface morphologies of the UT-CuWO4 and PC-CuWO4, respectively. The UT-CuWO4 samples were left in the electrolyte under open-circuit conditions for 16 hours without any illumination, whereas the PC-CuWO4 samples were illuminated under the same conditions. A nanoporous surface with an extensive microstructure network is clearly visible in both these images, indicating that the surface has remained mostly intact after the photocharging treatment. This is also shown in Fig. S2(a and b).† To further confirm if the photocharging treatment has led to the formation of any additional active sites at the surface, the electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 was determined by performing cyclic voltammetry scans in the dark, at a series of different scan rates for each of these samples. The double layer capacitance (Cdl), obtained from the slope of the current density versus scan rate plot, can be directly correlated to the ECSA. In Fig. 5(a), the similar Cdl values indicate that there is no major change in the number of active sites in the UT- and PC-CuWO4 samples. The small change in the obtained Cdl values could be a result of the error margin in these fitting techniques.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of UT-CuWO4 sample. (b) SEM image of PC-CuWO4 sample. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) plot for UT- and PC-CuWO4, obtained at 1.3 VRHE from performing cyclic voltammetry at different scan rates in the dark. (b) X-ray diffractograms of UT- and PC-CuWO4. 
The bulk crystal structure of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 were also analysed with the X-ray diffraction technique. Fig. 5(b) shows the XRD spectra for both the untreated and the photocharged samples. Sharp peaks corresponding to CuWO4 (positions marked in red), agreeing with other reports in the literature,13,17 indicate a very crystalline thin film of CuWO4. More importantly, no shift in peak positions or a significant increase in the peak intensities were visible after the photocharging treatment, suggesting that the bulk structure has remained unchanged after the photocharging treatment. This is also consistent with the reports on photocharging of BiVO4.7,11
To investigate if the chemical composition of the surface has been altered due to the photocharging treatment, the surface composition of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 was analysed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 6(a–c) show the narrow spectra of the Cu 2p, O 1s and B 1s species. The W 4f narrow spectra is shown in Fig. S3(a).† Cu 2p peaks have a signature of four distinct features, when the Cu exists in the Cu2+ state.25,26 The Cu2+ satellite peaks (as marked in the figure) are a result of the shake-up transitions in the valence band of copper, due to the photoejection of a core electron.27 The characteristic Cu 2p3/2 peaks for Cu(I)O, Cu(II)O and Cu(II) hydroxide are at 932.18 ± 0.12 eV, 933.76 ± 0.11 eV and 934.67 ± 0.02 eV, respectively28 and their associated Cu 2p5/2 peaks around 955 eV. The Cu 2p spectra in Fig. 6(a) consists of copper in Cu(I), Cu(II) and Cu(II) hydroxide forms for both the UT- and PC-CuWO4, as evidenced by the complex spectra with peaks between 930 and 940 eV, resulting from the convolution of signals from copper in different forms. Interestingly, the peaks at ∼932 eV and ∼952 eV diminished after photocharging, which is attributed to Cu+, possibly suggesting that the concentration of Cu+ species at the surface has decreased near the semiconductor–electrolyte interface after photocharging. Similarly, the W 4f and O 1s spectra were also analysed for the UT- and PC-CuWO4. The W 4f7/2 has a characteristic peak at 35.8 ± 0.4 eV, when the tungsten is in the +6 oxidation state,28 with the W 4f5/2 doublet peak at ∼37.9 ± 0.4 eV. A W 5p3/2 peak is also normally visible at ∼40.8 eV.28 The associated lattice oxygen (O 1s) would have a peak at 530.5 ± 0.2 eV.28 The O 1s peaks could also have a shoulder at higher binding energies. This shoulder peak at ∼532 eV is a characteristic of oxygen in the chemisorbed species at the surface.6,10 All these characteristic peaks for W 4f and O 1s are visible in Fig. S3(a)† and 6(b) for both UT- and PC-CuWO4. The shoulder peak in the O 1s spectra has become more prominent post photocharging, possibly due to the build-up of oxygen in some chemisorbed species during photocharging. Both the O 1s and W 4f spectra also seem to have a minor shift of ∼0.1 eV to higher binding energies post photocharging. B 1s spectra was also recorded for both UT- and PC-CuWO4. B 1s has a peak at ∼192.2 eV for boron in a borate species.29,30 This peak is clearly visible in Fig. 6(c) for the PC-CuWO4 sample and less so for the UT-CuWO4. A noisy spectrum even after performing 300 scans indicates that the concentration of this boron species at the surface is low. This data was presented without normalisation due to this low signal to noise ratio. The valence band spectra of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 were measured in a similar fashion, shown in Fig. 6(d). The spectra of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 seem to be similar, except for a noticeable shift of valence band maximum (VBM) to higher binding energies (by ∼0.4 eV) for the photocharged sample. The complete valence band spectra is shown in Fig. S3(b).†
 Fig. 6  XPS spectra of (a) Cu 2p, (b) O 1s, (c) B 1s and (d) valence band of UT- and PC-CuWO4. 
To determine if the band edge positions have been altered due to photocharging, Mott–Schottky plots were gathered for the UT- and PC-CuWO4 samples. Additionally, the Mott–Schottky plots were also obtained for the PC-CuWO4 after discharging in the dark OCP conditions, as shown in Fig. 7. The Mott–Schottky plots can be used to determine the flat band potential and the charge carrier densities of CuWO4. The flatband potential can be estimated from the x-intercept of the linear fit to the Csc−2vs. potential plot, while the slope of this linear fit is inversely proportional to the charge carrier density. All three, the UT- and PC-CuWO4 and the discharged sample, had a similar x-intercept of ∼0.5 VRHE and similar slopes. This flatband potential value agrees with other reports on spray deposited CuWO4.14 The small difference, <50 mV, in the x-intercept values could be a factor of the accuracy of the Mott–Schottky method and would fall within the error margin.
 Fig. 7  Mott–Schottky plots of UT-, PC- and discharged CuWO4 samples obtained in the fixed frequency mode in the dark. 
Discussion
The photocharging treatment has clearly improved the performance of CuWO4 post photocharging. This was confirmed by both the cyclic voltammetry scans and the IPCE experiments for the UT- and PC-CuWO4. The catalytic efficiency of UT- and PC-CuWO4 was calculated according to the method suggested by Dotan et al.31 A clear bump in the low potential region of the catalytic efficiency plot (Fig. S4(a)†) confirms the de-intercalation of H+ and Na+ from the CuWO4 lattice,13,20 as suggested before. The hole scavenger experiments suggested a “bulk” enhancement factor from the photocharging effect, together with any surface enhancement. This bulk enhancement post photocharging could be a result of multiple factors; (1) improved light absorption, (2) morphological changes, or (3) improved charge separation in the space charge region. A series of characterisation techniques were performed to better understand this potential bulk enhancement. Absorption spectra of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 showed no major difference within the bandgap. This was confirmed from the Tauc plot which showed a bandgap of ∼2.25 eV for both the UT- and PC-CuWO4. In fact, the IPCE plots also had a similar onset for both the UT- and PC-CuWO4. SEM images of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 also didn’t show any major difference, with both the micro and nanostructures remaining intact after the photocharging treatment. This was also confirmed by the ECSA plots, which provided similar double layer capacitance values for both the UT- and PC-CuWO4. The XRD data also revealed that the bulk of the CuWO4 remained unchanged post photocharging. The information obtained from the absorption spectra, IPCE plots, SEM images, ECSA experiments and XRD patterns suggest that the bulk enhancement is not a result of any morphological change or improved light absorption due to the photocharging effect, rather, it could be due to an improved charge separation in the space charge region post photocharging. To verify this, the charge separation efficiency was also calculated as per the method recommended by Dotan et al.,31 as in Fig. S4(b).† This plot confirms the increase in charge separation efficiency post photocharging.
The chemical composition of the surface of UT- and PC-CuWO4 was analysed using XPS. The data suggested that the surface composition of copper has changed after photocharging. Specifically, there was a decrease in the concentration of Cu+ at the surface for the PC-CuWO4 samples. Copper predominantly exists in the +2 oxidation state in the bulk lattice of CuWO4. But the surface of such semiconductors could have copper in the +1 oxidation state due to the abrupt termination of the surface. These cations could then act as electron or hole traps at the surface, decreasing the photocurrent obtained from the material. Passivation layers are normally used to suppress such recombination losses at the surface. The decrease in the concentration of Cu+ at the surface, coupled with the increase in photocurrent after the photocharging treatment, could mean that there is some kind of chemical passivation of these electron traps due to the photocharging effect. In fact, Favaro et al. used in situ HAXPES on BiVO4 and confirmed the light induced formation of a chemical complex between a metal cation within the semiconductor and a solution anion species, which resulted in the “light induced surface passivation”.6 They reported that the formation of this chemical complex is reversible under dark conditions. Similarly, the photocharging treatment in the case of CuWO4, as in this work, could also form such a complex between the copper atoms at the semiconductor surface and borate or perchlorate ions in the solution. Perchlorate ions in solution are normally considered to be “inert” and are less interactive towards an electrochemical surface compared with a borate anion. Therefore, chances are that the photocharging treatment could induce the formation of a copper borate complex at the surface, similar to the formation of a BiPO4 complex as in the report of Favaro et al. The B 1s XPS spectra with a peak at ∼192.2 eV for the PC-CuWO4 sample, which corresponds to the spectra of boron in a borate form,29,30 confirms the presence of a borate species at the surface. The O 1s spectra and W 4f spectra did not show a major difference, except for the increase in the peak at 532 eV for the O 1s spectra. As mentioned earlier, this peak is normally attributed to oxygen from chemisorbed species at the surface of the semiconductor. Therefore, this O 1s peak at 532 eV could be due to the oxygen in the borate species at the surface, formed as a result of the photocharging treatment. Similar observations were also made by Favaro et al.6 and Trześniewski et al.10 in the case of BiVO4. The valence band XPS spectra for the UT- and PC-CuWO4 also looked similar, expect for a significant shift in the valence band maximum (VBM) by ∼0.4 eV. Interestingly though, the Mott–Schottky plots suggests that the CB band position has not changed and is fixed at the 0.5 VRHE post photocharging. The valence band (VB) of CuWO4 is composed of Cu(3d) and O(2p) orbitals.17,32 There are conflicting reports in the literature about the composition of the conduction band in CuWO4. Some reports suggest that the conduction band (CB) is composed predominantly of W(5d),17 whereas other reports suggest that it is composed of W(5d) and Cu(3d).32 It is important to point out here that the penetration depth of a commercial XPS system is ∼5 nm from the surface and thus the data represents the chemical composition information of these first five nanometers. Combining the information obtained from the Tauc plot, XRD, Mott–Schottky plot and the XPS data suggests that a heterojunction of two semiconductors could have formed close to the surface, due to the photocharging treatment. The anodic shift of the VBM by ∼0.4 eV indicates that a semiconductor with a higher bandgap may have formed at the surface due to the photocharging treatment. Therefore, this heterojunction is composed predominantly of the UT-CuWO4 and a higher bandgap semiconductor at the surface. The unchanged bulk data, as observed in the absorption spectra and XRD data of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 suggest that the thickness of the higher bandgap semiconductor is extremely small, possibly smaller than 5 nm. The origin of this higher bandgap semiconductor is still unclear. The presence of a borate species at the surface post photocharging, as seen in the B 1s XPS spectra, would suggest that this high bandgap semiconductor might be borate-based.
There are reports in the literature about the existence of CuB2O4 and Cu3B2O6 photocatalysts, both semiconductors with bandgaps of ∼3.1 eV and ∼2.16 eV, respectively.29 Therefore, a heterojunction could have formed between the CuWO4 and either of these two semiconductors, close to the surface, due to the photocharging treatment. The improved charge separation in the space charge region, post photocharging, would imply that the band bending at this heterojunction should be favourable for taking the electrons away from the surface and/or drive holes to the SEI for water oxidation. Unfortunately, there are not many reports in the literature on these two copper borate species. Especially, there is no information about the absolute band edge positions and the intrinsic Fermi level positions of these two semiconductors in the literature, to our knowledge. Therefore, further research is needed to identify the exact composition of this photo-induced copper borate complex. The data obtained from the Mott–Schottky plots cannot be used anymore to determine the CB position because of the existence of this heterojunction. Fig. 8 shows an artistic representation of the authors’ view of the heterojunction formed, between CuWO4 and copper borate, due to the photocharging process. The improved band bending resulting from this heterojunction improves the charge separation and minimises charge carrier recombination. The formation of this copper complex could be initialised by the photo-corrosion of CuWO4, similar to the suggestions of Favaro et al. on BiVO4.6 An attempt was made to perform inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) on the electrolyte samples, post photocharging, to see if any copper or tungsten has leached into the solution in the process of photocharging (Table S1†). However, the data was too erroneous as the concentrations were too low and hence was too close or below the detection limit. High background noise, especially from the sodium ions in the solution, also made the measurements erroneous. The open-circuit potential measurements (Fig. S5†) during the photocharging process suggests that the formation of this complex reaches an equilibrium, after a few hours of photocharging, as seen from the plateauing of the OCP after a few hours. A similar observation was also made in the case of BiVO4.10,11 Thus, this film probably does not grow beyond a few nanometers in thickness.
 Fig. 8  (a) Band diagram representing the band bending in the space charge region for UT-CuWO4. (b) A speculative band diagram showing the additional band bending in the space charge region post photocharging, because of the formation of a heterojunction between CuWO4 and the copper borate complex. 
Conclusion
In this work, the effect of photocharging on CuWO4 photoanodes is presented. Prolonged exposure of CuWO4 photoanodes to light under OCP conditions improved the performance of the photoanodes and doubled the photocurrent at 1.23 VRHE. This enhancement was seen to be reversible under dark conditions, but at a much slower rate than reports on photocharging of BiVO4.11 Photoelectrochemical experiments with a hole scavenger suggest that the enhancement in performance is facilitated by a “bulk” factor. Thorough material characterisation suggests that the bulk optical and material properties have not changed post photocharging, and neither does the morphology. It is very striking that all these features are very similar to the reports on photocharging of BiVO4.10,11
XPS data suggested a change in the surface chemical composition post photocharging. There was a decrease in the concentration of Cu+ at the surface after photocharging. Initial indications suggests that this could be due to chemical passivation of trap sites at the surface. An in situ HAXPES study on the photocharging of BiVO4 indicated a light-induced formation of BiPO4 layer at the surface of BiVO4 during photocharging in a phosphate buffer.6 In this article, we speculate on the build-up of a copper borate complex in a similar fashion at the CuWO4 surface due to photocharging. This results in the formation of a heterojunction between CuWO4 and the copper borate complex close to the surface. This proposal is supported by the presence of borate peak in the B 1s spectra for the PC-CuWO4, additional buildup of a peak at 532 eV in the O 1s spectra and a ∼0.4 eV anodic shift in the valence band maximum. Copper borate exists in two different forms, CuB2O4 and Cu3B2O6. Both are proven photocatalysts with a bandgap of ∼3.1 eV and 2.16 eV, respectively.29 Our data suggests that this copper borate layer is extremely thin and does not grow beyond a few nanometers in thickness. The heterojunction formed by these two semiconductors leads to an improved charge separation in the space charge region, close to the surface and thus an improvement in the photocurrent post photocharging. More research is needed to determine the exact composition of this copper borate complex.
This article, along with other reports on photocharging of metal oxide semiconductors (BiVO4, WO3, Fe2O3 (ref. 6–12)), suggests that the metal oxide semiconductor–electrolyte interface is more complex than normally perceived. The effect of this time-dependent light-induced surface layer formation with the electrolyte species at the metal oxide semiconductor surface should be considered in all future works in the field of photo-electrochemistry with metal oxide semiconductors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the NWO VIDI grant awarded to Dr Wilson A. Smith. The authors would like to thank Dr Ibadillah A. Digdaya for having fruitful discussions on the topic, and Kailun Yang and Sanjana Chandrashekar for their help in obtaining the SEM images and for the XRD measurements, respectively.
References

          An IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, in 2018: Global warming of 1.5 °C, ed. V. Masson-Delmotte PZ, H. O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield, IPCC,  2018 Search PubMed .

          B. J. Sixto Giménez, Photoelectrochemical solar fuel production, Springer, Switzerland,  2016 Search PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, Near-complete suppression of surface recombination in solar photoelectrolysis by “Co-Pi” catalyst-modified W:BiVO4, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(45), 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Nanoporous BiVO4 photoanodes with dual-layer oxygen evolution catalysts for solar water splitting, Science, 2014, 1245026 Search PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, An Optocatalytic Model for Semiconductor–Catalyst Water-Splitting Photoelectrodes Based on In Situ Optical Measurements on Operational Catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(6), 931–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Favaro, F. F. Abdi, M. Lamers, E. J. Crumlin, Z. Liu and R. van de Krol, 
            et al., Light-Induced Surface Reactions at the Bismuth Vanadate/Potassium Phosphate Interface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122(2), 801–809 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, J. He, B. Pena and C. P. Berlinguette, Curing BiVO4 Photoanodes with Ultraviolet Light Enhances Photoelectrocatalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55(5), 1769–1772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. He, B. Pena and C. P. Berlinguette, Exposure of WO3 Photoanodes to Ultraviolet Light Enhances Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(38), 25010–25013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Y. Liu, J. E. Thorne, Y. He and D. Wang, Understanding Photocharging Effects on Bismuth Vanadate, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(27), 22083–22087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Trześniewski, I. A. Digdaya, T. Nagaki, S. Ravishankar, I. Herraiz-Cardona and D. A. Vermaas, 
            et al., Near-complete suppression of surface losses and total internal quantum efficiency in BiVO4 photoanodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(6), 1517–1529 RSC .
B. J. Trześniewski and W. A. Smith, Photocharged BiVO4 photoanodes for improved solar water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(8), 2919–2926 RSC .
J. Xie, P. Yang, X. Liang and J. Xiong, Self-Improvement of Ti:Fe2O3 Photoanodes: Photoelectrocatalysis Improvement after Long-Term Stability Testing in Alkaline Electrolyte, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(6), 2769–2775 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bohra and W. A. Smith, Improved charge separation via Fe-doping of copper tungstate photoanodes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(15), 9857–9866 RSC .
Y. Gao and T. W. Hamann, Elucidation of CuWO4 Surface States During Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8(12), 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Lhermitte and B. M. Bartlett, Advancing the Chemistry of CuWO4 for Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(6), 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Valenti, D. Dolat, G. Biskos, A. Schmidt-Ott and W. A. Smith, Enhancement of the Photoelectrochemical Performance of CuWO4 Thin Films for Solar Water Splitting by Plasmonic Nanoparticle Functionalization, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(4), 2096–2104 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Yourey and B. M. Bartlett, Electrochemical deposition and photoelectrochemistry of CuWO4, a promising photoanode for water oxidation, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(21), 7651 RSC .
J. E. Yourey, K. J. Pyper, J. B. Kurtz and B. M. Bartlett, Chemical Stability of CuWO4 for Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(17), 8708–8718 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Baeck, K. S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Enhancement of Photocatalytic and Electrochromic Properties of Electrochemically Fabricated Mesoporous WO3 Thin Films, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15(15), 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Smith, A. Wolcott, R. C. Fitzmorris, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Quasi-core-shell TiO2/WO3 and WO3/TiO2 nanorod arrays fabricated by glancing angle deposition for solar water splitting, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(29), 10792 RSC .
M. Valenti, A. Venugopal, D. Tordera, M. P. Jonsson, G. Biskos and A. Schmidt-Ott, 
            et al., Hot Carrier Generation and Extraction of Plasmonic Alloy Nanoparticles, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(5), 1146–1152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Cooper, S. Gul, F. M. Toma, L. Chen, Y.-S. Liu and J. Guo, 
            et al., Indirect Bandgap and Optical Properties of Monoclinic Bismuth Vanadate, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(6), 2969–2974 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ruiz-Fuertes, M. N. Sanz-Ortiz, J. González, F. Rodríguez, A. Segura and D. Errandonea, Optical absorption and Raman spectroscopy of CuWO4, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, 215, 012048 CrossRef .
J. E. Yourey, J. B. Kurtz and B. M. Bartlett, Water Oxidation on a CuWO4–WO3 Composite Electrode in the Presence of [Fe(CN)6]3−: Toward Solar Z-Scheme Water Splitting at Zero Bias, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(4), 3200–3205 CrossRef CAS .
O. Y. Khyzhun, T. Strunskus, S. Cramm and Y. M. Solonin, Electronic structure of CuWO4: XPS, XES and NEXAFS studies, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 389(1–2), 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, W. Li and G. Yang, Hydrogen-interstitial CuWO4 nanomesh: a single-component full spectrum-active photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Brisk and A. Baker, Shake-up satellites in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1975, 7(3), 197–213 CrossRef CAS .

NIST X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Database [Internet], National Institute of Standards and Technology,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Wen, X. Zou, F. Zuo, G. J. O. Beran and P. Feng, Visible-light-responsive copper(II) borate photocatalysts with intrinsic midgap states for water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(5), 1553–1556 RSC .
C. Ong, H. Huang, B. Zheng, R. Kwok, Y. Hui and W. Lau, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy of nonmetallic materials: electronic structures of boron and BxOy, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95(7), 3527–3534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Probing the photoelectrochemical properties of hematite (α-Fe2O3) electrodes using hydrogen peroxide as a hole scavenger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(3), 958–964 RSC .
M. Lalić, Z. Popović and F. Vukajlović, Electronic structure and optical properties of CuWO4: an ab initio study, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 63, 163–167 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00179kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Voltammetric scans (in light and dark) of UT- and PC-CuWO4 in the back illumination mode. Measurements were performed with and without a hole scavenger. (b) Voltammetric scans demonstrating the decay and re-photocharging of the PC-CuWO4 substrates.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Absorption spectra of as-deposited and photocharged CuWO4. (b) Tauc plot constructed from the absorption data for the as-deposited and photocharged CuWO4.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the UT- and PC-CuWO4 substrates. (b) Absorbed photo to current efficiency (APCE) of the UT- and PC-CuWO4.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of UT-CuWO4 sample. (b) SEM image of PC-CuWO4 sample.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) plot for UT- and PC-CuWO4, obtained at 1.3 VRHE from performing cyclic voltammetry at different scan rates in the dark. (b) X-ray diffractograms of UT- and PC-CuWO4.	 

 	Fig. 6  XPS spectra of (a) Cu 2p, (b) O 1s, (c) B 1s and (d) valence band of UT- and PC-CuWO4.	 

 	Fig. 7  Mott–Schottky plots of UT-, PC- and discharged CuWO4 samples obtained in the fixed frequency mode in the dark.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Band diagram representing the band bending in the space charge region for UT-CuWO4. (b) A speculative band diagram showing the additional band bending in the space charge region post photocharging, because of the formation of a heterojunction between CuWO4 and the copper borate complex.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00179k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
