Toward fiber-, paper-, and foam-based flexible solid-state supercapacitors: electrode materials and device designs  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR10301A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR10301A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7041-7061Toward fiber-, paper-, and foam-based flexible solid-state supercapacitors: electrode materials and device designs

        
          
            Jing 
            Liang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Changzhong 
            Jiang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *abd
aLaboratory of Printable Functional Nanomaterials and Printed Electronics, School of Printing and Packaging, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: weiwu@whu.edu.cn
bShenzhen Research Institute of Wuhan University, Shenzhen 518057, P. R. China
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410000, P. R. China
dNational & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Advanced Packaging Materials Developing Technology, Hunan University of Technology, Zhuzhou 412007, P. R. China
Received 
      21st December 2018
    , Accepted 10th March 2019First published on 14th March 2019AbstractFlexible solid-state supercapacitors possess promising safety performance and intrinsic fast charging–discharging properties, enabling them to accomplish the requirements of lightweight and multifunctional wearable electronics that have recently become fairly popular. Because electrode materials are the core component of flexible solid-state supercapacitors, we exhaustively review the recent investigations involving electrode materials that have used carbons, metal oxides, and conductive polymers. The principles and methods of optimizing and fabricating electrodes for use in flexible supercapacitors are discussed through a comprehensive analysis of the literature. In addition, we focused on three types of flexible solid-state supercapacitors (fiber-, paper-, and porous foam-based structures) to satisfy the requirements of flexible electronic devices. Further, we summarize the practical applications of flexible solid-state supercapacitors, including energy conversion/collection devices and energy storage/detection devices. Finally, we provide the developmental direction for flexible solid-state supercapacitors in the future.Jing LiangJing Liang received her BS from the Jining Medical University in 2013. She is currently pursuing a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wei Wu in the School of Printing and Packaging at Wuhan University. Her research involves the preparation of transition metal nanomaterials and their electrochemical applications for printed flexible energy storage devices.Wei WuWei Wu received his PhD in 2011 from the Department of Physics, Wuhan University, China. He then joined the group of Prof. Daiwen Pang at Wuhan University (2011) and Prof. V. A. L. Roy at the City University of Hong Kong (2014) as a postdoctoral fellow. Now, he is a full professor and Director of Laboratory of Printable Functional Nanomaterials and Printed Electronics, School of Printing and Packaging, Wuhan University. He has published over 100 papers, which have received over 3600 citations. He received the STAM Best Paper Award in 2017 and Hong Kong Scholars Award in 2014; he is also the topical editor of Frontiers in Materials. His research interests include the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials, including anti-counterfeiting, printed electronics, and intelligent packaging.
1. Introduction
Supercapacitors, also called ultracapacitors, have an irreplaceable role in certain applications such as low-power electronic equipment, electric and hybrid vehicles, and renewable energy.1 Supercapacitors were first developed in the 1960s.2 However, supercapacitors have been important to the growth of hybrid electric vehicles since the 1990s.3 As compared to traditional capacitors and batteries, a supercapacitor has proven to be a green and prominent energy storage device with capacities in the range of 100–1000 F. Although the energy density of supercapacitors is small, their power density and cycling life are much larger than that of a battery.4,5 In the recent years, the development of supercapacitor technology has been gainfully employed in consumer electronics, energy transportation, power compensation, and other fields, and its market reach is rapidly expanding. With the ever-increasing demand for portable and wearable electronics, it is crucial to develop flexible devices that can store energy. Therefore, mechanically flexible supercapacitors have become a strong candidate among the various available energy devices.
Supercapacitors mainly comprise a separator, electrode, electrolyte, and current collector. As the core component of supercapacitors, the electrode material and electrolyte have recently become research hotspots. There are three types of supercapacitors: electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs),6 pseudocapacitors,7 and hybrid supercapacitors on the basis of their energy storage mechanisms.8 EDLCs store energy by charge accumulation at the electrode–electrolyte interface via an electrostatic interaction. Therefore, carbon electrode materials have been mostly developed to improve the performance of EDLCs because of their higher surface areas.9 In contrast, pseudocapacitors store electrons through a reversible faradaic reaction, which also occurs at the electrode–electrolyte interface; pseudocapacitors possess higher energy capacity than EDLCs. Transition metal oxide materials and conducting polymer materials are often regarded as potential active electrode materials for pseudocapacitors.10 To simultaneously achieve higher energy density and power density at the same time, researchers have begun to design hybrid supercapacitors, which comprise a combination of EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. However, combining the advantages of EDLCs and pseudocapacitive materials remains a challenge because of their intrinsically anisotropic properties and diverse preparation approaches.11 The crucial task of achieving excellent performance from supercapacitors is to fabricate promising electrode materials. Over the past few decades, various electrode materials such as carbons,12 metals,13 transition metal oxides,14 metal oxides/hydroxides,15 conductive polymer materials,16 and their composites have been extensively studied to manufacture supercapacitors.
Flexible and wearable functions are considered to be important features for the next generation of electronic products. Therefore, the development of flexible supercapacitors as an energy device has become imperative for wearable electronic applications. A flexible supercapacitor is an energy storage device that can afford stable performance under various deformation conditions.17,18 In general, the current flexible tests involving flexible supercapacitors mainly focus on different deformation statuses, such as bending,19 folding,20 twisting,21 stretching,22etc. The bending test of a flexible supercapacitor has been investigated by bending to a variety of degrees (0–180°). The folding/unfolding and twisting tests of an electrode are examined via creasing several hundred times. The stretching test is a fatigue test after stretching certain cycles of the electrode under different strains. There are two important directions in the development of flexible supercapacitors: (1) increasing the specific capacitance of the electrode materials, which is often used to enhance the electrochemical performance of flexible supercapacitors, and (2) optimizing the construction structure of flexible supercapacitors, enhancing the deformability of flexible devices. In general, there are three main structures for flexible supercapacitors: fiber-, paper/fabric-, and foam-based structures. According to the contact form of the electrode and electrolyte, it can be divided into a “sandwich” structure and a plane interdigital structure. It is important to select and design a suitable device structure to realize the performance requirements of flexible supercapacitors.23 The electrochemical characteristics of flexible supercapacitors generally include power density, capacitance, energy density, and cycling life. The specific capacitance (Cs, F g−1) reflects the amount of capacitance of the unit electrode material. The computational formula from the galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves can be shown as follows:24 Cs = (IΔt)/(mΔV)(1)Cs can also be calculated by the integral area (S) of the cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves: Cs = S/2mυΔV(2)where Δt, ΔV, I, m, and υ are the discharge time, potential window, discharge current, mass, and scan rates, respectively. The area ratio capacitance (CA, F cm−2) and volumetric specific capacitance (Cv, F cm−3) can be determined by replacing m with the areal and volumetric values of the electrode.
The areal energy density (E) and power density (P) can be determined as follows:25 E = Cs × ΔV2/(2 × 3600)(3) P = E × 3600/Δt(4)where E indicates the size of the supercapacitor's energy storage capacity and P indicates the energy storage and release capacity of the supercapacitors in a unit of time. When the energy density of the supercapacitors is the same, greater power density represents faster charging–discharging performance of the supercapacitors. In general, an intact two-electrode ultracapacitor cell mainly consists of two electrodes that are connected by a separator (Fig. 1). The separator can effectively isolate the positive and negative electrodes, preventing the migration of electrons and ensuring ion exchange between the electrodes. On the basis of the different requirements of the supercapacitor, there are various materials that can be used to fabricate unit cells, such as paper, fiber, plastic, etc.26
 Fig. 1  Two-electrode unit cell of supercapacitors and the designed supercapacitor devices with different shapes. 
We comprehensively introduce the study of various electrode materials and the structural design of devices; then, we also review their integration with wearable electronics. Our discussion begins with the structural design of electrodes to the preparation of the desired electrochemical performance of flexible supercapacitors. The recent progresses in the fabricated electrode materials for typical flexible supercapacitors are introduced in detail. According to their structures and pattern designs, existing flexible supercapacitors are categorized into three different types: fiber, paper-, and porous-foam-based flexible supercapacitors (Fig. 2). Finally, we proposed the future development trends in flexible supercapacitors. We envision that this review will become a comprehensive source of information in this field, promoting the development of electrode materials and further facilitating its practical applications for flexible supercapacitors.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of electrode materials and classification of structural fabrication for flexible supercapacitors. 
2. Electrode materials for flexible supercapacitors
2.1. Carbon materials
The synthesis of electrode materials with favorable electrochemical performance and mechanical stability is vital to construct flexible supercapacitors. Carbon materials such as active carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs),27 graphene,8,28,29 and their composites30 have been developed as electrode materials for flexible supercapacitors because of their good electrical properties (104–105 S cm−1), excellent mechanical strength, and large specific surface area (1250–3000 m2 g−1). The synthesis processes of carbon materials are relatively simple, and most carbon materials are environmentally friendly and inexpensive.
Activated carbon is the most widely used active electrode material in EDLCs with advantages of high specific surface area (as high as 3000 m2 g−1) and abundant availability. Although the theoretical capacitance of activated carbon can be as high as 600 F g−1, the actual specific capacitance of an activated carbon electrode in an aqueous electrolyte is only 75–250 F g−1. Indeed, the specific capacitance of active carbon materials not only depends on the specific surface area, but also is relevant to the pore size distribution and structure of active carbon materials. The activated carbon obtained from coconut shells can be introduced by activation treatment for two times yielding numerous pores. The diameter of pores increases from 0.6–0.8 nm to 1–3 nm, and the specific capacitance of activated carbon increases from 140 to 240 F g−1 at the same current density because the electrolyte can rapidly migrate in a developed mesoporous structure.31 These results emphasize that it is efficient to tune the porosity of the activated carbon electrode to improve both surface area and electrolyte migration (matching pore size of electrode and ion size).32 In addition, the higher specific surface area of activated carbon is also suitable for expanding the effective surface area of other metal oxide electrodes. A composite electrode comprising NiO and activated carbon has been developed. The surface areas of NiO increases from 150 m2 g−1 to 575 m2 g−1, as well as the capacitance is improved from 20 F g−1 of NiO to 100 F g−1.33 In addition to improving its electrochemical performance, research involving activated carbon electrode materials can also be combined with other materials with excellent properties to meet the requirements of practical supercapacitor applications.
As a typical one-dimensional (1D) structural nanomaterial, CNTs possess a large surface area and outstanding electrical and mechanical network properties.34 The current density of CNTs can be as high as 109 A cm−2, which is 1000 times that of noble metals. Typically, the capacitance of bare CNT electrodes ranges from 5 to 200 F g−1.35 The network structure of CNT also favors robustness under various deformation states. For example, a flexible supercapacitor has been fabricated based on bacterial nanocellulose papers and CNTs. The specific capacitance of a CNT electrode is 50.5 F g−1 (∼20.2 mF cm−2), and the energy density is 15.5 mW h g−1. The supercapacitor has promising cycling stability with 0.5% decrease in capacitance after 5000 cycles.36 Subsequently, surface modification, defect introduction, and heteroatom doping (such as N,37 B,38 S,39 or P40) methods have been developed to effectively boost the performance of CNT-based materials. For instance, N-doped mesoporous carbon nanofibers have been designed and fabricated for use in flexible supercapacitors. The high capacity (327.3 F g−1) of this as-synthesized carbon nanofiber electrode can be ascribed to the increasing number of active sites of the materials with a higher degree of nitrogen doping.41 However, the low power density of pure CNTs is still deficient for use in flexible supercapacitors with higher energy density requirements. Therefore, the integration of a synergistic effect between pseudocapacitive nanomaterial and CNTs is considered to be a valid method to increase the capacitance of CNT electrodes. CNT-based composite electrodes such as CNT/polymer composites42–45 and CNT/metallic oxide hybrids can emerge as a reasonable choice for flexible supercapacitors.46–48
Graphene, as another carbon material with extraordinary electrical conductivity and mechanical properties, has become a significant research hotspot in the fabrication of flexible supercapacitors. In particular, the theoretical specific surface area and capacitance of graphene electrodes are high, reaching up to 2675 m2 g−1 and 550 F g−1, respectively.49 However, the agglomeration of graphene sheets is an obstacle in the preparation and application process. To mitigate these practical problems, the microporous structure of the graphene electrode material is expected to provide an effective avenue. The most meaningful study involves the fabrication of porous graphene (pore diameters: 0.6–5 nm) via KOH. The specific surface area of the porous electrode can reach up to 3000 m2 g−1, and the specific capacitance can also be as high as 170 F g−1.50 Moreover, the nitrogen doping of porous graphene (N-Gr) has been developed to facilitate the charge transfer rates in flexible supercapacitors. The specific capacitance of the fabricated N-Gr electrode materials is 390 F g−1 and the specific surface area is 203 m2 g−1.51
Apart from using pure graphene as the electrode material, a combination of graphene with active materials is another strategy to realize pseudocapacitance for flexible supercapacitors. For example, graphene/polyaniline (PANI) composite paper electrodes can be fabricated by the in situ electrodeposition of a PANI film onto graphene paper, which could be subjected to a stress value of 12.6 MPa. Further, the highest capacitance of the electrode is 233 F g−1 with volumetric charge storage of 135 F cm−3.52 Three-dimensional (3D) porous graphene materials are desirable electrode materials for use in high-power supercapacitors because their porous structure can increase ion charge storage and prevent the restacking of graphene layers. For instance, PANI/3D porous ionic liquid (IL)-graphene electrodes have been fabricated by the electropolymerization method. The specific capacitance of the obtained PANI-IL-graphene electrode materials can reach up to 662 F g−1. As a result, this electrode exhibits worthwhile long-term electrochemical stability with the retention of about 93% capacity after 5000 cycles.53 This superior performance strongly suggests the critical importance of integrating a porous structure for improving the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors.
2.2. Metal oxides
Carbon materials have been widely used as electrodes in EDLCs. However, their lower specific capacity limits their applications. Pseudocapacitive electrode materials of metal oxides have been developed to increase the capacity of flexible supercapacitors. Pseudocapacitors are not only generated on the surface of the electrode, but also on the inside of the entire electrode; and they can yield higher capacitance (10–100 times) than that of EDLCs for similar electrode areas.54 Metal oxide electrodes possess longer life (105–106 cycles) and require simple maintenance, which is a worthwhile characteristic for energy storage materials in order to achieve higher efficiency and practicality; hence, they have been attracting considerable attention recently. At present, metal oxide electrode materials are mainly divided into noble metal oxides and transition metal oxides for use in flexible supercapacitors.55,56

2.2.1. Ruthenium oxide (RuO2) nanoparticles. 
Studies on noble metal oxide electrodes have mainly focused on RuO2, which exhibits good conductivity and high theoretical specific capacitance among other pseudocapacitive materials (1360 F g−1 for RuO2·0.5H2O).57 RuO2—discovered by Conway et al.58—is the first material that has been discovered to possess pseudocapacitive properties and used as an electrode material, yielding better conductivity than a carbon electrode. The involved pseudocapacitive reactions in RuO2 materials are not identical for different electrolytes.59,60 The corresponding reaction mechanism in an acidic electrolyte is as follows. RuO2 + xH + xe− ⇔ RuO2−x (OH)x(5)
With the transfer of electrons, protons also participate in this process. The oxidation states of Ru(II) can change to Ru(IV).61
However, it has been suggested that RuO2 can be oxidized into RuO42− and RuO44− in alkaline solutions. These high valence states of Ru would be reduced to RuO2 during discharging.62 The charge storage process occurs mainly on the surface of RuO2; the specific surface area, particle size, and amount of combined water of RuO2 materials play vital roles in the electrochemical behavior of RuO2 electrodes. The higher specific surface area of RuO2 materials results in increased active centers, fast redox reactions, and higher capacitance. Coating a thin RuO2 nanofilm onto a rough substrate is an effective method to increase the surface area. For example, a RuO2 film coated on the surface of multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) electrodes yields higher specific capacitance of 628 F g−1.63 The smaller particle size of RuO2 can also increase the specific surface area, thereby decreasing the diffusion distance of RuO2 and resulting in higher capacity. If the size of the nanoparticles is controlled, higher pseudocapacitance can be obtained by increasing proton transportation and number of electroactive centers.64 Further, the additional combined water in RuO2·xH2O results in better proton diffusion, and therefore, can generate increased capacitance. As reported in the literature, the capacitance of RuO2·0.5H2O is 900 F g−1, which decreases to 29 F g−1 for RuO2·0.03H2O.65 The water content in RuO2·xH2O is highly dependent on the preparation process and conditions. Generally, the water content in RuO2·xH2O can be controlled by a chemical method or sol–gel process; this content decreases with an increase in the annealing temperature (appropriate temperature: 116 °C).66 It has been proposed that proton permeation is efficient for bulk RuO2 with hydrous regions, and interconnected RuO2 is a region devoted to electronic transformation.
However, RuO2 is expensive, which limits its commercial applications. As charge storage in a pseudocapacitor mainly occurs at the electrode–electrolyte interface on RuO2 materials, there are several effective methods to improve the performance of RuO2 electrodes, such as increasing the electroactive surface area of the electrode and combining with other excellent cheap electrode materials. Therefore, many researchers have devoted their efforts toward integrating RuO2 nanoparticles with carbon nanomaterials, other transition metal oxides (MnO2, Fe3O4, NiO, etc.), and conducing polymers, further improving the electrochemical activity.67 For instance, RuO2/graphene-coated Cu foil electrode has been fabricated by using a cathodic electroplating technique. The electrode shows higher specific capacitance of 1561 F g−1 (0.015 F cm−1) without any significant decrease under bending conditions.68,69 The high cost of RuO2 electrode materials limits its applications only to the military and aerospace fields.


2.2.2. Manganese oxide (MnO2) nanoparticles. 
As a competent alternative, MnO2 electrode materials exhibit distinguished properties such as high specific capacitance, natural abundance, and environmental compatibility for use in flexible supercapacitors. In 1999, Lee et al. firstly found that MnO2 electrode materials exhibit the pseudocapacitive behavior in aqueous electrolytes. The specific capacitance of MnO2 electrode materials can reach up to 200 F g−1.70 It has been reported that different crystals of MnO2 nanoparticles (α-, β-, γ-, and δ-MnO2; Fig. 3a–d, respectively) can be synthesized by using various methods, such as hydrothermal reaction,71 coprecipitation,72 sol–gel,73 and electrochemical deposition.74 The capacitance of MnO2 materials strongly depends on the crystalline structures, and the capacitance decreases in the following order: α-MnO2 > δ-MnO2 > γ-MnO2 > β-MnO2.75,76 At the same time, various morphologies of MnO2, including nanowires, nanotubes, nanobelts, nanoflowers, dendritic clusters, etc., have been successfully synthesized.77–79 Generally, there are two categories of MnO2 electrode materials for supercapacitor applications: powdered electrode material and film electrode material. The focus of research on powdered electrode materials has been on the preparation of MnO2 powders with higher specific capacitance and higher activity.80–82 For example, the capacitance of ultrafine MnO2 nanowire networks with large surface areas is 279 F g−1, which is larger than that of MnO2 nanotubes and MnO2 nanoneedles (220–233 F g−1).83–85 The proposed reason is that the diameter of nanowires is less than 10 nm, increasing the large specific surface area and providing more active sites for charge transfer. Another extraordinary MnO2 morphology is two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets. For example, the 2D structure of ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets can be fabricated with a thickness of 2 nm. Such electrodes show higher specific capacitances of 774 F g−1.86 Thin-film MnO2 electrodes involve the direct deposition of MnO2 onto the substrate by a certain method, resulting in higher specific capacitance. Such a thin structure can increase the chances of contact between the electrolyte and material, improving the ion migration rate. For example, novel film electrodes using MnO2 hydrates fabricated via a sol–gel-derived method have been prepared. The specific capacitance values of such electrodes can reach up to 698 F g−1.87
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the prepared α-MnO2 nanosphere at different magnifications (a, b, reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2018), ultralong δ-MnO2 nanofibers (c, reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017), hierarchical mesoporous δ-MnO2 nanostructure (d, reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016), core–shell-like MnO2@MnO2 hexagonal nanoplate arrays and schematic representation of hierarchical MnO2 nanostructures@MnO2 hexagonal nanoplates coated on a single carbon fiber cloth (e, f, reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016). 
In spite of the high specific capacitance achieved for MnO2 (about 100–700 F g−1), it is still less than 50% of its theoretical value (1370 F g−1), which can be attributed to the large resistivity and equivalent series resistance. Various studies have demonstrated that the combination of MnO2 with a conducting additive can yield composite materials and overcome the aforementioned disadvantage, including carbon materials,88,89 conducting polymers,90 metal oxides,91etc. For instance, 2D δ-MnO2 integrated on graphene has been developed to fabricate hybrid materials for use in flexible supercapacitors, where ions can be transported to the interface. The specific capacitance of the obtained electrode is 267 F g−1 and the cyclic performance efficiency remained 92% after 7000 cycles.92 The addition of conductive polymers is also a valid strategy to enhance the electrochemical performance of MnO2 electrodes. For example, a flake-like structure of MnO2 nanomaterials can be fabricated by achieving growth on carbon fibers wrapped by poly[3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene] (PEDOT) in order to enhance the electrochemical performance of MnO2 electrodes. The RCFs/MnO2/PEDOT composite electrode achieved a prominent capacitance value of 922 F g−1 with stable cycling performance, wherein no significant capacitance decrease was observed after 5000 cycles when used in a flexible supercapacitor.93


2.2.3 Fe2O3/Fe3O4 nanoparticles. 
Iron oxides (e.g., Fe2O3, Fe3O4) are prominent electrode materials because of their high theoretical capacities (3625 F g−1 for α-Fe2O3), natural abundance, and environmental friendliness. In general, various iron oxides exhibit various phases such as α-Fe2O3 (diamond structure), β-Fe2O3 (orthorhombic structure), γ-Fe2O3 (cubic structure), and Fe3O4.95,96 The electrochemical performance of an Fe2O3 electrode mainly depends on its crystal structure, particle size, and surface morphology.97 Therefore, various nanostructured materials can be manufactured to improve the electrochemical performance of electrode materials, such as nanofibers,98 nanorods,99,100 and nanoflowers.101 However, the specific capacitances of the prepared iron oxide electrodes generally range from 5 F g−1 to 138 F g−1, which are far below the theoretical value, on account of poor electrical conductivity. Porous nanostructured materials have been intensely investigated, which can improve the electrolyte diffusion rate. For example, porous α-Fe2O3 nanostructures have been synthesized with discharge capacitances of more than 300 F g−1.102,103 Recently, a mesoporous Fe2O3 electrode was synthesized via a robust solvent-deficient method. The specific capacitance of this electrode was 469 F g−1.104
Apart from the aforementioned designs, the introduced deficiencies can improve the conductivity by 2–5 times and offer abundant active sites for electrochemical actions of the Fe2O3 electrode materials (Fig. 4a–f).105,106 For example, oxygen-deficient α-Fe2O3 nanorods can be prepared by the thermal decomposition method under a N2 atmosphere (denoted as N-Fe2O3 nanorods). As compared to pristine α-Fe2O3 nanorods prepared in air, the areal capacitance of N-Fe2O3 nanorods is 382.7 mF cm−2. After 10000 cycles, the capacitance still remains 95.2%, which shows the latter's outstanding stability.97
 Fig. 4  SEM images of Fe2O3 nanofibers (inset: flexible Fe2O3 electrode) and CV and GCD curves of Fe2O3 nanofiber electrodes (a, b, c, reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), SEM images of carbon fabric-Fe2O3 nanosheets (CF-Fe2O3) with inset showing the CF-Fe2O3 electrode under the condition of bending and twisting and the GCD curves and cycling stability of CF-Fe2O3 electrodes (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), SEM images of Fe2O3/TiO2 nanorods (g, reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), flower-like Fe3O4/MnO2 (h, reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015), and Fe2O3 nanorods (i, reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018). 
However, iron oxide electrodes suffer from poor cycling performance because of low conductivity and morphology collapse during charging–discharging processes. Combining Fe2O3 with conductive carbon materials or polymers is also an effective strategy to increase electrode conductivity. For instance, we can use nanocomposite architecture where a mass of Fe2O3 nanoparticles is uniformly deposited on the surface of MWCNTs. This electrode material exhibits higher specific capacitance of 787 F g−1. The capacity of the electrode still remains 91.6% after 5000 cycles.107 Further, leaf-like polypyrrole (PPy) has been combined with Fe2O3 electrodes. The specific capacitance of this combination can reach up to 1167.8 F g−1 due to the remarkable conductivity of PPy.108
In addition, Fe3O4 has often served as an electrode for flexible supercapacitors yielding preferable electrical conductivity (200 S cm−1), wide operating potential window, and environmental friendliness. In an earlier report, it has been found that the capacitive behavior of Fe3O4 powders is small (5.3 F g−1).109 Subsequently, Fe3O4 films with a uniform cubic structure have been prepared by a simple hydrothermal process. An electrode prepared by this Fe3O4 film exhibits specific capacitance of 118.2 F g−1.110 Fe3O4 nanowire electrodes manufactured with an aqueous electrolyte have yielded capacitance of 190 F g−1.111
However, the aggregation of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the electrode leads to a decrease in the specific capacitance and undesirable cycling stability of Fe3O4, which limits its practical applications. One effective way is to suppress the aggregation of Fe3O4. For example, ultrafine Fe3O4 nanoparticles (5–10 nm) have been synthesized when using ethanolamine (ETA) as the reductant. The addition of ETA along with an ultrasound process can be considered crucial to facilitate dispersibility and improve the capacitance of Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The higher specific capacitance of the as-synthesized Fe3O4 nanoparticles is 207.7 F g−1 at 0.4 A g−1.112 Another promising way involves the incorporation of Fe3O4 nanostructures in carbon-based materials to resolve the abovementioned problem, thereby enhancing the electrochemical performance of Fe3O4 electrodes. For instance, excellent Fe3O4/biocarbon composite electrode materials have been developed. The specific capacitance of these electrodes is as high as 342 F g−1. In addition, after 1000 cycles, the capacity of this electrode still remains 89.5%, showing outstanding cycling stability.113 To enhance the electrochemical performance of Fe3O4/carbon composites, the combination between carbon and Fe3O4 should be enhanced. For instance, Fe3O4 nanosheets are prepared in situ encapsulated by graphene layers (denoted as G@Fe3O4). The high capacitance of the fabricated G@Fe3O4 electrode without any organic binder is 732 F g−1 at 2 A g−1.114 This graphene coating not only prevents active Fe3O4 aggregation but also forms Fe–O–C bonds, resulting in the generation of a strong chemical connection between Fe3O4 and graphene to yield outstanding performance.
Recently, metal ion doping has become another effective method to improve the electrochemical performance of Fe3O4 electrode materials. Metal ion (such as Mn2+, Co2+, etc.) doping improves the charge storage performance of electrodes by enhancing conductivity, filling oxygen vacancies, and promoting the diffusion path and redox reaction of Fe3O4 materials.115 For example, a composite electrode material with cobalt-doped Fe3O4 nanosphere composites and N-graphene sheets has been developed, exhibiting higher specific capacitance (775 F g−1). After 10000 cycles, this electrode material showed outstanding cycling performance with 97.1% capacitance retention.116 Co doping not only boosts the electrochemical performance, but also inhibits the attenuation of Fe3O4 nanospheres in the process of long-term charging–discharging.


2.2.4. NiO/Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles. 
Among the various transition metal oxides, nickel oxides (NiO) are fascinating electrode materials with high theoretical specific capacitance (2573 F g−1), low cost, easy synthesis, and environmentally friendly features. In general, NiO materials are usually fabricated by using nickel hydroxide (Ni(OH)2). Ni(OH)2 also exhibits excellent capacitance properties with theoretical values up to 2082 F g−1. The energy storage mechanism of NiO and Ni(OH)2 is mainly caused by the reversible redox reaction of Ni2+ and Ni3+, which is shown as follows:121 NiO + OH− ⇔ NiOOH + e−(6) Ni(OH)2 + OH− ⇔ NiOOH + H2O + e−(7)
The specific capacitance of porous NiO/Ni composite electrode is reported to be only 50–70 F g−1 in earlier applications of supercapacitor construction.122 Then, various NiO nanostructures, such as nanotubes,123 nanowires,124 and nanoflowers125 have been synthesized to enhance the performances of energy storage (Fig. 5a–c).126 The achieved specific capacitance (390 F g−1) of porous NiO nanocolumn electrode materials is larger than that of both nanoplates (285 F g−1) and nanoslices (176 F g−1) at the same current density of 5 A g−1 (Fig. 5d–f).125,127 It has been proven that the construction of electrode materials with a porous structure can promote electrochemical performance improvement. Another inspiration to improve the performance of NiO electrodes is to design 3D hierarchical or hollow structural electrodes, which facilitate ion transportation to the interface between the electrode and electrolyte. For example, flower-like NiO hollow nanospheres with a higher surface area of 176 m2 g−1 have been fabricated. This electrode material possesses high specific capacitance of 585 F g−1 for discharge current of 5 A g−1.128 However, the high resistivity of NiO electrodes limits their electrochemical performance. An effective way is to combine NiO electrode with a conductive carbon material. For example, a flexible single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) film decorated with NiO nanoparticles has been prepared. The specific capacitance of this composite electrode can reach up to 1422 F g−1. The capacitance of this electrode material still maintains 100% after 500 bending cycles, displaying excellent flexibility.129,130
 Fig. 5  SEM images of NiO nanoflakes sample (a, reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013) and NiO nanoflower (b, reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013), schematic diagram of NiO nanomaterial electrode participating in the reaction during charge–discharge processes (c, reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013), SEM images, cyclic voltammograms, and cycling performance of ZnO@C@NiO core–shell nanorod array electrode materials (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2018), SEM images and charge transfer mechanism in KOH electrolyte of the FeOF/Ni(OH)2 electrode and specific capacitance of different electrode materials with different current densities in 3 M KOH (g, h, i, reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 
When compared with NiO electrode materials, various studies have demonstrated that Ni(OH)2 materials possess higher specific capacitance.131,132 For example, the flower nanostructure of Ni(OH)2 with ultrathin nanoflakes (7.4 nm) can be used to develop electrode materials. The specific capacitance of such an electrode is 1715 F g−1 (scan rate: 5 mV s−1).133 Subsequently, an ultrathin Ni(OH)2 nanosheet grown on the surface of a nickel foam substrate electrode has been synthesized in the form of a 3D structure. This electrode exhibits specific capacitance of 2384.3 F g−1 (current density: 1 A g−1) with significant cycling ability (retained 75% after 3000 cycles).134 In addition, amorphous Ni(OH)2 materials possess excellent electrochemical performance that may become available during supercapacitor applications. Therefore, a mesoporous structure of Ni(OH)2 nanobox can be synthesized with a diameter of 450–500 nm, where the size of the mesoporous structure is 4–20 nm. This Ni(OH)2 electrode exhibits specific capacitance of 2495 F g−1 (current density: 1 A g−1). After the charge–discharge of 1200 cycles, the specific capacitances lose less than 5% capacitance.135
Various studies have demonstrated that the introduction of highly electrically conductive carbon materials into Ni(OH)2 to construct composite materials is also an effective and promising approach to enhance conductivity. For this reason, Zhang et al. prepared a 3D macroporous hybrid electrode material by combining Ni(OH)2 materials with carbon nanofibers for applications in flexible supercapacitors. The obtained Ni(OH)2/carbon nanofiber hybrid electrode exhibits specific capacitance of 2523 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1. The Ni(OH)2/carbon nanofibers electrode material has excellent mechanical flexibility, electrical conductivity, and stable cycling performance (retains 83% capacitance after 1000 cycles).136

2.3. Conducting-polymer-based electrode materials
As a promising electrode material for use in flexible supercapacitors, the capacitance of conducting polymers is mainly induced by Faraday capacitors. The conjugated structure of a conductive polymer can improve the delocalization of electrons, exhibiting better conductivity.138 The prominent conductive feature of a polymer structure is realized by rapid reversible n-type or p-type element doping.139 Therefore, conductive polymer electrode materials have gradually become research hotspots, such as PANI, PPy, PEDOT, and their derivatives.
PANI of p-doping shows better performance and is widely used because of the low potential of n-doping PANI. In general, there are two effective strategies to enhance the electrochemical performance of PANI electrode materials. One is to improve the structural stability and morphology of conductive polymers. The other is to composite with other materials. For example, the capacitance of as-synthesized PANI nanofibers electrode is 554 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1. However, the capacitance of the electrode rapidly decreases after continuous cycling tests. To resolve this problem, MWCNTs are combined with PANI. This electrode material shows specific capacitance of 606 F g−1.140 In addition, the doping of transition metal elements is another promising method.141 For example, a film electrode material is prepared by the Mn doping of PANI. The specific capacitance of this electrode is 474 F g−1.142 In subsequent research, Co,143 Cu,144 and Au145 have also been doped into PANI to improve conductivity.
PPy has attracted increased attention because of its better flexibility, and it can be used to obtain worthwhile performance for a smaller volume.146,147 For example, PPy hydrogel electrodes with a 3D porous microstructure can be prepared by an interfacial polymerization method. Its specific capacitance is 380 F g−1 (areal capacitance: 6.4 F cm−2).148 Moreover, PPy is often deposited onto the surface of carbon materials to fabricate electrode materials. For example, the PPy/MWCNT composite exhibits exceptionally high value of 890 F g−1 in 1.0 M KCl electrolyte.149
PEDOT is a new type of polythiophene derivative material. It can satisfy the performance requirements of capacitors with higher electrical conductivities (300–500 S cm−1), which is larger than that of PANI (0.1–5 S cm−1) and PPy (10–50 S cm−1).150 The fast kinetics of PEDOT can be mainly attributed to its high surface area, which increases the ion insertion processes, and therefore, enhances the performance of PEDOT when used in supercapacitor electrodes. For example, a porous PEDOT nanoarray electrode material has been prepared via a controlled electropolymerization process, exhibiting capacitance of 109.3 F g−1.151 Then, TiO2 and TiN were coated onto the surface of PEDOT nanoarrays to improve the performance of porous PEDOT nanoarrays. The composite PEDOT-TiN and PEDOT-TiO2 electrode shows specific capacitances of 393.1 F g−1 and 128.7 F g−1, respectively, at 1.0 mA cm−2. The PEDOT-TiN electrode is used to construct a flexible supercapacitor, which could light a LED under folding up to 180°.152 Other PEDOT/carbon composite electrode materials have been explored, yielding excellent mechanical properties. For instance, Sohn et al. grew PEDOT onto porous multilayered graphene foam to form an electrode with a prominent electrochemical performance (denoted as PEDOT/3D GF). The specific capacitance of this improved PEDOT/3D GF electrode in 1 M H2SO4 is 522 F g−1 at 2 mA cm−2.153 However, the poor solubility of PEDOT is the main limitation in the fabrication of flexible supercapacitors.154 Polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) has been employed to resolve the solubility issues of PEDOT; however, this may reduce the conductivity of PEDOT.155 Consequently, the introduction of lignosulfonate serves both as a dopant and surfactant to enhance polymeric dispersions.156 The use of a surfactant-free method to fabricate dispersible PEDOT microspheres157 and employing the water-soluble version of the copolymer are also generally used to improve upon this problem.158,159
Cycling instability is another major obstacle for conductive polymer electrodes in practical applications because of the structural collapses during charge–discharge cycling. To address the above issue, researchers have attempted to synthesize carbon or MnO2 modification composites and use as electrodes. The synergistic effects between polymers and other carbon or metal oxide materials can enhance the electrochemical performance of PEDOT. For example, a carbonaceous shell coated onto polymer electrodes (shell thickness: ∼5 nm) has been prepared: the capacitance of the composite materials retains ∼95% capacity after 10000 cycles, which is significantly higher than pure PPy electrodes (∼85% after 10000 cycles). This strategy may offer a new horizon for fabricating stable flexible polymer electrodes for use in pseudocapacitive devices.160 The conductive polymer electrode material has become a research hotspot due to its superior performance, lower cost, and rapid discharging behaviors. It can make a significant contribution toward the development of flexible supercapacitors.
Many promising efforts have been made to develop advanced electrode materials with higher energy and power densities for use in flexible supercapacitors. We outline the preparation processes and properties of carbon materials, metal oxide materials, and conducting polymer electrode materials and then discuss the strategies for structural designs that can improve the electrochemical performance. Table 1 summarizes the electrochemical properties of different electrode materials for supercapacitor applications.
Table 1 Summary on different electrodes for use in flexible solid-state supercapacitors




Type of electrode
Substrates
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Energy density
Power density
Cycle stability
Application
Ref.




3D graphene hydrogel
Au coated PI
H2SO4/PVA
186 F g−1
0.61 W h kg−1
0.67 kW kg−1
91.6% retain over 10000 cycles
Light up a green LED

162



RuO2/SWCNT
PET, SiO2/Si and cloth fabrics
H3PO4/PVA
138 F g−1
18.8 W h kg−1
96 kW kg−1
No decrease after 1000 cycles
Inkjet-printed supercapacitor

67



3D CNTs/PEDOT
Aluminum foil
H2SO4/PVA
147 F g−1
8.3 W h kg−1
10.2 kW kg−1
94.7% retain after 3000 cycles
Fabricated symmetric all solid state supercapacitor cell

163



Fe3O4/carbon nanotube/polyaniline
CNT film
H2SO4/PVA
201 F g−1
28.0 W h kg−1
5.3 kW kg−1
96.4% retain after 10000 cycles
Fabricated flexible solid-state supercapacitor device

164



Carbon microsphere-MnO2 nanosheets
Textile
H3PO4/PVA
19.23 mF cm−2
—
—
84% after 2000 cycles
Fully printed supercapacitor

165



PANI/CNT nanocomposite
Commercial A4 print paper
H2SO4/PVA
350 F g−1
7.1 W h kg−1
2.189 kW kg−1
92% after 1000 cycles
Light a red LED

166



MoS2 hierarchical nanospheres
Carbon cloth
LiCl/PVA
368 F g−1
5.42 W h kg−1
0.128 kW kg−1
96.5% retain after 5000 cycles
Light 8 red color commercial LEDs

167



β-Ni(OH)2/graphene
Flexible current collector
KOH/PVA
61.7 mF cm−2
17 μW h cm−2
1200 μW cm−2
92% obtained after 2000 cycles,
Light a red LED

168



Polymer/polypyrrole
Cu-TCPP@P70 film
H2SO4/PVA
496 F g−1
0.29 mW h cm−3
270 mW cm−3
70% obtained after 3000 cycles
Power an electronic clock

16



Cellulose nanofibers CNFs/MoS2/RGO
—
H2SO4/PVA
916.42 F g−1
22.8 W h kg−1
4.3 kW kg−1
98% after 5000 cycles
Fabricated flexible supercapacitors.

169





Carbon materials are mainly used in EDLCs. However, because of the electrostatic adsorption of the charge storage process, carbon materials have low actual capacitance (<200 F g−1) with a higher specific area. Then, the activation of the physics (CO2, H2O) and chemistry (KOH, NaOH, ZnCl2), doping of heteroatoms, and depositing onto porous substrates have been developed to improve the capacitance properties of carbon electrode materials with larger pore structures and surface areas. There is a general agreement that a smaller pore size (<2 nm) of carbon materials can increase the specific surface area, and a higher amount of micropores (pores wider than 2 nm) can enhance the supply of electrolytes. In order to further improve the electrochemical performance of carbon-based electrodes, composites involving transition metal oxides and conducting polymers are also a promising choice.
For metal oxide electrode materials, pseudocapacitance contributes toward facilitating the faradaic reactions of electrode materials, which is 10–100 times higher than those for carbon materials. Appropriate material optimizations such as designing the surface layering, increasing the amount of physically and chemically bonded water, and lowering the internal electrical resistance have been favored to enhance the electrochemical performance of metal oxide electrodes. As compared to metal oxide materials, conducting polymers are another type of pseudocapacitor electrodes that exhibit relatively large specific capacitances. For example, PANI is a more significant electrode with higher capacitance (up to 1500 F g−1) among the available conducting polymers; it also affords easy preparation, excellent electrical conductivity, and environmental stability.161 Not only the redox reaction, but also the chemical absorption reactions of the conducting polymer electrode material can enhance capacitance. Therefore, it is beneficial to facilitate more redox active sites and increase the specific capacitance of such electrode materials. However, fast and reversible redox reactions in metal oxides and conducting polymers induce unstable cyclability. Therefore, combining them with carbon electrode materials can facilitate the synergistic effect of both these materials. Pseudocapacitor materials provide excellent capacitance, while carbon materials act as a framework to maintain stable performance during charge–discharge cycling. As for the hybrid material system for the development of electrodes, the connection between carbon materials and pseudocapacitive materials should be strengthened. The effective combination of these electrode materials may promote a newer generation of supercapacitor electrodes with excellent electrochemical performance in the future.
3. Structural design of flexible supercapacitors
3.1. Fiber-based flexible supercapacitors
A flexible fibrous supercapacitor is different from a traditional flexibility planar supercapacitor, which not only possesses higher power density, faster charge–discharge efficiency, and longer cycle life, but also can meet the miniaturization and integration requirements of flexible wearable electronics. The production of flexible fiber-based supercapacitors mainly depends on the fabrication of fiber-based flexible electrodes. Many materials have been used for the preparation of fiber-based electrodes, such as metal wires, carbon fibers, polymer fibers, and composite fibers. For example, a fiber-based supercapacitor has been prepared by using ZnO nanowires covered with gold film electrodes, serving as a high-efficiency prototype for fiber-based flexible supercapacitors. The prepared fiber supercapacitor exhibits energy and power densities of about 2.7 × 108 W h cm−2 and 1.4 × 105 W cm−2, respectively, in a gel electrolyte. Interestingly, the fiber supercapacitor under investigation had a large power supply, which is sufficient for self-powering systems.170 In spite of the presence of metallic wires, carbon fiber materials have also been used as a collector for preparing fiber-based flexible supercapacitors. For example, a fiber-based supercapacitor comprising CNT sheets has been developed. The specific capacitance of this supercapacitor ranges from 42 F g−1 to 80 F g−1, which retains 18 F g−1 after stretching under 75% strain for 100 cycles (Fig. 6a). The admirable flexibility can be beneficial for fiber-based supercapacitors; however, the low capacitance and energy density can be detrimental toward the practical applications of fiber-based flexible supercapacitors.171 Then, MnO2 has been introduced as a promising electrode material to boost the performance of fiber-based flexible supercapacitors. For instance, the prepared carbon fiber fabric/MnO2 hybrid electrodes possessed outstanding electrochemical supercapacitive properties with specific capacitance of 467 F g−1 and no significant decrease after 5000 cycles. The energy density of this electrode is 20 W h kg−1.172 Furthermore, better performing MnO2@poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)/PPy composite nanofibers have been fabricated by the electrospun method. The MnO2@PAA/PPy fiber electrode exhibits specific capacity of 564 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 without decrease after 5000 cycles.173
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of a stretchable CNT–fiber-based supercapacitor (a, reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013), two-electrode fibers and integrated polymer solar cells (b, reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012), and fiber device with electrochemical supercapacitors (c, reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014), photograph of a transparent fiber-based textile supercapacitor being lifted up by a tender flower and curving without suffering damage (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015). 
Because of the excellent flexibility of fiber-shaped supercapacitors, it is possible to integrate them with other energy storage devices. It is necessary to integrate multiple-fiber devices to improve the limited energy and power density of a single-fiber supercapacitor. For example, a fiber-based flexible supercapacitor can be fabricated with a commercial pen ink and plastic fiber electrodes (Fig. 6b). The areal capacitance, energy density, and power density of this fabricated fiber-based supercapacitor device is 11.9–19.5 mF cm−2, 1.76–2.70 × 106 W h cm−2, and 9.07 mW cm−2, respectively. Pen ink is also composed of graphite carbon nanoparticles and it is dip-coated onto fibers as electrodes, exhibiting steady cycling life after 15000 cycles.174 To further broaden the applications of fiber-based flexible supercapacitors, polymer solar cells (used as the photovoltaic conversion (PC) part) are integrated with flexible “energy fibers” (acting as the energy storage (ES) part) to realize the need for self-powered devices (Fig. 6c). For the ES device, TiO2-nanotube-modified Ti wires have been fabricated and then MWCNT sheets are wrapped on their exterior to function as electrodes. The energy density of this prepared fiber supercapacitor is 1.61 × 10−7 W h cm−2. The efficiency of the photoelectric conversion and storage can reach up to 0.82%. After bending 100 times, the efficiency of this fiber device shows excellent performance with a decrease of only 10% of the initial value. In addition, these “energy fibers” can be easily woven with other fibers to form flexible textiles, which may provide new ideas for future optoelectronic wearable applications.175 Another attempt is to fabricate textile electrodes for use in fiber-based flexible supercapacitors. For example, a lightweight flexible textile supercapacitor has been fabricated by using MWCNT/PANI composite fiber-based electrodes. The specific capacitance of this textile supercapacitor is 272.7 F g−1. Even after bending for 200 cycles, there is no significant capacity decrease (Fig. 6d–f). This provides an effective strategy for the construction of wearable electronic devices and extends its application in wearable supercapacitors.176 These fiber-based flexible supercapacitors are fabricated by depositing electrode materials onto a flexible fiber substrate. At the same time, the electrode material and substrate may suffer from mechanical damage caused by deformation or cutting, resulting in the destruction of the electronic device during practical applications. Therefore, a self-healing supercapacitor has been developed with high stretchability by using PPy/RGO/MWCNT fiber springs. This fiber-based supercapacitor can be easily stretched up to 100% with capacity retention of 82.4%. After cutting and healing, the capacitance of the device exhibits no obvious decrease, and it retains 54.2% capacity even after the third healing process.177 A more efficient method for the preparation of self-healing fiber supercapacitors has been proposed in which the broken yarn electrode is reconnected and rearranged by using the magnetic attraction of the electrodes themselves. This magnetic flexible supercapacitor prepared by the successive coating of Fe3O4, PPy, and polyurethane shells, restores up to ∼72% of the specific capacitance after 4 breaking/healing cycles.178 All of the above fiber-based flexible supercapacitors have demonstrated outstanding mechanical properties and they can be integrated with other devices, facilitating their promising practical applications in wearable devices.
3.2. Paper-/fabric-based supercapacitors
A paper-based flexible supercapacitor can be employed in wearable electronic applications because of its natural abundance, high flexibility, and environment-friendly features. When combined with the technology of printed electronics, printed-paper-based flexible supercapacitors can become a promising alternative to conventional supercapacitors for use in future flexible energy applications. The fibers in a paper-based flexible supercapacitor can yield excellent mechanical properties because of the strong intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen-bonding forces. Moreover, CNTs, graphene, and PEDOT have been introduced in the paper electrodes of flexible supercapacitors for enhancing the electrochemical performance.180,181 In general, there are two types of facile paper-based flexible supercapacitors: (1) functional-conductive-cellulose or graphene-paper-based flexible supercapacitors, which are often prepared by physical and chemical methods, and (2) printed-electrode-based flexible supercapacitors, which are fabricated by inkjet printing, screen printing, gravure printing, etc.
Graphite-paper-based flexible supercapacitors have attracted research attention because of their excellent conductivity and mechanical properties. For example, a graphite-paper-based flexible supercapacitor with capacitance of 260 F g−1 (15.6 mF cm−2) has been prepared (Fig. 7a). Such a supercapacitor shows excellent cycling stability (retains >99% capacitance after 10000 cycles) and its energy density can reach up to 8.8 W h kg−1.182,183 However, drawbacks such as irreversible agglomeration and restacking of graphene nanosheets can decrease the specific capacitance and induce unstable cycling stability of graphene-paper-based flexible supercapacitors. To resolve this problem, MnO2- and PANI-based active electrode nanomaterials have been usually added into reduced graphene oxide (rGO) papers. At the current density of 1.0 A g−1, the specific capacitance of rGO/MnO2/PANI electrodes can increase up to 636.5 F g−1.184 Apart from graphene paper, cellulose/conductive material composite papers have also been used to construct flexible supercapacitors. For example, a flexible highly conducting PEDOT paper with a conductivity of 375 S cm−1 has been prepared. This PEDOT-paper-based flexible supercapacitor exhibits energy density of 1 mW h cm−3. Furthermore, a 3.6 V interdigital supercapacitor has been constructed by using three capacitors for high-energy applications.185 Another Ni(OH)2/graphene/bacterial-cellulose-paper-based electrode has been fabricated for use in flexible supercapacitors. The areal capacitance of this electrode is 10.44 F cm−2 (877.1 F g−1). After 15000 cycles, the capacitance of this electrode retains 93.6% capacity, thereby exhibiting promising cycling stability. Even when bent to 180° at strength of 48.8 MPa (in the wet state), this paper electrode exhibits stable electrochemical performance.186
 Fig. 7  Images of bendable graphite-paper-based electrodes (a, reproduced from ref. 196 from permission of John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016), the all-printed flexible supercapacitor connected in series (b, reproduced from ref. 197 from permission of John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), interdigitated printed electrode after folding (c, reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017), photograph of the BATTERY-written inkjet-printed supercapacitor lighting up a LED (d, reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016) and knitted TENG-fabric-based supercapacitor under widened tensile deformations (e, reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2017), schematic illustration of the PEDOT:PSS/CNF-coated yarn supercapacitor (f, reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016). 
Printed flexible supercapacitors are promising electronic devices that employ printing techniques for the manufacture of supercapacitors, and they have recently seen rapid growth. This printed flexible supercapacitor has the advantages of mass production, flexibility, low cost, and pattern designability.187,188 Various printing methods have been used to fabricate paper supercapacitors.189 However, developing compatible printable inks remains a major challenge.190 For example, SWCNTs and graphene inks have been used in the preparation of paper-based flexible supercapacitors. Conductive ink comprising SWCNTs has been formulated and printed as current collectors and electrodes for use in paper-based flexible supercapacitors. The specific capacitance of this all-printed paper-based flexible supercapacitor is 200 F g−1. Furthermore, this device could maintain stable cycling life over 40000 cycles.191 Another interesting conductive paper is prepared by inkjet printing where activated carbon/CNTs ink is printed onto the surface of commercial paper. The obtained high capacitance of the device is 100 mF cm−2 without a significant decrease over 10000 cycles. The diverse printed patterns of paper-based supercapacitors as an energy device could drive LED illumination.192
Recently, the development direction involving flexible supercapacitors in human wearable devices has tended toward the preparation of comfortable and breathable electronic devices. Therefore, textile- or fabric-based flexible supercapacitors with lightweight characteristic and mechanical flexibility have proven to be strong contenders for fabricating wearable power supplies. According to the literature, there are two types of fabric-based flexible supercapacitors. (1) Flexible textile supercapacitors weaved by cotton fibers or yarns (modified with conductive materials). (2) Printed supercapacitors in which electrode materials are directly printed onto textile substrates. Textile-based flexible supercapacitors have attracted increased interest because of their small volumes and easy integration into desired shapes. For example, an all-solid-state flexible yarn supercapacitor has been reported by coating Ni layer and rGO onto yarn surfaces (denoted as rGO-Ni-yarn). This rGO-Ni-yarn electrode is integrated with a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) cloth for self-charging power applications. This device yields high capacitance of 72.1 mF cm−2.193 Thereafter, a flexible and washable yarn supercapacitor has been prepared by using carbon nanofibers and PEDOT:PSS-coated carbon fibers. This flexible supercapacitor is knitted into the TENG fabric to yield self-charging power devices. The power density of TENG fabric supercapacitors is ∼85 mW m−2. After washing, the TENG fabric device can still light up 124 LEDs.194 Textiles have also been used as flexible substrates to directly manufacture flexible supercapacitors. The printing technique is used to deposit active materials onto the surface of textile substrates with rapid and scalable features. For example, a screen-printed textile-based flexible supercapacitor has been fabricated by using carbon microspheres and MnO2 nanosheets as the active electrode materials. The specific capacitance of this all-printed flexible supercapacitor is 19.23 mF cm−2. Moreover, after bending and twisting 100 times, the device still maintains stable electrochemical performance.165 The inkjet printing method has also been used to fabricate all-solid-state paper-based flexible supercapacitors. The areal capacitance of printed interdigitated finger-based flexible supercapacitors is as high as 52.9 mF cm−2 because of the hierarchical structure of Ni@MnO2 electrode materials. In spite of the excellent flexibility and electrochemical stability of printed devices, large-scale artistic supercapacitors have displayed desirable attributes for future portable and wearable devices.195 The printing method has been introduced into the fabrication of flexible supercapacitors, satisfying the requirements of researchers to make larger-scale devices.
3.3. Foam-based flexible supercapacitors
Fiber- and paper-based flexible supercapacitors exhibit outstanding gravimetric capacitances, energy densities, and power densities. However, energy outputs of fiber- or paper-based flexible supercapacitors are very limited. Therefore, foam-based supercapacitors with 3D porous structure have been developed to yield high-performance supercapacitors, achieving higher energy outputs. The 3D porous structures are beneficial for electrode materials as such a structure can provide a large specific surface area, and the hierarchical porous structure accelerates electrolyte ion immersion. In general, 3D microporous frameworks have been prepared by using carbon materials or carbon/polymer composite materials. For instance, 3D macroporous structural supercapacitors have been fabricated by using chemically modified graphene and adding a MnO2 layer to boost the capacitance (Fig. 8a and b). This porous graphene structure electrode material shows specific capacitance of 389 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Moreover, the energy and power densities of this assembled flexible supercapacitor is 44 W h kg−1 and 25 kW kg−1, respectively.199 Conducting polymers have also been fabricated for porous flexible supercapacitors because of their easy fabrication and large pseudocapacitance. A generic approach is to prepare and utilize 3D porous carbon materials with high surface areas. For example, GO-induced porous core-like PPy/PET has been fabricated for flexible supercapacitors. This device shows specific capacitance and energy density of 568.35 F g−1 and 37.4 W h kg−1, respectively, at 0.1 A g−1. In addition, 83.4% of the capacitance is retained after 500 cycles, showing stable cycling capacity.200 A carbon-foam-based electrode has been developed by growing ultrathin MnO2 on the surface of carbon (Fig. 8d and e). The specific capacitance and energy density of this fabricated MnO2/carbon foam supercapacitor is 1270.5 F g−1 and 86.2 W h kg−1, respectively.201 Apart from a 3D macroporous structure, a flexible and robust sponge-like structure is also utilized to manufacture porous flexible supercapacitors. The splendid metal–organic framework (MOF)-derived porous carbon materials have been prepared for use in flexible supercapacitors. This electrode material has a high specific surface area (1356 m2 g−1) and its specific capacitance can reach up to 369 F g−1 at 400 mV s−1. After 2000 bending cycles, this porous flexible supercapacitor device retains 96% capacity, which can still power red LEDs for more than 10 min.202 These porous 3D structures of flexible supercapacitors could facilitate the transport of electrons, leading to low electrical resistance and high capacitance.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram and SEM image of MnO2/embossed graphene (e-CMG) electrode with a 3D structure (a, b, reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012) and photographs of rolled-up flexible supercapacitor devices prepared by foam-like Ni@Ni1.4Co1.6S2 materials (c, reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Royal Society Chemistry, copyright 2015), A digital photograph of a porous graphite-foam-based flexible supercapacitor under bending conditions (d, reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017) and nitrogen-doped carbon-foam-based flexible supercapacitor device under compression (e, reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016). 
4. Applications in wearable flexible devices
Smart wearable electronics have recently caught immense research interest. Therefore, the development of flexible power sources is one of the most important issues to ensure the use of wearable products in daily lives. Flexible supercapacitors have been developed as the most prominent energy storage devices for wearable applications because of their excellent safety and fast charging–discharging performances. Another trend is to integrate flexible supercapacitors into multifunction wearable platforms for further applications in smart medical, sports and fitness, military, smart furniture, entertainment, etc.
Solar cells have broad applications in the wearable electronics field because they can provide continuous energy to wearable devices under light illumination. However, solar cells cannot work properly at night. Therefore, a single energy harvesting device is difficult to implement on wearable devices: supercapacitors can become the ideal auxiliary energy supply. For example, Cai et al. prepared a flexible carbon micro-supercapacitor, which could amplify voltage and capacitance by connecting the single supercapacitor in parallel or in series. A self-powered system has been successfully prepared with a solar panel as the energy harvester and a flexible supercapacitor as the energy storage portion, which can successfully power a digital clock.206 In addition, a self-charging power device has been developed by incorporating flexible transition metal carbide (MXene) supercapacitors with human motion energy harvesting module, which could drive a variety of electronics and sensors. The specific capacitance of such flexible supercapacitors is 23 mF cm−2. After 10000 cycles, 95% capacitance is retained.207 This self-power supply system described above can realize the energy storage of flexible supercapacitors in addition to the conversion of power generation, which makes it practical for wearable device applications.
Another wearable functional device involves the assembly of various sensors and flexible supercapacitors to achieve the multiple functions of signal detection and energy storage. For instance, a fiber-based flexible device has been fabricated by integrating a supercapacitor and an optical detector. This device could generate current under light illumination and charging the flexible supercapacitor.208 In addition, a dual-mode sensor is produced by using PPy/GF electrode material for use in flexible supercapacitors and PDMS/PPy/GF as pressure/temperature-sensing materials (Fig. 9a–c).209 The areal capacitance of this flexible supercapacitor is 89.6 mF cm−2 at 0.6 mA cm−2. The manufactured dual mode sensor can simultaneously detect pressure and temperature signals. It exhibits high sensitivity, fast response/recovery, and high durability during 10000 pressure cycles. Multifunctional platforms have been constructed by integrating supercapacitors with functional sensors, extending the applications of flexible supercapacitors.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the manufactured dual-mode sensors, current responses with temperature gradients at a pressure of 1 kPa, and current response (ΔI/I0) at different pressures of this sensor (a, b, c, reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), the self-healing process of PVA/H2SO4-hydrogel-film-based flexible supercapacitors (d, reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). 
Self-healing materials (mostly polymeric materials) are a class of materials that have self-monitoring and self-healing properties, which can repair external damage. In practical applications, supercapacitors with self-healing characteristics are highly desirable for flexible and implantable electronic devices. In order to fabricate self-healing flexible supercapacitors, considerable effort has been devoted toward the design of various electrodes, electrolytes, and substrates. There are two main types of healing mechanisms: one is compounded with functional self-healing materials; the other is self-healing by providing energy to trigger covalent or noncovalent bonding of the material. Recently, an intrinsic self-healing electrolyte (vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticle-PAA, VSNP-PAA) based on hydrogen bonding has been designed to assemble flexible supercapacitors. PPy was uniformly electrodeposited on the CNT paper to function as the electrode. These self-healing supercapacitors can maintain 100% capacitance with 20 breaking/healing cycles, which is superior than that of the earlier reported devices (<5 cycles).210 To simplify the cumbersome assembly process of self-healing flexible supercapacitors, an all-in-one configuration of self-healing supercapacitors has been developed by the in situ deposition of SWCNT-PANI electrode nanomaterials onto the surface of self-healing hydrogel electrolyte separators. The obtained flexible supercapacitors exhibit outstanding capacitance of 15.8 mF cm−2 at current density of 0.044 mA cm−2. It also exhibits excellent and reliable self-healing ability with 80% specific capacitance retention after the fifth self-healing cycle and can illuminate LEDs after automatic self-healing by cutting (Fig. 9d).211 The self-healing properties of flexible supercapacitors can significantly extend the service life and improve the safety of materials, exhibiting far-reaching scientific significance.
5. Outlook and perspectives
Excellent flexible supercapacitors are desirable for use in wearable electronic devices because of their long life, excellent mechanical properties, high charge–discharge efficiencies, and high energy densities. As the core component of supercapacitors, electrode materials have been widely studied in the recent years. In the foregoing discussions, carbon material electrodes were initially used in flexible supercapacitors, followed by metal oxide electrodes and polymer electrodes. We reviewed the different electrode materials and clarified the effective tactics of electrode construction for flexible solid-state supercapacitors. The performances of the current electrode materials are still unsatisfactory, and therefore, high-performance, stable, and environment-friendly electrode materials should be exploited in the future. In addition, the current progresses in fiber-, paper-/fabric- and foam-based flexible supercapacitors are reviewed. Despite the significant advances made in the field of flexible supercapacitors, several future research directions have been suggested as follows:
(1) To explore novel electrode materials is still a fascinating and continuous research direction. At present, electrode materials are a significant component of flexible supercapacitors and have included carbon, metal oxide/hydroxide, and conducting polymer materials, which have made significant progress in the past. Recently, MOF has been suggested to be a promising functional electrode material with very high specific areas of 46000 m2 g−1. Ni-MOF, Cu-MOF, and Co-MOF have been generally used in flexible supercapacitors. Other emerging electrode materials should arouse extensive attention, which have high electronic conductivity and surface porosity, such as MXenes, black phosphorus, etc.
(2) It is essential to develop and design a rational structure of electrode materials to obtain high-performance flexible supercapacitors. Various promising strategies have been developed, such as introducing a porous structure, increasing interlayer spacing in the crystalline structure, designing a 3D structure, etc. In general, the design of a microporous structure (<2 nm) of pore-dependent electrode carbon materials is an efficient method for increasing the capacitance. Another interesting way is to load the active materials on large surface substrates to form a 3D structure, including synthetically engineered carbon nanonetworks, as well as porous papers and textiles.
(3) Common standards need to be developed to evaluate the performance of flexible supercapacitors. Various studies use specific capacitance as a common comparison parameter to evaluate and compare the performance of supercapacitors. However, mass specific capacitance is not reasonable because the amount of active material added to the electrode is negligible as compared to the mass of the microdevice. In addition, the volumetric specific capacitance is also inaccurate to represent the characteristics of flexible supercapacitors without considering the thickness. This measurement modality can induce large errors from thin to thick electrode films. For the micro-features of wearable electronic devices, the coverage area of supercapacitors is limited. Therefore, areal capacitance can be used for a better characterization of the performance of supercapacitors. Then, a standard should be developed to assess the performance of flexible supercapacitors, avoiding excessive specific capacitance calculations.
(4) New technology is necessary to fabricate flexible supercapacitor devices. There are various preparation processes for flexible solid-state supercapacitors, such as photolithography, electroplating, etc. These processes with complex steps and strict conditions limit the practical applications of flexible supercapacitors in electronic devices. With the application of inkjet, screen, and gravure printing technologies in printed electronics, printing technology opens up a promising preparation method for supercapacitors. This printed flexible supercapacitor could meet the market demand for wearable devices with a solid film structure and high pattern resolution.
(5) Flexible supercapacitors should be integrated with other functional devices for use in multifunctional wearable devices. The new challenge for flexible supercapacitors is that the developed flexible supercapacitors should integrate into wearable clothes and electronic devices. Then, challenges still remain involving the integration of flexible supercapacitors with other detection modalities or functional devices for practical applications. In order to achieve better compatible applications, researchers should exploit the use of excellent electrode materials with high energy storage performance and search for new fabrication technologies for preparing flexible wearable supercapacitors in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSFC (51471121), Basic Research Plan Program of Shenzhen City (JCYJ20170303170426117), Hunan Provincial Key Research and Development Program (2018GK2064), Research Plan Program of Changsha City (kq1804010), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042018kf203) and Wuhan University.
References
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
M. Conte, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 806–818 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. O'Leary, Masters, 1997, 14 Search PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Min, C. Zhao, G. Chen and X. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 155–164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, B. Jiang, L. Fang, F. Ling, F. Wu, B. Hu, F. Meng, K. Niu, F. Lin and H. Zheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 714, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhattacharya, T. Joo, M. Kota and H. S. Park, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 980–987 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. He and B. Huang, Carbon, 2018, 127, 449–458 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 325–332 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chen, Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-G. Lin, Y.-K. Lin, Y.-Y. Horng, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7124–7130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, C. Lu, Y. Su, D. Cui, Y. He, C. Zhang, M. Cai, F. Zhang, X. Feng and X. Zhuang, Carbon, 2018, 127, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Mu, B. Huang, J. Du, J. Zhou, X. Pan and E. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Haldorai, S. R. Choe, Y. S. Huh and Y.-K. Han, Carbon, 2018, 127, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
R. Patel, J. T. Park, M. Patel, J. K. Dash, E. B. Gowd, R. Karpoormath, A. Mishra, J. Kwak and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12–29 RSC .
H. U. Shah, F. Wang, A. M. Toufiq, S. Ali, Z. U. H. Khan, Y. Li, J. Hu and K. He, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 719–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, F. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Luo, L. Liu, M. Shen and Y. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 2547–2557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, W. R. Leow, B. Zhu, H. Yang, J. Yu, W. Wang, H. Wang, S. Yin and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5559–5566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Li, B. Zhu, L. Guo, Y. Yang, R. Hao, H. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Guo and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3472–3479 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guo, Y. Ma, H. Li and T. Zhai, Small, 2016, 12, 1024–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ge, L. Yang, L. Fan, C. Zhang, X. Xiao, Y. Gogotsi and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 568–578 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, L. Li, Z. Lin, Z.-K. Wu, K.-s. Moon and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 470–478 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Jeong, J. F. Du, Y. R. Kim, C. J. Raj and B. C. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 777, 59–64 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Muellen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487–2494 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Faraji and F. N. Ani, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 823–834 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lin and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 354–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 RSC .
L.-N. Jin, P. Liu, C. Jin, J.-N. Zhang and S.-W. Bian, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 510, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, L. Chen, Q. Ai, D. Li, P. Si, J. Feng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lou and L. Ci, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Chien, C.-Y. Liao, Y.-C. Hao, C.-C. Hsu, I. C. Cheng, I.-S. Yu and J.-Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 391–399 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Q. Yang, L.-F. Gao, Z.-Y. Zhu, C.-X. Hu, Z.-P. Huang, R.-T. Liu, Q. Wang, F. Gao and H.-L. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, L. Li, M. Zhang, B. An and X. Zhu, J. Environ. Sci., 2013, 25(Suppl 1), S110–S117 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, O. Kimizuka, K. Machida, S. Suematsu, K. Tamamitsu, S. Saeki, Y. Yamada, N. Yoshizawa, O. Tanaike, J. Yamashita, F. Don, K. Hata and H. Hatori, Energy Fuel, 2010, 24, 3373–3377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
M. Cai, X. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Qiu, L. Chen, X. Li, J. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Nie, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 749–758 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Liang, L. Liu and B. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kang, S.-J. Chun, S.-S. Lee, B.-Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S.-Y. Lee and W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400–6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Seredych, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 438–447 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rodríguez, I. Camean, R. García and A. B. García, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5090–5094 CrossRef .
H.-K. Jeong, M. Jin, E. J. Ra, K. Y. Sheem, G. H. Han, S. Arepalli and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1162–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, F. Suárez-García, J. M. Tascón and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tan, Y. Han, L. He, Y. Dong, X. Xu, D. Liu, H. Yan, Q. Yu, C. Huang and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23620–23627 RSC .
J. Benson, I. Kovalenko, S. Boukhalfa, D. Lashmore, M. Sanghadasa and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6625–6632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. L. Almeida, E. R. Edwards and N. G. Ferreira, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 69–80 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. El-Khodary, G. M. El-Enany, M. El-Okr and M. Ibrahim, Synth. Met., 2017, 233, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, G. Liang, C. Xu, D. Ren, J. Wang, Z.-Z. Pan, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19934–19942 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Zhou, R. Liu, X. Li, Y. Bai and G. Yuan, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 14906–14913 RSC .
G. Huang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, P. Sheng and H. Peng, Carbon, 2017, 125, 595–604 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, M. J. Shin, C. W. Park and J.-D. Kim, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 538, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dai, Z. Liu, B. Zhao, J. Zeng, H. Hu, Q. Zhang, D. Chen, C. Qu, D. Dang and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 387, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z.-G. Chen, J. Tan, Z.-S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Halab Shaeli Iessa, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, F. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kate, S. A. Khalate and R. J. Deokate, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 734, 89–111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cottineau, M. Toupin, T. Delahaye, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Appl. Phys. A, 2006, 82, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science,  2008, 321, 651–652 Search PubMed.
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Wu, S. L. Kuo and M. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2002, 104, 62–65 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Wen and C. C. Hu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2158–2163 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-f. Su, F. Wu, L.-y. Bao and Z.-h. Yang, New Carbon Mater., 2007, 22, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Lee, H. M. Pathan, K.-D. Jung and O.-S. Joo, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1527–1531 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sugimoto, H. Iwata, Y. Yasunaga, Y. Murakami and Y. Takasu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4092–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sugimoto, K. Yokoshima, Y. Murakami and Y. Takasu, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1742–1748 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng and Y. Xin, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, H. Chen, J. Qiu and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, J. Kim, Y. Jo, A. T. A. Ahmed, H. S. Chavan, H. Woo, A. I. Inamdar, J. L. Gunjakar, S. M. Pawar, Y. Park, H. Kim and H. Im, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 725, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Ren, H.-Y. Lu, H.-B. Lin, Y.-N. Liu and Y. Xing, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2010, 46, 77–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Lee and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 144, 220–223 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Li, J. Yuan, X. F. Shen, S. Gomez-Mower, L. P. Xu, S. Sithambaram, M. Aindow and S. L. Suib, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1247–1253 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, X. Tao, D. Wei, H. Wang, Q. Yu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 1357–1362 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, A. Yuan and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 1007–1011 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, M. Toupin, R. Dugas, L. Athouël, O. Crosnier and D. Bélanger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2171–A2180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Devaraj and N. Munichandraiah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4406–4417 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Patil, A. C. Lokhande, P. A. Shinde and C. D. Lokhande, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16636–16649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ye, T. Li, G. Ma, X. Peng and J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 351, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Huang, S. Chen, L. Kang, X. He, Z. Lei, F. Shi, H. Xu and Z.-H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19107–19115 RSC .
S. Bag and C. R. Raj, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8384–8394 RSC .
K. Xu, S. Li, J. Yang and J. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 448–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Sassin, C. N. Chervin, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1062–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Li, Z.-H. Liu, Z. Yang and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 855–859 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, H. Xia, J. Y. Fuh and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 935–938 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, Q. Han, Z. Zheng, Y. Yang and X. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4356–4361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu and F. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2598 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Pang, M. A. Anderson and T. W. Chapman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, G. Lu, F. Wu, C. Xu, X. Kang and Z. Cheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 986–993 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yu, H. Yin, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Tang and M.-Q. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501458 CrossRef .
J. Han, L. Li, P. Fang and R. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15900–15907 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nithya and N. S. Arul, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 297–318 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xiong, W. Wang, S. Qin, H. Cheng, Y. Zeng, B. Wang and Z. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1201–1211 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nagaraju, Y. H. Ko, S. M. Cha, S. H. Im and J. S. Yu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1507–1522 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, D. Wu, Y. Gao, T. Wang, Y. Tan and D. Jia, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 738, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, M. Yu, Y. Meng, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601053 CrossRef .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Binitha, M. Soumya, A. A. Madhavan, P. Praveen, A. Balakrishnan, K. Subramanian, M. Reddy, S. V. Nair, A. S. Nair and N. Sivakumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11698–11704 RSC .
F. Yang, K. Xu and J. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 729, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, Z. Wu, Y. Luo, W. Qiu, X. Fan, B. Long, M. Huang, P. Liu and Y. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 7–17 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Li, M. Li and Z. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 742, 759–768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhari, D. Bhattacharjya and J.-S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25120–25128 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Wang, D. Meng, X. Qin and G. Diao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16276–16285 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Kore and B. J. Lokhande, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 725, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. V. Savilov and H. Xia, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Liang, Y. Ma and D. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 7747–7753 RSC .
M. Li and H. He, Vacuum, 2017, 143, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .
P.-Y. Tang, L.-J. Han, A. Genc, Y.-M. He, X. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Ramon Galan-Mascaros, J. Ramon Morante and J. Arbiol, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 189–201 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, C. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Jiao and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2643–2646 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, K. Huang and S. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. Johnston, A. Crossley and P. S. Grant, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7637–7644 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Ji, S. Wang, L. Kong, X. Jiang and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3793–3799 RSC .
J. Chen, J. Qiu, B. Wang, H. Feng, K. Ito and E. Sakai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 804, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, H. Liang, H. Jia, S. Chen, J. Guo, J. Qi, C. Qu, J. Cao, W. Fei and J. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24594–24601 RSC .
M. Aghazadeh, I. Karimzadeh, M. R. Ganjali and A. Behzad, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18121–18129 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, J. Balamurugan, X. Li, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1701275 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, H. Niu, X. Yang, Z. Sun, F. Li, Q. Wang and F. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 10683–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, H. Yu, L. Zhi, W. Zhang, L. Dang, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18982–18991 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chakravarty, A. Das, C. Sarma and P. Roy, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 3284–3294 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sahoo, M. Pradhan, A. Roy, S. Dutta, C. Ray, Y. Negishi, A. Pal and T. Pal, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, W. Xing, L. Zhang, S. Zhuo, J. Zhou, G. Wang and S. Qiao, Power Technol., 2012, 224, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Liu and M. A. Anderson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. X. Pan, X. H. Xia, P. S. Tang and H. F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Dam, X. Wang and J.-M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8246–8256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-I. Kim, J.-S. Lee, H.-J. Ahn, H.-K. Song and J.-H. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1596–1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vijayakumar, S. Nagamuthu and G. Muralidharan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2188–2196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ouyang, X. Xia, H. Ye, L. Wang, X. Jiao, W. Lei and Q. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3549–3561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Cao, W. Guo, Z.-M. Cui, W.-G. Song and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3204–3209 RSC .
A. Majeed, P.-X. Hou, S. Jiang, J.-C. Li, L.-Q. Ping, G.-X. Li, F. Zhang, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24813–24819 RSC .
M. M. Sk, C. Y. Yue, K. Ghosh and R. K. Jena, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 121–140 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Cai, G. Y. Zhang, J. Chen, X. L. Gou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4212–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Luo, P. V. Parkhutik, A.-C. Millan and E. Matveeva, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, T. Zhao, C. Li and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3818–3823 RSC .
X. Xiong, D. Ding, D. Chen, G. Waller, Y. Bu, Z. Wang and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, J. Song, Y. Zhu and C. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 344–348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. Ding, Y. Huang, H. Gu, Y.-E. Miao and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22669–22677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wang, R. Zhao, C. Li, D. Guo, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701014 CrossRef .
K. Lota, V. Khomenko and E. Frackowiak, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Ji, W. Ma, C. Chen, W. Song and J. Zhao, Molecules, 2016, 21, 868 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sivakkumar, W. J. Kim, J.-A. Choi, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth and D.-W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 1062–1068 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hu and C.-H. Chu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2000, 65, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Patil, J. S. Shaikh, D. S. Dalavi, M. M. Karanjkar, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma and P. S. Patil, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A653–A657 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Wu, H. Qu, J. Xu, L. Ye and B. Li, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18735–18744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Upadhyaya, N. Ahmed, R. Deka and D. Kakati, Iran. Polym. J., 2012, 21, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, Y. Liu, L. Kong, L. Kang, C. Xu and F. Ran, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45309 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Q. Lu, S. Yang, J. Guo, Q. Tian, W. Yao, Z. Guo, V. A. L. Roy and W. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 3, 1700206 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Q. Tian, W. Yao, M. Li, Y. Li and W. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Pan, B. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. Bao and G. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6086–6091 RSC .
X. Lin and Y. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4990–4997 CrossRef CAS .
J. Carlberg and O. Inganäs, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L61–L64 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. Du and C. Xia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 204, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. A. M. Abdah, N. A. Rahman and Y. Sulaiman, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 466–473 CrossRef .
J. S. Sohn, U. M. Patil, S. Kang, S. Kang and S. C. Jun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107864–107871 RSC .
M. G. Han and S. P. Armes, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 4523–4526 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Huang, H.-Z. Lin, T.-C. Wen and A. Gopalan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1058–1063 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ajjan, N. Casado, T. Rębiś, A. Elfwing, N. Solin, D. Mecerreyes and O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1838–1847 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. P. F. Turner, M. Zhao and W. C. Mak, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 99, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Lang, J. F. Ponder, A. M. Österholm, N. J. Kennard, R. H. Bulloch and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23887–23897 RSC .
A. M. österholm, J. F. Ponder Jr., J. A. Kerszulis and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13492–13498 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, W. Yang, X. Mao, L. Xu, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Lu, Y. Yan and T.-W. Chou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11271–11277 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Qiao and Z. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32317–32323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Javed, S. Dai, M. Wang, D. Guo, L. Chen, X. Wang, C. Hu and Y. Xi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Ye, J. Chen, N. Wang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 737, 731–739 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, L. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Yu, J. Wang, J. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Fan and Z. Shao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 43512–43520 RSC .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cakici, R. R. Kakarla and F. Alonso-Marroquin, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Shen, Z. Zhang, E. Barrios and L. Zhai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4041–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, H. Lin, J. Deng, P. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401438 CrossRef .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453–13457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Wang, R. Hao and L. Guo, Small, 2016, 12, 4683–4689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, H. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Niu, H. Lu, Y. Yang, L. Cheng and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21298–21306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, Y. Su, D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. Du and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 917–922 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramadoss, K.-Y. Yoon, M.-J. Kwak, S.-I. Kim, S.-T. Ryu and J.-H. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. He, V. Pavlinek, Q. Cheng, P. Sáha and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17165–17171 RSC .
B. Anothumakkool, R. Soni, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1339–1347 RSC .
L. Ma, R. Liu, L. Liu, F. Wang, H. Niu and Y. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 335, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, R. Kumar, A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600260 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Y. Feng and W. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410, 69–77 CrossRef .
W. Wu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 187–224 CrossRef .
W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7342–7372 RSC .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L.-F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dong, Y.-C. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Dai, S. L. Zhang, H. Zou, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9490–9499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701736 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Ferrero, M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 1055–1063 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Li, E. Asher, S. Deng, X. Sun and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803600 CrossRef .
J. Yun, Y. Lim, H. Lee, G. Lee, H. Park, S. Y. Hong, S. W. Jin, Y. H. Lee, S.-S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700135 CrossRef .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhong, X. Qing, Q. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Wang, X. Liu, M. Li and D. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 8409–8419 CrossRef CAS .
S. He and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Cao, Z.-J. Sun, S.-Y. Zhao, B. Wang and Z.-B. Han, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1692–1699 RSC .
L. Mi, W. Wei, S. Huang, S. Cui, W. Zhang, H. Hou and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20973–20982 RSC .
W. Li, X. Xu, C. Liu, M. C. Tekell, J. Ning, J. Guo, J. Zhang and D. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702738 CrossRef .
K. Xiao, L.-X. Ding, G. Liu, H. Chen, S. Wang and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5997–6002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, C. Lv and A. Watanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1671–1679 RSC .
Q. Jiang, C. Wu, Z. Wang, A. C. Wang, J.-H. He, Z. L. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Hou, D. Chen, R. Wang and G. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, G. Lee, D. S. Kim, J. H. Oh, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. Oh, J. Y. Yun and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707013 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, K. Zheng and P. Wan, Small, 2018, 14, 1704497 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Jing Liang	Jing Liang received her BS from the Jining Medical University in 2013. She is currently pursuing a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Wei Wu in the School of Printing and Packaging at Wuhan University. Her research involves the preparation of transition metal nanomaterials and their electrochemical applications for printed flexible energy storage devices.
Wei Wu	Wei Wu received his PhD in 2011 from the Department of Physics, Wuhan University, China. He then joined the group of Prof. Daiwen Pang at Wuhan University (2011) and Prof. V. A. L. Roy at the City University of Hong Kong (2014) as a postdoctoral fellow. Now, he is a full professor and Director of Laboratory of Printable Functional Nanomaterials and Printed Electronics, School of Printing and Packaging, Wuhan University. He has published over 100 papers, which have received over 3600 citations. He received the STAM Best Paper Award in 2017 and Hong Kong Scholars Award in 2014; he is also the topical editor of Frontiers in Materials. His research interests include the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials, including anti-counterfeiting, printed electronics, and intelligent packaging.
Cs = (IΔt)/(mΔV)	(1)
Cs = S/2mυΔV	(2)
E = Cs × ΔV2/(2 × 3600)	(3)
P = E × 3600/Δt	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Two-electrode unit cell of supercapacitors and the designed supercapacitor devices with different shapes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of electrode materials and classification of structural fabrication for flexible supercapacitors.	 
RuO2 + xH + xe− ⇔ RuO2−x (OH)x	(5)

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the prepared α-MnO2 nanosphere at different magnifications (a, b, reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2018), ultralong δ-MnO2 nanofibers (c, reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017), hierarchical mesoporous δ-MnO2 nanostructure (d, reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016), core–shell-like MnO2@MnO2 hexagonal nanoplate arrays and schematic representation of hierarchical MnO2 nanostructures@MnO2 hexagonal nanoplates coated on a single carbon fiber cloth (e, f, reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of Fe2O3 nanofibers (inset: flexible Fe2O3 electrode) and CV and GCD curves of Fe2O3 nanofiber electrodes (a, b, c, reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), SEM images of carbon fabric-Fe2O3 nanosheets (CF-Fe2O3) with inset showing the CF-Fe2O3 electrode under the condition of bending and twisting and the GCD curves and cycling stability of CF-Fe2O3 electrodes (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), SEM images of Fe2O3/TiO2 nanorods (g, reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), flower-like Fe3O4/MnO2 (h, reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015), and Fe2O3 nanorods (i, reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018).	 
NiO + OH− ⇔ NiOOH + e−	(6)
Ni(OH)2 + OH− ⇔ NiOOH + H2O + e−	(7)

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of NiO nanoflakes sample (a, reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013) and NiO nanoflower (b, reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013), schematic diagram of NiO nanomaterial electrode participating in the reaction during charge–discharge processes (c, reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemistry and Society, copyright 2013), SEM images, cyclic voltammograms, and cycling performance of ZnO@C@NiO core–shell nanorod array electrode materials (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2018), SEM images and charge transfer mechanism in KOH electrolyte of the FeOF/Ni(OH)2 electrode and specific capacitance of different electrode materials with different current densities in 3 M KOH (g, h, i, reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

3D graphene hydrogel	Au coated PI	H2SO4/PVA	186 F g−1	0.61 W h kg−1	0.67 kW kg−1	91.6% retain over 10000 cycles	Light up a green LED	
162

RuO2/SWCNT	PET, SiO2/Si and cloth fabrics	H3PO4/PVA	138 F g−1	18.8 W h kg−1	96 kW kg−1	No decrease after 1000 cycles	Inkjet-printed supercapacitor	
67

3D CNTs/PEDOT	Aluminum foil	H2SO4/PVA	147 F g−1	8.3 W h kg−1	10.2 kW kg−1	94.7% retain after 3000 cycles	Fabricated symmetric all solid state supercapacitor cell	
163

Fe3O4/carbon nanotube/polyaniline	CNT film	H2SO4/PVA	201 F g−1	28.0 W h kg−1	5.3 kW kg−1	96.4% retain after 10000 cycles	Fabricated flexible solid-state supercapacitor device	
164

Carbon microsphere-MnO2 nanosheets	Textile	H3PO4/PVA	19.23 mF cm−2	—	—	84% after 2000 cycles	Fully printed supercapacitor	
165

PANI/CNT nanocomposite	Commercial A4 print paper	H2SO4/PVA	350 F g−1	7.1 W h kg−1	2.189 kW kg−1	92% after 1000 cycles	Light a red LED	
166

MoS2 hierarchical nanospheres	Carbon cloth	LiCl/PVA	368 F g−1	5.42 W h kg−1	0.128 kW kg−1	96.5% retain after 5000 cycles	Light 8 red color commercial LEDs	
167

β-Ni(OH)2/graphene	Flexible current collector	KOH/PVA	61.7 mF cm−2	17 μW h cm−2	1200 μW cm−2	92% obtained after 2000 cycles,	Light a red LED	
168

Polymer/polypyrrole	Cu-TCPP@P70 film	H2SO4/PVA	496 F g−1	0.29 mW h cm−3	270 mW cm−3	70% obtained after 3000 cycles	Power an electronic clock	
16

Cellulose nanofibers CNFs/MoS2/RGO	—	H2SO4/PVA	916.42 F g−1	22.8 W h kg−1	4.3 kW kg−1	98% after 5000 cycles	Fabricated flexible supercapacitors.	
169


 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of a stretchable CNT–fiber-based supercapacitor (a, reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013), two-electrode fibers and integrated polymer solar cells (b, reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012), and fiber device with electrochemical supercapacitors (c, reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014), photograph of a transparent fiber-based textile supercapacitor being lifted up by a tender flower and curving without suffering damage (d, e, f, reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015).	 

 	Fig. 7  Images of bendable graphite-paper-based electrodes (a, reproduced from ref. 196 from permission of John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016), the all-printed flexible supercapacitor connected in series (b, reproduced from ref. 197 from permission of John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), interdigitated printed electrode after folding (c, reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017), photograph of the BATTERY-written inkjet-printed supercapacitor lighting up a LED (d, reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016) and knitted TENG-fabric-based supercapacitor under widened tensile deformations (e, reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemistry Society, copyright 2017), schematic illustration of the PEDOT:PSS/CNF-coated yarn supercapacitor (f, reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram and SEM image of MnO2/embossed graphene (e-CMG) electrode with a 3D structure (a, b, reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012) and photographs of rolled-up flexible supercapacitor devices prepared by foam-like Ni@Ni1.4Co1.6S2 materials (c, reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Royal Society Chemistry, copyright 2015), A digital photograph of a porous graphite-foam-based flexible supercapacitor under bending conditions (d, reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017) and nitrogen-doped carbon-foam-based flexible supercapacitor device under compression (e, reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the manufactured dual-mode sensors, current responses with temperature gradients at a pressure of 1 kPa, and current response (ΔI/I0) at different pressures of this sensor (a, b, c, reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), the self-healing process of PVA/H2SO4-hydrogel-film-based flexible supercapacitors (d, reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
