Thermochemical processing of fuels involving the use of molecular oxygen  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6RA18616E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6RA18616E
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 102231-102248Thermochemical processing of fuels involving the use of molecular oxygen
Hongfan Guoa, 
Qiuxiang Chenga, 
Ze Jina, 
Dan Wanga, 
Guangwen Xu*b and 
Yunyi Liu*a
aKey Laboratory of Applied Technology for Chemical Engineering of Liaoning Province, College of Chemical Engineering, Shenyang University of Chemical Technology, Shenyang 110142, PR China. E-mail: liuyunyia@163.com;  Fax: +86 24 89383760;   Tel: +86 24 89383118
bState Key Laboratory of Multi-Phase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: gwxu@ipe.ac.cn;  Fax: +86 10 82629912;   Tel: +86 10 82544886
Received 
22nd July 2016
, Accepted 29th September 2016First published on 27th October 2016AbstractIn a high-temperature (e.g., 1000 °C) atmosphere containing combustibles, it is naturally thought that air/O2 should be kept away for fear of combustion and explosion. However, during thermochemical processing (TCP) of carbonaceous fuels (CFs) it's actually not that simple. TCP, the process for recovering CFs or converting problematic CFs into preferred ones, is a key technology for efficiently and relatively cleanly utilizing various CFs that supply the majority of the worldwide energy demand. However, TCP is often subject to some obstacles (e.g., high energy input and thermodynamic constraint). This review on extensive literature demonstrates that not only does introducing a controlled amount of O2 (i.e., molecular oxygen) into TCP overcome its many obstacles, but also this O2-assisted strategy is applicable to all of the main CFs currently known. Despite such a wide applicability to CFs, there lacks a comprehensive consideration of various aerobic TCP processes for understanding the O2-assisted strategy as a kind of universal TCP technology for CFs. In this review, we for the first time summarize and discuss the use of O2 in various TCP processes for all of the main CFs. We hope that this review can inspire more consideration of the various aerobic TCP processes so that these extremely complex processes can be communicated or consulted from each other's experience/research findings in order to enlighten, guide or promote their respective development.
1 Introduction
Although some forms of energy sources, such as nuclear, solar or wind energy, are in use or being developed, the majority of the worldwide energy demand is still supplied by carbonaceous fuels (e.g., coal, petroleum, biomass and their derived H2).1–11 In addition, carbonaceous fuels, particularly fossil fuels, will still remain as a dominant energy source for the next several decades.4 However, the massive use of conventional fossil fuels causes two severe global problems: environmental deterioration (e.g., global warming) and energy crisis due to the depletion of conventional fossil fuel sources.2–5,8,11 Some measures can be attempted to solve these two problems, for example, (1) exploiting unconventional alternative fossil fuels like oil shale and heavy oil; (2) efficiently and more cleanly using fuel to reduce wasting of resources and emissions of the pollutants; (3) utilizing renewable biomass to replace fossil fuels and lower CO2 emission. The realization of all of these goals needs facile, efficient and greener fuel processing technologies.
Among various fuel processing technologies, thermochemical conversion is one type of the most common and successful technology. It can be categorized into many forms, such as combustion, pyrolysis, retorting, gasification or reforming, etc.2 Combustion directly converts the chemical energy of fuels into heat. However, the direct combustion of some fuels causes low efficiency and pollution.6,7,9 In addition, some fuels are not suitable for direct combustion in some cases, such as coal or oil shale for cars, which prefer liquid fuels.
Therefore, before use, the problematic original fuel needs to be converted into other preferred forms of fuel via thermochemical processing (TCP), such as retorting solid oil shale into oil, cracking heavy hydrocarbons into light oil, or gasifying a solid carbonaceous material into syngas.6,10 Thus, the difficult-to-handle fuel is converted into easy-to-handle gaseous or liquid fuels and some corrosive or toxic elements are removed. TCP also gives other advantages. For example, as compared to the original fuel, the syngas produced after gasification conversion has a higher potential energy efficiency for combustion, or for fuel cells which usually are not limited by Carnot efficiency.6,12 TCP also provides alternative ways for utilizing stranded fuel resources. For example, a significant portion of the world’s natural gas reserves remain unusable by expensive and energy intensive gas compressing technologies (e.g., LNG) or pipelines,13 because these gases are too remote or unavailable due to other reasons.14 The TCP of natural gas into liquid transportable fuels (e.g., methanol), the so-called gas-to-liquid technology, is a promising alternative method for utilizing these stranded gas reserves.15
However, many TCP processes are performed by highly endothermic reactions at high temperatures even above 1000 °C, which makes the processes energy-intensive and high-cost.14,16–21 Especially in underground TCP processes, it's not easy to apply heat within the geologic formation.22–25 Moreover, in order to obtain a high reaction temperature, substantial fuel has to be combusted externally to supply heat, resulting in an enormous discharge of COx and NOx.19 Therefore, an energy efficient TCP process without the requirement of an external heat supply would be significant.26 Introducing air/O2 (i.e., molecular oxygen) into TCP appears to be a good way to overcome these problems. It makes the process exothermic so that external heating becomes inessential (i.e., autothermal operation).19 It should be noted that the presence of O2 in these TCP processes just causes partial oxidation, wherein only a controlled amount of O2 is provided to ensure that as much energy as possible is stored in the produced combustible products. This greatly differs from full combustion whose aim is just to get heat.27 Therefore, enough O2 is provided during the combustion and the resultant products mainly consist of incombustible flue gas. It must be pointed out that the role of O2 in TCP is not limited to just forming autothermal conversion processes. O2 can also play many other important roles, such as preventing coking, making the conversion thermodynamically favorable and relatively environmentally benign, etc.28,29
Unfortunately, however, because O2 can be associated with burning or explosion, it's often subject to the prejudice that it should be avoided in the TCP of fuels. For example, currently many people still think heating oil shale in the absence of O2 is retorting while heating oil shale in the presence of O2 is combustion, that is, O2 should be avoided in oil shale retorting; however, some recent studies have confirmed that the right use of O2 in oil shale retorting gives distinctive advantages.4,22–25,30–32 The current situation is that the advantages of using O2 in TCP are gradually being discovered in practical industrial production, and an aerobic TCP process is often developed in isolation from the others. This lacks broad consideration of the O2-assisting TCP processes of a wide variety of carbonaceous fuels together for understanding their commonalities. Moreover, O2-assisted TCP is appreciably more complex than full combustion and can be affected by many factors (e.g., amount of O2 and reaction temperature),33 therefore it's still far from being fully understood. This has hindered its application amd development. In this article, we demonstrate the use of molecular oxygen in various TCP processes for all of the main fuels. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time anyone has conducted such work. We expect that the present work can deepen the understanding of complex O2-assisted TCP processes, and particularly that these processes can give reference to each other for furthering their respective development or give enlightenment for adopting O2-assisted strategy in the utilization of new carbonaceous fuels.
2 Enhanced oil recovery (EOR)
Heavy oils are a largely untapped hydrocarbon resource with vast reserves.34–36 Conventional technologies, such as pressure depletion and water flooding, are not effective in recovering heavy oils due to their high viscosity.35 As a result, increasing attention is being paid towards using tertiary enhanced oil recovery (EOR) techniques to improve the recovery rate.34–36 Thermal methods, the most successful EOR processes, rely on several displacement mechanisms, but the most important one is heating the oil to a lower viscosity.36 The hot steam injection route accounts for the majority of the thermal EOR projects currently in operation, however, it is energy intensive resulting from steam generation.37
In contrast, the in situ combustion (ISC) technique is an efficient and economical thermal EOR technique.37,38 It in situ generates heat by injecting air (or O2 enriched air) into a reservoir to oxidize a small portion of hydrocarbons, in contrast to hot fluid injection methods wherein heat is generated at the surface by combusting a lot of valuable fuel (e.g., coal) and then is transported to the reservoir by a fluid.34,35,38–40 By generating and utilizing the heat in situ, ISC offers many advantages over other EOR processes, such as higher efficiency in terms of heat utilization and displacement drive mechanisms, a lower environmental impact, etc.35,36,38,39,41 ISC is particularly favorable for heavy oil reservoirs, because the heat generated in situ increases the temperature and significantly reduces the oil viscosity by several orders of magnitude.35,38,41 By ISC, a high displacement efficiency (up to 95%) can be achieved.42 Also, the oil is in situ upgraded by 5–7 API points, as the heaviest components are consumed and the light crude-oil components fractionate.35
In the ISC process, a very thin combustion front (no more than several inches)35,43,44 is sustained to generate heat.45,46 However, it should be noted that ISC is still a cracking and distillation process as a whole, as exothermic oxidation by O2 just consumes a minor fraction of the oil in the reservoir (5–10%) and the consumed components are mostly from the less economically-desirable heavier components.41,45,46
In a normal ISC process, the combustion front travels downstream from the injection well towards the production well (Fig. 1a).34,47 The generated heat will be partially consumed by the cracking of heavy hydrocarbons in the adjacent layer downstream, named the cracking or vaporization zone.42 In the cracking zone, the original oil cracks into a lighter oil fraction and coke-like residue.34 The formed lighter oil fraction is vaporized and thus displaced, while the coke-like residue is deposited and immobilized on the porous rock.34,36,45 Verkoczy indicated that the decomposition of asphaltenes, the heaviest components of heavy oils, significantly contributes to forming coke-like deposits.35 Once the combustion front reaches the coke deposits, the coke is utilized as fuel to drive the continuation of the ISC process downstream, that is, the solid coke-like residues deposited on the reservoir rock serve as the actual fuel for the ISC process rather than the crude oil itself.34,35,42,48
 Fig. 1  (a) Distribution of reservoir zones in a normal ISC process; (b) weight loss and temperature distribution of different zones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 
Therefore, the success of an ISC process chiefly depends on the amount and rate of fuel deposition in the cracking zone, as they control the amount of heat generated during the process.35,42,48 For a normal ISC process, O2 is mainly consumed at the combustion front and coke zone, and very little O2 can permeate through the coke zone and get into the transition area of the oil bank and coke zone, causing oxidative pyrolysis; that is to say, cracking can be divided into thermal cracking and oxidative cracking as is shown in Fig. 1b. The temperature distribution and the main reactions in different zones are shown in Fig. 1b and Table 1, respectively.47
Table 1 Main reactions in a normal ISC process47




Reactions zones
Reaction temperature




Oxidative cracking (or oxidative pyrolysis) zone: heavy oil + O2 → light oil + coke + H2O + COx + heat
300–400 °C


Cracking (or pyrolysis) zone: heavy oil → light oil + coke + adsorption of heat
400–470 °C


Coke combustion: coke + O2 → H2O + COx + heat
470–550 °C




Moreover, because water has a higher heat capacity than air, it can be injected together with air to improve thermal efficiency.36 This process is named wet ISC. The injected water is transformed into steam upon contact with the hot rocks, and thus the heat stored upstream is recovered and then transported downstream.
In brief, the ISC process produces heat for itself, but it's not a simple “combustion” in the normal sense or just “the burning of oil”. Instead, it utilizes the economically undesirable heavier oil components in the reservoir to heat the reservoir itself so that a high oil displacement efficiency can be achieved, accompanied by the in situ upgrading of heavy oil. However, although ISC has been extensively studied for a long time (ISC for heavy oil recovery can be traced back to the turn of the 20th in the USA), it still lacks predictability at both the lab and field scale.40–42,49,50 The reason for this is attributed to the extreme complexity of the ISC process which involves simultaneous heat and mass transfer in a multiphase environment coupled with numerous heterogeneous and homogeneous chemical reactions of oil in porous media.43,48 To better utilize ISC, there is still a long way to go.50
3 Retorting oil shale for preparing shale oil
Oil shale (OS), an unconventional fossil fuel, is a sedimentary rock containing a high proportion of insoluble macromolecular organic matter called kerogen.22–25,51,52 Kerogen can be converted into petroleum-like shale oil, when the rock is heated through the chemical process of pyrolysis or retorting. The known reserves of OS are very large, much larger than the reserves of crude oil in the world, which makes OS one of the most abundant fossil fuels.
OS retorting techniques can be categorized into two types: aboveground (ex situ) and underground (in situ).30–32 However, no matter what type of retorting we employ, substantial energy input is required to thermally break down the kerogen matrix into shale oil. High heat or energy input is one of the most difficult obstacles for retorting,53 as it makes the operation of retorting extremely difficult, for example, using a 700 °C heat carrier gas to heat OS to over 500 °C for completing an aboveground retorting process.22,52,54 Therefore, developing a retorting process with low energy input is very meaningful in the OS industry. Such an endeavor is particularly of significance for the underground retorting technique, as it's very hard to apply heat to OS within the geologic formation.
In order to overcome the above problem, very recently some low energy-input retorting strategies were demonstrated, such as the topochemical reaction method,30–32 self-heating retorting4,22–25 and ISC-like retorting.55 In these strategies, OS is partially oxidized by a certain amount of air. Subsequently a large amount of heat is released. Thus, once retorting is initiated, an external heat supply is not required. A high-temperature heat carrier is also not needed. In addition, despite a reduced heat input, no obvious losses in oil yield were found.22,31 Fig. 2 shows a typical structure analysis of the obtained oil.31 As is shown in Fig. 2, the obtained shale oil mainly consists of various hydrocarbons, indicating that the presence of air doesn't cause an obvious oxidation of the obtained oil. The above results suggest that O2-assisted retorting is different from physical heating or complete combustion.30 Instead, it's a chemical heat-enhanced process that not only conserves energy but also decomposes OS more thoroughly.30
 Fig. 2  GC-MS analysis of the shale oil collected from air-assisted retorting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2015 NPG. 
Guo et al.4,23 and Sun et al.31 showed that substantial fixed carbon or residual carbon (RC) is produced and left in the solid semicoke byproduct in a traditional anaerobic retorting process, and the calorific value of RC is enough for heating OS to 550 °C under anaerobic conditions; but RC can be utilized in O2-assisted retorting by an in situ exothermic reaction with O2 during retorting, which serves as a heat source. This partly explains why O2-assisted retorting itself provides heat to increase the retorting temperature but without markedly losing oil yield. Interestingly, to some extent it's similar to the ISC process for heavy oil recovery, wherein the solid coke-like residues deposited on the reservoir rock serve as a heat source rather than the crude oil itself so that as high as 95% displacement efficiency is achieved.34,35,42 In practical OS industrial production, utilizing RC or semicoke is significant, as the plentiful semicoke byproduct has relatively high char contents and should be considered for use as a fuel instead of being abandoned. For example, Shell Oil Company is exploring an in situ retorting technology by using a great deal of electricity to heat OS, wherein the semicoke is left within the ground.56 In addition, the utilization of semicoke in O2-assisted retorting can be considered as a way to in situ generate heat during retorting, which probably also prevents heat loss caused by heat transfer.
Finally, it must be mentioned that O2-assisted retorting is a very complicated process. For example, as is shown in Fig. 3, Sun et al.31 identified multiple zones in a horizontal fixed bed reactor: the spent shale zone, the retorting zone, and the preheating zone. In the spent shale zone, the generated heat is applied to the subsequent OS pyrolysis in the retorting zone. In the retorting zone, the organics or kerogen are pyrolysed into hydrocarbons, producing RC. In the preheating zone, the OS is preheated by the residual heat from the exhaust gases. However, the reactions in the bed are complex, as each zone gradually undergoes a transition along the fixed bed, and self-pyrolysis propagation is the result of a coupling between OS pyrolysis, oxidation and the transfer of heat and gas.
 Fig. 3  Main phenomena occurring during the propagation of the self-pyrolysis front in a horizontal fixed bed reactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2015 NPG. 
In future work, more attention should be paid to the reaction mechanism of the O2-assisted OS retorting processes that are currently less studied. A well-understood reaction mechanism will help to choose suitable operating parameters for practical oil-shale retorting processes.
4 Cracking of hydrocarbons
In the petrochemical industry, it is desirable to have clean and energy-saving processes for converting hydrocarbons to useful chemicals, such as light olefins.57 An alternative route for light olefin production is catalytic dehydrogenation, but this presents several drawbacks due to thermodynamic constraints and coking on catalysts.28 By now, light olefins are still mainly produced by high-temperature destructive methods like pyrolysis (thermal cracking) or the steam cracking of hydrocarbons (ethane to naphtha) at 800–900 °C, however, the strongly endothermic nature makes the process energy-intensive and high-cost.19–21,58 Moreover, due to the external combustion of a great deal of fuel to obtain a high reaction temperature, enormous amounts of COx and NOx are emitted.19 Coke deposition in the reactor is another significant drawback, as it causes many serious problems (e.g., it hampers heat transfer from the reactor walls so that more energy is required).18,19
In this respect, catalytic and non-catalytic oxidative cracking of hydrocarbons are considered as the most promising method, because the presence of O2 can remove coke and make the reaction thermodynamically favorable but with surprising selectivity.19,20,28,29 In addition, partial oxidation transforms the cracking from being endothermic into exothermic, so that the process can be run in an autothermal way, which minimizes energy consumption and capital cost.17,18
The gas-phase (homogeneous) oxidative cracking of light alkanes (C2–C4) mainly focuses on the breaking of C–H bonds, however, the cracking of C–C bonds becomes more remarkable when heavier hydrocarbons are used.19,58 Therefore, to make a discrimination, oxidative cracking can be termed as gas-phase oxidative dehydrogenation of light alkanes (ODe) and as gas-phase oxidative cracking of higher hydrocarbons (OCr).19
The work of Burch et al. on ODe of ethane and propane showed that the homogeneous ODe reactions were competitive with the heterogeneous catalytic reactions over the best catalysts available at that time.58 Lemonidou and Stambouli found that non-catalytic (gas-phase) ODe of n-butane has a much higher selectivity to lower alkenes than either pyrolysis or catalytic ODe of n-butane under comparable conditions.19,58
Although light (C2–C4) alkanes are preferable feedstocks due to low production costs, heavy feedstocks are also desired due to their abundance. However, the use of them is a challenge, because the naphthenic and aromatic compositions in them are very hard to convert in traditional pyrolysis.58 Compared to pyrolysis, the advantage of OCr becomes more distinct in the case of these inferior feedstocks, as the presence of O2 improves the thermodynamics and kinetics and makes the ring rupture rather easy.19 For example, when cyclohexane is used as the feedstock, OCr can give excellent conversion (∼86.8%) and alkenes yield (43.7%) at relatively low temperature (750 °C), while pyrolysis is negligible at such a low temperature.16,59 Moreover, CO prevails in the produced COx and the CO2 yield is always below 1%, which means that ∼90% of CO2 emission by fuel burning in pyrolysis would be saved.19
Compared to pyrolysis, OCr also significantly enhances the ring rupture of decalin or tetralin (as the model compounds of heavier naphthene and arene, respectively) and the decoking ability due to the presence of O2. OCr can produce both lower alkenes and light fuels with good selectivities at 100% conversion.58 The ring rupture or opening of these multi-ring compounds is much more relevant to the upgrading of fuel oils. This indicates that the OCr of heavy hydrocarbons, rich in multi-ring naphthene feeds, is a promising method for producing lower alkenes and high octane rating gasoline.
The reaction temperature of oxidative cracking can be decreased to 600 °C if a catalyst is present, such as Li/MgO, but obtaining an efficient catalyst still remains a challenge.20,21,57,60 Catalytic oxidative cracking is suggested to proceed via a heterogeneously initiated homogeneous reaction, wherein O2 can play two critical roles: (1) regenerate the active sites by preventing coking and removing the adsorbed hydrogen atoms (formed during activating alkane) from the catalyst surface; (2) accelerate the radical chemistry in the gas phase.21
Moreover, when exothermic oxidative cracking and endothermic thermal cracking are performed simultaneously by feeding steam and O2 together, the process becomes highly energy efficient and non-hazardous.26 Little or no external energy is required. High olefin selectivity can be obtained without coking on the catalyst. This coupling strategy is also suitable for the oxidative coupling of methane to C2 hydrocarbons (this will be described in Section 6.2).
Parenthetically, this section indicates that, as compared to anaerobic pyrolysis, hydrocarbon cracking in the presence of molecular oxygen (i.e., oxidative cracking) can greatly increase the decoking ability and easily cut higher hydrocarbons into lighter ones. The former favorable effect has obtained some attention in ISC for heavy oil recovery (Section 2) and O2-assisted oil shale retorting (Section 3). However, the latter favorable effect needs to be given more attention in those processes.
5 Production of synthesis gas (syngas)
Syngas is a commercialized product mainly consisting of CO and H2, which can be obtained by gasifying coal, biomass and even organic wastes, or by reforming natural gas or other hydrocarbons from petroleum.61,62 As is shown in Fig. 4,63 syngas can be directly used as a fuel for advanced power generation (e.g., combustion turbines and fuel cells),64 or used to synthesize H2 and clean liquid synthetic fuels, such as methanol, dimethyl ether (DME), higher alcohols, Fischer–Tropsch-diesel and gasoline.14,65–67 Liquid synthetic fuels can be used to replace crude oil. Syngas can also be used to produce synthetic natural gas (SNG).67 SNG production from coal has regained attention in recent years for reducing pollutant emissions by direct coal-burning, etc.68 It should be noted that the H2/CO ratio of syngas is better to match the downstream synthesis, such as 2/1 in methanol synthesis (2H2 + CO → CH3OH).14
 Fig. 4  Various fuel products manufactured by syngas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
The use of molecular oxygen in the production of syngas is quite known. In Sections 5.1–5.3, we will describe syngas production involving the use of molecular oxygen via coal gasification, biomass gasification and hydrocarbon reforming. We will find that, although these various TCP processes bear respective features, they also obviously share some commonalities.
5.1 Coal gasification
Coal, a low-cost fuel, can last for more than 150 years64,69 and will remain as an indispensable energy source globally for a long time.70–72 With the increasing demand for clean energy and concerns regarding environmental pollution, developing efficient coal conversion technologies with a lower environmental impact is highly attractive and will be a steady challenge.69–71,73 Among various technologies for coal utilization, gasification is a key route for efficiently converting coal into energy carriers.7,9,74 Particularly, coal gasification is relatively environmentally benign, as compared to traditional pulverized coal firing technology.7,9 Therefore, it attracts extensive attention nowadays.7,9
Coal gasification is usually performed at 900–1300 °C.75 Steam is a frequently used gasifying agent. The reactions of carbon with steam and with CO2 formed during the gasification process are the main gasification reactions for producing syngas (column 1 in Table 2). However, all of these reactions are endothermic, such as the highly endothermic Boudouard reaction (ΔH = 173.3 kJ mol−1). Introducing air as another gasifying agent appears to be a good method for solving this problem. The resulting exothermic reactions (column 2 in Table 2) can be used to keep the endothermic gasification reactions ongoing at the required high temperature. Compared to the char–O2 reaction with a high reaction rate, the char–steam reaction is the rate-limiting step;76 this fact is also suitable for biomass gasification as discussed in the next section.77 To prevent contamination of the product gas by N2, air can be replaced by using pure O2 as a gasifying agent.
Table 2 Main reactions in the process of coal gasification in the presence of O2 (ref. 75)




Gasification by CO2 or steam
Oxidation by O2




Water–gas reaction:
(1) C + H2O → CO + H2
C + O2 → CO2


(2) C + 2H2O → CO2 + 2H2
2C + O2 → 2CO


Boudouard reaction:
C + CO2 → 2CO
2CO + O2 → 2CO2


2H2 + O2 → 2H2O




The autothermal air–steam gasification strategy also initiates a promising technology—underground coal gasification (UCG), a technology that gasifies coal in situ within the coal seam to prepare syngas.78–83 UCG is analogous to the technology of coal gasification on the surface, however, UCG is more complex and difficult.84 Due to increasing energy demand, the depletion of oil and gas sources, and global climate change, UCG technology has received a growing interest and is currently being developed worldwide.79,84
As is shown in Fig. 5, UCG involves a minimum of two wells (injection well and production well) connected by a channel through which gases can flow.70,78,79,84 The gasifying agent is supplied to the underground via the injection well, and the product gases are extracted on the surface via the production well.78 In a conventional UCG process, O2 (or air) and steam (or water) are injected simultaneously into a coal layer. O2 exothermically reacts with coal, providing the heat for the reactions of coal with steam and CO2 to produce syngas via endothermic Boudouard and shift reactions. Very recently Eftekhari et al.85 showed that alternating the injection of air and steam (i.e., first mainly injecting O2 and subsequently injecting water or steam) can reduce the carbon footprint and increase the hydrogen/carbon ratio.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the underground coal gasification (UCG) process (Source: UCG association). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Compared to the conventional subsurface mining-surface gasification process, UCG without human labor underground has lower capital/operating costs.79–81 Particularly, UCG could be an effective technology for using deeply deposited (or low-grade) coal beds or residual beds, which are unmineable or unsuitable for traditional methods technologically or economically.70,78–82 If UCG is successfully developed, the world's coal reserves are likely to be revised upwards by a substantial amount.78,81 In addition, due to societal concerns about global warming, coal (only one atom of hydrogen per atom of carbon in average) is considered less attractive than oil (two atoms of hydrogen per atom of carbon in average) and CH4.72,85 UCG has the potential to be linked with carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), as it doesn't require transporting CO2 (Fig. 5).78–81 Therefore, it's possible to reduce the carbon footprint of coal if coal is utilized via UCG.81,85
5.2 Biomass gasification
Biomass comprises a broad range of biomaterials, such as wood, crops, algae, energy grasses, industrial and municipal organic wastes, etc.63,64,66,86 Among all of the renewable resources, biomass is the only renewable source of carbon which can be converted to solid, liquid and gaseous product.5,87 Compared to fossil fuels, biomass has several significant advantages including abundance, cleanness, renewability, availability worldwide, and carbon-neutrality.2,86,88
Biomass can be converted into more desired forms of fuel by TCP, hydrolysis or bio-chemical/biological processes.89 Generally, the TCP process (a few seconds or minutes) is more efficient than bio-chemical/biological processes (several days, weeks or even longer) in terms of reaction time.2 As is shown in Fig. 6, pyrolysis and gasification are the main TCP technologies for biomass conversion. Pyrolysis is a devolatilization process in the absence of air.10,66 Compared to pyrolysis, gasification is more economical and efficient.5,10,33,64,88,90 Biomass gasification is generally performed around 800–900 °C.77 The advantage is that all of the biomass including lignin can be degraded and converted into syngas.66,86 Gasification is also a successful option for industrial and municipal organic waste management by converting these low- or negative-value wastes into marketable fuels.33 Although coal gasification is a well-established technology, its adaptation to biomass gasification still poses some challenges in the designing of the process, mainly due to the chemical and physical differences between biomass and coal (or coke).91 Its key differences from coal (or coke) include a lower heating value, more volatile matter, higher reactivity of biomass and its resulting char, lower ash, higher alkali content, greater oxygen and hydrogen content, less sulfur and nitrogen, etc.64,92
 Fig. 6  Thermochemical-catalytic approaches for the transformation of biomass to fuels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
Like coal, biomass can be alternatively gasified by steam.66 Biomass gasification with steam can produce a fuel gas with a heating value of 10–14 MJ N−1 m−3 plus a relatively high H2 content.5,93–95 Nevertheless, it is a complex endothermic process64 and requires higher operating temperatures.94 Thus, additional equipment and energy are required to maintain the gasification temperature above 800 °C.5,93,96 This makes the process more expensive.94 One easy way is to add some air or O2 into the gasifier to allow the resultant exothermic reactions to drive the endothermic gasification reactions, and thus an autothermal biomass gasification process can be achieved.66,93,94 O2 can also reduce catalyst deactivation by consuming some formed coke.66
By now, biomass gasification has been performed in the presence of various gasifying agents, such as air, steam, O2–steam, air–steam, O2–enriched air and O2–air–steam.5,59,97 As air is obviously economical, it becomes a commonly used gasifying agent.98 Biomass air gasification technology boosts the feasibility of the gasification process and has been developed for industrial application.5 However, it generates a gas product diluted by N2 with a comparably low heating value (4–7 MJ N−1 m−3 LHV),63,86,94 which only seems useful for electricity or heat generation.5,59,93,99,100
Pure O2 gasification gives a fuel LHV of 10–12 MJ N−1 m−3, which is popular for fossil fuel-based synthetic fuel production.63 But producing pure O2 increases the energy consumption.94 In steam–O2 (or steam–air) gasification, the necessary heat is provided through partial oxidation reactions. The produced gas has a medium heating value with a high H2 content; the problem of N2 dilution is also avoided.5,59,93,94 Hernández et al.101 compared the use of steam, air, or an air/steam mixture as gasifying agents. The results showed that the air/steam mixture gives a trade-off between gas quality, gas production and cold gas efficiency. Therefore, air (or O2) is often used together with steam as the gasifying agent.94,97
As is shown in Fig. 7, a typical O2–steam (or air–steam) gasification process for biomass usually involves four stages, but these different stages overlap and there are no clear limits between them.10,27,33,98 In the pyrolysis stage, biomass thermally breaks down and volatile matter is released as gases containing H2O, CO, H2, CO2, CH4, tar and other hydrocarbons.10,33,98 As a result, biomass is reduced to solid charcoal or char.33,98 The oxidation stage involves the reaction of some gases (such as H2) and char with an air gasifying agent, resulting in the formation of CO, CO2 and H2O. The heat released in this stage is utilized for drying, pyrolysis and gasification reactions. In the reduction or gasification stage, the char produced during pyrolysis is converted mainly to syngas. These reactions are mostly endothermic in nature, and thus cause a decrease in reaction temperature. Incidentally, the reactions at the oxidation and reduction stages are very similar to those in the coal gasification process shown in Table 2.5,27,33,92,98 However, biomass char is usually more reactive than fossil char (e.g., coal, lignite or peat) or coke, because it is more porous and contains alkali metals.98 Alkali metals can play a key role in TCP processes due to their catalytic activity.64,92
 Fig. 7  Main stages for biomass gasification via partial oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 
5.3 Reforming of hydrocarbons
Many kinds of hydrocarbons have been used for reforming to produce syngas, including light and higher hydrocarbons, coke oven gas, and oxygenated hydrocarbons (e.g., alcohols, dimethyl ether). With decreasing petroleum reserves, in the 21st century there is a clear trend towards increasing the use of methane as an energy source15,102 due to its huge reserves and continually discovered new sources (e.g., coal-bed methane, natural hydrates, and shale gas).103,104 In addition, as is illustrated in Fig. 8, by now methane is still the main source for producing H2, a very clean fuel.105 Therefore, in this section we will mostly focus on the reforming of methane (also due to the limitation of journal space).
 Fig. 8  Various sources for hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Methane can be reformed by CO2. CO2 reforming (CH4 + CO2 → 2H2 + 2CO) has several potential advantages, including CO2 reuse.104 A major problem with CO2 reforming is rapid catalyst deactivation mainly due to carbon deposition. Steam reforming (SR) of methane is the conventional technology for syngas production on an industrial scale,104 which has the highest efficiency for H2 production.106 However, similar to steam gasification of coal and biomass, SR of methane has a large kinetic barrier107 and requires intensive energy input for keeping a ∼900 °C reaction temperature because the reactions are strongly endothermic, which is the major drawback of this technology.104,108–110 Furthermore, the obtained H2/CO ratio (3/1; CH4 + H2O → 3H2 + CO) is usually too high for many downstream applications, like the Fischer–Tropsch process.104,110
Different from the above two endothermic processes, partial oxidation (PO) of methane to syngas (CH4 + 0.5O2 → 2H2 + CO) by introducing a controlled amount of air or O2 is a mildly exothermic process with a rapid reaction rate and low capital costs.104,108,111–113 The rapid reaction rate allows for the configuration of compact reactors with high space-time yields.108,109 Besides the greatly reduced energy input, the carbon footprint is also reduced in syngas production.108,109 In addition, the syngas H2/CO ratio is theoretically 2/1, suitable for downstream applications.104,111,112 The economic analysis of catalytic PO of methane for methanol production indicates that the required energy is 10–15% less and the capital investment could be reduced by 25–30%.104 Therefore, the PO route receives increasing attention.
PO of methane can be performed by a non-catalytic route and a catalytic route.108,113–116 The non-catalytic process has been commercialized by Texaco and Shell.114 However, in the absence of a catalyst, the reactor temperature must be high enough to complete methane conversion. The catalytic process can lower the reaction temperature. Ni-based catalysts are the most extensively used catalysts due to a lower price than noble metal catalysts.112 However, there is still no large-scale application of this process, because Ni-based catalysts suffer from deactivation. Developing Ni-based catalysts with excellent performance still remains a tremendous challenge.
PO can also be combined with CO2 or SR to get an exact H2/CO ratio.104 An alternative route is to use PO and SR in parallel to generate syngas streams and then mix the streams to obtain the desired composition.15,117 Another preferred and most cost effective process is autothermal reforming (ATR), which combines exothermic PO with endothermic SR in one reactor.15,106 ATR, essentially an oxidative steam reform (fuel + O2 + H2O → CO + H2), is realized by feeding fuel, water and air together, that is, without water it's PO and without O2 it's SR.118 The Oryx plant in Qatar is based on ATR technology at a low steam/carbon ratio. It produces a syngas with a H2/CO ratio equal to 2, suitable for subsequent use in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.15
In recent years, the catalytic ATR process has received much attention for on-board H2 generation for fuel-cell systems.119 First ATR of a hydrocarbon produces a COx/H2 mixture, and then a water–gas shift reaction (CO + H2O → CO2 + H2) is used to convert the produced CO into more H2.118 Endothermic SR needs an external heat source, but exothermic PO needs external cooling; while ATR, a stand-alone H2-converting process, avoids complicated heat exchange and can achieve a zero net energy input or output. Thus, ATR offers simple design, low investment, low operating temperature and high energy efficiency. ATR can reform various hydrocarbons of high energy density, such as gaseous methane and propane, liquid alcohols, gasoline and diesel. In addition, ATR displayed a higher coke-resistance ability than SR as shown by a proprietary rhodium catalyst.118,120
Finally, from Sections 2, 4 and 5 we can see that using O2 together with steam (or water) often gives extra advantages owing to various reasons, such as modifying product distribution in methane reforming for syngas production, and recovering thermal energy from hot rocks in an ISC process for heavy oil recovery. This should be taken into account when we explore the utilization of new or unconventional carbonaceous fuels. In this respect, for example, the promising O2-assisted oil-shale retorting route described in Section 3 deserves more investigation in future work on “its performance in the presence of water or steam”.
6 Direct conversion of methane
Following the oil crisis in the 1970s, tremendous efforts have been made worldwide in search of commercially viable chemical conversion routes for methane to more valuable and easily transportable fuels or higher hydrocarbons.18,121 Although the conversion of methane into methanol and other liquid fuels via the syngas route is feasible, there is the limitation of the syngas H2/CO ratio and the challenge of feasibility in the use of energy (60% or more of the capital cost in a Fischer–Tropsch route is used to produce syngas).122 Thus, a direct route for methane conversion into liquid fuels or higher hydrocarbons is much desired, as it's more energy and cost effective. It is hoped that the direct conversion of methane can compete with petrochemicals so that natural gas can replace oil.
Given that the methane C–H bond is the strongest among all of the hydrocarbon bonds,123 utilizing molecular oxygen to activate methane is a promising choice for realizing the direct conversion of methane. As is shown in Fig. 9, the main direct oxidative conversion routes of methane are partial oxidation to methanol (route 2) and oxidative coupling to C2 hydrocarbons (route 3). The challenges for commercializing these two direct routes and the indirect route (i.e., via syngas) shown in Fig. 9 are quite similar, such as suitable reactor design, problems of high temperature operation, etc.124
 Fig. 9  Three processes of particular interest for the oxidative conversion of methane. 
6.1 Partial oxidation of methane to methanol
As shown above, building LNG plants or pipelines is not economically viable for a large part of the worlds natural gas reserves.13 Converting methane into liquid transportable methanol fuel seems to be a good solution. It is also an alternative method for substituting the rapidly depleting oil resources,125,126 as methanol is considered a much more efficient fuel than petroleum-based ones.127 It has been suggested that, if methanol can be manufactured via more economical routes, methanol is superior to other forms of alternative energy (e.g., H2, nuclear fission, solar, and wind) because the current commercial infrastructure favors the storage and utilization of a liquid fuel.107,128
Among different methods for converting methane to methanol, direct oxidation to methanol is a particularly promising method.129 Being an exothermic reaction, it would be superior to the conventional industrial process via syngas in terms of energy efficiency.130,131 Technoeconomic evaluation has demonstrated that, given over 70% methanol selectivity at 8–15% methane conversion, the direct process is able to compete with the indirect one.130
The gas phase (homogeneous) partial oxidation of methane is operated by a free radical mechanism. In the absence of a catalyst, it starts with the activation of CH4 molecules by molecular oxygen via the following reaction: CH4 + O2 → CH3˙ + HO2˙.131 Subsequently, the produced methyl radicals (CH3˙) can form other oxygenated radicals in the presence of molecular oxygen, such as CH3OO˙. Generally, high pressure favors the formation of methanol; a high CH4/O2 ratio gives higher methanol selectivity, but lower methane conversion.130,132 Because the reaction can be essentially homogeneous in a glass-lined reactor and stainless steel metal surface can diminish the methanol selectivity, quartz or pyrex glass-lined reactors are recommended for obtaining high methanol selectivity. Zhang et al.130 showed that, by preventing feed gas from coming into contact with the metal, a comparatively high methanol yield (ca. 8%; 60% methanol selectivity at 13% methane conversion) can be obtained at 430–470 °C and 5.0 MPa.
Owing to the exothermic nature of the reaction, a “hot spot” will appear at a certain location in the reactor. It's showed that, for the gas phase partial oxidation of methane to methanol in tubular reactors, when the temperature is high enough to initiate the reaction, the reactor can be divided into three reaction zones: pre-reaction zone, fierce reaction zone, and post-reaction zone.132 The reaction is completed mostly in the fierce reaction zone. Then, if a catalyst is expected to improve the methanol selectivity and yield, it should be located in the pre-reaction zone to initiate a partial oxidation reaction at a lower temperature, or in the fierce reaction zone to control the homogeneous free radical reactions.
Many catalysts, such as Fe-, Cu-, and Co-containing ZSM-5 zeolites,130 have been investigated.133–136 However, until now, few catalytic reactions can show a better yield than the reported gas phase process.130 This seemingly simple reaction has remained an unsolved challenge in catalytic chemistry for many decades,129 resulting from the fact that high temperatures (usually >873 K) are required to activate the very inert CH4.134,137 While at high temperatures, methanol readily undergoes further oxidation down to CO2 and H2O. As is seen from Fig. 10, the addition of each subsequent oxygen atom is accompanied by a progressive decrease in free energy and thus favors full oxidation.129
 Fig. 10  Free energy changes with the gradual oxidation of methane by O2.129 
6.2 Oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) to C2 hydrocarbons (ethane and ethylene)
In the pioneering work of Keller and Bhasin in the early 1980s, methane was activated with the assistance of O2, which initiated a worldwide research wave to explore high-temperature (>1073 K) oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) to C2 hydrocarbons.138,139 OCM is an ideal method for producing C2 hydrocarbons. It typically proceeds between 630 and 950 °C.16,102 Higher C2 yield can be realized by either increasing CH4 conversion, C2 selectivity, or both.121 In reality, however, it's difficult to get both high conversion and selectivity since higher conversion usually leads to lower C2 selectivity. Therefore, feasible catalytic processes have been investigated.17,102,140
Many catalysts, such as Li-doped MgO, perovskites and metals oxides, have been screened for this reaction.13,16–18,140–143 The catalyst is activated through dissociative oxygen chemisorption and subsequently produces gas-phase methyl radicals (CH3˙) by hydrogen abstraction from CH4 (Fig. 11). By the way, as shown in the above Section 6.1, the direct oxidation of methane to methanol is also initiated by the production of methyl radicals which can proceed in the absence of a catalyst.131 The produced methyl radicals can then couple in the gas phase to form ethane, which in turn can be dehydrogenated into ethylene. However, they can also be oxidized to undesired COx in the gas phase as well as on the catalyst surface.102,143–145 As a result, reaching an economically feasible limit for commercializing the OCM process (single pass C2 yield is higher than 25–30%) is still a challenge.18,121,146
 Fig. 11  Global reaction steps involved in the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) in the presence of a catalyst (note: it can be seen that the heterogeneous catalytic reactions are accompanied by the homogeneous (gas-phase) reactions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Besides the attempts through catalysis, high yields can also be obtained by improving reaction engineering, such as by optimizing the CH4/O2 feed ratio.18 Increasing the CH4/O2 feed ratio will increase C2 selectivity but lower CH4 conversion, and vice versa.121 When CH4 and O2 are co-fed, the local CH4/O2 ratio cannot be changed independently. However, if the local CH4/O2 ratio is controlled by feeding O2 through discrete feed points in the reactor, higher C2 selectivity and a reasonably high CH4 conversion can be achieved simultaneously. By such way, Lu et al.121 showed that the C2 yields can reach up to 27.5%, very close to the recommended threshold value of ∼30% for commercializing the OCM process. In addition, the hot spots, formed by highly exothermic reactions, can be mitigated.
Another example of optimizing the OCM reaction is the redox cyclic mode of OCM developed by Sung et al.147 and Greish et al.148 In this route, molecular oxygen and CH4 are injected into the reactor as separate pulses (Fig. 12). First, an air or molecular oxygen pulse is introduced into the reactor and the lattice of the catalyst catches oxygen. Then, an inert carrier gas (e.g., helium or N2) is used to remove molecular oxygen as well as the oxygen species adsorbed on the catalyst surface. In the third step, CH4 is injected and OCM proceeds. After that, a new circle can be started again. Thus, the OCM reaction proceeds stepwise due to the participation of lattice oxygen in the oxidative conversion of CH4 rather than molecular oxygen. The amount of air needed for the entire re-oxidation (recovery) of the catalyst depends on the amount of oxygen lost by the catalyst during the oxidative conversion of CH4. The yield of C2 hydrocarbons can reach ∼30% at a C2 selectivity close to 60%.
 Fig. 12  Scheme of the redox cyclic mode of oxidative coupling of methane (OCM).147,148 
7 Modified O2-assisted conversion processes
7.1 Co-conversion processes
Co-conversion modes include: (1) co-feeding more than one kind of feedstock; (2) coupling the exothermic process and endothermic process into an overall autothermal process; and so on. The second mode can be operated in a single reactor to get both chemical and thermal coupling, or in different reactors between which the reaction heat is exchanged, i.e., only thermal coupling.141 Some examples have been described in the above sections, such as oxidative steam cracking of hydrocarbons (Section 4) and oxidative steam reforming of methane (Section 5.3), wherein only a single kind of feedstock is used to produce a single product in a single reactor. This section gives examples of co-feeding different kinds of feedstocks, or examples of processes producing two kinds of products. Due to the limitation of the journal space, this section only introduces two examples in detail; other examples available are not described here, such as endothermic methane steam reforming/exothermic coal gasification in a single reactor,57,149–151 biomass/coal co-gasification via partial oxidation,64,74,101,152,153 and the oxidation of CH4 to C2H4 and syngas simultaneously.154–156
Example 1: heavy oil pyrolysis/coal gasification into light olefins and syngas simultaneously. Heavy oil is an attractive feedstock, however, its steam pyrolysis into lower olefins is highly energy intensive.149,157 The coke (or coal) gasification via partial oxidation is strongly exothermic. As is shown in Fig. 13, if the released heat is used to support endothermic heavy oil steam pyrolysis, energy coupling will be realized. This constitutes the basic principle of coke (or coal) and heavy oil co-conversion into light olefins and syngas simultaneously.149,157–159 The co-conversion is performed in a modified blast furnace.149,157 Encouraging results show that the contents of light olefins, alkanes (CH4, C2H6) and syngas are about 24%, 28% and 37%, respectively. The coke from heavy oil pyrolysis can be consumed by O2. Thus, the coking problem, which frequently occurs in a traditional pyrolysis furnace, is solved in this process.
 Fig. 13  Principle of a coke (or coal) and heavy oil co-conversion process for preparing light olefins and syngas simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 
This co-conversion process provides an ideal thermodynamic condition for pyrolysis and gasification, and it can be operated at quasiequilibrium conditions without catalysts. The advantages include high thermal efficiency, strong compatibility of feedstocks, low production of CO2, and an absence of the coking problem.

Example 2: thermal coupling of exothermic OCM and endothermic SRM. The overall CH4/O2 ratio in the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) process usually cannot be smaller than 2 to obtain a good C2 selectivity.141 Under such low O2 feeding, CH4 conversion is rather limited. Thus, the OCM process will involve the separation of selective products from the product mixture, and a large recycle of unconverted CH4. As a result, it's insufficient for OCM to develop an attractive industrial process.Tiemersma et al. proposed a thermal coupling process.141 As is depicted in Fig. 14, CH4 is first fed to the OCM reactor for producing higher hydrocarbons, and then the desired C2H4/C2H6 products are separated. Sequentially, the remaining product gas containing unconverted CH4 is fed to the steam reforming of methane (SRM) reactor. Thus, not only can CH4 recycle be avoided for the OCM process, but also the excess OCM reaction heat is consumed by SRM. By such a coupling, syngas and higher hydrocarbons are obtained simultaneously. A fixed-bed reverse flow membrane reactor, used for exothermic OCM, is immersed in a fluidized-bed reactor where endothermic SRM is performed. Such a reactor configuration greatly facilitates the heat exchange between the OCM reaction and SRM reaction, enabling autothermal operation. When the CH4/O2 molar ratio is 2–2.5, cyclic steady state C2 yield reaches up to 30% at ∼100% CH4 conversion.
 Fig. 14  Thermal coupling of exothermic OCM and endothermic SRM (OCM: oxidative coupling of methane; SRM: steam reforming of methane). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 

7.2 Chemical-looping (CL) technologies
In the final paragraph of Section 6.2, we described a specially modified process of oxidative coupling of methane (OCM), namely redox cyclic OCM (Fig. 12). The chemical looping (CL) technology described in this section shares a common feature with the process of redox cyclic OCM, that is, molecular oxygen indirectly reacts with fuel. CL is a novel and relatively clean gasification, reforming or combustion technique that utilizes a metal oxide as an oxygen carrier (OC) to transfer oxygen from air to fuel.107,108,160–164 Fig. 15 shows the schematic diagram of a typical CL process.161,165 The process is configured with two interconnected fluidized bed reactors: an air reactor and a fuel reactor; the solid OC is circulated between the two reactors.162,163,166 First, the reduced OC is oxidized in the air reactor with air by a highly exothermic reaction.163 Subsequently, the resulting hot oxidized OC is transported to the fuel reactor where it comes into contact with fuel and delivers oxygen to the fuel; after the oxidized OC is reduced by fuel to the initial state, it returns to the air reactor to start a new cycle again.162,163,167
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of a typical chemical-looping (CL) process.161,162,164 
The amount of oxygen in the fuel reactor can be adjusted by adjusting the OC circulation rate.163 When the OC/fuel is high, the fuel is completely oxidized to CO2 and water vapor, and at this time, the CL process becomes CL combustion whose target product is heat.160 When a low and suitable amount of OC is circulated, the fuel is partially oxidized, and at this time, the CL process becomes CL reforming or gasification whose target product is syngas instead of heat.160–162,165 In these CL processes, an OC particle is heated up in the air reactor by the exothermic oxidation of OC and then releases heat in the fuel reactor.162 Thus, OC also serves as a heat carrier to provide the heat required by the reforming or gasification reactions in the fuel reactor, which also balances the heat in the system so that extra energy input is not needed.161,162 Moreover, in a fuel reactor OC can play the role of a catalyst to allow lower reaction temperatures, or to decompose and reform undesirable tar.
CL technology avoids direct contact between fuel and air, and thus the produced syngas is not diluted with N2,160,165 in contrast to traditional conversion processes (e.g., biomass gasification by partial oxidation) which require nearly pure O2 as a gasifying agent for preparing such high quality syngas.162 The air separation unit for O2 production is highly energy intensive. While in CL combustion, CO2 and H2O are inherently separated from the other noncondensable components in the flue gas, such as N2 and unused O2.160 The formed CO2 can be readily recovered by condensing the water vapor, and the obtained water-free CO2 stream can be sequestrated or used for other applications.160,163,166 This represents the main advantage of CL technology over other CO2 capture methods (e.g., oxy-combustion),163 as a high energy penalty is produced in conventional processes for realizing such gas separation.168,169 The technology has recently been successfully demonstrated for more than 1000 h at scales of up to 140 kW.166
In addition, CL technology is also potentially applicable to H2 production for small mobile devices. CO2 capture seems implausible for small mobile emission sources (e.g., cars), although it has great potential for large point sources (e.g., power plants). This is noteworthy, as the transportation sector is responsible for about one-quarter of global CO2 emissions.166,170 An alternative solution is to use H2 as a fuel. H2 production by CL reforming is a promising route for this kind of application. Besides the advantage that the product is undiluted with N2, the air separation unit for CO2 capture is avoided here.165,166 In addition, higher H2 yield is obtained when a water–gas shift reactor is used downstream of the CL system, but the CO2 capture can be finished in the global process and no external energy source is needed. CH4 is usually used as the fuel.166 Very recently, sulphur-free kerosene, a liquid fuel, was used in a 300 Wth unit.165 CL reforming of bioethanol provides a promising environmentally friendly process for H2 production, as is shown in Fig. 16.171 Cormos evaluated the H2 production from bioethanol at an industrial scale (300 MWth) with different carbon capture options, and the CL design showed promising energy efficiency and total carbon capture.172
 Fig. 16  H2 production with bioethanol via a CL reforming process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
It must be pointed out that, after an intensive study on the CL technique as a promising route for syngas or H2 production, many derived forms of the CL process have been developed in order to use CL technology more efficiently.163,166,173–175 For example, a CL process employing three reactors was developed for H2 production.173,175 As is shown in Fig. 17, this CL process produces separate streams of H2 and CO2, in contrast to conventional processes which produce a H2/COx mixture. The three reactors include fuel, steam and air reactors. Usually, the fuel reactor is endothermic, while the steam reactor and air reactor are exothermic. Thus, the thermal balance of the whole system is sustained. In the fuel reactor, Fe2O3 is reduced to wustite (FeO) by oxidizing the fuel to H2O and CO2 which is ready for geological storage after H2O condensation. The reduced form of iron oxide (FeO) is then supplied to the steam reactor where it is oxidized to magnetite (Fe3O4) by taking oxygen from the steam which results in the production of H2.173
 Fig. 17  Three-reactor CL process used for H2 production (FR: fuel reactor; SR: steam reactor; AR: air reactor). Reproduced with permission from ref. 173, Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
The main drawback of CL technology is a lack of maturity.163 Developing suitable OCs is the primary challenge.160–162 A suitable OC should have sufficiently high conversion rates in redox reactions, resistance to attrition and agglomeration, low cost and should be environmentally benign.160,162 Many metal oxides have been extensively investigated, such as Ni, Fe, Co, Cu, Mn or their blends, particularly Ni/NiO.160–162,166 However, these OCs have their respective disadvantages.160–162
8 Conclusions
In summary, although the encounter of fuel with O2 at high temperatures often leads one to believe that this burns fuel and is dangerous, in practical industrial production it's actually being gradually found that the TCP of fuels in the presence of air/O2 is a very effective fuel processing route, even sometimes performed at high temperatures above 1000 °C. The involvement of air/O2 in TCP can give many distinctive advantages for all of the main carbonaceous fuels.
First, some conventional TCP processes are strongly endothermic, leading to intensive energy input. Heat loss also occurs during heat transfer. Introducing a controlled amount of air/O2 into TCP can solve these problems. It enables the process to not require an external heat supply (i.e., autothermal operation) as well as heating equipment or high-temperature heat carriers, which minimizes energy/capital consumption and significantly simplifies the process. An autothermal strategy also allows for the use of deeply deposited or low-grade resources unsuitable for mining, such as underground coal gasification with a low cost and carbon footprint. It should be noted that aerobic TCP does not simply just burn fuel, but retains most of the energy of the original fuel. For example, the heavy oil recovery by injecting air into a reservoir mostly consumes undesirable heavier components accounting for only 5–10% of the oil.
Besides these advantages, the high reactivity of O2 can promote the reaction rate or avoid thermodynamic limitation. For example, it's difficult to convert heavy naphthene in traditional pyrolysis. But when O2 is present, ring rupture becomes rather easy; both lower alkenes and gasoline fuels can be obtained at relatively low temperatures. O2 can also activate the very inert CH4 molecules for realizing CH4 direct conversion. The presence of O2 in TCP also exhibits some other extraordinary advantages, such as greatly increasing the decoking ability, modifying the product distribution, improving the fuel quality, reducing CO2 production or favoring CO2 capture, etc.
Moreover, clearly aerobic TCP processes share some commonalities (the obvious examples: exothermic; often perform better when O2 is used together with water/steam; etc.). However, currently the attentions of some researchers are often restricted to their respective related fuel or process so that the experience or findings of some aerobic TCP processes are not shared with other ones. We hope that this work can initiate a collaborative development between aerobic TCP processes of different fuels, such as heavy oil recovery, oil shale retorting and hydrocarbon cracking. In short, O2-assisted TCP is different from simple physical heating or full combustion. The correct use of O2 in TCP not only improves thermal efficiency, simplifies process operation, and alleviates the environmental impact in the use of various fuels, but also helps to exploit stranded or unconventional energy resources.
Finally, it must be mentioned that the TCP of CFs involves an extremely wide range of complicated knowledge, so it's not easy to elucidate the present topic in depth. There is still a need for more experts from different fields of CFs together to continue researching it more deeply.
Abbreviations

ATRAutothermal reforming
CCSCarbon capture and sequestration
CFsCarbonaceous fuels
CLChemical looping technology
DMEDimethyl ether
EOREnhanced oil recovery
ISCIn situ combustion
LHVLower heating value
LNGLiquefied natural gas
OCOxygen carrier
OCMOxidative coupling of methane
OCrGas-phase oxidative cracking of higher hydrocarbons
ODeGas-phase oxidative dehydrogenation of light alkanes
OSOil shale
POPartial oxidation
RCResidual carbon
SNGSynthetic natural gas
SRSteam reforming
SRMSteam reforming of methane
TCPThermochemical processing
UCGUnderground coal gasification

AcknowledgementsFinancial support from the Program for Liaoning Innovative Research Team in University (LNIRT; Project LT2013010), the Education Administration of Liaoning Province (Project L2014161), the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering (Grant No. CRE-2015-C-109) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21403143) is gratefully acknowledged.
ReferencesT. Dijkmans, M. R. Djokic, K. M. Van Geem and G. B. Marin, Fuel, 2015, 140, 398–406 CrossRef CAS .H. Huang and X. Yuan, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2015, 49, 59–80 CrossRef .G. Voitic, S. Nestl, K. Malli, J. Wagner, B. Bitschnau, F. Mautner and V. Hacker, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 53533–53541 RSC .H. Guo, Q. Cheng, D. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Ding, Y. Pei, H. Zhu and Y. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30(7), 5355–5362 CrossRef CAS .Z. A. B. Z. Alauddin, P. Lahijani, M. Mohammadi and A. R. Mohamed, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 2852–2862 CrossRef CAS .A. Gomez and N. Mahinpey, Fuel, 2015, 148, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .C. Frau, F. Ferrara, A. Orsini and A. Pettinau, Fuel, 2015, 152, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Noori and K. Karimi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65683–65690 RSC .G. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Shao, K. Li and H. Zuo, Int. J. Min. Sci. Technol., 2015, 25, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .V. Kirubakaran, V. Sivaramakrishnan, R. Nalini, T. Sekar, M. Premalatha and P. Subramanian, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 179–186 CrossRef .B. S. Sazzad, M. A. Fazal, A. S. M. A. Haseeb and H. H. Masjuki, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60244–60263 RSC .F. Nagel, Electricity from wood through the combination of gasification and solid oxide fuel cells, Ph.D. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich,  2008 .T. Serres, C. Aquino, C. Mirodatos and Y. Schuurman, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 509–518 CrossRef CAS .W. Cho, H. Yu, W. Ahn and S. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 28, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .K. Aasberg-Petersen, T. S. Christensen, C. S. Nielsen and I. Dybkjær, Fuel Process. Technol., 2003, 83, 253–261 CrossRef CAS .A. Vatani, E. Jabbari, M. Askarieh and M. A. Torangi, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2014, 20, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Yunarti, M. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, J. Choi, D. J. Suh, J. Lee, I. W. Kim and J. Ha, Catal. Commun., 2014, 50, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .K. Langfeld, B. Frank, V. E. Strempel, C. Berger-Karin, G. Weinberg, E. V. Kondratenko and R. Schomacker, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 417–418, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, W. Li, H. Xu and Y. Chen, Fuel Process. Technol., 2004, 86, 151–167 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Kaliya and S. B. Kogan, Catal. Today, 2005, 106, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .C. Boyadjian, L. Lefferts and K. Seshan, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 372, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .H. Guo, S. Peng, J. Lin, J. Chang, S. Lei, T. Fan and Y. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 2445–2451 CrossRef CAS .H. Guo, Y. Pei, K. Wang, Q. Cheng, Y. Ding, Z. Jin, Y. Yang, Q. Wu and Y. Liu, Fuel, 2015, 160, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .H. Guo, J. Lin, Y. Yang and Y. Liu, Fuel, 2014, 118, 186–193 CrossRef CAS .H. Guo, Y. Yang, K. Wang, Y. Pei, Q. Wu and Y. Liu, Fuel, 2015, 143, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Choudhary and S. A. R. Mulla, Appl. Energy, 2001, 68, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .J. Chang, Forestry biomass resources and energy utilization technologies, Science Press, Beijing,  2010 Search PubMed .C. Trionfetti, S. Crapanzano, I. V. Babich, K. Seshan and L. Lefferts, Catal. Today, 2009, 145, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .C. Trionfetti, I. V. Babich, K. Seshan and L. Lefferts, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 310, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, F. Bai, B. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Guo, W. Guo, Q. Wang, X. Lü, F. Yang and Y. Yang, Fuel, 2014, 115, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, F. Bai, X. Lü, Q. Li, Y. Liu, M. Guo, W. Guo and B. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8290–8297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Bai, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, B. Liu, M. Guo, X. Lü, W. Guo, Q. Li, C. Hou and Q. Wang, Oil Shale, 2014, 31, 377–393 CrossRef CAS .T. K. Patra and P. N. Sheth, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 50, 583–593 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, K. Jessen and T. T. Tsotsis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2011, 66, 2723–2733 CrossRef CAS .N. Hosseinpour, Y. Mortazavi, A. Bahramian, L. Khodatars and A. A. Khodadadi, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 477, 159–171 CrossRef CAS .M. Greaves, T. J. Young, S. El-Usta, R. R. Rathbone, S. R. Ren and T. X. Xia, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2000, 78, 721–730 CrossRef CAS .Y. H. Shokrlu, Y. Maham, X. Tan, T. Babadagli and M. Gray, Fuel, 2013, 105, 397–407 CrossRef .X. Zhang, Q. Liu and H. Che, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 3416–3426 CrossRef CAS .R. G. dos Santos, J. A. V. Vargas and O. V. Trevisan, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 7140–7148 CrossRef CAS .M. Cinar, L. M. Castanier and A. R. Kovscek, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4438–4451 CrossRef CAS .T. X. Xia, M. Greaves, A. T. Turta and C. Ayasse, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2003, 81(3), 295–304 CrossRef CAS .D. Aleksandrov and B. Hascakir, Fuel Process. Technol., 2015, 130, 224–234 CrossRef CAS .B. Chen, L. M. Castanier and A. R. Kovscek, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 868–876 CrossRef CAS .M. S. K. Youtsos and E. Mastorakos, Fuel, 2013, 108, 780–792 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Mailybaev, J. Bruining and D. Marchesin, Combust. Flame, 2011, 158, 1097–1108 CrossRef CAS .S. Lovett, F. Monmont and N. Nikiforakis, Combust. Flame, 2015, 162, 960–977 CrossRef CAS .C. Xi, W. Guan, Y. Jiang, J. Liang, Y. Zhou, J. We, X. Wang, H. Cheng, J. Huang and B. Wang, Adv. Pet. Explor. Dev., 2013, 40(6), 766–773 CrossRef .M. Rezaei, M. Schaffie and M. Ranjbar, Fuel, 2013, 113, 516–521 CrossRef CAS .R. Zhao, Y. Chen, R. Huan, L. M. Castanier and A. R. Kovscek, J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 2015, 127, 82–92 CrossRef CAS .I. A. Nesterov, A. A. Shapiro and E. H. Stenby, J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 2013, 106, 46–61 CrossRef CAS .A. Vyas, J. Xue and J. L. Goldfarb, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .X. Lan, W. Luo, Y. Song, J. Zhou and Q. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 7800–7806 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Na, C. H. Im, S. H. Chung and K. B. Lee, Fuel, 2012, 95, 131–135 CrossRef CAS .W. Wang, Y. Ma, S. Li, J. Shi and J. Teng, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 830–834 CAS .M. V. Kök, G. Guner and S. Bagci, Oil Shale, 2008, 25(2), 217–225 CrossRef .X. Han, I. Kulaots, X. Jiang and E. M. Suuberg, Fuel, 2014, 126, 143–161 CrossRef CAS .N. Kijima, K. Matano, M. Saito, T. Oikawa, T. Konishi, H. Yasuda, T. Sato and Y. Yoshimura, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 206, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhu, X. Liu, Q. Ge, W. Li and H. Xu, Fuel Process. Technol., 2006, 87, 649–657 CrossRef CAS .M. Campoy, A. Gómez-Barea, F. Vidal and P. Ollero, Fuel Process. Technol., 2009, 90, 677–685 CrossRef CAS .C. Boyadjian, B. van der Veer, I. V. Babich, L. Lefferts and K. Seshan, Catal. Today, 2010, 157, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo, D. Duan, X. Song and Z. Wang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2006, 87, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .N. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Ma, S. Fan and T. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34204–34211 RSC .W. Zhang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 866–876 CrossRef CAS .L. E. Taba, M. F. Irfan, W. A. M. W. Daud and M. H. Chakrabarti, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5584–5596 CrossRef .G. Liu, T. Niu, A. Cao, Y. Geng, Y. Zhang and Y. Liu, Fuel, 2016, 176, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Bulushev and J. R. H. Ross, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .J. Kopyscinski, T. J. Schildhauer and S. M. A. Biollaz, Fuel, 2010, 89, 1763–1783 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xia, Y. Fan, T. Wang, X. Guo and C. Chen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 131, 12–21 CrossRef CAS .J. Rizkiana, G. Guan, W. B. Widayatno, X. Hao, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang and A. Abudula, Appl. Energy, 2015, 154, 944–950 CrossRef CAS .A. Strugała-Wilczek and K. Stańczyk, Fuel, 2015, 158, 733–743 CrossRef .J. Tanner, M. Bläsing, M. Müller and S. Bhattacharya, Fuel, 2015, 158, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhu, Z. Zhang, J. Fan and P. Jiang, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2016, 84, 302–312 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, J. Xiao, M. Ding, E. G. Eddings, X. Wei, X. Fan and Z. Zong, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .Q. Xu and S. Pang, AIChE J., 2015, 61, 1639–1647 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhu, Effects of CO2 on structure and gasification reactivity of char, Master thesis, Taiyuan University of Technology,  2015 .X. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Bai and S. Zhang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2015, 115, 233–241 CrossRef CAS .A. Nzihou, B. Stanmore and P. Sharrock, Energy, 2013, 58, 305–317 CrossRef CAS .D. Yang, N. Koukouzas, M. Green and Y. Sheng, J. Energy Inst., 2016, 89(4), 469–484 CrossRef .A. W. Bhutto, A. A. Bazmi and G. Zahedi, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2013, 39, 189–214 CrossRef CAS .A. Verma and A. Kumar, Appl. Energy, 2015, 147, 556–568 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Roddy and P. L. Younger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 400–407 CAS .A. N. Khadse, Fuel, 2015, 142, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .M. Sajjad and M. G. Rasul, Procedia Eng., 2015, 105, 537–548 CrossRef CAS .E. Krause, A. Krzemień and A. Smoliński, J. Loss Prev. Process Ind., 2015, 33, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Eftekhari, K. H. Wolf, J. Rogut and H. Bruining, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2015, 150–151, 154–165 CrossRef CAS .S. Heidenreich and P. U. Foscolo, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2015, 46, 72–95 CrossRef .A. Demirbas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 2106–2116 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, M. Tamura, Y. Nakagawa and K. Tomishige, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 178, 53–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Arregi, G. Lopez, M. Amutio, I. Barbarias, J. Bilbao and M. Olazar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25975–25985 RSC .S. Anis and Z. A. Zainal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2355–2377 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Palma, Appl. Energy, 2013, 111, 129–141 CrossRef .L. Emami-Taba, M. F. Irfan, W. M. A. W. Daud and M. H. Chakrabarti, Biomass Bioenergy, 2013, 57, 249–263 CrossRef CAS .X. Meng, W. de Jong, N. Fu and A. H. M. Verkooijen, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 2910–2924 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Holmgren, T. Berntsson, E. Andersson and T. Rydberg, Energy, 2012, 45, 817–828 CrossRef CAS .L. Shen, Y. Gao and J. Xiao, Biomass Bioenergy, 2008, 32, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .K. Umeki, K. Yamamoto, T. Namioka and K. Yoshikawa, Appl. Energy, 2009, 87, 791–798 CrossRef .A. M. Sharma, A. Kumar and R. L. Huhnke, Fuel, 2014, 116, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Ruiz, M. C. Juárez, M. P. Morales, P. Muñoz and M. A. Mendívil, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 18, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .G. Schuster, G. Lffler, K. Weigl and H. Hofbauer, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 77, 71–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Gil, M. Aznar, M. Caballero, E. Frances and J. Corellas, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 1109–1118 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Hernández, G. Aranda, J. Barba and J. M. Mendoza, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 99, 43–55 CrossRef .E. Esche, D. Müller, S. Song and G. Wozny, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 91, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang, Z. Li, W. Huang, J. Yang and H. Xue, Fuel, 2015, 156, 243–253 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhu, D. Zhang and K. D. King, Fuel, 2001, 80, 899–905 CrossRef CAS .P. Parthasarathy and K. S. Narayanan, Renewable Energy, 2014, 66, 570–579 CrossRef CAS .M. K. A. Hamid, N. Ibrahim, K. A. Ibrahim and A. Ahmad, Simulation of hydrogen production for mobile fuel cell applications via autothermal reforming of methane, Proceedings of the 1st international conference on natural resources engineering & technology, Putrajaya, Malaysia,  24–25th July 2006, pp. 540–548 Search PubMed .K. M. Carsch and T. R. Cundari, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2012, 980, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .M. Tang, L. Xu and M. Fan, Appl. Energy, 2015, 151, 143–156 CrossRef CAS .L. Silvester, A. Antzara, G. Boskovic, E. Heracleous, A. A. Lemonidou and D. B. Bukur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 7490–7501 CrossRef CAS .L. Neal, A. Shafiefarhood and F. Li, Appl. Energy, 2015, 157, 391–398 CrossRef CAS .M. Jia, W. Li, H. Xu, S. Hou and Q. Ge, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 233, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .C. Ding, W. Liu, J. Wang, P. Liu, K. Zhang, X. Gao, G. Ding, S. Liu, Y. Han and X. Ma, Fuel, 2015, 162, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .S. Kado, K. Imagawa, A. Kiryu, F. Yagi, T. Minami, H. Kawai, K. Kawazuishi, K. Tomishige, A. Nakamura and Y. Suehiro, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Peña, J. P. Gómez and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 144, 7–57 CrossRef .X. Zhou, C. Chen and F. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 1620–1629 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Morsy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 1096–1104 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Wilhelm, D. R. Simbeck, A. D. Karp and R. L. Dickenson, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 71, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Cheekatamarla and A. M. Lane, J. Power Sources, 2005, 152, 256–263 CrossRef CAS .S. H. D. Lee, D. V. Applegate, S. Ahmed, S. G. Calderone and T. L. Harvey, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .S. Springmann, G. Friedrich, M. Himmen, M. Sommer and G. Eigenberger, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 235, 101–111 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, A. G. Dixon, W. R. Moser and Y. H. Ma, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2000, 55, 4901–4912 CrossRef CAS .S. Majhi and K. K. Pant, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 2364–2369 CrossRef CAS .C. L. McMullin, A. W. Pierpont and T. R. Cundari, Polyhedron, 2013, 52, 945–956 CrossRef CAS .J. Zaman, Fuel Process. Technol., 1999, 58, 61–81 CrossRef CAS .L. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Huang and L. Lei, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2010, 19, 628–637 CrossRef CAS .C. Liu, C. Mou, S. S. F. Yu and S. I. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1374–1376 Search PubMed .K. Villa, S. Murcia-López, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Olah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2636–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. V. Starokon, M. V. Parfenov, S. S. Arzumanov, L. V. Pirutko, A. G. Stepanov and G. I. Panov, J. Catal., 2013, 300, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, D. He, J. Li, B. Xu, Y. Liang and Q. Zhu, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 224, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .V. Arutyunov, Catal. Today, 2013, 215, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, D. He and Q. Zhu, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2008, 17, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Parfenov, E. V. Starokon, L. V. Pirutko and G. I. Panov, J. Catal., 2014, 318, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hu, M. Anpo and C. Wei, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2013, 264, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Dallos, V. Kafarov and R. M. Filho, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 134, 209–217 CrossRef CAS .B. Michalkiewicz, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 277, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .B. Lee, Y. Sakamoto, D. Hirabayashi, K. Suzuki and T. Hibino, J. Catal., 2010, 271, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .H. Arakawa, M. Aresta, J. N. Armor, M. A. Barteau, E. J. Beckman and A. T. Bell, et al., Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 953–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Guo, G. Fang, G. Li, H. Ma, H. Fan and L. Yu, et al., Science, 2014, 344, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Hiyoshi and T. Ikeda, Fuel Process. Technol., 2015, 133, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .T. P. Tiemersma, T. Kolkman, J. A. M. Kuipers and M. van Sint Annaland, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 203, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .V. J. Ferreira, P. Tavares, J. L. Figueiredo and J. L. Faria, Catal. Commun., 2013, 42, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Alexiadis, J. W. Thybaut, P. N. Kechagiopoulos, M. Chaar, A. C. Van Veen, M. Muhler and G. B. Marin, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150–151, 496–505 CrossRef CAS .T. Eppinger, G. Wehinger and M. Kraume, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 1693–1703 CrossRef CAS .R. Ghose, H. T. Hwang and A. Varma, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 472, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .S. Sadjadi, U. Simon, H. R. Godini, O. Görke, R. Schomäker and G. Wozny, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 281, 678–687 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Sung, K. Y. Choo, T. H. Kim, A. Greish, L. Glukhov, E. Finashina and L. Kustov, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 380, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Greish, L. M. Glukhov, E. D. Finashina, L. M. Kustov, J. Sung, K. Choo and T. Kim, Mendeleev Commun., 2010, 20, 28–30 CrossRef CAS .Z. Guo and X. Gong, Coal gasification technology and principle, Science Press, Beijing,  2014 Search PubMed .X. Song and Z. Guo, Fuel, 2005, 84, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo, D. Duan, X. Song and X. Yu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .K. Kumabe, T. Hanaoka, S. Fujimoto, T. Minowa and K. Sakanishi, Fuel, 2007, 86, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .F. Pinto, C. Franco, R. N. André, C. Tavares, M. Dias, I. Gulyurtlu and I. Cabrita, Fuel, 2003, 82, 1967–1976 CrossRef CAS .S. Ren, S. Qin, J. Zhu, X. Peng and C. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 2078–2083 CrossRef CAS .C. Hu, J. Wu, H. Zhang and S. Qin, AIChE J., 2007, 53(11), 2925–2931 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Qin and C. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 7090–7095 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo, N. Duan and Q. Qiao, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 2439–2446 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, H. Wen and Z. Xu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 1416–1428 CrossRef CAS .X. Song and Z. Guo, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 560–569 CrossRef CAS .F. He, X. Li, K. Zhao, Z. Huang, G. Wei and H. Li, Fuel, 2013, 108, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .Q. Guo, X. Hu, Y. Liu, W. Jia, M. Yang, M. Wu, H. Tian and H. Ryu, Powder Technol., 2015, 275, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .H. Ge, L. Shen, F. Feng and S. Jiang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2015, 85, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Medrano, H. P. Hamers, G. Williams, M. van Sint Annaland and F. Gallucci, Appl. Energy, 2015, 158, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhao, L. Guo and X. Zou, Appl. Energy, 2015, 157, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .F. García-Labiano, E. García-Díez, L. F. de Diego, A. Serrano, A. Abad, P. Gayán, J. Adánez and J. A. C. Ruíz, Fuel Process. Technol., 2015, 137, 24–30 CrossRef .L. Nalbandian, A. Evdou and V. Zaspalis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6657–6670 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Alvaro, I. L. Paniagua, C. G. Fernandez, J. R. Martin and R. N. Carlier, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 104, 170–179 CrossRef .S. Khalili, B. Khoshandam and M. Jahanshahi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35692–35704 RSC .W. Wang, S. Ramkumar and L. Fan, Fuel, 2013, 104, 561–574 CrossRef CAS .A. W. Bhutto, K. Qureshi, R. Abro, K. Harijan, Z. Zhao, A. A. Bazmi, T. Abbas and G. Yu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 32140–32170 RSC .E. García-Díez, F. García-Labiano, L. F. de Diego, A. Abad, P. Gayán, J. Adánez and J. A. C. Ruíz, Appl. Energy, 2016, 169, 491–498 CrossRef .C. C. Cormos, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 5597–5606 CrossRef CAS .M. N. Khan and T. Shamim, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 1186–1194 CrossRef CAS .P. Chiesa, G. Lozza, A. Malandrino, M. Romano and V. Piccolo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 2233–2245 CrossRef CAS .R. Siriwardane, H. Tian and J. Fisher, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1698–1708 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Distribution of reservoir zones in a normal ISC process; (b) weight loss and temperature distribution of different zones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

Oxidative cracking (or oxidative pyrolysis) zone: heavy oil + O2 → light oil + coke + H2O + COx + heat	300–400 °C
Cracking (or pyrolysis) zone: heavy oil → light oil + coke + adsorption of heat	400–470 °C
Coke combustion: coke + O2 → H2O + COx + heat	470–550 °C

 	Fig. 2  GC-MS analysis of the shale oil collected from air-assisted retorting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2015 NPG.	 

 	Fig. 3  Main phenomena occurring during the propagation of the self-pyrolysis front in a horizontal fixed bed reactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2015 NPG.	 

 	Fig. 4  Various fuel products manufactured by syngas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

Water–gas reaction:	(1) C + H2O → CO + H2	C + O2 → CO2
(2) C + 2H2O → CO2 + 2H2	2C + O2 → 2CO
Boudouard reaction:	C + CO2 → 2CO	2CO + O2 → 2CO2
2H2 + O2 → 2H2O

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the underground coal gasification (UCG) process (Source: UCG association). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Thermochemical-catalytic approaches for the transformation of biomass to fuels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Main stages for biomass gasification via partial oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Various sources for hydrogen production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105, Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Three processes of particular interest for the oxidative conversion of methane.	 

 	Fig. 10  Free energy changes with the gradual oxidation of methane by O2.129	 

 	Fig. 11  Global reaction steps involved in the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) in the presence of a catalyst (note: it can be seen that the heterogeneous catalytic reactions are accompanied by the homogeneous (gas-phase) reactions). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143, Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Scheme of the redox cyclic mode of oxidative coupling of methane (OCM).147,148	 

 	Fig. 13  Principle of a coke (or coal) and heavy oil co-conversion process for preparing light olefins and syngas simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Thermal coupling of exothermic OCM and endothermic SRM (OCM: oxidative coupling of methane; SRM: steam reforming of methane). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of a typical chemical-looping (CL) process.161,162,164	 

 	Fig. 16  H2 production with bioethanol via a CL reforming process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Three-reactor CL process used for H2 production (FR: fuel reactor; SR: steam reactor; AR: air reactor). Reproduced with permission from ref. 173, Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 
ATR	Autothermal reforming
CCS	Carbon capture and sequestration
CFs	Carbonaceous fuels
CL	Chemical looping technology
DME	Dimethyl ether
EOR	Enhanced oil recovery
ISC	In situ combustion
LHV	Lower heating value
LNG	Liquefied natural gas
OC	Oxygen carrier
OCM	Oxidative coupling of methane
OCr	Gas-phase oxidative cracking of higher hydrocarbons
ODe	Gas-phase oxidative dehydrogenation of light alkanes
OS	Oil shale
PO	Partial oxidation
RC	Residual carbon
SNG	Synthetic natural gas
SR	Steam reforming
SRM	Steam reforming of methane
TCP	Thermochemical processing
UCG	Underground coal gasification

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
