Interface engineering of inorganic solid-state electrolytes for high-performance lithium metal batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01435D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01435D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3780-3822Interface engineering of inorganic solid-state electrolytes for high-performance lithium metal batteries

        
          
            Xianguang 
            Miao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huiyang 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Sun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chengxiang 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiwei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoqiang 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Longwei 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Liquid-Solid Structural Evolution and Processing of Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, P. R. China. E-mail: yinlw@sdu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 531 88396970;   Tel: +86 531 88396970
Received 
      7th May 2020
    , Accepted 16th September 2020First published on 16th September 2020AbstractThe high fluidity and flammability characteristics of the conventional organic liquid electrolyte make it vulnerable for the currently employed commercial lithium batteries to suffer from potential safety risks and premature cell failure. Replacing liquid electrolytes with inorganic solid-state versions coupled with the employment of Li metal anodes is believed to be ideal for next generation energy storage systems with both high security and high energy density. However, even though several promising solid-state electrolytes possess extremely high ionic conductivity, the issues related to a poor electrode/electrolyte interface are a critical constraint. Herein, interface engineering based on current fundamental understanding, challenges, and opportunities of the interface chemistry between inorganic solid-state electrolytes and electrode materials are presented. Firstly, we focus on the interfacial configuration characteristics and mechanisms, pointing out that the unsatisfactory interfacial compatibility and stability, and the dendrite problem are the main drawbacks in achieving high-performance cells, where the interface contact/wettability, constant interfacial reactions, inadequate interfacial Li+ stripping/plating process, and Li dendrite formation/propagation mechanism will be individually reviewed. Then, the recent research status and trends in ameliorating the electrode/electrolyte interface are systematically examined, including the efforts for component optimization and the architectural design of bulk anodes, electrolytes, cathodes, and the interface engineering construction between them. Moreover, several progressive applications and future research directions of interface chemistry will be proposed, aiming to present a comprehensive and enlightening overview for interface engineering that are relevant for the integration of applicable solid-state Li metal batteries.
Xianguang Miao
Xianguang Miao received his BS degree from the Department of Material Physics, Shandong University (SDU), China in 2016. He is currently a PhD Candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at SDU under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. His current research mainly focuses on the material and structure design of solid-state lithium/sodium batteries.
Zhiwei Zhang
Zhiwei Zhang received her BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Later, she worked at the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, SDU. Her current research mainly focuses on the design and development of nanostructured gel and applications of Li-ion, Na-ion, Li–S, and Li–air batteries.
Zhaoqiang Li
Zhaoqiang Li received his BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University, China, in 2011 and 2016, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. He is currently a postdoctoral candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhongwei Chen at the University of Waterloo, Canada. His current research mainly focuses on metal–organic framework-derived nanostructures and applications in energy storage and conversion devices, including alkaline secondary batteries and electrocatalysts.
Longwei Yin
Longwei Yin is a distinguished professor and Director of the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 from SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 at Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li- or Na-based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electro-catalysis, and solar cells.

Broader context
The ever-increasing development of high-performance Li batteries has exhibited tremendous revolution in portable electronic devices, electric vehicles, and even intelligent energy storage fields. However, the commercially employed organic liquid electrolyte generally shows undesired fluidity and flammability, which may result in premature cell failure and potential safety risks. Therefore, the implementation of inorganic solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) in high capacity Li metal batteries is believed to be ideal for obtaining batteries with both high security and high energy density. However, their practical applications are currently inhibited by several technical challenges, such as dendrite propagation and poor cycle/rate properties, among which imperfect solid–solid contact interface is considered as a crucial factor in determining the overall battery performance. Herein, focusing on the current fundamental understanding, problems, and opportunities of interface chemistry between inorganic SSEs and electrode materials, the interfacial configuration characteristic and mechanism will be demonstrated. The recent improvement strategies for ameliorating the electrode/electrolyte interface will be summarized to reflect the research status, trends, and challenges. Several progressive applications and future directions will also be proposed, which aim to provide a comprehensive and enlightening review on the scientific mechanisms and engineering strategies for the interface chemistry of applicable solid-state Li metal batteries.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing energy density of Li batteries has highly hastened the widespread popularization of portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, and has further revolutionized the way people live.1–3 However, due to the fluidity and flammability characteristics of organic liquid state electrolytes, conventional Li batteries suffer from potential risks such as electrolyte volatilization, premature cell failure, and even serious explosion problems.4–6 At present, several recurring spontaneous combustion incidents of civilian phones and cars have put forward an urgent demand for the implementation of high-security durable Li batteries.7 Moreover, as the Li metal possesses an extremely high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and the lowest negative electrochemical potential (−3.04 V vs. SHE),8–10 the successful implementation of Li metal anodes in safer batteries is also expected. Consequently, inorganic solid-state electrolytes (SSEs), which have satisfactory Li+ conductivity as well as superior thermal stability and uninflammability, are deemed to be promising for actualizing the safe employment of Li metal anodes in assembling next generation energy storage devices with both high security and superior electrochemical performance.11–13
Since its birth in 1970s, several types of inorganic SSEs have been developed, including garnets, lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON), Li/Na superionic conductor (LISICON/NASICON)-type oxides, perovskites, antiperovskites, and sulfides.14–16 Some new types of electrolytes that have been recently proposed also show distinctive Li+ conductive performance, such as borohydrides and chlorides.17–19 In general, the conductive mechanism is considered to involve Li+ migration between the ground-state stable sites or the intermediate metastable sites of the host anion framework, which can be greatly optimized by adjusting the available Li+ content and their bonding environment, as defined by the arrangement of immobile anions.20,21 At present, some promising SSEs have shown superior ionic conductivity that are comparable with that of organic liquid electrolytes (of the order of 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature).22–24 However, the output electrochemical performance of the assembled solid-state batteries (SSBs) is still far from satisfaction, where the poor contact interface between the electrode and electrolyte has been identified as a key scientific issue that remains to be solved.
Evidently, the solid–solid contact makes it difficult to realize the efficient interfacial Li+ migration. As for the aforementioned Li metal anodes and the promising high capacity cathodes,25,26 although the replacement of the inorganic solid electrolyte is believed to be competent to match these ideal electrodes and meanwhile improve the safety of the integrated batteries to some extent, the interfacial compatibility and resulting large interfacial resistance turn out to be challenging.27 In addition, constant interfacial reactions can also accelerate irreversible capacity decay of the assembled batteries, which consequently put forward several new challenges to be solved, such as contact loss, interfacial deterioration, and Li dendrite growth during cycling.28,29 As for the electrolyte itself, besides the ionic conductivity, the chemical stability, electrochemical window, mechanical strength, and assembled strategy of the electrolyte can also affect the interfacial conditions in integrated batteries.30
In this review, we focus on the current fundamental understanding, problems, and opportunities in the interface chemistry between inorganic SSEs and electrode materials, aiming to provide a comprehensive and enlightening overview for interface engineering that are relevant for the integration of applicable solid-state Li metal batteries. Firstly, based on the interfacial configuration characteristic and mechanism (Fig. 1a), two main problems that hinder effective interfacial Li+ migration, namely, interfacial compatibility and stability, will be examined systematically (Fig. 1b and c). As the root and the representative reflection of several electrochemical deterioration issues, the formation model and influence mechanism of Li dendrites will be expressed particularly (Fig. 1d). Moreover, we emphatically summarize the recent improvement strategies for ameliorating the electrode/electrolyte interface, including the efforts regarding the composition and architecture of bulk cathodes, electrolytes, anodes, and the interface engineering between them in order to reflect the present research status, trends, and challenges. Lastly, several progressive applications and future directions of the interface chemistry among solid-state batteries will be proposed, aiming to achieve the ultimate goal for obtaining storage systems with both high security and high energy density.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the evolution from liquid state battery using organic liquid electrolytes to solid-state battery using SSEs and the corresponding interfacial problems between electrodes and SSEs including interfacial, (b) compatibility,261 (c) stability,64 and (d) Li dendrites.74 
2. Interfacial configuration, mechanism, and challenges in solid-state batteries
The interfacial issue is the vital task underlying the high safety and superior performance of solid-state lithium metal batteries. In this section, we will first express the interfacial configuration and characteristics of SSBs. Then, the interfacial ionic transport mechanism and challenges of unsatisfactory compatibility and stability will be discussed in detail. Some representative issues related to the anode/electrolyte interface and the cathode/electrolyte interface will be specifically expounded.
2.1 Interfacial configuration and compatibility
As for conventional batteries based on liquid state electrolytes, Li+ can easily transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte materials due to the fine infiltrated surface of the electrodes in liquid electrolytes, which ensures relatively low interfacial resistance of battery systems.31–33 However, when inorganic SSEs are used to assemble the SSBs, the interfacial conditions are extended to the poor rigid solid–solid contact, which makes the well-proportioned interfacial Li+ redox processes difficult to realize, thus demonstrating significantly increased interfacial resistance and further deteriorating the electrochemical performance during cycling.34–37 This section features a detailed discussion on the interfacial configuration and compatibility between electrodes and electrolytes without external adding voltage, which is regarded as an initial static process.

2.1.1 Interface between anodes and SSEs. 
The use of non-flammable inorganic SSEs makes the Li metal anode safer and realistic for practical application.38,39 Generally speaking, the interfacial compatibility of the anode side is determined by the wettability between the Li anodes and the electrolytes, including the viscosity of Li metal.40,41 Moreover, the Li metal possesses much higher elastic rigidity than that of some alkali metals such as metallic Na and K, making it much more difficult for the physical interfacial contact to satisfy the practical efficient interfacial ionic transport.42,43 In addition, the external stress and operating temperature are also crucial for the actual interfacial resistance.44–46
In particular, due to the rigid state of the inorganic electrolyte, the affinity of Li on the SSEs is considered to play a key role among interfacial concerns. As shown in Fig. 2, there exist two main kinds of characterization methods for experimentally evaluating the wettability of Li and the SSEs. On the one hand, some intuitional characterization techniques, for example, optical adhesion tests (Fig. 2a–d), contact angle measurements (Fig. 2e–h), and optical rolling experiments (Fig. 2i–l) of SSEs with molten Li-based anodes as well as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the Li/SSEs interface (Fig. 2m), can provide convincing evidence for interfacial wettability.41,47–51 On the other hand, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements (Fig. 2n) and some other electrochemical characterizations of Li symmetric cells are also widely operated to elucidate the interfacial contact of the anodes/SSEs indirectly. To date, a majority of the studies have shown that the interfacial resistance of the pure Li/SSEs interface is a bit large, including that of Li/Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO),52 Li/Li1+xAlxTi2−xP3O12 (LATP),53 and the interface of some other mainstream SSEs. In addition, computational analysis based on density functional theory (DFT) structural relaxations of the Li/SSEs interface is also performed to evaluate their wetting property, where the calculated work of adhesion (Wad) and the contact angle of the interfacial explicit atomistic model are qualitatively consistent with the experimental measurements, indicating the important role of theoretical calculations in interfacial compatibility verification and prediction in SSB research.54
 Fig. 2  Characterization methods for evaluating the wettability of Li-based anodes to SSEs. Digital photos of the garnet SSE before and after dipping in molten (a and b) pure Li and (c and d) the Li–C composite.41 Contact angle measurements of (e) the pristine Li droplet and (f–h) the Li–C3N4 composite droplets with different content of g-C3N4 on garnet SSE.47 Optical rolling experiments of (i and j) molten Li and (k and l) the Li–BN composite on a garnet SSE slope with a 45° tilt.48 Molten Li rolled down from the slope much faster than Li–BN, indicating the less adhesiveness of Li. (m) The schematic and the SEM images of the garnet SSE/Li interface with and without coating. (n) Comparison of the EIS profiles of the Li symmetric cells.49 


2.1.2 Interface between the cathodes and the SSEs. 
In pursuit of high overall energy density, some cathodes with high theoretical capacity are considered as ideal options for matching with Li metal anodes. Similar to conventional liquid electrolyte-based cells, LiFePO455 and ternary cathode materials56 are widely used in assembling SSBs. In addition, high-performance SSEs have also been applied to Li–sulfur and Li–air batteries for ultrahigh reversible capacity and abundant reserves.57–60 However, oxide cathodes are more rigid than Li metal anodes and they generally show up as large particles with irregular morphology. The employment of S or O2 also needs specially designed hosts or catalyst materials, which are typically carbon-based or noble metal materials with poor flexibility, resulting in extremely poor solid–solid contact and large interfacial resistance. In consequence, the simple layer-by-layer assembly strategy of cathodes and SSEs is essential for realizing efficient interfacial Li+ transmission.
Therefore, the applicable cathode layer in the SSBs usually consists of active materials, SSE, carbon, and binder materials, which makes the cathode/SSE interface more complicated than the anode/SSE interface. Moreover, contact loss at the interfaces caused by stress release and volume variation of the electrode materials represents other pervasive problems.61 Many factors have been shown to affect the interfacial compatibility of the interface between the cathode and the electrolytes. The reduction of the active particle size can increase the contact area with the SSEs and permit larger generated stress during cycling, thus promoting continuous Li+ conduction at the interface.62 Higher external stress and elevated temperature during battery assembling can also improve the interfacial contact between the cathode and the SSE. However, these methods may accelerate the interfacial reactions between the cathode and the SSE,63 thus generating an interphase with low Li+ conductivity and large interfacial resistance, which will be discussed in Section 2.2.1.2.

2.2 Interfacial stability
The interfacial stability at the electrode/electrolyte interface remains decisive for achieving high energy and power density during long-term cycling, as the detailed interfacial reactions provide critical information about the interphase composition and the various derived effects of solid-state batteries. Specifically, the reaction between the electrodes and the SSEs depends on the energy alignment of the electrolytes’ lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or the conduction band (CB) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or the valence band (VB) with the chemical potential (μa for anodes and μc for cathodes) of the electrode materials.64 It tends to be thermodynamically stable if μa > LUMO or μc < HOMO; otherwise, an interphase forms at the interface similar to the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film in batteries with liquid electrolytes. Several characterization techniques, including in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and DFT calculations, have been employed to characterize the interfacial stability and to confirm the interphase products.65 In this section, the interfacial stability based on constant interfacial reactions and inadequate interfacial Li+ stripping/plating processes will be discussed. In addition, since Li dendrite propagation is of vital importance for the potential electrochemical deterioration and the safety issues of the Li metal solid-state cells, the formation model and influencing mechanism of Li dendrites will be particularly discussed.

2.2.1 Constant interfacial reactions. 
2.2.1.1 The interface between anodes and SSEs. 
The low chemical potential of Li metal makes it difficult for the anodes/SSEs interface to maintain superior capacity during long-term cycling.66,67 In this section, the constant chemical and electrochemical interfacial reactions between SSEs and Li will be discussed and the serious problem of Li dendrite penetration will be shown in detail later. The interfacial decomposition of sulfide SSEs is typically caused by the reduction of some oxidizing cations, such as P5+, Ge4+, and Sn4+.68 For example, Li3PS4 and Li7P3S11 have been shown to decompose into Li3P and Li2S when contacted with the Li metal anode and the additional Li-Ge alloy is found at the Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS)/Li interface.69 These decomposition products are believed to be detrimental as they turn the interface into a mixed ionic-electronic conducting interphase (MCI), which leads to the continuous decomposition of sulfide SSEs. This mechanism was confirmed by Wenzel et al.70 using in situ XPS, where the interphase layer thickness of LGPS/Li was found to be proportional to the reaction time. To further explore the time-dependent evolution of different binding states, they also investigated the decomposition products formed during the lithiation of LGPS, as shown in Fig. 3a. The result indicates that the content of interfacial decomposition products increases with the increase in the Li deposition time, and the generated binary compounds with poor transport properties may result in increasing interfacial impedance and inferior cycling performance (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Profiles for different decomposition products formed during the lithiation of LGPS SSE as a function of Li deposition time. (b) Schematic of the interphase formation at the LGPS/Li interface.70 (c) EIS spectra of LATGP, LAGP, and LATTP SSEs with two Li electrodes.53 Types of (d) thermodynamically stable interfaces, (e) MCI, and (f) metastable ionic conductive but electronic insulating interphases between the Li metal and the SSEs.69 
As for the oxide SSEs, the reduction stability mainly depends on the transition metal cations at the surface of the electrolytes, which determines the energy of the orbital for electron insertion upon reduction. For most widely used LLZO SSEs, the DFT results reveal that they are relatively stable against Li at normal pressure and temperature, and some experimental observations based on X-ray diffraction (XRD) and XPS analyses also show no detectable valence state change of LLZO and Li5La3Ta2O12 (LLTaO) when contacting Li, indicating the relative stability of the LLZO/Li and LLTaO/Li interfaces.71 However, some NASICON and garnet-type oxide SSEs containing Ti4+, P5+, Nb5+, or other oxidizing cations can be easily reduced by Li. Hartmann et al.53 observed a 20 μm interphase layer at the LATGP (Ti-doped LAGP, Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3)/Li interface, which was identified by ex situ XPS characterization to be the Li–Ti/Ge alloys. Moreover, all the resistance of the three synthesized types NASICON SSEs, including LAGP, LATGP, and LATTP (Ti and Ta-doped, without Ge), increased continuously with time when contacting with Li (Fig. 3c). Similarly, Ti3+, Ti2+, and Ti0 species were found at the interface of Li3xLa2/3−xTiO3 (LLTO)/Li as a result of the reduction of Ti4+, according to the in situ XPS results,69 and LixLa(1−x)/3NbO3 was also found to be unstable against Li due to the existence of Nb5+. Therefore, the paradox between the resulting Li+ conduction promotion and the interfacial instability of transition metal element doping has to be seriously considered.
In summary, the interfacial electronic/ionic conducting properties are crucial for the interphase composition and stability between the SSEs and the Li metal anodes. Janek and co-workers69 categorized the interfaces into three types in 2015, including thermodynamically stable interfaces (Fig. 3d), above-mentioned MCI (Fig. 3e), and ionic conductive but electronic insulating interphases (Fig. 3f). However, the influence mechanism of each types of interface on the Li/SSE stability remains unclear to date, among which the most ideal type of changes are considered with constant scientific developments. Initially, thermodynamically stable interfaces such as LLZO/Li are considered to be the most valuable but continuous interfacial contact degradation and increasing polarization promotes dendrite propagation during cycling.72,73 Therefore, the consensus of most researchers is that the electronic insulating and ionic conducting interface can restrain dendrite growth to some extent. Also, MCI has been identified as the most undesirable one due to its constant thickening, which leads to increased impedance, large polarization, and eventually the cell dies. But, recently, additional artificial MCI with specific thickness74,75 have been shown to be effective in decreasing the interfacial impedance and suppressing dendrite propagation simultaneously, resulting in greatly improved critical current density and, therefore, high output power density. The detailed strategies for interface reformation will be discussed later.
2.2.1.2 The interface between cathodes and SSEs. 
Both theoretical calculations and experimental results have been carried out to investigate the chemical and electrochemical stability of the cathode/SSE interface. Firstly, mutual chemical diffusion issue happens widely between both oxide and sulfide SSEs and cathodes. Kim et al.76 found a 100 nm interdiffusion layer on the interface between LiCoO2 and LLZO, and the interfacial reaction can be kinetically accelerated at elevated temperatures. Similarly, in contrast to the interface formed by the room temperature pressing method shown in Fig. 4a and b, there was an obvious interfacial layer between the LiCoO2 cathode and the 80Li2S·20P2S5 SSE after pressing at 210 °C (Fig. 4c). Meanwhile, no obvious interfacial layer could be observed at the Li4Ti5O12/SSE interface after the same treatment of pressing at 210 °C (Fig. 4d).77 These results confirmed the complicated interfacial conditions between the cathodes and the SSEs, where the component and applied environmental circumstance changes are both influence the interfacial mutual chemical diffusions. Worse, some Li-free decomposition products, such as La2Zr2O7 and LaCoO3 at the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/LLZO interface, may block the ionic transport and cause large polarization during subsequent cycling.78Fig. 4e also shows that the interfacial layer at the LiCoO2/Li3PS4 interface contains Co, S, and P elements, with Co diffusing into the SSE side for over 50 nm.79 This result was confirmed by the cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) image and the nanoarea electron diffraction (n-ED) pattern, as shown in Fig. 4f and g, where the n-ED of position 1 was amorphous while that of position 2 indicated the presence of a nanosized polycrystal. Furthermore, according to systematic calculations, a series of interfacial reactions were predicted to occur after contact between the cathodes and the SSEs.80
 Fig. 4  HAADF-STEM images of the interface between the LiCoO2 or Li4Ti5O12 cathode and SSE pressed at (a and b) room temperature and (c and d) 210 °C.77 (e) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and the EDX line profiles of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface. (f) The cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding (g) n-ED patterns of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface.79 (h) Evolution of the four resistances in a Li-In|β-Li3PS4|NCM-811/β-Li3PS4 cell obtained by fitting the impedance spectra in the first and second cycles as a function of the open-circuit voltage.85 (i) Schematic illustrations of the Li+ concentration in the LCO/LPS interface.81 
The space charge layer among the interface boundary can also influence Li+ migration, thereby resulting in high interfacial resistance, especially for sulfide SSE-based batteries. In particular, the high voltage oxide cathodes possess higher chemical potential and stronger attraction of Li+ compared with the sulfide SSEs. As a result, Li+ will migrate from the SSE side to the cathode side when the SSEs and cathodes are contacted together, thus generating a Li+ depletion zone on the SSE side, which will prevent the subsequent Li+ diffusion process between the cathode materials and the SSEs (Fig. 4i).81 Therefore, even if sulfide SSEs are believed to realize more intimate contact with the cathode particles due to their better flexibility than the oxides,82 the interfacial resistance is still too large to satisfy favorable electrochemical performance. The existence of a space charge layer was confirmed by both DFT calculations and electron holography measurements.81,83
The interfacial stability goes from bad to worse when external potential is applied, with some more complicated electrochemical reactions taking place. Sulfide SSEs can be easily oxidized by the corresponding oxide cathodes during cycling due to their relatively low chemical potential. To amplify the redox activity, Chiang et al.84 applied the β-Li3PS4/C composite as the electroactive electrode and confirmed the existence of elemental sulfur as a result of the oxidation of S2− in sulfide SSEs at high voltage. However, although the addition of carbon can provide electronic percolation paths, it may simultaneously accelerate the interfacial oxidation reaction. Moreover, the generated polysulfide by-products can also block Li+ diffusion paths, leading to increased interfacial resistance and irreversible capacity loss. Similar results were confirmed by Koerver et al.85 at the interface of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 and β-Li3PS4. As shown in Fig. 4h, an irreversible and large interfacial resistance was generated at the cathode/SSE interface during the first charge process and the decomposition of sulfide SSEs as well as the volume shrinking of cathode materials were identified as important reasons for capacity fading. More recently, Zhang et al.86 performed in situ EIS and in situ Raman spectroscopy to monitor the detailed interface evolutions in the LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2/Li6PS5Cl/Li cells. The results showed that the severe space charge layer effect played a leading role in the increase in the interfacial impedance at the early stage of cycling and the structural change of PS43− also deteriorated the interface. In the subsequent cycles, the capacity decay was determined by multiple impacts including space charge layer, interfacial reactions, chemo-mechanical failure, and Li dendrite propagation. These results further reflect the multiple and complicated degradation mechanisms on the interface between high voltage cathodes and sulfides SSEs, which put forward a challenging issue for the overall investigation of the interface.
As for oxide electrolytes, some side reactions can be accelerated by external voltage at temperatures far lower than the thermal reaction temperature of the cathodes and SSEs. Park et al.87 indicated the phenomenon of irreversible electrochemical decomposition of the LiCoO2/LLZO interface at about 3.0 V. Similarly, for LiMn1.5Ni0.5O2/LLZO, a new interphase of Li2MnO3, Li0.35Ni0.05NiO2, and other impurities was observed on the surface of the cathodes after electrochemical cycling.88 Moreover, the effect of the space charge layer is also extremely amplified at high voltages. Yamamoto et al.83 found a sharp voltage drop zone of the LiCoO2/NASICON interface during cycling, which was attributed to the formation of a lithium depletion zone, therefore resulting in inferior electrochemical performance.


2.2.2 Inadequate interfacial Li+ stripping/plating process. 
Except for undesirable interfacial reactions, sufficient Li+ stripping/plating behavior on the electrode/electrolyte interface is also crucial for high-performance SSBs. Conventional batteries with liquid electrolytes possess more endurance towards electrochemically generated mechanical stress/strain due to the liquidity of the electrolyte. However, when it is extended to solid-state batteries, even slight changes may greatly affect the Li+ transfer process among the solid–solid contact interfaces.
In case of the anodes/SSEs interface, the generated stress during cycling can be up to 1 GPa for an over-potential of 135 mV,89,90 which makes it challenging for the accommodating ability of the designed interface. Many efforts have been performed to authentically investigate the Li+ stripping/plating process. Bruse et al.91 used three-electrode cells to separately explore the process of Li+ plating and stripping at the Li metal/Li6PS5Cl interface during cycling. According to the cross-section SEM and in situ X-ray computed tomography analysis, they found that the critical stripping current density plays a crucial role in electrochemical cycling and is much smaller than the critical current for plating. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 5a, when Li+ is stripped from the interface faster than it is replenished, voids form on the Li anode at the interface and further accumulate on cycling, which actually increases the local current density and interfacial resistance at the interface. Furthermore, the critical stripping current density varies with the change in the external pressure, which is 0.2 and 1.0 mA cm−2 at 3 and 7 MPa, respectively, indicating that the Li metal creeping rather than diffusion is the primary mechanism of replenishing Li metal at the interface. Based on these results, it can be concluded that a considerable pressure is required when assembling solid-state batteries with high power densities.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li metal/Li6PS5Cl interface cycled at an overall current density above the critical stripping current density.91 (b) In situ TEM set-up. (c–e) TEM images and (f and g) SAED changes during Li plating with increasing time. HRTEM images (h and i) before plating and (j) after plating. (k–m) TEM images of the Li stripping process.92 
Li and Goodenough92 also verified the creeping model of Li plating. With the help of in situ TEM measurements (Fig. 5b), they prepared a mixed ionic–electronic conductor as the Li deposition interlayer to investigate the plating and stripping of metallic lithium held within a large number of parallel hollow tubules. Fig. 5c–g show the TEM images and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) changes during Li plating with increasing time, and the HRTEM image shows that the structure before plating (Fig. 5h–i) turned to the crystalline form after the plating (Fig. 5j), indicating the first formation of the Li crystal. Fig. 5k–m show the TEM images of the Li stripping process, where the Li atom is transported from the current collector side to the SSE side, which is the opposite direction of plating. Li metal was found to grow out of and retract inside the designed tubules as single crystals mainly via diffusional Coble creeping along the conductor/metal phase boundary. The Coble creep mechanism can largely relieve the generated stress and maintain the electronic/ionic contacts, thus allowing reversible plating/stripping of Li across a distance of 10 mm for 100 cycles.
Similarly, using in situ TEM, Kang et al.93 investigated the electrochemistry of the Li/LLZO interface by probing Li deposition through the electrolyte in an anode-free SSB in real time. The result showed that the Li plating process was strongly affected by the surface geometry of LLZO, where non-uniform and filamentary Li growth was triggered particularly at the morphological defects. In addition, lithium-growth behavior was significantly influenced by the modified artificial interlayer, where the layer of Au showed more homogeneous Li deposition compared with the Ag and Si layers, demonstrating the vital significance of constructing an appropriate buffer layer at the anode/electrolyte interface.
In case of the cathode/SSE interface, it causes a huge polarization as a result of the poor contact between the SSEs and the cathode particles, which could accumulate and further deteriorate the whole battery system. To achieve intimate contact, a thermal treatment process is usually adopted to reduce the interfacial resistance. However, the co-sintering process may bring new interphases and make the interfacial behaviors more complicated. During electrochemical cycling, the Li+ insertion/extraction process across high capacity cathode materials can also lead to huge volume changes, which put forward a tremendous challenge in maintaining interfacial contact.94 Moreover, the external stacked pressure and operating temperature can also affect the cathodes/SSEs interface and further, the output power density.95,96 Detailed efforts will be described in the following section.

2.3 Li dendrites
As mentioned above, Li metal holds considerable promise in high-performance stationary energy storage systems owing to its high theoretical capacity and low redox potential, which makes its employment as the anode of Li batteries more suitable than graphite. However, the large-scale implementation of Li anodes is seriously hampered by uncontrolled dendrite propagation over the electrochemical plating/stripping process, which inevitably causes the wastage of Li resources, premature cell failure, and even serious explosion problems in the presence of liquid organic electrolytes. Even after the replacement with uninflammable inorganic SSEs, detrimental Li dendrites can still penetrate along the grain boundaries and voids between the SSE grains. Worse still, Kang's group97 found that thermal runaway can occur at elevated temperatures of only 200 °C as a result of oxygen release by the interface layer when the LAGP solid oxide electrolyte contacts lithium metal, indicating potential safety issues of local heat release in asserted reformative inorganic solid-state batteries.
In terms of the origin of dendritic behavior, most researchers ascribe it to the uneven thermodynamic e−/Li+ transfer as well as heterogeneous nucleation and growth kinetics of the plated/stripped Li, with detailed mechanisms that remain elusive. Many models were established to simulate the growth mechanism of Li dendrites. The space charge model states that the interfacial metachronous ion depletion behavior does generate an ionic concentration gradient (dC/dx), i.e., local space charge layer, at the electrode surface, which drives the growth of Li dendrites.98–101 In particular, for a given anion transference number (ta) and ambipolar diffusion coefficient (D), there exists a limiting current density J*, above which ion depletion near the Li surface will occur at a characteristic Sand time τ, as expressed in the following. (1) (2) (3)where F represents Faraday's constant, and C0, L, and J refer to the bulk ion concentration, the inter-electrode distance, and the applied current density, respectively. However, this model applies only to relatively high current density and cannot expound the growth behavior of the dendrites, which can still be observed at a rather low current density (<1 mA cm−2).
Another model states that the Li stripping/plating process is not uniform across almost all SEI but occurs only at ion-conducting sites as a result of morphological and compositional non-uniformity of the local SEI.102,103 This makes the actual current density considerably larger than the applied J. Similarly, there exists a critical dendrite length (Lc).104,105 Once the dendrite length is smaller than Lc, it cannot grow and propagate across the SSE, while a length larger than the critical length can grow spontaneously. Based on DFT calculations and Griffith's energy-based analysis,106 the growth of Li dendrites across the SSE has to conquer the strain energy at the tip of the quondam boundary and form a new interface simultaneously. The interfacial energy and the strain energy can be calculated as Einterface = 2γLB(4) (5)where γ is the interfacial energy required to form a new interface per unit surface area. The surface area is expressed as L × B, where L is the interface length and B is the part thickness. σ represents the stress at the tip of the boundary, which is mainly affected by the external current. E is the bulk modulus and V represents the volume. Since the strain energy decreases while the interfacial energy increases with the dendrite length increasing, there exists a maximum required energy when the dendrite length reaches Lc. (6)
The non-uniformity of the SEI makes the dendritic behavior appear even at much lower current densities, indicating the necessity of constructing a uniform and conducting SEI layer on dendrite suppression.
In addition, with the help of time-resolved operando neutron depth profiling, Wang et al.107 illustrated the origin of Li dendrite formation by monitoring the dynamic evolution of Li concentration profiles during lithium plating. They found that the isolated Li dendrites only randomly formed at some places in the SSE pellets and were not interconnected, which cannot be explained by the above-mentioned interface-generated dendrite growth mechanism, and they proposed that the high electronic conductivity of some inorganic electrolytes was mostly responsible for the dendrite formation with the help of electrochemical analysis.
3. Engineering strategy on interfacial chemistry
As the ideal pursuit for next generation energy storage systems, the main components of SSBs are considered to be a stable Li metal anode, a satisfactory SSE, and a high-voltage cathode material. Compared with the conventionally used liquid state batteries, the key point is the performance of SSEs and their derivative issues. In view of the above-mentioned issues on interfacial chemistry between inorganic SSEs and anodes/cathodes, some strategies are still required to be performed to meet the needs of superior safety, long lifespan, and high energy density. Obviously, the interfacial chemistry is determined by the bulk performance of the electrodes and the SSEs, as well as their contact interface conditions. Therefore, in this section, the engineering strategy on interfacial chemistry related to the configuration of bulk anodes, SSEs, cathodes, and the interface between SSEs and anodes/cathodes will be summarized, respectively. Moreover, since the external cycling environment is also crucial for the interfacial property and specific performance of the integrated SSBs, it will be introduced in detail as well.
3.1 Engineering strategy for anode configuration
The simple stacking method of Li anodes and SSEs layers generates a series of problems. For example, as for the stability issue, a number of experimental studies have shown that physical contact between the Li metal and thiophosphate sulfide electrolytes caused the formation of Li3P, Li2P, and other side products at the Li/SSEs interface,108–110 which results in increased impedance and fast cell degradation. As for the compatibility concern, heating or even melting the Li metal anode has been performed so as to integrate it with SSEs for a closer interface contact. Recently, Zheng et al.111 described the intrinsic lithiophilic nature of garnet by eliminating the effect of the oxide layer on the surface of lithium metal and demonstrated that the garnet SSEs contact the fresh Li surfaces, which can effectively decrease the Li/garnet interfacial impedance. However, as far as the present situation is concerned, the ideal interface resistance reduction and performance improvement are still limited due to microscopic-gap induced poor wetting properties and more susceptible side reactions between the Li metal anodes and the SSEs. Therefore, modifying the metallic Li anode with engineering strategies that can offer more opportunities and wider selections to incorporate various processing techniques plays an important role in practical batteries.

3.1.1 Component optimization of anodes. 
To solve the above-mentioned stability and compatibility problems, Li alloys have been investigated. Some lithium intermetallic phases containing In,112 Sn,113 or Sb114 possess even larger chemical diffusion coefficients compared with Li self-diffusion. For example, in accordance with the known binary phase diagram, Santhosha et al.115 showed that metallic Li and In are able to form different intermetallic phases or compounds at room temperature. When integrated into the symmetric solid-state cells with β-Li3PS4 as the SSE, the cells with an optimal Li/In ratio can enable stable lithium insertion/extraction for more than 100 cycles, while those electrodes with very high lithium content will lead to a rapid increase in the interface resistance.
Besides, Li-based composites also demonstrate exciting promise for effectively replacing pure Li metal anodes. As shown in Fig. 6a, Duan et al.41 fabricated Li–graphite (Li–C) anode with a dramatic modification of the wettability with garnet SSEs. By casting the Li–C composite onto the garnet-type SSE, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results show that the obtained symmetric cells only deliver an interfacial resistance as low as 11 Ω cm2, while the pure Li/garnet interface shows a large resistance of 381 Ω cm2. Furthermore, the Li–C/SSE/Li–C symmetric cells show superior cycling stability with small voltage hysteresis over hundreds of hours and demonstrate a critical current density up to 1.0 mA cm−2. As a comparison, the Li/SSE/Li symmetric cells fail to work in a few hours with rapidly increased voltage hysteresis. Similarly, Huang et al.47 showed that the addition of g-C3N4 is able to effectively increase the viscosity and decreases the surface tension of molten Li, thus providing a much better physical contact with the garnet SSEs compared with the pristine Li metal. In addition, a favorable Li+ conductive but e−-insulating Li3N layer can be formed in situ at the Li/SSE interface owing to the reaction between g-C3N4 and molten Li, which can lead to superior interface wettability with garnet SSEs and suppress dendritic Li formation effectively (Fig. 6b). As shown in Fig. 6c, Wen et al.48 also fabricated Li and two-dimensional boron nitride nanosheets composite, which can trigger the interfacial transition from point contact to complete adhesion and greatly improves the wettability with garnet-type SSEs. Moreover, full cells paired with the above-mentioned composite anodes and the LiFePO4 cathodes demonstrate comparable electrochemical performance with liquid cells. These results show that Li metal-based composites are promising candidates for addressing the interface challenges between the Li metal and the SSEs.
 Fig. 6  Component optimization of anodes. (a) Schematic diagrams for casting pure Li and Li–C composite on garnet SSE.41 (b) Synthetic process of the Li–C3N4 composite and the interfacial contact comparison of Li/garnet and Li–C3N4/garnet.47 (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of boron nitride nanosheets (BNNS), Li–BNNS composite, and contact comparison between the Li–BNNS/garnet and the pure Li/garnet interface.48 


3.1.2 Architectural design of the anodes. 
Instead of the planar Li foil, specially designed Li anodes with specific architecture are widely used in liquid battery systems by encapsulating metallic Li in a porous and robust matrix.116–118 This strategy can not only overcome the volume change issues of the Li anodes considerably but also effectively reduce the local current density, thus suppressing Li dendrite growth due to the large specific surface area and high conductivity of the Li-matrix composite anodes. When the liquid electrolytes are replaced by SSEs, this method can still restrict the problems related to the planar Li anode during the cycling process. Chi et al.119 designed a 3D Li anode through a thermal infusion strategy between the Ni foam matrix and molten Li. As expected, the obtained 3D Li anodes can suppress the lithium dendrite formation by increasing the Li+ deposition sites (Fig. 7a). Benefiting from this ingenious arrangement, the assembled Li symmetrical cells with 3D Li composite anodes and polymer electrolyte-modified Ta-doped-LLZO (LLZTO) SSEs exhibit a stable voltage profile over 700 h. The full cell with LiFePO4 cathodes also shows a stable cycling capability of 135 mA h g−1 with a high coulombic efficiency of about 99.6% after 200 cycles at 90 °C.
 Fig. 7  Architectural design of the anodes. (a) Schematics illustrating the impact of the 3D Li anode for Li metal SSBs.119 (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the 3D Li–rGO anode with a flowable interphase for SSBs.120 (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure, optical photos, SEM, and EDS mapping of the prepared hybrid anodes of vertical graphene on Cu mesh.121 
Moreover, Cui et al.120 adopted the 3D Li-reduced graphene oxides (rGO) anode incorporated with a flowable interfacial layer to construct the SSBs. As shown in Fig. 7b, the 3D composite anodes significantly decrease the effective current density and reduce the interfacial fluctuation from the whole electrode level to the local scale. Furthermore, the flowable polymer electrolyte interphase ionically connects the 3D Li–rGO anode surface to the bulk SSE, which is crucial for accommodating the interfacial fluctuation and guarantees excellent adhesion at all times. As a result, the Li–LiFePO4 full cells with the LLZTO middle layer using the 3D Li–rGO metal anode demonstrated much lower charge/discharge over-potential and higher specific capacity compared to the Li foil reference. Similarly, Huang et al.121 fabricated composites of vertical graphene on Cu mesh as hybrid anodes and successfully applied it for solid-state lithium metal batteries (Fig. 7c). The prepared anodes with dual 3D and lithiophilic structure offer well-distributed lithiophilic nucleation sites, which is vital for guiding uniform lithium growth at the initial plating stage. As a consequence, the assembled symmetric batteries exhibited dendrite-free Li plating/stripping, stable Coulombic efficiency over 250 cycles at 2 mA cm−2, and an ultralong lifespan of 500 cycles at 5 mA cm−2. The full lithium metal cells with the prepared novel 3D hybrid anodes showed lower polarization and enhanced cycling stability. In particular, this design revealed the decisive influence of the initial Li nucleation and growth behavior in the “host” structure and the electrochemical properties.

3.2 Engineering strategy for SSEs
The performance of SSEs themselves is the determining point for developing high energy density and safe solid-state lithium metal batteries due to the elimination of most of the safety issues encountered with liquid electrolytes. Compared with the conventionally used pure SSEs layers obtained by the simple pressing method, the modification strategies related to the surface and the bulk of SSEs are identified to be effective for interfacial performance improvement with the electrode materials. In this section, these two parts will be expressed respectively.

3.2.1 Surface optimization of the SSEs. 
Regarding the surface modification, Wang et al.122 investigated an ultra-smooth surface LAGP electrolyte with a nanoscale surface roughness by a simple nano-polishing method. After the nano-polishing process, the surface density of the LAGP electrolytes can be greatly increased due to the filling of voids on the surface of the SSEs, thus providing sufficient interfacial contact with Li and ensuring more efficient Li+ transport. An all solid-state Li–air battery was prepared by assembling Li metal anodes integrated with the ultra-smooth surface LAGP SSE and air cathodes with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and RuO2 nanoparticles. Such a design can generate an ultra-smooth and flat interface between Li and the SSE and reduce the interface impedance of the battery, thus effectively suppressing Li dendrite growth by eliminating protrusion-induced locally concentrated free electron density on the surface of the Li metal. The construction of an ultra-fine and flat interface shows great potential for suppressing Li dendrite growth and seems valuable for developing high-performance SSBs.
Similarly, the method of rapid acid treatment was also performed to obtain fresh garnet SSEs surface without the Li2CO3 impurity layer before assembling the SSBs. As discussed in the above sections, a thin Li2CO3 layer on the garnet surface could generate poor garnet/Li interfacial contact, which will increase the Li/garnet interfacial impedance and lead to undesired lithium dendrite growth and severe performance decay of the SSBs. Inspired by this point, Huo et al.123 reported rapid acid treatment to remove the surface Li2CO3 layer and turned the garnet surface to lithiophilic at the same time (Fig. 8a). Both SEM images (Fig. 8b and c) and Raman mappings (Fig. 8d) of the LLZTO pellets confirmed the successful removal of the Li2CO3 layer. The obtained garnet pellets with rapid acid treatment exhibited low interfacial resistance, which decreased from 940 Ω cm2 to 26 Ω cm2 at 30 °C, which is comparable to that of the pellets with various surface coatings. In addition, the LiFePO4/Li and LiCoO2/Li full cells with acid-treated garnet SSEs displayed superior reversible capacity and rate performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the LLZTO/Li interface and (b and c) top-view SEM images of the LLZTO surface before and after the rapid acid treatment. (d) Raman mappings of the LLZTO pellet and LLZTO with different acid treatment times.123 (e) Schematic illustration of Li distribution in the porous garnet framework at the original, charged, and discharged states.126 (f) Schematic illustration of the porous-dense-porous trilayer garnet framework.127 (g) A single-material SSB using LGPS as the anode, electrolyte, and cathode material simultaneously.128 
Aside from the above-mentioned dense and planar electrolyte, electrolytes with specific architectures have also garnered great interest. As for the cathode side interface, a 3D bilayer garnet SSE framework was prepared by Hu et al.124 using the tape-casting process to address the chemical/physical issues such as short circuits and electrode volume variation. In particular, the obtained 3D framework SSE consists of a conventional thin dense layer of only a few microns together with a designed thick porous layer, which was used in the Li–S SSBs. On the one hand, the thick porous layer provides continuous Li+/e− pathways to host the sulfur cathode. On the other hand, the thin dense layer supported by the porous layer can block polysulfide diffusion and impede Li dendrite formation. As a consequence, the hybrid Li–S cells showed excellent performance during the subsequent cycles, including high initial Coulombic efficiency above 99.8% and high average Coulombic efficiency above 99%. Similarly, Broek et al.125 also designed a nanoporous interlayer on the dense c-Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 pellets through the sacrificial organic template method. When the Li4Ti5O12 cathode materials were casted on the porous surface, the intrinsically high interfacial surface area and contact points could result in a much smaller interfacial impedance.
As for the anode side interface, Hu et al.126 also infiltrated molten Li into the porous layer of the 3D bilayer garnet SSE framework to form a 3D Li metal anode with a constant volume to improve the cycling stability. Moreover, the dense layer in this bilayer structure works as a solid-state separator to prevent short-circuits. As shown in Fig. 8e, due to the large contact area between Li and the SSE framework, the local current density on the interface can be significantly reduced, resulting in a small over-potential and the homogeneous distribution of Li during cycling. Based on the bilayer SSE framework, Li–Li(Ni0.5Mn0.3Co0.2)O2 full batteries can provide high energy densities of 242 and 330 W h kg−1 at high cathode mass-loadings of 14 and 32 mg cm−2, respectively, which is significantly higher than that of conventional garnet-based batteries.
These works have mainly focused on 3D SSE construction of one side interface, while two side treatment was also explored. Based on a porous-dense-porous trilayer garnet electrolyte structure fabricated via tape-casting, a 3D mixed electron/ion conducting framework was prepared (Fig. 8f).127 Moreover, the conformally coated CNTs on one porous side of the SSE can facilitate the use of a 3D solid-state lithium metal anode by introducing Li to the 3D framework via electrochemical deposition. The lithiation process of CNT was adjusted to be slow; thus, the contact between the Li anode and the garnet was obviously improved, achieving a low resistance of only 20 Ω cm2. When the cathode was infused into another porous side, Li+ can be stably cycled between the two sides. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 8g, Han et al.128 revealed a novel high energy single-material SSB using LGPS as the anode, electrolyte, and cathode material simultaneously. LGPS possessed high ionic conductivity (σLi ≈ 10−2 S cm−1), which could store Li+ at both high and low potential after mixing with carbon, and the Li–S and Ge–S components in LGPS acted as active centers for the corresponding cathode and anode.


3.2.2 Bulk modification of the SSEs. 
Even if the sulfide SSEs are known for their extraordinary electrochemical performance, the instability of lithium metal and the sensitivity to oxygen issues still remain to be solved.129–131 To solve these problems, the substitution doping strategy is widely employed. For example, Fei et al. used the solid-state sintering method to dope the S-site of the sulfide Li10GeP2S12 SSE with the O element to prepare Li10GeP2S12−xOx at different sample ratios (x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0).132 Interestingly, the electrical conductivity of the doped sample decreases as the proportion of the O element increases, and they figured out that the electrochemical window of the doped sample was more stable towards metallic lithium. Similarly, the effect of Se doping was also investigated. The result indicates that the transmission path of Li+ is widened and it is favorable for the ionic conductivity because of the larger ionic radius of Se than that of S. Moreover, the electrochemical stability between Li10GeP2S11.8Se0.2 and metallic lithium can be stabilized in the range from 0 to 6 V.
Besides, for the method of interstitial doping, lithium halides (LiX, X = F, Cl, Br, I) are usually selected to solve the remaining problems.133,134 According to Choi's studies,135 the obtained Li2S–P2S5 glasses with lithium halide doping, especially LiI, showed favorable mechanical properties and high ionic conductivity. They also found that the powder-pressed pellets of Li2S–P2S5 with lithium halides possessed less pores and grain boundaries, which could reduce the contact area between the SSE and air, thus resulting in superior capacity and improved stability of the assembled SSBs.
Moreover, the strategy of mixing second phase additives with SSE is effective for stabilizing the Li/SSEs interface. Xu et al.136 added Li3PO4 into the LLZTO mother powders and the glassy Li3PO4 phase was distributed on the garnet grain boundaries after the sintering processes. The improved cycling performance of the assembled symmetric cells is attributed to the existence of Li3P, which is formed in situ through the reaction between the Li3PO4 additive and the plated Li during the charge processes. The mixing strategy of the annealing hybrid SSEs is effective for stabilizing the electrodes/SSEs interface and suppresses lithium dendrite growth for the obtained synthetic advantages.
Meanwhile, minimizing the solid electrolyte thickness is also crucial for the interfacial chemistry of the SSBs.137,138 Moreover, since the Li diffusion time t and the thickness of the electrolyte layer L is proportional to the square, t = L2/D (D, diffusion constant), the deficiency of low conductivity can also be compensated to some extent.52 Currently, the main synthetic method of the inorganic SSE layer is achieved through high-pressure powder compacting and the thickness of most of the pellets is at least several hundred micrometers, which can hardly meet the demand for both adequate interface contact and sufficient ionic conductivity.139–141 To solve this problem, Yan et al.142 developed a simple and low-cost production method to construct an SSB using a garnet-type LLZO nanoparticle slurry to form an SSE layer with reduced thickness. The synthesized LLZO nanoparticle slurry was prepared with a suitable solvent, dispersant, adhesives, and surfactant without cold/hot pressing to form several micrometers thick SSE layer. The integrated LiFePO4/LLZO/Li cell exhibited an excellent cycling stability of 136.8 and 146.2 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at room temperature and 60 °C, respectively. This work provides a prospective way for preparing high-performance SSE layers with micrometer thicknesses, which could be used for the industrialization of SSBs.
Conceptually speaking, since the rigidity of LLZO makes the interfacial contact with electrodes far from unsatisfactory, the combination of a polymer electrolyte will be effective for solving this problem. As for fabricating the composite electrolytes, garnet can be dispersed as a filler in the form of connected particles, interconnected nanofibers, or preferably, aligned nanofibers in the polymer electrolyte.143–145 For these composite electrolytes, the interface between the component phases as well as the particle size and the weight ratio of garnet are all determining factors for the overall ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability.146 This strategy is also applicable for fabricating sulfide-based composite SSEs. For example, Zhang et al.147 added 5 wt% poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) to Li6PS5Cl SSEs to inhibit the interfacial reactions and Li dendrite formation, with the assembled LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2/Li full battery exhibiting ultrahigh capacity retention rate of 91% over 200 cycles. Moreover, modulating the intrinsic structure of the composite electrolytes proved to be effective for balancing the contradiction between ionic conductivity and mechanical strength.148,149 Recently, Duan et al.150 designed an in situ plasticized SSE with a double-network, which exhibits enhanced ion conductivity, favorable thermal stability, excellent mechanical flexibility, wide electrochemical window, and also good capability for inhibiting the formation of Li dendrites. In addition, the assembled pouch cells show highly reversible electrochemical performance and maintain their electrochemical functions well even under deformation and truncation. This strategy provides a brand-new way for modulating the intrinsic structure of solid-state electrolytes so as to improve the related performances of batteries.

3.3 Engineering strategy of cathode configuration
The thickness and configuration of cathodes play a vital role in the energy density of SSBs. The traditional slurry-based coating method can easily control the thickness of the cathodes but the cathodes prepared by this approach possess deficient contact with oxide SSEs.151,152 Considering this point, the strategy of co-sintering LiCoO2 (LCO) and LLZO was proposed.153,154 However, mutual elemental diffusion occurred at high temperatures when LLZO contacted with LCO, leading to a highly resistive interphase. In order to solve the problem, Li3BO3 was added as a sintering additive by physically separating Ca and Nb co-doped LLZO and LCO during the sintering process.153 The drawback is that the separation is not complete. Meanwhile, Han et al.155 presented an innovative approach to take advantage of the spontaneous formation of the conformal Li2CO3 coating on the surfaces of both LLZO and LCO when exposed to air. With this method, LCO and LLZO were thermally soldered together through the reaction between the Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 solder and the Li2CO3 coatings, forming the Li2.3−xC0.7+xB0.3−xO3 interphase with high ionic conductivity (much higher than that of Li3BO3) after sintering at 700 °C. Therefore, the addition of Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 as an auxiliary wetting agent can ensure a tightly glued interface between the active materials and the SSE particles, and the elemental diffusions and chemical reactions between LCO and LLZO are effectively suppressed due to the designed interphase. Furthermore, a complete separation is achieved. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 9a, a self-assembled block copolymer template method was used to synthesize a 3D bicontinuous nanocomposite electrode, which consists of the LiCoO2 active cathode material and the LLZO electrolyte on a scale of several tens of nanometers.156 In this nanocomposite electrode, nanosized LCO was embedded in the LLZO matrix after removing the polymer. As a result, nanosized particles and ameliorative contact were obtained simultaneously, enabling excellent electrochemical properties.
 Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of a 3D bicontinuous nanocomposite electrode material from a self-assembled block copolymer template.156 (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of MoS2/Li7P3S11 composite electrode.169 (c) Raman mapping images of SSBs using Li4GeS4–Li3PS4-coated LiCoO2 particles with or without heat-treatment at 200 °C after initial charging.170 
The effects of some other types of additives were also investigated. The addition of electrolytic salt portions into the cathode material can facilitate Li+ diffusion at the cathode/SSE interface among SSBs.157 Guo's group158 prepared SSBs constructed via the Li6.20Ga0.30La2.95Rb0.05Zr2O12 electrolyte, metallic Li anode, and LiFePO4 cathode, and the cathode was mixed with the Li(CF3SO2)2N electrolytic salt in order to reduce the SSE/cathode interfacial resistance. The EIS and long-term charge/discharge cycling tests indicated that the obtained hybrid cathode can facilitate interfacial Li+ transportation and decrease the resistance, thus endowing the SSBs with improved electrochemical performance. Moreover, the addition of sulfur into sulfide cathodes can also provide an excellent composite cathode. Hayashi et al.159 synthesized a CuS/S composite by the mechanical milling process. In the assembled CuS/S|Li2S–P2S5|Li–In full batteries, the CuS/S composite delivered a capacity of about 650 mA h g−1, which exceeds the theoretical capacity of CuS, which is only 560 mA h g−1, suggesting that lithiated CuS formed first and then reacted with sulfur in the cycling process.
The strategy of reducing the particle size and increasing the contact area is another effective approach. Typically, the cathode composites of SSBs consist of a mixture of cathode active materials and SSE particles to ensure sufficient Li+ conductivity and intimate interfacial contact of the cathodes/SSEs.160,161 However, the electronic percolation of such a composite electrode is not satisfactory for practical applications, and carbon conductive additives may even cause severe degradation of the sulfide SSEs upon cycling.162–164 Strauss et al.165 demonstrated that the capacity of the assembled cells with LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 (NCM622) cathodes and β-Li3PS4 SSEs is strongly dependent upon the particle size of the cathode-active materials. The results showed that those with smaller particle size demonstrated more superior electrochemical performance compared with the larger ones. This research emphasized the vital importance of optimizing the particle size of active materials and maintaining electronic contact by enabling highly specific capacities of the assembled batteries. Similarly, Choi et al.166 prepared a sulfur cathode through different milling processes and compared their performance. The results showed that smaller particle size and good contact were obtained by the secondary ball milling process, which allowed high utilization of the active materials.
Some novel cathode architectures with specially-designed configurations proved effective in assembling the SSBs. For example, Sakuda et al.167 directly coated the 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte on LiNbO3-coated LCO cathodes and adjusted the coating proportion systematically. They found that the cells with electrolyte coating exhibited excellent reversible capacity, which further increased with the increase in the coating proportion. Importantly, less amount of sulfide electrolyte was used in this way to form a cathode composite compared to the conventional mixing approach, which plays a crucial role in increasing the energy density of integrated SSBs. Furthermore, 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte was also deposited on NiS, which is grown on vapor-grown carbon nanofibers (VGCF).168 In this composite cathode, the VGCF and sulfide coating layer provide continuous electronic conduction pathways and ionic conduction pathways, respectively. Therefore, the full cell showed high discharge capacity of 240 mA h g−1 at 1C rate. Similarly, the cathodes coated with other sulfide electrolytes, such as Li7P3S11-coated MoS2169 (Fig. 9b) and Li4GeS4–Li3PS4-coated LiCoO2170 (Fig. 9c), also exhibited improved electrochemical performance. The infiltration of solution-processable SSEs represents another interesting strategy. Kim et al.171 dipped the LCO and graphite electrodes into an Li6PS5Cl (LPSCl) sulfide electrolyte solution in ethanol to prepare a composite cathode with intimate ionic contacts formed by ionic percolation pathways. Thus, the LPSCl-infiltrated LiCoO2 and graphite electrodes showed high reversible capacities of 141 and 364 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, respectively.
3.4 Engineering strategy of the anodes/SSEs interface
The interface between the Li metal anode and SSE is representative of its complicated interfacial chemistry and unapprehended interaction mechanism, and it further varies from contacting with different types of SSEs. For example, the oxide particles generally possess larger elastic modulus than sulfides or hydrides, which will lead to much uneven surface and more defects of obtained oxide SSEs during conventional used cold-pressing densification processes. Consequently, the interfacial contact is usually inferior when oxide SSEs contact with Li metal anodes, resulting in high interfacial resistance.172,173 Moreover, rigid oxide SSEs/Li interfaces show poor endurance towards the generated stress/strain during cycling and Li dendrites can propagate into the SSEs more easily owing to the reduced contact area and improved local current density.174 Similarly, severe side reactions occur at the interface between the Li metal anodes and the sulfide SSEs and the reaction products will also result in high interfacial resistance. Furthermore, the corresponding dendrite issue is a common problem existing in almost all types of SSEs.175 In this section, the engineering strategies will be presented as two main parts, including the interface between Li with oxide SSEs and sulfide SSEs, respectively. Other types of SSEs such as Li3N and hydrides will not be discussed here.

3.4.1 Interface of Li Metal and oxide SSEs. 
3.4.1.1 Interface based on garnet-type SSEs. 
Among the oxide SSEs, garnet-type LLMO (M = Ta and Zr) with nearly the highest cycling stability against Li metal anode demonstrate superior electrochemical performance. However, they present a lithiophobic surface, thus resulting in poor physical contact with the Li metal and large interfacial resistance.123,176 To address this problem, several strategies aiming to change the surface of garnet from lithiophobic to lithiophilic have been developed. Essentially, whether the surface energy of Li and garnet SSEs matches is the decisive factor. Considering this point, two measures have been undertaken. On the one hand, strategies for tuning the surface energy of the Li metal through the modification of bulk Li metal to form an Li-containing alloy to match that of the garnet surface have been summarized in the previous chapter. On the other hand, modifying the garnet surface to minimize the difference in the surface energy is also of vital importance. Specifically, it is extensively reported that introducing a buffer layer between garnet SSEs and metallic lithium is an effective way to improve their contact conditions and decrease the interfacial impedance. In this section, various buffer layers including metal, metallic oxides, non-metallic element, gel electrolytes, metal sulfides, and nitrides used to modify the garnet surface will be expressed in detail.
Based on the advantages of the alloying method, the Li-containing alloy can also be formed by coating an external thin metal layer on the garnet surface. For example, Hu et al.177 introduced an ultrathin layer of Al into the interface through a vapor deposition method. During assembly with the Li metal anode, the Al layer would be immediately covered by molten Li metal, which then migrates toward the bulk Li metal. The alloying process significantly improves the wettability of the Li metal to the garnet SSE, as indicated in Fig. 10a. As a result, the Al layer turned into an Li-rich solid solution, making the garnet surface lithiophilic, which allows the generated alloy electrode to conformally adhere to the garnet surface after the solidification of molten Li metal (Fig. 10b). Coincidentally, the interface resistance was reduced from 950 Ω cm2 to 75 Ω cm2. Based on the strategy of forming the Li-containing alloy layer, Hu et al.178 also reported that a layer of 20 nm Ge can achieve similar improvements. Moreover, Guo et al.176 prepared a 10 nm Sn layer, which can ensure that the batteries work at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, which is higher than 0.2 mA cm−2 of the 20 nm Al layer and 0.1 mA cm−2 of the 20 nm Ge layer. The reason for the improved cycling stability may be attributed to the moderated volume changes during the lithiation/delithiation processes of the Li–Sn alloy. The above metal layers are all formed by contacting with molten Li; thus, the symmetric cell should be heated above 184 °C, which is the melting point of Li, for several minutes. Differently, Tsai et al.72 used Au as a buffer layer, which can form an Li–Au alloy at room temperature.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) pristine garnet SSE/Li and engineered garnet SSE/Li interface using the Li–metal alloy. (b) The Li–Al alloy interface between the Li metal and the garnet SSE.177 (c) TEM, HAADF-STEM image, and corresponding EELS maps of the interface of Al2O3-coated garnet with a Ti protection layer.49 (d) SEM images of the graphite-coated SSE and Li/graphite-coated SSE interface. (e) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of graphite reacted with Li metal via the generated interfacial LiC6.181 
Except for metal buffer layers, inorganic metallic oxides and non-metallic element interlayers have also been explored on the garnet surface to improve the interfacial wettability, which would be lithiated by molten lithium and act as an Li+ conductor layer subsequently. One of the successful methods is introducing an ultrathin Al2O3 coating layer on the SSEs through atomic-layer deposition (ALD), as shown in Fig. 10c. Han et al.49 reported that a 5 nm layer of Al2O3 can lead to great improvements in the wetting behavior of the Li metal and the SSEs by tuning the surface energy of garnet to match that of molten Li, thus achieving a dramatic decrease in the interfacial resistance due to the elimination of voids at the interface between the garnet and Li metal, which was reduced from 1710 Ω cm2 to 34 Ω cm2. As Al2O3 was lithiated when contacting with molten Li, an ionic interfacial conductive layer would form, which could effectively transport Li+ between the garnet SSE and the Li metal and mitigate the existence of impurities and defects such as Li2CO3 patches and surface cracks at the interface. These results were verified by computational results as well. Similar to Al2O3, Wang et al.179 reported that a thin layer of ZnO coated on the garnet surface by the ALD method can also improve the Li wetting behavior. In this interface, ZnO was reduced to zinc metal and further alloyed with lithium. Due to its higher chemical reactivity with molten Li than Al2O3, it can provide an additional driving force to wet the surface of the garnet SSE. In addition, a highly tortuous 3D porous garnet SSE was taken as a lithium host. Therefore, the conformal ZnO coating layer can enable molten Li to flow into the complex 3D anode frameworks, thus forming a self-supported lithium metal composite anode with both high ionic and electric conductivity for solid-state lithium metal batteries. Moreover, some binary oxide interlayers, such as indium tin oxides, have also shown significant influence in ameliorating the interface between Li and garnet-type SSEs.180
The first reported non-metallic element layer was the construction of an ultrathin amorphous Si layer through plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), which is known to be a highly reactive material with Li. Luo et al.40 demonstrated that the ultrathin amorphous Si coating layer (∼10 nm) can generate ameliorative interfacial contact with the garnet and an Li+ conducting lithiated Si layer was formed in situ between the garnet and the Li metal. Meanwhile, the reaction between Si and Li can enable the garnet surface to switch from “superlithiophobic” to “superlithiophilic” behavior. Moreover, Chen et al.181 drew a graphite-based soft interface with a pencil, which is cheaper than the commonly used techniques such as ALD, PECVD, and physical vapor deposition (PVD). As indicated in Fig. 10d and e, the graphite interlayer could be easily lithiated to form the golden LiC6 phase, through which Li+ could diffuse from metallic Li to graphite spontaneously at room temperature, thus ensuring the even distribution of Li+ at the interface layer. Furthermore, compared to the reported inorganic oxides or metal materials, the graphite layer shows better ductility and compressibility. Benefiting from this advantage and the formed good Li+/e− conducting LiC6 layer, the plating–stripping process of the symmetric cell is more stable, implying superior improvement in the interfacial stability.
The above-mentioned various buffer layers mainly focus on minimizing the difference in the surface energy between garnet and the Li metal. However, if an interlayer possesses specific characteristics that are suitable as an electrolyte, it would be ideal as an interlayer between the garnet and the Li anode directly. In view of this, gel electrolyte interlayers consisting of polymer matrix and liquid electrolyte are thought to satisfy these demands. Compared with the abovementioned interlayers (Si, Al, Al2O3), this type of interlayer is more scalable for battery manufacturing and application processes. Liu et al.182 used a gel electrolyte consisting of a porous poly(vinylidene difluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP) polymer matrix and a controlled amount of the liquid electrolyte stored inside the matrix as an interlayer to improve the interface contact of the garnet/electrodes. Because this gel interlayer possesses a soft structure, high ionic conductivity, and good wettability, the interfacial resistance was significantly decreased from 1.4 × 103 Ω cm2 to 214 Ω cm2.
In fact, point contacts between the Li metal and the garnet SSEs will not only result in huge interfacial impedance but also initiate dendrite nucleation at the interface. In principle, a sharp edge or protrusion with high-curvature on the anode can easily generate a locally enhanced electric field by the locally concentrated free electron density on the surface of the electrodes, which will result in preferential and faster Li+ deposition on the tips/protrusions, eventually evolving into dendrites.122 Once a tiny dendrite forms, Li+ preferentially deposits on the existing dendrite spots and further propagates into the bulk SSE, eventually triggering the short circuit of the SSBs.183,184 The above-mentioned intermediate layers are mainly used to enhance the wettability of garnet with Li to get sufficient contacts for decreasing the interfacial impedance. Meanwhile, the Li+ plating/stripping process is more homogeneous, thus restraining Li dendrite growth at the interface to some extent. However, the dendrites are still observed to form at a relatively low current density (<0.9–1 mA cm−2) even if the area specific resistance (ASR) of the Li/SSE interface has been optimized.54,73,185 This result indicates that the sole improvement of wettability is not sufficient to thoroughly solve the dendrite problem. In this regard, different strategies related to the interphase layer have been performed.
According to Han's reports, the ultimate solution for dendrite suppression in the garnet SSEs lies in lowering the electronic conductivity of the bulk electrolyte and the ideal intermediate layer should demonstrate small interfacial resistance, high ionic conductivity but negligible electronic conductivity (preferably electronic insulation), and mechanical stability during subsequent cycles.107 Similarly, Manthiram et al.186 indicated that a thermodynamically unstable but kinetically stable interlayer with high ionic conductivity and low electronic conductivity was able to suppress the lithium dendrites efficiently. Corresponding to this strategy, Fu et al.105 reduced the interfacial resistance and prevented lithium dendrite growth simultaneously through the in situ formation of the interlayers enabled by the conversion reaction of the MoS2 layer coated on a bare LLZO pellet (Fig. 11a). When the MoS2 layer contacted with the Li anode, it can generate a layer of interphase consisting of Mo and Li2S as a result of the conversion reaction between them. Due to the poor electronic conductivity, the kinetics of the conversion reaction turns sluggish, which makes the Mo/Li2S interlayer kinetically stable and able to hinder the reaction between the MoS2 and Li at a given current density. Furthermore, the local tip electric field effect could also be suppressed, making the interfacial current distribution more even. As a result, the interfacial resistance is reduced to only 14 Ω cm2 and the critical current density of Li symmetric cells is improved from 0.7 mA cm−2 to 2.2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11b). Moreover, when the actual cycling current density exceeds the critical current density, the bare LLZO pellet-based cells will short-circuit while that of the LLZO@MoS2 pellet will polarize instead of short-circuiting, which can be confirmed in Fig. 11c–f. The reason is believed to be that the increased current density will drive more electrons through the existing interlayer to trigger more MoS2 to react, thus thickening the interlayer and further switching off the circuit (Fig. 11g).
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of the MoS2 powder, the LLZO powder, and the MoS2-coated LLZO pellet. (b) Galvanostatic performance of the symmetric Li cells with and without MoS2 coating at step-increased current densities at 100 °C. The surface and cross-section optical images of (c and d) the shorted bare LLZO pellet and (e and f) the polarized LLZO@MoS2 pellet. (g) Schematic diagram of the morphological and chemical evolution of the MoS2-coating layer in the polarization process.105 (h) TEM image of MCL. (i) Rate performance of the Li/LLZTO/LCO, Li/LLZTO-MCL/LCO cells, and cycle performance of the Li/LLZTO-MCL/LCO cell.74 
On the other hand, a mixed ion/electron conductive interface has also been reported to be beneficial for Li dendrite suppression. Sun et al.74 revealed that a mixed conductive layer (MCL) consisting of electron-conductive nanoparticles embedded in an ion-conductive network (shown in Fig. 11h) not only leads to the transition from lithiophobicity to lithiophilicity but also homogenizes the electric field distribution inside the MCL and suppresses Li propagation into the garnet SSEs. As a result, the Li/MCL/garnet/MCL/Li cells exhibited excellent cycling performance for over 1000 h at 0.1 mA cm−2 and a critical current density as high as 1.2 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 11i, the assembled Li/LLZTO-MCL/LCO full cells also demonstrate superior rate performance and long cycling stability.
3.4.1.2 Interface based on other types of oxide SSEs. 
In addition to garnet SSEs, LiPON is also believed to be a class of Li metal-stable SSE.187 Even though LiPON would be reduced by the Li metal as well, the decomposition products (Li3P, Li3N, and Li2O) act as a passivation layer, which can prevent the further reduction and decomposition of LiPON.134,188 Unlike garnet SSEs, the Ti-containing SSEs, such as perovskite type LLTO and NASICON-type LATP, are considered to be unstable against the Li metal due to the reduction in Ti4+ by the Li metal. The idea of protecting the Li–metal unstable SSEs by a relatively Li–metal stable SSE is used to solve this issue. For example, Lee et al.189 prepared a LiPON/LLTO/LiPON structure to improve the compatibility of LLTO with the Li metal in a thin-film battery, where the stable potential window was improved to above 5 V. Similarly, LAGP has been demonstrated to be stable with Li metal and Zhao et al. used an LAGP layer to prevent LATP from directly contacting with the Li metal.190–192
However, with a further study, researchers showed that the Ge4+ in LAGP undergoes reduction by the Li metal as well.53 Given this point, metallic layers, such as Ge,193 Bi,194 and Cr195 thin film, were respectively coated on the surface of the LAGP to suppress the reduction from Ge4+ to Ge2+ and Ge0 and simultaneously reduce the Li/LAGP interfacial resistance. Besides, it is reported that some glass sulfide electrolytes exhibit better stability towards the Li metal compared to ceramic electrolytes.196 Inspired by this point, if the ceramic electrolytes could transform into the glass state, the stability of some unstable oxide SSEs may also be improved. Coincidently, the ceramic LAGP could be softened to glass LAGP at a certain temperature according to Yan's report.197 In view of these, Zhang et al.198 thoroughly covered an amorphous LAGP layer on the surface of the substrate ceramic LAGP electrolyte sheet through spin-coating and co-sintering processes to improve the stability of LAGP towards the Li anode. The results demonstrated that the surface amorphized LAGP electrolyte showed enhanced Li stability as well as improved cycling performance. The reasons are that the growth tendency of the interphases into the inner electrolyte is extremely suppressed by the amorphous layer, which shows continuous surface and generated surficial products to improve the imperfect physical contact of Li/LAGP. Moreover, because the element distribution in the glass LAGP is disordered, it possesses few sequential electronic conductive channels that can insulate the ceramic LAGP from a highly reducing external environment, thus protecting the inner part of the ceramic LAGP electrolyte and reducing the electrolyte/electrode interface impedance.
In order to improve the compatibility between Li metal anodes and SSEs, an additional polymer interlayer with soft characteristics has also been investigated. Many polymer SSEs act as these types of interlayers. For example, as shown in Fig. 12a, Wan et al.199 constructed stable electrode/SSE Janus interfaces based on PEO and poly-(acrylonitrile) (PAN) polymer electrolyte. PEO was contacted on the Li anode side and PAN was contacted on the high-potential cathode side, thus endowing the LATP ceramic with excellent wettability toward electrodes and suppressing the interfacial reduction and growth of the Li dendrites. The prepared sandwiched SSE showed a wide electrochemical stability window from 0 V to 4.5 V. Similarly, a PEO SSE interlayer was also introduced into the interface between the Li anode and the Ta-doped LLZO to ensure close contact.119 Moreover, Zhou et al.200 prepared a polymer/ceramic-membrane/polymer sandwiched electrolyte, where cross-linked poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate layers containing pendant molecules attached to the polymer framework were introduced. Fig. 12b shows the SSB design and the molecular structure of the polymer. This sandwiched architecture can block anion transfer to reduce the double-layer electric field at the Li/polymer interface and make the interfacial Li+ flux more homogeneous to suppress Li dendrite nucleation. This polymer interlayer could also be replaced by a flexible composite SSE with improved mechanical strength through the addition of an inorganic SSEs powder into the polymer slurry,201 and the performance of the composite SSEs depends on the amount and variety of the inorganic SSEs powder.143,202–204 In addition, the composite SSEs could also be designed into special structures to meet different interfacial needs.205–207 Similar strategies are aimed to fabricate composite SSEs with excellent overall performance due to the mutual advantages of inorganic and organic SSEs.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled full SSB with the double-layer composite SSE.199 (b) Schematic illustration of the SSB design and the molecular structure of the polymer.200 (c) Schematic illustration of the process for coating LiF or LiI layer on the Li metal surface.215 (d) Schematic illustration of alucone-SSE based SSB and the chemical structure of alucone.222 


3.4.2 Interface of Li Metal and sulfide SSEs. 
Sulfide SSEs can be classified as amorphous glasses and crystalline materials, such as glass-ceramics, argyrodite Li6PS5X (X = Cl, Br, and I), thio-LISICONs, and LGPS. However, unlike garnet-type oxide SSEs, sulfide SSEs are generally unstable against Li metal electrodes, as reflected in the electrolyte reduction by Li. Therefore, the main challenges are the severe interfacial side reactions and Li dendrite formation between Li metal and SSEs. To address these issues, some intermediate layers similar to the above-mentioned strategies on the Li/oxide SSEs interface have been experimented on, which can restrain the electrochemical reduction effectively.
3.4.2.1 Interface based on glass state SSEs. 
Owing to their open structure and large free volume, inorganic glass state SSEs usually possess higher ionic conductivity than their corresponding crystalline state materials. For glass Li2S–P2S5 (LPS) sulfides, the reaction products will result in high interfacial resistance. Initially, M. Ogawa et al.208 introduced a 20 nm silicon thin layer as a protective layer by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) to stabilize the Li/Li2S–P2S5 interface. The integrated thin film battery delivered stable specific discharge capacity for 500 cycles. Moreover, some metal thin films were inserted in between the Li foil and the SSEs. Nagao et al.209 deposited a layer of Indium (500 nm) onto the surface of 80Li2S–20P2S5 SSE by vacuum evaporation, which further reacted with Li to form the Li–In alloy layer. The obtained Li–In alloy layer demonstrated good cyclability and high rate capability for the Li/Li4Ti5O12 cells, which could be cycled for 120 cycles reversibly and work at a high current density of 1.3 mA cm−2. In contrast, when In was directly deposited on the Li foil, no alloy reaction would occur in the Li-In/SSE interface, making their contact with Li2S–P2S5 SSE inferior to that of Li foil/In-coated Li2S–P2S5. Similar results were also confirmed by depositing Au onto the surface of 75Li2S–25P2S5 SSE, which greatly broadened the utilization of Li metal and proved effective in maintaining stable Li plating and stripping processes.210
3.4.2.2 Interface based on crystalline state SSEs. 
Glass-ceramics could be obtained by heating amorphous glass SSEs at a certain temperature, such as Li7P3S11 (70Li2S–30P2S5)211 and Li3PS4 (75Li2S–25P2S5),212 which have been found to crystallize in the LPS glass system. For example, glass-ceramics Li7P3S11 was obtained by heating 70Li2S·30P2S5 glass in the range of 258–360 °C, and it exhibited higher ionic conductivity than pristine glass. However, it is reported that Li7P3S11 can be reduced into Li3PS4 at a higher voltage of 2.28 V and further reduced at 1.71 V.213 Therefore, Sang et al.214 evaluated the effect of interfacial electrochemical potential to the chemical reaction by comparing two types of interlayer materials, Si and Al2O3, at the interface of Li7P3S11 and the Li metal, respectively. Specifically, a layer of Si with 20 nm thickness was sputtered onto the Li7P3S11 pellet with the protection of Au, and a layer of 10 nm Al2O3 was also deposited using ALD. The results revealed that both Si and Al2O3 can significantly improve the cycling life but the Al2O3 layer showed much more distinct improvement. The reason is that the generated LixAl(2−x/3)O3 interlayer can drop the potential between Li7P3S11 and Li, and thus suppress the decomposition of SSE, while Li2S was found as a decomposition product at the interface after the cells were shorted for the Si layer.
Li dendrite growth in sulfide SSEs has greatly limited the realization of high safety SSBs. However, the common strategy of coating an electron-conductive layer (such as Au) between the SSEs and the Li metal cannot effectively block the parasitic reactions at the interface. As mentioned above, Li dendrite growth would be promoted once the interphase shows low interface energy with the Li metal. Therefore, a novel strategy focusing on constructing an extra SEI layer between Li and SSEs, which shows higher interface energy with Li, has proved to be effective and provides a new opportunity for the commercialization of Li metal batteries. As shown in Fig. 12c, Xu et al.215 fabricated LiF and LiI layers at the interface between Li and Li7P3S11 to suppress Li dendrite growth. Due to the higher interface energy of LiF/Li than that of LiI/Li, the LiF interlayer shows much higher capability than LiI in suppressing Li dendrite growth. Wang et al.104 introduced an LiF-rich SEI layer between Li3PS4 and the Li metal anode by coating/infiltrating lithium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) onto the LPS. The LiF-rich SEI layer with low electronic conductivity effectively blocked the parasitic reactions between the SSEs and Li metal, while the high interfacial energy of the Li metal and high bulk modulus suppressed the dendrite formation. Therefore, the critical current density of the Li symmetric cells was markedly enhanced from 0.7 mA cm−2 to a record-high value of more than 2 mA cm−2 and the Li plating/stripping Coulombic efficiency was increased from ∼88 to ∼98%. The integrated full cell with high cathode loading also demonstrates stable cycling performance. In addition, Liang et al.216 successfully fabricated an electronically insulating LixSiSy protection layer on the surface of Li by the chemical reaction between Li, Li2S8 and SiCl4 to stabilize the Li3PS4/Li interface. The main components of the obtained air stable LixSiSy protection layer are Li2SiS3/Li4SiS4 and SiS2 together with a small amount of Li2S, where the Li2SiS3/Li4SiS4 species can ensure fast ionic migration across the protection layer and Li2S can prevent further interfacial reactions with the Li metal. Computational results also confirmed the vital role of Li2S in preventing the side reaction of sulfide SSEs and Li metal anodes. As modeled by Lepley et al.,217 a very thin film of Li2S can effectively stabilize the interface of Li3PS4/Li. Similarly, Chen et al.218 also proved that the Li2S buffer layers may improve the stability of the Li/Li6PS5Cl interface using first-principles calculation results.
As for the sulfides with Li11−xM2−xP1+xS12 (M = Ge, Sn, and Si) structures, Li10GeP2S12 with extremely high Li+ conductivity of 12 mS cm−1 can compete with commercial liquid electrolytes.219 However, it would react with Li to generate some species with low ionic conductivity but with considerable electronic conductivity at the interface of Li/LGPS. Coating a protective layer at the interface is useful for eliminating the direct exposure of Li metal to sulfide SSEs, thus preventing the reduction of LGPS by Li. Recently, an in situ formed LiH2PO4 protective layer on the Li metal surface was reported by Xu et al. using an ingenious interface reengineering strategy by spin casting different concentrations of phosphoric acid solution in tetrahydrofuran.220 This protective layer was able to solve the intrinsic chemical stability issues of LGPS and the Li metal specifically by limiting the migration of mixed ionic-electronic reactants to the inner side of the LGPS and the kinetically sluggish interfacial reactions can also help to stabilize the interface. As a consequence, the full cell of LCO/LGPS/LiH2PO4–Li was able to deliver long cycling stability and high capacity. Similarly, Gao et al.221 introduced a nanocomposite layer of organic (LiO–(CH2O)n–Li) and inorganic (LiF, –NSO2–Li, Li2O) Li salts as an interphase to stabilize the Li/SSE interface, which was formed in situ by electrochemically reducing a liquid electrolyte on the Li electrode. The generated interphase not only stabilizes the Li/LGPS interface in the range from 0 V to 3 V but also provides fast ion conduction channels at the interface.
Apart from the in situ formation of a protective layer on Li electrode surface via chemical/electrochemical reactions, molecular layer deposition (MLD) is also a commonly used technology for the preparation of organic polymer films and organic–inorganic hybrid films. For example, Wang et al.222 prepared an organic–inorganic hybrid interlayer (alucone) on Li metal through MLD (Fig. 12d) and reported that the alucone layer is much more effective than the Al2O3 coating layer deposited by the ALD method in suppressing lithium dendrite growth and interfacial reactions at the interface between Li10SnP2S12 sulfide SSEs and the Li metal. The underlying reason is believed to be that the Li+ conductive LiAlOx thin film derived from the lithiation of Al2O3 possesses a very high elastic modulus, which cannot accommodate the large stress and strain generated during the Li+ plating/stripping processes. In contrast, the alucone film with higher toughness can maintain its continuous membrane structure at almost all times during cycling. Therefore, the assembled LiCoO2-based solid-state Li metal batteries with optimal thickness of the alucone film exhibit much smaller polarization, higher Coulombic efficiency, higher capacity, and longer cycle life.
Liquid electrolytes have also been added into the SSEs to form hybrid electrolytes for lowering the grain boundary resistance and enhancing interfacial contact with the Li anode. However, liquid electrolytes possess poor thermodynamic stability against the Li anode. Recently, the emerging super-concentrated “solvent-in-salt” solvates were shown to satisfactorily fabricate hybrid solid–liquid electrolytes. For example, Philip et al.223 prepared a hybrid electrolyte by the addition of highly fluorinated ether-modified LiTFSI solvate to the surface of LPS and LGPS SSEs. Compared with the bare Li/SSE/Li counterparts, the LGPS–solvate system shows cell resistance an order of magnitude lower than that of bare LGPS. However, the LPS–solvate system exhibits a higher cell resistance than that of the bare LPS. These results may be understood to construe that the solvate can totally permeate into the bulk of LGPS, while LPS possesses higher solubility in the ether-based solvate, which results in a dissolved interphase layer on the surface of the pellet, thereby increasing the overall cell resistance. But the cycling stability of the modified cells is much more improved compared with its counterparts, indicating the remarkable effect of altering the grain boundary structures and the interphase between the electrodes and the SSEs. The strategy of protecting Li–metal-unstable SSEs by a relatively Li-metal-stable SSE could also be used for LGPS SSEs. For example, Wan et al.224 used 70% Li2S–29% P2S5–1% P2O5 SSE as a protective layer to avoid the reduction reaction between LGPS and the Li metal anode.

3.5 Engineering strategy of the cathodes/SSEs interface
As mentioned in the preceding section, various interlayers have been developed to achieve intimate contact between inorganic SSEs and Li anodes. Similarly, an intimate contact is much more urgently needed for the cathode/electrolyte interfaces. At the same time, direct contact between cathodes and some types of inorganic SSEs would lead to several side reactions and other undesired effects. Therefore, it is necessary to systematically pay attention to the performed engineering strategies related to the cathode/electrolyte interface.

3.5.1 The interface of cathodes and oxide SSEs. 
As discussed above, mutual diffusions of La, Zr, and Co between LLZO and LiCoO2 occur at the interface during a thermal treatment, which results in a mutual diffusion layer and acts as a significant resistor at the interface. To resolve this problem, numerous efforts involving metal buffer layers were employed to block their direct contact. Nb metal was firstly chosen because it has been seen as a suitable doping agency of LLZO to inhibit the generation of impurities, thus stabilizing the LLZO/LCO interface. Hence, Kato et al.225 deposited a thin Nb layer (∼10 nm) on the surface of the LLZO pellet by radio frequency magnetron sputtering, followed by the deposition of the LCO film (150 nm) on the Nb-modified surface by PLD. Thus, a Li+-conductive amorphous Li-Nb-O layer formed at the LLZO/LCO interface, which can prevent the mutual diffusion of Co, La, and Zr, which will form non-Li+-conductive phases such as a crystalline La2CoO4 phase (Fig. 13a). As a result, the interfacial resistance decreased from 2600 Ω cm−2 to 150 Ω cm−2. The cycling stability and rate capability of the assembled Li/SSE/LiCoO2 SSBs was also improved. Meanwhile, the Ta interlayer was also tested, which can also decrease the interfacial resistivity, albeit less effectively than Nb.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the Nb-modified LLZO/LCO interface.225 (b) Schematic illustration of the Li+ flux process at the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface without and with the succinonitrile interlayer. (c) Rate performance of the Li/LLZTO/LiFePO4 battery with the succinonitrile-modified interlayer.232 (d) Schematic illustration showing the Li+ concentration around the LiPON/LNM interface without and with BaTiO3 modification. (e) A series of Nyquist plots of the Li/LiPON/LNM batteries with different BaTiO3 electrospray deposition times, and the corresponding top view SEM images of the LNM cathodes, where BaTiO3 is seen as white dots. (f) Rate capabilities of the unmodified Li/LiPON/LNM battery and the battery with 60 min BaTiO3 electrospray deposition.234 
Another approach to tackle the issue of high interface resistance is to introduce ion-conducting polymerics, gels, or liquids as wetting agents at the interfaces.226–228 With such a design strategy, the Li+ conducting polymerics and gels could ensure intimate contact between the electrode and the electrolyte by filling the voids at the interface. In comparison, the addition of liquid ion conductors may be more efficient on the cathode side because liquids can penetrate through the pores of the composite electrode, thus increasing the contact area between the cathodes and the SSEs and providing more interfacial paths for ionic transport at the interface.229 However, the intrinsic obstacles of liquid electrolytes may deteriorate the interfacial conditions. It is reported that room temperature ionic liquid electrolytes (ILEs) exhibit better thermal stability, lower flammability, and wider potential window than that of conventional carbonate-based liquid electrolytes.230,231 Meanwhile, LLZO possesses similar stability as that of ILEs, making ILEs highly compatible with LLZO. Considering these points, Pervez et al.229 introduced ILE interlayers at the electrodes/LLZO interfaces to improve the interfacial properties of LLZO-based SSBs. With this strategy, the ILE composed by N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (Pyr14FSI) and LiTFSI salt could fill the voids at the electrodes/LLZO interface, thus providing a medium for efficient Li+ transport. The results showed that ILE is quite stable in the presence of LLZO. Furthermore, with ILE-interlayers at both the Li/LLZO and LiFePO4/LLZO interfaces, Li dendrite formation was dramatically suppressed and the electrochemical performance was greatly improved due to the significant reduction of the interfacial resistance.
Similar to liquid electrolytes, the plastic crystal interlayer can not only penetrate into the cathodes to access a much larger fraction of the cathode particles but also deform reversibly with cathode particle volume changes. Given these advantages, a suitably designed plastic crystal interlayer can also be applied in the SSBs. Lu et al.232 modified the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface by employing a layer of succinonitrile with fluoroethylene carbonate additive (Fig. 13b). The plastic crystal interlayer drastically reduced the interfacial resistances, decreasing the ASR from ∼13000 Ω cm2 to ∼560 Ω cm2. As shown in Fig. 13c, the integrated Li/LLZTO/LiFePO4 battery with a modified interlayer shows a superior rate capacity of 140 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at room temperature.
In the thin film battery system, the LiPON/Li interface resistance is decreased a bit, while the LiPON/cathode interface is increased since the interfacial resistance at the cathode side is much larger than that at the anode side. Jeong et al.233 reported that a thin Al2O3 layer deposited onto LCO before LiPON deposition could further reduce the high resistance at the LCO/LiPON interface. A solid solution of LiCo1−yAlyO2 was formed on the interface, which was believed to be the improving mechanism for the enhanced electrochemical performance. As discussed above, when high potential cathodes were used, such as LiCr0.05Ni0.45Mn1.5O4−δ (LNM), a similar space charge layer in the solid-state systems appeared at the interface, which caused a high interfacial resistance. To solve this problem, Yada et al.234 deposited BaTiO3 nanoparticles onto the LNM film, where the electric dipoles in the BaTiO3 nanoparticles could reduce the large potential difference between LNM and LiPON, which can rearrange the Li+ distribution and yield additional Li+ pathways (Fig. 13d). Benefiting from the BaTiO3 modification at the LiPON/LNM interface, the RLiPON/LNM distinctly decreased with the amount of BaTiO3 increasing (Fig. 13e). Consequently, these favorable interfacial properties enabled extremely improved electrochemical performance of as high as 5 V. As shown in Fig. 13f, when testing at a high current density of 8C, the BaTiO3 modified Li/LiPON/LNM battery still retained 84% of its initial discharge capacity recorded at 0.25C, which was superior to that of the unmodified battery.


3.5.2 The interface of cathodes and sulfide SSEs. 
Unlike the poor contact between the oxide SSEs and the cathodes, the sulfide SSEs layers can achieve intimate contact with the cathodes when additional pressure was applied and the external conditions will be expressed later. Moreover, under some specific designed measurements, the interfacial contact could also be greatly ameliorated. For example, a soft electrolyte was shown to be effective for increasing the contact area between the active material and the solid electrolyte. Kitaura et al.77 employed the 80Li2S–20P2S5 glassy electrolyte as a soft layer, which was converted to a supercooled liquid state by hot pressing to form contacts with the Li4Ti5O12 and LiNbO3 coated LCO active materials. The assembled Li4Ti5O12/80Li2S–20P2S5/LiNbO3-coated LCO solid battery shows a considerable reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1. However, the mutual diffusion, side reactions, and space charge layer effect still existed in the sulfide SSEs/cathodes interface, leading to a large interfacial resistance and poor interfacial stability. In order to address these issues, many researchers have focused on interface engineering strategies to modify the sulfide SSE/cathode interface.
Since the pairing of sulfide materials with layered LCO usually shows large reaction energy, several interfacial buffer layers of LCO cathodes have been prepared. Sasaki et al.235 interposed a thin ion-conducting film between the sulfide SSEs and the oxide electrodes, which was formed by the spray coating of Li4Ti5O12 with a thickness ranging from 1.1 to 38.9 nm on the surface of the LCO cathode particles. As a result, the Li4Ti5O12-coated LCO samples showed much smaller resistance than that of the uncoated samples. The rate capability of In-Li/LCO cells with LGPS SSE was also improved. Compared with the capacity at 0.13 mA cm−2, the In–Li/LCO cells indicated 64% capacity retention at 5 mA cm−2versus the uncoated sample with only 4% capacity. Furthermore, a graphite/LCO all solid-state cell with a 70Li2S–30P2S5 sulfide SSE and a coated LCO cathode demonstrated comparable power densities with commercialized Li ion batteries. Similarly, spray coated Li4Ti5O12 on a cheaper oxide cathode LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 was also investigated with the 70Li2S–30P2S5 sulfide SSE.236 However, the performance improvement of the Li4Ti5O12 coating on LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 was not as significant as that on LCO, which may be owing to the much easier diffusion of Ni into Li4Ti5O12 than that of Co.
Unfortunately, the Li4Ti5O12 coating has a serious drawback, which lies in the relatively low ionic conductivity. Therefore, several other buffer layers with higher ionic conductivity have been used to replace Li4Ti5O12, such as LiNbO3237 and LiTaO3,238 which could be processed at preferred low temperatures, thus avoiding the thermal diffusion of specific elements at high temperatures. This replacement could result in better rate capability due to the smaller interfacial resistance. Furthermore, the effect of the LiNbO3 coating on the high voltage LiMn2O4 cathode was investigated.239 It was concluded that a similar space charge layer exists between LiMn2O4 and the LGPS SSE, which is rate-determining and can be suppressed by the LiNbO3 coating to improve the rate capability. This result was confirmed by Haruyama et al.81 They also elucidated the effect of the LiNbO3 buffer layer on the space charge layer of the LCO/LPS interfaces and found that the pure LCO/LPS interface showed a disordered structure with attractive Li adsorption sites, whereas the construction of the LiNbO3 buffer layers can generate smooth interfaces for both LCO and LPS sides without the Li adsorption sites, thus suppressing the effect of the space charge layer (Fig. 14a).
 Fig. 14  (a) Optimized interface structures and Li+ concentration illustrations in the LCO/LPS and LCO/LNO/LPS interfaces.81 HAADF TEM images of the interfaces and the corresponding elemental concentration profiles of the Co, S, and P elements obtained by EDS line scan at (b) the uncoated LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 SSE interface and (c) the Al2O3-coated LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 SSE interface.241 Red arrows in (b and c) represent the positions and the directions of the EDS line scans. (d) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and EDX line profiles for P, S, Co, and Ni, and the magnified EDX line profiles for Ni of the NiS-coated LiCoO2/80Li2S·20P2S5 SSE interface. (e) Charge–discharge curves of the In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 cells with uncoated and NiS-coated LiCoO2 for the first cycle and the charge–discharge curves of the cells with NiS-coated LiCoO2 for 10 cycles.243 (f) Schematic illustration of the interfacial reactions in the all-solid-state cells and (g) galvanostatic initial charge/discharge profiles of the all-solid-state cells using the pristine and Li2CO3-coated LiCoO2 powders.246 
To further investigate the effect of the ionic conductivity of different coating layers, a Li+ conductive metal oxide Li2SiO3 layer and an insulating oxide SiO2 buffer layer were prepared to coat the LCO surface so as to decrease the interfacial resistance.240 The resistance was decreased from 270 Ω for the uncoated LCO to 220 Ω for the SiO2 coating and 160 Ω for the Li2SiO3 coating, indicating that the Li+ conductivity of the coating layer is of vital importance to reduce the interfacial resistance. The cycling performance of the integrated In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LCO full cells was also greatly enhanced due to the modified cathode/SSE interface. Similarly, Lee et al.241 found that the formation of the interfacial layer at the LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 interface can be greatly reduced by the coating of Al2O3 (Fig. 14b and c), thus improving the interfacial stability and cycling performance of the whole battery system. However, owing to the poor ionic conductivity of the Al2O3 layers, the optimum rate capability performance of the assembled SSBs was still unfulfilled. In contrast, the LiAlO2 layer with higher ionic conductivity can provide a more effective Li+ conduction pathway from the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cathodes to the SSEs.242
Besides, similar improvements were performed using different materials coated on cathodes, which will be summarized briefly in this part. On the one hand, sulfides in the form of CoS and NiS acted as extra effective buffer layers for suppressing the degradation of the highly reactive interface between the charged LiCoO2 and the Li2S–P2S5 SSE.243 For example, as shown in Fig. 14d, Sakuda et al. found that the interposition of the NiS coating can reduce the interfacial co-diffusion layer to only 30 nm, which is much lower than that of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface without coating. Furthermore, compared with the pure In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 cells consisting of uncoated LiCoO2, the In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 cells with NiS-coated LiCoO2 displayed higher initial discharge capacity and more stable cycling performance (Fig. 14e). In addition, an amorphous surface layer consisting of Li, Fe, Nb, P, O, and C elements also proved to be effective for improving the interfacial properties between the LiFePO4 electrodes and the Li2S–P2S5 SSEs.244 Moreover, 2D TaO3 nanosheets and Li2CO3 are special in these coating materials. The layer of TaO3 can be very thin (∼1 nm) and is electronically insulative with a bandgap of 5.3 V, which can decrease the resistance by two orders of magnitude in the In-Li/LGPS/LCO system.245 While Li2CO3 is unfavorable in conventional liquid Li+ batteries as it is electrochemically inactive, as shown in Fig. 14f, it has been proved that an appropriate amount of Li2CO3 modified on LCO can act as a physical barrier to suppress the mutual diffusion of interfacial Co and S atoms, thus improving the interfacial stability and cell reversibility (Fig. 14g).246 Some other materials such as Li2O–SiO2247 and Li2O–ZrO2248 were also found to be effective in alleviating the interface of the cathodes and the sulfide SSEs.
To sum up, the construction of the abovementioned coating layers can prevent the sulfide SSEs from directly contacting with the oxide cathodes. Moreover, the oxidation potential of these coatings is usually higher than that of the SSEs, which makes them more stable against the cathodes. Consequently, the unstable sulfide SSEs/cathodes interface are replaced by two stable interfaces of the coating/sulfide SSE interface and the coating/cathode interface, thus suppressing the formation of the space charge layer and restraining undesired interfacial mutual diffusion and side reactions significantly.

3.6 Applied external conditions
The interfacial environments of solid-state lithium metal batteries may also be affected by the applied external conditions, such as the packaging technique, applied pressure, and operating temperature. In this section, we will describe it briefly. In terms of the packaging technique, unlike the conventionally used pressing method for the prepared electrode and the SSE layers, in situ vacuum deposition has been widely used to realize good interfacial contact between the SSE and the cathode. For example, Ohta et al.249 deposited LCO cathode on the Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 SSE as a thin film (∼500 nm) through PLD. Consequently, interfacial resistance between LCO and SSE was comparable to that of the lithium ion batteries with liquid organic electrolytes, and the activation energy was even lower. In addition, a thin film of LCO was also sputtered onto the Li2O–Al2O3–SiO2–P2O5–TiO2–GeO2 glass ceramic solid electrolyte.250 Besides LCO, amorphous TiS4 cathode was deposited on the garnet-type LLZO solid electrolyte pellet by the PLD method, and the full cells showed a reversible capacity of about 500 mA h g−1 at 0.01 mA cm−2 at 25 °C.251 It is also known that a high packaging pressure can ensure improved initial contact between the electrolyte and the electrode to some extent by preventing the appearance of voids. In addition, the constant applied pressure during cycling is also effective for ameliorating the electrochemical performance of the assembled SSBs. However, a very high stack pressure will cause short-circuit of the cell immediately (75 MPa) or after a relatively short time of plating and stripping (25 MPa). Doux et al. studied a range of cycling stack pressures and demonstrated that an optimal pressure of 5 MPa can allow long-term cycling in the SSBs.252
To date, most SSBs have been expected to work effectively at room temperature and their performance can be greatly improved with increasing temperature. However, it is important to note that undesired side reactions occur more quickly at higher temperatures. Therefore, integrative capability optimization method is required to balance the overall performance of the practical solid-state lithium metal batteries.
4. Progressive applications and future directions
As described above, although the actual microstructure and evolutionary process of the electrode/electrolyte interface remain to be further verified, several approaches adopted to assemble the SSBs have greatly decreased the interfacial resistance, thus improving the electrochemical performance, among which some specific types of SSEs hold remarkable potential in assembling high-performance SSBs. In addition, for application-oriented concerns, apart from the safety and energy density, some more performance metrics for SSBs are required to re-evaluate the application prospect, and more advanced characterization techniques are also urgently needed. Moreover, some new types of Li batteries that have higher energy density, such as Lithium–sulfur and Lithium–air batteries, provide much wider application stages for the SSEs. In this section, based on the interface chemistry, we will focus on the progressive applications and future directions, and give some detailed perspectives.
4.1 Promising inorganic SSEs
As shown in Table 1, several types of inorganic SSEs have been discovered with characteristic advantages and drawbacks. Currently, thin film batteries are the most mature solid battery technology towards practical commercialization, where the step-by-step deposition of the electrodes and the LiPON SSE can realize intimate interfacial contact of the whole system.253 Moreover, although the ionic conductivity of LiPON is only 2 × 10−6 S cm−1, the corresponding area-specific resistance is as low as 50 Ω cm2, thus obtaining superior performance with more than ten thousand cycles.52 However, the low mass loading of the active materials make it difficult for the output energy density of the thin film battery to satisfy the demand for large scale electronic devices and electric vehicles.254 Also, based on the above discussion, the interfacial compatibility and stability are the main obstacles for the practical application of commercial SSBs. Since no specific type of inorganic SSEs with high conductivity can solve these two interfacial issues simultaneously, those with one intrinsic superiority may possess a greater chance of final prioritization. In this sense, from the aspect of practical application, we estimate that garnet-type and sulfide SSEs are the most promising inorganic SSEs for assembling bulk SSBs.
Table 1 Summary of several types of inorganic SSEs




Type
Structure
Representative material
Conductivity (S cm−1)
Advantages
Disadvantages




Oxide
Garnet
Li7La3Zr2O1252
10−5–10−3
• High mechanical strength
• Non-flexible


LISICON
Li14Zn(GeO4)412


• Relatively high chemical and electrochemical stability
• Poor compatibility with electrode materials


NASICON
Li1.6Al0.6Ti1.4(PO4)353




• Energy-extensive manufacturing process


Perovskite
Li3.3La0.56TiO3189








Antiperovskite
Li3OCl11












Sulfide
Glass Li2S–P2S5
80Li2S–20P2S577
10−7–10−2
• High ionic conductivity
• Unstable in air


Glassy ceramic
Li7P3S11211
• Good mechanical flexibility
• Low oxidation stability


Argyrodite Li6PS5X
Li6PS5Cl91
• Low grain-boundary resistance
• Poor compatibility with cathode materials


Thio-LISICON
Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S416






Li11−xM2−xP1+xS12 Structure
Li10SnP2S12222










Thin film
—
LiPON14
10−6
• High electrochemical stability
• Low energy density


• Expensive large-scale production






Halide
—
LiI19
10−8–10−5
• Good mechanical strength and mechanical flexibility
• Unstable in air


• Stable with Li metal
• Low oxidation voltage




• Low conductivity






Borohydride
—
LiBH417
10−7–10−4
• Low grain-boundary resistance
• Unstable in air


• Stable with Li metal
• Poor compatibility with cathode materials


• Good mechanical strength and mechanical flexibility






As for the garnet-type SSE, apart from its high ionic conductivity, its unique feature is that it is chemically stable against active electrodes without interfacial reactions. This point is extremely significant for the development of solid-state batteries. Moreover, after removing the carbonate layers formed on the surfaces by suitable processes, the interfacial condition between the garnets and the Li anode can be better ameliorated.255 Therefore, poor interfacial contact with the cathodes has become the most urgent issue that remains to be solved. On the contrary, sulfide SSEs show better interfacial compatibility with the electrode materials due to their ductile nature, thus realizing lower resistance and more effective interfacial Li+ transfer process. They also possess the highest ionic conductivity among the SSEs, which is comparable with that of the liquid state electrolytes. However, the chemical instability at ambient atmosphere and electrochemical instability with Li and high voltage oxide cathodes have extremely hindered the practical application of sulfide SSEs.213,256 In addition, undesired Li dendrite propagation is another problem that widely exists in almost all types of SSEs.
Consequently, rational component optimization of electrodes and SSEs, artificial interphase design, and external stress assistance are believed to be essential for the performance improvement towards practical application of commercial SSBs. Some research efforts based on garnet-type SSEs and sulfide SSEs are summarized in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Based on these present achievements, we would like to provide some additional perspectives for further investigation.
Table 2 Summary of the garnet-type SSE-based SSBs




Cathode
SSE
Performance
Ref.


Active material
SSE
Thickness (μm)
Capability (mA h g−1 cycle)
Test conditions




LiFePO4
Li7La3Zr2O12
3–5
146.2/100
0.1C (60 °C)

142



LiFePO4
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–PEO
∼40
141.5/200
0.1C (60 °C)

143



LiFePO4
Li6.375La3Zr1.375Nb0.625O12–Sn
1200
151.7/100
0.1C (RT)

176



LiFePO4
Li7La3Zr2O12–PVDF–HFP
100
110/180
0.5C (RT)

279



LiFePO4
Li6.85La2.9Ca0.1Zr1.75Nb0.25O12
—
117.8/100
0.1 mA cm−2 (RT)

178



LiFePO4
Li6.20Ga0.30La2.95Rb0.05Zr2O12
∼1000
110/20
0.05C (60 °C)

158



LiFePO4
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12
100
139.5/100
0.05C (60 °C)

138



LiFePO4
Li6.5La3Zr1.5Nb0.5O12–PEO
—
95.6/30
0.05C (40 °C)

280



LiFePO4
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12
100
142.7/150
0.1C (30 °C)

123



LiCoO2
Al-Li7La3Zr2O12
75
139/1
0.1C (60 °C)

281



LiCoO2
Li6.8La2.95Ca0.05Zr1.75Nb0.25O12
1000
78/1
0.01C (RT)

153



LiCoO2
Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12
1000
85/5
0.05C (RT)

282



LiCoO2
Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25 O12
1000
55.8/1
0.007C (RT)

283



LiCoO2
Li7La3Zr2O12-Nb thin layer
1000–2000
80/25
0.001 mA cm−2 (RT)

225



LiCoO2
Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12–PVDF
—
147/120
0.4C (RT)

284



LiCoO2
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12
100
116/100
0.1C (30 °C)

123



LiCoO2
Li6.25La3Zr2Al0.25O12–LiBr
1000
111.6/70
0.02C (RT)

285



LiMn2O4
Li7La3Zr2O12–0.3B2O3
2000
96.44/20
0.005 mA cm−2 (RT)

286



LiMn2O4
Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12–Ag
600
88/100
0.2C (RT)

287



Li[Ni0.5Co0.2Mn0.3]O2
Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12
∼1000
76.6/5
5000 mA cm−2 (80 °C)

288



Li4Ti5O12
Li6·25Al0·25La3Zr2O12
500–1000
15/1
0.008 mA cm−2 (95 °C)

125



V2O5
Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12
∼200
150/20
50 mA g−1 (100 °C)

63



α-TiS4
Li7La3Zr2O12-Li3BO3
—
500/15
0.01 mA cm−2 (RT)

251



S-C
Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12
300
800/60
0.2 mA cm−2 (65 °C)

289



S-Ketjenblack (KB)
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–MgO
∼2000
936/20
0.1C (RT)

290



S-CNT
Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 bilayer
∼590
645/1
0.2 mA cm−2 (RT)

124



S
Li7La3Zr2O12
∼200
400/50
1 mA cm−2 (RT)

291



S
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12
∼300
920/200
0.5 mA cm−2 (RT)

51



S–C
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–MgO
—
685/200
0.2C (RT)

292



S
Li6.5La3Zr1.5Nb0.5O12
60–100
1100/50
50 mA g−1 (RT)

293



S
Li6La3Ta1.5Y0.5O12–graphene
—
947.03/200
0.5C (RT)

294



O2
Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12
—
12000/1
200 mA g−1 (RT)

295



Air
Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12
1000
1000/50
0.02 mA cm−2 (80 °C)

296





Table 3 Summary of sulfide SSE-based SSBs




Cathode
SSE
Performance
Ref.


Active materials
SSE
Thickness (μm)
Capacity (mA h g−1/cycle)
Test conditions




LiNbO3-coated LiCoO2
Li7Ge3PS12
1000
55/10
7.25 mA g−1 (RT)

297



LiFePO4
Li10GeP2S12
500
122/120
0.5C (RT)

298



Li4Ti5O12
70Li2S·29P2S5·1P2S3
1500
140/700
12.7 mA cm−2 (100 °C)

299



Li4Ti5O12
Li6PS5Cl
500
158/250
0.05C (80 °C)

300



NCM111
Li6PS5Cl
570
60/20
0.1C (RT)

301



ZrO2-coated NCM111
75Li2S·25P2S5
—
115/50
0. 1C (RT)

302



NCM622
LiI–Li3PS4
500
126/40
0.1C (55 °C)

135



S–Super P
Li7P2.9Mn0.1S10.7I0.3
—
800/60
0.05C (RT)

303



S–Cu
80Li2S·20P2S5
545
650/20
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

159



S–Cu
60Li2S·40SiS2
—
980/5
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

304



S–AB
80Li2S·20P2S5
—
850/200
1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)

305



S–AB
80Li2S·20P2S5
—
920/20
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

273



S–Super P
Li10SnP2S12
681
1180/50
0.025C (RT)

306



S–Super P
Li6PS5Cl
600
389/200
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

307



S–Activated carbon (AC)
80Li2S·20P2S5
435
1217/10
1.6 mA cm−2 (RT)

308



S–Super P
Li6PS5Br
300
1080/50
0.1C (RT)

309



S–Super P
BN doped-Li7P3S11
1000
185/50
—

310



S–KB
Li1.5PS3.3
477
1200/50
1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)

311



S–KB
LGPS-IL
466
750/50
83.5 mA g−1 (RT)

312



S–CMK-3
Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4
435
1000/50
0.023 mA cm−2 (RT)

313



S–VGCF
Li3PS4
—
1200/50
0.1 mA cm−2 (RT)

314



S–AC
Li1.5PS3.3
—
1800/1000
1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)

315



S–Acetylene black (AB)
Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4
435
640/40
83.75 mA g−1 (RT)

316



S–AB
Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01
360
500/30
0.05C (RT)

317



S–AB
Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4
435
500/30
83.75 mA g−1 (RT)

318



S–AB
70Li2S·30P2S5
430
560/6
0.13 mA cm−2 (RT)

166



S–CR
Li10.05Ge1.05P1.95S12
435
1500/50
0.5C (RT)

319



S-CNT
Li6PS5Cl
615
1393/50
0.17 mA cm−2 (RT)

320



S-CNF
Li3PS4
403
1400/10
0.025 mA cm−2 (RT)

321



S-CNTs
LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–P2O5
975
660/400
1C (60 °C)

322



S–rGO
Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3
—
827/60
80 mA g−1 (RT)

323



S–rGO
Li7P3S11
613
306/120
160 mA g−1 (RT)

324



S–Mesoporous carbon
Li3PS4
545
1100/400
1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)

325



Li3PS4 coated Li2S
β-Li3PS4
681
850/100
0.1C (RT)

326



Li2S–LiI–VGCF
75Li2S·25P2S5
409
930/50
0.13 mA cm−2 (RT)

327



Li2S–Cu
80Li2S·20P2S5
545
350/20
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

328



Li2S–AB
75Li2S·25P2S5
545
620/10
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

329



Li2S–Li6PS5Cl–C
80Li2S·20P2S5
605
830/60
50 mA g−1 (RT)

330



Li2S–C–VGCF
70Li2S·30P2S5
800
464/9
0.044 mA cm−2 (RT)

331



Li2S–C
80Li2S·20P2S5
401
730/25
0.05 mA cm−2 (RT)

332



Li2S–LiI–VGCF
Li3PS4 in Kevlar fiber
100
750/20
0.05C (RT)

333



Li2S–C
Li7P3S11
681
1073/30
0.2 mA cm−2 (60 °C)

334



Li2S–VGCF
78Li2S·22P2S5
401
600/20
0.05 mA cm−2 (RT)

335



FeS–S
77.5Li2S·22.5P2S5
806
900/225
0.11 mA cm−2 (60 °C)

336



a-MoS3
80Li2S·20P2S5
545
670/60
0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)

337



TiS2
LGPS
621
170/40
0.88 mA g−1 (RT)

338



Co9S8–Li7P3S11
LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–P2O5
1000
421/1000
1.27 mA cm−2 (RT)

339



Fe–S–VGCF
75Li2S·25P2S5
545
458/200
0.64 mA cm−2 (RT)

340



SeS2–AB
LGPS + Li3PS4
585
935/100
0.4 A g−1 (RT)

341



rGO–VS4
LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–1P2O5
1000
333/500
0.5 A g−1 (RT)

342





(i) Integrated engineering optimization and comprehensive performance evaluation. As discussed above, the Li+ transfer behavior among bulk electrodes, SSEs, and the interfaces between them are inherently affected by each other, together exerting an influence on the output performance of the assembled SSBs. The component optimization and architectural design of the SSBs are indispensable for the ultimate goal of developing applicable next-generation energy storage systems with both high security and high energy density. Hence, the point-to-point engineering strategy to solve a single problem does not seem to be the most advisable and effective way for integrated performance improvement. Similarly, full cell-level comprehensive performance evaluation metrics are also needed to avoid some emerging inadvisable strategies that alleviate one problem while making the evaluation metrics poorer, which will be discussed later in more detail.
(ii) More attention to the thickness of the applied SSEs and integral output energy density of the assembled SSBs. Most currently applied inorganic SSEs reported in the literature show large thicknesses in the range of 500–1000 μm and a mass loading as high as 70–400 mg cm−2, which significantly lower the integral output energy density of the assembled SSBs. Moreover, several applied strategies such as introducing interlayers and constructing 3D architecture could further decrease the energy density. Therefore, developing high-quality SSEs with both high ionic conductivity and superior mechanical strength are still essential for reducing the thickness of the SSE plates and the proportion of SSEs contained in the electrodes.
(iii) Preferential exploration of some specific application fields with particular performance requirements. As discussed above, there exists a combined challenge in the geometric, mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical aspects as well as the complicated spatial and temporal changes that hinder the practical applications of SSBs. As a matter of fact, the complete replacement of liquid electrolytes with SSEs in large-scale applications among civilian, industrial, medical, or even military fields is difficult to realize over the next decade. Therefore, the research on SSBs in some specific application fields with particular performance requirements may be preferentially explored for the near-future applications, such as the miniaturization of microelectronic devices, the integration in aero-spacecraft, and the implementation in biological sensors.
(iv) Constant external environment assistance with novel architectural design. The bulk ionic transfer as well as the interfacial conditions of the SSBs are deeply affected by the external applied pressure and the operating temperature. Moreover, numerous studies have proved that the interfacial Li+ behavior is dominated by creeping at reasonable temperatures and strain rates. Some novel architectural design with appropriate constant pressure/temperature assistance may be helpful for improving the performance of the assembled SSBs.
(v) The applicability and cost consideration. The applicability and the production cost of the SSBs should also be precisely considered to compete with existing energy storage technologies. For example, when SSEs are used in large-scale energy storage devices containing large quantities of materials with diverse properties, the undesired reaction products as well as generated heat and pressure during cycling can accumulate to a non-negligible level, which may further speed up the deterioration of the integrated energy reactor. Moreover, some cost-effective large-scale production technologies should be further developed to meet more efficient target-oriented application.
4.2 Advanced characterization techniques and performance metrics
Diverse advanced characterization techniques are prerequisites for obtaining fundamental and deep understanding, and for further promoting the practical applications. Unlike the interface between the electrodes and the liquid electrolytes, the compactly embedded interfaces in solid-state batteries are difficult to isolate without damaging the real surface condition.65 To solve the problem, apart from traditional electrochemical characterization approaches such as cyclic voltammogram, EIS, and polarization testing, various visualized methods have been established. Focus ion beam is widely employed to accurately prepare the cross-section of the interface for further ex situ analysis, including cross-section SEM, TEM, energy-dispersed X-ray analysis (EDX), and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).257–259 Moreover, with the help of special microbattery samples, some in situ experimental characterizations are also developed in pursuit of more accurate precision. For example, Tatsumisago et al.79 investigated the reactivity of the 80Li2S–20P2S5 electrolyte with active materials such as the LiCoO2 cathode and the Li4Ti5O12 anode with the help of HAADF-STEM, which opened up the door for interfacial in situ TEM observations. Also, in the past few years, in situ XRD, in situ XPS (Fig. 15a and b), cryogenic electron microscopy (Fig. 15c), in situ STEM-EELS (Fig. 15d), neutron depth profiling (Fig. 15e), and some other advanced experiments have also been employed to reveal the interfacial configuration and changes in the solid-state batteries.53,69,107,260–262
 Fig. 15  Selective examples of chemical examinations. (a) In situ lithiation of solid electrolytes during XPS surface analysis. The argon ion gun is used to sputter a lithium metal foil placed in the vicinity of the sample of interest.53 (b) The basic idea and setup of the in situ XPS technique.69 An argon ion beam is used to sputter lithium, gold, or aluminum metal on the sample surface. After deposition, the reaction products at the interface are investigated using photoelectron spectroscopy. (c) Schematic images showing the processes for the preparation of the sample, mounting onto the grid, loading onto the holder, and transferring into the TEM safely.262 (d) Schematic of the experimental setup of a nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid, showing the triangular geometry of the cell.260 The cathode is electrically connected to the grid and a piezo-controlled STM tip makes contact with the anode current collector. (e) Schematic images of the experimental set-up for operando NDP.107 
Apart from the interdependence of performance measures, the lack of a basic reference system also restricts the development of solid-state batteries. Recently, Janek et al.263 benchmarked the performance of all solid-state batteries by using a minimalistic system, which only contains a lithium metal anode, β-Li3PS4 solid electrolyte, and the Li(Ni0.6Co0.2Mn0.2)O2 cathode active material. After comparing the reported literature with this minimalistic cell, they identified the research targets towards high-performance solid-state batteries, such as achieving less than 40 Ω cm2 internal resistance, less than 50 μm SSE thickness, more than 5 mA h cm−2 area capacity, and 500 W h kg−1 hypothetical cathode specific energy.
Furthermore, many mobile phone and automobile companies have accelerated the industrial layout of solid-state batteries for ultimate commercial applications. Toyota has developed sulfide electrolytes with high Li+ conductivity and significantly lowered the internal resistance by an innovative packaging technology.16 Recently, they announced that electric vehicles with solid-state batteries will be displayed during the Tokyo Olympics. ProLogium Corporation has tested semi-solid-state battery packs based on oxide electrolytes, aiming to achieve a high energy density of 810 W h L−1.264 Bosch, Dyson, Samsung, and Seeo have also launched research programs to improve the safety of commercial batteries.16,61 However, lithium metal has not been employed to replace conventional anodes yet and the interfacial condition is still far from satisfactory. As for the SSE itself, in particular, the area-specific resistance instead of solely the ionic conductivity should be considered, as the thickness of the SSE layer also affects the energy density of the whole battery.52 In combination with electrode materials, interfacial design and packaging technology are crucial for the output capacities. Moreover, the security testing and cost assessments should also be taken into account for developing practical and accessible solid-state batteries.265–267
4.3 Lithium–sulfur and Lithium–air batteries
Compared with conventional lithium ion batteries with oxide cathodes, Li–S and Li–air batteries have captured worldwide attention as potential batteries for next-generation applications due to their low cost, appropriate equilibrium potential, and high theoretical capacity and energy density (as shown in eqn (7) and (8)). However, both of them suffer from undesirable drawbacks that hinder their wide application,268 where the use of SSEs is considered to be effective for solving most of these problems, thus enabling much wider application stages and miraculous ceiling for the SSEs. As for Li–S batteries, the ubiquitous shuttle effect of intermediate polysulfides and the dissolution of S/Li2S in organic liquid electrolytes can be effectively prevented through the use of SSEs.269,270 Hence, the assembled solid-state Li–S batteries can demonstrate improved Coulombic efficiency and superior cycling stability. Furthermore, for application-oriented concerns, poorly controlled electrode/electrolyte interface, severe pulverization, and alarming safety problems in liquid state Li–S batteries can also be extremely ameliorated due to the solid and relatively stable character of the SSEs. Similar effects also exist in solid-state Li–air batteries, such as the suppression of electrolyte volatilization, insoluble Li2O2 blocking, and the crossover of gases across electrolytes. More importantly, inorganic SSEs are considered to be stable and compatible with Li2O2.271,272 Therefore, many attempts have been performed for solid-state Li–S and Li–air batteries, among which interface engineering also plays an important role for improving the reversible capacity and cycling stability of assembled batteries. 2Li+ + S + 2e− = Li2S, E0 = 2.15 V vs. Li+/Li(7) 2Li+ + O2 + 2e− = Li2O2, E0 = 2.96 V vs. Li+/Li(8)
As for Li–S batteries, Tatsumisagoet al.273 prepared a favorable Li/Li2S–P2S5 interface by inserting a lithium thin film between them, which can help to realize reproducible lithium stripping/plating during cycling, thus delivering a capacity higher than 900 mA h g−1. To obtain favorable contacts between the cathode components, Li2S nanocomposites were coupled with Li2S–P2S5 by mechanical milling and the reversible capacity was improved to 1000 mA h g−1. LiBH4 electrolyte with better electrochemical compatibility with Li was also assembled into the solid-state Li–S batteries and a higher S utilization ratio could be achieved simultaneously, showing superior electrochemical performance at relatively higher operating temperature.274 In addition, several innovative interfacial designs were also performed. Xie et al.275 took Li7P3S11 as a coating layer to prepare tellurium-doped S@Sulfurized polyacrylonitrile cathode, where the interfacial compatibility as well as the reaction kinetics were significantly enhanced due to the synergistic effect between Te-doping and intimate Li7P3S11 coating. As a result, the assembled solid-state Li–S battery exhibited excellent performance with a reversible capacity over 1173.1 mA h g−1 and long lifespans over 500 cycles. Computational analysis was also performed to investigate the evolution mechanisms of the S-cathode/SSE interface, which was supposed to provide more information to actually accelerate the understanding and design of applicable solid-state Li–S batteries.276
As for Li–air batteries, Zhou et al.277 prepared a cathode composed of single-walled carbon nanotubes with the LAGP electrolyte by high-energy ball milling method, which could decrease the particle size and make the CNTs/LAGP interface more intimate. The well-designed battery maintained a superior cyclability of 1000 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles at room temperature in air, demonstrating a great potential for high capacity actual application batteries. To further improve the interfacial stability of the battery system, Zhao et al.278 coated silicone-oil film on the surface of a porous borate cathode, which could block H2O and CO2 from reaching the reaction sites but allowed high rate O2 transfer due to the increase in the specific area and extremely reduced oxygen transfer resistance. The assembled solid-state Li–air batteries can maintain a high capacity of 5000 mA h g−1 for 50 cycles (125 days) in ambient air. Therefore, the employment of SSEs may actually speed up the industrialization of Li–S and Li–air batteries that have been explored for decades.
5. Conclusion
Solid-state lithium metal batteries with both high security and high energy density represent the application tendency of next-generation energy storage systems. However, as for the assembled SSBs, the problems based on poor electrode/electrolyte interface are a critical constraint. In this review, focusing on the current fundamental understanding, challenges, and opportunities of the interface chemistry between inorganic SSEs and electrodes, we firstly exhibit the interfacial configuration characteristics and mechanisms of SSBs. Then, to further investigate the generation source and influence mechanism of the interface issues, we point out that the unsatisfactory interfacial compatibility, stability, and dendrite problem are the main shackles for achieving high-performance cells. Specifically, for the anode-electrolyte interface, the lithiophobic characteristic of some SSEs can easily give rise to poor interface contact, and the volume change and side reactions during electrochemical cycling will further deteriorate the interface. In addition, continuous Li dendrite formation and propagation through SSE represents another pervasive problem. For the cathode-electrolyte interface, the major issues are the point contact and the accompanying highly resistive interphase, coupled with undesired interfacial reactions and the formation of an Li-depleted layer at the interface between the SSEs and the high-voltage cathodes. Moreover, the recent research status and trends for ameliorating the electrode/electrolyte interface are systematically expressed, including the efforts for component optimization and the architectural design of bulk anodes, SSEs, cathodes, and the interface engineering construction between them. Lastly, several progressive applications and insightful future research directions are proposed in detail. This review provides a comprehensive and in-depth introduction on the scientific mechanisms and engineering strategies of the SSB interface chemistry, which is also compactly and rationally organized. We try to present the classic and latest research findings and propose progressive perspectives towards interface engineering that are relevant to the integration of applicable solid-state Li metal batteries. Overall, it is highly expected and also anticipated that more novel design strategies and efficient solid-state energy storage systems could come into the picture and further revolutionize the way we live in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the project supported by the Sate Key Program of National Natural Science of China (Grant No. 51532005) and the National Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51472148 and 51272137).
References
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, X. Lü, C.-J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu and T. Qing, Aqueous Li-ion battery enabled by halogen conversion–intercalation chemistry in graphite, Nature, 2019, 569(7755), 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, P. Y. Yuen, K. Liu, J. Xie, R. H. Dauskardt and Y. Cui, An artificial solid electrolyte interphase with high Li-ion conductivity, mechanical strength, and flexibility for stable lithium metal anodes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(10), 1605531 CrossRef .
W. An, B. Gao, S. Mei, B. Xiang, J. Fu, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Scalable synthesis of ant-nest-like bulk porous silicon for high-performance lithium-ion battery anodes, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, Electrolytes for solid-state lithium rechargeable batteries: recent advances and perspectives, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(5), 2525–2540 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Jiang, Y. Yu and J. Sun, Progress of enhancing the safety of lithium ion battery from the electrolyte aspect, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 93–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, A short review of failure mechanisms of lithium metal and lithiated graphite anodes in liquid electrolyte solutions, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148(3–4), 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-Y. Liang, X.-D. Zhang, X.-X. Zeng, M. Yan, Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, W.-P. Wang, X.-W. Wu and J.-L. Shi, Enabling Durable Electrochemical Interface via Artificial Amorphous Cathode Electrolyte Interphase for Hybrid Solid/Liquid Lithium-Metal Batteries, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 6647–6651 CrossRef .
M. Dresselhaus and I. Thomas, Alternative energy technologies, Nature, 2001, 414(6861), 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, Lithium metal anodes for rechargeable batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(2), 513–537 RSC .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, J.-H. Kim, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Metallic anodes for next generation secondary batteries, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(23), 9011–9034 RSC .
R. Chen, W. Qu, X. Guo, L. Li and F. Wu, The pursuit of solid-state electrolytes for lithium batteries: from comprehensive insight to emerging horizons, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3(6), 487–516 RSC .
Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, S.-H. Bo, J. C. Kim, L. J. Miara and G. Ceder, Understanding interface stability in solid-state batteries, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 105–126 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, S. Stalin, C. Z. Zhao and L. A. Archer, Designing solid-state electrolytes for safe, energy-dense batteries, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 229–252 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lacivita, A. S. Westover, A. Kercher, N. D. Phillip, G. Yang, G. Veith, G. Ceder and N. J. Dudney, Resolving the amorphous structure of lithium phosphorus oxynitride (Lipon), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(35), 11029–11038 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, K. Liao, Q. Lu and Z. Shao, Recent advances in the interface engineering of solid-state Li-ion batteries with artificial buffer layers: challenges, materials, construction and characterization, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1780–1804 RSC .
L. Fan, S. Wei, S. Li, Q. Li and Y. Lu, Recent progress of the solid-state electrolytes for high-energy metal-based batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(11), 1702657 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, R. S. Kühnel, A. Remhof, L. Duchêne, E. C. Reyes, D. Rentsch, Z. Łodziana and C. Battaglia, A Lithium Amide-Borohydride Solid-State Electrolyte with Lithium-Ion Conductivities Comparable to Liquid Electrolytes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(19), 1700294 CrossRef .
J. Cuan, Y. Zhou, T. Zhou, S. Ling, K. Rui, Z. Guo, H. Liu and X. Yu, Borohydride-Scaffolded Li/Na/Mg Fast Ionic Conductors for Promising Solid-State Electrolytes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(1), 1803533 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Liang, X. Yang, K. Adair, C. Wang, F. Zhao and X. Sun, Progress and Perspectives on Halide Lithium Conductors for All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1429–1461 RSC .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Lithium battery chemistries enabled by solid-state electrolytes, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(4), 1–16 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Q. Bai, A. M. Nolan, Y. Liu, S. Gong, Q. Sun and Y. Mo, Lithium Chlorides and Bromides as Promising Solid-State Chemistries for Fast Ion Conductors with Good Electrochemical Stability, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(24), 8039–8043 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama and K. Kawamoto, A lithium superionic conductor, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10(9), 682–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Seino, T. Ota, K. Takada, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, A sulphide lithium super ion conductor is superior to liquid ion conductors for use in rechargeable batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(2), 627–631 RSC .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, High-power all-solid-state batteries using sulfide superionic conductors, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(4), 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. Hu, X. Pang and Z. Zhou, Recent progress in high-voltage lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 229–242 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, J. Zheng, M. Gu, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang and C.-M. Wang, Intragranular cracking as a critical barrier for high-voltage usage of layer-structured cathode for lithium-ion batteries, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–9 CrossRef .
F. S. Gittleson and F. El Gabaly, Non-faradaic Li+ migration and chemical coordination across solid-state battery interfaces, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(11), 6974–6982 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, Q. Li, X. Yu, L. Chen and H. Li, Approaching Practically Accessible Solid-State Batteries: Stability Issues Related to Solid Electrolytes and Interfaces, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6820–6877 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurung, J. Pokharel, A. Baniya, R. Pathak, K. Chen, B. S. Lamsal, N. Ghimire, W.-H. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Q. Qiao, A review on strategies addressing interface incompatibilities in inorganic all-solid-state lithium batteries, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3(12), 3279–3309 RSC .
J. Schnell, T. Günther, T. Knoche, C. Vieider, L. Köhler, A. Just, M. Keller, S. Passerini and G. Reinhart, All-solid-state lithium-ion and lithium metal batteries–paving the way to large-scale production, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 160–175 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Lin, X. Bi, L. Tian, K. Yang, J. Liu, M. Li, Z. Chen, J. Lu and K. Amine, 
            In situ quantification of interphasial chemistry in Li-ion battery, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14(1), 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, A. Salehi, G. Lin, J. Hu, X. Jin, E. Agar and F. Liu, Probing Li-ion concentration in an operating lithium ion battery using in situ Raman spectroscopy, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227361 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Luo, M. Chen and L. Wu, Uniformly Confined Germanium Quantum Dots in 3D Ordered Porous Carbon Framework for High-Performance Li-ion Battery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000373 CrossRef CAS .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Fundamentals of inorganic solid-state electrolytes for batteries, Nat. Mater., 2019, 1–14 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, P. Oh, J. Kim, H. Cha, S. Chae, S. Lee and J. Cho, Advances and Prospects of Sulfide All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries via One-to-One Comparison with Conventional Liquid Lithium Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(29), 1900376 CrossRef .
Z. Gao, H. Sun, L. Fu, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Promises, challenges, and recent progress of inorganic solid-state electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(17), 1705702 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Hu, Batteries: getting solid, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(4), 1–2 Search PubMed .
H. Duan, Y.-X. Yin, Y. Shi, P.-F. Wang, X.-D. Zhang, C.-P. Yang, J.-L. Shi, R. Wen, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Dendrite-free Li-metal battery enabled by a thin asymmetric solid electrolyte with engineered layers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(1), 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, S. Gu, X. Hong, K. Rui, X. Huang, J. Jin, C. Chen, J. Yang and Z. Wen, Pre-modified Li3PS4 based interphase for lithium anode towards high-performance Li-S battery, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 16–23 CrossRef .
W. Luo, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, K. K. Fu, J. Dai, S. D. Lacey, C. Wang, B. Liu, X. Han and Y. Mo, Transition from superlithiophobicity to superlithiophilicity of garnet solid-state electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(37), 12258–12262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, W. Wu, A. M. Nolan, T. Wang, J. Wen, C. Hu, Y. Mo, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Lithium–Graphite Paste: An Interface Compatible Anode for Solid-State Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(10), 1807243 CrossRef .
B. Lee, E. Paek, D. Mitlin and S. W. Lee, Sodium metal anodes: Emerging solutions to dendrite growth, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119(8), 5416–5460 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hosaka, K. Kubota, A. S. Hameed and S. Komaba, Research Development on K-Ion Batteries, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6358–6466 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Tian and Y. Qi, Simulation of the effect of contact area loss in all-solid-state Li-Ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164(11), E3512–E3521 CrossRef CAS .
A. Neumann, S. Randau, K. Becker-Steinberger, T. Danner, S. Hein, Z. Ning, J. Marrow, F. H. Richter, J. R. Janek and A. Latz, Analysis of Interfacial Effects in All-Solid-State Batteries with Thiophosphate Solid Electrolytes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(8), 9277–9291 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Schröder, T. Arlt, I. Manke, R. Koerver, R. Pinedo, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, (Electro) chemical expansion during cycling: monitoring the pressure changes in operating solid-state lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(20), 9929–9936 RSC .
Y. Huang, B. Chen, J. Duan, F. Yang, T. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Yang, C. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, g-C3N4: An Interface Enabler for Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3699–3704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wen, Y. Huang, J. Duan, Y. Wu, W. Luo, L. Zhou, C. Hu, L. Huang, X. Zheng and W. Yang, Highly Adhesive Li-BN Nanosheet Composite Anode with Excellent Interfacial Compatibility for Solid-State Li Metal Batteries, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14549–14556 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Y. Gong, K. K. Fu, X. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Liu, H. Wang and G. Rubloff, Negating interfacial impedance in garnet-based solid-state Li metal batteries, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16(5), 572–579 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krauskopf, R. Dippel, H. Hartmann, K. Peppler, B. Mogwitz, F. H. Richter, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Lithium-Metal Growth Kinetics on LLZO Garnet-Type Solid Electrolytes, Joule, 2019, 3(8), 2030–2049 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X. Huang, Z. Song, K. Rui, Q. Wang, S. Gu, J. Yang, T. Xiu, M. E. Badding and Z. Wen, Highly stable garnet solid electrolyte based Li-S battery with modified anodic and cathodic interfaces, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 282–290 CrossRef .
N. Zhao, W. Khokhar, Z. Bi, C. Shi, X. Guo, L.-Z. Fan and C.-W. Nan, Solid garnet batteries, Joule, 2019, 3, 1190–1199 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hartmann, T. Leichtweiss, M. R. Busche, M. Schneider, M. Reich, J. Sann, P. Adelhelm and J. R. Janek, Degradation of NASICON-type materials in contact with lithium metal: formation of mixed conducting interphases (MCI) on solid electrolytes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(41), 21064–21074 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharafi, E. Kazyak, A. L. Davis, S. Yu, T. Thompson, D. J. Siegel, N. P. Dasgupta and J. Sakamoto, Surface chemistry mechanism of ultra-low interfacial resistance in the solid-state electrolyte Li7La3Zr2O12, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(18), 7961–7968 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hovington, M. Lagacé, A. Guerfi, P. Bouchard, A. Mauger, C. Julien, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, New lithium metal polymer solid-state battery for an ultrahigh energy: nano C-LiFePO4 versus nano Li1.2V3O8, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(4), 2671–2678 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Zheng, Y. Xia, C. Liang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, X. Tao and W. Zhang, All-solid-state batteries with slurry coated LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 composite cathode and Li6PS5Cl electrolyte: Effect of binder content, J. Power Sources, 2018, 391, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Luo and X. Sun, Towards high-performance solid-state Li–S batteries: from fundamental understanding to engineering design, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2140–2195 RSC .
C. Li, Z. Xi, D. Guo, X. Chen and L. Yin, Chemical immobilization effect on lithium polysulfides for lithium–sulfur batteries, Small, 2018, 14(4), 1701986 CrossRef .
J. Yi, S. Guo, P. He and H. Zhou, Status and prospects of polymer electrolytes for solid-state Li–O2 (air) batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(4), 860–884 RSC .
W. Yu, C. Xue, B. Hu, B. Xu, L. Li and C.-W. Nan, Oxygen-and dendrite-resistant ultra-dry polymer electrolytes for solid-state Li–O2 batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 244–251 CrossRef .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, A solid future for battery development, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(9), 1–4 Search PubMed .
T. Shi, Q. Tu, Y. Tian, Y. Xiao, L. J. Miara, O. Kononova and G. Ceder, High Active Material Loading in All-Solid-State Battery Electrode via Particle Size Optimization, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1902881 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, K. Fu, Y. Gong, C. Yang, Y. Yao, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel and H. Xie, Rapid thermal annealing of cathode-garnet interface toward high-temperature solid-state batteries, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(8), 4917–4923 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, The Li-ion rechargeable battery: a perspective, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(4), 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, K. Wang, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y.-C. Cao, F. Wei and L. Mai, Interfaces in solid-state lithium batteries, Joule, 2018, 2(10), 1991–2015 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hoshina, K. Dokko and K. Kanamura, Investigation on electrochemical interface between Li4Ti5O12 and Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 NASICON-type solid electrolyte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(11), A2138–A2142 CrossRef .
J. M. Whiteley, J. H. Woo, E. Hu, K.-W. Nam and S.-H. Lee, Empowering the lithium metal battery through a silicon-based superionic conductor, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161(12), A1812 CrossRef .
J. Feng, L. Lu and M. Lai, Lithium storage capability of lithium ion conductor Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 501(2), 255–258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Krüger, J. Sann and J. Janek, Interphase formation on lithium solid electrolytes—An in situ approach to study interfacial reactions by photoelectron spectroscopy, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenzel, S. Randau, T. Leichtweiß, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. R. Janek, Direct observation of the interfacial instability of the fast ionic conductor Li10GeP2S12 at the lithium metal anode, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(7), 2400–2407 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangadurai, S. Narayanan and D. Pinzaru, Garnet-type solid-state fast Li ion conductors for Li batteries: critical review, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(13), 4714–4727 RSC .
C.-L. Tsai, V. Roddatis, C. V. Chandran, Q. Ma, S. Uhlenbruck, M. Bram, P. Heitjans and O. Guillon, Li7La3Zr2O12 interface modification for Li dendrite prevention, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(16), 10617–10626 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, W. Chen, M. Kunz, K. Persson, N. Tamura, G. Chen and M. Doeff, Effect of surface microstructure on electrochemical performance of garnet solid electrolytes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(3), 2073–2081 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huo, Y. Chen, R. Li, N. Zhao, J. Luo, J. G. P. da Silva, R. Mücke, P. Kaghazchi, X. Guo and X. Sun, Design of a mixed conductive garnet/Li interface for dendrite-free solid lithium metal batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 127–134 RSC .
J. Dai, C. Yang, C. Wang, G. Pastel and L. Hu, Interface engineering for garnet-based solid-state lithium-metal batteries: Materials, structures, and characterization, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(48), 1802068 CrossRef .
K. H. Kim, Y. Iriyama, K. Yamamoto, S. Kumazaki, T. Asaka, K. Tanabe, C. A. Fisher, T. Hirayama, R. Murugan and Z. Ogumi, Characterization of the interface between LiCoO2 and Li7La3Zr2O12 in an all-solid-state rechargeable lithium battery, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(2), 764–767 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, Fabrication of electrode–electrolyte interfaces in all-solid-state rechargeable lithium batteries by using a supercooled liquid state of the glassy electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(1), 118–124 RSC .
G. Vardar, W. J. Bowman, Q. Lu, J. Wang, R. J. Chater, A. Aguadero, R. Seibert, J. Terry, A. Hunt and I. Waluyo, Structure, chemistry, and charge transfer resistance of the interface between Li7La3Zr2O12 electrolyte and LiCoO2 cathode, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(18), 6259–6276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Interfacial observation between LiCoO2 electrode and Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolytes of all-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using transmission electron microscopy, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(3), 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Richards, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim and G. Ceder, Interface stability in solid-state batteries, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(1), 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han, K. Takada and Y. Tateyama, Space–charge layer effect at interface between oxide cathode and sulfide electrolyte in all-solid-state lithium-ion battery, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(14), 4248–4255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Sulfide solid electrolyte with favorable mechanical property for all-solid-state lithium battery, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2261 CrossRef .
K. Yamamoto, Y. Iriyama, T. Asaka, T. Hirayama, H. Fujita, C. A. Fisher, K. Nonaka, Y. Sugita and Z. Ogumi, Dynamic visualization of the electric potential in an all-solid-state rechargeable lithium battery, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49(26), 4414–4417 CrossRef CAS .
T. Swamy, X. Chen and Y.-M. Chiang, Electrochemical redox behavior of li ion conducting sulfide solid electrolytes, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koerver, I. Aygün, T. Leichtweiß, C. Dietrich, W. Zhang, J. O. Binder, P. Hartmann, W. G. Zeier and J. R. Janek, Capacity fade in solid-state batteries: interphase formation and chemomechanical processes in nickel-rich layered oxide cathodes and lithium thiophosphate solid electrolytes, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(13), 5574–5582 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zheng, L. Li, Y. Xia, H. Huang, Y. Gan, C. Liang, X. He, X. Tao and W. Zhang, Unraveling the intra and intercycle interfacial evolution of Li6PS5Cl-based all-solid-state lithium batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(4), 1903311 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, B.-C. Yu, J.-W. Jung, Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Gao, S. Son and J. B. Goodenough, Electrochemical nature of the cathode interface for a solid-state lithium-ion battery: interface between LiCoO2 and garnet-Li7La3Zr2O12, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(21), 8051–8059 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hänsel, S. Afyon and J. L. Rupp, Investigating the all-solid-state batteries based on lithium garnets and a high potential cathode–LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(43), 18412–18420 RSC .
R. Armstrong, T. Dickinson and J. Turner, The breakdown of β-alumina ceramic electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 1974, 19(5), 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Porz, T. Swamy, B. W. Sheldon, D. Rettenwander, T. Frömling, H. L. Thaman, S. Berendts, R. Uecker, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Mechanism of lithium metal penetration through inorganic solid electrolytes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(20), 1701003 CrossRef .
J. Kasemchainan, S. Zekoll, D. Spencer Jolly, Z. Ning, G. O. Hartley, J. Marrow and P. G. Bruce, Critical stripping current leads to dendrite formation on plating in lithium anode solid electrolyte cells, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Li, X. Yao, C. Wang, Y. Li, W. Xue, D. Yu, S. Y. Kim and F. Yang, Li metal deposition and stripping in a solid-state battery via Coble creep, Nature, 2020, 578(7794), 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, C. Jung, H. Kim, K. E. Thomas-Alyea, G. Yoon, B. Kim, M. E. Badding, Z. Song, J. Chang and J. Kim, The Role of Interlayer Chemistry in Li-Metal Growth through a Garnet-Type Solid Electrolyte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1903993 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jalem, Y. Morishita, T. Okajima, H. Takeda, Y. Kondo, M. Nakayama and T. Kasuga, Experimental and first-principles DFT study on the electrochemical reactivity of garnet-type solid electrolytes with carbon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(37), 14371–14379 RSC .
M. J. Wang, R. Choudhury and J. Sakamoto, Characterizing the Li-Solid-Electrolyte Interface Dynamics as a Function of Stack Pressure and Current Density, Joule, 2019, 3(9), 2165–2178 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koerver, W. Zhang, L. de Biasi, S. Schweidler, A. O. Kondrakov, S. Kolling, T. Brezesinski, P. Hartmann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Chemo-mechanical expansion of lithium electrode materials–on the route to mechanically optimized all-solid-state batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(8), 2142–2158 RSC .
H. Chung and B. Kang, Mechanical and thermal failure induced by contact between a Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 solid electrolyte and Li metal in an all solid-state Li cell, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(20), 8611–8619 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Chazalviel, Electrochemical aspects of the generation of ramified metallic electrodeposits, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1990, 42(12), 7355 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, A. Shyamsunder and L. F. Nazar, An in vivo formed solid electrolyte surface layer enables stable plating of Li metal, Joule, 2017, 1(4), 871–886 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bai, J. Li, F. R. Brushett and M. Z. Bazant, Transition of lithium growth mechanisms in liquid electrolytes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(10), 3221–3229 RSC .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, Dendritic growth mechanisms in lithium/polymer cells, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 925–929 CrossRef .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron, C. Brissot, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, Onset of dendritic growth in lithium/polymer cells, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 804–806 CrossRef .
H. Liu, X. B. Cheng, J. Q. Huang, H. Yuan, Y. Lu, C. Yan, G. L. Zhu, R. Xu, C. Z. Zhao, L. P. Hou, C. He, S. Kaskel and Q. Zhang, Controlling dendrite growth in solid-state electrolytes, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(3), 833–843 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. Ji, F. Han, J. Yue, J. Chen, L. Chen, T. Deng, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Fluorinated solid electrolyte interphase enables highly reversible solid-state Li metal battery, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(12), eaau9245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, P. Yu, N. Zhang, G. Ren, S. Zheng, W. Huang, X. Long, H. Li and X. Liu, 
            In situ formation of a bifunctional interlayer enabled by a conversion reaction to initiatively prevent lithium dendrites in a garnet solid electrolyte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(4), 1404–1412 RSC .
A. A. Griffith, VI. The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1921, 221(582–593), 163–198 Search PubMed .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, High electronic conductivity as the origin of lithium dendrite formation within solid electrolytes, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(3), 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Oh, Y. E. Choi, D. H. Kim, Y.-G. Lee, B.-S. Kim, J. Park, H. Sohn and Y. S. Jung, All-solid-state lithium-ion batteries with TiS2 nanosheets and sulphide solid electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(26), 10329–10335 RSC .
S. Teragawa, K. Aso, K. Tadanaga, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Liquid-phase synthesis of a Li3PS4 solid electrolyte using N-methylformamide for all-solid-state lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(14), 5095–5099 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Shao, B. Lotsch, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, J. Janek, L. F. Nazar, C.-W. Nan, J. Maier and M. Armand, New horizons for inorganic solid-state ion conductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(8), 1945–1976 RSC .
H. Zheng, S. Wu, R. Tian, Z. Xu, H. Zhu, H. Duan and H. Liu, Intrinsic Lithiophilicity of Li–Garnet Electrolytes Enabling High-Rate Lithium Cycling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1906189 Search PubMed .
W. Alexander, L. Calvert, R. Gamble and K. Schinzel, The lithium–indium system, Can. J. Chem., 1976, 54(7), 1052–1060 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tatsumisago and A. Hayashi, Preparation of lithium ion conducting glasses and glass–ceramics for all-solid-state batteries, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(12–13), 1411–1417 CrossRef CAS .
G.-T. Zhou, O. Palchik, V. Pol, E. Sominski, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Microwave-assisted solid-state synthesis and characterization of intermetallic compounds of Li3Bi and Li3Sb, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13(10), 2607–2611 RSC .
A. Santhosha, L. Medenbach, J. R. Buchheim and P. Adelhelm, The Indium–Lithium Electrode in Solid-State Lithium-Ion Batteries: Phase Formation, Redox Potentials, and Interface Stability, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2(6), 524–529 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Zhu and Y. Lu, 3D porous Cu current collector/Li-metal composite anode for stable lithium-metal batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(18), 1606422 CrossRef .
L. Fan, S. Li, L. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Gao, Y. Fu, F. Chen, J. Li, H. L. Zhuang and Y. Lu, Enabling stable lithium metal anode via 3D inorganic skeleton with superlithiophilic interphase, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(33), 1802350 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, D. Lei, Y. B. He, Y. Yuan, Q. Yun, B. Ni, W. Lv, B. Li, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, Compact 3D Copper with Uniform Porous Structure Derived by Electrochemical Dealloying as Dendrite-Free Lithium Metal Anode Current Collector, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(19), 1800266 CrossRef .
S.-S. Chi, Y. Liu, N. Zhao, X. Guo, C.-W. Nan and L.-Z. Fan, Solid polymer electrolyte soft interface layer with 3D lithium anode for all-solid-state lithium batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 309–316 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, Y. Jin, K. Liu, X. Tao, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Cui, Transforming from planar to three-dimensional lithium with flowable interphase for solid lithium metal batteries, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(10), eaao0713 CrossRef .
S. Huang, H. Yang, J. Hu, Y. Liu, K. Wang, H. Peng, H. Zhang and L. Z. Fan, Early Lithium Plating Behavior in Confined Nanospace of 3D Lithiophilic Carbon Matrix for Stable Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, Small, 2019, 15(43), 1904216 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Wang, J. Liu, H. Song, Y. Liu, P. Wang, P. He, J. Xu and H. Zhou, Ultra-fine surface solid-state electrolytes for long cycle life all-solid-state lithium–air batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(43), 21248–21254 RSC .
H. Huo, Y. Chen, N. Zhao, X. Lin, J. Luo, X. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Guo and X. Sun, 
            In situ formed Li2CO3-free garnet/Li interface by rapid acid treatment for dendrite-free solid-state batteries, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Fu, Y. Gong, G. T. Hitz, D. W. McOwen, Y. Li, S. Xu, Y. Wen, L. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Pastel, Three-dimensional bilayer garnet solid electrolyte based high energy density lithium metal–sulfur batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(7), 1568–1575 RSC .
J. Van Den Broek, S. Afyon and J. L. Rupp, Interface-Engineered All-Solid-State Li-Ion Batteries Based on Garnet-Type Fast Li+ Conductors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(19), 1600736 CrossRef .
B. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Xu, D. W. McOwen, Y. Gong, C. Yang, G. R. Pastel, H. Xie, K. Fu and J. Dai, 3D lithium metal anodes hosted in asymmetric garnet frameworks toward high energy density batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 376–382 CrossRef .
S. Xu, D. W. McOwen, C. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Luo, C. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Gong, J. Dai and Y. Kuang, Three-Dimensional, Solid-State Mixed Electron–Ion Conductive Framework for Lithium Metal Anode, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(6), 3926–3933 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, T. Gao, Y. Zhu, K. J. Gaskell and C. Wang, A battery made from a single material, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(23), 3473–3483 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin and C. Liang, Lithium-sulfur batteries: from liquid to solid cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(3), 936–958 RSC .
S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. R. Janek, Interfacial reactivity benchmarking of the sodium ion conductors Na3PS4 and sodium β-alumina for protected sodium metal anodes and sodium all-solid-state batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(41), 28216–28224 CrossRef CAS .
R. Garcia-Mendez, F. Mizuno, R. Zhang, T. S. Arthur and J. Sakamoto, Effect of processing conditions of 75Li2S–25P2S5 solid electrolyte on its DC electrochemical behavior, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 237, 144–151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Design principles for solid-state lithium superionic conductors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(10), 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kato, M. Yamamoto, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Mechanical properties of Li2S–P2S5 glasses with lithium halides and application in all-solid-state batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(3), 1002–1007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. He and Y. Mo, Origin of outstanding stability in the lithium solid electrolyte materials: insights from thermodynamic analyses based on first-principles calculations, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(42), 23685–23693 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Choi, S.-H. Choi, A. D. Bui, Y.-J. Lee, S.-M. Lee, H.-C. Shin and Y.-C. Ha, LiI-Doped Sulfide Solid Electrolyte: Enabling a High-Capacity Slurry-Cast Electrode by Low-Temperature Post-Sintering for Practical All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(37), 31404–31412 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, W. Li, H. Duan, H. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Li and H. Liu, Li3PO4-added garnet-type Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12 for Li-dendrite suppression, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Kim, B. Son, S. Mukherjee, N. Schuppert, A. Bates, O. Kwon, M. J. Choi, H. Y. Chung and S. Park, A review of lithium and non-lithium based solid-state batteries, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 299–322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, N. Zhao, Y. Li, C. Chen, Z. Liu and X. Guo, All solid-state lithium batteries based on lamellar garnet-type ceramic electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, S. Xin, S. Li, J. Zhu, X. Lü, Z. Cui, Q. Jia, J. Zhou and Y. Zhao, Fluorine-doped Antiperovskite electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(34), 9965–9968 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fitzhugh, F. Wu, L. Ye, W. Deng, P. Qi and X. Li, A High-Throughput Search for Functionally Stable Interfaces in Sulfide Solid-State Lithium Ion Conductors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(21), 1900807 CrossRef .
T. Jiang, P. He, G. Wang, Y. Shen, C. W. Nan and L. Z. Fan, Solvent-Free Synthesis of Thin, Flexible, Nonflammable Garnet-Based Composite Solid Electrolyte for All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903376 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, Z. Li, Z. Wen and W. Han, Li/Li7La3Zr2O12/LiFePO4 all-solid-state battery with ultrathin nanoscale solid electrolyte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(3), 1431–1435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, N. Zhao, M. Zhang, Y. Li, P. K. Chu, X. Guo, Z. Di, X. Wang and H. Li, Flexible and ion-conducting membrane electrolytes for solid-state lithium batteries: dispersion of garnet nanoparticles in insulating polyethylene oxide, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, M. Tang and Y. Y. Hu, Lithium ion pathway within Li7La3Zr2O12-polyethylene oxide composite electrolytes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(40), 12538–12542 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, N. Liu, J. Sun, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Li, H.-W. Lee and Y. Cui, Ionic conductivity enhancement of polymer electrolytes with ceramic nanowire fillers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(4), 2740–2745 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Li, S.-P. Li, L.-Z. Fan, C.-W. Nan and J. B. Goodenough, PEO/garnet composite electrolytes for solid-state lithium batteries: From “ceramic-in-polymer” to “polymer-in-ceramic”, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zheng, J. Lou, Y. Xia, C. Liang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, X. Tao and W. Zhang, Poly (ethylene oxide) reinforced Li6PS5Cl composite solid electrolyte for all-solid-state lithium battery: Enhanced electrochemical performance, mechanical property and interfacial stability, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Ha, E.-H. Kil, Y. H. Kwon, J. Y. Kim, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, UV-curable semi-interpenetrating polymer network-integrated, highly bendable plastic crystal composite electrolytes for shape-conformable all-solid-state lithium ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(4), 6491–6499 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Yue, Q. Wang, J. Chai, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Guo and G. Cui, Safety-reinforced poly (propylene carbonate)-based All-solid-state polymer electrolyte for ambient-temperature solid polymer lithium batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(24), 1501082 CrossRef .
H. Duan, Y.-X. Yin, X.-X. Zeng, J.-Y. Li, J.-L. Shi, Y. Shi, R. Wen, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, 
            In situ plasticized polymer electrolyte with double-network for flexible solid-state lithium-metal batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 85–91 CrossRef .
Y. J. Nam, D. Y. Oh, S. H. Jung and Y. S. Jung, Toward practical all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries with high energy density and safety: Comparative study for electrodes fabricated by dry-and slurry-mixing processes, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 93–101 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ates, M. Keller, J. Kulisch, T. Adermann and S. Passerini, Development of an all-solid-state lithium battery by slurry-coating procedures using a sulfidic electrolyte, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 204–210 CrossRef .
S. Ohta, J. Seki, Y. Yagi, Y. Kihira, T. Tani and T. Asaoka, Co-sinterable lithium garnet-type oxide electrolyte with cathode for all-solid-state lithium ion battery, J. Power Sources, 2014, 265, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagata and T. Nanno, All solid battery with phosphate compounds made through sintering process, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174(2), 832–837 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, J. Yue, C. Chen, N. Zhao, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Wang, X. Guo and C. Wang, Interphase engineering enabled all-ceramic lithium battery, Joule, 2018, 2(3), 497–508 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wakayama, H. Yonekura and Y. Kawai, Three-dimensional
bicontinuous nanocomposite from a self-assembled block copolymer for a high-capacity all-solid-state lithium battery cathode, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(12), 4453–4459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Moving to a solid-state configuration: a valid approach to making lithium–sulfur batteries viable for practical applications, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(45), 5198–5201 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Wu, W. K. Pang, V. K. Peterson, L. Wei and X. Guo, Garnet-type fast Li-ion conductors with high ionic conductivities for all-solid-state batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(14), 12461–12468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, All-solid-state Li/S batteries with highly conductive glass–ceramic electrolytes, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5(8), 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Park, D. Y. Oh, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, L. Han, J. Y. Kim, H. Xin, F. Lin, S. M. Oh and Y. S. Jung, Solution-processable glass LiI-Li4SnS4 superionic conductors for all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(9), 1874–1883 CrossRef CAS .
X. Judez, G. G. Eshetu, C. Li, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, H. Zhang and M. Armand, Opportunities for rechargeable solid-state batteries based on Li-intercalation cathodes, Joule, 2018, 2(11), 2208–2224 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, T. Leichtweiß, S. P. Culver, R. Koerver, D. Das, D. A. Weber, W. G. Zeier and J. R. Janek, The detrimental effects of carbon additives in Li10GeP2S12-based solid-state batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(41), 35888–35896 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hakari, M. Deguchi, K. Mitsuhara, T. Ohta, K. Saito, Y. Orikasa, Y. Uchimoto, Y. Kowada, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Structural and electronic-state changes of a sulfide solid electrolyte during the Li deinsertion–insertion processes, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(11), 4768–4774 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koerver, F. Walther, I. Aygün, J. Sann, C. Dietrich, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Redox-active cathode interphases in solid-state batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(43), 22750–22760 RSC .
F. Strauss, T. Bartsch, L. de Biasi, A.-Y. Kim, J. R. Janek, P. Hartmann and T. Brezesinski, Impact of cathode material particle size on the capacity of bulk-type all-solid-state batteries, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(4), 992–996 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Choi, J. S. Jin, J.-Y. Park and H.-T. Lim, Performance improvement of all-solid-state Li-S batteries with optimizing morphology and structure of sulfur composite electrode, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 723, 787–794 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, All-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using LiCoO2 particles with pulsed laser deposition coatings of Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(16), 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aso, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, All-Solid-State Lithium Secondary Batteries Using NiS-Carbon Fiber Composite Electrodes Coated with Li2S–P2S5 Solid Electrolytes by Pulsed Laser Deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(3), 686–690 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, X. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Xia, X. Xia, J. Wu and J. Tu, Rational coating of Li7P3S11 solid electrolyte on MoS2 electrode for all-solid-state lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2018, 374, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, M. Otoyama, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemical and structural evaluation for
bulk-type all-solid-state batteries using Li4GeS4–Li3PS4 electrolyte coating on LiCoO2 particles, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Oh, K. H. Park, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, H. A. Lee, S.-M. Lee and Y. S. Jung, Infiltration of solution-processable solid electrolytes into conventional Li-ion-battery electrodes for all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(5), 3013–3020 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, Z. Wang, I. H. Chu, J. Luo and S. P. Ong, Elastic properties of alkali superionic conductor electrolytes from first principles calculations, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163(2), A67 CrossRef .
H. D. Lim, J. H. Park, H. J. Shin, J. Jeong, J. T. Kim, K. W. Nam, H. G. Jung and K. Y. Chung, A Review of Challenges and Issues Concerning Interfaces for All-Solid-State Batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 224–250 CrossRef .
A. Banerjee, X. Wang, C. Fang, E. A. Wu and Y. S. Meng, Interfaces and interphases in All-Solid-State batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6878–6933 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, S. Wang, J. Lochala, D. Desrochers, B. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Yang and J. Xiao, The role of the solid electrolyte interphase layer in preventing Li dendrite growth in solid-state batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(7), 1803–1810 RSC .
M. He, Z. Cui, C. Chen, Y. Li and X. Guo, Formation of self-limited, stable and conductive interfaces between garnet electrolytes and lithium anodes for reversible lithium cycling in solid-state batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(24), 11463–11470 RSC .
K. K. Fu, Y. Gong, B. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Xu, Y. Yao, W. Luo, C. Wang, S. D. Lacey and J. Dai, Toward garnet electrolyte–based Li metal batteries: An ultrathin, highly effective, artificial solid-state electrolyte/metallic Li interface, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(4), e1601659 CrossRef .
W. Luo, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, K. Fu, G. Pastel, C. F. Lin and Y. Mo, Reducing interfacial resistance between garnet-structured solid-state electrolyte and Li-metal anode by a germanium layer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(22), 1606042 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Gong, B. Liu, K. Fu, Y. Yao, E. Hitz, Y. Li, J. Dai, S. Xu and W. Luo, Conformal, nanoscale ZnO surface modification of garnet-based solid-state electrolyte for lithium metal anodes, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(1), 565–571 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lou, G. Wang, Y. Xia, C. Liang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, X. Tao, J. Zhang and W. Zhang, Achieving efficient and stable interface between metallic lithium and garnet-type solid electrolyte through a thin indium tin oxide interlayer, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Z. Gong, D. Wang, B. Zheng, J. Zhu, Y. Lu, Y.-S. Hu, X. Guo and H. Li, Drawing a soft interface: an effective interfacial modification strategy for garnet-type solid-state Li batteries, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(6), 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Liu, K. Gong, X. Fu, Y. Han, G. Yao, C. Pastel, H. Yang, E. D. Xie and L. Wachsman, Hu, Garnet solid electrolyte protected Li-metal batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(22), 18809–18815 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Basappa, T. Ito and H. Yamada, Contact between garnet-type solid electrolyte and lithium metal anode: influence on charge transfer resistance and short circuit prevention, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164(4), A666–A671 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cheng, A. Sharafi and J. Sakamoto, Intergranular Li metal propagation through polycrystalline Li6. 25Al0. 25La3Zr2O12 ceramic electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 223, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharafi, H. M. Meyer, J. Nanda, J. Wolfenstine and J. Sakamoto, Characterizing the Li–Li7La3Zr2O12 interface stability and kinetics as a function of temperature and current density, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Xu, W. Li, A. Dolocan and A. Manthiram, Interfacial chemistry in solid-state batteries: formation of interphase and its consequences, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(1), 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bates, N. Dudney, G. Gruzalski, R. Zuhr, A. Choudhury, C. Luck and J. Robertson, Fabrication and characterization of amorphous lithium electrolyte thin films and rechargeable thin-film batteries, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43(1–3), 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schwöbel, R. Hausbrand and W. Jaegermann, Interface reactions between LiPON and lithium studied by in situ X-ray photoemission, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 273, 51–54 CrossRef .
J. Min Lee, S. Ho Kim, Y. Tak and Y. S. Yoon, Study on the LLT solid electrolyte thin film with LiPON interlayer intervening between LLT and electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163(1), 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Jin, X. Wu, G. Ma, J. Yang and Z. Wen, A shuttle effect free lithium sulfur battery based on a hybrid electrolyte, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(39), 21225–21229 RSC .
X. Xu, Z. Wen, X. Wu, X. Yang and Z. Gu, Lithium ion-conducting glass-ceramics of Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3–xLi2O (x = 0.0–0.20) with good electrical and electrochemical properties, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90(9), 2802–2806 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zhao, F. Ma, Y. Guo and Y. Jin, Stable LATP/LAGP double-layer solid electrolyte prepared via a simple dry-pressing method for solid-state lithium ion batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(95), 92579–92585 RSC .
Y. Liu, C. Li, B. Li, H. Song, Z. Cheng, M. Chen, P. He and H. Zhou, Germanium Thin Film Protected Lithium Aluminum Germanium Phosphate for Solid-State Li Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(16), 1702374 CrossRef .
H. Fei, Y. Li, Y. Wei, J. Yang, P. Hu, Z. Rao, X. Chen, L. Yuan and Z. Li, Construct an Ultrathin Bismuth Buffer for Stable Solid-state Lithium Metal Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12793–12800 CrossRef .
F. J. Q. Cortes, J. A. Lewis, J. Tippens, T. S. Marchese and M. T. McDowell, How Metallic Protection Layers Extend the Lifetime of NASICON-Based Solid-State Lithium Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 167(5), 050502 CrossRef .
T. Ohtomo, A. Hayashi, M. Tatsumisago, Y. Tsuchida, S. Hama and K. Kawamoto, All-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using the 75Li2S·25P2S5 glass and the 70Li2S·30P2S5 glass–ceramic as solid electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, Y. Zhu, F. Pan, J. Liu and L. Lu, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 Li-ion conductor prepared by melt-quench and low temperature pressing, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Chen, J. Yang, G. Liu, X. Yao, P. Cui and X. Xu, Stable cycling of all-solid-state lithium battery with surface amorphized Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 electrolyte and lithium anode, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Liang, X.-X. Zeng, X.-D. Zhang, T.-T. Zuo, M. Yan, Y.-X. Yin, J.-L. Shi, X.-W. Wu, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Engineering Janus Interfaces of Ceramic Electrolyte via Distinct Functional Polymers for Stable High-Voltage Li-Metal Batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(23), 9165–9169 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Li, S. Xin, A. Manthiram and J. B. Goodenough, Plating a dendrite-free lithium anode with a polymer/ceramic/polymer sandwich electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(30), 9385–9388 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pervez, P. Ganjeh-Anzabi, U. Farooq, M. Trifkovic, E. P. Roberts and V. Thangadurai, Fabrication of a Dendrite-Free all Solid-State Li Metal Battery via Polymer Composite/Garnet/Polymer Composite Layered Electrolyte, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6(11), 1900186 CrossRef .
K. He, C. Chen, R. Fan, C. Liu, C. Liao, Y. Xu, J. Tang and R. K. Li, Polyethylene oxide/garnet-type Li6. 4La3Zr1. 4Nb0. 6O12 composite electrolytes with improved electrochemical performance for solid-state lithium rechargeable batteries, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 175, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huo, N. Zhao, J. Sun, F. Du, Y. Li and X. Guo, Composite electrolytes of polyethylene oxides/garnets interfacially wetted by ionic liquid for room-temperature solid-state lithium battery, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huo, Y. Chen, J. Luo, X. Yang, X. Guo and X. Sun, Rational Design of Hierarchical “Ceramic-in-Polymer” and “Polymer-in-Ceramic” Electrolytes for Dendrite-Free Solid-State Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(17), 1804004 CrossRef .
L. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Feng, R. Tan, Y. Zuo, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, L. Han, Z. Wang and F. Pan, Flexible Composite Solid Electrolyte Facilitating Highly Stable “Soft Contacting” Li–Electrolyte Interface for Solid-state Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(22), 1701437 CrossRef .
J. Hu, P. He, B. Zhang, B. Wang and L. Z. Fan, Porous film host-derived 3D composite polymer electrolyte for high-voltage solid-state Lithium batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 283–289 CrossRef .
H. Duan, M. Fan, W. P. Chen, J. Y. Li, P. F. Wang, W. P. Wang, J. L. Shi, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Extended Electrochemical Window of Solid Electrolytes via Heterogeneous Multilayered Structure for High-Voltage Lithium Metal Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(12), 1807789 CrossRef .
M. Ogawa, R. Kanda, K. Yoshida, T. Uemura and K. Harada, High-capacity thin film lithium batteries with sulfide solid electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 487–490 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Bulk-type lithium metal secondary battery with indium thin layer at interface between Li electrode and Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80(10), 734–736 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kato, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Enhancing utilization of lithium metal electrodes in all-solid-state batteries by interface modification with gold thin films, J. Power Sources, 2016, 309, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamane, M. Shibata, Y. Shimane, T. Junke, Y. Seino, S. Adams, K. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Crystal structure of a superionic conductor, Li7P3S11, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178(15–18), 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mercier, J.-P. Malugani, B. Fahys, G. Robert and J. Douglade, Structure du tetrathiophosphate de lithium. Acta Crystallographica Section B: Structural Crystallography and Crystal, Chemistry, 1982, 38(7), 1887–1890 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Cao, Y. Ma, A. Natan, P. Aurora and H. Zhu, Sulfide-Based Solid-State Electrolytes: Synthesis, Stability, and Potential for All-Solid-State Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(44), 1901131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sang, K. L. Bassett, F. C. Castro, M. J. Young, L. Chen, R. T. Haasch, J. W. Elam, V. P. Dravid, R. G. Nuzzo and A. A. Gewirth, Understanding the effect of interlayers at the thiophosphate solid electrolyte/lithium interface for all-solid-state Li batteries, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(24), 8747–8756 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, F. Han, X. Ji, X. Fan, J. Tu and C. Wang, Interface engineering of sulfide electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 958–966 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, W. Li, K. R. Adair, M. N. Banis, Y. Hu, T. K. Sham and H. Huang, An Air-Stable and Dendrite-Free Li Anode for Highly Stable All-Solid-State Sulfide-Based Li Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(38), 1902125 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lepley, N. Holzwarth and Y. A. Du, Structures, Li+ mobilities, and interfacial properties of solid electrolytes Li3PS4 and Li 3 PO 4 from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88(10), 104103 CrossRef .
B. Chen, C. Xu, H. Wang and J. Zhou, Insights into interfacial stability of Li6PS5Cl solid electrolytes with buffer layers, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2019, 19(2), 149–154 CrossRef .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Reviving the lithium metal anode for high-energy batteries, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12(3), 194 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Chen, J. Yang, J. Wang, L. Yao, X. Yao, P. Cui and X. Xu, Interface re-engineering of Li10GeP2S12 electrolyte and lithium anode for all-solid-state lithium batteries with ultralong cycle life, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(3), 2556–2565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, D. Wang, Y. C. Li, Z. Yu, T. E. Mallouk and D. Wang, Salt-Based Organic–Inorganic Nanocomposites: Towards A Stable Lithium Metal/Li10GeP2S12 Solid Electrolyte Interface, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(41), 13608–13612 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Liang, X. Li, X. Lin, R. Li and K. R. Adair, Stabilizing interface between Li10SnP2S12 and Li metal by molecular layer deposition, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Philip, P. T. Sullivan, R. Zhang, G. A. Wooley, S. A. Kohn and A. A. Gewirth, Improving cell resistance and cycle life with solvate-coated thiophosphate solid electrolytes in lithium batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11(2), 2014–2021 CrossRef .
H. Wan, G. Peng, X. Yao, J. Yang, P. Cui and X. Xu, Cu2ZnSnS4/graphene nanocomposites for ultrafast, long life all-solid-state lithium batteries using lithium metal anode, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 59–65 CrossRef .
T. Kato, T. Hamanaka, K. Yamamoto, T. Hirayama, F. Sagane, M. Motoyama and Y. Iriyama, 
            In situ Li7La3Zr2O12/LiCoO2 interface modification for advanced all-solid-state battery, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Z. Weng, Y. Wang, F. Li, H.-M. Cheng and H. Zhou, An aqueous dissolved polysulfide cathode for lithium–sulfur batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(10), 3307–3312 RSC .
D. Dong, B. Zhou, Y. Sun, H. Zhang, G. Zhong, Q. Dong, F. Fu, H. Qian, Z. Lin, D. Lu, Y. Shen, J. Wu, L. Chen and H. Chen, Polymer electrolyte glue: A universal interfacial modification strategy for all-solid-state Li batteries, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(4), 2343–2349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Y. Zhang, S. Han, J. Wang, Z. Peng and L. Chen, Unlocking the energy capabilities of lithium metal electrode with solid-state electrolytes, Joule, 2018, 2(9), 1674–1689 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pervez, G. Kim, B. P. Vinayan, M. A. Cambaz, M. Kuenzel, M. Hekmatfar, M. Fichtner and S. Passerini, Overcoming the Interfacial Limitations Imposed by the Solid–Solid Interface in Solid-State Batteries Using Ionic Liquid-Based Interlayers, Small, 2020, 2000279 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan and W. Zheng, Ionic liquids and their solid-state analogues as materials for energy generation and storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(2), 1–15 Search PubMed .
M. Montanino, M. Carewska, F. Alessandrini, S. Passerini and G. B. Appetecchi, The role of the cation aliphatic side chain length in piperidinium bis (trifluoromethansulfonyl) imide ionic liquids, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 57, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, J. Yu, J. Wu, M. B. Effat, S. C. Kwok, Y. Lyu, M. M. Yuen and F. Ciucci, Enabling room-temperature solid-state lithium-metal batteries with fluoroethylene carbonate-modified plastic crystal interlayers, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 311–319 CrossRef .
E. Jeong, C. Hong, Y. Tak, S. C. Nam and S. Cho, Investigation of interfacial resistance between LiCoO2 cathode and LiPON electrolyte in the thin film battery, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159(1), 223–226 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yada, A. Ohmori, K. Ide, H. Yamasaki, T. Kato, T. Saito, F. Sagane and Y. Iriyama, Dielectric modification of 5 V-class cathodes for high-voltage all-solid-state lithium batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(9), 1301416 CrossRef .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Zhang, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Enhancement of the high-rate capability of solid-state lithium batteries by nanoscale interfacial modification, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18(17), 2226–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Seino, T. Ota and K. Takada, High rate capabilities of all-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using Li4Ti5O12-coated LiNi0. 8Co0. 15Al0. 05O2 and a sulfide-based solid electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(15), 6488–6492 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, I. Sakaguchi, L. Zhang, R. Ma, K. Fukuda, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, LiNbO3-coated LiCoO2 as cathode material for all solid-state lithium secondary batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9(7), 1486–1490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Zhang, K. Fukuda, I. Sakaguchi, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Interfacial modification for high-power solid-state lithium batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179(27–32), 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Zhang, X. Xu, B. T. Hang, T. Ohnishi, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Interfacial phenomena in solid-state lithium battery with sulfide solid electrolyte, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 594–597 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Improvement of high-rate performance of all-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using LiCoO2 coated with Li2O–SiO2 glasses, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11(1), A1–A3 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Woo, J. E. Trevey, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. S. Choi, S. C. Kim, S. M. George, K. H. Oh and S.-H. Lee, Nanoscale interface modification of LiCoO2 by Al2O3 atomic layer deposition for solid-state Li batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(7), A1120 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okada, N. Machida, M. Naito, T. Shigematsu, S. Ito, S. Fujiki, M. Nakano and Y. Aihara, Preparation and electrochemical properties of LiAlO2-coated Li (Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3) O2 for all-solid-state batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 255, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, N. Nakamoto, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, All-solid-state lithium secondary batteries with metal-sulfide-coated LiCoO2 prepared by thermal decomposition of dithiocarbamato complexes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(30), 15247–15254 RSC .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, M. Tatsumisago, Y. Hosoda, T. Nagakane and A. Sakamoto, All-solid-state lithium secondary batteries using Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolytes and LiFePO4 electrode particles with amorphous surface layer, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41(3), 260–261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, T. Ohnishi, K. Akatsuka, M. Osada, B. T. Hang, K. Kumagai, T. Sekiguchi and T. Sasaki, Tantalum oxide nanomesh as self-standing one nanometre thick electrolyte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(9), 3509–3512 RSC .
J. Kim, M. Kim, S. Noh, G. Lee and D. Shin, Enhanced electrochemical performance of surface modified LiCoO2 for all-solid-state lithium batteries, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42(2), 2140–2146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. Fujiki, T. Yamada, Y. Aihara, Y. Park, T. Y. Kim, S.-W. Baek, J.-M. Lee, S. Doo and N. Machida, A rocking chair type all-solid-state lithium ion battery adopting Li2O–ZrO2 coated LiNi0. 8Co0. 15Al0. 05O2 and a sulfide based electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 943–950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. Sakurai, S. Yubuchi, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Application of LiCoO2 particles coated with lithium ortho-oxosalt thin films to sulfide-type all-solid-state lithium batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(8), A1610–A1616 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohta, T. Kobayashi, J. Seki and T. Asaoka, Electrochemical performance of an all-solid-state lithium ion battery with garnet-type oxide electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 332–335 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, Y. Oh, K. H. Kang, J. H. Kim, J. Kim and C. S. Yoon, Characterization of sputter-deposited LiCoO2 thin film grown on NASICON-type electrolyte for application in all-solid-state rechargeable lithium battery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(19), 16063–16070 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuyama, R. Takano, K. Tadanaga, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Fabrication of all-solid-state lithium secondary batteries with amorphous TiS4 positive electrodes and Li7La3Zr2O12 solid electrolytes, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 285, 122–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Doux, H. Nguyen, D. H. Tan, A. Banerjee, X. Wang, E. A. Wu, C. Jo, H. Yang and Y. S. Meng, Stack Pressure Considerations for Room-Temperature All-Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(1), 1903253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bates, G. Gruzalski, N. Dudney, C. Luck and X. Yu, Rechargeable thin-film lithium batteries, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 70, 619–628 CrossRef .
S. Nowak, F. Berkemeier and G. Schmitz, Ultra-thin LiPON films–Fundamental properties and application in solid-state thin film model batteries, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, M. Liu, A. Mehta, H. Xin, F. Lin, K. Persson, G. Chen, E. J. Crumlin and M. Doeff, Garnet electrolyte surface degradation and recovery, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(12), 7244–7252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, D. Xie, G. Liu, J. P. Mwizerwa, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Xu and X. Yao, Sulfide solid electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries: structure, conductivity, stability and application, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 58–74 CrossRef .
M. Otoyama, Y. Ito, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Raman imaging for LiCoO2 composite positive electrodes in all-solid-state lithium batteries using Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolytes, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brazier, L. Dupont, L. Dantras-Laffont, N. Kuwata, J. Kawamura and J.-M. Tarascon, First cross-section observation of an all solid-state lithium-ion “nanobattery” by transmission electron microscopy, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(6), 2352–2359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Santhanagopalan, D. Qian, T. McGilvray, Z. Wang, F. Wang, F. Camino, J. Graetz, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Interface limited lithium transport in solid-state batteries, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(2), 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. Xin, K. He, J. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, 
            In situ STEM-EELS observation of nanoscale interfacial phenomena in all-solid-state batteries, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(6), 3760–3767 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, K. R. Adair, Q. Sun and Y. Liu, Manipulating Interfacial Nanostructure to Achieve High-Performance All-Solid-State Lithium-Ion Batteries, Small Methods, 2019, 3(10), 1900261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Li and Y. S. Meng, Cryogenic electron microscopy for characterizing and diagnosing batteries, Joule, 2018, 2(11), 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Randau, D. A. Weber, O. Kötz, R. Koerver, P. Braun, A. Weber, E. Ivers-Tiffée, T. Adermann, J. Kulisch and W. G. Zeier, Benchmarking the performance of all-solid-state lithium batteries, Nat. Energy, 2020, 1–12 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Gong, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Recent advances in all-solid-state rechargeable lithium batteries, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 363–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnell, F. Tietz, C. Singer, A. Hofer, N. Billot and G. Reinhart, Prospects of production technologies and manufacturing costs of oxide-based all-solid-state lithium batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(6), 1818–1833 RSC .
K. Takada, Progress in solid electrolytes toward realizing solid-state lithium batteries, J. Power Sources, 2018, 394, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xia, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Cui and W. Liu, Practical challenges and future perspectives of all-solid-state lithium-metal batteries, Chem, 2019, 5(4), 753–785 CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Li–O2 and Li–S batteries with high energy storage, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11(1), 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. G. Galpaya, L. Yan, M. Sun, Z. Lin, C. Yan, C. Liang and S. Zhang, Exploiting a robust biopolymer network binder for an ultrahigh-areal-capacity Li–S battery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(3), 750–755 RSC .
Y. Ansari, S. Zhang, B. Wen, F. Fan and Y. M. Chiang, Stabilizing Li–S Battery Through Multilayer Encapsulation of Sulfur, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(1), 1802213 CrossRef .
J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, A critical review of Li/air batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 159(2), R1 CrossRef .
J. Lai, Y. Xing, N. Chen, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Electrolytes for Rechargeable Lithium–Air Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 2974–2997 CrossRef .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Fabrication of favorable interface between sulfide solid electrolyte and Li metal electrode for bulk-type solid-state Li/S battery, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 177–180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Ngene, P. Norby, T. Vegge, P. E. De Jongh and D. Blanchard, All-solid-state lithium-sulfur battery based on a nanoconfined LiBH4 electrolyte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(9), A2029–A2034 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Peng, S. Li, X. Wang, S. Cheng and J. Xie, Elevating reactivity and cyclability of all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries by the combination of tellurium-doping and surface coating, Nano Energy, 2020, 105083 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Camacho-Forero and P. B. Balbuena, Elucidating Interfacial Phenomena between Solid-State Electrolytes and the Sulfur-Cathode of Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2019, 32(1), 360–373 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. Li, H. Kitaura, X. Zhang, M. Han, P. He and H. Zhou, Fabrication and Performance of All-Solid-State Li–Air Battery with SWCNTs/LAGP Cathode, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(31), 17307–17310 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhu, T. S. Zhao, Z. H. Wei, P. Tan and L. An, A high-rate and long cycle life solid-state lithium–air battery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(12), 3745–3754 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. Nie, F. Li, Z. L. Wang and C. Sun, A durable and safe solid-state lithium battery with a hybrid electrolyte membrane, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, Y. Wu, W. Tang, F. Deng, J. Yao, Z. Liu, R. Hu, Alamusi, Z. Wen, L. Lu and N. Hu, Composite solid polymer electrolyte with garnet nanosheets in poly (ethylene oxide), ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(7), 7163–7170 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cheng, T. Kimura, M. Shoji, H. Ueda, H. Munakata and K. Kanamura, Ceramic-Based Flexible Sheet Electrolyte for Li Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(9), 10382–10388 CrossRef .
S. Ohta, S. Komagata, J. Seki, T. Saeki, S. Morishita and T. Asaoka, All-solid-state lithium ion battery using garnet-type oxide and Li3BO3 solid electrolytes fabricated by screen-printing, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Ren, Y. Shen, S.-X. Zhao, Y. Lin and C.-W. Nan, Achieving high capacity in bulk-type solid-state lithium ion battery based on Li6. 75La3Zr1. 75Ta0. 25O12 electrolyte: Interfacial resistance, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Huang, B. Xu, Y. Lin, B. Xu, L. Li, C.-W. Nan and Y. Shen, Synergistic coupling between Li6. 75La3Zr1. 75Ta0. 25O12 and poly (vinylidene fluoride) induces high ionic conductivity, mechanical strength, and thermal stability of solid composite electrolytes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(39), 13779–13785 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, H. Zhang, W. Yao and J. Lin, Solid-state lithium battery chemistries achieving high cycle performance at room temperature by a new garnet-based composite electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2018, 393, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, L. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Peng and Y. Zou, Low temperature synthesis and ion conductivity of Li7La3Zr2O12 garnets for solid-state Li ion batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 310, 129–133 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, X. Dong, P. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Interfacial modification of Li/Garnet electrolyte by a lithiophilic and breathing interlayer, J. Power Sources, 2019, 419, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, S.-X. Zhao, Y.-H. Lin, Y. Shen, J. Luo, L. Li and C.-W. Nan, Enhanced electrochemical performance of bulk type oxide ceramic lithium batteries enabled by interface modification, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(11), 4649–4657 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Chen, A. Dolocan, Z. Cui, S. Xin, L. Xue, H. Xu, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Garnet electrolyte with an ultralow interfacial resistance for Li-metal batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(20), 6448–6455 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Y. Lu, J. Jin, S. Gu, T. Xiu, Z. Song, M. E. Badding and Z. Wen, Method using water-based solvent to prepare Li7La3Zr2O12 solid electrolytes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(20), 17147–17155 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Fu, Y. Gong, S. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, J. Dai, C. Wang, B. Liu, G. Pastel and H. Xie, Stabilizing the garnet solid-electrolyte/polysulfide interface in Li–S batteries, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(19), 8037–8041 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Lu, T. Xiu, J. Jin, M. E. Badding and Z. Wen, A Li-Garnet composite ceramic electrolyte and its solid-state Li-S battery, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, D. W. McOwen, L. Zhang, G. T. Hitz, C. Wang, Z. Ma, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Dai and Y. Kuang, All-in-one lithium-sulfur battery enabled by a porous-dense-porous garnet architecture, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 458–464 CrossRef .
P. J. Kim, S. Narayanan, J. Xue, V. Thangadurai and V. G. Pol, Li-Ion-Permeable and Electronically Conductive Membrane Comprising Garnet-Type Li6La3Ta1. 5Y0. 5O12 and
Graphene Toward Ultrastable and High-Rate Lithium Sulfur Batteries, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(8), 3733–3741 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yin, T. Liu, X. Yang, Z. Chang and X. Zhang, Hybrid electrolyte with robust garnet-ceramic electrolyte for lithium anode protection in lithium-oxygen batteries, Nano Res., 2018, 11(6), 3434–3441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, N. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Guo, X. Feng, X. Liu, Z. Liu, G. Cui, H. Zheng and L. Gu, A rechargeable Li-air fuel cell battery based on garnet solid electrolytes, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inoue, K. Suzuki, N. Matsui, M. Hirayama and R. Kanno, Synthesis and structure of novel lithium-ion conductor Li7Ge3PS12. Journal of Solid-state, Chemistry, 2017, 246, 334–340 CAS .
C. Wang, K. R. Adair, J. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. Sun, F. Zhao and X. Lin, Solid-State Plastic Crystal Electrolytes: Effective Protection Interlayers for Sulfide-Based All-Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(26), 1900392 CrossRef .
K. Minami, A. Hayashi, S. Ujiie and M. Tatsumisago, Electrical and electrochemical properties of glass–ceramic electrolytes in the systems Li2S–P2S5–P2S3 and Li2S–P2S5–P2O5, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192(1), 122–125 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hwang, Y. Ma, Y. Cao, Q. Li, L. Wang, X. Cheng, P. Zuo, C. Du, Y. Gao and G. Yin, Fabrication and electrochemical properties of Li4Ti5O12@ Li6PS5Cl for all-solid-state lithium batteries using simple mechanical method, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 7795–7806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Auvergniot, A. Cassel, J.-B. Ledeuil, V. Viallet, V. Seznec and R. m. Dedryvère, Interface stability of argyrodite Li6PS5Cl toward LiCoO2, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, and LiMn2O4 in bulk all-solid-state batteries, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(9), 3883–3890 CrossRef CAS .
N. Machida, J. Kashiwagi, M. Naito and T. Shigematsu, Electrochemical properties of all-solid-state batteries with ZrO2-coated LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 as cathode materials, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
R.-c. Xu, X.-h. Xia, S.-h. Li, S.-z. Zhang, X.-l. Wang and J.-p. Tu, All-solid-state lithium–sulfur batteries based on a newly designed Li7P2.9Mn0.1S10.7I0.3 superionic conductor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(13), 6310–6317 RSC .
N. Machida, K. Kobayashi, Y. Nishikawa and T. Shigematsu, Electrochemical properties of sulfur as cathode materials in a solid-state lithium battery with inorganic solid electrolytes, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175(1–4), 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Sulfur–carbon composite electrode for all-solid-state Li/S battery with Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56(17), 6055–6059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yi, L. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Geng and L.-Z. Fan, High Capacity and Superior Cyclic Performances of All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Batteries Enabled by a High-Conductivity Li10SnP2S12 Solid Electrolyte, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(40), 36774–36781 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, L. van Eijck, S. Ganapathy and M. Wagemaker, Synthesis, structure and electrochemical performance of the argyrodite Li6PS5Cl solid electrolyte for Li-ion solid-state batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagata and Y. Chikusa, Transformation of P2S5 into a Solid Electrolyte with Ionic Conductivity at the Positive Composite Electrode of All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Energy Technol., 2014, 2(9–10), 753–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen and S. Adams, High performance all-solid-state lithium/sulfur batteries using lithium argyrodite electrolyte, J. Solid-State Electrochem., 2015, 19(3), 697–702 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, L. Wang, H. Fei and L. Ci, Boron nitride doped Li 7 P 3 S 11 solid electrolyte with improved interfacial compatibility and application in all-solid-state Li/S battery, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30(21), 19119–19125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagata and Y. Chikusa, Activation of sulfur active material in an all-solid-state lithium–sulfur battery, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
E. Umeshbabu, B. Zheng, J. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Stable Cycling Lithium–Sulfur Solid Batteries with Enhanced Li/Li10GeP2S12 Solid Electrolyte Interface Stability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(20), 18436–18447 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, Y. Imade, H. Narisawa, T. Kobayashi, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and R. Kanno, All-solid-state Li–sulfur batteries with mesoporous electrode and thio-LISICON solid electrolyte, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kinoshita, K. Okuda, N. Machida, M. Naito and T. Sigematsu, All-solid-state lithium battery with sulfur/carbon composites as positive electrode materials, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 256, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagata and Y. Chikusa, All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Battery with High Energy and Power Densities at the Cell Level, Energy Technol., 2016, 4(4), 484–489 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, D. Kato, K. Hara, T.-a. Yano, M. Hirayama, M. Hara and R. Kanno, Composite sulfur electrode prepared by high-temperature mechanical milling for use in an all-solid-state lithium–sulfur battery with a Li3. 25Ge0. 25P0. 75S4 electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .
R.-c. Xu, X.-h. Xia, X.-l. Wang, Y. Xia and J.-p. Tu, Tailored Li 2 S–P 2 S 5 glass-ceramic electrolyte by MoS 2 doping, possessing high ionic conductivity for all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(6), 2829–2834 RSC .
K. Suzuki, D. Kato, K. Hara, T.-a. Yano, M. Hirayama, M. Hara and R. Kanno, Composite sulfur electrode for all-solid-state lithium–sulfur battery with Li2S–GeS2–P2S5-based thio-LISICON solid electrolyte, Electrochemistry, 2017, 17–00055 CAS .
K. Suzuki, N. Mashimo, Y. Ikeda, T. Yokoi, M. Hirayama and R. Kanno, High cycle capability of all-solid-state lithium–sulfur batteries using composite electrodes by liquid-phase and mechanical mixing, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(6), 2373–2377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Liu, Y.-H. Lin, Y. Shen, L. Li and C.-W. Nan, High-Conductivity Argyrodite Li6PS5Cl Solid Electrolytes Prepared via Optimized Sintering Processes for All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(49), 42279–42285 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, S. Ito, R. Omoda, T. Watanabe, Y. Aihara, M. Agostini, U. Ulissi, J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, All solid-state lithium–sulfur battery using a glass-type P2S5–Li2S electrolyte: benefits on anode kinetics, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(4), A646 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, N. Huang, Z. Huang, L. Cai, J. Wu and X. Yao, CNTs@ S composite as cathode for all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries with ultralong cycle life, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 40, 151–155 CrossRef .
R. Xu, Z. Wu, S. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Xia, X. Xia, X. Huang and J. Tu, Construction of all-solid-state batteries based on a sulfur–graphene composite and Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3 solid electrolyte, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23(56), 13950–13956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kızılaslan and H. Akbulut, Assembling All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Batteries with Li3N-Protected Anodes, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84(2), 183–189 CrossRef .
A. Sakuda, Y. Sato, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Sulfur-Based Composite Electrode with Interconnected Mesoporous Carbon for All-Solid-State Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Energy Technol., 2019, 7(12), 1900077 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, Z. Liu, N. J. Dudney and C. Liang, Lithium superionic sulfide cathode for all-solid lithium–sulfur batteries, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(3), 2829–2833 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hakari, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Highly utilized lithium sulfide active material by enhancing conductivity in all-solid-state batteries, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44(12), 1664–1666 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, R. Ohtsubo, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno and M. Tatsumisago, All-solid-state rechargeable lithium batteries with Li2S as a positive electrode material, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183(1), 422–426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi, M. Tatsumisago, T. Ichinose, T. Ozaki, Y. Togawa and S. Mori, Li2S nanocomposites underlying high-capacity and cycling stability in all-solid-state lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 471–476 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, J. Yue, X. Fan, T. Gao, C. Luo, Z. Ma, L. Suo and C. Wang, High-performance all-solid-state lithium–sulfur battery enabled by a mixed-conductive Li2S nanocomposite, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(7), 4521–4527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Shen, Y. Lin and C.-W. Nan, Synergistic effect of processing and composition x on conductivity of xLi2S-(100−x) P2S5 electrolytes, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 305, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, I. Yoon, W. T. Nichols and D. Shin, Carbon-coated Li2S cathode for improving the electrochemical properties of an all-solid-state lithium-sulfur battery using Li2S-P2S5 solid electrolyte, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44(7), 7450–7453 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, J. Yue, S. Liu, J. Tu, F. Han, P. Liu and C. Wang, Cathode-supported all-solid-state lithium–sulfur batteries with high cell-level energy density, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(5), 1073–1079 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, H. Wang, D. Wang, X. Li, Z. Gong and Y. Yang, 
            In Situ Generated Li2S–C Nanocomposite for High-Capacity and Long-Life All-Solid-State Lithium Sulfur Batteries with Ultrahigh Areal Mass Loading, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(5), 3280–3287 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eom, S. Son, C. Park, S. Noh, W. T. Nichols and D. Shin, High performance all-solid-state lithium-sulfur battery using a Li2S-VGCF nanocomposite, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Yersak, C. Stoldt and S.-H. Lee, Electrochemical evolution of an iron sulfide and sulfur based cathode for all-solid-state Li-Ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(8), A1009–A1015 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuyama, A. Hayashi, T. Ozaki, S. Mori and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemical properties of all-solid-state lithium batteries with amorphous MoS 3 electrodes prepared by mechanical milling, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(27), 14142–14147 RSC .
W. J. Li, M. Hirayama, K. Suzuki and R. Kanno, Fabrication and all solid-state battery performance of TiS2/Li10GeP2S12 composite electrodes, Mater. Trans., 2016, 57(4), 549–552 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, D. Liu, C. Wang, P. Long, G. Peng, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Xu, High-energy all-solid-state lithium batteries with ultralong cycle life, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(11), 7148–7154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, T. Hakari, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, Y. Suginaka, S. Mori and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemical Properties of All-solid-state Lithium Batteries with Amorphous FeSx-based Composite Positive Electrodes Prepared via Mechanochemistry, Electrochemistry, 2018, 17–00104 Search PubMed .
X. Li, J. Liang, J. Luo, C. Wang, X. Li, Q. Sun, R. Li, L. Zhang, R. Yang and S. Lu, High-Performance Li–SeSx All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(17), 1808100 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, H. Wan, G. Liu, Z. Ding, J. P. Mwizerwa and X. Yao, Rational design of multi-channel continuous electronic/ionic conductive networks for room temperature vanadium tetrasulfide-based all-solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 771–782 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Xianguang Miao
	Xianguang Miao received his BS degree from the Department of Material Physics, Shandong University (SDU), China in 2016. He is currently a PhD Candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at SDU under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. His current research mainly focuses on the material and structure design of solid-state lithium/sodium batteries.

Zhiwei Zhang
	Zhiwei Zhang received her BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Later, she worked at the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, SDU. Her current research mainly focuses on the design and development of nanostructured gel and applications of Li-ion, Na-ion, Li–S, and Li–air batteries.

Zhaoqiang Li
	Zhaoqiang Li received his BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Material Chemistry, Shandong University, China, in 2011 and 2016, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. He is currently a postdoctoral candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhongwei Chen at the University of Waterloo, Canada. His current research mainly focuses on metal–organic framework-derived nanostructures and applications in energy storage and conversion devices, including alkaline secondary batteries and electrocatalysts.

Longwei Yin
	Longwei Yin is a distinguished professor and Director of the Institute of Materials Physics & Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 from SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 at Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li- or Na-based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electro-catalysis, and solar cells.

Broader context
The ever-increasing development of high-performance Li batteries has exhibited tremendous revolution in portable electronic devices, electric vehicles, and even intelligent energy storage fields. However, the commercially employed organic liquid electrolyte generally shows undesired fluidity and flammability, which may result in premature cell failure and potential safety risks. Therefore, the implementation of inorganic solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) in high capacity Li metal batteries is believed to be ideal for obtaining batteries with both high security and high energy density. However, their practical applications are currently inhibited by several technical challenges, such as dendrite propagation and poor cycle/rate properties, among which imperfect solid–solid contact interface is considered as a crucial factor in determining the overall battery performance. Herein, focusing on the current fundamental understanding, problems, and opportunities of interface chemistry between inorganic SSEs and electrode materials, the interfacial configuration characteristic and mechanism will be demonstrated. The recent improvement strategies for ameliorating the electrode/electrolyte interface will be summarized to reflect the research status, trends, and challenges. Several progressive applications and future directions will also be proposed, which aim to provide a comprehensive and enlightening review on the scientific mechanisms and engineering strategies for the interface chemistry of applicable solid-state Li metal batteries.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the evolution from liquid state battery using organic liquid electrolytes to solid-state battery using SSEs and the corresponding interfacial problems between electrodes and SSEs including interfacial, (b) compatibility,261 (c) stability,64 and (d) Li dendrites.74	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization methods for evaluating the wettability of Li-based anodes to SSEs. Digital photos of the garnet SSE before and after dipping in molten (a and b) pure Li and (c and d) the Li–C composite.41 Contact angle measurements of (e) the pristine Li droplet and (f–h) the Li–C3N4 composite droplets with different content of g-C3N4 on garnet SSE.47 Optical rolling experiments of (i and j) molten Li and (k and l) the Li–BN composite on a garnet SSE slope with a 45° tilt.48 Molten Li rolled down from the slope much faster than Li–BN, indicating the less adhesiveness of Li. (m) The schematic and the SEM images of the garnet SSE/Li interface with and without coating. (n) Comparison of the EIS profiles of the Li symmetric cells.49	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Profiles for different decomposition products formed during the lithiation of LGPS SSE as a function of Li deposition time. (b) Schematic of the interphase formation at the LGPS/Li interface.70 (c) EIS spectra of LATGP, LAGP, and LATTP SSEs with two Li electrodes.53 Types of (d) thermodynamically stable interfaces, (e) MCI, and (f) metastable ionic conductive but electronic insulating interphases between the Li metal and the SSEs.69	 

 	Fig. 4  HAADF-STEM images of the interface between the LiCoO2 or Li4Ti5O12 cathode and SSE pressed at (a and b) room temperature and (c and d) 210 °C.77 (e) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and the EDX line profiles of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface. (f) The cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding (g) n-ED patterns of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface.79 (h) Evolution of the four resistances in a Li-In|β-Li3PS4|NCM-811/β-Li3PS4 cell obtained by fitting the impedance spectra in the first and second cycles as a function of the open-circuit voltage.85 (i) Schematic illustrations of the Li+ concentration in the LCO/LPS interface.81	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li metal/Li6PS5Cl interface cycled at an overall current density above the critical stripping current density.91 (b) In situ TEM set-up. (c–e) TEM images and (f and g) SAED changes during Li plating with increasing time. HRTEM images (h and i) before plating and (j) after plating. (k–m) TEM images of the Li stripping process.92	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Einterface = 2γLB	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Component optimization of anodes. (a) Schematic diagrams for casting pure Li and Li–C composite on garnet SSE.41 (b) Synthetic process of the Li–C3N4 composite and the interfacial contact comparison of Li/garnet and Li–C3N4/garnet.47 (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of boron nitride nanosheets (BNNS), Li–BNNS composite, and contact comparison between the Li–BNNS/garnet and the pure Li/garnet interface.48	 

 	Fig. 7  Architectural design of the anodes. (a) Schematics illustrating the impact of the 3D Li anode for Li metal SSBs.119 (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the 3D Li–rGO anode with a flowable interphase for SSBs.120 (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure, optical photos, SEM, and EDS mapping of the prepared hybrid anodes of vertical graphene on Cu mesh.121	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the LLZTO/Li interface and (b and c) top-view SEM images of the LLZTO surface before and after the rapid acid treatment. (d) Raman mappings of the LLZTO pellet and LLZTO with different acid treatment times.123 (e) Schematic illustration of Li distribution in the porous garnet framework at the original, charged, and discharged states.126 (f) Schematic illustration of the porous-dense-porous trilayer garnet framework.127 (g) A single-material SSB using LGPS as the anode, electrolyte, and cathode material simultaneously.128	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of a 3D bicontinuous nanocomposite electrode material from a self-assembled block copolymer template.156 (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of MoS2/Li7P3S11 composite electrode.169 (c) Raman mapping images of SSBs using Li4GeS4–Li3PS4-coated LiCoO2 particles with or without heat-treatment at 200 °C after initial charging.170	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) pristine garnet SSE/Li and engineered garnet SSE/Li interface using the Li–metal alloy. (b) The Li–Al alloy interface between the Li metal and the garnet SSE.177 (c) TEM, HAADF-STEM image, and corresponding EELS maps of the interface of Al2O3-coated garnet with a Ti protection layer.49 (d) SEM images of the graphite-coated SSE and Li/graphite-coated SSE interface. (e) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of graphite reacted with Li metal via the generated interfacial LiC6.181	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of the MoS2 powder, the LLZO powder, and the MoS2-coated LLZO pellet. (b) Galvanostatic performance of the symmetric Li cells with and without MoS2 coating at step-increased current densities at 100 °C. The surface and cross-section optical images of (c and d) the shorted bare LLZO pellet and (e and f) the polarized LLZO@MoS2 pellet. (g) Schematic diagram of the morphological and chemical evolution of the MoS2-coating layer in the polarization process.105 (h) TEM image of MCL. (i) Rate performance of the Li/LLZTO/LCO, Li/LLZTO-MCL/LCO cells, and cycle performance of the Li/LLZTO-MCL/LCO cell.74	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembled full SSB with the double-layer composite SSE.199 (b) Schematic illustration of the SSB design and the molecular structure of the polymer.200 (c) Schematic illustration of the process for coating LiF or LiI layer on the Li metal surface.215 (d) Schematic illustration of alucone-SSE based SSB and the chemical structure of alucone.222	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the Nb-modified LLZO/LCO interface.225 (b) Schematic illustration of the Li+ flux process at the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface without and with the succinonitrile interlayer. (c) Rate performance of the Li/LLZTO/LiFePO4 battery with the succinonitrile-modified interlayer.232 (d) Schematic illustration showing the Li+ concentration around the LiPON/LNM interface without and with BaTiO3 modification. (e) A series of Nyquist plots of the Li/LiPON/LNM batteries with different BaTiO3 electrospray deposition times, and the corresponding top view SEM images of the LNM cathodes, where BaTiO3 is seen as white dots. (f) Rate capabilities of the unmodified Li/LiPON/LNM battery and the battery with 60 min BaTiO3 electrospray deposition.234	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Optimized interface structures and Li+ concentration illustrations in the LCO/LPS and LCO/LNO/LPS interfaces.81 HAADF TEM images of the interfaces and the corresponding elemental concentration profiles of the Co, S, and P elements obtained by EDS line scan at (b) the uncoated LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 SSE interface and (c) the Al2O3-coated LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4 SSE interface.241 Red arrows in (b and c) represent the positions and the directions of the EDS line scans. (d) Cross-sectional HAADF-STEM image and EDX line profiles for P, S, Co, and Ni, and the magnified EDX line profiles for Ni of the NiS-coated LiCoO2/80Li2S·20P2S5 SSE interface. (e) Charge–discharge curves of the In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 cells with uncoated and NiS-coated LiCoO2 for the first cycle and the charge–discharge curves of the cells with NiS-coated LiCoO2 for 10 cycles.243 (f) Schematic illustration of the interfacial reactions in the all-solid-state cells and (g) galvanostatic initial charge/discharge profiles of the all-solid-state cells using the pristine and Li2CO3-coated LiCoO2 powders.246	 

Oxide	Garnet	Li7La3Zr2O1252	10−5–10−3	• High mechanical strength	• Non-flexible
LISICON	Li14Zn(GeO4)412	
	• Relatively high chemical and electrochemical stability	• Poor compatibility with electrode materials
NASICON	Li1.6Al0.6Ti1.4(PO4)353	
	
	• Energy-extensive manufacturing process
Perovskite	Li3.3La0.56TiO3189	
	
	

Antiperovskite	Li3OCl11	
	
	



Sulfide	Glass Li2S–P2S5	80Li2S–20P2S577	10−7–10−2	• High ionic conductivity	• Unstable in air
Glassy ceramic	Li7P3S11211	• Good mechanical flexibility	• Low oxidation stability
Argyrodite Li6PS5X	Li6PS5Cl91	• Low grain-boundary resistance	• Poor compatibility with cathode materials
Thio-LISICON	Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S416	
	

Li11−xM2−xP1+xS12 Structure	Li10SnP2S12222	
	



Thin film	—	LiPON14	10−6	• High electrochemical stability	• Low energy density
• Expensive large-scale production


Halide	—	LiI19	10−8–10−5	• Good mechanical strength and mechanical flexibility	• Unstable in air
• Stable with Li metal	• Low oxidation voltage

	• Low conductivity


Borohydride	—	LiBH417	10−7–10−4	• Low grain-boundary resistance	• Unstable in air
• Stable with Li metal	• Poor compatibility with cathode materials
• Good mechanical strength and mechanical flexibility	



LiFePO4	Li7La3Zr2O12	3–5	146.2/100	0.1C (60 °C)	
142

LiFePO4	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–PEO	∼40	141.5/200	0.1C (60 °C)	
143

LiFePO4	Li6.375La3Zr1.375Nb0.625O12–Sn	1200	151.7/100	0.1C (RT)	
176

LiFePO4	Li7La3Zr2O12–PVDF–HFP	100	110/180	0.5C (RT)	
279

LiFePO4	Li6.85La2.9Ca0.1Zr1.75Nb0.25O12	—	117.8/100	0.1 mA cm−2 (RT)	
178

LiFePO4	Li6.20Ga0.30La2.95Rb0.05Zr2O12	∼1000	110/20	0.05C (60 °C)	
158

LiFePO4	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12	100	139.5/100	0.05C (60 °C)	
138

LiFePO4	Li6.5La3Zr1.5Nb0.5O12–PEO	—	95.6/30	0.05C (40 °C)	
280

LiFePO4	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12	100	142.7/150	0.1C (30 °C)	
123

LiCoO2	Al-Li7La3Zr2O12	75	139/1	0.1C (60 °C)	
281

LiCoO2	Li6.8La2.95Ca0.05Zr1.75Nb0.25O12	1000	78/1	0.01C (RT)	
153

LiCoO2	Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12	1000	85/5	0.05C (RT)	
282

LiCoO2	Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25 O12	1000	55.8/1	0.007C (RT)	
283

LiCoO2	Li7La3Zr2O12-Nb thin layer	1000–2000	80/25	0.001 mA cm−2 (RT)	
225

LiCoO2	Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12–PVDF	—	147/120	0.4C (RT)	
284

LiCoO2	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12	100	116/100	0.1C (30 °C)	
123

LiCoO2	Li6.25La3Zr2Al0.25O12–LiBr	1000	111.6/70	0.02C (RT)	
285

LiMn2O4	Li7La3Zr2O12–0.3B2O3	2000	96.44/20	0.005 mA cm−2 (RT)	
286

LiMn2O4	Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12–Ag	600	88/100	0.2C (RT)	
287

Li[Ni0.5Co0.2Mn0.3]O2	Li6.75La3Zr1.75Ta0.25O12	∼1000	76.6/5	5000 mA cm−2 (80 °C)	
288

Li4Ti5O12	Li6·25Al0·25La3Zr2O12	500–1000	15/1	0.008 mA cm−2 (95 °C)	
125

V2O5	Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12	∼200	150/20	50 mA g−1 (100 °C)	
63

α-TiS4	Li7La3Zr2O12-Li3BO3	—	500/15	0.01 mA cm−2 (RT)	
251

S-C	Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12	300	800/60	0.2 mA cm−2 (65 °C)	
289

S-Ketjenblack (KB)	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–MgO	∼2000	936/20	0.1C (RT)	
290

S-CNT	Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 bilayer	∼590	645/1	0.2 mA cm−2 (RT)	
124

S	Li7La3Zr2O12	∼200	400/50	1 mA cm−2 (RT)	
291

S	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12	∼300	920/200	0.5 mA cm−2 (RT)	
51

S–C	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12–MgO	—	685/200	0.2C (RT)	
292

S	Li6.5La3Zr1.5Nb0.5O12	60–100	1100/50	50 mA g−1 (RT)	
293

S	Li6La3Ta1.5Y0.5O12–graphene	—	947.03/200	0.5C (RT)	
294

O2	Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12	—	12000/1	200 mA g−1 (RT)	
295

Air	Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12	1000	1000/50	0.02 mA cm−2 (80 °C)	
296



LiNbO3-coated LiCoO2	Li7Ge3PS12	1000	55/10	7.25 mA g−1 (RT)	
297

LiFePO4	Li10GeP2S12	500	122/120	0.5C (RT)	
298

Li4Ti5O12	70Li2S·29P2S5·1P2S3	1500	140/700	12.7 mA cm−2 (100 °C)	
299

Li4Ti5O12	Li6PS5Cl	500	158/250	0.05C (80 °C)	
300

NCM111	Li6PS5Cl	570	60/20	0.1C (RT)	
301

ZrO2-coated NCM111	75Li2S·25P2S5	—	115/50	0. 1C (RT)	
302

NCM622	LiI–Li3PS4	500	126/40	0.1C (55 °C)	
135

S–Super P	Li7P2.9Mn0.1S10.7I0.3	—	800/60	0.05C (RT)	
303

S–Cu	80Li2S·20P2S5	545	650/20	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
159

S–Cu	60Li2S·40SiS2	—	980/5	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
304

S–AB	80Li2S·20P2S5	—	850/200	1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)	
305

S–AB	80Li2S·20P2S5	—	920/20	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
273

S–Super P	Li10SnP2S12	681	1180/50	0.025C (RT)	
306

S–Super P	Li6PS5Cl	600	389/200	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
307

S–Activated carbon (AC)	80Li2S·20P2S5	435	1217/10	1.6 mA cm−2 (RT)	
308

S–Super P	Li6PS5Br	300	1080/50	0.1C (RT)	
309

S–Super P	BN doped-Li7P3S11	1000	185/50	—	
310

S–KB	Li1.5PS3.3	477	1200/50	1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)	
311

S–KB	LGPS-IL	466	750/50	83.5 mA g−1 (RT)	
312

S–CMK-3	Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4	435	1000/50	0.023 mA cm−2 (RT)	
313

S–VGCF	Li3PS4	—	1200/50	0.1 mA cm−2 (RT)	
314

S–AC	Li1.5PS3.3	—	1800/1000	1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)	
315

S–Acetylene black (AB)	Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4	435	640/40	83.75 mA g−1 (RT)	
316

S–AB	Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01	360	500/30	0.05C (RT)	
317

S–AB	Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4	435	500/30	83.75 mA g−1 (RT)	
318

S–AB	70Li2S·30P2S5	430	560/6	0.13 mA cm−2 (RT)	
166

S–CR	Li10.05Ge1.05P1.95S12	435	1500/50	0.5C (RT)	
319

S-CNT	Li6PS5Cl	615	1393/50	0.17 mA cm−2 (RT)	
320

S-CNF	Li3PS4	403	1400/10	0.025 mA cm−2 (RT)	
321

S-CNTs	LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–P2O5	975	660/400	1C (60 °C)	
322

S–rGO	Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3	—	827/60	80 mA g−1 (RT)	
323

S–rGO	Li7P3S11	613	306/120	160 mA g−1 (RT)	
324

S–Mesoporous carbon	Li3PS4	545	1100/400	1.3 mA cm−2 (RT)	
325

Li3PS4 coated Li2S	β-Li3PS4	681	850/100	0.1C (RT)	
326

Li2S–LiI–VGCF	75Li2S·25P2S5	409	930/50	0.13 mA cm−2 (RT)	
327

Li2S–Cu	80Li2S·20P2S5	545	350/20	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
328

Li2S–AB	75Li2S·25P2S5	545	620/10	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
329

Li2S–Li6PS5Cl–C	80Li2S·20P2S5	605	830/60	50 mA g−1 (RT)	
330

Li2S–C–VGCF	70Li2S·30P2S5	800	464/9	0.044 mA cm−2 (RT)	
331

Li2S–C	80Li2S·20P2S5	401	730/25	0.05 mA cm−2 (RT)	
332

Li2S–LiI–VGCF	Li3PS4 in Kevlar fiber	100	750/20	0.05C (RT)	
333

Li2S–C	Li7P3S11	681	1073/30	0.2 mA cm−2 (60 °C)	
334

Li2S–VGCF	78Li2S·22P2S5	401	600/20	0.05 mA cm−2 (RT)	
335

FeS–S	77.5Li2S·22.5P2S5	806	900/225	0.11 mA cm−2 (60 °C)	
336

a-MoS3	80Li2S·20P2S5	545	670/60	0.064 mA cm−2 (RT)	
337

TiS2	LGPS	621	170/40	0.88 mA g−1 (RT)	
338

Co9S8–Li7P3S11	LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–P2O5	1000	421/1000	1.27 mA cm−2 (RT)	
339

Fe–S–VGCF	75Li2S·25P2S5	545	458/200	0.64 mA cm−2 (RT)	
340

SeS2–AB	LGPS + Li3PS4	585	935/100	0.4 A g−1 (RT)	
341

rGO–VS4	LGPS + 75Li2S–24P2S5–1P2O5	1000	333/500	0.5 A g−1 (RT)	
342


 	Fig. 15  Selective examples of chemical examinations. (a) In situ lithiation of solid electrolytes during XPS surface analysis. The argon ion gun is used to sputter a lithium metal foil placed in the vicinity of the sample of interest.53 (b) The basic idea and setup of the in situ XPS technique.69 An argon ion beam is used to sputter lithium, gold, or aluminum metal on the sample surface. After deposition, the reaction products at the interface are investigated using photoelectron spectroscopy. (c) Schematic images showing the processes for the preparation of the sample, mounting onto the grid, loading onto the holder, and transferring into the TEM safely.262 (d) Schematic of the experimental setup of a nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid, showing the triangular geometry of the cell.260 The cathode is electrically connected to the grid and a piezo-controlled STM tip makes contact with the anode current collector. (e) Schematic images of the experimental set-up for operando NDP.107	 
2Li+ + S + 2e− = Li2S, E0 = 2.15 V vs. Li+/Li	(7)
2Li+ + O2 + 2e− = Li2O2, E0 = 2.96 V vs. Li+/Li	(8)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
