Contribution from a hole-conducting dye to the photocurrent in solid-state dye -sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP22493J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP22493J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20172-20177Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsContribution from a hole-conducting dye to the photocurrent in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Eva L. 
            Unger
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ana 
            Morandeira
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Mats 
            Persson
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Burkhard 
            Zietz
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Emilie 
            Ripaud
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Philippe 
            Leriche
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jean 
            Roncali
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Gerrit 
            Boschloo
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physical and Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Box 259, 75105 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Gerrit.Boschloo@fki.uu.se
bDepartment of Photochemistry and Molecular Science, Uppsala University, Box 523, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Ana.Morandeira@fotomol.uu.se
cGroup Linear Conjugated Systems, CNRS, MOLTECH, University of Angers, 2, Bd Lavoisier, F-49049 Angers, France. E-mail: jean.roncali@univ-angers.fr
Received 
      3rd August 2011
    , Accepted 7th September 2011First published on 12th October 2011AbstractThe hole transporting medium in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells can be utilized to harvest sunlight. Herein we demonstrate that a triphenylamine-based dye, used as hole-transporting medium, contributes to the photocurrent in a squaraine-sensitized solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell. Steady-state photoluminescence measurements have been used to distinguish between electron transfer and energy transfer processes leading to energy conversion upon light absorption in the hole-transporting dye.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs)1 and organic solar cells (OSCs)2 are interesting for low-cost solar energy conversion. DSCs based on liquid electrolytes for the regeneration of the sensitizer have been demonstrated to reach 11% conversion efficiency.3 Solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell (ssDSC) devices using the organic hole transporting medium (HTM) spiro-MeOTAD have been realized.4 For these devices power conversion efficiencies of 6.1% have been achieved5 but the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of these devices is limited.4,6 The LHE of ssDSC can potentially be enhanced by employing dye-multilayers7 or utilizing the volume of the HTM for light harvesting.8–12
It has been demonstrated that fluorophores embedded in the HTM can contribute to the photocurrent via Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) to the sensitizer dye in ssDSC.8,10,12 Another interesting approach involves FRET from quantum dots embedded in the nanocrystalline TiO2 to the sensitizer.13 Light-absorbing polymers, like poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), have been used as HTM in combination with mesoporous dye-sensitized titanium dioxide (TiO2).9,11,14,15 In some cases P3HT was shown to give a contribution to the photocurrent.9,11,16
Herein, we investigated a solar cell device utilizing a small-molecular hole transporting dye (HTD) instead of spiro-MeOTAD as a secondary absorber in a ssDSC. The schematic architecture and requirements for energy level alignment are depicted in Fig. 1. As in ssDSC the metal oxide (TiO2) is sensitized with a dye referred to as injection dye (ID).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic picture of solid state dye-sensitized solar cells employing a hole-transporting dye (HTD) and an injection dye (ID). (b) Required energy level alignment for the suggested device. The HTD can contribute to the photocurrent both via electron and energy transfer. 
Both ID and HTD can contribute to the photocurrent. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) for these types of devices can be represented as the sum of the individual contributions: EQE = EQEID + EQEHTD(1)The pathways for photoinduced energy and electron transfer upon excitation of the injection dye and the hole transporting dye are illustrated in Fig. 1b.
Upon light harvesting in the ID (LHEID), electrons are injected into the TiO2 (ηinj,ID). Consecutively, the oxidized ID needs to be regenerated by the HTD (ηreg). The product of injection efficiency (ηinj,ID), regeneration efficiency (ηreg) and charge collection efficiency (ηCC) can be combined to one parameter: the internal quantum efficiency of the ID (IQEID). The external quantum efficiency of the ID-contribution to the EQE is thus: EQEID = LHEID × IQEID(2)Light absorption in the bulk of the HTD layer (LHEHTD) leads to the generation of excitons. These can be separated into free charge carriers either through electron transfer to TiO2 (solid arrow, Fig. 1b), electron transfer mediated via the ID (dashed arrow, Fig. 1b) or energy transfer from the HTD to the ID followed by injection via the ID (ηXT, Fig. 1b).11 We do herein not distinguish between the two electron transfer mechanisms. The contribution from the energy transfer mechanism to the overall EQEHTD depends on the energy transfer efficiency (ηXT, Fig. 1b) from the HTD to the ID and, consecutively, on the internal quantum efficiency of the ID (IQEID). EQEHTD = LHEHTD(ηinj,HTD × ηcc + ηXT × IQEID)(3)Energy transfer can be beneficial for exciton conversion as it can occur over longer distances. This leads to an increase in the apparent exciton diffusion length.17,18
In this study a squaraine sensitizer (SQ, Fig. 2) was used as ID. This compound is similar to other squaraine sensitizer dyes investigated in DSC.19,20 A triphenylamine tri-substituted with thienylenevinylene groups (TVT, Fig. 2) was used as HTD. This compound has been previously investigated as donor material in organic solar cells.21 Since this dye absorbs in the visible range (λmax = 435 nm), it can potentially act both as HTM and light absorbing dye and thus lead to an extension of the photo-response. The fabrication and characterization of bilayer and mesoporous hybrid solar cell devices incorporating SQ as ID and TVT as HTD is presented and compared to devices using spiro-MeOTAD as HTM. The spectral separation in the absorption of the chosen compounds does not result in panchromatic light-harvesting22 but allows to distinguish the respective contribution of each compound to the photocurrent. The energetic alignment of the investigated dyes allows for energy transfer. The relative contribution from this pathway to the EQEHTD (eqn (3)) was estimated by steady state photoluminescence measurements.
 Fig. 2  Hole transporting triphenylamine dye (TVT) and squaraine injection dye (SQ) investigated in this study with suggested mechanisms for photoconversion. 
2. Experimental
The synthesis, previous characterization of the hole-transporting tris[thienylvinylthienyl]-triphenylamine (further referred to as TVT, Fig. 2) and its photovoltaic performance in conjunction with phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) have been reported elsewhere.7
The squaraine dye (SQ, Fig. 2) 5-carboxy-2-[[3′-[(5″-ethyloxycarbonyl-3′,3-dibutyl-1″-pentyl-H-indol-2″-ylidene) methyl]-2′-hydroxy-4′-oxo-2-cyclobuten-1′-ylidene]methyl]-3,3-trimethyl-1-methyl-3H-indolium was received as a gift from Dr Jianjun He.
The light-harvesting efficiency of the solar cells was determined from the UV-Vis absorption spectrum measured on an Ocean Optics HR2000 fiberoptic spectrometer. To correct for the difference in the number of absorbed photons (= LHE) in the photoluminescence measurements, the sample absorbance was measured on a Cary 5000 spectrometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out on a Fluorolog Jobin Yvon spectrofluorometer. Electrochemical measurements were performed using a CH-Instruments potentiostat. The thickness of mesoporous metal oxide films was determined by profilometry (Sloan DekTak).
Solid-state dye sensitized solar cells using the squaraine sensitizer (SQ) as injection dye (ID) and TVT or spiro-MeOTAD as HTM were investigated. A dense layer of titanium dioxide was deposited by spray pyrolysis onto fluorine doped tin oxide glass substrates (FTO, TEC15, Pilkington) as described previously7 resulting in a dense TiO2 layer of ca. 100 nm thickness. A paste containing TiO2 nanoparticles (Dyesol) was diluted 1∶10 and 1∶20 with terpineole, spin-cast onto the substrates at 1000 rpm (Chemat Technology KW-4A spin-coater) and sintered at 450 °C for 30 minutes. SQ was chemisorbed to the electrodes from a 0.2 mM solution in ethanol (12 h). The hole-transporting dye TVT and spiro-MeOTAD were applied onto the electrodes, left 30 s to soak and then spin-cast at 2000 rpm. No additives to the hole-transporting medium or dye were used in this study. After drying in a nitrogen stream the absorbance of the samples was measured. The back contact of the solar cell devices was established by a spin-cast layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, aqueous solution, Aldrich) and graphite powder (Aldrich) as described previously.23
The solar cell devices were characterized by current density–voltage (J–V) measurements using a computer-controlled source meter (Keithley 2400) under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation (Newport solar simulator model 91160). The light source was calibrated using a silicon diode as a reference. During characterization the solar cells were clamped to ensure electric contact through the graphite powder. An aperture with the same area as the graphite back contact (0.19 cm2) was used for the measurements. External quantum efficiencies (EQE) were recorded with a computer-controlled setup consisting of a xenon light source (ASB-XE-175), a monochromator (AB301-T) and a potentiostat (PAR 273).
Energy transfer between TVT and SQ was investigated by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements. Mesoporous ZrO2, prepared following a recipe by Dr Brian O'Regan, was used as a non-quenching reference in the PL measurements.24 ZrO2 films were made by spin-coating (2000 rpm, 30 s) a home-made dispersion of ZrO2 nanoparticles on microscope glass slides followed by a sintering step at 450 °C for 30 minutes. The dyes, SQ and TVT, were applied as described for the solar cell samples with the difference that the SQ solution contained 10 mM cheno-deoxycholic acid (Fluka) to avoid SQ-aggregation.25 Steady state PL measurements were carried out at a 45° angle relative to the excitation beam. For comparison, reference samples with either SQ (adsorbed from solution) or TVT (spin-cast) were measured under the same experimental conditions. The experimental results of the reference samples were adjusted to match the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) of SQ and TVT in the sample comprising both dyes.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Properties of investigated compounds
For the device architecture described herein, the optical and electronic properties of ID adsorbed to TiO2 and the HTD as a solid film rather than their solution properties are of importance.
To illustrate this point, the normalized absorption (Anorm) and steady-state photoluminescence (PLnorm) spectra for TVT and the squaraine dye SQ in chlorobenzene solution and as solid films are compared in Fig. 3. In the solid phase the shoulder in the absorbance of TVT at 350 nm becomes more pronounced. The photoluminescence of TVT becomes broader in the solid phase and extends further into the low energy region. From the intercept of Anorm and PLnorm the E0-0 of TVT was determined to be 2.63 eV and 2.50 eV in chlorobenzene solution and solid phase, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Normalized absorption Anorm and photoluminescence spectra PLnorm of TVT (Anorm: solid, PLnorm: dashed) and SQ (Anorm: dash-dot, PLnorm: dotted) in (a) chlorobenzene solution (b) as spin-cast film (TVT) or chemisorbed (SQ) onto mesoporous ZrO2. 
The oxidation potentials E0 were determined from cyclic voltammetry. SQ was measured adsorbed to a mesoporous TiO2 film and TVT as a solid film on FTO substrates which were the working electrode in the measurements. Experimental details on these measurements can be found in the ESI.† Under these conditions TVT and SQ gave E0 values of 0.87 V and 0.85 V vs. NHE, respectively.
The molecular extinction coefficient ε of SQ was determined to be 220000 M−1 cm−1 in chlorobenzene solution. Adsorbed to ZrO2, the Anorm of SQ becomes considerably broader compared to the solution spectrum. In chlorobenzene solution, the PLnorm of SQ is the mirror image of the Anorm with a shoulder from a vibronic transition around 600 nm. The E0-0 of SQ in solution was determined to be 1.88 eV. Upon adsorption to the metal oxide a more pronounced spectral feature at 600 nm is observed. The PLnorm has a larger Stokes shift compared to the solution spectrum and the E0-0 amounts to 1.86 eV.
Substracting the E0-0 from the oxidation potential, the excited state potentials of TVT and SQ amount to −1.61 V and −1.0 V, respectively. Considering the flat-band potential of anatase TiO2 (−0.5 vs. NHE19,20,25) both SQ and TVT should be able to inject electrons into TiO2 upon excitation. The conduction band of ZrO2 is 1.1 eV more positive compared to TiO2.23 ZrO2 was therefore used as a non-quenching substrate for the steady-state photoluminescence measurements carried out herein.
When adsorbing SQ molecules to the mesoporous metal oxide a band evolves at 600 nm. This is due to H-aggregate formation as observed for other squaraine sensitizer dyes, illustrated in Fig. 4a.19,20,25 Interestingly, upon spin-casting TVT onto the sample this band decreases while the SQ-monomer band at 660 nm increases (Fig. 4b). Both the HTD and spiro-MeOTAD (ESI†) seem to partially disaggregate (Fig. 4B) the SQ-aggregates having thus a similar effect as the co-adsorber cheno-deoxycholic acid (cDCA) (Fig. 4c). We found that the PL of squaraines heavily depends on their degree of aggregation. A detailed investigation of this effect lies outside the scope of this work. Steady-state PL measurements were therefore carried out on samples with additional cDCA to estimate the energy transfer from TVT to SQ.
 Fig. 4  Absorption spectrum of (a) SQ on mesoporous ZrO2 exhibiting H-aggregates (A), (b) SQ with added TVT on mesoporous ZrO2 leading to decreased aggregation of SQ (B) and (c) SQ with cheno-deoxycholic acid causing complete disaggregation (C). 
In the solid state, both the TVT emission and SQ absorption become broader (Fig. 3b) and their spectral overlap thus larger compared to the solution spectra (Fig. 3a). Energy transfer from TVT to SQ is thus feasible in solar cell devices comprising SQ as ID and TVT as HTD.
The spectral separation allows us to distinguish between the contribution of SQ and TVT to the photocurrent and perform steady-state PL measurements to examine the energy transfer from TVT to SQ. We find this dye combination suitable as a proof of principle for the suggested solar cell device architecture.
3.2. Solar cell devices
Solar cell devices comprising a combination of SQ as ID and TVT as HTD were compared with devices comprising TVT without ID and SQ in combination with spiro-MeOTAD. For this comparison non-porous spray-coated TiO2 substrates were used to avoid limitations from insufficient pore infiltration or difference in hole mobility in the hole transporting media.
The solar cell efficiency for representative devices derived from J–V measurements under 1 sun illumination are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of solar cell performancea data for various solar cell devicesb based on FTO/denseTiO2/mesoporousTiO2/ID/HTD




TiO2
ID
HTD

V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF

η






a Measured under AM 1.5 conditions at 1000 W m−2.
b Active area 0.19 cm2.
c Additional mesoporous layer on dense TiO2.





dense
None

TVT

0.33
0.08
0.38
0.01



SQ

Spiro
0.66
0.21
0.61
0.09



SQ


TVT

0.43
0.24
0.59
0.06


mpc, 70 nm

SQ


TVT

0.48
0.64
0.64
0.19


mpc, 150 nm

SQ


TVT

0.47
0.62
0.54
0.16




Devices using spiro-MeOTAD as a hole-transporting medium exhibit a higher efficiency compared to the devices using TVT because of a higher open circuit voltage VOC while the short circuit current JSC and fill factor FF were comparable.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for the devices using dense TiO2 substrates with TVT only (TVT), SQ in combination with spiro-MeOTAD and SQ in combination with TVT (SQ/TVT) are compared in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of the EQE of bilayer solar cells with TVT (dotted), SQ/spiro-MeOTAD (solid) and SQ/TVT (dashed). TVT acts as a sensitizer by itself but still contributes to the photocurrent with SQ as an injection dye at the interface. Spiro-MeOTAD gives a contribution to the photocurrent when used in combination with an ID. 
For the SQ/spiro-MeOTAD sample (Fig. 5, solid) SQ gives a characteristic response between ∼600–700 nm. Surprisingly, there is also a response at 380 nm coinciding with the absorption of spiro-MeOTAD (ESI†, Fig. S3). Spiro-MeOTAD can thus also contribute to the photocurrent either via direct injection or energy transfer from excited spiro-MeOTAD to SQ. A detailed investigation of this mechanism is beyond the scope of this work.
A spin-cast layer of TVT on dense TiO2 substrates gives an EQE of about 3% (Fig. 5, dotted). Excitons generated in the bulk of the HTD material can be expected to contribute to the photocurrent.
The SQ/TVT sample exhibits a response from both dyes. The EQE generated by the TVT does not decrease upon addition of the ID monolayer between the TVT and TiO2 although it might be expected that the mean spatial separation between TVT and the interface increases. Additionally to direct injection from TVT to TiO2, mediated injection viaSQ and energy transfer from TVT to SQ are possible (eqn (3)).
Results for SQ/TVT samples comprising a thin additional mesoporous layer of TiO2 are also given in Table 1. The thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 layer spin-coated from 10 times and 20 times diluted commercial paste was measured to be 150 nm and 70 nm, respectively. Increasing the surface area for charge separation gives rise to a 3-fold increase of the short-circuit current density (JSC). Devices with the thicker mesoporous TiO2 layer exhibited a non-linear dependency of JSC on light-intensity and a decreased fill factor. This indicates increased recombination and charge transport limitations in the devices.
For the bilayer samples (Fig. 5) the contribution of SQ to the EQE is about 2 times higher using spiro-MeOTAD as HTD compared to TVT. As the LHE of these two samples was comparable, the difference in EQEID must originate from a difference in the IQEID (eqn (2)). A schematic energy level diagram, derived from the redox potentials and E0-0 for SQ, TVT and spiro-MeOTAD, is shown in the inset of Fig. 5. The lack of driving force (ΔG) for regeneration of SQ by TVT is the probable cause for the lower EQEID. The SQ/TVT combination is thus not optimal with respect to the ηreg and the device performance of ID/HTD combinations should be improved when optimized with respect to this parameter.
The external quantum efficiency of the HTD (EQEHTD) can contain contributions from both electron transfer or energy transfer mechanisms (eqn (3)). In Fig. 6 the EQE of the solar cell sample comprising a 150 nm mesoporous TiO2 layer is shown in comparison with its LHE. The IQEHTD (TVT) is 35% and the IQEID (SQ) amounts to 23%. As the EQEHTD depends on the IQEID (eqn (3)) the relative contributions of electron transfer and energy transfer mechanisms to the EQE can be estimated. As the IQEHTD > IQEID photoconversion by electron transfer must at least account for a part of the observed EQEHTD.
 Fig. 6  
EQE (solid) and LHE (dashed) of solid state dye-sensitized solar cell devices comprising a 150 nm mesoporous TiO2 layer sensitized with SQ and infiltrated with TVT as a hole transporting dye. 
3.3. Estimation of the energy transfer efficiency ηXT
Energy transfer from TVT to SQ was investigated by photoluminescence (PL) emission and excitation measurements. Using mesoporous ZrO2 substrates as a non-quenching reference the energy transfer from TVT to SQ could be investigated by probing the SQ-emission upon TVT excitation. As the PL of SQ was found to be crucially dependent on the degree of aggregation of the squaraine molecules (see ESI†), the co-adsorber cheno-deoxycholic acid (cDCA) was used in the preparation of the samples for the PL measurements. The absorption spectra of the SQ samples indicate fully disaggregated molecules. The addition of TVT did not affect the absorption spectrum of the sample further. In these samples, the TVT molecules are probably lying on the top of the SQ/cDCA monolayer and do not intercalate in between the aggregates. The intermolecular distance and orientation between SQ and TVT can therefore be expected to be different compared to the solar cell samples. The determined ηXT should thus represent a minimum value.

Fig. 7 shows the PL-emission spectra comparing the emission of a sample comprising both dyes (SQ/TVT) with reference samples comprising each constituent dye. The samples were excited at 430 nm, close to the maximum of the TVT absorption (Fig. 3b). The measured PL of the reference samples was corrected to account for small differences in the amount of dyes with respect to the SQ/TVT sample.
 Fig. 7  
PL-emission spectra (exc. 430 nm) of SQ/cDCA/TVT (solid) in comparison with reference samples (SQ/cDCA: dashed and TVT: dotted) on mesoporous ZrO2. This indicates energy transfer from TVT to SQ. 
The sample comprising both dyes exhibits a PL signal at 680 nm originating from the emission of SQ. In comparison, the SQ reference gives about 6.5 times lower PL, because of the weak absorption of SQ at 430 nm. The TVT reference sample exhibits a broad PL with a maximum around 600 nm. This PL is quenched substantially around the absorption maximum of SQ in the SQ/TVT sample. The quenched TVT emission and emerging SQ emission indicate energy transfer from TVT by SQ.
The mechanism for energy transfer (Förster, Dexter or a trivial mechanism involving emission and reabsorption) cannot be distinguished from the present experiments. In device geometries where the energy donor is embedded in the HTM matrix,8,10,12 Förster-resonant energy transfer might be the only mechanism. However, in the device architecture investigated herein the energy donor (TVT) is in vicinity to the acceptor (SQ). Orbital overlap of adjacent molecules makes a Dexter-type mechanism for energy transfer plausible. Considering the high optical densities and sample geometry with TVT being surrounded by SQ in the 3-dimensional mesoporous matrix, a trivial mechanism for energy transfer cannot be excluded.
The excitation spectrum of the samples is shown in Fig. 8. The samples were excited between 380 nm and 680 nm while probing the PL-emission at 700 nm. The PL of the SQ and TVT reference samples was corrected for the difference in LHE with respect to the SQ/TVT sample (ESI†, Fig. S4). The SQ/TVT sample exhibits an emission at 700 nm both for excitation of TVT and SQ. The lower SQ-emission for the SQ/TVT sample compared to the SQ reference is probably due to non-radiative quenching pathways introduced by the HTD. The signal <400 nm for the SQ sample is due to the higher energy transition.
 Fig. 8  
PL-excitation spectra of SQ/TVT (solid) in comparison with reference samples of SQ (dashed) and TVT (dotted). Comparing the PL for excitation at 430 nm with excitation at 660 nm the exciton transfer efficiency from TVT to SQ is estimated to be 26%. 
The TVT excitation has the same characteristic spectral shape as the reference sample with TVT only (inset Fig. 8) but is an order of magnitude higher. We ascribe this signal to the excitation of TVT with subsequent energy transfer and emission from SQ. Comparing the SQ-emission for the SQ/TVT sample for TVT-excitation (430 nm) with direct SQ-excitation (655 nm) the excitation energy transfer efficiency (ηXT) was determined to be 26%. Using eqn (3) the contribution from excitation energy transfer to the overall IQETVT can be calculated to account for 6% of the determined 35%. In this case, the remaining 29% must originate from direct or mediated electron transfer from TVT to TiO2.
4. Conclusion
We have investigated the dye tris(thienyl-vinyl-thienyl)-triphenyl-amine (TVT) as hole transporting medium in squaraine (SQ) sensitized solid state dye sensitized solar cells. Both dyes, TVT and SQ, contribute to the photocurrent. Spiro-MeOTAD was also found to give a photocurrent response in the blue part of the spectrum and can thus be regarded to be a hole transporting dye (HTD).
The conversion efficiency of the ID crucially depends on the regeneration efficiency of the ID by the HTD. In this aspect, TVT was inferior to spiro-MeOTAD resulting in a lower internal quantum efficiency of the ID. This is a crucial factor to maximize the performance of these solar cells.
Different pathways, electron transfer and energy transfer, for the conversion of photons harvested in the HTD into current were discussed. The energy transfer efficiency from the employed HTD (TVT) to the ID (SQ) was estimated to be 26% by steady-state photoluminescence. Direct or mediated electron transfer from the HTD to TiO2 is in this case the dominant pathway for photon to electricity conversion upon light absorption in the HTD. The HTD (TVT) appeared to intercalate into the squaraine monolayer reducing aggregation of the latter.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jianjun He (AnaSpec Inc) for the squaraine dye used as ID in this study. Brian O'Regan is thanked for the recipe and Leif Häggman is thanked for the preparation of the ZrO2 paste. This project is financed by the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskaprådet).
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .
Y. Chiba, I. Ashraful, Y. Watanabe, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638–L640 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cai, S.-J. Moon, L. Cevey-Ha, T. Moehl, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1452 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Unger, E. Ripaud, P. Leriche, A. Cravino, J. Roncali, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11659 CAS .
J. H. Yum, B. Hardin, S. J. Moon, E. Baranoff, F. Nüesch, M. McGehee, M. Grätzel and M. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 9441 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, S. Kim, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, J. Basham and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4250 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, J. Basham, M. Paulose, S. Kim, O. K. Varghese, A. Vaish, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2387 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 596 CrossRef CAS .
K. Driscoll, J. Fang, N. Humphry-Baker, T. s. Torres, W. T. S. Huck, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4981 CrossRef CAS .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, C.-Y. Jiang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 994 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Jiang, K. Manseki, Y.-H. Yu, N. Masaki, K. Suzuki, Y.-l. Song and S. Yanagida, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2481 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Moon, E. Baranoff, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8244 RSC .
S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034907 CrossRef .
S. R. Scully, P. B. Armstrong, C. Edder, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2961 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, P. Walter, S. Huber, D. Rentsch, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, F. De Angelis, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10320 CrossRef CAS .
T. Geiger, S. Kuster, J.-H. Yum, S.-J. Moon, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. Nüesch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2720 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roquet, A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3459–3466 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 842 CAS .
J.-E. Moser, M. Wolf, F. Lenzmann and M. Grätzel, Z. Phys. Chem., 1999, 212, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tatay, S. A. Haque, B. O'Regan, J. R. Durrant, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon, A. Vidal-Ferran, P. Gavina and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3037 RSC .
J. H. Yum, J. S. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Walter, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, M. Grätzel and M. Nazeeruddin, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424005 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrochemical characterization of SQ and TVT, absorbance spectra of samples used for PL measurements, effect of degree of aggregation on the SQ emission and PL-emission measurements without cDCA. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp22493jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic picture of solid state dye-sensitized solar cells employing a hole-transporting dye (HTD) and an injection dye (ID). (b) Required energy level alignment for the suggested device. The HTD can contribute to the photocurrent both via electron and energy transfer.	 
EQE = EQEID + EQEHTD	(1)
EQEID = LHEID × IQEID	(2)
EQEHTD = LHEHTD(ηinj,HTD × ηcc + ηXT × IQEID)	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Hole transporting triphenylamine dye (TVT) and squaraine injection dye (SQ) investigated in this study with suggested mechanisms for photoconversion.	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalized absorption Anorm and photoluminescence spectra PLnorm of TVT (Anorm: solid, PLnorm: dashed) and SQ (Anorm: dash-dot, PLnorm: dotted) in (a) chlorobenzene solution (b) as spin-cast film (TVT) or chemisorbed (SQ) onto mesoporous ZrO2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Absorption spectrum of (a) SQ on mesoporous ZrO2 exhibiting H-aggregates (A), (b) SQ with added TVT on mesoporous ZrO2 leading to decreased aggregation of SQ (B) and (c) SQ with cheno-deoxycholic acid causing complete disaggregation (C).	 


dense	None	
TVT
	0.33	0.08	0.38	0.01

SQ
	Spiro	0.66	0.21	0.61	0.09

SQ
	
TVT
	0.43	0.24	0.59	0.06
mpc, 70 nm	
SQ
	
TVT
	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.19
mpc, 150 nm	
SQ
	
TVT
	0.47	0.62	0.54	0.16

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of the EQE of bilayer solar cells with TVT (dotted), SQ/spiro-MeOTAD (solid) and SQ/TVT (dashed). TVT acts as a sensitizer by itself but still contributes to the photocurrent with SQ as an injection dye at the interface. Spiro-MeOTAD gives a contribution to the photocurrent when used in combination with an ID.	 

 	Fig. 6  
EQE (solid) and LHE (dashed) of solid state dye-sensitized solar cell devices comprising a 150 nm mesoporous TiO2 layer sensitized with SQ and infiltrated with TVT as a hole transporting dye.	 

 	Fig. 7  
PL-emission spectra (exc. 430 nm) of SQ/cDCA/TVT (solid) in comparison with reference samples (SQ/cDCA: dashed and TVT: dotted) on mesoporous ZrO2. This indicates energy transfer from TVT to SQ.	 

 	Fig. 8  
PL-excitation spectra of SQ/TVT (solid) in comparison with reference samples of SQ (dashed) and TVT (dotted). Comparing the PL for excitation at 430 nm with excitation at 660 nm the exciton transfer efficiency from TVT to SQ is estimated to be 26%.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrochemical characterization of SQ and TVT, absorbance spectra of samples used for PL measurements, effect of degree of aggregation on the SQ emission and PL-emission measurements without cDCA. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp22493j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
