Understanding the role of inorganic carrier transport layer materials and interfaces in emerging perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02911A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02911A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 15725-15780Understanding the role of inorganic carrier transport layer materials and interfaces in emerging perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Vishesh 
            Manjunath†
a, 
      
        
          
            Santosh 
            Bimli†
a, 
      
        
          
            Parvez A. 
            Shaikh
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Satishchandra B. 
            Ogale
          
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Rupesh S. 
            Devan
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Khandwa Road, Simrol, 453552, India. E-mail: rupesh@iiti.ac.in
bDepartment of Physics, AKI's Poona College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Pune, Maharashtra 411001, India
cDepartment of Physics and Centre for Energy Science, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune 411008, India. E-mail: satishogale@iiserpune.ac.in
dResearch Institute for Sustainable Energy (RISE), TCG Centres for Research and Education in Science and Technology (TCG-CREST), Kolkata 700091, India. E-mail: satish.ogale@tcgcrest.org
Received 
      11th July 2022
    , Accepted 5th September 2022First published on 26th September 2022AbstractIn the last decade, organic–inorganic hybrid and metal halide perovskite materials have shown tremendous tunability properties and capacity to harvest solar energy efficiently via conceptually new solar cell architectures. Presently, third-generation thin-film solar cells employing perovskite light absorbers produce a power conversion efficiency of ∼25%, which is attributed to their exceptionally unique and device-worthy optoelectronic properties. Although the perovskite light absorbers play a main role in the harvesting process, the corresponding device architectures must contain other backing layers such as electron and hole transport layers, which are crucial for the efficient and stable electronic functioning of the solar cell. Thus, understanding the functional significance of these transport layers and synergistically optimizing them with respect to the perovskite light absorbers is highly significant for further developments in this arena. Therefore, this review focuses and critically analyses the electron and hole transport layers used in perovskite solar cells, highlighting their functional significance and critical role. Their functionality basically originates from their crystal structure, chemistry, electronic and optical properties, and compatibility with the corresponding synthesis protocols of perovskites. Overall, this work aims at developing a comparative analysis and enhanced understanding of the transport of photogenerated charges across the active interfaces in the perovskite solar cells.
Vishesh Manjunath
Vishesh Manjunath received his Master's Degree (2016) in Nanotechnology from VIT University, Vellore, India. In 2017, he joined Dr Rupesh's research group for a PhD program in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. His research interests include photovoltaics, thin-film technology, green hydrogen generation, visible and ultraviolet light sensors and the fabrication of optoelectronic devices.
Santosh Bimli
Santosh Bimli received his Master's Degree (2019) in Material Science Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. In 2019, he joined Dr Rupesh's research group for a PhD program in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. His research interests include developing nanostructures for optoelectronic applications like Hybrid thin film solar cells, resistive switching devices, photodetector, and magneto-optics.
Parvez A. Shaikh
Dr Parvez Shaikh is currently a SERB-TARE Fellow in Dr Rupesh's group at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India, and working (since 2017) as an Assistant Professor of PHYSICS at AKI's Poona College of Arts, Science & Commerce, Pune, India. He has worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (2014–2017). He was also CSIR-Research Associate (2011–2014) at the National Chemical Laboratory (NCL) Pune, India. His research interests are hybrid optoelectronic materials, solar cells, and devices for energy conversion.
Satishchandra B. Ogale
Prof. (Dr) Satishchandra Ogale is currently a Professor Emeritus, IISER Pune and Director, Research Institute for Sustainable Energy (RISE), Salt Lake, Kolkata, India. Previously he was a Raja Ramanna Fellow of the Department of Atomic Energy (2019–20), Professor of Physics at IISER Pune (2015–18), Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR, CSIR), New Delhi (2006–15), and Pune University (1980–96). He was also a Visiting Professor and Senior Research Scientist at the University of Maryland, College Park (1996–2006). He has performed research for many years on advanced functional materials for energy applications which includes hybrid perovskite and solar cells, green energy and energy storage devices, photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Rupesh S. Devan
Dr Rupesh Devan is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. Before receiving the INSPIRE Faculty Award (2014) from the Department of Science and Technology (DST) India, he worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at National Dong Hwa University, Taiwan (2007–2013). His research areas include developing nano-hetero-architectures and hybrid materials for applications in supercapattery, solar cells, photodetectors, green hydrogen generation, and water remediation.
1. Introduction
Renewable energy has shown great promise to combat the emerging energy demand globally, with its contribution to the energy sector increasing fairly rapidly.1 Among the renewable energy resources and their harvesting approaches, solar energy conversion into electrical energy has shown excellent promise towards sustainable development.2 Solar cells are devices that convert incoming light energy into usable electrical energy. Although a myriad of efforts has been undertaken in the past 50 years to achieve a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) through different solar cell designs and architectures, a knowledge gap still persists in the comprehensive understanding of how different material interfaces can affect the overall advancement of solar cell technology.3
Silicon-based solar cells are one of the earliest solar cells making use of crystalline silicon with a bandgap of 1.11 eV, which is well-positioned in the optimum range for broadband light absorption. At present, first-generation silicon solar cells continue to dominate this field, with significant progress being made towards a high photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) due to the developed purification and fabrication technology and earth abundance of the required materials.4 Recently, the greater supply than demand has also reduced the costs of other materials, and thus the corresponding improved yields have reduced the projected price of photovoltaic technology.5 Moreover, over the years, various materials such as amorphous-Si, GaAs, CdTe/Se, PbSe/S, CIGS, and CZTS have been successfully deposited and optimized into thin films with required thickness and quality and are used as absorbers in second-generation solar cells to further address and combat related problems.6–11 The advantages of these second-generation solar cells include their low production cost, flexibility, and light weightedness.12
During the last few decades, third-generation solar cells based on nanocrystals, polymers, sensitized dyes, organic–inorganic and inorganic halide perovskites have shown tremendous progress bringing a high degree of novelty and versatility in both the design of new materials and solar cell architectures.13–16 Specifically, the emerging perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained enormous interest in the last decade with the corresponding conversion efficiency (∼25%) competing with their first-generation silicon counterparts.17 Also, the newly introduced perovskite/Si tandem cells have already delivered a remarkable efficiency of 29.5% (refer to the NREL website for more details).
Hybrid perovskites are molecularly assembled organic–inorganic compounds that absorb incoming light energy efficiently across a significant portion of the solar spectrum. They can be highly tuned to generate various desirable optical and optoelectronic properties. These organo-inorganic perovskite materials form the ABX3 structure, where A represents an organic cation (CH3NH3+, Cs+, etc.), B represents a divalent metal (Pb2+, Sn2+, etc.) and X is a halogen (Cl−, I−, and Br−). The size of these three ions is strictly confined by the tolerance factor (t) for a stable perovskite structure.18 Moreover, the perovskite light absorbers possess a high absorption coefficient in the visible region (∼350 to 800 nm), high extinction coefficient (∼104 cm−1 at 550 nm), long charge diffusion lengths, and ease of processing, which have led to the fabrication of low-cost PSCs at room temperature consuming a lower amount of material.19 These intrinsic properties of perovskite light absorbers can be tailored to meet the requirements by merely substituting the ions in perovskite materials.20 However, compared to the perovskite light absorbers, the transport layers are equally important in the solar cell design to render high efficiency and stability.
Two different carrier-selective transport layers are required to achieve effective carrier extraction at both external terminals. These transport layers preferably perform selective charge carrier extraction (i.e., n-type or p-type) by blocking the transport of the other (i.e., p-type or n-type). The deposition of a p or n type transport layer on the light exposure side of the solar cell first, followed by an intrinsic layer results in the device configuration of the conventional negative–intrinsic–positive (n–i–p) and inverted positive–intrinsic–negative (p–i–n). Theoretically, both the (n–i–p) and (p–i–n) device architectures should give the same efficiency, but they differ due to their optical properties, transmittance in the UV-Vis-NIR region, material compatibility, and formation of an ohmic contact with the transparent side of the electrode. Additionally, the investigation of an inverted (p–i–n) architecture that alters optical behaviour was reported in the literature.21 Generally, the recombination process involves both types of carriers present within the proximity of the charge diffusion pathway, where the extraction of particular types of charge carriers at different ends will reduce their recombination. However, various other qualities such as high conductivity for selected carrier types, reduction of the unfavourable effect at the interfaces, closely matching mobilities of the charge carriers across the interface and tuning of the bandgap for smooth charge transfer of the interfacial charge carrier-type selective transport layers contribute to the realization of high efficiency in PSCs.
In this review, we critically discuss and compare different possible inorganic transport layers (electrons and holes) mainly used for the PSCs. The functionalities, properties, and requirements of these transport layers to achieve efficient PSCs are the main focus. We primarily present, analyse, and discuss the developments pertaining to highly efficient inorganic electron transport layers (ETLs) composed of TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, and ternary metal oxides and hole transport layers (HTLs) composed of NiOx, VOx, CoOx, CuO, CuI, and CuSCN. Further, the effect of the physical, chemical, and photoelectrical properties of these widely used inorganic transport layers on the performance of PSCs is discussed in depth. Finally, we also include a brief section on the most extensively used organic transport layers towards the end of this review article.
2. Importance of transport layers
The transport layers in PSCs perform specific functions similar to that in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (Fig. 1). However, the term ‘division of labour’ has been widely used to understand the functionalities of each component in PSCs,22 which include (i) perovskite light absorber: absorbs the majority of the solar spectrum and creates electron–hole pairs, (ii) transport layers: selectively dissociate the excitons generated in the light absorber, and (iii) electrodes: establish an electronic high-quality interface between the device and the external circuit with minimal resistance. Accordingly, the systematic synchronization of these basic components in terms of optical, chemical, structural, and electronic properties leads to a high performance in PSCs. The range of coverage, uniformity, and thickness of the transport layers depend on the employed coating technique. Notably, the interface at the transport layer/perovskite absorber plays a crucial role in the overall device performance. Depending on the structure of the employed transport layers, PSCs are classified into planar and mesoporous device architectures (Fig. 2). Theoretically, the device architecture with a larger charge diffusion length (Ld) than the thickness of the perovskite absorber (t) (i.e., Ld > t) is identified as a planar device architecture, which is the opposite in the mesoscopic device architecture (i.e., Ld < t). This structure is further divided into two configurations, namely, regular planar with negative intrinsic positive (n–i–p) and inverted planar with positive intrinsic negative (p–i–n), to facilitate excellent optical transparency in the transport layer and allow maximum light illumination on the perovskite-like absorber.23 Alternatively, the mesoporous structure demonstrates a large effective interface between the transport layer and perovskite, facilitating dissociation of the generated excitons, but lacks charge collection efficiency due to the grain boundary-assisted recombination.24 The transport layers are found to guide the growth of the perovskite absorber, but the lattice mismatch between the perovskite and transport layers alters the charge transport. Also, chemical compatibility aspects such as stability and reactivity of the transport layer with the perovskite layer are equally important. Moreover, the transport layers optically protect the perovskite absorber from high-energy UV radiation, enhancing the device stability. Leijtens et al.25 observed higher stability in mesoscopic PSCs sensitized with metal oxide than non-sensitized PSCs. The surface-adsorbed oxygen states of metal oxides possess deep trap sites for the injected electrons upon continuous exposure to the UV spectrum and may leak into the hole transport material. Furthermore, the presence of defects, interstitials, and impurities in the transport layer, and thereby at its interface with perovskite, strongly influences the charge mobility, transport, and recombination. The oxygen vacancies and interstitial atoms at the interface are known to create shallow or deep levels near the band edge, which form recombination centres.26 Therefore, the selection of defect tolerant interfaces is a prerequisite for smooth charge transfer and to avoid charge recombination. The charge mobilities of the transport layers, when closely matched with the perovskite light absorber, drastically reduce the charge accumulation at the transport layer/perovskite interface and enhance the collection efficiency. Therefore, engineering of the transport layers by doping, faceting, or growing heterostructures is required to address these charge recombination issues.27–31 Although a wide range of transport layers has been employed to efficiently transport electrons from the perovskite absorbers to the contacts, the bandgap and band alignment of the transport layers with perovskite light absorbers are fundamental prerequisites for the fabrication of a working device. Usually, wide bandgap semiconductors are employed to allow the maximum visible spectrum illumination on the perovskite films. Band alignment or band edge alignment guides the electrons through the transport layers to reduce the leakage of excited charges in the opposite direction. Besides these functionalities, the ease of processing, use of earth abundant materials, chemical stability, stability under light illumination, non-toxicity, and feasibility of real-time operation are the main concerns to realize the commercial availability of PSCs. Usually, the high processing temperature of metal oxides restricts the use of plastic substrates in PSCs. Overall, in the continuing search for ideal transport layers, different material systems with a wide range of approaches are discussed in the present review.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (a) dye-sensitized solar cell (i.e., DSSC) and (b) perovskite solar cells (i.e., PSC). 
 Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) mesoporous and (b) planar PSC. 
3. Role of interface and carrier transport in PSCs
3.1 Interfaces
When the perovskite layer absorbs light, the photo-generated charge carriers drift towards the respective interfaces (perovskite/ETL or perovskite/HTL) under the influence of the built-in electric field, where an ultrafast charge extraction process takes place. The efficient charge extraction depends on smooth charge transport through the interface, which is hindered by peculiar features related to the interface such as the surface energy of the two constituent layers, energy level alignment at the interface, interfacial layer, defects, mobile ions, trap states, charge recombination, and charge accumulation. These obstructions result in the recombination of charges, hysteresis effect, and light soaking in PSCs. Consequently, the precise control of these issues (discussed here and shown in Fig. 3) strongly influences the performance and stability of PSCs, which is discussed in detail in this review.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the importance of interfaces in PSCs. 
The understanding and investigation of the reasons for the recombination process in the perovskite layer and at the interface are imperative not only to control it but also to narrow the interface engineering schemes, which can be done with the help of a differential equation expressed as follows: (1)where p is the photo-induced charge carrier density, and r1, r2 and r3 are trap-assisted (mono-molecular), interfacial (bi-molecular), and auger recombination rate constants, respectively. The latter is negligible due to the wide bandgap nature of perovskite materials. The charge recombination in the perovskite is also significantly less for highly crystalline perovskite films. The dominant recombination is mainly due to the second-order, i.e., interfacial (bimolecular), recombination arising from (i) structural defects in the perovskite layer emanating from the lattice mismatch and thermal vibration, (ii) energy off-set between the perovskite and transport layers, (iii) surface defects present in the transport materials such as ZnO and SnO2 (ETL) and NiO (HTL), and (iv) difference in the charge carrier mobility of perovskite and transport layers.32
The charge dynamics, including extraction, transfer, and recombination of charge carriers, happens at the interface. Charge extraction is a very fast process and takes a few hundred picoseconds, which is significantly less than the lifetime of the charge carriers (around a few nanoseconds). Although the charge extraction process is hindered by the presence of PbI2 at the surface of the perovskite, surface modification has become a prime requirement.33,34 Furthermore, the hole traps resulting from the under-coordinated halide anions on the crystalline surface of MAPbI3 thin films can induce significant charge accumulation at the perovskite/HTL interface.35 These trap states existing at the interface can be eliminated by interface engineering to reduce the recombination rate and improve the charge transfer. Also, it has been perceived that the passivation of trap states can eradicate the hysteresis anomaly. Another obstruction for efficient charge extraction is the migration of ions present in the perovskite (MA+, Pb2+, and I−) towards the interface, which can also affect the device performance. These ions have low activation barriers and ionic diffusion coefficients to move within the perovskite, especially when the device is exposed to light illumination.36
Another important feature is the energy level alignment at the interface, which is essential for smooth charge transportation. Generally, a band offset of ∼0.2 eV is required for efficient charge transfer at the perovskite/ETL interface. Further, the appropriate tailoring in the energy level alignment allows smooth charge transportation, which results in a higher short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF). Also, an increase in the open circuit voltage (VOC) can be achieved by optimum tailoring of the band alignment.37
Different approaches for interface engineering, including screening of alternative transport materials with different morphologies and surface modification to alter the charge carrier dynamics, have been attempted to improve the device performance, mainly VOC, JSC, and FF. Furthermore, the use of a mesoporous layer can affect the ion migration, producing a lower accumulation of charge carriers at the interface. The use of doped and composite transport materials, transport layer with different morphologies (one-dimensional and three-dimensional), and bi-layered mesoporous scaffolds can alter the mobility and band alignment of the transport layer, which will improve the device performance and stability. Additionally, different surface modifications and surface passivation techniques can and have been used to optimize the interface.
3.2 Charge carrier dynamics
The two main carrier characteristics of the transport layers that influence the performance of PSCs are mobility (μ) and conductivity (σ). The mobility of the carriers in the perovskite should be well-matched to that of the transport layers, i.e., the mobility of carriers in the transport layers should be greater than or equal to that of the perovskite absorbers for smooth extraction from the perovskite absorber at the interface of the perovskite and transport layer. Conversely, charge accumulation occurs at the perovskite/transport layer interface when the mobility of the carriers in the transport layers is lower than that in the perovskite light absorbers, leading to interfacial recombination. Practically, the carrier mobility of a material depends on its processing methods, microstructures, morphology, and defect characteristics. The electron mobility in a semiconductor can be expressed as follows: (2)where μ, m* and τ are the charge mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1), effective mass, and characteristic time (s) of the charges in the transport layers, respectively.
Further, the charge conductivity of the transport layer should be comparable to that of the perovskite absorber to ensure lower charge recombination in the transport and achieve better performances in PSCs. The electrical conduction in a semiconductor is given by the following equation: σ = nDE(3)where σ is the electrical conductivity (S m−1), n is the free charge concentration based on the Boltzmann relation, D is the diffusion coefficient of charges, and E is the electric field (V m−1). Thus, considering Einstein's equation, the electrical conductivities of the transport layers can be increased by either increasing the charge mobility (μe and μh for ETLs and HTLs, respectively) or concentration of free charges (ne and nh for ETLs and HTLs, respectively). Furthermore, the conductivity and mobility of the transport layers largely influence the series and shunt resistance of PSCs. Various reports suggest that the inclusion of low mobility transport layers at perovskite/transport layer interface results in dominant trap-assisted recombination losses, delivering poor device performances. Therefore, various research groups have used the doping strategy to enhance the carrier mobility in the transport layers, but doping results in other unfavourable issues such as parasitic absorption, dopant diffusion, and doping-induced degradation pathways. In addition, the concentration of dopants required to enhance the mobility in the semiconducting transport layers depends on their thickness and creates ambiguity in ascertaining the exact dopant that can work and its concentration. Le-Corre et al.38 reported an alternative strategy to doping and found a different transport layer (with high mobility), namely, optimizing the thickness of the transport layers, which directly affected the fill factor (FF) of the PSCs. Further, to reduce the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers in the perovskite light absorbers, the mobility of electrons (μe) and holes (μh) should be balanced, i.e., the ratio of μe and μh should be equal to one. Thus, Chen et al.39 used the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method and demonstrated the importance of choosing and grading the transport layers to achieve a μe and μh ratio of 1, which enhanced the performance of PSCs.
In general, the carrier transport in the perovskite layer is discussed based on the ideal space charge region, but some studies have reported changes in the semiconducting state (p, i, or n) of the perovskite absorber depending on its ionic composition. Subsequently, Byeon et al.40 introduced the concept of dominant p–n junction depending on the type of ETL used. Electron-beam-induced current measurement (EBIC) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) were used to analyse the electric field and charge densities. The EBIC measurements for devices based on a TiO2 ETL showed a strong EBIC signal at the TiO2/perovskite interface, unlike PSCs with a C60 ETL, showing a strong EBIC signal at the perovskite/spiro interface, as shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, the generated charges dissociate at the dominant junction with a strong built-in potential and are transferred to the corresponding transport layers. Further, the E-field inside the junction was measured by local contact potential differences (CPDs) with cross-sectional KPFM measurements. A strong E-field was observed at the TiO2/perovskite interface for the TiO2-based device, while the uniform distribution of a weak E-field was noticed at the MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interface and in the MAPbI3 layer. On the contrary, a strong E-field developed at the MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interface instead of the C60/MAPbI3 interface in the C60-based device. This again corroborates that the choice of ETL decides the location to form the dominant p–n junction. The carrier density profiles obtained showed that holes were extensively amassed at the TiO2 interface, and therefore, the net charge of the perovskite layer was also positive for the TiO2-based device. However, the C60-based device mainly showed electron accumulation at the spiro-MeOTAD interface rather than C60 (Fig. 5). The net charge of the entire perovskite layer was negative in the device comprised of C60 than that of TiO2. Thus, the actual devices were not an ideal p–i–n solar cell, indicating a localized E-field at the specific interface with distinct transport layers. This further emphasizes the choice of transport layers as a key factor in controlling the carrier dynamics in the PSCs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematics of electron-beam-induced current measurement setup. (b–d) Cross-sectional SEM images representing the EBIC signal in a bright green color and (e–g) their line profiles perpendicular to layers of TiO2, TiO2/C60, and C60, respectively. The scale bars in SEM images are 500 nm.40 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2580–2589). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of cross-sectional Kelvin probe force microscopy measurement scheme. (b and e) Distribution of contact potential differences in OC (red line) and SC (blue line) condition and (c and f) normalized E-field distribution and OC conditions under illumination and (d and g) charge density profile evaluated from photo-potential difference between VOC − VSC of TiO2- and C60-based PSCs, respectively. The arrows in (b) and (e) indicate the built-up VOC. (OC: open circuit, SC: short circuit, VOC: open circuit voltage, and VSC: short circuit voltages).40 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2580–2589). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
The semiconducting transport layers are vital components of high-performing PSCs, but these metal oxide transport layers usually possess inherent trap states. The UV active trap states in the semiconducting transport layers act as recombination centres, which directly impact the FF and short circuit current densities (JSC) of the PSCs. Further, the recombination centres formed at the interface of the transport layer and perovskite absorber give rise to hysteresis in PSCs. Nimens et al.41 emphasized that the fabrication method used to deposit the transport layers directly determines the trap density at the transport layer/perovskite interface. Further, besides the morphology of the transport layers or the perovskite absorber films, the trap density obtained due to the fabrication process of the transport layer greatly controls the performance of PSCs.
Overall, the charge transfer dynamics compete at different timescales. The lifetime of photogenerated carriers in polycrystalline perovskite films ranges from 10–100 ns. With driving forces such as concentration gradient and built-in potential, the photogenerated carriers diffuse to the transport layer/perovskite interface and are selectively separated in a timescale of ∼10 ns. Subsequently, the free carriers get collected through the transport layers at a typical timescale of ∼10 μs. In the transport layers, before the carriers reach the electrode, the interfacial recombination competes with the carrier transport at the typical timescale of 1–1000 μs depending on the concentration of interfacial traps arising from their synthesis protocol, resulting in photocurrent and photovoltage loss.42–44 Thus, by ensuring that the transport layers possess less traps at the transport layer/perovskite interface, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs can be significantly enhanced.
3.3 Density of states
The density of states (DOS) can help understand the distribution of the number of electron states per unit volume in the electronic band structure, which determines the optical properties and the VOC of solar cells.45,46 Interestingly, the atomic and electronic structure at the interface is the result of the combined effects of the surface structures of the independent constituent layers, giving rise to the solitary electronic structure, while forming the interface. Particularly, at the interface of the perovskite/transport layer, the atomic and electronic structure plays a pivotal role by affecting the lifetime and mobility of charge carriers.47 Furthermore, the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum (mostly inorganic semiconductors) are analogous to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (mostly organic/polymer semiconductors). Fig. 6(a) shows the electronic structure, which is comprised of the vacuum energy level (Evac), work function (WF), Fermi energy (Ef), bandgap (Eg), electron affinity (EA), and ionization energy (IE) for all organic/inorganic semiconductors. The position of these energy levels and their alignment at the junction plays a key role in the overall performance of electronic devices.48
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the electronic structure for (a) all organic/inorganic, (b) ordered (or crystalline), and (c) amorphous (or disordered) semiconductors. 
The vacuum energy level is the energy of a stationary electron with zero kinetic energy located outside the surface of the material. The work function is the energy difference between the vacuum level and Fermi level (WF = Evac − Ef), which depicts the energy barrier that restricts an electron from escaping the material. The Fermi energy represents the value at absolute zero temperature. The ionization energy (IE) refers to the energy difference between the vacuum level and valence band (VB) and depicts the minimum energy necessary to eliminate the electrons from the VB. Reciprocally, the energy gained by dropping an electron from the vacuum level to the conduction band (CB) is known as the electron affinity (EA) of the semiconductors. The distribution of DOS in the energy band can be better understood by splitting semiconductors into two categories, i.e., ordered (single crystals and polycrystalline thin films) and disordered (amorphous materials) systems. In the case of ordered semiconductors, the localised charge carriers are at the band edges, and it shows a parabolic shape distribution of the DOS at the band edges, which can be represented as follows:49 (4) (5)where Ec and Ev are the conduction and valence band edges, respectively. This infers that there are no gap states in the forbidden gap of the semiconductor or the DOS is reduced to zero in the energy gap Ev < E < Ec. This results in the formation of sharp conduction and valence band edges, as shown in Fig. 6(b).50
In the case of disordered semiconductors such as amorphous and most organic semiconductors, the charge carriers have a poor degree of localization.51 The weak localization at the band edges results in extended states, which progressively change to localized states, leading to the outgrowth of an extended state tail in the energy gap.50,51 Therefore, the DOS is more appropriately described by the Gaussian or exponential distribution. Further, the Gaussian disorder model (GDM) was proposed to understand the charge carrier transport in disordered organic semiconductors, which gives the Gaussian density-of-state function, g(E), as follows: (6)where N0 is the density of states per unit volume, which is generally considered the density of the molecule, and σ is the width of the distribution. The extended states tailing from the Gaussian-distributed DOS are incapable of accurately defining clear bandgap and sharp band edges. Therefore, the energy gap is defined as the energy difference between HOMOonset and LUMOonset (Fig. 6(c)). Further details on determining the bandgap of disordered semiconductors can be found in previous studies.50,52,53
In PSCs, to locate the band edges at the interface, Chatterjee et al. used scanning tunneling microscopy, i.e., they recorded the tunneling current versus tip voltage of ultra-thin films of layers of PSCs subsequently coated over n-type silicon substrates. The differential conductance (dI/dV) of the thin films was calculated from the obtained data, which corresponds to the DOS. The spectra in Fig. 7 show the positive and negative voltages, denoted as the CB and VB levels, respectively, obtained with respect to the Fermi level. Further, the difference in the valence and conduction band levels (transport gap) is slightly lower than the optical bandgap due to trap states, which contributes to the tunneling current.54 Moreover, the surface oxide states of the transport layer nanoparticles can be modified by ligands (silanes or thiols), which can alter the valence and conduction band edge levels by altering the density of states.55
 Fig. 7  (a) Differential conductance (dI/dV) plots of NiO, Cu@NiO, Cu2O, MAPbI3, and PCBM thin films. VB and CB edges of the materials and HOMO and LUMO levels of PCBM with respect to the Fermi energy are marked with vertical continuous and broken straight bars in the positive and negative voltage regions, respectively. (b) Schematic energy level diagram of Cu2O/MAPbI3/PCBM heterojunction. The dashed line represents the Fermi energy after contact.54 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1428–1437). Copyright (2016), the American Chemical Society. 
Photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PYS) can also be further used to determine the work function of the transport layers. Teo et al. tailored the work function of an NiOx layer with lanthanum doping, which could alter the density of states owing to changes in the valence and conduction band levels.56 It should also be noted that the lattice mismatch at the transport layer/perovskite influences the charge dynamics. Hu et al.57 conducted a first-principles study on the SnO2/CsPbI2Br heterojunction and showed that the SnO2(110) surface is well-matched with the CsPbI2Br (100) surface due to their mismatch of 6.4%. The DOS at the interface was different from that in the bulk because of the corresponding variation in electronic states at the interface. Therefore, it should be noted that the DOS in PSCs depends on not only the bulk of the subsequent layers but also the interface; however, it can be tuned by controlled doping to adjust the band offsets and achieve a high VOC.
4. Electron transport layer (ETL)
The bandgap and band alignment of the ETLs control and guide the electron transfer at the ETL/perovskite interface. ETLs, in the form of wide bandgap n-type semiconductors transparent to visible light, absorb in the UV wavelength range.58 Moreover, they allow full visible radiance to strike the perovskite absorber, but this may not be true in inverted device architectures where light strikes through the hole transport layer (HTL) and transparent conducting substrates.59 Typically, the bandgap values of the ETLs are higher than the perovskite absorbers utilized to fabricate PCSs. Therefore, the CB edge of the ETL should be at a lower potential than that of the perovskite absorber to guide the electrons through the ETL and reduce the leakage of excited charges in the opposite direction. In the n-type structure, the Fermi levels of the ETLs are close to the CB; hence, the probability of the VB electron movement from the perovskite to ETL is close to zero, and hence negligible (Fig. 8). Therefore, variety of ETLs has been explored to control the recombination process and accelerate the charge carrier recombination dynamics in search of efficient and stable photovoltaic performances. In this section, we discuss the important characteristics of various inorganic ETLs and their outstanding development in delivering excellent PCEs when combined with perovskite absorbers.
 Fig. 8  Schematic depicting the path of a photogenerated electron from the perovskite light absorber to the external circuit. (CBM: conduction band minimum and VBM: valence band maximum.) 
4.1. Inorganic ETLS
Inorganic ETLs, which are engineered into nanostructures for exploiting the nano-regime physical properties, increase the junction interface. Therefore, oxides of various metals such as titanium (Ti), tin (Sn), zinc (Zn), tungsten (W), barium (Ba), strontium (Sr), aluminium (Al), iron (Fe), and indium (In) have been explored for their performance as ETLs in PSCs.60–64 The band structures of several persuasive inorganic ETLs are summarized in Fig. 9. The appearance of inorganic ETLs in various crystalline polymorphs and their ability to tailor the charge transfer dynamics are of special interest to the PV community. The objective is to look for cost-effective inorganic ETLs processible under ambient conditions. Furthermore, the ETLs can act as a prominent template for the overlaying perovskite layer in PSCs after engineering their phases and crystallinity. The synthesis, characterization, and significance of a few critical inorganic ETLs employed in PSCs are thoroughly discussed in this section.
 Fig. 9  Schematic showing the band structures and the band alignment of various inorganic ETLs with a perovskite absorber. 

4.1.1. Titanium dioxide (TiO2). 
TiO2 is one of the fascinating electron transport materials widely used in the fabrication of PSCs due to its low processing cost, chemical stability, and non-toxic nature. Titanium oxide has several allotropic forms categorized as TiO2 and TinO2n−1 with different crystal structures, namely, monoclinic, triclinic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, rhombohedral, and hexagonal.65,66 However, its most well-known forms are anatase (tetragonal structure, I41/amd space group), brookite (orthorhombic structure, Pbca space group), and rutile (tetragonal structure, P42/mnm space group), which are composed of a TiO6 octahedral network through shared oxygen at the corners. The TiO6 octahedra share both the corners and the edges to form the rutile and brookite-type crystal structures, but the sharing of only edges results in the formation of an anatase crystal structure. The chains of the edge-shared distorted TiO6 octahedra run parallel to the c-axis and deliver the brookite phase. These distinct crystalline forms influence the electronic and electrochemical properties of TiO2 nanostructures,67–72 and hence play a crucial role in the performance of PSCs. In the nanocrystalline form, the anatase, brookite, and rutile phases are the most thermodynamically stable at crystalline dimensions of ≤11 nm, between 11 to 35 nm, and ≥35 nm, respectively.73 Nevertheless, the synthesis of the brookite phase is most challenging because of its metastable nature.74,75 Owing to the ease of processing of the anatase and rutile phases, they are more widely utilized than the brookite phase in solar cells.76–78
The wide adaptability of TiO2 as photoanodes in DSSCs has promoted it as an interesting ETL material in PSCs.79,80 TiO2, which is an n-type wide bandgap semiconductor (i.e., Eg = 3.2 eV with CB edge level at −4.2 eV and VB edge level at −7.0 eV), is one of the most transparent materials to visible light and offers electronically favourable band edge alignment with most of the known perovskite absorbers. Usually, a compact TiO2 film is used as the hole-blocking layer in PSCs. Various thin film growth techniques, namely, spin coating,81 aerogel-assisted coating,82 electrospinning,83 sputtering,84 atomic layer deposition (ALD),85 hydrothermal growth,86,87 spray coating,88 and template-based synthesis,82 have been employed for the synthesis of good-quality TiO2 transport layers. However, hydrothermal synthesis is an attractive process for obtaining hierarchical nanostructures such as nano-dendrites, which offer dual functions of significant light trapping and efficient electron collection (Fig. 10).89 The 3D morphology efficiently extracts the photoelectrons from the perovskite absorber (i.e., MAPbI3) and reduces the electron transport length in the matrix to surmount the obstacle of short electron diffusion length. Further, finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations revealed that the electron transport pathway in PSCs consisting of branched nano-dendrites assists in the photoelectron collection near the spiro-MeOTAD layer due to absorption of long-wavelength light. Moreover, the surface passivation of the 1D TiO2 nanorods by atomically deposited TiO2 nanoparticles offers excellent charge separation, controlling the back-flow reaction of the electrons excited from the perovskite absorber. This facilitates a low recombination rate with a conversion efficiency of 13.45%.90 The secondary oxidation treatments at higher temperatures always contribute to the presence of defects/impurities (i.e., residual carbon) and changing the band alignment at the interface. The impurities serve as unproductive quenching sites or charge recombination centres, effectively trapping the photogenerated electrons at the interface of the TiO2 ETL and perovskite absorber, thereby curtailing the dramatically injected electron yield. However, the formation of defects or impurities was eliminated via UV-O3 treatment without compromising the density of oxygen vacancies to gain competitive efficiency from the amorphous ALD-grown TiO2 (i.e., 9.97%) and compact TiO2 (i.e., 16.9%) ETLs.91,92 Moreover, the uneven blocking layer of TiO2 nanoparticles between the valleys and plateaus of F-doped SnO2 induced unidentical electron transportation, and thereby the poor charge collection reduced the performance of the corresponding PSCs.93
 Fig. 10  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) TiO2 nanodendrites and (b) solar cell architecture comprised of TiO2 nanodendrites. (c) Schematic of the FDTD simulation cells for perovskite–TiO2 nanodendrites. FDTD-simulated EM energy density distribution in PSC after continuous electromagnetic waves passing through the perovskite–TiO2 nanodendrites with wavelengths of (d) 450 nm and (e) 650 nm.89 
Dharani et al.94 introduced electrospun TiO2 nanofibers as a photoanode, enabling a greater loading of perovskite materials and also lowering the trap-assisted recombination. Despite the more open structure and porous arrangement of the nanofibers, the poor PbI2 conversion in CH3NH3PbI3 was reported to impede the device efficiency.95 The tapered nanocones of rutile TiO2 oriented in the [002] direction exhibited superior efficiency than nanorods, irrespective of the variation in their length (Fig. 11).96 The suppressed charge recombination due to the faster electron injection rate of the TiO2 nanocones was beneficial for the charge separation at their interfaces with CH3NH3PbI3, resulting in an enhancement in the efficiency. The two possible factors responsible for the faster electron transfer from the perovskite to nanocones are as follows: (i) larger surface to volume ratio of the nanocones improving the change separation and (ii) decreased distribution of electrostatic potential for p–n junction, generating an electric field along the axial direction, which enabled enhanced electron transportation, while minimizing its trapping. Specifically, the driving force for the injection of electrons into the TiO2 nanocone ETL and transport along the axial direction for the nanocone/perovskite systems was absent in the nanorods (Fig. 11(d)), which led to faster electron transfer from the perovskite to TiO2 nanocones, suppressing the charge recombination. Likewise, highly ordered anti-reflecting titania nanotubes served as nanocontainers and ETL in CH3NH3PbI3 PSCs and facilitated efficient charge collection/extraction, delivering an efficiency of 14.8% despite the relatively lower loading of CH3NH3PbI3.60
 Fig. 11  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of TiO2 nanocones. Electric potential contours for n-type (b) nanorod and (c) nanocone in the p-type matrix and (d) scheme of electron injection from perovskite to TiO2 and transport within TiO2. Note: er− represents electron injection along the radial direction and ez− along the axial direction.96 Reprinted with permission from (Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 409–418). Copyright (2015), Elsevier. 
It was shown by Xiao et al.97 that nanoporous submicron TiO2 spheres with high specific surface area ensure higher light scattering effect and better contact with the perovskite through infiltration, which caused higher light absorption and faster charge transport, respectively, delivering excellent stability against atmospheric moisture when the PSCs with 14.3% efficiency were exposed to the air. Similarly, the smaller leakage current and reduced transport resistance of opal-like mesoscopic TiO2 ensued a high (18.2%) efficiency.98 Further, as shown by Thambidurai et al.,99 interface modification of a mesoporous TiO2 ETL by (OH)2 uplifted the conduction band of TiO2, leading to better energy level alignment with the perovskite, thereby enhancing the optical absorption, reducing the carrier recombination, and rendering excellent electron transportation. Together, they led to a high PCE of 17.5%. The passivation of the perovskite/TiO2 interface using poly(vinylcarbazole) (PVCz) and PCBM is a versatile and rational method to gain a PCE of around 21.1%. The PVCz-assisted homogeneous dispersion of PCBM in the mesoporous TiO2 layer also prevented elution after the formation of the perovskite layer. The interface modification induced efficient charge transport to the TiO2 ETL and efficiently reduced the carrier recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface.100 Moreover, the introduction of a sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) passivation layer at the interface of the TiO2 ETL and perovskite delivered an efficiency of 18.75%.101
Recently, Wang et al.102 introduced the interface modification of TiO2/perovskite by CsAc to reduce the interface defect density and the related carrier recombination. Even though the CsAc improved the affinity of the perovskite precursor to form a compact and highly crystalline perovskite layer by decreasing the Gibbs free energy for heterogeneous nucleation, the carbon as an HTL may have restricted the efficiency to 13.8%. Likewise, a robust and simple acid-treatment strategy was introduced to produce an amorphous TiO2 buffer layer above the anatase TiO2 surface as an ETL.103 The acid treatment weakened the bonding of the zigzag octahedral chains in TiO2 and formed an amorphous buffer layer by shortening the staggered octahedron chains. This led to the formation of oxygen vacancies in the amorphous TiO2 ETL, and hence increased electron density, efficiently transferring electrons from the perovskite to ETL layer. Modification of the interlayer between the TiO2 and perovskite layers by introducing air-stable n-type DMBI-doped PCBM was shown to significantly diminish the energy level offset at the interface, thereby delivering an efficiency of 20.1%.104
Nanocomposites of TiO2 have also been explored to ensure the higher performance of PSCs based on them. Indeed, it was found that the PCE of 15% achieved using a TiO2/graphene nanocomposite29 further improved after replacing graphene with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs).105 However, the increased number of recombination sites due to higher loading of SWCNTs adversely affected the performance features. The composite of phosphotungstic acid (PW12) and TiO2 ETL down-shifted the conduction band edge and led to a well-aligned interface with the perovskite for excellent electron excitation.106 Besides, metal oxides were also used as a substitute of carbon materials to form nanocomposites with TiO2, but were found to be relatively inefficient as ETLs due to the inhibited recombination rate offered by impure phase formation.107 Therefore, Y,108 Ga,109 Zr,110 and Ru111 doped and Zr/N112 and Er–Yb,113 co-doped TiO2 nanostructures have also been explored as ETLs to achieve longer carrier lifetimes and higher charge density at the ETL/perovskite interface. Moreover, hydrogen114 and cadmium115 have been utilized to alter the recombination resistance and charge carrier density of TiO2 to further increase the collection efficiency. An Nb-doped TiO2 ETL covered with an over-layer of TiO2 nanorods was shown to reduce the interface transport resistance and capacitance, thereby delivering an efficiency of 18.88% due to electron injection from the CB of perovskite to Nb–TiO2.116
Sung et al.117 doped a TiO2 ETL with Na2S in search of interface defect passivation and improved conductivity. The Na cations and S anions were observed to improve the conductivity and change the wettability of the TiO2 layers, respectively. This was noted to improve the crystallinity of the perovskite layers and passivate defects at the ELT/perovskite interface. Recently, various anions of TFSI−, Cl−, F−, and CO32− of Li salts have been explored as ETLs for PSCs.118 The first three anions of Li salts remain doped in TiO2 to improve the electrical properties by one-order enhancement in electron mobility and reduced electron trap density of Li-doped TiO2 ETLs. Conversely, the stronger chemical bonding between Li2CO3 and TiO2 exhibits the deepest conduction band and delivers the maximum efficiency of over 25%. The high temperature firing at ∼450 °C required to gain the crystalline phase of pristine or doped TiO2 nanostructures restricts the processing of the ETLs over plastic substrates. Alternatively, low-temperature processing to protect the plastic substrate, while gaining the desired crystalline phase of TiO2 has been attempted to fabricate flexible PSCs. The plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of a compact TiO2 layer at 80 °C on ITO-coated PEN flexible substrates119 and E-beam evaporation of TiO2 on PET substrates120 have been found to be effective to fabricate wearable power devices, achieving a PCE of 13%. However, physical deposition methods, such as ALD,119 e-beam evaporation120 and sputtering,121 are complex and demand high energy consumption to create a vacuum. Therefore, the use of solution methods such as spin coating122 and solution dispersion123 on flexible substrates was also attempted, but the PCE was limited to 10%. Consequently, further optimization of the solution-based processes at low temperature to gain dense and compact TiO2 ETLs is essential to improve the PCE.


4.1.2. Tin oxide (SnO2). 
Tin oxide can be synthesized in various chemical forms (i.e., SnO2, SnO, Sn2O3, and Sn3O4) and crystalline phase forms (i.e., orthorhombic, tetragonal, cubic, and triclinic crystals).65 Most importantly, being chemically stable, UV-resistant, and low-temperature processible (<200 °C), SnO2 also supports high bulk electron mobility (i.e., 240 cm2 V−1 s−1), wide bandgap (i.e., 3.6–4.0 eV), and visible transparency.124 Thus, considering its higher charge mobility and extended UV stability, it can potentially dethrone the lower charge mobility ETLs such as TiO2. Recently, SnO2 nanocrystalline films have been identified as both technically viable ETLs and antireflection films.125 Various synthetic techniques such as ALD,126 chemical bath deposition,127 electrochemical deposition,128 pulsed laser deposition (PLD),129 e-beam evaporation,130 and spray coating131,132 have also been used to synthesize compact, uniform, and well-defined morphologies of SnO2 ETLs. However, the solution processing of salts such as SnCl2, SnCl4, SnCl2·2H2O, and SnCl4·5H2O, followed by thermal decomposition,125 is the most widely employed technique due to its easy scalability as an industrial tool to render well-defined morphologies of ETLs for PCSs. Moreover, the uniform layers of SnO2 nanoparticles easily realized by an automated spray coating technique at lower processing temperature over 15 cm2 active area was shown to deliver an improved charge-lifetime at the ETL/perovskite interface and stable performance under self-life test for 1000 h.132
A thin layer of SnO2 nanoparticles as the ETL delivered an efficiency of 21% in planar-structure PSCs,133 but the development of PbI2, a p-type material at the interface, led to a higher hole transfer rate than electron transfer rate. The reduced barrier at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface and passivation of the surface or grain boundary defects by PbI2 were found to control the device performance. Moreover, SnO2 was also studied with ZnO nanostructures to improve the PCE performance, where a hollow domed SnO2 nanotube array was grown over ZnO nanorods as a sacrificial template (Fig. 12), but the PCE was still restricted to 12.1%, which could be due to sluggish electron transport from the hierarchical thicker shell layer of SnO2 nanotubes, providing pinholes.134 The pinholes caused surface current leakage and compromised the charge recombination processes at the interface. Therefore, the preparation of a smooth and compact bilayer structure of SnO2 nanoparticles by filling the pin-holes reduced the oxygen-deficient regions, improved crystallinity, and downsized the dislocations, facilitating its efficacy as an ETL for PSCs. Indeed, the bilayer SnO2 structure delivered a PCE of 16.84% due to the lowered electron trap density, enormously reduced contact resistance, and charge accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface.135
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of time-dependent growth of SnO2-DNTs under reaction time of (i) 15, (ii) 30, (iii) 60, and (iv) 90 min. (b) Spin-coated perovskite films over SnO2-DNT/FTO/glass substrates at different reaction times. Schematic growth mechanism of (c) ZnO nanorods covered with discontinuous SnO2 nanoparticles, (d) OH− ions as by-product of SnO2 can etch the ZnO nanorods, and (e) SnO2-DNT@ZnO nanorods. (f) Fabrication scheme of PSCs and (g) corresponding cross section of SnO2-DNTs and SnO2-DNT/perovskite/P3HT/Au device. The scale in black indicates 500 nm.134 Reprinted with permission from (Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 378–385). Copyright (2017), Elsevier. 
Surface treatments with aqueous solutions of salts such as TiCl4 have been explored to significantly retard the recombination process of SnO2.136 However, the inclusion of conducting materials in SnO2 ETLs provides a better interface with the perovskite and control over the recombination process, and thus more attractive in the search for improved PCEs. The addition of a small amount of graphene quantum dots was shown to enrich the electronic properties of SnO2, thereby aiding the delivery of a steady-state PCE of 20.23% with very little hysteresis via controlled electron transfer from graphene.137 The photogenerated electrons from graphene effectively fill the electron traps and improve the electron density in the conduction band (CB) of SnO2, which collectively accounts for the reduced work function and improved conductivity of SnO2. The reduced electron trap density and increased conductivity of the ETLs facilitated an enhancement in the electron extraction efficiency and reduced recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. Further, the addition of graphene to mesoporous SnO2 microspheres resulted in a relatively reduced charge transfer resistance (i.e., faster electron extraction) and larger recombination resistance than the pristine SnO2, consequently leading to the least interface potential loss and PCE of 17.08%.131 Likewise, the inclusion of carbon nanotubes substantially increased the conductivity of the SnO2 ETL by lowering the defect density, which improved the electron extraction and transport. This reduced the electron accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface and significantly enhanced the PCE to 20.33%.138
Recently, Yoo et al.139 introduced a holistic approach to improve the performance of PSCs by virtue of charge carrier management. The SnOx ETL was developed with an ideal film coverage and thickness by tuning the chemical bath deposition protocol. Further, the decoupling of the passivation strategy between the bulk and the interface minimized the bandgap barrier and improved the charge carrier properties. Although control of the pH from most acidic (i.e., 1) to 6 delivered thin uniform films to a distinct nanorod morphology, where the lower film coverage at the most acidic pH caused interfacial recombination, and the oxygen site defects at pH > 3 reduced the carrier lifetime by increasing the non-radiative recombination. The magic reaction at pH 1.5 exhibited ideal film coverage, morphology, and chemical composition and delivered a certified PCE of 25.2%. A high FF of 84.8% was identified to be responsible for the enhanced PCE, which improved the carrier mobility in the CH3NH3PbBr3 active layer and excellent charge collection with the least parasitic losses from shunt/series resistances. Thus, the close association of charge carrier management with the FF and the VOC can direct the improved performances of PSCs to reach the theoretical efficiency limit. Moreover, the resistance gradient across the edge and centre of the thin film influences the free carrier mobility to a considerable extent.140 Hence, the realization of a uniform film with the controlled agglomeration of grains, which is feasible by adopting the rastering of multiple spray nozzles, can render an excellent ETL for PSCs.
Besides these efforts, doping strategies have been considered to improve the electron charge transfer, lower the charge recombination, and reduce the contact resistance at the SnO2/perovskite interface. The downward shift of the CB or Fermi level and enhanced conductivity of the SnO2 ETL after Li,61 Mo,141 Mg,142 Cl,143 Er,144 KF,145 TaCl5,146 Zr/F,147 and NH4Cl,148 doping expedited the injection and transfer of electrons, increased the offsets of the doped ETLS/perovskite layers, and inhibited the charge recombination at the interface. Yang et al.149 explored a Y-doped SnO2 ETL in search of efficient PSCs. The Y-doping promoted the homogeneous distribution of well-aligned SnO2 nanosheets, which allowed better infiltration in and contact with the perovskite and improved electron transfer from the perovskite to SnO2 nanosheet ETL. Moreover, after Y-doping, the uplifted band levels resulted in better energy level alignment and reduced charge recombination at the Y-SnO2/perovskite interface. Moreover, the optimized 5 mol% doping of Nb in SnO2 created better surface coverage with perovskite and yielded a PCE of 20.5% due to the reduced recombination centres and enhanced electron extraction at the interfacial contact.150 The Cl-capping uplifted the band levels of the SnO2 nanoparticle ETL and suppressed the non-radiative recombination with faster transfer of charge carriers. Moreover, Cl-capping created a hydrophobic surface for SnO2, which reduced the trap density and suppressed the interfacial recombination of charges by dramatically increasing the grain size and crystallinity of the perovskites, delivering the hysteresis-free PCE of 18.1%.151 In another study, nitrogen-doped graphene oxide (NGO) was introduced as an oxidizing agent for SnO2 to control the oxygen defects. The altered oxidation state from Sn2+ to Sn4+ reduced the oxygen vacancies in SnO2 in the composite of NGO–SnO2 and efficiently extracted the charges and reduced the carrier recombination, thereby delivering a PCE of 16.55%.152 Likewise, diluted CdS quantum dots improved the carrier mobility of SnO2 and delivered a PCE of 20.78% by accelerating the charge extraction at the modified interface.153
Xia et al.154 introduced the zwitterion sulfamic acid (+H3N–SO3−) between the SnO2 ETL and the perovskite layer, in which the interfacial chemical bridge formed through the coordination bond via –SO3− anions and electrostatic interactions via –NH3+, remedying the oxygen vacancies of SnO2 and passivating the charged defects of the perovskites, respectively. This dipole alignment passivated the interfacial defects and offered barrier-free efficient charge transfer between SnO2 and perovskites, leading to a PCE of 20.4%. Recently, the bi-directional functionalization via –NH2 groups resulted in a PCE of 20.25%.155 The chemical interface of –NH2 groups expedited the charge transfer in the ETL and reduced the trap-state density in the perovskite.
Tu et al.156 introduced the effect of molecular doping in an SnO2 ETL on the overall performance of PSCs. The triphenylphosphine oxide (TPPO) molecule adopted n-type doping in SnO2 to realize electron transfer from the R3P+–O−σ bond to the peripheral Sn atoms rather than the atoms directly interacting at the surface, which produced delocalized electrons at the surface, leading to a reduced work function and increased conductivity (Fig. 13). Moreover, the significantly reduced energy barrier (i.e., 0.55 to 0.39 eV) after TPPO doping assisted the electron transfer and faded the charge accumulation at the interface, delivering a PCE of 20.69%. Similarly, graphdiyne doping in SnO2 was employed to precisely engineer the interface due to heterogeneous perovskite nucleation, reducing the grain boundaries and defect density and leading to favourable C–O σ bond formation and band alignment. Consequently, this reduced the interfacial recombination and delivered a PCE of 20.74%.157 In the future, molecular doping in the ETL can lead to achieving an excellent efficiency in PSCs, but the strong reducibility and stability under ambient conditions need be inspected thoroughly. Similarly, modulation of the perovskite crystallization process needs to be explored deeply to gain a deeper understanding of the process of realizing highly stable and crystalline perovskite films. Recently, it was shown that a Ti3C2Tx quantum dot-modified SnO2 ETL delivered a steady-state PCE of 23.3% with excellent charge extraction efficiency.158
 Fig. 13  (a) Surface contact angle of SnO2, TPPO-doped SnO2, and acetonitrile treated SnO2 on ITO substrate; the oxygen atom of TPPO tetrahedral molecule connection with Sn atom leaving other three ends facing upward delivered larger contact angle; (b) the side view of the relaxed model of TPPO absorbed SnO2(110) surface; charge density difference (Δρ) of TPPO on SnO2(110) surface was evaluated at isovalue of 1.2 × 10−4 |e| Å−3; (c) blue indicates electron depletion, and (d) yellow indicates electron accumulation; (e) top view of charge density difference (Δρ) of TPPO absorbed on SnO2(110), electron gain is indicated by yellow.156 Reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805944). Copyright (2019) John Wiley & Sons. 


4.1.3. Zinc Oxide (ZnO). 
Zinc oxide, an n-type semiconductor, offers high crystallinity at low processing temperature and favourable band alignment with hybrid perovskite. A direct bandgap of 3.2 eV, electron mobility of 205–300 cm2 V−1 s−1, and electron diffusion co-efficient of 1.7 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 are the other major characteristics of ZnO, attracting researchers to explore it as a potential ETL to improve the performance of PSCs.159–164 Various methods have been widely explored to process and coat ZnO films under an ambient atmosphere, and each method provides a unique way of controlling the structure, electronic properties, and surface defects,165,166 which strongly affect the charge carrier transfer at the ZnO/perovskite interfaces. Furthermore, various morphologies (nanorods, nanosheets, monolayers, and nano-flowers, etc.) of ZnO have been explored to improve the charge carrier collection efficiency at this interface. A simple and cost-effective approach to process the ZnO hole-blocking layer is repeated spin coating of a mixed solution of ethanol and zinc acetate as a precursor with intermediate drying to achieve the desired thickness. Son et al.167 introduced the solution-immersion method for the preparation of one-dimensional (1D) ZnO nanorods as an ETL in PSCs, which resulted in fast charge collection efficiency, leading to improved efficiency compared to that of TiO2 nanorods as the ETL. The single-crystalline 1D ZnO nanorods offered smooth charge transfer across the ZnO/perovskite interface due to the internal electric field along the c-axis, i.e., common growth direction for ZnO nanorods and absence of grain boundaries.168 The compact and uniform planar ZnO films indeed delivered relatively high-efficiency solar cells.
Tseng et al.169 produced uniform ZnO films using RF sputtering under pure Ar and Ar + O2 working gas to tune the surface electronic properties, which resulted in downshifting of the band structure, improving the electron injection and rendering an efficiency of ∼16% combined with methylammonium lead iodide (i.e., MAPbI). However, given that the high-energy ions used during sputtering damage the substrate and deteriorate the ZnO film quality, ALD has been utilized to obtain high-quality ZnO films.170 The optimized thickness of 30 nm for ALD-grown ZnO films attained a high VOC (i.e., 0.97 V), FF (i.e., 48%), and JSC (i.e., 14.15 mA cm−2) of the PSCs. This study revealed a better excitation dissociation rate at the ZnO/perovskite interface, hinging on the exciton lifetime and photo-induced absorption strength. Nevertheless, an increase in thickness beyond 30 nm caused a high series resistance, and the performance of the PSCs decreased. Besides, the spray coating technique was also explored for the mass production of planar ZnO films over a larger area.171 Hydrothermally grown 1D hexagonal ZnO nanorods exhibited high charge conduction due to their sparsely populated conduction band and showed a good agreement between the experimentally measured JSC and integrated current density calculated from the external quantum efficiency.167
The two major drawbacks of ZnO ETLs are the severe charge recombination at the ZnO/perovskite interface due to the high-density of surface defect states and their poor chemical stability due to the presence of hydroxyl groups and organic residue on the surface of ZnO, which deteriorate cell efficiency. Notably, the presence of volatile organic residue on the surface of ZnO enables the penetration of atmospheric water/oxygen at the ZnO/perovskite interface and degrades the perovskite, leading to the operational instability of PSCs.44 Thus, this has stimulated researchers to investigate other possibilities of ZnO surface control to overcome the interface stability. The chemical behavior of the ZnO surface, which is basic in nature, is responsible for the deprotonation of the methylammonium cation to form methylamine through an acid–base reaction, which causes the perovskite to undergo thermal decomposition even in the absence of hydroxyl groups and residual organic ligand at the ZnO surface.172,173 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the geometry optimization of the ZnO/perovskite structure revealed that the deprotonation of the methylammonium ion (Fig. 14) is a constructive guide to develop PSCs capable of withstanding harsh temperature conditions.
 Fig. 14  Optimized geometrical structure of the ZnO ETL and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (upper panel). The magnified structure of deprotonated methylammonium cations (lower panel) from the portion marked in the upper panel.172 Reprinted with permission from (Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236). Copyright (2015), the American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, creative strategies such as doping and surface passivation of ZnO have been effectively used in search of its excellent performance as an ETL in PSCs. Both planar and nanostructured ZnO ETLs were doped with elements such as Mg,174–176 Al,177–179 I,180 and Sn181 to develop low defect sites, larger surface area, and rapid electron extraction, which are some of the prerequisites for efficient ETLs. Besides, recently, the ZnO surface was modified with methylammonium chloride (MACl),182 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),183 and ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA)184 to eliminate the deprotonation ability and enhanced stability of the ZnO/perovskite interface was achieved.
Separately, the most widely studied optoelectronic material, aluminium-doped ZnO (i.e., AZO), has been proposed as an ETL and transparent conducting electrode in PSCs, which also improves the thermal stability by decreasing the Lewis acid–base chemical reaction at the ZnO/perovskite interface.179 A monolayer of Cs and Li-doped ZnO as the ETL in a PSC delivered a PCE of 18%, which is comparable to that of the well-accepted TiO2. This is attributed to the increased electron density due to the decrease in trap density by reducing the oxygen vacancies at the ZnO surface.185 The doping of iodine facilitated the dense growth of ZnO:I nanopillars and led to a matching work function between the ETL and perovskite, which resulted in a PCE of around 18%.180 The doping of ZnO174 is a common and effective approach to fine-tune the position of the Fermi level (EF) and band structure and increase the conductivity to avoid interface charge recombination by achieving an optimized CB edge difference between ZnO and perovskite. Alternatively, the surface passivation strategy helps to enhance the thermal stability during annealing,186 improve the morphology of the perovskite layer,187 and reduce the back electron transfer and charge recombination.168 ZnO ETLs passivated with thin layers of MgO,62 TiO2,186 Zn2SnO4,188 Nb2O5,187 SnO2,168etc. were used to limit the degradation of the perovskite absorber due to the surface defects of ZnO at the perovskite/ZnO interface. The well-optimized passivation of ZnO with TiO2 using the wet chemical approach of layer-by-layer absorption and reaction (LBLAR) method189 achieved an efficiency of ∼13.5% with better long-term stability compared to unpassivated ZnO nanorods (Fig. 15).186
 Fig. 15  SEM images of ZnO nanorods (a and c) without and (b and d) with TiO2 passivation, depicting the top and cross sectional views, respectively. (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of ZnO nanorod with TiO2 passivation. The yellow dashed line in the HRTEM image marks the edge of the ZnO/TiO2 nanorod.186 
Overall, the degradation and thermal decomposition of perovskite due to the ZnO surface hinder the long-term stability and outdoor applications of ZnO-based PSC devices. Therefore, more efforts by the broader research community are required to search for novel ways other than passivation that can stop the deprotonation of methylammonium and also provide smooth charge transfer across the ZnO/perovskite interface.


4.1.4. Ternary metal oxides. 
Ternary metal oxides with the perovskite structures of ABO3 and A2BO4 are gaining more attention than binary metal oxides, given that they allow better tunability of the bandgap, work function, and conductivity by adjusting the relative ratio of cations.190–195 BaSnO3 (BSO) is a wide bandgap (i.e., 3.2 eV) n-type transparent semiconductor with a perovskite structure similar to the photoactive layer. High-temperature processed BSO led to reduced charge recombination and charge transfer resistance at the BSO/perovskite interface, delivering PCEs close to 12%.196,197 Additionally, one-dimensional BSO nanorods showed better electron conduction subject to direct pathways and less grain boundaries than nanoparticles.198 Further, to gain atomic insights into the BSO/perovskite interface, first principal DFT calculations were performed by Guo et al.,199 revealing large interface binding energies, favouring robust interface and charge transfer capability, which were shown to further improve with the doping depth of La in BSO. Moreover, theoretical studies also predicted the easy bandgap tuning of BSO by substituting La200 or Sr201 to produce optimal band alignment for improved device performance. Likewise, La-doping of BSO via the superoxide colloidal solution route was shown to yield improved electron mobility and optimal bandgap of BSO, which delivered an efficiency close to ∼21% from the PSCs fabricated with a single cation lead triiodide. Recently, Zn doping also led to improved interfacial contact and reduced charge recombination at the interface of BSO.202
SrTiO3 (STO), having high electron mobility and a slightly higher conduction band than TiO2, has also been employed as the ETL for PSCs, giving a PCE of 10%.203 This striking device performance was ascribed to the STO/perovskite interface with reduced charge recombination due to the high dielectric constant of STO and formation of a uniform photoactive layer with large crystals on STO, allowing complete surface coverage.204 Unfortunately, the high-temperature processing, poor average JSC, and inadequately studied STO/perovskite interface were limitations in the initial stage. However, Neophytou et al.205 achieved a PCE of 19% from low temperature (150 °C)-processed STO as the ETL, which was attributed to the better optical transparency, reduced interfacial trap state density, improved electron transport, and efficient charge extraction. Despite the long term stability under UV light illumination, the conduction band edge of STO is unfavourable for the injection of electrons from the perovskite layers. Therefore, tuning of the CB position of STO by Nb doping, together with the removal of SrO phase segregated on the surface of Nb-doped STO, was shown to enable fast charge transfer at the interface, which collectively resulted in the highest PCE of 20.2%.206 In parallel attempts to use STO as the ETL of PSCs, a variety of nanocomposites such as graphene/STO,207 3-D self-branching of TiO2/STO nanoparticles,203 and Al2O3–graphene/STO208 has been employed to achieve the highest PCE of close to 20.6%. Besides, BaTiO3 (BTO), a ferroelectric material, has also been utilized as the ETL in PSCs owing to its spontaneous polarization, which drives the photo-generation of electrons to improve the transport and charge extraction.209 The use of a mesoporous double layer of BTO/TiO2210 and ultrathin layer of BTO to modify the mesoporous TiO2–perovskite interface211 resulted in boosted charge extraction and reduced charge recombination. Also, doped ABO3 perovskites such as Y-doped SrSnO3212 and La-doped SrSnO3213 have helped to achieve an efficiency close to 19%.
Ternary metal oxides besides the ABO3 perovskite structure such as A2BO4 and A2B3O8 have been scarcely studied as ETLs in PSCs. Among them, particularly, Zn2SnO4 (ZSO) is an up-and-coming alternative to TiO2 in PSCs due to its comparable conduction band edge, higher electron mobility, much faster charge injection, and high electron diffusion efficiency, as observed by time and frequency-resolved spectroscopy.214 Moreover, it provides negligible hysteresis and extraordinary stability with acid/base and polar molecules, and also enhances the crystallization of the perovskite layer. Its refractive index close to FTO permits high transmittance in the visible range. Furthermore, the use of ZSO as an ETL instead of ZnO plays a dual role by improving the crystallization of the perovskite without antisolvent treatment and providing increased stability without encapsulation.215 Also, the use of ZSO/ZnO and ZSO/RGO nanocomposites as ETLs has resulted in better transmittance, electrical conductivity, and charge collection efficiency.216,217 Amorphous ZSO films with extreme surface uniformity delivered an efficiency close to 20% in the presence of the FAMAPbI3 perovskite light absorber.63 In an attempt to overcome the differences in charge diffusion lengths between the perovskite and transport layers, a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) of a composite of ZSO nanoparticles and perovskite was also explored as the photoactive layer (Fig. 16). The enhanced charge collection efficiency, improved morphology of the perovskite layer with large crystal size, balanced charge carrier mobility, and reduced trap density of BHJ films helped to achieve an efficiency close to 21%.218 Finally, a mesoporous layer of the Zn2Ti3O8 perovskite structure was employed as an ETL in a PSC, resulting in a PCE of 17.2%.219
 Fig. 16  Schematic of (a) device structure and (b) band diagram of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs. (c) J−V characteristics and (d) EQE spectra (with integrated JSC) of planar heterojunction (PHJ) and BHJ PSCs, respectively.218 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34020–34029). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society. 


4.1.5. Scaffolding technique. 
The scaffolding technique has attracted attention due to its ability to exploit the long charge diffusion lengths of the perovskite light absorbers. The dielectric scaffolds offer a higher level of conduction band edge than the perovskite absorbers and prohibit the reverse electron transport from the perovskite, increasing the VOC of PSCs.220,221 Moreover, the implementation of insulating scaffolds is possible due to the long-range balanced electron and hole diffusion lengths of organic–inorganic perovskites. A mesoporous metal-oxide scaffold contributed to the electron–hole diffusion length of ∼>1 μm in a mixed halide (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) and ∼100 nm in triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite absorbers.222 Lee et al.220 demonstrated the use of a mesostructured insulating scaffold to enhance the light absorption and photon management. The assembly of perovskite absorbers over the mesostructured scaffolds forced the electrons to reside in and be transported through the perovskite, thereby being effective in providing a better PCE. The balance between series and shunt resistances was obtained by a thicker capping layer of less conductive spiro-OMeTAD (i.e., ∼10−5 S cm−1). The self-connected percolating network of scaffolds with a larger surface area infiltrated the perovskite and allowed better charge transport. In these scaffolds, the photo-generated electrons flow through the perovskite absorbers to the front electrodes rather than injecting into the oxide layer, and the holes inject into the organic hole conductor to flow through the back contact.
Bell et al.223 systematically explored the effect of inorganic scaffolds on the performance of PSCs, which efficiently absorb light, generate charges, and transport electrons/holes with little recombination losses. This approach eliminates the use of discrete hole and electron transport media in interpenetrating composites by introducing an ambipolar material for the conversion of absorbed photons into collected charges and transport of both electrons and holes. A porous Al2O3 scaffold placed between TiO2 and the perovskite absorber supported the charge separation and transport to deliver a PCE of 12.3%. Moreover, the ultraviolet light instability of TiO2, due to the surface oxygen vacancies promoting the degradation of perovskite absorbers, was countered by introducing a mesostructured inert Al2O3 scaffold in an organometal tri-halide PSC to form a p–i–n heterojunction with spiro-OMeTAD HTL.25
For the efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons by the inorganic scaffolds, the infiltration of perovskites deep inside the scaffold is an important issue to be investigated. Hwang et al.224 controlled the size of monodispersed SiO2 nanoparticles and observed an excellent performance at the diameter of 50 nm due to the optimized domain size of the perovskites and stronger optical absorption. The fragmentary infiltration of perovskites in the scaffold with a particle diameter <50 nm restricted the transport of electrons, whereas the needle-like growth of the perovskite grains over the particles with a size of >50 nm decreased the absorption of light due to the complex scattering behaviour, thereby impeding the performance of PSCs. However, the inclusion of SiO2 nanoparticles in the matrix of TiO2 formed a mesoporous composite scaffold, which led to an increase in photocurrent by affecting the optical properties of the mesoporous scaffold and altering the ion migration at the perovskite interface, providing a beneficial effect to render a PCE of 16.71%.225 Zhao et al.226 replaced the Al2O3 scaffold with a hygroscopic polyethylene glycol (PEG) scaffold to control the PSC performance in a highly humid environment. Even though the hygroscopic PEG absorbs H2O and prevents the evolution of PbI2 (i.e., degradation of perovskite) by forming a compact moisture barrier in the vicinity of the perovskite grains, the PCE did not exceed 15.4% for unknown reasons. Further, scaffold and mesoporous transport layer combinations have been made to enhance the charge transport synergistically and suppress the charge recombination at the perovskite/transport layer interface. In these combinations of scaffolds, the ratio of scaffold to transport layer nanoparticles is controlled to optimize the transport processes.227 The TiO2 ETL quickly transfers the electrons through a wide interface with the perovskite, but the insulating Al2O3 scaffold directs the electrons to transport entirely through the perovskite. Nevertheless, the heterogeneous combination of Al2O3 and TiO2 directs the electrons to take easy pathways either through the ETL or the perovskite (Fig. 17) and renders a good PCE by engineering the difference in charge carrier balance and ion migration. Moreover, a bilayer mesoporous scaffold of TiO2 and Al2O3 was shown to enhance the air-stability of ambient-processed PSCs with a PCE of 16.84%.228 The inclusion of the Al2O3 scaffold not only protected the infiltrated perovskite from degradation due to moisture attack but also offered stable light transmission, ensuring an adequate yield of photo-generated charge carriers, and mitigated the charge transportation property deterioration.
 Fig. 17  (a) Device structure composed of mesoscopic Al2O3 scaffold, TiO2 ETL and FAPbI3−xClx perovskite. (b) ELT/scaffold (i.e., TiO2/Al2O3) constitution variation-dependent electron transport mechanism.227 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4608–4615). Copyright (2016), the American Chemical Society. 
Kwon et al.229 introduced parallelized nanopillar PSCs using anodized alumina oxide (AAO) as a scaffold. The AAO scaffold provided control over spatial distribution, relative volume fraction, and visible range transparency of the perovskite absorber. The vertically aligned perovskite pillars terminated the shunt currents and modulated the visible transmittance due to the vertical electronic transport and modulated the parasitic scattering because of the uneven deposition of the perovskite. The incorporation of an MoOx buffer layer and TiO2 ETL together with the AAO scaffold controlled the ion migration at the perovskite interface and delivered a PCE of 9.6%.
Recently, Xu et al.230 introduced slot-die coating for the mass production of PSCs consisting of a TiO2 ETL and ZrO2 scaffolds. Even though the infiltration mechanism in the scaffold was discussed based on the Lucas-Washburn model, further understanding of the coating parameters and their effect on the charge transport at the interface is recommended for the mass production of the PSCs. Quiang et al.231 explored an Al2O3 scaffold with Li-doped SnO2 ETL to achieve an enhanced PCE. The Li-doped ETL and scaffold inhibited the charge recombination and prolonged the electron lifetime, but the PCE was restricted to 10.1% due to the unfavourable participation of the grain boundaries and bulk of the materials in the charge transfer process.
Overall, SiO2,224 Al2O3,232 AAO and ZrO2233 scaffolds have been explored for the better infiltration of perovskites to gain high PCEs, but most of them delivered efficiencies in the range of 10% to 16%. Furthermore, they do not eliminate the need for a compact hole-blocking layer or ETL to fabricate efficient PSCs. The thickness, roughness, and porosity of the scaffolds need to be considered for controlling the charge transport, diffusion coefficient, and collection efficiency of PSCs.


4.1.6. Other inorganic ETLs. 
In addition to the well-studied binary metal oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2, many other metal oxides such as WOx,234 CeOx,235 In2O3,236 Nb2O5,237 and Fe2O3238 have been explored as ETLs for PSCs. Cerium oxide (CeOx) offers several benefits including wide bandgap (i.e., 3.5 eV), high dielectric constant (ε ∼ 26),239 sufficient optical transparency (refractive index of 2.1–2.7),240 good ionic conductivity (σ = 120 S cm−1 K−1),241 high thermal and chemical stability, ease of processing, low cost, and earth abundance, thereby qualifying as a highly promising ETL material.235,242–248 The low-temperature processing of CeOx (x = 1.81 °C at 100 °C) with an inverted architecture and CeOx (x = 1.87 °C at 150 °C) with a planar device architecture resulted in PCEs of 16.1% and 17.4%, respectively.235,248 Recently, lower-temperature processed CeOx (at 80 °C) as an ETL was shown to help realize a PCE of 14.6%.243 The dense CeOx layers not only protect the perovskite absorber from moisture but also act as a diffusion barrier to prevent corrosion.248 Additionally, CeOx nanocrystals were utilized as a double ETL with PCBM242,245 and ZnO246 to achieve the best efficiency values of 17.3% and 19.5%, respectively. The improvement in PCE with double ETLs was possible due to the decreased series resistance for charge extraction.245 CeOx, when introduced with regular ETLs (ZnO), reduces the work function of the electron transport material (i.e., ETM) and eliminates the interfacial barrier. The rich discrete energy levels of CeOx also prevent the UV-induced degradation of the perovskite absorber.246
Tungsten oxide (WOx) is another crucial ETM possessing excellent chemical stability, wide bandgaps (2 to 3 eV),249–251 and high electron mobility (10 to 20 cm2 V−1 s−1).252 Mahmood et al.253 explored 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures of WO3 as ETLs for PCSs. The 2D WO3 nanosheets offered good perovskite infiltration and fast carrier charge dynamics, thereby performing well compared to the nanoparticle and nanorod morphologies. However, they suffered from recombination losses at the WO3/perovskite interface, which had to be controlled by forming WO3–TiO2 core–shell structures. Amorphous WOx offered control over the conductivity and short circuit current, leading to an improved PCE (∼15%) at the cost of lower transmittance (80% of TiO2) and VOC due to the inherent charge recombination.234,254 Conversely, a WOx film introduced with TiO2 as a bilayer ETL served as an antireflection coating, rendering an enhanced JSC255 and improved non-wettability, which led to better crystallization of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and resulted in a PCE of ∼20%.256 The high-temperature processing of amorphous WOx incorporates defects, and subsequently deteriorates the performance of PSCs. On the contrary, ultra-low temperature (<50 °C) processing scales down the trap densities and offers high electron mobility, thereby yielding an efficiency of ∼20%.64
The higher built-in potential achieved by the α-Fe2O3 ETL/perovskite interface led to more efficient charge extraction/transport, reduced charge accumulation, and less charge recombination than TiO2 ETLs.238 The solution-processed Ni-doped (4%) α-Fe2O3 yielded an efficiency of ∼11% with the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite owing to its enhanced electrical conductivity and lowered conduction band minimum, and also exhibited good stability upon exposure to ambient air and high-level UV irradiation.257 The effective approach of doping non-equilibrium Ti4+ in the lattice of Fe2O3via the quenching process reduced the surficial oxygen vacancies and structural defects, which act as deep trap states. These states are responsible for the sluggish electron charge transfer and accumulation of charges at the ETL/perovskite interface, delivering a PCE of 17.8%.258 The quenching approach assisted with a uniform doping distribution and increased doping density in the bulk lattice of Fe2O3 by suppressing the segregation of TiOx on the surface (Fig. 18(a)). Likewise, 1D core–shell nanostructures serve to reduce the absorber instability and increase the mobility and recombination resistance. The core–shell structures of ZnO/SnO2,168 Al2O3/ZnO,259 WO3/TiO2,253 TiO2/MgO,260etc. have been explored to gain efficient electron injection and enhancing the recombination resistance at the ETL/perovskite interface. A thin MgO layer (large bandgap of ∼8 eV) coating over mesoporous TiO2 particles increased the recombination resistance through an effective charge transfer mechanism (Fig. 18(b) and (c)), leading to a better VOC and FF (i.e., 0.89 V and 67.1%) than that of the pristine TiO2 (i.e., 0.85 V and 71.2%), respectively.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of (a) mechanism for increased doping density in the bulk and suppressed segregation on the surface of Ti–Fe2O3,258 (b) charge transfer mechanism, and (c) band energy diagram of the MgO/TiO2 core–shell nanoparticle-based PSC.260 
Moreover, the well-optimized In2O3, which satisfies the properties required for excellent ETLs such as wide bandgap (i.e., 3.8 eV), high electron mobility (μ = 10 cm2 V−1 s−1),261 high transparency, antireflection property, and thermal stability, offer efficient electron extraction and charge transfer, producing a stable efficiency of ∼14% for 31 days when In3+ was stabilized by inhibiting hydrolysis using acetylacetone.262 The PCE was further improved (i.e., up to 18.12%) by modifying the In2O3/perovskite interface with a PCBM interlayer.261 The doping with Ce,263 Zr,264 and Sn265 resulted in higher electron mobility and lower parasitic absorption in the NIR range than that of pristine In2O3 and resulted in a PCE of above 20%. Alternatively, Nb2O5 is a visibly transparent, air-stable, and water-insoluble material with extensive polymorphism, and its bandgap can be tuned by controlling the stoichiometry and crystallinity.266,267 Kogo et al.268 first introduced Nb2O5 as an effective ETL with mesoporous Al2O3 perovskite-based PSCs and observed a higher VOC (1.13 V) than that with TiO2. However, the room-temperature processed amorphous Nb2O5 rendered a PCE of 17% and replaced the crystalline Nb2O5 as an ETL in flexible PSCs.237 However, the direct e-beam-evaporated269 and spin-coated270 pristine Nb2O5 were shown to offer smooth charge transfer by reducing the charge resistance and recombination at the interface, producing an efficiency of ∼19%. Moreover, 5% Zn doping further assisted in faster charge extraction and reduced charge recombination at the Nb2O5 ETL/perovskite interface.271 The Nb2O5 passivation over TiO2 and ZnO was shown to improve the crystallinity of the perovskite overlayer, and thereby the stability of PSCs.187,272 Low-temperature processed CdSe,273 CdS,274 and Bi2S3 nanocrystals are also appealing in the foregoing context due to their corresponding smaller interfacial barrier with suppressed charge trapping and smooth charge transfer without accumulation at the interface.275 Besides the above-mentioned developments to enhance the capabilities of inorganic ETLs, plasmonic nanoparticles (such as Au and Ag cores) have also been incorporated in inorganic ETLs to enhance their light absorption even further and reduce the exciton binding energy.31,276,277
Even though several inorganic materials have been demonstrated as alternatives to the most common inorganic ETLs (i.e., TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2), various combinations of earth-abundant constituent elements in terms of doping, composites, core–shell structures, etc. need to be explored for controlled interfacial reactions, delivering a higher PCE. Additionally, theoretical work on new inorganic ETL materials is essential to understand the electronic and structural properties of the interface, leading the way for a targeted experimental approach.

4.2. Organic ETLS
Organic n-type semiconductors are promising alternatives to metal-oxide-based ETLs due to their good thermal/chemical stability, low-temperature processability, LUMO level matching with the conduction band of the perovskite, etc.278–280 Additionally, organic ETLs can mend the surface defects by coordination with lead ions and reduce the charge-trap related recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface.278 In contrast, low-temperature processed inorganic ETLs either require high-cost techniques or provide non-uniform film coverage.84 Therefore, various researchers have replaced inorganic ETLs with organic counterparts to address these problems. Particularly, fullerene and its derivatives, with excellent electron mobility and ability to passivate the trap state on the surface of the perovskite layer, have shown the promising possibility of utilization as ETMs.279
A [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) derivative of fullerene, a well-studied compound in organic solar cells, has been used in low temperature-processed PSCs as an ETL, which efficiently blocks the holes at the perovskite/PCBM interface because of the higher VB of the perovskite than the HOMO level for PCBM, resulting in a PCE of ∼12%.281 Furthermore, graphene quantum dot/PCBM nano-composite282 was shown to improve the electrical conductivity compared to pristine PCBM. A blend of polystyrene/PCBM283 was shown to yield smooth films together with a uniform layer of organic ETL, which helped to enhance the charge collection. Moreover, a blend of organic and inorganic ETLs was also explored to govern the morphology and control the stability of the perovskite absorber and improve the device performance. Zeng et al.284 achieved a PCE of ∼14% from a composite of CdSe quantum dots with PCBM as the ETL, increasing the built-in potential at the perovskite/ETL interface, which facilitated efficient electron–hole pair separation and enhancement of the photocurrent.
Liu et al.285 explored thin films of organic PC61BM over inorganic TiO2 coupled with C60 as the ETL and observed efficient charge extraction at the ETL/perovskite interface (Fig. 19), which was stimulated by the higher electrical conductivity of PC61BM. Furthermore, an interlayer of organic molecules between the ETL/metal contact interface was introduced to passivate the defects, reducing the band bending and acting as a permeation barrier for moisture to enhance the stability.286
 Fig. 19  (a) The device assembly of perovskite hybrid solar cells incorporated with PC61BM the electron extraction layer, (b) molecular structures of PC61BM, water-soluble fullerene derivative (C60–Ac10) and P3HT. (c) LUMO and HOMO energy levels of the materials used in the perovskite hybrid solar cells.285 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
The inclusion of additives in PCBM decreases the film roughness and influences the morphology, which increases the recombination resistance at the perovskite/PCBM interface. Also, these additives ease the exciton dissociation and promote fast charge transport.287 Recently, Xiong et al.280 used poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as an additive to dope PCBM to avoid aggregation, thereby enhancing the moisture and water resistance. This was shown to result in a retention of 85% of the initial PCE at 20% for 720 h. Similarly, after the modification of the PCBM/perovskite interface with poly(9-vinyl-carbazole) (PVK) doping in PCBM, it showed better anti-UV, moisture, and thermal stability.288 The other non-fullerene-based organic ETLs include naphthalene diimide derivatives, perylene diimide derivatives, azaacene derivatives, indacenodithiophene derivatives, and n-type conjugated polymers, which can be new alternatives to gain a better performance than various modifications of PCBM.289 Non-fullerene-based ETLs have unique advantages such as molecular structure diversity and adjustable frontier molecular orbitals.290 However, a detailed review of organic ETMs is beyond the scope of this review, which can be found in the literature.289,290
Despite the promising properties of organic ETLs, they have only appeared in a small number of reports compared with inorganic ETLs. However, assuming that the superior electrical and optical properties can be harnessed from organic ETMs, a roadway for higher efficiency in PSCs can be visualized. Overall, matching the only energy levels at the ETL/perovskite interface is not sufficient, where matching the electron mobility is a pre-requisite to avoid charge accumulation. A detailed study of the interface is required considering the defects on the perovskite surface, chemical reactions, and effect on perovskite morphology due to the presence of the ETL, charge trapping, and charge recombination.
Despite the differences in the electrical properties, synthesis process, and interface effects in the various above-cited materials used as ETLs, numerous ETL systems have delivered high PCEs. ETLs continue to exert a significant influence on the device performance and efficiency even after selecting distinguished perovskite materials as overlayers in PSCs. In the initial stage of research, only ∼7% efficiency was observed with the PSCs utilizing oxides of Ti, Zn, Sn, etc. to from ETL/perovskite heterostructures. The higher efficiency reported each year for a decade from a variety of ETLs in the most prominent recent reports is shown in Fig. 20. Recently, the efficiency reached ∼25% with the advancement of ETLs in interface engineering due to the doping, co-doping, compositing, decoration, etc. of ETLs. A brief summary of the inorganic ETLs processed using various synthetic methods and their corresponding device performance parameters are tabulated in Table 1. Thus, future developments of novel ETLs should not only focus on enhancing the power conversion efficiency but must be rationalized based on cost and sustainability.
 Fig. 20  Comparative study of the influential ETLs developed by year to gain the best maximum efficiency in the last decade (collected from ISI Web of Knowledge up to 15th August 2022).296,297,304,309,314,316 
Table 1 A brief summary of inorganic ETLs processed with various synthesis methods and their corresponding device performance parameters




S. no.
Device configuration
Methoda

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Year
Ref.





a SC = spin coating, P-CVD = plasma-activated chemical vapor deposition, CBD = chemical bath deposition, SILAR = successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction, TE = thermal evaporation, ALD = atomic layer deposition, SP = spray-pyrolysis, RC = reflux condensation, ED = electrochemical deposition, ET = emulsion technique, LPCVD = low pressure chemical vapor deposition, TO = thermal oxidation, HP = hydrolysis pyrolysis, SGS = sol–gel synthesis, HT = hydrothermal, ES = electro-spinning, ST = solvothermal, PP = peroxide-precipitate, UVT = UV treatment, S = spray, and RFS = RF sputtering.





Titanium dioxide (TiO2)


1.
FTO/LD-TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
CBD
1.174
25.43
0.831
24.81
2022

299



2.
FTO/RbCl:TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
DC
1.11
23.14
0.807
20.75
2022

318



3.
FTO/Ta:TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SPM
1.094
23.94
0.781
20.45
2022

319



4.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC/MW
1.07
22.18
0.71
17.97
2022

320



5.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/α-FAPbI3/OAI/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SP
1.189
26.35
0.817
25.6
2021

298



6.
FTO/c-TiO2/Li2CO3–TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.171
26.17
0.825
25.28
2021

118



7.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
ALD
1.06
23.92
0.71
18.05
2021

98



8.
FTO/TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT/S
1.16
24.56
0.808
22.99
2020

321



9.
FTO/Nb–TiO2/(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(BrxI1−x)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au)
SC
1.11
24.7
0.78
21.3
2020

322



10.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
HT
1.11
23.42
0.74
19.39
2020

323



11.
ITO/NH2–TiO2 NPs/Cs0.05(FA0.87MA0.13)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SGS
1.20
23.15
0.767
21.33
2019

324



12.
FTO/TiO2-B/(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.05
24.94
0.72
18.83
2019

325



13.
FTO/Y-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HP
1.04
23.55
0.75
18.32
2019

108



14.
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 NC-NR/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
1.055
22.95
0.71
17.2
2019

326



15.
FTO/c-TiO2/a-SnO2/Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.169
23.91
0.765
21.4
2018

295



16.
FTO/Nb:TiO2/TiO2 NR/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HP
1.03
23.95
0.77
18.88
2018

116



17.
ITO/TiO2:TOPD/PC60BM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.10
23.11
0.802
20.3
2017

294



18.
FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.075
22.28
0.769
18.43
2016

293



19.
FTO/c-TiO2/TiO2NF/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
CBD
0.985
22.0
0.72
15.71
2016

327



20.
FTO/TiO2/mp-TiO2 NF/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
ES
0.98
20.0
0.74
15.5
2015

292



21.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag
ALD
0.979
24.3
0.572
13.60
2015

328



22.
FTO/graphene/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.05
21.9
0.74
15.6
2014

29



23.
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
TO
1.09
21.97
0.63
15.07
2014

84



24.
FTO/r-TiO2 NR/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
0.955
15.6
0.63
9.4
2013

291



25.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
0.80
17.8
0.53
7.6
2012

220







Zinc oxide (ZnO)


26.
FTO/ZnO/2-TA/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.16
22.9
0.775
20.6
2022

306



27.
FTO/AZO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
ALD
1.05
23.16
0.74
18.09
2022

329



28.
FTO/Mg:ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
ES
0.83
25.06
0.65
13.52
2022

330



29.
ITO/ZnO/ZnO-Cl-Phen/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI2.7Br0.3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.16
22.88
0.797
21.15
2021

305



30.
FTO/ZnO/ZnS/TiO2/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
1.12
24.07
0.77
20.6
2021

331



31.
FTO/ZnO/IBA/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.12
21.93
0.75
18.84
2020

332



32.
FTO/MLG/ZnO/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC/LPCVD
1.15
23.42
0.781
21.03
2019

303



33.
FTO/ZnO–MgO–EA+/TiO2/(CsFAMA)Pb(BrI)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au/graphene
SC
1.12
23.86
0.789
21.08
2018

62



34.
ITO/ZnO–K/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SGS
1.13
23.0
0.771
19.90
2018

333



35.
ITO/c-ZnO/ZnO:I/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
HT
1.13
22.42
0.719
18.24
2017

180



36.
ITO/AZO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
RFS
1.07
21.5
0.725
17.6
2016

177



37.
ITO/Mg–ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.07
20.6
0.745
16.5
2016

175



39.
PEN/ITO/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au
SP
1.10
18.7
0.75
15.6
2016

334



40.
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO/Ag/Al2O3-PET
ALD
1.02
20.73
0.764
16.5
2015

302



41.
ITO/c-ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.03
20.4
0.749
15.7
2014

301



42.
FTO/c-ZnO/ZnO NR/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
0.991
20.08
0.56
11.13
2014

167



43.
FTO/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CBD
1.02
16.98
0.511
8.9
2013

300







Tin oxide (SnO2)


44.
FTO/c-TiO2/Paa-QD-SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/OAI/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.176
26.09
0.838
25.72
2022

311



45.
FTO/SnO2/BA + PEAI/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
SC
1.144
25.16
0.811
23.35
2022

335



46.
FTO/SnO2–LiOH/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Ag
SC
1.15
24.20
0.763
21.31
2022

336



47.
FTO/Cl–SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
SC/DC
1.07
24.25
0.73
18.94
2022

337



48.
FTO/SnO2/FAPbI3:0.38MDACl2/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.189
25.74
0.832
25.8
2021

310



49.
FTO/SnO2/MA0.15FA0.85Pb(IxClyBr1−x−y)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CBD
1.181
25.14
0.848
25.2
2021

139



50.
FTO/SnO2–K2SO4/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Ag
SC
1.2
22.89
0.771
21.18
2021

338



51.
FTO/SnO2:CdS QD/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
HT/SC
1.13
23.45
0.78
20.78
2021

153



52.
FTO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.14
23.38
0.76
20.24
2021

339



53.
ITO/urea-SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.13
23.51
0.76
20.25
2021

155



54.
FTO/SnO2/SnO2:TaCl5/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
SC
1.08
22.56
0.75
18.23
2021

146



55.
ITO/SnO2/SnO2-KF/CsPbI2Br/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag
SC
1.31
14.79
0.79
15.39
2021

145



56.
FTO/SnO2:Eu/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CBD
1.13
22.61
0.79
20.14
2021

144



57.
FTO/SnO2 NR/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
ET
1.15
23.45
0.78
21.35
2020

340



58.
ITO/SnO2/SA/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.15
22.80
0.78
20.41
2020

154



59.
ITO/SnO2-CNT/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.12
23.26
0.782
20.33
2020

138



60.
FTO/SnO2/MgO/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.36
11.70
0.693
11.04
2020

341



61.
ITO/SnO2/TPPO/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.11
24.3
0.77
20.69
2019

156



62.
ITO/SnO2/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.10
24.2
0.77
20.5
2019

342



63.
FTO/SnO2:NH4Cl/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.19
22.2
0.75
20
2019

143



64.
ITO/SnO2:NGO/Rb0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.17
18.87
0.75
16.54
2019

152



65.
ITO/SnO2/C9/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.12
22.8
0.789
21.3
2018

308



66.
FTO/Mg-SnO2 bl/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SGS
1.112
22.80
0.758
19.21
2018

343



67.
ITO/SnO2:GQDs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.13
23.05
0.778
20.23
2017

137



68.
FTO/SnO2NS/C60/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
1.039
23.62
0.75
18.31
2017

344



69.
ITO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
ED
1.08
19.75
0.65
13.88
2017

128



70.
ITO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbI3)0.03/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.10
25.28
0.731
20.28
2016

307



71.
FTO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.11
23.27
0.67
17.21
2015

125



Ternary metal oxides


72.
FTO/LBSO-PFA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
laser
1.139
24.10
0.86
23.74
2022

345



73.
FTO/ZSO/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
CBD
9.368
3.24
0.745
22.59
2022

317



74.
FTO/c-TiO2/NO-BSO/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SP
0.94
23.04
0.68
14.77
2021

346



75.
FTO/ZSO/CsMAFA/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CBD
1.14
23.59
0.79
21.3
2020

315



76.
FTO/La–SrSnO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.12
23.3
0.718
18.7
2020

213



77.
FTO/c-ZSO/mp-ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
1.05
24.79
0.704
18.32
2020

347



78.
FTO/La+-BaTiO3/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
0.96
21.5
0.69
14.3
2020

348



79.
FTO/c-ZSO/mp-ZSO/Cs0.5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
RC
1.06
24.58
0.79
20.1
2019

349



80.
FTO/am-ZSO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
PLD
1.12
22.49
0.796
20.04
2019

350



81.
FTO/Y-SrSnO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.14
22.7
0.74
19.0
2019

212



82.
ITO/SrTiO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.143
23.02
0.721
19.0
2019

205



83.
FTO/ZSO/FAMAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.036
24.72
0.781
20.02
2018

63



84.
FTO/LBSO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au
PP/SC
1.12
23.4
0.81
21.2
2017

200



85.
FTO/c-TiO2/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
HT
1.048
23.71
0.692
17.21
2017

313



86.
FTO/ZnO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SP
1.035
19.71
0.59
12.03
2017

216



87.
FTO/BSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
PP
0.968
17.45
0.637
10.96
2017

197



88.
FTO/bl-ZSO/rGO–ZSO/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/PTAA/Au
ES
1.046
22.50
0.76
17.89
2016

217



89.
FTO/TiO2/BSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.03
16.8
0.71
12.3
2016

196



90.
FTO/TiO2/BaTiO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
0.962
19.3
0.67
12.4
2016

210



91.
ITO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au
SC
1.05
21.6
0.67
15.3
2015

312



92.
FTO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
SC
0.84
15.03
0.62
7.02
2014

214



Scaffolds


93.
FTO/Nb:SrTiO3/SrO/(MAPbI3)x(CsFAMA)1−x/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
ST
1.11
23.9
0.76
20.2
2020

206



94.
ITO/ZrO2/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC/UVT
1.068
23.32
0.782
19.48
2020

351



95.
FTO/Nb2O5/Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.13
12.80
0.72
10.3
2015

268



96.
FTO/TiO2/SiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SG
1.05
16.4
0.66
11.45
2014

224



97.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.07
17.3
0.59
10.8
2013

233



98.
FTO/TiO2/Al2O3/Au@SiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.02
16.94
0.64
11.4
2013

31



99.
FTO/c-TiO2/Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
0.98
17.8
0.63
10.9
2012

220



Other Inorganic ETLs


100.
ITO/c-TiO2/CdSe/ZnS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.08
22.9
0.73
18.1
2020

352



101.
ITO/a-WO3/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
TE
1.11
23.01
0.803
20.52
2019

353



102.
FTO/In2S3/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au
CBD
1.09
7.76
0.659
5.59
2019

354



103.
FTO/TiO2 NCs/Nb2O5/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SC
1.04
20.49
0.716
15.25
2018

355



104.
FTO/mp-TiO2-ZnS/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
SILAR
1.02
19.05
0.754
14.9
2018

356



105.
FTO/NMT-CdS/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CBD
1.12
19.7
0.74
16.3
2018

357



106.
FTO/CdS/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
P-CVD
1.04
20.76
0.68
14.68
2017

358



107.
ITO/WO3/SAMs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.02
21.9
0.665
14.9
2015

359





5. Hole transport layer (HTL)
The HTL is equally essential to transport the acceptors or holes generated in the photoactive perovskite layer to the cathode. The HOMO of the hole transport material (HTM) under consideration for PSCs is required to be located at a higher level than the valence band edge of the perovskite absorber (Fig. 21). The minimized energy barrier at the perovskite/HTL interface allows easy collection of the photogenerated holes. Moreover, the conductivity of the HTM, which plays a vital role in charge transfer and charge recombination at the perovskite/HTL interface, can be revamped by governing interface energetics and defect densities. Besides, the thermal and chemical stability of HTMs continue to be a concern for the long-term and efficient photovoltaic performance. Thus far, various nanostructured, doped, and passivated HTLs have been explored in PSCs depending on the selected device architecture. In this section, we critically discuss the involvement of various inorganic HTLs in delivering a higher PCE.
 Fig. 21  Schematic displaying the path of the photogenerated hole from the perovskite light absorber to the external circuit. (CBM: conduction band minimum and VBM: valence band maximum.) 
5.1. Inorganic HTLS
Inorganic HTLs have gained importance in PSCs due to their ability to be downsized to nanostructures, increasing the junction interface. Given that PSCs are the resultant evolution of sensitized solar cells, though with conceptually newer foundations, redox electrolytes have been replaced with solid-state electrolytes or HTLs in PSCs. However, the expensive solid-state organic spiro-OMeTAD when introduced in PSCs degrades the perovskite absorbers due to the use of hygroscopic dopants. Therefore, the low-cost inorganic HTLs with high chemical/thermal stability and scalability have attracted considerable attention from the scientific and industrial community as a replacement for spiro-OMeTAD. Various inorganic materials based on binary oxides, cyanates, and delafossite such as NiO, VOx, CoOx, CuOx, CuI, CuCSN, and CuGaO2 have been investigated for their performance as HTLs in PSCs.360–363 The band structure positions of selected inorganic HTLs with reference to the perovskite absorber are summarized in Fig. 22. These HTMs are sensibly engineered to alter the charge transfer dynamics and to efficiently extract holes. The significance and optoelectronic properties of these important inorganic HTLs employed in PSCs are discussed in this section.
 Fig. 22  Schematic of band alignment of various inorganic HTLs with perovskite absorber. 

5.1.1. Nickel oxide (NiO). 
NiO is one of the most widely studied HTLs for PSCs due to its chemical inertness, low processing cost, and earth-abundant nature. Nickel oxides with molecular formulas of NiO, NiO2, and Ni2O3 can be engineered to obtain cubic, monoclinic, rhombohedral, and hexagonal crystalline phases.364–369 Mainly, p-type semiconducting stoichiometric NiO with a wide bandgap of 3.6–4 eV65,370,371 and deep valence band edge (i.e., −5.2 to −5.4 eV) provides excellent band alignment with the perovskite light absorber. The higher conduction band positioning of NiO than perovskite materials become advantageous to conduct holes very efficiently and serves as an excellent electron blocking layer.
Docampo et al.372 introduced NiO as an HTL in PSCs and gained an efficiency of <1% when utilized with a mixed halide perovskite absorber as the photoactive material. The low efficiency was attributed to the inadequate surface coverage and large number of pinholes in the perovskite films coated over the NiO HTL in the inverted device architecture. The possibility of improving the PCE after controlling the doping density projected NiO as one of the forthcoming worthwhile HTL candidates. Therefore, various growth mechanisms and thin-film technologies have been explored for its synthesis or/and coating of NiO films in the ambient atmosphere, such as sputtering,373 atomic layer deposition (ALD),374 solvothermal growth,375 sol–gel,376 e-beam evaporation,377 reactive e-beam evaporation,378 atmospheric pressure spatial atomic layer deposition (AP-SALD),379 and thermal evaporation followed by oxidation.380 Among them, repeated spin coating has been observed to be a simple and cost-effective method to gain precise control over the thickness and crystallinity of NiO nanostructures, although the residual ligands reduce the coverage of the perovskite absorber, and hence the performance of PSCs. Moreover, the thickness of the faceted and corrugated NiO nanocrystalline films controls the hole extraction and transport competence at the HTL/perovskite interface376 because a lower thickness presents a higher leakage current and a higher thickness offers higher series resistance. A precisely controlled ultra-thin NiO film with negligible absorption loss prepared by ALD showed no residuals and pinholes. The extremely thin NiO film with a thickness of 5–7.5 nm, few times the Debye length (i.e., 1–2 nm for NiO), increased the work function and hole concentration by overlapping of the space charge regions. Moreover, high-temperature treatment improved its interfacial properties by reducing the content of hydroxylate NiOOH and reducing the amount of surface defects related to C–N at the HTL/perovskite interface, achieving a PCE of 16.4%.374 Subsequently, Liu et al.381 utilized a solution-combustion based NiO HTL with the two-step-processed MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx perovskite to achieve a PCE 19.4%. Recently, the controlled island-like growth of NiO offered a lower absorption in the visible region, and also increased the effective interface with the perovskite absorber, while governing the shunt resistance.380 Knowing the fact that mesoporous structures provide a better interface between the HTL and perovskite, Yin et al.382 explored a mesoporous nanoforest of 1D NiO nanotube morphology. The hierarchical tube morphology offered a continuous conducting pathway for rapid hole extraction and less charge leakage due to the substantially passivated interfacial hole-trapping state density (i.e., 1.274 × 1016 cm−3), which yielded a PCE of 18.77% with quenched Shockley–Read–Hall recombination losses (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images of the NiO nanotube nanoforest with controlled length and branch growth. Schematic of (c) device architecture and corresponding cross-section SEM image and (d) charge transport in PSCs consisting of NiO nanocrystals and nanoforest HTLs. (e) Comparative PCE distribution of nanocrystal and nanotubes.382 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44308–44314). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society. 
The Ni3+ and Ni2+ variations govern the defect levels in NiO and inversely alter the conductivity and optical transmittance of the HTL. The spatial localization of the HOMO of the perovskite/HTL system on the NiO layer estimated by adopting the relativistic pseudopotentials and pseudo-atomic orbitals predicted the transfer of holes from the perovskite in close proximity of the NiO surface connected by halogen and lead atoms (Fig. 24).383 Therefore, precise control of the Ni3+/Ni2+ ratio by the defect density aligns the VB of the HTL with the perovskite and provides faster hole extraction with lower energy losses, offering a PCE close to 18%.377,383,384 Nevertheless, the significantly reduced oxygen vacancies in self-doped Ni2O3385 and NiOOH386 yielded a PCE close to 20%, gaining attention as futuristic HTLs to replace NiO. The Ni3+ cation sites act as a Lewis electron acceptor and Brønsted proton acceptor by deprotonating cation amines and oxidizing iodide species. Therefore, different amounts of Cu,387,388 Y,389 La,56 Fe,390 Co,391,392 Sr,393 Ag,394 Na,395 and Zn396,397 metals and rare earth elements (i.e., Eu, Yb, Tb, Ce, and Nd)398 were doped to enhance the intrinsic conductivity, charge extraction ability, hole mobility, energy level alignment, and optical transparency of NiO films by reducing the Ni2+/Ni3+ vacancy formation energy due to their replacement. Even though the segregation of alkaline cations such as Li,399 Cs,400 and K401,402 on the NiO surface improve the performance of PSCs due to their favourable interaction with perovskite, their time-dependent disparity in the spatial distribution modifies their performance and stability.
 Fig. 24  Optimized structures showing the HOMO (left) and LUMO (right) orbitals for three mutual orientations of an NiO (lower) and perovskite (upper) interfacial region. The geometries G1 refer to the surface separation of ∼1 nm between the perovskite and NiO, and G2 and G3 indicate the close proximity of <0.3 nm between the perovskite and NiO, but perovskite contact NiO(100) surface via the closest halogen atom and MA ion and halogen atom and lead atoms, respectively. The upper row shows the MAPbI3, and the lower row represents the MAPbBr3 perovskite nanoparticles. In the NiO structure, the Ni and O atoms are represented by green and red spheres, respectively. In the perovskite structure, the Br, I, and Pb atoms are identified in brown.383 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11467–11478). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
Al doping in the lattice of NiOx not only enhances the electrical conductivity of the HTL but also improves the crystalline growth of the perovskite absorber, concurrently aligning its energy levels, which dramatically reduces the energetic nonradiative recombination losses and enables quicker hole transportation at the perovskite/HTL interface to deliver a PCE of 20.84%.403 Mg doping has shown to downshift the VB maximum, matching it well with the perovskite and lowering the energy redundancy for hole injection. The reduced energy band offset benefitted the efficient charge collection/transport and curtailed the hysteresis, yielding a reproducible PCE of 18.5% from an ambient-stable commercial device with an active area of 10 cm × 10 cm.404 Interestingly, embedding Au inside an NiO layer to form Au–NiOx as both an electrode and electrode interlayer for PSCs was attempted to replace the ITO electrode, but difficulties were encountered in the formation of a compact layer, reducing the film thickness to control the transmittance, and loss of photoexcitation energy due to self-recombination of opposite charges at the electrode. This hampered the PSC device performance (i.e., PCE = 10.24%).405 The further addition of Cu on the top of Au–NiO film effectively reduced the resistance, but the device delivered a maximum PCE of 11.1% at a 1 nm Cu layer. This was reduced further with an increase in the thickness of Cu (i.e., >1 nm).406 UV-ozone irradiation reduced the interface barrier between a Cu-doped NiOOH HTL and MAPbI3 perovskite by surface dipole formation and also increased the carrier concentration and charge extraction efficiency.407 Recently, Zhou et al.408 improved the electrical conductivity of an NiOx film by enhancing the Ni3+ content after N-doping and achieved a PCE of 17.02%. The reduced Gibbs free energy on the hydrophilic N-doped NiOx surface led to a higher nucleation density, and thereby larger grain growth of the perovskite absorber with improved interfacial contact and passivation of the trap states in the perovskite layer, thereby suppressing nonradiative recombination.
Cobalt-doping exhibits a synergistic effect and endows the NiOx film with a further improvement in its performance. As an HTL in PSCs, p-type Co-doping provides low transparency and high conductance, whereas alkali and alkaline co-dopants result in high transparency with low conductivity. It was reported that 10% Li@5% Co co-doping synergistically enhanced the PCE to 20.1% by providing a shorter carrier lifetime of 0.67 μs and a larger recombination lifetime of 5.24 ms, signifying efficient hole/charge transfer/extraction and suppressed charge carrier recombination, respectively.409 The synergy between Ag and Li co-dopants with the +1 oxidation states was shown to tailor the optoelectronic properties of NiO. The smallest formation energy of Li and Ag among the related defects created shallower acceptor levels in NiO and enhanced the hole concentration, which effectively optimized the charge extraction/transport and reduced the charge accumulation at the interface, therefore boosting the PCE to 19.24%.410 Mg2+ doping compensates the undesirable positive shift caused in the VB of NiOx due to the incorporation of Li and promotes the formation of an ohmic contact at the perovskite interface by reducing the barrier height via staircase energy level alignment with the MAPbI3 perovskite.360 However, the inclusion of Co2+ in Mg–Li reduced the device performance severely (i.e., PCE = 13.22%) for unknown reasons.411 Besides, polymeric PTAA, DEA, PFBT, and PEAI coatings412–415 introduced as an overlayer for the NiOx HTL effectively modified the interfacial contact and boosted the interfacial charge transfer through gradient band alignment and reduced trap state density. The lone-paired functional groups on the polymer coordination with Ni and Pb ions form a quasi-2D polymeric-perovskite grain, which blocks the electron transport in the HTL and limits the carrier recombination at the interface.


5.1.2. Vanadium oxide (VOx). 
Vanadium oxides composed of VO5 square pyramids or distorted VO6 octahedra with shared oxygen atoms appear in various chemical forms such as VO2, V2O3, V2O5, V3O5, V3O7, V4O7, V5O9, V6O11, and V6O13 of orthorhombic, cubic, triclinic, tetragonal, monoclinic, and rhombohedral crystalline phases.65 The existence of valence band levels and conduction band levels at ∼−5.36 eV and ∼−2.94 eV, respectively, and the bandgap of ∼2.6 eV have projected VOx as another interesting HTL candidate material for PSCs. The low-temperature synthesis protocols have been shown to incorporate hydroxyl groups in vanadium oxides (i.e., VOx), and the post-synthesis heat treatment results in oxygen vacancies by establishing V5+ (i.e., ∼65% to 75%) and V4+ (i.e., ∼35–25%) cations,416–420 which are prominent trap sites, restricting their use as HTL. Basically, the air-oxidation of VOx films during their synthesis naturally results in the formation of V2O5 on the top surface at the interface between the perovskite absorber and VOx HTL and controls the device performance by monitoring the band-offset.421 The large variation between the V5+ and V4+ cations results in the assembly of V2Ox films with higher roughness and sizable thickness, which typically yield a larger barrier to allow the tunnelling of charges in PSCs.419 Therefore, a thin layer of hydrated V2O5 (i.e., VOx) has been explored as an alternative HTL to overcome the catastrophic electrical and structural inhomogeneities in the frequently explored PEDOT:PSS hole extraction layer, which adversely affect the device lifetime. Moreover, a compact layer of thermally stable VOx nanoparticles not only enhanced the light-harvesting but also delivered extremely high transmittance (i.e., 95–98%), higher quenching efficiency, and reduced internal resistance, which facilitated efficient charge transportation, offering a PCE close to 14%.417,418 Likewise, it also assisted in improving the stability of gradient hetero-junction-based PSCs exposed to solar radiation in N2 (i.e., 15.8% PCE for 750 h) and ambient (14.1% PCE for 175 h) environments.416
The V2Ox additive, as an interface modification layer, is a good hole extraction layer, and thus has been utilized to improve the quality of perovskite light absorbers (i.e., CH3NH3PbI3−xClx).420,422 The hydrogen bonds and dangling bonds in the hydrated V2Ox additive produce larger perovskite grains. The optimized amount of additive produces a dense perovskite film of larger grains, which play a crucial role in reducing the trap charge density to improve the current injection, thereby concurrently limiting the leakage current. Although these modifications are performed to overcome the high recombination rate at the V2Ox/perovskite interface, they also mitigate the migration of iodide ions into the crystal boundaries and retain a stable device performance beyond 1000 h. Besides, an ambient atmosphere-processed VOx interlayer in an unencapsulated n–i–p device showed excellent PCE retention (i.e., 71% of initial value) after illumination at the high temperature of 70 °C for 1100 h,423 but the slow ingress of oxygen and water in the unencapsulated device degraded the perovskite layer, despite a barrier layer being imposed to reduce the rate of vanadium ion diffusion. Therefore, the VOx thin film was further passivated with an aminopropanoic acid (APPA) interfacial layer to control the effect of oxygen vacancies on the charge recombination at the perovskite/VOx HTL interface, which also enriched the perovskite crystallinity, reducing the content of charge-trapping pinholes.424
A copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)425 and thermally crosslinked triarylamine-based X-DVTPD426 buffer layer was introduced in the VOx matrix to resist the incorporation of moisture and realize excellent interfacial energy level alignment. The synergistic bilayer HTL was shown to reduce the charge carrier recombination, enhancing the charge extraction at the interface. Furthermore, VOx was also introduced over poly(triarylamine) to induce hydrophilicity to grow a high-quality perovskite absorber layer, thereby improving the PCE (i.e., 18.9%).427 A thin overlayer of VOx was shown to suppress the trap-assisted recombination, significantly improving the charge extraction and transport at the interface. However, owing to the limited improvement in PCE to 19%, subsequent efforts were focused on increasing the conductivity of pristine VOx by doping rather than via additives or complex bilayer formation.
The improved conductivity of VOx (i.e., 1.05 × 10−3 S m−1) and interfacial adhesion with the MAPbI3 perovskite layer after Cs doping resulted in a 30% enhancement in the device efficiency.428 On the contrary, when dispersed in carbon, VOx facilitates the charge transfer at the perovskite/carbon interface due to the high work function without compromising the conductivity of carbon.429 Recently, PSCs with a top hybrid HTL comprised of VOx incorporated p-type polytriarylamine (PTAA) polymer reached an efficiency of 20.1% and exhibited negligible degradation after 4500 h of light soaking due to the higher tolerance of VOx towards the perovskite absorber (Fig. 25).430 The donor–acceptor interactions between the electron-deficient VOx and electron-rich amine-centers of polymer enable the impeccable fusion of VOx and PTAA layers, which provide improved charge transport, possibly similar to doping effects. The post-treatment strategy of vanadium oxides offers great flexibility to tailor the cation distribution, and hence the energy level alignment. The UV post-treatment of a few-atomic layer thick (∼1 nm) pristine VOx HTL film was shown to increase the oxidation states from V4+ to V5+, drawing the Fermi level close to the valence band, thereby enabling the hole quenching pathway for the transportation of holes to improve the device efficiency.431 Even though VOx has shown promise towards efficient and stable PSCs, further investigation of morphology controlled VOx nanostructures, doped VOx, and composites with other promising materials are required to explore as it as an HTL for reaching a milestone efficiency and the cost-effective mass production of PSCs.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of n–i–p PSCs consisting of a hybrid HTL of PTAA and VOx with lower gas permeability and better barrier properties than the volatile perovskite decomposition products. Molecular structure, linked pyramid-based structure and topography of (b) spin-coated p-type PTAA thin film and (c) evaporated 30 nm-thick VOx film on glass. (d) I–V characteristics of PSC consisting of VOx in bilayer hybrid HTL. (e) Stability of PSCs with bilayer hybrid HTLs under illumination.430 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5563–5568). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 
The use of an ALD V2O5 buffer layer a barrier layer was shown to improve the long-term thermal stability of PSCs.432 Indeed, a precisely controlled stoichiometric V2O5 HTL enhanced the PCE from 13.26% to 18.03% when interfaced with PEDOT:PSS under ambient conditions.433–435 V2O5 curbs the formation of oxygen defects and also ensures hole transfer from the perovskite absorber (CH3NH3PbI3) to V2O5 HTL by forming an excellent ohmic contact.436 Moreover, filling the pinholes of PEDOT:PSS by incorporating V2O5 nanoparticles improved the carrier mobility and increased the surface energy by exposing more PEDOT chains to the interface with the perovskite absorber.437 Further, V2O5 combined with nickel phthalocyanine (NiPc) effectively extracted holes from the perovskite by mediating the VB of both and rendered a 63% enhancement in the PCE (i.e., 19.4%).438 Basically, the VB of pristine V2O5 forms an electronically barrier-free cascading contact for hole transportation and extraction across the interface.


5.1.3. Cobalt oxide (CoOx). 
Cobalt oxide is another HTM attracting attention due to its hole-quenching capability and low processing cost. Cobalt oxides with the molecular formulas CoO, Co3O4, and Co2O3 can be obtained in cubic and hexagonal spinel crystalline phases with a wide bandgap in the range of 1.3 to 2.4 eV.439 The much shorter hole extraction time of CoOx (2.8 ns) relative to NiOx (22.8 ns) and CuOx (208.5 ns) has projected Co-oxides as possible competitor materials to other inorganic HTLs.440 In 2016, Shalan et al.440 introduced ultrathin CoOx films as an HTL in inverted PSCs, which was obtained via a simple spin-coating technique followed by high-temperature processing (400 °C). Besides the excellent light harvesting capability, it was mainly the phenomenal charge separation ability of the highly transparent CoOx (i.e., 15 nm thick) achieved a PCE of 14.5% even with a single-cation single-halide perovskite. Despite the fact that an ultrathin HTL minimizes the incident photon loss induced by Co ion absorption and curtails the carrier losses by shortening the transport path, the introduction of a metal ion in the CoOx lattice changes the conductivity of CoOx and energy-level mismatch with the perovskite. The deeper VB position of CoOx (∼5.46 eV) than the HOMO of CH3NH3PbI3 (−5.4 eV) hinders the hole transport and causes severe recombination. However, the incorporation of Cu in CoOx uplifts the VB (−5.34 eV), without altering the CB edge (−3.2 eV), which is maintained much higher than that of CH3NH3PbI3 (−3.9 eV). This severely reduces the carrier transfer loss at the interface and energetically favours the electron injection.441
Spinel Co3O4 with octahedral Co3+ is significantly tolerant to structural distortion or disorder, and hence excellent hole transport materials for PSCs. Co3O4 assists with the issues of carrier transport and recombination process at the carbon/perovskite interface in carbon-based PSCs by reducing the charger transfer resistance from perovskite and suppressing interfacial recombination. Moreover, the interfacial layer of Co3O4 significantly promotes the separation and extraction of photo-generated carriers, as well as the hydration of perovskites, thereby providing a steady performance under ambient and light soaking conditions.442,443 Low-valency doping reduces the density of defect states and enhances the hole mobility of Co3O4 by introducing acceptor energy levels on both the Co2+ and Co3+ sites of Co3O4. Therefore, Li+ doping in the lattice of Co3O4 improves the light absorption and boosts the hole mobility by forming an Li-enriched LiCoO2 overlayer, which facilitates efficient hole transportation at the Li–Co3O4/perovskite interface, delivering a PCE of ∼14%.444 However, the super-hydrophilicity induced in LiCoO2 after UV/ozone treatment led to the formation of a highly dense MAPbI3 film with an excellent interface, which was shown to enhance the PCE to 19%.445
Recently, the co-doping of Zn2+ in LiCoO2 improved its conductivity and enormously enhanced its hole mobility, which caused a 4-fold enhancement in the PCE compared to that of the pristine Co-oxide HTL.446 The rock-salt CoO with octahedral high-spin Co2+ is another HTM from the CoOx family that has the potential to improve the PCE. Recently, a CoO film was treated with pyridine to control the adverse effect of oleylamine molecules present on the CoO film on the growth of the perovskite film, and thereby the performance of PSCs. The ligand exchange process by pyridine not only improved the conductivity by influencing the defect states in CoO but also altered the HTL/perovskite interface for excellent charge extraction, showing a 5-fold improvement in the PCE.447 Recently, the decoration of CoO nanoplates in a discontinuous manner to fill the boundaries of crystalline perovskite grains yielded the highest PCE of 20.72% by improving the charge-transfer kinetics and hole extraction ability (Fig. 26).448 The uncovered perovskite grains assured uninterrupted hole transport from the perovskite to spiro-OMeTAD HTL; moreover, the CoO nanoplates residing at the perovskite grain boundaries (where defect sates exist) reduced the trap state density (3.773 × 1015 cm−3), suppressing the charge recombination. Overall, the best PCE is still to be realized from PSCs utilizing Co-oxide HTLs. In the future, the choice of precursor and reaction kinetics should be considered to obtain the best-quality nanostructures of Co-oxide HTLs to ensure maximum hole quenching and improved efficiency. Therefore, the research direction should be focused on improving the conductivity and mobility of CoO by proper choice of doping and the film quality by tuning the processing method to boost the interface between CoO-perovskite to reduce the recombination loss.
 Fig. 26  Top-view SEM images of the perovskite layer (a) without and (b) with CoO nanoplate HTL, and their respective cross-sectional views (c) without and (d) with CoO nanoplate HTL. (e) PL and (f) TRPL spectra of the CoO nanoplate HTL. (g) J–V curves of the PSCs with and without CoO nanoplate HTL and (h) VOC and PCE obtained by forward and reverse scan of 20 of these PSCs. The control was a PSC without CoO nanoplates.448 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32159–32168). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society. 


5.1.4. Copper oxide (CuOx). 
The earth abundance oxides of copper with molecular formulas of CuO (cupric oxide), Cu2O (cuprous oxide), and Cu4O3 (paramelaconite, thermodynamically unstable) can be realized in cubic, monoclinic, and tetragonal structures, respectively.449,450 Cu-oxides are primarily utilized as buffer layers for the stable encapsulation of PSCs to maintain efficiency in adverse environmental conditions.451 The two-orders of magnitude higher mobility of pristine and modified Cu-oxides (i.e., ∼256 cm2 V−1 s−1) than NiO (i.e., 2.8 cm2 V−1 s−1) makes them an excellent choice as HTLs. Most importantly, the best-performing PSCs using copper oxide are prepared with ultrathin films of CuOx, but the ultra-thin nature of the film restricted the analysis of its crystallographic data for tailoring its interfacial properties. Therefore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies have been given importance to understand the properties of the surface facing the interface. The existence of a Cu+ content in the range of 63–68% (i.e., 37–32% of Cu2+) confirmed the presence of both Cu2O and CuO phases in CuOx.452,453 Nevertheless, the Cu+/Cu2+ ratio was controlled via the self-oxidation of independently prepared Cu2O and CuO thin layers to govern the channels for charger carrier transport by lattice matching, and thereby the solar device efficiency.454 The equal existence of Cu+ and Cu2+ delivered a Cu4O3 phase with a bandgap of <1.6 eV,449,455 which is lower for blocking the conduction electrons, and hence not explored much. However, the Cu2O and CuO forms exhibit bandgaps (Eg) in the range of ∼2.1 to 1.6 eV, with an approximately similar VB level of −5.4 eV, satisfying the primary requirement as HTLs in PSCs.
The conversion of spin-coated CuI into Cu2O and CuO under controlled thermal treatment delivered a PCE close to 13% and created excitement among the scientific community exploring solar materials.361 The mixture of Cu2+/Cu+ with a ratio of 3:1 produced a PCE of 17.4% by improving the hole extraction and charge dissociation at the CuOx/MAPbI3 interface in the presence of a buffer layer.452 Further, in search of improved efficiency, Chen et al.456 transformed complex CuO–Cu2O uneven morphologies into stable CuO nanoparticles of uniform dimension, but this complex CuO–Cu2O structure delivered a maximum PCE of only ∼8% for unknown reasons. Therefore, various synthesis techniques such as electrostatic spray deposition,457 magnetron sputtering,456 solvothermal method,458 SILAR,54 ion bean sputtering,459 thermal oxidation,453 spin-coating,452 chemical vapor deposition,451 and electrospinning460 have been examined to control the Cu-oxide film thickness and its interface with the perovskite absorber layer, influencing the efficiency of PSCs. The CuOx employed in place of PEDOT:PPS HTL exhibited a stable and higher PCE (17.1%) than that of the pure Cu2O and CuO HTLs.453,461 Recently, it has been shown that a highly crystalline perovskite overlayer on CuOx quantum dots reduced the charge trap state density, leading to a higher carrier transfer efficiency and reduced charge recombination, delivering a PCE of 19.91%.462 However, CuOx suffers from a low transmittance in the visible range, and its further improvement by reducing thickness compromises the optical losses.
The nanoparticle-based interface modification concept provides a series of benefits in PSCs. Monodispersed CuO nanoparticles (5–10 nm) improve the light manipulation, suppress parasitic interfacial resistance, and induce higher hole-extraction ability, resulting in a VOC of 1.09 V and an efficiency of 15.3%.458 However, CuO nanowires introduced as an anode buffer layer in the inverted planar device structure yielded a PCE of 16.35%, which originated from the higher hole mobility (or improved conductivity) of the HTL and its larger interfacial area with perovskite. Even though the diameter of nanowires plays a central role in improving the charge extraction ability, unoptimized overlapping of the nanowires increases the hole transport distance and declines the crystallinity of the perovskite layer, thereby reducing the performance of PSCs.460 Further, Ag nanoparticle doping in CuO nanowires increases the light trapping and suppresses the charge recombination rate, but their high cavity mobility reduces the PCE (i.e., ∼11%).463 Besides, a reactively sputtered CuO thin film barely accompanied with Cu2O, under controlled annealing conditions, had shown the highest efficiency of 22.56% due to the increased exciton-assisted band-to-band recombination.464
The incorporation of Cu2O in PSCs has been shown to reduce the recombination losses at the interface. Cu2O forms type II band alignment at both the p–i and i–n interfaces, enabling charge separation and uninterrupted carrier transport from MAPbI3.54 The synergistic effect of Cu2O nanocubes as the top HTL on the perovskite light absorber (CH3NH3PbI3) in a planar n–i–p PSC demonstrated a highly stable PCE of ∼17.23% at room temperature without encapsulation.465 Further, the heterojunction of Cu2O with SiO2 enhanced the PCE to 18.4% by effectively preventing defects and pinholes, and also tailoring the recombination and recollection of charge carriers at the interface with the perovskite absorber.466 To further enhance the device performance, surface modification strategies using nonpolar solvents have been explored. Surface modification of Cu2O quantum dots using silane molecules has been seen to increase the recombination resistance, offering faster and more efficient charge carrier extraction to deliver a PCE of 18.9%.467 Moreover, a Cu/Cu2O composite layer introduced as a p-type-modified layer between low-mobility hole transport materials and the metal electrode acted as an electron blocking buffer layer and effectively improved the PCE.459,468 Cu2O was also blended with CuSCN to avoid the formation of defects and impurities at the interface due to the reaction of halides migrated from organohalide perovskites into CuSCN.469 The existence of Cu2O nanoparticles resulted in the faster extraction of charges generated in organohalide perovskites by their interaction with CuSCN, thereby rendering a PCE of 19.2% by minimizing the detrimental interfacial degradation.
Device simulations have predicted that Cu2O has the ability to improve the PCE to over to 25% by tuning the bandgap470–472 due to its high mobility despite the complications in its synthesis. However, control over the interface properties has become a key obstacle in this development. Due to the presence of Cu vacancies at the surface or termination in the oxygen planes, the reactive oxygen becomes the recombination centres to trap the conduction electrons. Therefore, the atomistic model developed by Castellanos-Aguila et al.473 for the Cu2O(001) and MAPbI3 interface showed that the formation of vacancies in the Cu2O-terminating planes eliminates the dangling bonds and deep trap states, enabling the PSCs to exhibit excellent photoconversion efficiency (Fig. 27). However, the diverse nanostructure morphologies and doping or co-doping of Cu2O with promising elements are yet to be fully explored in-depth to understand their effect on the device performance.
 Fig. 27  (a–d) Logarithm of LDOS × Vcell averaged in the xy planes calculated between the MAPI and Cu2O interface and (e–h) their Bader charges summed by layers for the four interface models: (a and e) O/PbI, (b and f) O/MAI, (c and g) Cu/PbI, and (d and h) Cu/MAI. The interface states are higher in energy than the MAPI CB, allowing electrons to return to MAPI. Therefore, holes can be transferred from MAPI to Cu2O without being trapped, although they can be attracted and recombine with electrons trapped at the O/PbI and Cu/PbI interfaces.473 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44648–44657). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society. 


5.1.5. Copper iodide (CuI). 
CuI crystallizes in zinc blende (<390 °C), wurtzite (>390 °C and <440 °C) and rock salt (>440 °C) structures,474,475 which is another promising HTL with a wide bandgap (i.e., ∼3.1 eV), high hole mobility (i.e., 0.5–2 cm2 V−1 s−1), high transparency, good chemical stability, and low production cost. Various solution-based and solid–gas reaction processes have been endorsed as facile methods to synthesize CuI.476–480 Systematic modelling based on a combination of DFT-based computational and group-theory methods has illustrated that among the intrinsic point defects, copper vacancies are the most prominent to govern the electronic and transport properties of CuI, resulting in an improvement in the PCE.475 Initially, CuI was explored in conventional n–i–p PSCs, and then utilized in inverted planar PSCs to improve the PCE by avoiding iodide formation at the interface. The incorporation of an iodine atom expands the Cu (with lattice constant of 3.59 Å) structure of the film and results in the formation of a compact CuI crystal, removing the pinhole defects. Simultaneously, new species are formed at the interface of perovskite/CuI by loading Cu in the perovskite, resulting in stronger charge-extraction and noticeable short circuit current density.481 Nevertheless, the redundant iodine acts as an interfacial recombination centre.
Christians et al.477 introduced CuI as a competitor to spiro-OMeTAD in PSCs, providing 2-orders of magnitude larger electrical conductivity; nevertheless, the high recombination in the CuI-based device restricted the PCE to 6% at a lower VOC, suggesting a strong possibility for the advancement of its performance. Moreover, benefitting from the high transmittance of CuI, with deep valence band, it showed a higher PCE than the acidic and hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs.482 The smaller magnitude of charge separation at the perovskite/CuI interface leads to the generation of a smaller local electric field; thereupon, the faster polarization relaxation down-sizes the hysteresis in J–V measurement of CuI based PSCs.483 The larger roughness of a powder-pressed CuI HTL reduced the device performance by severely trapping the charge carriers at the numerous air voids generated deep inside the HTL layer.476 The thermally evaporated ∼40 nm-thick compact CuI HTL decreased the charge-carrier recombination losses at the interface and exhibited an air-stable PCE of 14.7%.484 Later, an air-stable PCE of 16.8% was obtained by optimizing the morphology of the perovskite film coated on the CuI HTL to effectively reduce the energy loss at the interface.485 Recently, the use of CuI-decorated Cu nanowires as a hybrid Cu@CuI nanostructure enabled a PCE of 18.4% by efficient charge extraction from the outer CuI layer and rapid charge transfer from the inner Cu wires.486 However, the synergistic effect of Na-doped TiO2 ETL and CuI HTL, where Na-doped TiO2 enhanced the electron conductivity/mobility and CuI induced a higher recombination resistance, improved charger transport at both interfaces (i.e. HTL/perovskite and ETL/perovskite interface) and delivered an efficiency of 17.6%.478
Despite its high mobility, the CuI HTL alone forms leakage paths, leading to carrier recombination at the CuI/perovskite interface. Therefore, PEDOT:PSS was introduced as a middle layer for efficient carrier extraction through adequate energy level alignment, making the architecture more efficient with a thicker CuI overlayer.479,487 The further addition of CuI as a middle layer between PTAA and perovskite enhanced the charge extraction on both the sides and yielded a PCE of 20.34% by creating enhanced upward band bending (0.35 eV) at the CuI/perovskite interface with a large built-in potential (∼1.28 V) all over the active layer.488 Moreover, CuI is beneficial to reduce the trap-state concentration and parasitic charge accumulation, limiting the flow of charges through the passivation of other HTLs. Saranin et al.489 observed that the passivation layer of CuI fills the pinholes and severely reduces the trap states of metal oxide, protecting the perovskite/HTL interface from degradation and providing faster injection and relaxation processes in devices, yielding an impressive PCE of 15.2%.
Byranvand et al.490 introduced CuI islands on a TiO2 ETL to pull the electrons at the perovskite/TiO2 interface and extract them via the dipole moments formed. The higher conduction-band energy level of CuI (i.e., −2.2 eV) than the perovskite prevents the formation of PbI2 at the interface, facilitating superior electron extraction with a lower trap density, and the smaller Cu+ and larger I− ions mimicking PbI2 (i.e., Pb2+ and I2−) inhibit the back-recombination (Fig. 28(a and b)). Although a moderate number of CuI islands improved the PCE (i.e., 19%), a large number of CuI islands reduced it by blocking the electron pathways (Fig. 28(c)). Apparently, the incorporation of thiourea in CuI (i.e., Cu(Tu)I) operates by accelerating the hole transport and reducing the charge carrier recombination due to the increased depletion width (from 126 to 265 nm) as compared to the traditional CuI. Thus, Cu(Tu)I exhibited a PCE of 19.9% by lowering the trap state energy level and eliminating the potential wells for hole transport at the interface.491 This is why the doping or passivation strategies for further the modification of CuI endow it with potential to serve as magnificent HTLs for efficient PSCs.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of CuI islands formed on TiO2 compact layer and subsequent deposition of perovskite layer. In CuI-modified TiO2 (CuI@TiO2)-based PSCs, electrons move from the perovskites to the exposed TiO2 surface instead of CuI islands because of its high conduction band energy level. (b) Interfaces with various amounts of CuI islands. (c) FF and PCE of devices with various concentrations of CuI.490 Reprinted with permission from (Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1702235). Copyright (2017), John Wiley & Sons. 
Overall, CuI is one of the best HTMs to produce PCEs in the range of 20% to 26% after combining with TiO2, CdS, ZnSe, ZnO, ZnOS, etc.,492,493 but a well-optimized thickness ratio of the ETL, perovskite, and HTL is highly demanded. The interplay of Pb and CuI recovers the (Pb-based) perovskite by the Cu–I chemical drain in the system and increases the CuI contact, and hence the charge carrier transport. CuI-based devices show suppressed hysteresis with a significant light soaking effect. The chemical potential gradient redistributes the I− ions from CuI to the perovskite by diffusive movement during aging, which can be tuned by controlling the distribution and morphology of CuI. The ageing instability can be seen in any PSC that undergoes diffusive ion migration towards the interface, but it is relatively less for HTLs like CuI barely accumulating I− ions.


5.1.6. Copper thiocyanate (CuSCN). 
CuSCN is one of the cost-effective hole selective contacts for the emerging organo-metal halide PSCs. The hole mobility of 0.01–0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, HOMO level of −5.3 eV (& ECB = −1.8 eV), and high thermal and chemical stability of CuSCN have gained attention as inorganic HTLs in PSCs.494 CuSCN with an inherently wide bandgap (Eg = ∼3.8 eV) transmits in the complete visible spectrum, facilitates photoactive materials to absorb more light, and generates higher photocurrents in solar cells. Ito et al.495 proposed the use of CuSCN as an HTL in PSCs for the first time to control the degradation of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer during the light exposure test without encapsulation. Later, various synthesis protocols such as drop-casting,496 electrodeposition,497,498 spin coating,499 and spraying500 were developed to obtain CuSCN in an ambient atmosphere with minimum damage to the underlying perovskite absorber, followed by annealing strategies to achieve a higher efficiency. Nevertheless, the texturized grain growth of CuSCN after recrystallization produces poor interaction with the perovskite absorber, thus inducing non-contacting sites as charge recombination centres, thereby reducing the device efficiency. The high-temperature treatment causes the SCN− ions to diffuse near the perovskite/HTL interface, resulting in the degradation of the device performance, which can be impeded either by vacuum-assisted thermal treatment501 or K-SCN post-treatment.502
PSCs employing a CuSCN HTL exhibited a PCE of 13.3%, which degraded faster under elevated temperatures in ambient atmosphere. Therefore, the critical instability caused by the interfacial degradation of the heterojunction of CuSCN and perovskite in a dry N2 environment was resolved with rudimentary on-cell encapsulation using an additional coating of insulating poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA).503 The mesoporous and rough surface of a 600–700 nm-thick CuSCN layer utilized in conventional and mesostructured PCSs attained a maximum of PCE of 12%.496,504 However, a very thin (40 nm) uniform and compact CuSCN film furnished a higher degree of transparency, rendering a PCE of 16%, given that it efficiently generates a higher photocurrent and mitigates the recombination losses at the interface.499 The well-aligned junction geometries of the nanostructured arrays substantially increase the light trapping by reducing reflection losses, and also improve the carrier extraction by increasing the interfacial area at the perovskite/HTL interface. However, the hexagonal 3D prism, 2D pyramid, and 1D nanowire-like structures of the CuSCN HTL produced uncontrolled defect density and oversized growth of perovskite, restricting the PCE to <12%.505 Importantly, the incorporation of CuSCN in the mesoporous perovskite absorber layer resulted in the formation of a bulk heterojunction, which facilitated faster hole extraction with a resulting PCE of >15%.506
The deposition of the CuSCN HTL overlayer causes damage to the perovskite absorber. Therefore, a protective buffer solvent layer of chlorobenzene507 and PDMS508 was placed over the perovskite before the deposition of CuSCN, which not only hampered the formation and migration of defects but also promoted the crystallization of CuSCN to benefit the charge extraction at the interface (Fig. 29). However, the use of NH3 (aq) as a substitute to the commonly used diethyl sulfide solvent is seen to reduce the shunting pathways and interfacial current losses, resulting in a PCE of 17.5%.362 Further, a fast solvent removal process facilitates the formation of a compact and conformal CuSCN layer, which serves towards rapid charge extraction and collection. The potential-induced degradation of the CuSCN/Au contact provoked the operational instability of the PSCs with a PCE exceeding 20%. Accordingly, the inclusion of a conductive rGO spacer between CuSCN and Au avoids the electrical potential-induced reaction at their interface, forming an undesirable barrier and exceptionally improving the stability (i.e., >95% of the initial PCE at 60 °C for 1000 h aging).509 However, rGO has been seen to fail in improving the hole extraction and electron blocking, which cannot further enhance the PCE. Therefore, the introduction of ultrathin polymers layers of DTB510 and PTB7511 over CuSCN has gained attention. These innovative alterations have enhanced the hole extraction efficiency by cascading energy levels and providing environmentally stable PCEs of above 20% for over >1000 h of light illumination. Considering the dissimilarity around the defects structures, multi-component systems have been found to be helpful for the passivation of defects. The interfacial treatment of functional molecules such as Pr-ITC and Ph-DITC has been found to be effective in controlling the perovskite/CuSCN interface, resulting in a PCE of 19.17% PCE with an enhanced VOC.512
 Fig. 29  (a) Trap distribution spectra and (b) J–V characteristics measured in the dark for the MAPbI3/CuSCN-based PSCs with and without the PDMS interlayer. (c) Schematic of the cross-linking PDMS interlayer. The resistive and defective features of the PSCs are estimated from the curves in (a) fitted with slid lines. The arrows in (b) indicate the trap-filled limit voltages (VTFL).508 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46818–46824). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Kim et al.513 introduced CuSCN/P3HT composites to address the instability of PSCs towards high-moisture conditions. The hole-extractive CuSCN, when combined with a p-type conductive polymer, initiated oxidative activities and triggered in-situ p-doping of polymers, thereby improving the interfacial charge transportation and device performance. Alternatively, the coordination strategy, where the coordination bond between CuSCN and ligands (e.g., pyridine derivative) forms a stable intermediate phase, has been found to be exceptionally good for realizing a compact CuSCN HTL by reducing the formation of intermediate adducts and enabling faster recrystallization. Consequently, it facilitated hole extraction and suppressed charge recombination at the interface, resulting in a PCE of 19.2%.514 Besides, CuSCN is either doped or combined with organic HTLs such as F4TCNQ,515 PEDOT:PSS,516 and spiro-OMeTAD517 to reduce the energy barrier and improve the charge extraction at the interface.
Overall, the theoretically predicted PCE of 25%518 for the device utilizing CuSCN HTL, where Cu–I and Pb–N bonds form at the interface, inducing more significant electrostatic potential and electron–hole pair excitation, is highly encouraging. However, one should always consider that the molecular (atomic) adsorbates such as iodide and lead present in the perovskite absorber interact with CuSCN at the interface and form the PbI2 moiety, leading to additional empty states in the bandgap of CuSCN and tailoring the corresponding optoelectronic properties. Therefore, theoretical studies on the passivation of CuSCN and interaction of solvent molecules (DMSO or DMF) with CuSCN need to be thoroughly devoted to the molecular interfacial engineering of CuSCN HTLs for realizing excellent PCEs.


5.1.7. Other inorganic HTLs. 
Delafossite materials with the general chemical formula of ABO2, where A (Cu), B (Al, Ga, Cr), and O bear +1, +3, and −2 states, respectively, have also attracted scientific attention to understand their photoactivity. These layers are composed of edge-sharing BO6 octahedrons linked by triangular sheets of monovalent A+ ions in the ABO2 materials and possess high mobility, wide bandgap, and excellent stability. However, limited delafossite materials have been explored as HTLs for PSCs. CuAlO2 (CAO) exhibiting a bandgap of ∼3.75 eV and hole mobility of ∼3.6 cm2 V−1 s−1519 is one of them. However, CAO, possessing decent optical transparency and thermal/chemical stability, has processing issues due to the need for high-temperature processing to gain pure polycrystalline delafossite form, and the complex Al chemistry prohibits the efficient synthesis of nanostructures. However, its amorphous phase, which provides a band gap of ∼3.86 eV, has attracted attention due to its nonreactive behaviour with ITO or other HTL materials during deposition. Therefore, Igbari et al.520 introduced magnetron-sputtered CAO thin films below a PEDOT:PSS HTL in planar PSCs. The variation in the thickness of the CAO film tailored the energy level alignment and reduced the charge transfer resistance at the HTL/perovskite interface, which yielded an optimized PCE of ∼14.52% and stable performance with efficiency retention of 90% over 250 h in the ambient atmosphere without encapsulation. Further, the incorporation of 23% CuO in the uniformly distributed CAO nanoparticles enhanced the electrical conductivity, which further reduced the interfacial charge recombination and induced faster charge collection to render a higher PCE of 16.3%. Recently, PANI introduced during the electro-spray process to form a CAO/polyaniline (PANI) composite film delivered an ∼5% larger efficiency for the optimized wt% of CAO (i.e., 0.1%) than pure PANI film.521 The addition of PANI improved the interconnectivity between the CAO nanoparticles, enabling the conformal film coating of a CAO HTL, and enhanced the hole conduction into the organic polymer. Nevertheless, the excessive aggregation of CAO induced high surface roughness and increased the series resistance by segregating the CAO and polymer.
CuCrO2 (i.e., CCO) is another delafossite material with a hole mobility of 0.1–1 cm2 V−1 s−1, valence band maximum of −5.3 eV w.r.t. the vacuum level, and a bandgap of 3.1 eV,519 which can offer the tuning of the energy levels by altering the phase composition. Low-temperature solution-processed CCO nanocrystals demonstrated a PCE of ∼19% as HTLs in PSCs and acted as an excellent UV inhibitor, protecting the perovskite absorber from UV-induced degradation.522 Although DFT analysis proposed the formation of distinct hexagonal 2H (space group P63/mmc) and rhombohedral 3R (space group Rm) polytypes of CCO, both are stable and deliver identical optoelectronic properties.523 Besides the inverted device structure, CCO nanoparticles were utilized with a triple cation perovskite light absorber to form a highly stable n–i–p structure, exhibiting an efficiency of 16%.524 A bigger VB offset does not favour hole transfer, whereas a lower electron affinity favours electron-blocking. Therefore, Qin et al.525 employed different Cu/Cr ratios to modulate the energy levels and phase composition of a CCO film to improve the hole-collection and electron-blocking ability. These Cr-terminated polar CCO films achieved a respectable PCE of 17.19% (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic, (b) J–V characteristics under illumination, and (c) a cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs consisting of CuyCrzO2 film. (d) Band energy level diagram of PSCs comprised of CuyCrzO2 HTL in various volume ratios of y:z = 1:0, 4:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, and 0:1.525 Reprinted with permission from (Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700058). Copyright (2017), John Wiley & Sons. 
Yang et al.526 introduced an azeotropic-promoted doping approach for CCO to explore cost-effective commercialization aspects. The d–d excitation of the Cr3+ cations at the oxygen octahedrons of the delafossite structure causes the low transparency of CCO. The replacement of Cr3+ by In3+ (i.e., doping) decreases the absorption of d-d and improves the conductivity (i.e., carrier mobility) and transmittance of CCO, which are beneficial for solar-light harvesting and hole transport, and consequently an impressive PCE of 20.54% was achieved. Furthermore, considering the band alteration due to the doping of metallic elements, Mg has also been introduced in CCO. The smaller ionic radius of Mg than Cr overlaps the Cu d-orbitals by reducing the Cu–Cu bond distance, resulting in improved charge mobility and conductivity, which produces an efficiency close to 13%.527
CuGaO2 (i.e., CGO) is also a prominent HTL material with high carrier mobility (∼10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a bandgap of ∼3.58 eV, furnishing a well-matched energy level with perovskite absorbers.519 However, the aggregation of CGO results in a larger particle size, which is incapable of enabling the formation of a compact pinhole-free film, hindering its use as an HTL. Therefore, a surfactant such as Pluronic 123 was utilized to synthesize CGO nanoparticles with a diameter of <10 nm.528 Moreover, the use of CGO with CuSCN improved the PCE to 16% by reducing the trap density of cells.529 Besides the increased efficiency, a bilayer HTL was shown to offer high thermal stability, retaining 80% of the initial efficiency after exposure to a temperature of 85 °C and 85% relative humidity (RH) condition (encapsulated) for 400 h. Furthermore, Zn2+ doping (i.e., 5%) enhanced the hole mobility of pristine CGO (i.e., from 3.81 × 10−2 to 1.39 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1), which yielded an efficiency of ∼20% and high inertness to humidity and temperature.530 Chen et al.531 reported the development of mesoscopic inverted device structures utilizing compact NiOx and CGO mesoporous layers. The graded band alignment formed at the HTL with compact NiOx and mesoporous CGO was shown to enable higher hole extraction, leading to an efficiency of ∼19%. Further, solution-processed CGO nanoplates were coated on the perovskite absorber to form an n–i–p device structure, effectively lowering the monomolecular Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination and providing a PCE of ∼18%.363 Recently, a 3D hybrid HTL consisting of Cr-doped CGO nanoplates and NiO nanoparticles yielded a PCE of ∼20%. The nanoplates acted as expressways for hole extraction, whereas the ultrafine NiO nanoparticles modified the surface properties.532
Besides delafossite materials, various inorganic materials such as CuS, FeS2, CuZnS, and CZTS have been investigated for their application as HTLs in PSCs. The use of CuS nanoparticles uniformly deposited on ITO without compromising the roughness and transmittance of the ITO substrate resulted in an efficiency of ∼16% with CH3NH3PbI3 as the light absorber, although its VOC was limited to ∼0.8 V due to the considerable offsets in valence band levels at the CuS/perovskite interface.533 High hole mobility CuS nanoparticles have been incorporated in carbon to form a CuS/C composite HTL and improved the hole mobility.534 Moreover, digenite CuZnS nanocrystals were formed by partially replacing Cu with Zn in the covellite CuS structure and tested as HTLs in PSCs. The ternary CuZnS material showcased its potential as an HTL by yielding an efficiency of ∼18%.535 High-purity kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanocrystals as an inorganic HTM with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite achieved an efficiency of ∼15% and remarkable FF of 81%.536 Further, quantum dots of CZTS as HTLs were tested with all-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite absorbers, showing a promising efficiency of ∼5%.537 The thickness of the light-absorbing CZTS HTLs in inverted PSCs plays a prominent role in controlling the irradiation over the perovskite light absorber.538 Interestingly, numerical simulations have identified the plausible tailorability of the Cu2Zn(Sn1−xGex)S4 bandgap and band offsets at the perovskite/HTL interface through the partial replacement of Sn with Ge (i.e., x = 0.8) and predicted a theoretical efficiency of ∼20% in combination with CH3NH3PbI3 as a light absorber.539 Koo et al.540 observed an efficiency of ∼13% with octadecylamine-capped FeS2 nanoparticles, preventing moisture attack in the perovskite light absorber, thereby retaining stability for 1000 h. Further, the hole quenching capacity of iron pyrite FeS2 is comparable to that of the benchmark spiro-OmeTAD, but its efficiency is not higher to the defect-mediated recombination at the FeS2/perovskite interface, where low-energy photons are left largely unutilized with non-productive recombination events taking place.541 Although FeS2 is 300 times cheaper than spiro-OmeTAD, its inefficient hole collection needs to be improved by using a capping ligand. Moreover, a wide bandgap p-type quaternary chalcogenide Cu2BaSnS4 semiconductor having favourable band alignment with a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite light absorber and high carrier mobility (∼10 cm2 V−1 s−1) was shown to exhibit an efficiency of 10% in inverted PSCs.542 Similarly, spinel oxides of Ni, Co, Cu, etc. (such as CuCo2O4 and NiCo2O4) have been explored as HTLs in PSCs due to their high electrical conductivity, high optical transparency in the UV-Vis-NIR region, and well-matched energy levels to the perovskite absorber.543,544 The low-temperature solution-processable monodispersed spinel NiCo2O4 oxide nanoparticles synthesized via a combustion method show high electrical conductivity (∼4 S cm−1) and low roughness (0.56 nm), delivering an efficiency of ∼15% for the optimized film thickness of 15 nm with higher transmittance and better charge collection.545 Likewise, various doping strategies543 have been explored to investigate the practicality of spinel NiCo2O4 as HTLs in PSCs. Thus, besides the traditional inorganic HTLs used in PSCs, various combinations of pristine novel p-type materials need to be tested for their hole quenching capabilities.

5.2. Organic HTLS
Several organic HTMs previously used in DSSCs and organic bulk heterojunction solar cells, which satisfy the requirements of PSCs, have been tested as HTLs to improve the performance. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is one of the widely used organic small molecule p-type semiconductors and dominant solid-state HTLs in PSCs. The large bandgap (about 3 eV) with a deep HOMO level of spiro-OMeTAD located at −5.2 eV eases the acceptor transport from most of the perovskite absorbers to the external contact.546 Although spiro-OMeTAD has been proven to be the best HTM with good thermal stability owing to its high melting temperature, it suffers from poor conductivity (6 × 10−5 mS cm−1) and hole mobility (2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1).547 Thus, different strategies have been employed to deal with these issues, as follows: (a) doping to improve the conductivity together with hole mobility and to expedite the oxidation process; (b) designing novel synthesis processes to improve the film quality, coverage, and avoid pinholes; and (c) controlling the defects and hydrophobic nature at the interface. Butyl pyridine (TBP) and lithium salt (LiTFSI) are the most common dopants that increase the hole mobility of spiro-OMeTAD,81 but PSCs suffer from low stability with the introduction of the hygroscopic lithium. The doping of CuSCN and CuI in spiro-OMeTAD reduced the amount of pinholes and improved its crystallinity, which protected the perovskite absorber from humidity and exhibited an efficiency of ∼18%.548 However, spiro-OMeTAD suffers from complicated synthesis and is ∼20 times more expensive than gold.549 Recently, a mixture of PbS/spiro-OMeTAD and potassium persulfate (KPS)-doped spiro-OMeTAD HTLs exhibited a PCE of above 20%.550,551
Likewise, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is a typical choice as an HTL for inverted PSCs (p–i–n type), which shows high optical transparency in the visible region and exhibits the HOMO level of −5.3 eV, matching well with the perovskite. Unfortunately, PEDOT:PSS in its pristine form suffers from low conductivity (10−3 S cm−1), poor hole mobility, and hygroscopic and acidic nature.552,553 Thus, to overcome these issues, PEDOT:PSS is either treated with a dimethylformamide (DMF)/methanol mixture or annealed with non-polar vapours of toluene, which improves its conductivity, reduces its trap state density, and facilitates smooth charge transfer at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface, resulting in an improved PCE than the pristine HTL.553,554 Separately, the development of a PEDOT:PSS toluene-based ink coated over the perovskite absorber in the conventional planar (n–i–p type) device architecture has attracted attention from the scientific and industrial community.555 The absorbance of PEDOT films is very low in the UV-visible region, causing less parasitic losses during the second pass through the perovskite layer and resulting in an increased photocurrent with a PCE of 14.5% (Fig. 31). Further, the addition of island-like GeO2 particles in PEDOT:PSS film served well as growth sites for perovskite absorbers with better crystallinity,556 resulting in a PCE of ∼15%. Furthermore, different doping materials such as WO3, EMIC (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride), CuSCN, and 3-(cyclohexylamino)-2-hydroxy-1-propane sulfonic acid (CAPSO) have been employed to achieve the required electronic and optical properties at the PEDOT:PPS HTL/perovskite interface.516,552,557,558
 Fig. 31  (a) Absorbance spectra of ∼230 nm-thick PEDOT films (red circles) and ∼280 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD films doped with Li-TFSI (blue triangles) deposited on glass. (b) Steady-state PL spectra and (c) time-resolved PL decay exited at 507 nm of perovskite films coated with PMMA (black squares), PEDOT (red circles), and spiro-OMeTAD (blue triangles), respectively.555 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1666–1673). Copyright (2015), the American Chemical Society. 
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has been recommended as a promising organic HTL due to its larger-area solution processability, excellent optoelectronic properties, good hole mobility (0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1),559 and hydrophobic surface (contact angle >100°)560 compared to other organic HTLs. Recently, Jung et al.559 employed P3HT as the HTL in PSCs and achieved a PCE of 22.7%, which retained 16% over a large area (25 cm2). The surface treatment of P3HT using a gallium-based ligand, i.e., gallium(III) acetylacetonate (Ga(acac)3), interacted with the defects on the perovskite layer and modified the P3HT/perovskite interface, resulting in PCE of 24%.561 Moreover, the comparative performance of spiro-OMeTAD, P3HT and 4-(diethylamino)-benzaldehyde diphenyl-hydrazone (DEH) as the HTL in PSCs showed a better light absorption for P3HT in the visible region compared to spiro-OMeTAD and DEH; besides, a negligible change in photon conversion efficiency.562 In addition, other organic HTLs such as poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)-amine] (PTAA),563 polyaniline doped with camphor sulfonic acid (PANI-CSA),564 and tetraphenyl benzidine and MeO-triphenylamine (TPB-n-MOTPA) have been employed in PSCs as alternative organic HTLs.
Although the overall efficiency of PSCs generally increases with the use of organic HTLs, their high cost, requirement of very high purity, complicated synthesis process in an inert atmosphere, hydrophilic nature of the surface, requirement of surface treatment, and long-term instability continue to be prime concerns. The stability of the devices is reduced drastically due to the use of hygroscopic dopants, which triggers the degradation of the perovskite layer. In the future, these drawbacks need to be targeted to develop effective strategies for easy processing in the ambient atmosphere.
Similar to ETLs, numerous HTLs have delivered high PCEs despite their distinct electrical, optical, and interfacial properties. HTLs have tailored the device performance and efficiency when utilized with different perovskite coating layers in PSCs. The highest efficiencies proclaimed in the most prominent recent reports from a variety of HTLs are shown in Fig. 27. The initial ∼6% efficiency reported for PSCs utilizing oxides of Ni Cu, Co, and V as HTLs to from an HTL/perovskite heterojunction has recently been boosted to ∼23% (Fig. 32) with their advancement in terms of doping, co-doping, composite formation, decoration, etc. A brief summary of the inorganic HTLs processed with various synthesis methods and their corresponding device performance parameters are provided in Table 2. Therefore, the future development of novel HTLs should be explored, focusing on enhanced PCE and sustainable and cost-effective device designs. Finally, the easy, quick, low cost and low-temperature processing of each of the layers of PSCs is an extremely important and decisive consideration for the commercialization of this technology. Therefore, alternative methods are desirable to explore for the cost-effective processing of various HTLs in the ambient atmosphere. Besides, a significant variation in the device performance can be observed when the devices are tested for a small area and scaled to large-area devices. The uniform interface over a larger area is a major concern, which affects the performance and stability of the device under testing. In this scenario, there is plenty space for investigation and finding new materials and processing methods for HTLs, to bring the commercialization of this technology one step closer.
 Fig. 32  Comparative study of the influential HTLs developed by year to gain the best maximum efficiency in the last decade (collected from ISI Web of Knowledge up to 31st December 2021).574 
Table 2 A brief summary of inorganic HTLs processed with various synthesis methods and their corresponding device performance parameters




S. no.
Device configuration
Methoda

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Year
Ref.





a SC = spin coating, CP = chemical or co-precipitation method, RFS = RF sputtering, DCS = DC sputtering, SP = screen printing, ST = solvothermal, HT = hydrothermal, ED = electrochemical deposition, IBS = ion beam sputtering, ES = electro-spinning, LEP = ligand exchange process, TE = thermal evaporation, SBND = smart bottle neck deposition, DC = drop casting, VI = vapour iodization, PPT = powder press technique, DipC = dip coating, S = spray, and C = combustion.





Nickel oxide (NiO)


1.
ITO/NiOx/TPA-BA/PC61BM/BCP/Au
SC
1.15
23.36
0.829
22.25
2022

570



2.
FTO/S-NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Au
SC
1.13
22.56
0.78
19.91
2022

578



3.
ITO/NiOx/Cs0.5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PS-PAN/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cr/Au
SC
1.12
23.51
0.836
22.02
2021

569



4.
ITO/NiOx/RT-MAPb(I1−xClx)3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.16
23.52
0.847
23.07
2020

568



5.
ITO/Al:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/am-TiO2/Ag
SC
1.06
24.34
0.813
20.84
2020

403



6.
FTO/c-TiO2/Al2O3/FA0.026MA0.974PbI3−yCly-Cu:NiO/spiro-OMETAD/Au
CP/SC
1.05
24.51
0.805
20.67
2020

388



7.
FTO/Ni2O3/MA0.85FA0.15PbI0.9Cl0.1/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.06
19.66
0.826
17.89
2020

385



8.
ITO/Li:CO-NiO/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/PC61BM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.09
23.8
0.78
20.1
2019

409



9.
FTO/NiO NCs/mp-NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Au
ST
1.11
22.20
0.741
18.17
2019

579



10.
FTO/NiO/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/PCBM/BCP/Ag
C
1.12
23.7
0.76
20.2
2018

381



11.
ITO/Ag:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.08
19.70
0.783
16.86
2018

394



12.
FTO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
RFS
1.05
20.57
0.752
16.29
2018

580



13.
FTO/Cs:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZrAcac/Ag
SC
1.12
21.77
0.793
19.35
2017

400



14.
FTO/c-TiO2/NiO NTs + CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMETAD/Au
ES
1.12
22.7
0.752
19.3
2017

581



15.
FTO/NiMgOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnMgO/Al
DCS
1.08
21.3
0.79
18.2
2017

404



16.
ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
SC
1.07
20.58
0.748
16.47
2016

567



17.
ITO/Cu:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/bis-C60/Ag
C
1.05
22.23
0.76
17.74
2015

566



18.
ITO/Cu:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/C60/Ag
CP
1.12
19.17
0.73
15.4
2015

582



19.
ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al
RFS
1.00
17.4
0.61
10.7
2014

565







Cobalt oxide (CoOx)


20.
ITO/Zn,Li+:CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
0.93
19.7
0.639
11.64
2021

583



21.
ITO/Li–Co3O4/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Ag
SC
1.04
20.66
0.65
13.96
2020

444



22.
FTO/CoO/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PCBM/Ag
LEP
0.99
18.9
0.572
10.1
2020

447



23.
ITO/TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CoO/spiro-OMETAD/Au
ST
1.18
23.19
0.757
20.70
2019

448



24.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/ZrO2/Co3O4/C
CP
0.88
23.43
0.64
13.27
2018

442



25.
FTO/Co1−yCuyOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
DCS
0.93
17.98
0.599
9.98
2017

441



26.
FTO/Ni:CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
DCS
0.99
15.96
0.607
9.63
2017

584



27.
ITO/CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
SC
0.95
20.28
0.755
14.5
2016

440







Copper oxide (CuOx)


28.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuO/C
SC
0.83
16.98
0.55
7.75
2022

575



29.
ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
RFS
1.06
27.14
0.786
22.56
2021

464



30.
ITO/NiOx/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au
SC
1.12
22.29
0.783
19.91
2021

462



31.
ITO/SnO2/CsFAMA/Cu2O-CuSCN/Au
SC
1.05
23.23
0.784
19.2
2020

469



32.
FTO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/SiO2/GZO/Ag
RFS
1.12
20.90
0.786
18.4
2020

466



33.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05MA0.14FA0.81PbI2.55Br0.45/Cu2O/Au
SC
1.15
22.2
0.742
18.9
2019

467



34.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Cu2O/Au
SC
1.13
22.53
0.673
17.23
2019

465



35.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Cu2O/Ag
IBS
1.03
22.46
0.741
17.11
2018

459



36.
ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/ZnO/Al
SC
1.03
22.42
0.76
17.43
2017

452



37.
ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
SC
0.99
23.2
0.744
17.1
2016

461



38.
ITO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Ag
RFS
0.95
17.5
0.662
11.03
2016

453



39.
ITO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Al
DipC
1.07
16.52
0.755
13.35
2015

361





ITO/CuO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Al


1.06
15.82
0.725
12.16










Vanadium oxide (VOx)


40.
ITO/Cs-VOx/PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.08
22.47
0.79
19.64
2021

577



41.
ITO/PTAA/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/LiF/Al
SC
1.12
22.65
0.75
18.9
2021

427



42.
ITO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Al
RFS
1.00
20.7
0.66
13.66
2021

421



43.
ITO/SnO2/PCBA/CsFAPbI3/MAI/PTAA/VOx/Ag
TE
1.044
24.6
0.78
20.1
2020

430



44.
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEDOT:PSS-VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/LiF/Al
SC
1.02
22.98
0.77
18.0
2020

416



45.
ITO/V2O5:PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/PDINO/Al
SC
0.80
16.83
0.701
9.44
2020

437



46.
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al
SC
0.969
20.3
0.722
14.22
2019

418



47.
FTO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al
SC
0.99
20.98
0.761
16.06
2018

576



48.
FTO/TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/NiPc-(OBu)8/V2O5/Au
SC
1.07
23.0
0.728
17.9
2017

438



49.
ITO/VOx/APPA/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Ag
SC
0.96
19.42
0.752
14.07
2017

424



50.
ITO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al
SC
0.90
22.29
0.71
14.23
2016

417







Copper iodide (CuI)


51.
ITO/SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/CuI/PDMS/Au
SP
0.795
19.3
0.538
8.3
2022

573



52.
ITO/CuI/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/carbon
ED
1.10
20.26
0.78
20.35
2021

572



53.
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al
SC
0.977
23.13
0.737
16.65
2021

487



54.
FTO/CuSCN@CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/carbon
ED
1.08
18.24
0.79
15.58
2021

585



55.
PTTA/CuI/FA0.05MA0.95PbI3/PCBM/C60–N/Ag
SC
1.057
24.8
0.77
20.34
2020

488



56.
FTO/CuI/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Cu
SC
0.75
28.5
0.737
15.75
2020

479



57.
ITO/CuI/HaP/PCBM/AZO/Ag
SC
0.99
19.39
0.74
14.21
2020

480



58.
FTO/Cu@CuI//PCBM/ZnO/Ag
SC
1.06
23.31
0.761
18.80
2019

486



59.
FTO/NiO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.07
20.60
0.69
15.26
2019

489



60.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x/CuI/Pt-FTO
PPT
0.67
24.23
0.50
8.1
2019

476



61.
ITO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxPC61BM/PEI/Ag
SC
1.05
20.05
0.69
14.53
2018

571





ITO/CuI/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxPC61BM/PEI/Ag


1.11
22.33
0.76
18.76






62.
ITO/Cu(Tu)I–CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/C60/BCP/Ag
SC
1.12
22.3
0.798
20.0
2017

491



63.
FTO/Na–TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/
S
1.03
22.78
0.75
17.6
2017

478



64.
FTO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/PEI/Ag
VI
1.04
20.9
0.68
14.7
2017

484



65.
ITO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
SC
1.01
22.9
0.728
16.8
2016

485



66.
ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/CuI/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
SC
1.06
21.52
0.73
16.67
2016

548



67.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Au
TE
0.73
32.72
0.31
7.40
2016

481



68.
FTO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al
SC
1.04
21.06
0.62
13.58
2015

482



69.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Au
DC
0.55
17.8
0.62
6.0
2014

477







Copper thiocyanate (CuSCN)


70.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au
SC
0.981
23.77
0.724
16.89
2022

586



71.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au
SC
0.93
17.2
0.63
10.1
2022

587



72.
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsBr/CuSCN/Au
SC
1.05
12.3
0.76
9.96
2022

588



73.
ITO/SnO2/FA1−yMAyPbBr3−xIx/CuSCN/DTB/Au
SC
1.15
24.31
0.786
21.7
2020

510



74.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au
SC
0.83
22.15
0.60
11.02
2020

589



75.
FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/CuSCN/Au
SBND
1.074
23.17
0.756
18.74
2019

590



76.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PSC-CuSCN/Au
SC
1.068
22.85
0.761
18.57
2019

512



77.
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/CuSCN/ITO
SC
0.978
20.2
0.721
14.2
2019

591



78.
ITO/r-GO/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.031
18.21
0.761
14.28
2018

592



79.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au
S
1.013
23.10
0.731
17.10
2017

500



80.
ITO/3D-CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Bphen/Ag
ED
0.92
19.45
0.69
11.89
2017

505





ITO/2D-CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Bphen/Ag


0.82
18.56
0.61
9.19










Other inorganic HTLs


81.
ITO/CuBr/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60-N/Ag
SC
1.03
23.15
0.738
17.65
2022

593



82.
FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/CuIn0.75Ga0.25S2/C
SC
1.08
23.86
0.62
15.93
2020

594



83.
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Fe3O4/Au
SC
1.13
19.29
0.71
15.42
2020

595



84.
FTO/NiCoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
SC
1.08
22.27
0.833
20.03
2019

596



85.
ITO/c-CuCrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
HT
1.07
21.94
0.81
19.0
2018

522



86.
ITO/LiCoO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
RFS
1.06
22.5
0.8
18.88
2018

445



87.
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/CuGaO2/Au
HT
1.11
21.66
0.77
18.51
2017

363



88.
ITO/CuAlO2/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ag
DCS
0.88
21.98
0.75
14.52
2016

520





6. Summary and outlook
The past few years have witnessed the significant role of the transport layers on the performance of PSCs and a notable upshot among the PSC devices. Some of the important features attracting researchers in this area are the cost-effective synthesis procedures, use of solar energy, engineering compatibility of ETLs and HTLs, altering the carrier mobility, band edge alignment, carrier concentration, conductivity, optical transparency, and other optoelectronic properties of the transport layers, effects of trap states, dopant and defects on the device performance, charge transport and recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface, etc. Nevertheless, the most essential is the development of ideal transport layers.
Both organic and inorganic PSCs have shown promise to meet future energy demands. Unlike 3D perovskites predominantly suffering from instability, low-dimensional well-oriented perovskites may exhibit enhanced long-term stability. However, other supporting layers utilized with bulk and low-dimensional perovskites can alter the performance and stability of PSCs. Among the layers, the transport layers play a crucial role in maintaining and efficiently separating the photogenerated charge carriers and further boosting the solar efficiency and long-term stability. Engineering compatible transport layers with the perovskite light absorbers is essential given that the ETLs and HTLs perform peculiar functionalities depending on the adopted device architecture. Therefore, understanding the intrinsic properties of the transport layers, namely, the electronic band edge alignment, optical transparency, charge conductivity, and charge mobility, is fundamental for developing efficient PSCs. Among the plethora of material systems that can be used as transport layers in PSCs, the ideal transport layers should also be cost-effective with easy processing. Consequently, the research trend reveals that well-organized approaches to develop distinct transport layers will complement the improvement in overall solar cell efficiency, but the search for ideal transport layers is a never-ending process.
In this review, we summarized the evolution of the transport layers analogous to the progress of PSCs based on the observations and discussions in the literature. Although the perovskite light absorbers have shown superior optoelectronic properties, the importance of the transport layers in PSCs was explained parallel to the photoanodes and electrolytes used in DSSCs. Additionally, the transport layers are distinguished based on the filled states as n-type (ETL) and p-type (HTL) to gain deeper insight. In the regular n–i–p device structures, besides the band edge and bandgap alignment with the perovskite light absorbers, the ETLs provide a template for perovskite deposition and blocking UV irradiation, which deteriorate the perovskite light absorber. The compatible electron mobilities of the ETL with perovskite absorbers and conductivity of electrons in ETLs have become the detrimental factor in avoiding charge accumulation and charge recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface. The techniques such as nanostructuring, doping, and faceting used to tackle the charge accumulation and recombination were explained w.r.t. the majorly reported inorganic ETLs. The role of cost-effective synthetic procedures used for developing efficient inorganic ETLs and their feasibility in large-scale production were correlated with the PCEs. Furthermore, different inorganic materials reported as ETLs for PSCs were scrutinized depending on their functionalities, synthetic procedures, and electrical and optical properties. The inorganic ETLs initially delivered an efficiency of 3–9%, but reached the milestone of ∼26%. Among the ETLs, employing doped TiO2 ETLs has shown efficiencies of ∼25% and created excitement among researchers. However, their application on plastic substrates is limited by their high processing temperature. Furthermore, the ZnO ETLs contribute to the deprotonation of the perovskite light absorbers. Although SnO2 ETLs have shown chemical stability and high efficiency with low-temperature processing, understanding their trap states will be beneficial to further tailor the properties towards ideal ETLs. Furthermore, ternary metal oxides need to be engineered as ETLs with better controllability over their optoelectronic properties. The scaffolding technique has been used to prevent shunting paths in PSCs, and thereby increase the VOC. The diverse materials and their composites or combinations that can be used as ETLs in PSCs were discussed. Also, the extensively used organic ETLs in PSCs were compared for a comprehensive understanding. Overall, the ETLs have a direct influence on the efficiency of PSCs.
Conversely, there is an urgent need to replace the expensive hygroscopic organic HTLs employed in high-efficiency PSCs to increase their long-term stability and reduce their cost. Therefore, the importance of the HTL depending on the PSC device architecture was discussed in depth. Analogous to ETLs, HTLs perform similar functionalities w.r.t. the transport of photogenerated holes. Thus, the various techniques such as nanostructuring, doping, and forming composites used in PSCs were summarized. Inorganic HTLs such as NiO have achieved efficiency close to 22% in PSCs due to their well-aligned band edges and bandgap with perovskite light absorbers. Similarly, CoOx as an HTL has shown promise due to its high hole conductivity. The synthetic protocols, nanostructuring, and hole-quenching capabilities of multiple combinations of Cu-based HTLs such as CuO, Cu2O, CuSCN, and CuI are yet to be explored for a deep understanding. Although there are several reports based on VOx as an HTL in PSCs, doped and nanostructured VOx are yet to be explored. Further, the class of materials known as delafossites was briefly presented for their controllability over hole conductivity and ease of processibility. Finally, the most commonly used organic HTLs and their influence on the efficiency and long-term stability of PSCs were compared.
Overall, all the materials reported as transport layers were scrutinized based on their optoelectronic properties, stability, durability, and charge separation at the perovskite interface with the transport layer. Furthermore, in this review, the efficiency of PSCs was comparatively evaluated based on only their transport layers. The ETLs and corresponding HTLs play a significant role in the overall performance of PSCs and vice versa. However, to gain better efficiency, the quality of the perovskite light absorber films used and the active device area should be considered during further studies. The systematic investigation of different transport layers and involved material systems interpret that an ideal ETL in the n–i–p device structure should have a band-edged and bandgap alignment with the perovskite light absorbers, should possess compatible electron mobilities and conductivities with the perovskite light absorbers, and should be easily processible at low temperatures with no toxicity at a low-cost. Moreover, the increased effective interface at nanostructured ETL/perovskite (mesoporous structure) can relatively enhance the free-electron transport. Further, the synthesized films should have no pinholes and be easily scaled up with high reproducibility. Conversely, ideal HTLs should perform similar functions as ETLs for hole transport depending on the device architecture.
The outlook for ideal transport layers is presented here.
(a) Tailoring the carrier mobility, band edge levels, and diffusion lengths is a promising approach to achieve ideal ETLs/HTLs.
(b) The physical vapor deposition techniques such as ALD, sputtering, and PLD are feasible for the industrial production of the transport layers. However, one should look for industrially scalable low-temperature processing techniques for the easy and reasonable deposition of ETL/HTL encompassing non-toxic and naturally abundant materials in the ambient atmosphere. Novel low-temperature processing or synthesis can bring out uniform coating, leading to firm interfaces between different materials, which is necessary to avoid unfavourable effects at interfaces, defect state, and interfacial losses such as light socking effect and charge recombination.
(c) Precise engineering of the transport layer with minimum lattice mismatch, better chemical stability, excellent light management, and non-hygroscopic nature is mandatory to reduce defects and alterations in the intrinsic property of the perovskite active layer.
(d) The quest should be continued to explore new inorganic transport layers with higher p- and n-type conductivity and compatibility with the perovskite solution process deposition method. Moreover, the decoration, doping, faceting, and composites of promising materials identified as ETL/HTL will assist in electron/hole mobility matching, enhancing the light absorption, and improving the recombination resistance, and therefore, enhance the charge extraction. Hence, various combinations of 3d transition metals, graphene, noble metal nanoparticles, organic molecules, etc. should be explored in line with further advancement.
(e) Numerical simulation and first-principles calculations can help to understand the density of states, charge accumulation, flow of charge carriers, defect density, optical transparency, optimized thickness, band edge, and photo/thermal stability of the transport layers, which will open up a new window for efficient charge separation, overcoming the issues of photo-reactivity and interface defects, and improving the sensitivity in the visible spectrum. The additional direction of theoretical work should focus on the intrinsic modification and electronic alterations at the transport layer-perovskite interface where experiments are complicated and require simulation-assisted experiments. Furthermore, theoretical methods such as first-principles calculations, DFT, and ab initio calculations are necessary to give directions towards less known families of materials that can be applied as transport layers of PSCs.
(f) The industrial focus is on the preparation of planar ETLs and HTLs using physical/chemical vapor deposition methods due to ease of reproducibility and commercial viabilities. However, mesoporous 3D nanostructures provide a larger surface area and better interface with the perovskite absorber layer, have secured a place in the best efficiency chart, and need to be explored for their utilization in the cost-effective mass production of PSCs.
(g) Among the explored nanostructures such as 0D, 1D, and 2D, 1D ETLs and HTLs provide a larger aspect ratio and deliver excellent light trapping deep inside the perovskite absorber and ensure relatively enhanced charge conduction, and hence enhanced efficiency. However, the large-area production of well-defined 1D nanostructures and their better interface with the perovskite absorber needs to be explored for pilot production.
Overall, the paths for the finest optimization of the device structure and successful commercialization of PSCs entail the complete understanding of the transport layers and the charge extraction mechanism.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to conceptualization and writing of this review article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
SBO acknowledges funding support under the UK-India SUNRISE project. RSD and PAS would like to thank the UGC-DAE CSR, Indore, and SERB-DST, India, for their financial support of this work under grant No. CRS/2021-22/01/428 and TAR/2019/000106, respectively. V. M. and S. B. acknowledges the Institute Fellowship from IIT Indore for doctoral research work.
References
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
E. Kabir, P. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. A. Adelodun and K.-H. Kim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 894–900 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, H. Mehrvarz, F.-J. Ma, Y. Jiang, X. Deng, A. Soeriyadi, J. Kim, M. Zhang, L. Hu, X. Cui, D. S. Lee, J. Bing, Y. Cho, C. Chen, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2432–2443 RSC .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 RSC .
M. A. Green, Joule, 2019, 3, 631–633 CrossRef .
S. S. Mali, B. M. Patil, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale, Y. W. Oh, S. R. Jadkar, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 66, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Rondiya, Y. A. Jadhav, A. Zivkovic, S. B. Jathar, G. K. Rahane, R. W. Cross, A. V. Rokade, R. S. Devan, S. Kolekar, R. L. Z. Hoye, H. N. Ghosh, N. H. de Leeuw, S. R. Jadkar and N. Y. Dzade, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 890, 161575 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Bhat, A. V. Shinde, R. S. Devan, A. M. Teli, Y. R. Ma, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124, 34 CrossRef .
S. B. Pawar, J. S. Shaikh, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, D. Haranath, P. N. Bhosale and P. S. Patil, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 1869–1875 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pawar, R. S. Devan, D. S. Patil, A. V. Moholkar, M. G. Gang, Y. R. Ma, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 98, 244–254 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pawar, D. S. Patil, S. K. Patil, D. V. Awale, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, S. S. Kolekar, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 148, 310–316 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Bagnall and M. Boreland, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4390–4396 CrossRef .
H. W. Hillhouse and M. C. Beard, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 245–259 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shalini, R. Balasundara Prabhu, S. Prasanna, T. K. Mallick and S. Senthilarasu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 51, 1306–1325 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, D. Y. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, N. T. P. Hartono, Z. D. Ren, F. Oviedo, A. M. Buscemi, M. Layurova, D. X. Chen, T. Ogunfunmi, J. Thapa, S. Ramasamy, C. Settens, B. L. DeCost, A. G. Kusne, Z. Liu, S. I. P. Tian, I. M. Peters, J.-P. Correa-Baena and T. Buonassisi, Joule, 2019, 3, 1437–1451 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, X. Meng and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701883 CrossRef .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 RSC .
S. S. Mali and C. K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10528–10540 RSC .
A. R. Pascoe, M. J. Yang, N. Kopidakis, K. Zhu, M. O. Reese, G. Rumbles, M. Fekete, N. W. Duffy and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 439–452 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef .
J. Kim, K. S. Kim and C. W. Myung, npj Comput. Mater., 2020, 6, 100 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, J. Wu, C. Jiang, T. H. Liu, X. L. Que, R. Zhu and Q. H. Gong, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10161–10167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, L. P. Heiniger, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2591–2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Karthikeyan, S. Maniarasu, V. Manjunath, E. Ramasamy and G. Veerappan, Sol. Energy, 2017, 147, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, G. Garcia-Belmonte, R. Jose and I. Mora-Sero, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700623 CrossRef .
K.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Jeng, P.-S. Shen, Y.-C. Chang, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-H. Tsai, T.-Y. Chao, H.-C. Hsu, P.-Y. Lin, P. Chen, T.-F. Guo and T.-C. Wen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4756 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Manjunath, P. K. Mishra, R. Dobhal, S. Bimli, P. M. Shirage, S. Sen, P. A. Shaikh and R. S. Devan, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 4548–4557 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 RSC .
V. M. Le Corre, M. Stolterfoht, L. Perdigón Toro, M. Feuerstein, C. Wolff, L. Gil-Escrig, H. J. Bolink, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6280–6287 CrossRef CAS .
G.-S. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, C.-T. Lee and H.-Y. Lee, Sol. Energy, 2018, 174, 897–900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Byeon, J. Kim, J.-Y. Kim, G. Lee, K. Bang, N. Ahn and M. Choi, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2580–2589 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Nimens, J. Ogle, A. Caruso, M. Jonely, C. Simon, D. Smilgies, R. Noriega, M. Scarpulla and L. Whittaker-Brooks, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 602–615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, X. Xu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Small, 2015, 11, 2472–2486 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Li, Y. Li, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Joule, 2018, 2, 879–901 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, B. H. Babu, S. Wu, T. Liu, S. Fang, Z. Xiong, L. Han and W. Chen, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900257 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, J. S. Park, H.-K. Jeong, K. S. Son, T. S. Kim, J.-B. Seon, E. Lee, J. G. Chung, D. H. Kim, M. Ryu and S. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5416–5421 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 RSC .
M. F. N. Taufique, R. Khanal, S. Choudhury and S. Banerjee, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 149, 164704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Gharahcheshmeh and K. K. Gleason, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 8, 100086 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 115502 CrossRef .
S. Jung, C.-H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 395103 CrossRef .
H. F. Haneef, A. M. Zeidell and O. D. Jurchescu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 759–787 RSC .
J.-P. Yang, L.-T. Shang, F. Bussolotti, L.-W. Cheng, W.-Q. Wang, X.-H. Zeng, S. Kera, Y.-Q. Li, J.-X. Tang and N. Ueno, Org. Electron., 2017, 48, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Scaccabarozzi, A. Basu, F. Aniés, J. Liu, O. Zapata-Arteaga, R. Warren, Y. Firdaus, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Lin, M. Campoy-Quiles, N. Koch, C. Müller, L. Tsetseris, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4420–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1428–1437 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chakraborty, H. Bhunia, S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 281, 121021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Teo, Z. Guo, Z. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Kamata, S. Hayase and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 518–526 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, J. An, F. Si, H. Xue, F. Tang and W. Li, J. Electron. Mater., 2021, 50, 2129–2136 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zardetto, B. L. Williams, A. Perrotta, F. Di Giacomo, M. A. Verheijen, R. Andriessen, W. M. M. Kessels and M. Creatore, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 30–55 RSC .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
P. Qin, M. Paulose, M. I. Dar, T. Moehl, N. Arora, P. Gao, O. K. Varghese, M. Gatzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Small, 2015, 11, 5533–5539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, J.-Y. Kim, H. J. Son, C.-H. Lee, S. S. Jang and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, B. Wu, R. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Hui, B.-W. Mao and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705596 CrossRef .
K. Jung, J. Lee, C. Im, J. Do, J. Kim, W.-S. Chae and M.-J. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2410–2417 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Jiang, Y. Wu, J. Guo, X. Kong, X. Wu, Y. Li, D. Zheng, S. Wu, X. Gao, Z. Hou, G. Zhou, Y. Chen, J.-M. Liu, K. Kempa and J. Gao, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900499 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Devan, R. A. Patil, J.-H. Lin and Y.-R. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3326–3370 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, S. S. Kolekar and P. S. Patil, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1920–1924 RSC .
S. S. Mali, S. K. Desai, S. S. Kalagi, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale, R. S. Devan, Y.-R. R. Ma and P. S. Patil, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6130–6136 RSC .
R. S. Devan, Y.-R. Ma, R. A. Patil and S.-M. Lukas, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 62218–62225 RSC .
P. N. Didwal, P. R. Chikate, P. K. Bankar, M. A. More and R. S. Devan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 2935–2941 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitchamsetti, R. S. Kalubarme, P. R. Chikate, C. J. Park, Y. R. Ma, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 6620–6626 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Didwal, K. S. Pawar, P. R. Chikate, A. C. Abhyankar, H. M. Pathan and R. S. Devan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 12446–12451 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pawar, R. S. Devan, D. S. Patil, V. V. Burungale, T. S. Bhat, S. S. Mali, S. W. Shin, J. E. Ae, C. K. Hong, Y. R. Ma, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 117, 470–479 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Devan, Y.-R. Ma, M. A. More, R. T. Khare, V. V. Antad, R. A. Patil, V. P. Thakare, R. S. Dhayal and L. Schmidt-Mende, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 98722–98729 RSC .
R. A. Patil, R. S. Devan, Y. Liou and Y.-R. Ma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Devan, V. P. Thakare, V. V. Antad, P. R. Chikate, R. T. Khare, M. A. More, R. S. Dhayal, S. I. Patil, Y.-R. Ma and L. Schmidt-Mende, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2925–2934 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, C. A. Betty, P. N. Bhosale, R. P. Panmand, B. B. Kale, S. R. Jadkar, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and C. K. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 666–672 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Pawar, D. S. Patil, U. T. Pawar, R. S. Devan, M. M. Karanjkar, Y. R. Ma, S. W. Shin, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 2595–2604 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jain, A. Mary, V. Manjunath, R. Sakla, R. S. Devan, D. A. Jose and A. R. Naziruddin, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2021, 5014–5023 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
G. K. Pinheiro, R. B. Serpa, L. V. de Souza, M. L. Sartorelli, F. T. Reis and C. R. Rambo, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 527, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, Z. Zhuang, S. Yang, W. Chen, L. Song, M. Ding, G. Xia, P. Du and J. Xiong, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 439–445 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ke, G. J. Fang, J. Wang, P. L. Qin, H. Tao, H. W. Lei, Q. Liu, X. Dai and X. Z. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15959–15965 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Shalan, S. Narra, T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno, X. Shi, H. P. Wu, M. M. Elshanawany, E. W. G. Diau and H. Misawa, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1533–1540 RSC .
J.-F. Li, Z.-L. Zhang, H.-P. Gao, Y. Zhang and Y.-L. Mao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19476–19482 RSC .
T. S. Bhat, R. S. Devan, S. S. Mali, A. S. Kamble, S. A. Pawar, I. Y. Kim, Y. R. Ma, C. K. Hong, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 4501–4511 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Hsieh, J. Yu, S.-P. Rwei, K.-F. Lin, Y.-C. Shih and L. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 659, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lin, Y. H. Su, H. W. Cho, P. Y. Kung, W. P. Liao and J. J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1119–1125 RSC .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. K. Park, J. Heo, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1541–1551 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kim, R. T. Haasch, D. H. Cao, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24310–24314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, Y. Sanehira, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 674–676 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Gao, S. W. Yang, L. Lei, S. D. Zhang, Q. P. Cao, J. J. Xie, J. Q. Li and Y. Liu, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 624–626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dharani, H. K. Mulmudi, N. Yantara, P. T. T. Trang, N. G. Park, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and P. P. Boix, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1675–1679 RSC .
P. Zhou, W. N. Li, T. H. Li, T. L. Bu, X. P. Liu, J. Li, J. He, R. Chen, K. P. Li, J. Zhao and F. Z. Huang, Micromachines, 2017, 8, 55 CrossRef .
D. Zhong, B. Cai, X. L. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. D. Xing, S. Miao, W. H. Zhang and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, C. Wang, K. K. Kondamareddy, N. Cheng, P. Liu, Y. Qiu, F. Qi, S. Kong, W. Liu and X.-Z. Zhao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5453–5462 CAS .
H. Lu, B. Gu and S. Fang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 880–885 RSC .
M. Thambidurai, H. A. Dewi, P. C. Harikesh, S. Foo, K. M. Muhammed Salim, N. Mathews and C. Dang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5847–5852 CrossRef .
W. Okada, T. Suga, K. Oyaizu, H. Segawa and H. Nishide, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2848–2853 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ren, W. Han, Z. Li, C. Liu, L. Shen and W. Guo, Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Chen, L. Tao, Y. Zhang and X. Zhou, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3255–3264 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Cui, Z. Wang, M. Rager, Y. Yang, Z. Zou, Z. L. Wang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Yang, L. Lu, W. Xiao, H. Wu, S. Xiong, J. Tang, C. Duan and Q. Bao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901964 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, T. J. Macdonald, C. J. Shearer, M. Bat-Erdene, Y. Wang, M. J. Biggs, I. P. Parkin, T. Nann and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600504 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Di, W. Li, F. Liu, L. Jiang, J. Li, X. Hao and H. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8520–8526 CrossRef CAS .
A. Apostolopoulou, D. Sygkridou, A. Rapsomanikis, A. N. Kalarakis and E. Stathatos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Cui and C. Shi, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 275, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thambidurai, F. Shini, J. Y. Kim, C. Lee and C. Dang, Mater. Lett., 2020, 274, 128003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagaoka, F. Ma, D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, M. S. Glaz, A. E. Colbert, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 669–675 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. Liu, Y. Zhu, Z. Ma, B. Liu, X. Miao, R. Ma and C. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 169, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Zhang, J. F. Li, X. L. Wang, J. Q. Qin, W. J. Shi, Y. F. Liu, H. P. Gao and Y. L. Mao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 13325–13330 RSC .
X. L. Wang, Z. L. Zhang, J. Q. Qin, W. J. Shi, Y. F. Liu, H. P. Gao and Y. L. Mao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 839–845 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, J. H. Liang, Y. L. Li, J. S. Luo, B. Shi, C. C. Wei, D. K. Zhang, B. Z. Li, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and X. D. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700008 CrossRef .
Y. M. Li, Y. Guo, Y. H. Li and X. F. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, C. Shi, K. Lv, C. Ying and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2576–2581 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, D. Xie, Z. Song, C. Liang, L. Xu, X. Qu, Y. Yao, D. Li, H. Zhai, K. Zheng, C. Cui and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22853–22861 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, I.-W. Choi, S. J. Choi, J. W. Song, S.-I. Mo, J.-H. An, Y. Jo, S. Ahn, S. K. Ahn, G.-H. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2021, 5, 659–672 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y. Y. Lee, H. W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y. C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N. G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 RSC .
W. M. Qiu, U. W. Paetzold, R. Gehlhaar, V. Smirnov, H. G. Boyen, J. G. Tait, B. Conings, W. M. Zhang, C. B. Nielsen, I. McCulloch, L. Froyen, P. Heremans and D. Cheyns, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22824–22829 RSC .
D. Yang, R. X. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Z. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 RSC .
Y. H. Chu, H. K. Cai, L. K. Huang, Z. X. Xing, Y. Y. Du, J. Ni, J. Li and J. J. Zhang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1800669 CrossRef .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, T. Jacobs, R. Dera, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, Appl. Mater., 2014, 2, 081505 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and J. You, Small, 2018, 14, 1801154 CrossRef .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li, J. Wan, G. Yang and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, L. Steier and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 342–350 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 RSC .
J.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Zhu, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, G. Yang, X. Zheng, H. Lei, C. Chen, J. Ma, H. Wang and G. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 351, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, X. Zheng, H. Lei, W. Ke, C. Chen, Z. Chen, G. Yang and G. Fang, Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700118 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Y. Rui, X. Han, J. Yang, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227405 CrossRef CAS .
B. Taheri, E. Calabrò, F. Matteocci, D. Di Girolamo, G. Cardone, A. Liscio, A. Di Carlo and F. Brunetti, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1901284 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703852 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Gao, S. Yuan, B. Q. Cao and J. H. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, K. W. Tsai, Z. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600122 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, F. Liu, M. Lv, S. Chen, L. Hu, J. Tang, J. Yao and S. Dai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 28424–28429 RSC .
J. Xie, K. Huang, X. Yu, Z. Yang, K. Xiao, Y. Qiang, X. Zhu, L. Xu, P. Wang, C. Cui and D. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9176–9182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Q. Cao, Z. He, S. Wang, J. Han, T. Li, B. Gao, J. Yang, D. Deng and X. Li, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900415 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramarajan, M. Kovendhan, K. Thangaraju, D. P. Joseph and R. R. Babu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 1385–1393 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bahadur, A. H. Ghahremani, B. Martin, T. Druffel, M. K. Sunkara and K. Pal, Org. Electron., 2019, 67, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, M. Qin, G. Yang, Y. Guo, H. Lei, Q. Liu, W. Ke, H. Tao, P. Qin, S. Li, H. Yu and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8374–8383 RSC .
J. Liang, Z. Chen, G. Yang, H. Wang, F. Ye, C. Tao and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23152–23159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Zuo, Y. He, F. Qian, S. Zuo, Y. Zhang, L. Liang, Z. Chen, K. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. Gou and S. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2001466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Gu, S.-C. Chen and Q. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4240–4247 RSC .
J.-J. Cao, K.-L. Wang, C. Dong, X.-M. Li, W.-F. Yang and Z.-K. Wang, Org. Electron., 2021, 88, 105972 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, J. Zhang, X. Li, B. Cheng, J. Yu and W. Ho, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, Y. Li, A. A. Medjahed, S. Pouget, D. Aldakov, Y. Liu and P. Reiss, Small, 2021, 17, 2005671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, J. Ma, Q. Liu, W. Ke, Z. Chen, L. Xiong, P. Qin, Z. Chen, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Yan and G. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601769 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Halvani Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, M. T. Mayer, L. Steier, T. Ahmed, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J. Seo, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. R. Tress, T. Edvinsson, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 773–778 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gong, H. Guo, H. Zhang, J. Yang, H. Chen, L. Wang, F. Hao and X. Niu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11638–11646 RSC .
J. A. Hong, E. D. Jung, J. C. Yu, D. W. Kim, Y. S. Nam, I. Oh, E. Lee, J.-W. Yoo, S. Cho and M. H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2417–2423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, L. He, H. Jiang, X. Ma, F. Wang, L. Fan, M. Wei, J. Yang, L. Yang and N. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16326–16335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, X. Li, J. Zhou, B. Wang, Y. Chu, Y. Li, G. Wu, D. Zhang, B. Xue, X. Zhang, Y. Hu, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3186–3192 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, Q. Cao, X. Pu, J. Yang, J. Han, S. Wang, T. Li, Z. He and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 546, 148711 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tu, Y. Shao, W. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, Y. He, J. Li, F. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Lin, X. Lan, L. Xu, X. Shi, A. M. C. Ng, H. Li, L. W. Chung, A. B. Djurišić and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805944 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Si, W. Fan, M. Shi, M. Li, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, A. Sattar, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11573–11582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Lu, S. Feng, L. Yang, H. Dong, J. Wang, C. Tian, L. Li, H. Lu, J. Jeong, S. M. Zakeeruddin, Y. Liu, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3447–3454 RSC .
J. Luo, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 163, 289–306 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Chikate, P. K. Bankar, R. J. Choudhary, Y. R. Ma, S. I. Patil, M. A. More, D. M. Phase, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 21664–21670 RSC .
P. R. Chikate, K. D. Daware, D. S. Gayhane, Y. R. Ma, R. J. Choudhary, S. I. Patil, M. A. More, D. M. Phase, S. W. Gosavi, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 7891–7899 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Chikate, A. Sharma, S. R. Rondiya, R. W. Cross, N. Y. Dzade, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 1404–1414 RSC .
J. H. Lin, R. A. Patil, R. S. Devan, Z. A. Liu, Y. P. Wang, C. H. Ho, Y. Liou and Y. R. Ma, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Tarwal, A. V. Rajgure, A. I. Inamdar, R. S. Devan, I. Y. Kim, S. S. Suryavanshi, Y. R. Ma, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 199, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Chikate, K. D. Daware, S. S. Patil, P. N. Didwal, G. S. Lole, R. J. Choudhary, S. W. Gosavi and R. S. Devan, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 5535–5544 RSC .
N. L. Tarwal, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, R. S. Patil, M. M. Karanjkar and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 72, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Son, J. H. Im, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Liu, L. Wei, Z. Liu, L. Guan and G. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 339, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Tseng, C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-M. Lee, S. H. Chang, K.-H. Wang, C.-M. Chang, H.-M. Cheng, C.-C. Kei, Z.-L. Tseng and C.-G. Wu, Sol. Energy, 2015, 120, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and H. S. Jung, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9127–9138 RSC .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and T. L. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, H. Hu, B. Lin, J. Ding and N. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14405–14408 RSC .
J. Dong, J. Shi, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 073507 CrossRef .
J. Song, E. Zheng, L. Liu, X.-F. Wang, G. Chen, W. Tian and T. Miyasaka, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2640–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Zhenyun Zhang and J. Qi, Chin. Phys. B, 2021, 30, 038801 CrossRef .
Z.-L. Tseng, C.-H. Chiang, S.-H. Chang and C.-G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, Y. Zhao, J. Shi, H. Wei, J. Xiao, X. Xu, J. Luo, J. Xu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13381–13384 RSC .
X. Zhao, H. Shen, Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. Zhao, M. Tai, J. Li, J. Li, X. Li and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7826–7833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zheng, E.-F. Zhao, F.-L. Meng, X.-S. Lai, X.-M. Dong, J.-J. Wu and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12416–12425 RSC .
T. Y. Su, Y. H. Zheng, Z. W. Ma, L. Cheng, X. L. Xu, F. P. Zhang, G. Yu and Z. G. Sheng, Chemistryselect, 2018, 3, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, W. Wu, D. Zhang, Z. Li, G. Ren, W. Han and W. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12161–12168 RSC .
M. K. A. Mohammed and M. Shekargoftar, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 540–548 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Feng, C. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Priya, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Z. An, P. Fassl, Y. J. Hofstetter, D. Becker-Koch, A. Bausch, P. E. Hopkinson and Y. Vaynzof, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Yin, M. Que, Y. Yang and W. Que, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57996–58002 RSC .
P. Zhang, F. Yang, G. Kapil, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, T. Minemoto, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 615–620 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tai, X. Zhao, H. Shen, Y. Guo, M. Zhang, Y. Zhou, X. Li, Z. Yao, X. Yin, J. Han, X. Li and H. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, W. Que, D. Fei, H. Xie and Z. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 99, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
V. Manjunath, Y. K. Reddy, S. Bimli, R. J. Choudhary and R. S. Devan, Mater. Today Commun., 2022, 32, 104061 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitchamsetti, M. Samtham, P. N. Didwal, D. Kumar, D. Singh, S. Bimli, P. R. Chikate, D. A. Basha, S. Kumar, C. J. Park, S. Chakraborty and R. S. Devan, J. Power Sources, 2022, 538, 231525 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitchamsetti, Y. R. Ma, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 833, 155134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitchamsetti, P. N. Didwal, S. R. Mulani, M. S. Patil and R. S. Devan, Heliyon, 2021, 7, e07297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kitchamsetti, R. J. Choudhary, D. M. Phase and R. S. Devan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23446–23456 RSC .
M. S. Patil, N. Kitchamsetti, S. R. Mulani, S. R. Rondiya, N. G. Deshpande, R. A. Patil, R. W. Cross, N. Y. Dzade, K. K. Sharma, P. S. Patil, Y. R. Ma, H. K. Cho and R. S. Devan, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 122, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhu, Z. P. Shao, J. J. Ye, X. H. Zhang, X. Pan and S. Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970–973 RSC .
C. Y. Sun, L. Guan, Y. P. Guo, B. J. Fang, J. M. Yang, H. A. Duan, Y. J. Chen, H. Li and H. Z. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 722, 196–206 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, P. Selvaraj, P. Sujatha Devi and S. Sundaram, Mater. Lett., 2018, 219, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Xue, C. Geng, C. Li, X. Li and Y. Niu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 16075–16082 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, J. H. Suk, B. J. Kang, W. Yin, S. J. Lee, J. H. Noh, T. K. Ahn, F. Rotermund, I. S. Cho and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 958–964 RSC .
R. Dileep K, M. K. Rajbhar, A. Ashina, E. Ramasamy, S. Mallick, T. N. Rao and G. Veerappan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 258, 123939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hu, C. Wang, Y. Tang, L. Huang, J. X. Fu, W. M. Shi, L. J. Wang and W. G. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 679, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bera, K. W. Wu, A. Sheikh, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28494–28501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neophytou, M. De Bastiani, N. Gasparini, E. Aydin, E. Ugur, A. Seitkhan, F. Moruzzi, Y. Choaie, A. J. Ramadan, J. R. Troughton, R. Hallani, A. Savva, L. Tsetseris, S. Inal, D. Baran, F. Laquai, T. D. Anthopoulos, H. J. Snaith, S. De Wolf and I. McCulloch, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8090–8097 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, B. C. Moon, J. Lee and J. K. Kang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Hu, L. Huang, J. Fu, J. Jin, W. Shi, L. Wang and W. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52041–52047 RSC .
T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang and Y.-B. Hahn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903369 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, J. Ding, J. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Res., 2020, 35, 2158–2165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okamoto and Y. Suzuki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13995–14000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, Z. Zhang, W. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Gao and Y. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36067–36074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, H. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Li, L. Wang, X. Niu and Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Zhang, J. Yang, W. Gong, H. Chen, H. Wang, X. Liu, F. Hao, X. Niu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6889–6896 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Oh, D. H. Kim, J. A. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. W. Lee, I. J. Park, M. J. Ko, N. G. Park, S. G. Pyo, K. S. Hong and J. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22991–22994 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bera, A. D. Sheikh, M. A. Haque, R. Bose, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28404–28411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Li, Q. H. Jiang, J. Y. Yang, Y. B. Luo, X. Li, Y. R. Hou and S. Q. Zhou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. Kim and C. K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12158–12169 RSC .
W. Xu, L. Zheng, T. Zhu, L. Liu and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34020–34029 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pang, D. Shen, M. Wei and Z.-N. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 424–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 897–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 RSC .
S. H. Hwang, J. Roh, J. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16429–16433 RSC .
N. Aeineh, A.-F. Castro-Méndez, P. J. Rodriguez-Cantó, R. Abargues, E. Hassanabadi, I. Suarez, A. Behjat, P. Ortiz, J. P. Martínez-Pastor and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9798–9804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Yan, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Numata, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4608–4615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Q. Chen, H. Mo, J. Jacobs, A. Thomas and Z. Liu, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 2057–2067 RSC .
H.-C. Kwon, A. Kim, H. Lee, D. Lee, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601055 CrossRef .
M. Xu, W. Ji, Y. Sheng, Y. Wu, H. Cheng, J. Meng, Z. Yan, J. Xu, A. Mei, Y. Hu, Y. Rong and H. Han, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiang, Y. Xie, Y. Qi, P. Wei, H. Shi, C. Geng and H. Liu, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 523–529 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X. Fang, M. H. Lv, B. C. Lin, S. Zhang, J. N. Ding and N. Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5360–5367 RSC .
D. Q. Bi, S. J. Moon, L. Haggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762–18766 RSC .
K. Wang, Y. T. Shi, Q. S. Dong, Y. Li, S. F. Wang, X. F. Yu, M. Y. Wu and T. L. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L.-L. Deng, L.-Y. Wang, S.-M. Dai, Z. Xing, X.-X. Zhan, X.-Z. Lu, S.-Y. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1706–1712 RSC .
M. Qin, J. Ma, W. Ke, P. Qin, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, L. Xiong, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Lu, G. Yang and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8460–8466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, J. Yuan, D. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Wu, F. Jin, F. Wu, G. Shi, X. Tang, J. Zheng, S. Liu, Z. Liu and W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23181–23188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, T. Liu, X. Yin, H. Liu, X. Zhao, S. Luo, Y. Guo, Z. Yao, J. Wang, N. Wang, H. Lin and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1434–1441 RSC .
M. F. García-Sánchez, A. Ortiz, G. Santana, M. Bizarro, J. Peña, F. Cruz-Gandarilla, M. A. Aguilar-Frutis and J. C. Alonso, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 155–160 CrossRef .
T. Inoue, M. Osonoe, H. Tohda, M. Hiramatsu, Y. Yamamoto, A. Yamanaka and T. Nakayama, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 69, 8313–8315 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suzuki, I. Kosacki, H. U. Anderson and P. Colomban, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 2007–2014 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fang, S. Wu, W. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Zhang, R. Chen, Y. Yue, L. Deng, Y.-B. Cheng, L. Han and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2403–2414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pang, J. Li, X.-F. Wei, Z.-W. Ruan, M. Yang and Z.-N. Chen, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 4062–4069 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, Z. Xue, H. Liu, R. Qin, H. Zhai and M. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 18608–18613 RSC .
Z. Xing, S.-H. Li, B.-S. Wu, X. Wang, L.-Y. Wang, T. Wang, H.-R. Liu, M.-L. Zhang, D.-Q. Yun, L.-L. Deng, S.-Y. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meng, X. Feng, Y. Yang, X. Lv, J. Cao and Y. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13273–13278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, L. Gao, C. Zhang, Z. Xu and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4572–4589 RSC .
T. Hu, S. Xiao, H. Yang, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 471–474 RSC .
L. Ottaviano, L. Lozzi, M. Passacantando and S. Santucci, Surf. Sci., 2001, 475, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Weinhardt, M. Blum, M. Bär, C. Heske, B. Cole, B. Marsen and E. L. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3078–3082 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Dalavi, R. S. Devan, R. A. Patil, R. S. Patil, Y. R. Ma, S. B. Sadale, I. Kim, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3722–3728 RSC .
M. Gillet, K. Aguir, C. Lemire, E. Gillet and K. Schierbaum, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 467, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain, A. R. Kirmani and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9051–9057 RSC .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Yang, J. Du, L. Yang, L. Fan, Y. Sui, X. Liu and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 227157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Liu, V. O. Eze, T. Mori, Z. Huang, K. P. Homewood, Y. Gao and B. Lei, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 196, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Du, D. Han, L. Yang, L. Fan, Y. Sui, Y. Sun, X. Meng and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, T. Liu, N. Wang, Q. Luo, H. Lin, J. Li, Q. Jiang, L. Wu and Z. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Q. Zhang, C. Zhang, D. Chen, L. Zhou, Z. Lin, J. Chang, J. Zhang and Y. Hao, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 6404–6411 RSC .
A. K. Chandiran, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Yella, M. I. Dar, C. Y. Yi, S. A. Shivashankar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1190–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Han, H. S. Chung, B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. W. Lee, B. S. Swain, K. Mahmood, J. S. Yoo, N. G. Park, J. H. Lee and H. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9160–9164 RSC .
X. Guo, Z. Lin, J. Ma, Z. Hu, J. Su, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Chang and Y. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 226981 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Bi, K. He, X. Xu, X. Xiao, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhan, L. Zhong, G. Xu and H. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 836, 155460 CrossRef CAS .
S. An, P. Chen, F. Hou, Q. Wang, H. Pan, X. Chen, X. Lu, Y. Zhao, Q. Huang and X. Zhang, Sol. Energy, 2020, 196, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, X. Yang, M. Sajjad, F. Aljamaan, Y. Smirnov, M. N. Hedhili, W. Liu, T. G. Allen, L. Xu, E. Van Kerschaver, M. Morales-Masis, U. Schwingenschlögl and S. De Wolf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901741 CrossRef .
J.-H. Kim, T.-Y. Seong, K.-B. Chung, C. S. Moon, J. H. Noh, H.-J. Seok and H.-K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 418, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Rani, A. S. Zoolfakar, A. P. O'Mullane, M. W. Austin and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15683–15703 RSC .
J. H. Lin, R. A. Patil, M. A. Wu, L. G. Yu, K. D. Liu, W. T. Gao, R. S. Devan, C. H. Ho, Y. Liou and Y. R. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8667–8672 RSC .
A. Kogo, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 829–830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, X. Zhu, Z. Jin, W. Zi, Q. Wei and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shen, W. Zhang, Y. Li, A. Abate and M. Wei, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4101–4109 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, H. Ling, R. Zhang, Z. Wen, S. Hu, T. Akasaka, J. Xia and X. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Huo, X. Han, Z. Wang, M. Zhang and M. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 542, 148728 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. F. Fu, Z. W. Gu, C. C. Fan, X. Yang, H. Y. Li and H. Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9087–9090 RSC .
M. Abulikemu, J. Barbé, A. El Labban, J. Eid and S. Del Gobbo, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 636, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
D.-B. Li, L. Hu, Y. Xie, G. Niu, T. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. Gao, B. Yang and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2122–2128 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Que, L. L. Zhu, Y. W. Yang, J. Liu, P. Chen, W. Chen, X. T. Yin and W. X. Que, J. Power Sources, 2018, 383, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Lu, X. J. Pan, Y. Z. Ma, Y. Li, L. L. Zheng, D. F. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. J. Chen, S. F. Wang, B. Qu, F. Liu, Y. D. Huang, L. X. Xiao and Q. H. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11175–11179 RSC .
H. Wang, F. Yang, N. Li, M. A. Kamarudin, J. Qu, J. Song, S. Hayase and C. J. Brabec, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8848–8856 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cao, P. Huang, K. Zhang, Z. Sun, K. Zhu, L. Yuan, K. Chen, N. Chen and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3435–3443 RSC .
J. Xiong, Y. Qi, Q. Zhang, D. Box, K. Williams, J. Tatum, P. Das, N. R. Pradhan and Q. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1815–1823 CrossRef CAS .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Yang, J. S. Xie, V. Arivazhagan, K. Xiao, Y. P. Qiang, K. Huang, M. Hu, C. Cui, X. G. Yu and D. R. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, H. Yu, Z. L. Zhu, K. Jiang, T. Zhang, N. Zhao, S. H. Yang and H. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9098–9102 RSC .
X. F. Zeng, T. W. Zhou, C. Q. Leng, Z. G. Zang, M. Wang, W. Hu, X. S. Tang, S. R. Lu, L. A. Fang and M. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17499–17505 RSC .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. C. Du, T. Y. Meng, X. F. Yu, S. Z. D. Cheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ciro, S. Mesa, J. I. Uribe, M. A. Mejia-Escobar, D. Ramirez, J. F. Montoya, R. Betancur, H. S. Yoo, N. G. Park and F. Jaramillo, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9440–9446 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Xu, S. L. Zhao, B. Qiao, Y. Li, Z. L. Qin and Y. Q. Zhu, Acta Phys. Sin., 2017, 66, 118801 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. Long, R. Chen, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3812–3821 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Said, J. Xie and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900854 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, T. Ye and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20819–20848 RSC .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2859–2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Zhu, Y. Z. Xu, J. J. Shi, H. Y. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. H. Zhao, Y. H. Luo, Q. B. Meng and D. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 82282–82288 RSC .
F. Cai, L. Yang, Y. Yan, J. Zhang, F. Qin, D. Liu, Y.-B. Cheng, Y. Zhou and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9402–9411 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800794 CrossRef .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi, J. Lee, J.-H. Bae, S. K. Kwak, D. S. Kim and C. Yang, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, P. Cui, Y. Chen, L. Yan, X. Yue, S. Qu, X. Wang, S. Du, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, Z. Lan, Y. Yang, J. Ji, X. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Wang, X. Ding and M. Li, Joule, 2022, 6, 2186–2202 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kumar, N. Yantara, S. Dharani, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11089–11091 RSC .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chang, K. T. Lee, W. K. Huang, H. Y. Siao and Y. C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5122–5130 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, R. Tavakoli, P. Yadav and J. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 679–686 RSC .
Y. W. Noh, I. S. Jin, K. S. Kim, S. H. Park and J. W. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17163–17173 RSC .
S. Leng, L. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Liang, Y. Zheng, J. Jiang, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Qiu and C.-C. Chen, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2100285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. X. Song, X. R. Wu, C. F. Qiu, X. X. Yin, L. Hu, Z. Su, Y. Z. Jin, J. J. Chen and Z. F. Li, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 9266–9269 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
K. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Tu, Q. Meng and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3463–3471 RSC .
C. Ma and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3268–3275 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, D. Y. Lee, J. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Paik, Y. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2021, 598, 444–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Z. Lu, T. K. Lee, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. H. Liu, I. W. Choi, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, H. B. Kim, S. I. Mo, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, N. G. An, S. Cho, W. R. Tress, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, J. Y. Kim, M. Gratzel and D. S. Kim, Science, 2022, 375, 302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, J. H. Suk, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, W. M. Seong and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bao, J. Wu, X. He, Y. Tu, S. Wang, M. Huang and Z. Lan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 251, 307–315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dou, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, A. Abate, Y. Li and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14673–14676 RSC .
F. Sadegh, S. Akin, M. Moghadam, V. Mirkhani, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, Z. Wang, M. M. Tavakoli, M. Graetzel, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 105038 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, K. Williams, J. Tatum, F. Han, X. Zhu and Q. Dai, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2021, 13, 063501 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, C. X. Xiao, K. G. Brooks, J. X. Xia, X. X. Gao, H. Kanda, S. Kinge, A. M. Asiri, J. M. Luther, Y. Q. Feng, P. J. Dyson and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 23297–23306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, R. Roy, Z. H. Zhang, Y. C. Hu, F. Yang, C. C. Qin, L. L. Jiang and H. R. Liu, Sol. Energy, 2022, 231, 440–446 CrossRef CAS .
A. Culu, I. C. Kaya and S. Sonmezoglu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 3454–3462 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ranjan, R. Ranjan, A. Tyagi, K. S. Rana, A. Soni, H. K. Kodali, V. Dalal, A. Singh, A. Garg, K. S. Nalwa and R. K. Gupta, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2679–2696 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Paik, Y. Lee, H.-S. Yun, S.-U. Lee, S.-T. Hong and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001799 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sanehira, N. Shibayama, Y. Numata, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15175–15182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-M. Lee, W.-J. Lin, S.-H. Chen and M.-C. Wu, Org. Electron., 2020, 77, 105406 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Lei, P. Zhou, M. Zhang, T. Chen, H. Zeng, J. Zhu, S. Dai, S. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806095 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xie, J. Zhu, Y. Li, D. Shen, A. Abate and M. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khorasani, M. Marandi, A. Irajizad and N. Taghavinia, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 1071–1078 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. J. Tang, S. Yang, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6521–6526 RSC .
H. Lu, Y. Ma, B. Gu, W. Tian and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16445–16452 RSC .
J. Kruszynska, J. Ostapko, V. Ozkaya, B. Surucu, O. Szawcow, K. Nikiforow, M. Holdynski, M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, M. Kot, G. P. Kolodziej, M. Wlazlo, S. Satapathi, S. Akin and D. Prochowicz, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2200575 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Arshad, S. Wageh, T. Maiyalagan, M. Ali, U. Arshad, A. Noorul, M. B. Qadir, F. Mateen and A. G. Al-Sehemi, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 24363–24371 CrossRef .
K. Chen, W. Tang, Y. Chen, R. Yuan, Y. Lv, W. Shan and W.-H. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 61, 553–560 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Q. Fan, T. Shen, J. Jin, W. Deng, J. Xin, X. Huang, X. Wang and J. Li, Sol. Energy, 2020, 204, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
R. Azmi, S. Hwang, W. Yin, T.-W. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S.-Y. Jang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1241–1246 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, M. H. Lee, H. J. Han, B. R. Patil, J. S. Yu and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1572–1578 RSC .
C. Zhang, Q. X. Zhuang, H. Y. Li, C. Gong, H. X. Wang, R. Li, H. X. Li, Z. Y. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Z. Chen and Z. G. Zang, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200512 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Zhuang, H. X. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Gong, H. Y. Li, J. Z. Chen and Z. G. Zang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 5114–5122 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wu, C. Zhen and G. Liu, Rare Met., 2022, 41, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. X. Wang, H. Y. Li, Q. X. Zhuang, C. Gong, X. F. Hu, W. S. Cai, S. Y. Zhao, J. Z. Chen and Z. G. Zang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Jiang, Z. Li, C. Chen, X. Kong, Y. Chen, G. Zhou, J.-M. Liu, K. Kempa and J. Gao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1887–1893 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, G. Li, D. Wang, W. Sun, J. Wu and Z. Lan, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900558 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Wang, H. Y. Li, S. L. Cao, M. Wang, J. Z. Chen and Z. G. Zang, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, L. Zhang, S. She, J. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Li, D. Wang, J. Miao, G. Mi, H. Chen, Y. Tian, B. Xu and C. Cheng, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900331 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, M. Qin, C. Chen, J. Wen, G. Yang, Y. Guo, J. Ma, Q. Zhang, P. Qin, S. Li and G. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706276 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700117 CrossRef .
X. K. Yang, W. H. Zhao, M. J. Li, L. F. Ye, P. F. Guo, Y. X. Xu, H. Guo, H. W. Yu, Q. Ye, H. Y. Wang, D. Harvey, D. Shchukin, M. J. Feng, T. C. Sum and H. Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112388 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Liu, Y. J. Guan, S. Liu, S. Li, C. X. Gao, J. K. Du, C. Qiu, D. Y. Li, D. Y. Zhang, X. D. Wang, Y. F. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. G. Rong, A. Y. Mei and H. W. Han, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11032–11040 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, W. Xu, H. Yuan and J. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 823, 153730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, Y. Li, K. Liu and J. Zhang, Solid State Sci., 2020, 108, 106387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dou, D. Shen, Y. Li, A. Abate and M. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36553–36559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Chen, X. Shen, X. Bai, Z. Shi, W. W. Yu, Q. Dai and Y. Zhang, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Li, N. Tang, Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, X. Lu, X. Gao, J. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3328–3336 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav and R. Tavakoli, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2020, 14, 2000062 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Yang, J. Du, L. Xue, L. Yang, L. Fan, Y. Sui, J. Yang and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103825 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, M. Wang, X. F. Hu, T. W. Zhou and Z. G. Zang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 718–727 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S. Wang, X. Jia, X. Fang, S. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Ding and N. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 12823–12831 RSC .
S. F. Shaikh, H.-C. Kwon, W. Yang, R. S. Mane and J. Moon, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 738, 405–414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, T. N. Murakami, T. W. Kim, S. Kim, H. Tampo, M. Chikamatsu and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2018, 47, 1350–1353 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tong, Z. Song, C. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Yu, J. Xu, Y. Jiang, Y. Sheng, Y. Shi and K. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 19457–19463 RSC .
Y. Hou, C. O. R. Quiroz, S. Scheiner, W. Chen, T. Stubhan, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501056 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Zuo and L. M. Ding, Small, 2015, 11, 5528–5532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wijeyasinghe, A. Regoutz, F. Eisner, T. Du, L. Tsetseris, Y.-H. Lin, H. Faber, P. Pattanasattayavong, J. Li, F. Yan, M. A. McLachlan, D. J. Payne, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701818 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604984 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Dalavi, R. S. Devan, R. S. Patil, Y. R. Ma and P. S. Patil, Mater. Lett., 2013, 90, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Patil, R. S. Devan, J. H. Lin, Y. Liou and Y. R. Ma, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3070 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Patil, C. P. Chang, R. S. Devan, Y. Liou and Y. R. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9872–9880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kitchamsetti, P. R. Chikate, R. A. Patil, Y. R. Ma, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 7130–7140 RSC .
N. Kitchamsetti, M. S. Ramteke, S. R. Rondiya, S. R. Mulani, M. S. Patil, R. W. Cross, N. Y. Dzade and R. S. Devan, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 855, 157337 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Patil, R. S. Devan, J. H. Lin, Y. R. Ma, P. S. Patil and Y. Liou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Dalavi, R. S. Devan, R. S. Patil, Y. R. Ma, M. G. Kang, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1035–1039 RSC .
K. H. Parmar, V. Manjunath, S. Bimli, P. R. Chikate, R. A. Patil, Y. R. Ma and R. S. Devan, Chin. J. Phys., 2022, 77, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cui, F. Meng, H. Zhang, K. Cao, H. Yuan, Y. Cheng, F. Huang and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22862–22870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seo, I. J. Park, M. Kim, S. Lee, C. Bae, H. S. Jung, N. G. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. Shin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11403–11412 RSC .
J. Tang, D. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Xu, C. Yao, J. Wu and Z. Lan, Sol. Energy, 2018, 161, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Long, Z. Wei, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12571–12575 CAS .
T. Abzieher, S. Moghadamzadeh, F. Schackmar, H. Eggers, F. Sutterlüti, A. Farooq, D. Kojda, K. Habicht, R. Schmager, A. Mertens, R. Azmi, L. Klohr, J. A. Schwenzer, M. Hetterich, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, M. Powalla and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802995 CrossRef .
T. J. Routledge, M. Wong-Stringer, O. S. Game, J. A. Smith, J. E. Bishop, N. Vaenas, B. G. Freestone, D. M. Coles, T. McArdle, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2283–2290 RSC .
B. Zhao, L. C. Lee, L. Yang, A. J. Pearson, H. Lu, X.-J. She, L. Cui, K. H. L. Zhang, R. L. Z. Hoye, A. Karani, P. Xu, A. Sadhanala, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and D. Di, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41849–41854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Manjunath, S. Bimli, K. H. Parmar, P. M. Shirage and R. S. Devan, Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Chang, Z. Lin, L. Zhou, Z. Yang, D. Chen, C. Zhang, S. Liu and Y. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703432 CrossRef .
X. Yin, J. Zhai, L. Song, P. Du, N. Li, Y. Yang, J. Xiong and F. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44308–44314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. K. Thakur, P. Kumar, S. Gusarov, A. E. Kobryn, S. Riddell, A. Goswami, K. M. Alam, S. Savela, P. Kar, T. Thundat, A. Meldrum and K. Shankar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11467–11478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Feng, M. Wang, H. Zhou, W. Li, X. Xie, S. Wang, Z. Zang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9732–9741 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Elseman, L. Luo and Q. L. Song, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 14243–14250 RSC .
C. C. Boyd, R. C. Shallcross, T. Moot, R. Kerner, L. Bertoluzzi, A. Onno, S. Kavadiya, C. Chosy, E. J. Wolf, J. Werner, J. A. Raiford, C. de Paula, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, J. J. Berry, S. F. Bent, Z. C. Holman, J. M. Luther, E. L. Ratcliff, N. R. Armstrong and M. D. McGehee, Joule, 2020, 4, 1759–1775 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khan, B. D. Rezgui and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy, 2020, 209, 226–234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Mahmoudi and Y.-B. Hahn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000967 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, D. Chen, P. Yang, L. Yang, L. Qin, Y. Huang and X. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 258–264 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Chandrasekhar, Y.-H. Seo, Y.-J. Noh and S.-I. Na, Appl.
Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 588–596 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, Y. W. Noh, I. S. Jin, S. H. Park and J. W. Jung, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, K. Lu, J. Duan, Y. Jiang, L. Hu, T. Liu, Y. Zhou and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14153–14159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Mao, X. Hou, J. Duan, J. Zhou, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Sun and X. Chen, Sol. Energy, 2018, 174, 1133–1141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, K. Yao, X. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Liu, N. Zhou and F. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 782–790 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Girolamo, N. Phung, M. Jošt, A. Al-Ashouri, G. Chistiakova, J. Li, J. A. Márquez, T. Unold, L. Korte, S. Albrecht, A. Di Carlo, D. Dini and A. Abate, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900789 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, Y. W. Noh, I. S. Jin and J. W. Jung, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, Y. Jiang, Z. Qiu, H. Zhang, X. Zhu, I. Sikandar, X. Liu, X. Chen and B. Cao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3947–3954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Wu, W. Bi, Z. Song, X. Zhuang, S. Yang, S. Zhu and H. Song, J. Power Sources, 2019, 444, 227267 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Park, I. J. Park, S. Park, J. Kim, W. Jo, H. J. Son and J. Y. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2018, 18, S55–S59 CrossRef .
W. Chen, F.-Z. Liu, X.-Y. Feng, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan and Z.-B. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700722 CrossRef .
X. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhou, Y. Gu, M. Tai, H. Nan, Y. Zhou, J. Li and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5666–5676 RSC .
P.-C. Chen and S.-H. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6705–6713 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parida, S. Yoon, J. Ryu, S. Hayase, S. M. Jeong and D.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22958–22970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Jiang, S. Deng, A. Tam, P. Xu, M. Wong and H.-S. Kwok, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700463 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-C. Lai, K.-W. Lin, Y.-T. Wang, T.-Y. Chiang, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3290–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-C. Lai, K.-W. Lin, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and Y.-Y. Liao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 071103 CrossRef .
J. Kim, H. R. Lee, H. P. Kim, T. Lin, A. Kanwat, A. R. B. Mohd Yusoff and J. Jang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9284–9292 RSC .
P. Zhou, B. Li, Z. Fang, W. Zhou, M. Zhang, W. Hu, T. Chen, Z. Xiao and S. Yang, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. Zhang, D. Feng, Z. Lin, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, X. Fan and J. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9270–9277 RSC .
X. Xia, Y. Jiang, Q. Wan, X. Wang, L. Wang and F. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44501–44510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Gokdemir Choi, H. Moeini Alishah, S. Bozar, C. Kahveci, M. Canturk Rodop and S. Gunes, Sol. Energy, 2021, 215, 434–442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, C. Xin, W. Huang, B. Shi, Y. Ding, C. Wei, Y. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16806–16812 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Duan, J. Zhang, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, Q. Bao, Z. Sun and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 771–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, J. Zhai, P. Du, N. Li, L. Song, J. Xiong and F. Ko, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1006–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, G. Ren, Z. Li, M. Dong, C. Liu and W. Guo, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 46, 202–207 CrossRef .
L. Xu, M. Qian, C. Zhang, W. Lv, J. Jin, J. Zhang, C. Zheng, M. Li, R. Chen and W. Huang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. Hou, Q. Wei, H. Liu, K. Yang, W. Wang, Q. An and Y. Rong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8099–8102 RSC .
L. Xu, M. Qian, Q. Lu, H. Zhang and W. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2019, 236, 16–18 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, T. He, K. Liu, Q. Zhi and M. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26202–26210 RSC .
H. T. Peng, W. H. Sun, Y. L. Li, S. Y. Ye, H. X. Rao, W. B. Yan, H. P. Zhou, Z. Q. Bian and C. H. Huang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2960–2971 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eom, I. H. Yoo, Q. A. Sial and H. Seo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2021, 23, 62–67 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, T. He, K. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, H. Ma and M. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24282–24291 RSC .
T. H. Schloemer, J. A. Raiford, T. S. Gehan, T. Moot, S. Nanayakkara, S. P. Harvey, R. C. Bramante, S. Dunfield, A. E. Louks, A. E. Maughan, L. Bliss, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. O. Reese, S. F. Bent, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther and A. Sellinger, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2349–2360 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, W. Xu, X. Huang, J. Qi, Q. Yin, X. Jiang, F. Huang, X. Gong and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2017, 47, 85–93 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lei, H. Dong, J. Xi, Y. Niu, J. Xu, F. Yuan, B. Jiao, W. Zhang, X. Hou and Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6177–6180 RSC .
C.-C. Chang, J.-H. Tao, C.-E. Tsai, Y.-J. Cheng and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21466–21471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, H. Wang, X. Feng, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, R. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Photonics Res., 2021, 2000132 CrossRef .
X. Yao, J. Qi, W. Xu, X. Jiang, X. Gong and Y. Cao, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, C. Tong, W. Ji, Z. Fu, Z. Wan, Q. Huang, Y. Ming, A. Mei, Y. Hu, Y. Rong and H. Han, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2619–2625 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tepliakova, A. N. Mikheeva, L. A. Frolova, A. G. Boldyreva, A. Elakshar, A. V. Novikov, S. A. Tsarev, M. I. Ustinova, O. R. Yamilova, A. G. Nasibulin, S. M. Aldoshin, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5563–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, R. Zhao, R. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Wang, C. Liu, J. Chen and H. Zhou, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2018, 33, 115016 CrossRef .
J. A. Raiford, R. A. Belisle, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, A. F. Palmstrom, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1517–1525 RSC .
Y.-H. Lou and Z.-K. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13506–13514 RSC .
Z. Liu, T. He, H. Wang, X. Song, H. Liu, J. Yang, K. Liu and H. Ma, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 18456–18465 RSC .
D. Wang, N. K. Elumalai, M. A. Mahmud, M. Wright, M. B. Upama, K. H. Chan, C. Xu, F. Haque, G. Conibeer and A. Uddin, Org. Electron., 2018, 53, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Yeh, H.-Y. Lee and C.-T. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 822, 153620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Qin, X. Liu, M. Ren, J. Tong, N. Zheng, W. Chen and Y. Xia, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 1102–1109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, Y. Li, M. Safdari, C. Chen, P. Liu, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602556 CrossRef .
S. S. Kanakkillam, S. Shaji, B. Krishnan, S. Vazquez-Rodriguez, J. A. A. Martinez, M. I. M. Palma and D. A. Avellaneda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 501, 144223 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Shalan, T. Oshikiri, S. Narra, M. M. Elshanawany, K. Ueno, H.-P. Wu, K. Nakamura, X. Shi, E. W.-G. Diau and H. Misawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33592–33600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Huang, L. Lei, J. Zhu, Y. Yu, Y. Liu, S. Yang, S. Bao, X. Cao and P. Jin, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3624–3634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bashir, S. Shukla, J. H. Lew, S. Shukla, A. Bruno, D. Gupta, T. Baikie, R. Patidar, Z. Akhter, A. Priyadarshi, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2341–2350 RSC .
Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, X. Lu, X. Gao, J. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1800315 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Ge, B. Mahmoudi, S. Förster, F. Syrowatka, A. W. Maijenburg and R. Scheer, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3755–3769 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chiang, C.-C. Chen, M. K. Nazeeruddin and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13751–13760 RSC .
F. P. Gökdemir Choi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 8136–8148 CrossRef .
B. Li, Y. Rui, J. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Yang, Q. Zhang and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 573, 78–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dou, D. Wang, G. Li, Y. Liao, W. Sun, J. Wu and Z. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32159–32168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Heinemann, B. Eifert and C. Heiliger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 115111 CrossRef .
J. S. Shaikh, R. C. Pawar, R. S. Devan, Y. R. Ma, P. P. Salvi, S. S. Kolekar and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2127–2134 CrossRef CAS .
T. Eom, S. Kim, R. E. Agbenyeke, H. Jung, S. M. Shin, Y. K. Lee, C. G. Kim, T.-M. Chung, N. J. Jeon, H. H. Park and J. Seo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2170006 CrossRef .
Z.-K. Yu, W.-F. Fu, W.-Q. Liu, Z.-Q. Zhang, Y.-J. Liu, J.-L. Yan, T. Ye, W.-T. Yang, H.-Y. Li and H.-Z. Chen, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 13–18 CrossRef .
W. L. Yu, F. Li, H. Wang, E. Alarousu, Y. Chen, B. Lin, L. F. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Y. Li, K. W. Wu, X. B. Wang, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6173–6179 RSC .
Q. Yu, J. Pan, J. Mei, Z. Chen, P. Wang, P. Wang, J. Wang, C. Song, Y. Zheng and C. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 5736–5747 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Lei, L. Xiong, B. Li and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8033–8040 RSC .
L.-C. Chen, C.-C. Chen, K.-C. Liang, S. H. Chang, Z.-L. Tseng, S.-C. Yeh, C.-T. Chen, W.-T. Wu and C.-G. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 402 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Y. Bu, Y.-S. Fu, J.-F. Li and T.-F. Guo, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 46651–46656 RSC .
A. Savva, I. T. Papadas, D. Tsikritzis, G. S. Armatas, S. Kennou and S. A. Choulis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20381–20389 RSC .
Y.-J. Chen, M.-H. Li, J.-C.-A. Huang and P. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 7646 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Sun, S. Zhou, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Gao, Z. Li and Y. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11289–11296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, Y. Li, S. Ye, H. Rao, W. Yan, H. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Xiao, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10806–10813 RSC .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, R. Hu, W. Liu, S. Wang, M. Jiang, L. Chu, J. Zhang, X. A. Li, R. Xia and W. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 547, 149117 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhuang, L. Qiu, L. Dong, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, X. Ma, P. Du and J. Xiong, Polym. Compos., 2020, 41, 2145–2153 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Islam, Y. A. Wahab, M. U. Khandaker, A. Alsubaie, A. S. A. Almalki, D. A. Bradley and N. Amin, Crystals, 2021, 11, 389 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Elseman, M. S. Selim, L. Luo, C. Y. Xu, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, D. B. Liu, L. P. Liao, Z. Hao and Q. L. Song, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3808–3816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Tseng, L.-C. Chen, L.-B. Chang, G.-M. Wu, W.-S. Feng, M.-J. Jeng, D. W. Chen and K.-L. Lee, Sol. Energy, 2020, 204, 270–279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Chen, X. Zhao, S. Dai and B. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801169 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Chen, M.-H. Li, J.-C.-A. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6280–6286 RSC .
J. Kim, Y. Lee, B. Gil, A. J. Yun, J. Kim, H. Woo, K. Park and B. Park, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7572–7579 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deepthi Jayan and V. Sebastian, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 16618–16632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and S. Singh, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2020, 34, 2050258 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Hossain, F. H. Alharbi and N. Tabet, Sol. Energy, 2015, 120, 370–380 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Castellanos-Águila, L. Lodeiro, E. Menéndez-Proupin, A. L. Montero-Alejo, P. Palacios, J. C. Conesa and P. Wahnón, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44648–44657 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. M. Zheng-Johansson, I. Ebbsjö and R. L. McGreevy, Solid State Ionics, 1995, 82, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pishtshev and S. Z. Karazhanov, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 064706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Uthayaraj, D. G. B. C. Karunarathne, G. R. A. Kumara, T. Murugathas, S. Rasalingam, R. M. G. Rajapakse, P. Ravirajan and D. Velauthapillai, Materials, 2019, 12, 2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, W. Chu, D. Zhang, Z. Zhou and J. Xin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41354–41362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, W. Hu, Z. Li, X.-F. Wang and W. Tian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110351 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Khadka, Y. Shirai, M. Yanagida and K. Miyano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 210, 110486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. A. Nejand, A. Moshaii, N. Mohammadian, A. H. Alizadeh, R. Mohammadpour, V. Ahmadi and A. Alizadeh, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1929–1937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Chen, L. L. Deng, S. M. Dai, X. Wang, C. B. Tian, X. X. Zhan, S. Y. Xie, R. B. Huang and L. S. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19353–19359 RSC .
G. A. Sepalage, S. Meyer, A. Pascoe, A. D. Scully, F. Huang, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5650–5661 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Yu, X. Jiang, J. Li, B. Cai, X. Yang and L. Sun, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1836–1843 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, S. Ye, H. Rao, Y. Li, Z. Liu, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15954–15960 RSC .
J. Cao, B. Wu, J. Peng, X. Feng, C. Li and Y. Tang, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Chu, L. Li, A. S. Yerramilli, Y. He, H. Yang, Y. Shen and T. L. Alford, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 12929–12938 CrossRef CAS .
H. Javaid, V. V. Duzhko and D. Venkataraman, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saranin, P. Gostischev, D. Tatarinov, I. Ermanova, V. Mazov, D. Muratov, A. Tameev, D. Kuznetsov, S. Didenko and A. Di Carlo, Materials, 2019, 12, 1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Byranvand, T. Kim, S. Song, G. Kang, S. U. Ryu and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702235 CrossRef .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Salah, K. M. Hassan, M. Abouelatta and A. Shaker, Optik, 2019, 178, 958–963 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Haider, H. Anwar, S. Manzoor, A. G. Ismail and M. Wang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20, 1080–1089 CrossRef .
P. Pattanasattayavong, G. O. N. Ndjawa, K. Zhao, K. W. Chou, N. Yaacobi-Gross, B. C. O'Regan, A. Amassian and T. D. Anthopoulos, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4154–4156 RSC .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, H. Vahlman, H. Nishino, K. Manabe and P. Lund, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1194–1200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chavhan, O. Miguel, H.-J. Grande, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Seró and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12754–12760 RSC .
A. S. Subbiah, A. Halder, S. Ghosh, N. Mahuli, G. Hodes and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1748–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ye, W. H. Sun, Y. L. Li, W. B. Yan, H. T. Peng, Z. Q. Bian, Z. W. Liu and C. H. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jung, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500486 CrossRef .
I. S. Yang, M. R. Sohn, S. D. Sung, Y. J. Kim, Y. J. Yoo, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Gong, Z. Chen and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22684–22693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lyu, J. Chen and N.-G. Park, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 269, 367–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. K. Pathak, N. Sakai, R. Sheng, S. Bai, Z. Wang and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600571 CrossRef .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xi, G. Gao, H. Zhou, Y. Zhao, C. Wu, L. Wang, P. Guo and J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6136–6144 RSC .
I. Zimmermann, P. Gratia, D. Martineau, G. Grancini, J.-N. Audinot, T. Wirtz and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8073–8077 RSC .
G. A. Sepalage, S. Meyer, A. R. Pascoe, A. D. Scully, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, Y. Lee, A. J. Yun, B. Gil and B. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46818–46824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, S. She, X. Wang, Y. Tian, A. K. Y. Jen and B. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Tian, M. Hou, Y. Wu, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and G. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 27977–27984 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Yang, S. Lee, J. Choi, M. T. Jung, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6028–6037 RSC .
M. Kim, A. Alfano, G. Perotto, M. Serri, N. Dengo, A. Mezzetti, S. Gross, M. Prato, M. Salerno, A. Rizzo, R. Sorrentino, E. Cescon, G. Meneghesso, F. Di Fonzo, A. Petrozza, T. Gatti and F. Lamberti, Commun. Mater., 2021, 2, 6 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, J. Liu, J. Huang, F. Yu, R. Zhang, C.-H. Li, Y.-X. Zheng and J.-L. Zuo, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000777 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Jin, J. H. Lee, Y. W. Noh, S. H. Park and J. W. Jung, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2158–2166 RSC .
L. Xu, Y. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Zheng, W. Lv, M. Li, Y. Chen, W. Huang and R. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110316 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Jin, S. H. Park, K. S. Kim and J. W. Jung, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 847, 156512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Haider, H. Anwar and M. Wang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900102 CrossRef .
B. Gil, A. J. Yun, Y. Lee, J. Kim, B. Lee and B. Park, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2019, 15, 505–524 CrossRef CAS .
F. Igbari, M. Li, Y. Hu, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1326–1335 RSC .
I. Y.-Y. Bu, Y.-C. Lu, Y.-S. Fu and C.-T. Hung, Optik, 2020, 210, 164505 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, W. Chen, S. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702762 CrossRef .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, T. B. Daunis, X. Wang, J. Wang, B. Zhang, D. Barrera, Y. Yan, J. W. P. Hsu and D. B. Mitzi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 469–477 RSC .
S. Akin, Y. Liu, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Turan and S. Sonmezoglu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20327–20337 RSC .
P.-L. Qin, Q. He, C. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, G. Yang, H. Tao, L.-B. Xiong, L. Xiong, G. Li and G.-J. Fang, Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700058 CrossRef .
B. Yang, D. Ouyang, Z. Huang, X. Ren, H. Zhang and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902600 CrossRef .
S. Jeong, S. Seo and H. Shin, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 27956–27962 RSC .
I. T. Papadas, A. Savva, A. Ioakeimidis, P. Eleftheriou, G. S. Armatas and S. A. Choulis, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 57–64 CrossRef .
B. Lee, A. J. Yun, J. Kim, B. Gil, B. Shin and B. Park, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Jia, Y. Wu, N. Yuan, J. Ding, W.-H. Zhang and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, W. Tang, Y. Wu, R. Yuan, J. Yang, W. Shan, S. Zhang and W.-H. Zhang, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000344 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ouyang, C. Chen, Z. Huang, L. Zhu, Y. Yan and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16611–16619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tirado, C. Roldán-Carmona, F. A. Muñoz-Guerrero, G. Bonilla-Arboleda, M. Ralaiarisoa, G. Grancini, V. I. E. Queloz, N. Koch, M. K. Nazeeruddin and F. Jaramillo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, R. Zhang, Y. Ma, W. Liu, L. Chu, W. Mao, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Pu and X. A. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 462, 840–846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Kuang, M. Zhao, C. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Lu, N. Wang, C. Huang, C. Duan, H. Jian, L. Yao and T. Jiu, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 8375–8381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Khanzada, I. Levchuk, Y. Hou, H. Azimi, A. Osvet, R. Ahmad, M. Brandl, P. Herre, M. Distaso, R. Hock, W. Peukert, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8300–8306 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Zhou, Y.-Q. Deng, P.-P. Zhang, D.-X. Kou, W.-H. Zhou, Y.-N. Meng, S.-J. Yuan and S.-X. Wu, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1800354 CrossRef .
G. Y. Ashebir, C. Dong, Z. Wan, J. Qi, J. Chen, Q. Zhao, W. Chen and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 129, 204–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jamil, A. Ali, K. Mahmood, M. I. Arshad, S. Tahir, M. Ajazun Nabi, S. Ikram, N. Amin and S. Hussain, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 821, 153221 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, H. Jung, M. Park, J. Y. Kim, H. J. Son, J. Cho and M. J. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5400–5407 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Huckaba, P. Sanghyun, G. Grancini, E. Bastola, C. K. Taek, L. Younghui, K. P. Bhandari, C. Ballif, R. J. Ellingson and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 5316–5319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, C. R. Grice and Y. F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2920–2928 RSC .
A. Ioakeimidis, I. T. Papadas, D. Tsikritzis, G. S. Armatas, S. Kennou and S. A. Choulis, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 021101 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, I. S. Jin, Y. W. Noh, S. H. Park and J. W. Jung, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17661–17670 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Papadas, A. Ioakeimidis, G. S. Armatas and S. A. Choulis, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1701029 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Huang, Y. Cheng, H. Lei, L. Hu, Z. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4015–4018 RSC .
B. Tan, S. R. Raga, A. S. R. Chesman, S. O. Fürer, F. Zheng, D. P. McMeekin, L. Jiang, W. Mao, X. Lin, X. Wen, J. Lu, Y.-B. Cheng and U. Bach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901519 CrossRef .
M. Li, Z. K. Wang, Y. G. Yang, Y. Hu, S. L. Feng, J. M. Wang, X. Y. Gao and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601156 CrossRef .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, J. Song, D. Wang, W. Sun, J. Wu and Z. Lan, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 229149 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, P. Yuan, S. Wang, Y. Du, J. Zou, F. Cao, Z. Lan and J. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 380, 138233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, L. Yuan, J. Huang, J. Shi, Y. Cao, W. Zi and W. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2020, 78, 105557 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, M. I. Omer Mohamed, C. Xu, X. Wang and X. Tang, Org. Electron., 2020, 78, 105582 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, E. Zheng, H. Dong, G. A. Tosado and Q. Yu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9656–9666 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, S. Pathak, T. Stergiopoulos, T. Leijtens, K. Wojciechowski, S. Schumann, N. Kausch-Busies and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1666–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Wang, M. Li, D. X. Yuan, X. B. Shi, H. Ma and L. S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9645–9651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, M. Hu, C. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Zhong, X. Li, Y. Tian, C. Cheng and B. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103866 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, D. Wang, L. Duan, F. Haque, C. Xu, Y. Zhang, G. Conibeer and A. Uddin, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 349–358 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, T. Ederth and O. Inganäs, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9287–9294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Jeong, K. M. Yeom, S. J. Kim, E. H. Jung and J. H. Noh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2419–2428 RSC .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Valero, S. Collavini, S. F. Völker, M. Saliba, W. R. Tress, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and J. L. Delgado, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 2243–2254 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, H. Yu, J. W. Lee, J. Oh, S. Bae, S. K. Kim and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6250–6256 RSC .
K.-C. Wang, P.-S. Shen, M.-H. Li, S. Chen, M.-W. Lin, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11851–11858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jung, C.-C. Chueh and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7874–7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, P. Chen, M. Que, Y. Xing, W. Que, C. Niu and J. Shao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3630–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Hou, D. Yang, T. Ye, J. Yoon, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3412–3422 RSC .
J. Yang, Q. Cao, Z. He, X. Pu, T. Li, B. Gao and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105731 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. R. Zhang, H. P. Zeng, X. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Luo, F. X. Liu and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 443, 136405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Yu, J. Lai, X. Song, X. Yang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21435–21444 RSC .
K. Ramachandran, C. Jeganathan and S. Karuppuchamy, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 881, 160530 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Srivastava, H. S. Jung and D. Y. Khang, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, L. Jiang, P. Li, B. Fan and Y. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 124, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
V. Arjun, K. P. Muthukumaran, K. Ramachandran, A. Nithya and S. Karuppuchamy, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 923, 166285 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Wang, J. Li, Y. Bai, F. Wang, L. Liu, B. Zhang, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 21746–21754 RSC .
X. Yao, H. Geng, Y. Gu, H. Cui, G. Guan and M. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 23474–23482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, D. W. Kim and S. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2200437 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Li, K. M. Deng, Y. F. Dou, Y. S. Liao, D. Wang, J. H. Wu and Z. Lan, Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, J. H. Zheng, L. L. Zheng, G. H. Lin, H. D. Lin, G. Chen, B. B. Du and F. Y. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 103, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, J. Jun, H. Yu, K. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Lee and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21750–21756 RSC .
J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. G. Choi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 8136–8148 CrossRef .
A. B. Huang, L. Lei, Y. Yu, Y. Liu, S. W. Yang, S. H. Bao, X. Cao and P. Jin, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 20LT02 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ramachandran, C. Jeganathan, G. P. Kalaignan and S. Karuppuchamy, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 17883–17894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim, N. Kwon, D. Lee, M. Kim, M. Kim, Y. Lee, W. Kim, D. Hyeon, B. Kim, M. S. Jeong, J. Hong and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 5203–5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Krishna, G. Veerappan, P. Bhyrappa, C. Sudakar and E. Ramasamy, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 2000–2010 RSC .
Y. P. Liao, N. Tian, J. L. Wang, D. S. Yao, G. Y. Zheng, B. Zhou, Y. H. Yang and F. Long, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 9542–9548 CrossRef CAS .
U. Er, K. C. Icli and M. Ozenbas, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 293–304 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil and C. K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10246–10255 RSC .
H. Wang, H. A. Dewi, T. M. Koh, A. Bruno, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 484–493 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Chowdhury, M. Akhtaruzzaman, M. E. Kayesh, R. Kaneko, T. Noda, J.-J. Lee and A. Islam, Sol. Energy, 2018, 171, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
H. Javaid, N. Heller, V. V. Duzhko, N. Hight-Huf, M. D. Barnes and D. Venkataraman, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 8075–8083 CrossRef CAS .
F. Behrouznejad, M. Forouzandeh, R. Khosroshahi, K. Meraji, M. N. Badrabadi, M. Dehghani, X. G. Li, Y. Q. Zhan, Y. Liao, Z. J. Ning and N. Taghavinia, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 564 CrossRef .
F. Ansari, M. Salavati-Niasari, O. Amiri, N. Mir, B. A. Nejand and V. Ahmadi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 743–750 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, L. J. Tang, H. W. Qiao, Z. R. Zhou, Y. L. Zhong, L. R. Zheng, M. J. Chen, S. Yang and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20905–20910 RSC .

Footnote† Authors share equal authorship.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Vishesh Manjunath
	Vishesh Manjunath received his Master's Degree (2016) in Nanotechnology from VIT University, Vellore, India. In 2017, he joined Dr Rupesh's research group for a PhD program in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. His research interests include photovoltaics, thin-film technology, green hydrogen generation, visible and ultraviolet light sensors and the fabrication of optoelectronic devices.

Santosh Bimli
	Santosh Bimli received his Master's Degree (2019) in Material Science Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. In 2019, he joined Dr Rupesh's research group for a PhD program in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. His research interests include developing nanostructures for optoelectronic applications like Hybrid thin film solar cells, resistive switching devices, photodetector, and magneto-optics.

Parvez A. Shaikh
	Dr Parvez Shaikh is currently a SERB-TARE Fellow in Dr Rupesh's group at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India, and working (since 2017) as an Assistant Professor of PHYSICS at AKI's Poona College of Arts, Science & Commerce, Pune, India. He has worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (2014–2017). He was also CSIR-Research Associate (2011–2014) at the National Chemical Laboratory (NCL) Pune, India. His research interests are hybrid optoelectronic materials, solar cells, and devices for energy conversion.

Satishchandra B. Ogale
	Prof. (Dr) Satishchandra Ogale is currently a Professor Emeritus, IISER Pune and Director, Research Institute for Sustainable Energy (RISE), Salt Lake, Kolkata, India. Previously he was a Raja Ramanna Fellow of the Department of Atomic Energy (2019–20), Professor of Physics at IISER Pune (2015–18), Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR, CSIR), New Delhi (2006–15), and Pune University (1980–96). He was also a Visiting Professor and Senior Research Scientist at the University of Maryland, College Park (1996–2006). He has performed research for many years on advanced functional materials for energy applications which includes hybrid perovskite and solar cells, green energy and energy storage devices, photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction.

Rupesh S. Devan
	Dr Rupesh Devan is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science at the Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India. Before receiving the INSPIRE Faculty Award (2014) from the Department of Science and Technology (DST) India, he worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at National Dong Hwa University, Taiwan (2007–2013). His research areas include developing nano-hetero-architectures and hybrid materials for applications in supercapattery, solar cells, photodetectors, green hydrogen generation, and water remediation.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (a) dye-sensitized solar cell (i.e., DSSC) and (b) perovskite solar cells (i.e., PSC).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) mesoporous and (b) planar PSC.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the importance of interfaces in PSCs.	 
	(1)
	(2)
σ = nDE	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematics of electron-beam-induced current measurement setup. (b–d) Cross-sectional SEM images representing the EBIC signal in a bright green color and (e–g) their line profiles perpendicular to layers of TiO2, TiO2/C60, and C60, respectively. The scale bars in SEM images are 500 nm.40 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2580–2589). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of cross-sectional Kelvin probe force microscopy measurement scheme. (b and e) Distribution of contact potential differences in OC (red line) and SC (blue line) condition and (c and f) normalized E-field distribution and OC conditions under illumination and (d and g) charge density profile evaluated from photo-potential difference between VOC − VSC of TiO2- and C60-based PSCs, respectively. The arrows in (b) and (e) indicate the built-up VOC. (OC: open circuit, SC: short circuit, VOC: open circuit voltage, and VSC: short circuit voltages).40 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2580–2589). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the electronic structure for (a) all organic/inorganic, (b) ordered (or crystalline), and (c) amorphous (or disordered) semiconductors.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Differential conductance (dI/dV) plots of NiO, Cu@NiO, Cu2O, MAPbI3, and PCBM thin films. VB and CB edges of the materials and HOMO and LUMO levels of PCBM with respect to the Fermi energy are marked with vertical continuous and broken straight bars in the positive and negative voltage regions, respectively. (b) Schematic energy level diagram of Cu2O/MAPbI3/PCBM heterojunction. The dashed line represents the Fermi energy after contact.54 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1428–1437). Copyright (2016), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic depicting the path of a photogenerated electron from the perovskite light absorber to the external circuit. (CBM: conduction band minimum and VBM: valence band maximum.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic showing the band structures and the band alignment of various inorganic ETLs with a perovskite absorber.	 

 	Fig. 10  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) TiO2 nanodendrites and (b) solar cell architecture comprised of TiO2 nanodendrites. (c) Schematic of the FDTD simulation cells for perovskite–TiO2 nanodendrites. FDTD-simulated EM energy density distribution in PSC after continuous electromagnetic waves passing through the perovskite–TiO2 nanodendrites with wavelengths of (d) 450 nm and (e) 650 nm.89	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of TiO2 nanocones. Electric potential contours for n-type (b) nanorod and (c) nanocone in the p-type matrix and (d) scheme of electron injection from perovskite to TiO2 and transport within TiO2. Note: er− represents electron injection along the radial direction and ez− along the axial direction.96 Reprinted with permission from (Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 409–418). Copyright (2015), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of time-dependent growth of SnO2-DNTs under reaction time of (i) 15, (ii) 30, (iii) 60, and (iv) 90 min. (b) Spin-coated perovskite films over SnO2-DNT/FTO/glass substrates at different reaction times. Schematic growth mechanism of (c) ZnO nanorods covered with discontinuous SnO2 nanoparticles, (d) OH− ions as by-product of SnO2 can etch the ZnO nanorods, and (e) SnO2-DNT@ZnO nanorods. (f) Fabrication scheme of PSCs and (g) corresponding cross section of SnO2-DNTs and SnO2-DNT/perovskite/P3HT/Au device. The scale in black indicates 500 nm.134 Reprinted with permission from (Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 378–385). Copyright (2017), Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Surface contact angle of SnO2, TPPO-doped SnO2, and acetonitrile treated SnO2 on ITO substrate; the oxygen atom of TPPO tetrahedral molecule connection with Sn atom leaving other three ends facing upward delivered larger contact angle; (b) the side view of the relaxed model of TPPO absorbed SnO2(110) surface; charge density difference (Δρ) of TPPO on SnO2(110) surface was evaluated at isovalue of 1.2 × 10−4 |e| Å−3; (c) blue indicates electron depletion, and (d) yellow indicates electron accumulation; (e) top view of charge density difference (Δρ) of TPPO absorbed on SnO2(110), electron gain is indicated by yellow.156 Reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805944). Copyright (2019) John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Optimized geometrical structure of the ZnO ETL and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (upper panel). The magnified structure of deprotonated methylammonium cations (lower panel) from the portion marked in the upper panel.172 Reprinted with permission from (Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236). Copyright (2015), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of ZnO nanorods (a and c) without and (b and d) with TiO2 passivation, depicting the top and cross sectional views, respectively. (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of ZnO nanorod with TiO2 passivation. The yellow dashed line in the HRTEM image marks the edge of the ZnO/TiO2 nanorod.186	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of (a) device structure and (b) band diagram of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs. (c) J−V characteristics and (d) EQE spectra (with integrated JSC) of planar heterojunction (PHJ) and BHJ PSCs, respectively.218 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34020–34029). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Device structure composed of mesoscopic Al2O3 scaffold, TiO2 ETL and FAPbI3−xClx perovskite. (b) ELT/scaffold (i.e., TiO2/Al2O3) constitution variation-dependent electron transport mechanism.227 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4608–4615). Copyright (2016), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of (a) mechanism for increased doping density in the bulk and suppressed segregation on the surface of Ti–Fe2O3,258 (b) charge transfer mechanism, and (c) band energy diagram of the MgO/TiO2 core–shell nanoparticle-based PSC.260	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The device assembly of perovskite hybrid solar cells incorporated with PC61BM the electron extraction layer, (b) molecular structures of PC61BM, water-soluble fullerene derivative (C60–Ac10) and P3HT. (c) LUMO and HOMO energy levels of the materials used in the perovskite hybrid solar cells.285 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Comparative study of the influential ETLs developed by year to gain the best maximum efficiency in the last decade (collected from ISI Web of Knowledge up to 15th August 2022).296,297,304,309,314,316	 


Titanium dioxide (TiO2)
1.	FTO/LD-TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	CBD	1.174	25.43	0.831	24.81	2022	
299

2.	FTO/RbCl:TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	DC	1.11	23.14	0.807	20.75	2022	
318

3.	FTO/Ta:TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SPM	1.094	23.94	0.781	20.45	2022	
319

4.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC/MW	1.07	22.18	0.71	17.97	2022	
320

5.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/α-FAPbI3/OAI/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SP	1.189	26.35	0.817	25.6	2021	
298

6.	FTO/c-TiO2/Li2CO3–TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.171	26.17	0.825	25.28	2021	
118

7.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	ALD	1.06	23.92	0.71	18.05	2021	
98

8.	FTO/TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT/S	1.16	24.56	0.808	22.99	2020	
321

9.	FTO/Nb–TiO2/(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(BrxI1−x)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au)	SC	1.11	24.7	0.78	21.3	2020	
322

10.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	HT	1.11	23.42	0.74	19.39	2020	
323

11.	ITO/NH2–TiO2 NPs/Cs0.05(FA0.87MA0.13)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SGS	1.20	23.15	0.767	21.33	2019	
324

12.	FTO/TiO2-B/(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.05	24.94	0.72	18.83	2019	
325

13.	FTO/Y-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HP	1.04	23.55	0.75	18.32	2019	
108

14.	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 NC-NR/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	1.055	22.95	0.71	17.2	2019	
326

15.	FTO/c-TiO2/a-SnO2/Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.169	23.91	0.765	21.4	2018	
295

16.	FTO/Nb:TiO2/TiO2 NR/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HP	1.03	23.95	0.77	18.88	2018	
116

17.	ITO/TiO2:TOPD/PC60BM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.10	23.11	0.802	20.3	2017	
294

18.	FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.075	22.28	0.769	18.43	2016	
293

19.	FTO/c-TiO2/TiO2NF/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	CBD	0.985	22.0	0.72	15.71	2016	
327

20.	FTO/TiO2/mp-TiO2 NF/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	ES	0.98	20.0	0.74	15.5	2015	
292

21.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag	ALD	0.979	24.3	0.572	13.60	2015	
328

22.	FTO/graphene/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.05	21.9	0.74	15.6	2014	
29

23.	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	TO	1.09	21.97	0.63	15.07	2014	
84

24.	FTO/r-TiO2 NR/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	0.955	15.6	0.63	9.4	2013	
291

25.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	0.80	17.8	0.53	7.6	2012	
220



Zinc oxide (ZnO)
26.	FTO/ZnO/2-TA/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.16	22.9	0.775	20.6	2022	
306

27.	FTO/AZO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	ALD	1.05	23.16	0.74	18.09	2022	
329

28.	FTO/Mg:ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	ES	0.83	25.06	0.65	13.52	2022	
330

29.	ITO/ZnO/ZnO-Cl-Phen/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI2.7Br0.3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.16	22.88	0.797	21.15	2021	
305

30.	FTO/ZnO/ZnS/TiO2/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	1.12	24.07	0.77	20.6	2021	
331

31.	FTO/ZnO/IBA/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.12	21.93	0.75	18.84	2020	
332

32.	FTO/MLG/ZnO/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC/LPCVD	1.15	23.42	0.781	21.03	2019	
303

33.	FTO/ZnO–MgO–EA+/TiO2/(CsFAMA)Pb(BrI)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au/graphene	SC	1.12	23.86	0.789	21.08	2018	
62

34.	ITO/ZnO–K/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SGS	1.13	23.0	0.771	19.90	2018	
333

35.	ITO/c-ZnO/ZnO:I/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	HT	1.13	22.42	0.719	18.24	2017	
180

36.	ITO/AZO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	RFS	1.07	21.5	0.725	17.6	2016	
177

37.	ITO/Mg–ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.07	20.6	0.745	16.5	2016	
175

39.	PEN/ITO/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au	SP	1.10	18.7	0.75	15.6	2016	
334

40.	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO/Ag/Al2O3-PET	ALD	1.02	20.73	0.764	16.5	2015	
302

41.	ITO/c-ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.03	20.4	0.749	15.7	2014	
301

42.	FTO/c-ZnO/ZnO NR/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	0.991	20.08	0.56	11.13	2014	
167

43.	FTO/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CBD	1.02	16.98	0.511	8.9	2013	
300



Tin oxide (SnO2)
44.	FTO/c-TiO2/Paa-QD-SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/OAI/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.176	26.09	0.838	25.72	2022	
311

45.	FTO/SnO2/BA + PEAI/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag	SC	1.144	25.16	0.811	23.35	2022	
335

46.	FTO/SnO2–LiOH/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Ag	SC	1.15	24.20	0.763	21.31	2022	
336

47.	FTO/Cl–SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	SC/DC	1.07	24.25	0.73	18.94	2022	
337

48.	FTO/SnO2/FAPbI3:0.38MDACl2/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.189	25.74	0.832	25.8	2021	
310

49.	FTO/SnO2/MA0.15FA0.85Pb(IxClyBr1−x−y)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CBD	1.181	25.14	0.848	25.2	2021	
139

50.	FTO/SnO2–K2SO4/Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Ag	SC	1.2	22.89	0.771	21.18	2021	
338

51.	FTO/SnO2:CdS QD/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	HT/SC	1.13	23.45	0.78	20.78	2021	
153

52.	FTO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.14	23.38	0.76	20.24	2021	
339

53.	ITO/urea-SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.13	23.51	0.76	20.25	2021	
155

54.	FTO/SnO2/SnO2:TaCl5/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag	SC	1.08	22.56	0.75	18.23	2021	
146

55.	ITO/SnO2/SnO2-KF/CsPbI2Br/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag	SC	1.31	14.79	0.79	15.39	2021	
145

56.	FTO/SnO2:Eu/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CBD	1.13	22.61	0.79	20.14	2021	
144

57.	FTO/SnO2 NR/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	ET	1.15	23.45	0.78	21.35	2020	
340

58.	ITO/SnO2/SA/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.15	22.80	0.78	20.41	2020	
154

59.	ITO/SnO2-CNT/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.12	23.26	0.782	20.33	2020	
138

60.	FTO/SnO2/MgO/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.36	11.70	0.693	11.04	2020	
341

61.	ITO/SnO2/TPPO/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.11	24.3	0.77	20.69	2019	
156

62.	ITO/SnO2/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.10	24.2	0.77	20.5	2019	
342

63.	FTO/SnO2:NH4Cl/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.19	22.2	0.75	20	2019	
143

64.	ITO/SnO2:NGO/Rb0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.17	18.87	0.75	16.54	2019	
152

65.	ITO/SnO2/C9/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.12	22.8	0.789	21.3	2018	
308

66.	FTO/Mg-SnO2 bl/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SGS	1.112	22.80	0.758	19.21	2018	
343

67.	ITO/SnO2:GQDs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.13	23.05	0.778	20.23	2017	
137

68.	FTO/SnO2NS/C60/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	1.039	23.62	0.75	18.31	2017	
344

69.	ITO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	ED	1.08	19.75	0.65	13.88	2017	
128

70.	ITO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.97(MAPbI3)0.03/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.10	25.28	0.731	20.28	2016	
307

71.	FTO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.11	23.27	0.67	17.21	2015	
125

Ternary metal oxides
72.	FTO/LBSO-PFA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	laser	1.139	24.10	0.86	23.74	2022	
345

73.	FTO/ZSO/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	CBD	9.368	3.24	0.745	22.59	2022	
317

74.	FTO/c-TiO2/NO-BSO/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SP	0.94	23.04	0.68	14.77	2021	
346

75.	FTO/ZSO/CsMAFA/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CBD	1.14	23.59	0.79	21.3	2020	
315

76.	FTO/La–SrSnO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.12	23.3	0.718	18.7	2020	
213

77.	FTO/c-ZSO/mp-ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	1.05	24.79	0.704	18.32	2020	
347

78.	FTO/La+-BaTiO3/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	0.96	21.5	0.69	14.3	2020	
348

79.	FTO/c-ZSO/mp-ZSO/Cs0.5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	RC	1.06	24.58	0.79	20.1	2019	
349

80.	FTO/am-ZSO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	PLD	1.12	22.49	0.796	20.04	2019	
350

81.	FTO/Y-SrSnO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.14	22.7	0.74	19.0	2019	
212

82.	ITO/SrTiO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.143	23.02	0.721	19.0	2019	
205

83.	FTO/ZSO/FAMAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.036	24.72	0.781	20.02	2018	
63

84.	FTO/LBSO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au	PP/SC	1.12	23.4	0.81	21.2	2017	
200

85.	FTO/c-TiO2/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	HT	1.048	23.71	0.692	17.21	2017	
313

86.	FTO/ZnO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SP	1.035	19.71	0.59	12.03	2017	
216

87.	FTO/BSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	PP	0.968	17.45	0.637	10.96	2017	
197

88.	FTO/bl-ZSO/rGO–ZSO/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/PTAA/Au	ES	1.046	22.50	0.76	17.89	2016	
217

89.	FTO/TiO2/BSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.03	16.8	0.71	12.3	2016	
196

90.	FTO/TiO2/BaTiO3/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	0.962	19.3	0.67	12.4	2016	
210

91.	ITO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au	SC	1.05	21.6	0.67	15.3	2015	
312

92.	FTO/ZSO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	SC	0.84	15.03	0.62	7.02	2014	
214

Scaffolds
93.	FTO/Nb:SrTiO3/SrO/(MAPbI3)x(CsFAMA)1−x/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	ST	1.11	23.9	0.76	20.2	2020	
206

94.	ITO/ZrO2/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC/UVT	1.068	23.32	0.782	19.48	2020	
351

95.	FTO/Nb2O5/Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.13	12.80	0.72	10.3	2015	
268

96.	FTO/TiO2/SiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SG	1.05	16.4	0.66	11.45	2014	
224

97.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.07	17.3	0.59	10.8	2013	
233

98.	FTO/TiO2/Al2O3/Au@SiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.02	16.94	0.64	11.4	2013	
31

99.	FTO/c-TiO2/Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	0.98	17.8	0.63	10.9	2012	
220

Other Inorganic ETLs
100.	ITO/c-TiO2/CdSe/ZnS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.08	22.9	0.73	18.1	2020	
352

101.	ITO/a-WO3/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	TE	1.11	23.01	0.803	20.52	2019	
353

102.	FTO/In2S3/CsPbIBr2/spiro-OMeTAD:Li-TFSI:TBP/Au	CBD	1.09	7.76	0.659	5.59	2019	
354

103.	FTO/TiO2 NCs/Nb2O5/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SC	1.04	20.49	0.716	15.25	2018	
355

104.	FTO/mp-TiO2-ZnS/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	SILAR	1.02	19.05	0.754	14.9	2018	
356

105.	FTO/NMT-CdS/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CBD	1.12	19.7	0.74	16.3	2018	
357

106.	FTO/CdS/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	P-CVD	1.04	20.76	0.68	14.68	2017	
358

107.	ITO/WO3/SAMs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.02	21.9	0.665	14.9	2015	
359


 	Fig. 21  Schematic displaying the path of the photogenerated hole from the perovskite light absorber to the external circuit. (CBM: conduction band minimum and VBM: valence band maximum.)	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic of band alignment of various inorganic HTLs with perovskite absorber.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images of the NiO nanotube nanoforest with controlled length and branch growth. Schematic of (c) device architecture and corresponding cross-section SEM image and (d) charge transport in PSCs consisting of NiO nanocrystals and nanoforest HTLs. (e) Comparative PCE distribution of nanocrystal and nanotubes.382 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44308–44314). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Optimized structures showing the HOMO (left) and LUMO (right) orbitals for three mutual orientations of an NiO (lower) and perovskite (upper) interfacial region. The geometries G1 refer to the surface separation of ∼1 nm between the perovskite and NiO, and G2 and G3 indicate the close proximity of <0.3 nm between the perovskite and NiO, but perovskite contact NiO(100) surface via the closest halogen atom and MA ion and halogen atom and lead atoms, respectively. The upper row shows the MAPbI3, and the lower row represents the MAPbBr3 perovskite nanoparticles. In the NiO structure, the Ni and O atoms are represented by green and red spheres, respectively. In the perovskite structure, the Br, I, and Pb atoms are identified in brown.383 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11467–11478). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of n–i–p PSCs consisting of a hybrid HTL of PTAA and VOx with lower gas permeability and better barrier properties than the volatile perovskite decomposition products. Molecular structure, linked pyramid-based structure and topography of (b) spin-coated p-type PTAA thin film and (c) evaporated 30 nm-thick VOx film on glass. (d) I–V characteristics of PSC consisting of VOx in bilayer hybrid HTL. (e) Stability of PSCs with bilayer hybrid HTLs under illumination.430 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5563–5568). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Top-view SEM images of the perovskite layer (a) without and (b) with CoO nanoplate HTL, and their respective cross-sectional views (c) without and (d) with CoO nanoplate HTL. (e) PL and (f) TRPL spectra of the CoO nanoplate HTL. (g) J–V curves of the PSCs with and without CoO nanoplate HTL and (h) VOC and PCE obtained by forward and reverse scan of 20 of these PSCs. The control was a PSC without CoO nanoplates.448 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32159–32168). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a–d) Logarithm of LDOS × Vcell averaged in the xy planes calculated between the MAPI and Cu2O interface and (e–h) their Bader charges summed by layers for the four interface models: (a and e) O/PbI, (b and f) O/MAI, (c and g) Cu/PbI, and (d and h) Cu/MAI. The interface states are higher in energy than the MAPI CB, allowing electrons to return to MAPI. Therefore, holes can be transferred from MAPI to Cu2O without being trapped, although they can be attracted and recombine with electrons trapped at the O/PbI and Cu/PbI interfaces.473 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44648–44657). Copyright (2020), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of CuI islands formed on TiO2 compact layer and subsequent deposition of perovskite layer. In CuI-modified TiO2 (CuI@TiO2)-based PSCs, electrons move from the perovskites to the exposed TiO2 surface instead of CuI islands because of its high conduction band energy level. (b) Interfaces with various amounts of CuI islands. (c) FF and PCE of devices with various concentrations of CuI.490 Reprinted with permission from (Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1702235). Copyright (2017), John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Trap distribution spectra and (b) J–V characteristics measured in the dark for the MAPbI3/CuSCN-based PSCs with and without the PDMS interlayer. (c) Schematic of the cross-linking PDMS interlayer. The resistive and defective features of the PSCs are estimated from the curves in (a) fitted with slid lines. The arrows in (b) indicate the trap-filled limit voltages (VTFL).508 Reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46818–46824). Copyright (2019), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic, (b) J–V characteristics under illumination, and (c) a cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs consisting of CuyCrzO2 film. (d) Band energy level diagram of PSCs comprised of CuyCrzO2 HTL in various volume ratios of y:z = 1:0, 4:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, and 0:1.525 Reprinted with permission from (Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700058). Copyright (2017), John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Absorbance spectra of ∼230 nm-thick PEDOT films (red circles) and ∼280 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD films doped with Li-TFSI (blue triangles) deposited on glass. (b) Steady-state PL spectra and (c) time-resolved PL decay exited at 507 nm of perovskite films coated with PMMA (black squares), PEDOT (red circles), and spiro-OMeTAD (blue triangles), respectively.555 Reprinted with permission from (J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1666–1673). Copyright (2015), the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Comparative study of the influential HTLs developed by year to gain the best maximum efficiency in the last decade (collected from ISI Web of Knowledge up to 31st December 2021).574	 


Nickel oxide (NiO)
1.	ITO/NiOx/TPA-BA/PC61BM/BCP/Au	SC	1.15	23.36	0.829	22.25	2022	
570

2.	FTO/S-NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Au	SC	1.13	22.56	0.78	19.91	2022	
578

3.	ITO/NiOx/Cs0.5(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PS-PAN/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cr/Au	SC	1.12	23.51	0.836	22.02	2021	
569

4.	ITO/NiOx/RT-MAPb(I1−xClx)3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.16	23.52	0.847	23.07	2020	
568

5.	ITO/Al:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/am-TiO2/Ag	SC	1.06	24.34	0.813	20.84	2020	
403

6.	FTO/c-TiO2/Al2O3/FA0.026MA0.974PbI3−yCly-Cu:NiO/spiro-OMETAD/Au	CP/SC	1.05	24.51	0.805	20.67	2020	
388

7.	FTO/Ni2O3/MA0.85FA0.15PbI0.9Cl0.1/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.06	19.66	0.826	17.89	2020	
385

8.	ITO/Li:CO-NiO/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/PC61BM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.09	23.8	0.78	20.1	2019	
409

9.	FTO/NiO NCs/mp-NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Au	ST	1.11	22.20	0.741	18.17	2019	
579

10.	FTO/NiO/MA1−yFAyPbI3−xClx/PCBM/BCP/Ag	C	1.12	23.7	0.76	20.2	2018	
381

11.	ITO/Ag:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.08	19.70	0.783	16.86	2018	
394

12.	FTO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	RFS	1.05	20.57	0.752	16.29	2018	
580

13.	FTO/Cs:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZrAcac/Ag	SC	1.12	21.77	0.793	19.35	2017	
400

14.	FTO/c-TiO2/NiO NTs + CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMETAD/Au	ES	1.12	22.7	0.752	19.3	2017	
581

15.	FTO/NiMgOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnMgO/Al	DCS	1.08	21.3	0.79	18.2	2017	
404

16.	ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	SC	1.07	20.58	0.748	16.47	2016	
567

17.	ITO/Cu:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/bis-C60/Ag	C	1.05	22.23	0.76	17.74	2015	
566

18.	ITO/Cu:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/C60/Ag	CP	1.12	19.17	0.73	15.4	2015	
582

19.	ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al	RFS	1.00	17.4	0.61	10.7	2014	
565



Cobalt oxide (CoOx)
20.	ITO/Zn,Li+:CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	0.93	19.7	0.639	11.64	2021	
583

21.	ITO/Li–Co3O4/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Ag	SC	1.04	20.66	0.65	13.96	2020	
444

22.	FTO/CoO/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PCBM/Ag	LEP	0.99	18.9	0.572	10.1	2020	
447

23.	ITO/TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CoO/spiro-OMETAD/Au	ST	1.18	23.19	0.757	20.70	2019	
448

24.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/ZrO2/Co3O4/C	CP	0.88	23.43	0.64	13.27	2018	
442

25.	FTO/Co1−yCuyOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	DCS	0.93	17.98	0.599	9.98	2017	
441

26.	FTO/Ni:CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	DCS	0.99	15.96	0.607	9.63	2017	
584

27.	ITO/CoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	SC	0.95	20.28	0.755	14.5	2016	
440



Copper oxide (CuOx)
28.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuO/C	SC	0.83	16.98	0.55	7.75	2022	
575

29.	ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	RFS	1.06	27.14	0.786	22.56	2021	
464

30.	ITO/NiOx/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au	SC	1.12	22.29	0.783	19.91	2021	
462

31.	ITO/SnO2/CsFAMA/Cu2O-CuSCN/Au	SC	1.05	23.23	0.784	19.2	2020	
469

32.	FTO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/SiO2/GZO/Ag	RFS	1.12	20.90	0.786	18.4	2020	
466

33.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05MA0.14FA0.81PbI2.55Br0.45/Cu2O/Au	SC	1.15	22.2	0.742	18.9	2019	
467

34.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Cu2O/Au	SC	1.13	22.53	0.673	17.23	2019	
465

35.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Cu2O/Ag	IBS	1.03	22.46	0.741	17.11	2018	
459

36.	ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/ZnO/Al	SC	1.03	22.42	0.76	17.43	2017	
452

37.	ITO/CuOx/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	SC	0.99	23.2	0.744	17.1	2016	
461

38.	ITO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Ag	RFS	0.95	17.5	0.662	11.03	2016	
453

39.	ITO/Cu2O/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Al	DipC	1.07	16.52	0.755	13.35	2015	
361


	ITO/CuO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Al	
	1.06	15.82	0.725	12.16	
	



Vanadium oxide (VOx)
40.	ITO/Cs-VOx/PTAA/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.08	22.47	0.79	19.64	2021	
577

41.	ITO/PTAA/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/LiF/Al	SC	1.12	22.65	0.75	18.9	2021	
427

42.	ITO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Al	RFS	1.00	20.7	0.66	13.66	2021	
421

43.	ITO/SnO2/PCBA/CsFAPbI3/MAI/PTAA/VOx/Ag	TE	1.044	24.6	0.78	20.1	2020	
430

44.	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEDOT:PSS-VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/LiF/Al	SC	1.02	22.98	0.77	18.0	2020	
416

45.	ITO/V2O5:PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/PDINO/Al	SC	0.80	16.83	0.701	9.44	2020	
437

46.	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al	SC	0.969	20.3	0.722	14.22	2019	
418

47.	FTO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al	SC	0.99	20.98	0.761	16.06	2018	
576

48.	FTO/TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/NiPc-(OBu)8/V2O5/Au	SC	1.07	23.0	0.728	17.9	2017	
438

49.	ITO/VOx/APPA/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/BCP/Ag	SC	0.96	19.42	0.752	14.07	2017	
424

50.	ITO/VOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al	SC	0.90	22.29	0.71	14.23	2016	
417



Copper iodide (CuI)
51.	ITO/SnO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3−yCly/CuI/PDMS/Au	SP	0.795	19.3	0.538	8.3	2022	
573

52.	ITO/CuI/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/carbon	ED	1.10	20.26	0.78	20.35	2021	
572

53.	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al	SC	0.977	23.13	0.737	16.65	2021	
487

54.	FTO/CuSCN@CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/carbon	ED	1.08	18.24	0.79	15.58	2021	
585

55.	PTTA/CuI/FA0.05MA0.95PbI3/PCBM/C60–N/Ag	SC	1.057	24.8	0.77	20.34	2020	
488

56.	FTO/CuI/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Cu	SC	0.75	28.5	0.737	15.75	2020	
479

57.	ITO/CuI/HaP/PCBM/AZO/Ag	SC	0.99	19.39	0.74	14.21	2020	
480

58.	FTO/Cu@CuI//PCBM/ZnO/Ag	SC	1.06	23.31	0.761	18.80	2019	
486

59.	FTO/NiO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.07	20.60	0.69	15.26	2019	
489

60.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x/CuI/Pt-FTO	PPT	0.67	24.23	0.50	8.1	2019	
476

61.	ITO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxPC61BM/PEI/Ag	SC	1.05	20.05	0.69	14.53	2018	
571


	ITO/CuI/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxPC61BM/PEI/Ag	
	1.11	22.33	0.76	18.76	
	

62.	ITO/Cu(Tu)I–CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/C60/BCP/Ag	SC	1.12	22.3	0.798	20.0	2017	
491

63.	FTO/Na–TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/	S	1.03	22.78	0.75	17.6	2017	
478

64.	FTO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/PEI/Ag	VI	1.04	20.9	0.68	14.7	2017	
484

65.	ITO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	SC	1.01	22.9	0.728	16.8	2016	
485

66.	ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/CuI/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	SC	1.06	21.52	0.73	16.67	2016	
548

67.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Au	TE	0.73	32.72	0.31	7.40	2016	
481

68.	FTO/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al	SC	1.04	21.06	0.62	13.58	2015	
482

69.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Au	DC	0.55	17.8	0.62	6.0	2014	
477



Copper thiocyanate (CuSCN)
70.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au	SC	0.981	23.77	0.724	16.89	2022	
586

71.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au	SC	0.93	17.2	0.63	10.1	2022	
587

72.	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsBr/CuSCN/Au	SC	1.05	12.3	0.76	9.96	2022	
588

73.	ITO/SnO2/FA1−yMAyPbBr3−xIx/CuSCN/DTB/Au	SC	1.15	24.31	0.786	21.7	2020	
510

74.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au	SC	0.83	22.15	0.60	11.02	2020	
589

75.	FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/CuSCN/Au	SBND	1.074	23.17	0.756	18.74	2019	
590

76.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PSC-CuSCN/Au	SC	1.068	22.85	0.761	18.57	2019	
512

77.	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/CuSCN/ITO	SC	0.978	20.2	0.721	14.2	2019	
591

78.	ITO/r-GO/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.031	18.21	0.761	14.28	2018	
592

79.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuSCN/Au	S	1.013	23.10	0.731	17.10	2017	
500

80.	ITO/3D-CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Bphen/Ag	ED	0.92	19.45	0.69	11.89	2017	
505


	ITO/2D-CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Bphen/Ag	
	0.82	18.56	0.61	9.19	
	



Other inorganic HTLs
81.	ITO/CuBr/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60-N/Ag	SC	1.03	23.15	0.738	17.65	2022	
593

82.	FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/CuIn0.75Ga0.25S2/C	SC	1.08	23.86	0.62	15.93	2020	
594

83.	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Fe3O4/Au	SC	1.13	19.29	0.71	15.42	2020	
595

84.	FTO/NiCoOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	SC	1.08	22.27	0.833	20.03	2019	
596

85.	ITO/c-CuCrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	HT	1.07	21.94	0.81	19.0	2018	
522

86.	ITO/LiCoO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	RFS	1.06	22.5	0.8	18.88	2018	
445

87.	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/CuGaO2/Au	HT	1.11	21.66	0.77	18.51	2017	
363

88.	ITO/CuAlO2/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ag	DCS	0.88	21.98	0.75	14.52	2016	
520

Footnote
† Authors share equal authorship.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
