3  Mass spectrometry of free radicals: a methodological overview  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B408852M View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B408852M
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2005, 101, 53-993  Mass spectrometry of free radicals: a methodological overviewM. Sabliera and T. Fujii*baEcole Polytechnique Laboratoire des Mécanismes Réactionnels - UMR 7651, 91128 Palaiseau cedex, FrancebTokyo Metropolitan University, Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Sciences, Hachioji, 192-0397 Tokyo, JapanFirst published on 14th March 2005AbstractThis review outlines the advances that have been made in the area of mass spectrometric investigations of gas-phase radicals, and follows the guidelines appearing in the literature from the works covering this field during the period 2000–2004. An overview is presented of some topics of contemporary gas-phase radical investigations using techniques derived from physical chemistry, mainly supersonic jet pyrolysis combined with laser-based ionization methods. Specifically considered is the ion attachment mass spectrometry method because of its incoming contribution to radical chemistry, especially in the dynamic studies of individual free radical species.1 IntroductionThe making and the breaking of chemical bonds are the basis of practical concepts used everywhere in chemistry. It is becoming more and more apparent that many chemical reactions involving oxidation, combustion and atmospheric processes generally involve short-lived reactive intermediates such as radicals. Understanding their role in these processes requires that the mechanisms by which reactions take place or bonds are broken be understood. Mechanistic understanding of these reactions implies the knowledge of fundamental thermochemical properties such as enthalpies, entropies or heat capacities which can be used to provide insight into energetically favorable chemical transformations. Therefore, the availability of accurate thermochemical data on radicals is essential for understanding their reactivity.Because radicals are highly reactive species they are generally difficult to isolate and detect, additionally when they are detected, they are present in very low concentrations, and as a consequence direct experimental observation of radicals is quite demanding.Recent instrumental developments in mass spectrometry of free radicals are encompassed in two apparently opposite directions: (i) thermochemical data acquisition which employs techniques derived from physical chemistry, (ii) analysis of plasma and flame which necessitates the development of original detection methods. These two directions will constitute the guidelines in this article since they constitute the core of the articles published on the topic of mass spectrometry of free radicals.Classical approaches to the study of reactive intermediates like free radicals imply conducting the chemical reaction of interest under such conditions that the reactive intermediates can be trapped by another chemical way to convert them into stable species that can be spectroscopically characterized using traditional spectroscopic methods. Another approach consists of the use of a fast and selective spectroscopic method that provides specific information about the properties of the intermediates, typically electronic or vibrational, allowing the structure of these intermediates to be described. It is certainly in following this latter approach that most of the developments have been conducted recently in the mass spectrometry of free radicals.Indeed, determinations of bond energies by mass spectrometric studies necessitate the construction of thermochemical cycles, generally referred to as positive or negative thermochemical cycles depending on the ions involved as well as the quantities measured, ionization energy measurements in the first case, electron affinity measurements in the second case. The advent of laser-based spectroscopic methods has obviously favored the opportunities for such detailed studies on organic reactive intermediates and their thermochemical quantities, complementing the early data available. This has opened numerous opportunities for detailed studies of organic radicals, with the only limitation residing in the ability to generate the species cleanly and specifically under well-defined spectroscopic conditions, keeping in mind that for reactive intermediates, preparation itself is no trivial task. This explains why, from a methodological point of view, the development of experiments for studies of free radicals in the gas-phase using laser based ionization methods has been related to the design of new sources for the preparation of radicals, in completion of classical electrical discharge or excimer laser photolysis techniques. In particular, the adaptation of pyrolytic techniques for the development of supersonic jet flash pyrolysis has been of highly valuable interest in this field.A radically different approach for the generation and the preparation of reactive transient intermediates resides in the use of the relative stabilities of their cationic and anionic counterparts which are at the origin of the formation of unstable electron-rich or electron-deficient highly reactive intermediates. This is the principle used in neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry experiments that have appeared as a powerful tool for the generation and identification of numerous elusive species in a research area previously limited to the spectroscopy of jet-cooled molecules.Alternatively, it is possible to investigate reactions between ions and neutral free radicals, and this is then the ion chemistry of the process which is investigated and data are deduced from a combination of experimental results in adequate thermochemical cycles. The strategy consists firstly of the accurate measurement of accessible experimental data and secondly of the derivation of the value of interest, usually the bond dissociation energy, from these thermochemical cycles. These experiments, which usually combine appearance energy measurements and gas-phase acidity determination, can be conducted using ion cyclotron resonance spectrometers for measurements at equilibrium, but are mostly provided by flowing afterglow devices throughout the literature.The detection and characterization of free organic radicals has been one of the most important challenges for mass spectrometry during the past 60 years. If most of the information concerning the reactions of free radicals has come from kinetic studies in which the presence and behavior of radicals are mainly deduced from the nature of the reaction products and from the dependence of the observed reaction rates on various experimental parameters, mass spectrometry has early appeared as a direct method to study radical intermediates due to its immediate response in the analysis of representative samples of a reaction mixture. Nevertheless, few techniques allow the direct characterization of radical intermediate species because remote sampling by mass spectrometry methods without interfering or destroying the intrinsic nature of the system investigated is by far not obvious. From the mid seventies, improved experiments using electron ionization methods have been proposed to increase the sensitivity for radical detection, trying to reconcile the necessity to work at a low electron energy current to reduce the weight of interfering molecules in the acquired mass spectra, and to work with sufficient sensitivity for the detection of low-concentration radicals. Among the original methods developed in the purpose of detecting and characterizing free organic radicals in dynamic chemical systems such as cold plasmas, the ion attachment mass spectrometry (IAMS) method appears to be an alternative to low energy electron impact ionization methods which are principally reported nowadays solely in the investigation of chemical vapor deposition processes.This review is written with the physical chemist in mind, who would like to be aware of developments in the area of mass spectrometric investigations of gas-phase radicals, and follows the guidelines appearing in the literature from the recent instrumental developments proposed by the laboratories working in the field of gas-phase radical chemistry. We assume that the reader of this review is familiar with mass spectrometry, and if not, will refer to the use of mass spectrometry in the field of organic chemistry that has been reviewed copiously as well as in former issues of the present journal1,2 and in other regularly updated publications.3 The references quoted in the present review are of typical examples published recently in the field of mass spectrometry of radicals, and are completing the comprehensive review previously published by the authors, which covers the last sixty years of mass spectrometry studies in the domain of free radicals.4 We recommend to the reader to refer to it for exhaustive coverage of this field.For the sake of clarity, we have included at the end of this review a list of acronyms as a glossary to help with the use of terms appearing with propensity in the area of mass spectrometry. As a convention, a bond dissociation energy at 298 K is related to the abbreviation DH298, a bond dissociation energy at 0 K is related to the abbreviation D0. If different temperature measurements are specified in the quoted articles, the notation DHT has been adopted to define the corresponding measured or deduced values.2 Pioneering worksThe first free radical studies by mass spectrometry have schematically followed two directions in the purpose of detection and identification of radicals generated by thermal decomposition or in the purpose of investigating radical properties. In the first approach, the instrumental developments were directly focused on the development of experiments authorizing the sampling of a relatively high-pressure zone of radical generation with a mass spectrometer necessitating a low-working pressure. In the latter case, efforts were focused on the generation of the investigated radical in high concentrations to permit measurements of ionization potentials and calculation of the relevant dissociation energies of precursors.In both cases, the principle of operation consisted in the formation of a radical R by thermal decomposition of a precursor molecule RX directly introduced into the ion source. The resulting ionized radical, R+, can be produced in general by two processes which are summarized in the following reactions, eqns. (1) and (2): R + e− 						→ R+ 						+ 2e−(1) RX + e− 						→ R+ 						+ X + 2e−(2)where the minimum energy for reaction (1) is the ionization energy (IE) of the radical R, and the minimum energy for the dissociative ionization reaction (2) is the appearance energy (AE) of the radical R. As will be seen below, these two thermochemical quantities are associated through eqn. (3):  AE(R) 						= IE(R) 						+ DH298(R–X) 						+ eKE(3)where DH298(R–X) refers to the bond dissociation enthalpy of the R–X bond, and eKE to the kinetic energy release of the electron in eqn. (2). Thus, by employing electrons with a low energy, it is, in principle, possible to only ionize the free radical R eliminating any ions produced by the dissociative ionization process, reaction (2).Historically, the feasibility of detecting free radicals and elusive intermediate products of chemical reactions by means of mass spectrometry was pioneered by the works of Eltenton,5,6 Hipple and Stevenson7 who have demonstrated the utility of mass spectrometry for the application of radical detection in pressure regimes not attainable with the other methods available at that time.4The experimental difficulty related to the transfer of a gaseous sample from a relatively high-pressure reactor to the very low-pressure mass spectrometer without losing radicals in a high proportion through collisions in the gas-phase or on surfaces, has been at first the principal limitation for the development of mass spectrometry in the field of radical studies. The advent of molecular beam systems with their characteristic interface allowed a noticeable breakthrough due to the possibilities presented by this system with the rapid removal of the intermediate species from the reaction zone and the limitation of collisions with the walls of the instrument prior ionization.As a result of these instrumental improvements and due to an eager interest in thermochemical data, as early as the late fifties the list of radicals and atoms generated by various methods (thermal decomposition, combustion flames, electric discharges, bimolecular reactions), detected and investigated by mass spectrometry was already noteworthy.8Early studies investigating radicals in the gas-phase by mass spectrometry were performed by electron impact for the ionization of radicals. Nevertheless, structural information and thermochemical data were difficult to assess unambiguously, and with the advent of photoionization methods, the drawbacks of electron ionization methods have been clearly emphasized. By definition, ionization potentials measured by electron impact are considered to correspond to a vertical transition in the Franck–Condon sense and, as such, are slightly higher than the adiabatic values obtained from spectroscopic techniques. This resulted in an unavoidable ambiguity for the exact attribution of ionization energies. However, at the end of the fifties, no alternative to the electron impact values was experimentally available except for in a very few cases. By principle, a plot of the detected ion current against the electron energy should enable one to determine the ionization and appearance energies of the radical at the threshold (see eqn. (1) and eqn. (2) above). Several empirical methods have been used for this purpose. But, due to the Maxwell–Boltzman distribution of the ionizing electron energy and due to unreproducible effects in the electron source or in the ion source, data derived from electron impact studies could not be accepted without reservation. Experimental techniques existed for minimizing the effect of the distribution of energy in the electron beam but, unfortunately, their use suffered from the disadvantage that any gain in precision was obtained to the detriment of the overall sensitivity of the instruments so necessary for radical investigations. The overall absolute accuracy was consequently limited to errors in the 0.1 eV range but in the beginning of the sixties, these values were reasonably competitive with the data obtained by means of photoionization experiments with limited resolution not comparable to the values accessible nowadays.In addition to the experimental accuracy related to the definition of the ionizing electron beam energy, important uncertainties were arising from a change in geometry between the neutral radical and the resulting ion. For this reason, the development of vacuum ultraviolet photoionization methods could be regarded as one of, if not the most important improvement over mass spectrometric methods used to investigate radicals during the past 40 years.The high-energy resolution of the technique was often proposed as its main advantage and the most evident advantage of photoionization data compared to electron impact data resided in the clear differentiation between vertical and adiabatic ionization energies due to a higher energy resolution. However, uncertainties for the determination of true thresholds remained until the introduction of windowless vacuum ultraviolet monochromators, which have drastically extended the accessible energy range for ionization. With the advent of photionization techniques, it was therefore possible to obtain reliable threshold data as well as fine structures usually blurred in the electron impact method.4Since the advent of the modern molecular beam and laser techniques, experimental approaches to radical investigations have followed the major developments in relation to the expansion of photoelectron spectroscopy and more especially photoionization techniques.3 Radical thermochemistry and constraints associated with its investigation by mass spectrometry methodsA great quantity of thermochemical information on neutrals has been obtained through the threshold measurements of ionization and appearance energies.9 If one considers the homolytic bond dissociation of a neutral AB as resulting from the following fragmentation process, eqn. (4): A–B → A + B(4)the associated enthalpy of reaction ΔH298, or bond dissociation enthalpy (DH298), can be expressed by ΔH298 				= DH298(A–B) 				= 				ΔfH°298(A) 				+ 				ΔfH°298(B) 				− 				ΔfH°298(A–B) and refers usually to the AB species at 298 K. DH298 may be determined directly by measuring the enthalpy change in eqn. (4) at 298 K or may be obtained if the three heats of formation, ΔfH°298(A), ΔfH°298(B) and ΔfH°298(A–B), are known from independent experiments. If the value of ΔfH°298(A–B) could be known through calorimetric techniques, the remaining problem is one of determining ΔfH°298(A) and ΔfH°298(B). The fact that thermochemical information is missing for the neutral species A and B can be overcome with the use of thermochemical cycles introducing positive ions and their relevant ionization energy and appearance energy, as reported in the following equations:  DH298(A–B) 						= DH298(A+–B) 						+ IE(AB) 						− IE(A)(5) DH298(A–B) 						= AE(A+, AB) 						− IE(A)(6)In addition, relative heats of formation of the corresponding positive ions can be subsequently determined and can be anchored with accessible absolute values such as the heats of formation of atoms, measured spectroscopically.10If steady progress is regularly made in the measurements of ionic heats of formation, there still remains a lack of data concerning radicals in relation with the difficulties associated with the determination of enthalpies of formation for free radicals from ion-based experiments. A well recognized problem about ion thermochemistry is related to the case where one obtains an adiabatic IE value whose cation has a ground state geometry significantly different from those of the neutral. Consequently, measurement of the adiabatic IE is not possible by a vertical ionization process because of this difference in geometry between the neutral ground state and its cationic counterpart. Mix-up between the supposed adiabatic IE value and the vertical IE value involving transitions corresponding to slightly higher vibrational levels of the neutral precursor or geometrical changes from the neutral to the ionic state are the main reasons for the usually reported over-estimations in compiled values.11 Meanwhile, examples of erroneous or inaccurate values related to neutral thermochemistry data for free radicals are regularly reported and corrected.11,12Multiphoton excitation has appeared as an elegant way of overcoming such difficulties compared to the first essays of radical investigation by mass spectrometry, where most of the data relative to dissociation energies were obtained by direct measurements of appearance potentials using electron ionization methods.4 Indeed, in multiphoton ionization, the ground state of the ion during the ionization process is attained via a Rydberg state of the neutral which allows one to consider that its geometry attains the geometry of the ion.Computing heat capacity corrections allows one to adjust the bond dissociation enthalpies to any reaction temperature since these values are linked by the expression:  (7)which is usually employed to correct DH298(A–B) to 0 K yielding D0(A–B), the so-called bond dissociation energy. For a few common molecules, integrated heat capacities have been evaluated and tabulated over a range of temperatures,13 otherwise, they are calculated using equilibrium statistical mechanics. However, one must be aware of approximation reported sometimes for eqn. (7) in the case where bond dissociation energy D0(A–B) and bond dissociation enthalpy DH298(A–B) are considered as numerically equivalent or, in other words, if a need in precision no better than ±3 kcal mol−1 is required.12The experimental measurement of bond dissociation energies is not easy and necessitates great experimental care. Reported data are commonly attained through the study of radical kinetics, photoionization mass spectrometry (PIMS) or a combination of advanced experiments to gain electron affinities and gas-phase acidity measurements.4,12,14 In the latter method, photoelectron spectroscopy and gas-phase ion chemistry are used to build a thermochemical cycle represented by the following equations:  R− 						→ R + e− 						   EA(R)(8) RH → R− 						+ H+ 						   ΔacidH298(RH)(9) H+ 						+ e− 						→ H    −IE(H)(10)  RH → R + H    DH298(R–H)(11)The bond dissociation enthalpy DH298(R–H) is derived through the sum of eqns. (8)–(10):  DH298(R–H) 						= EA(R) 						+ 						ΔacidH298(RH) 						− IE(H)(12)As stated above, a set of heat capacity integrals can be included in eqn. (12) to correct “thermally” the value extracted for the homolytic bond enthalpy.12The instability of free radicals has contributed to the development of techniques permitting experiments on species easily destroyed in collisions. For this reason, modern experiments are generally performed using supersonic beams to avoid reactive collisions of radicals and to allow spectroscopy in supersonic free jets.15 By this principle the molecule of interest, diluted in a rare gas, is adiabatically expanded through a pulsed valve into the vacuum region resulting in a collimated beam of precursors distributed among a small number of quantum states. This technique appeared to be particularly well-suited to combination with laser spectroscopy.The challenge in studies of radicals lies in the way of generating them cleanly, in avoiding the formation of additional side products, and in obtaining a sufficiently high number density of unstable species to perform spectroscopy experiments. For this reason, the development and optimization of sources to generate isolated radicals is an area of active research in relation to gas-phase radical studies. Traditionally, photolysis as well as electrical discharges have been broadly used. The tendency to employ supersonic free jets has certainly favored the development of techniques like flash pyrolysis which is presented as a clean source of an isolated radical beam especially if the experimental conditions are properly chosen to select the bond to be pyrolytically broken, usually the thermochemically weakest bond in the precursor.15 Number densities in the order of 1014 cm−3 are reported at the nozzle exit of the supersonic jet16 and must be compared to the maximum radical density estimated at 1010–1011 radicals cm−3 for the flow beam reactor described below.17,18 With the utilization of suitable materials for the pyrolysis zone, temperatures as high as 1500 K can be attained. Pyrolysis of propargyl bromide demonstrates well how pyrolytic generation of propargyl radicals worked under these conditions especially with a suitable ionization wavelength allowing detection only of precursors and propargyl radical with no bromine side-products.16As will be seen in the following sections, in the field of thermochemical data acquisition, laser spectroscopy on isolated radicals has matured in such a way that it makes these techniques particularly suitable for such investigations particularly because of the wealth of information that can be gained on the chemistry of the systems investigated.4 Constraints associated with the investigation of flames and plasmas by mass spectrometry methodsThere is a well-recognized place for mass spectrometry in the remote sampling of systems containing radicals, even if optical spectrometry can be considered as the cleanest approach in the sense that it does not interfere with the system being sampled.17 However, the numerous publications reporting on mass spectrometric plasma or discharge sampling confirm the efficiency of mass spectrometry in these domains.4 Nevertheless, remote sampling by mass spectrometry methods without interfering or destroying the intrinsic nature of the system investigated is not obvious and the general approach usually chosen was to sample, through a small hole, fractions of the gas escaping from the plasma or the flame. The idea was residing in the simple concept of replacing an optical window by a molecular leak. The use of molecular beam techniques associated with modulating and chopping the neutral beam eluted from the radical source (furnace, plasma or flame) has greatly favored the investigation of such radical sources by mass spectrometry.18Threshold ionization at or below the appearance energy value of the radical investigated has been employed for radical detection.17 Some time elapsed before the development of experimental techniques allowing one to probe both neutral and ionic species in the same experiments.4 From the mid seventies, improved experiments have been proposed to increase the sensitivity for radical detection, trying to reconcile the necessity to work at a low electron energy current to reduce the weight of interfering molecules in the acquired mass spectra, and to work with sufficient sensitivity for the detection of low-concentration radicals. Most of the sampling systems proposed consisted nevertheless of a discharge flow system with a global working pressure of about 10−2 Torr and an intermediate flow regime expected to minimize collisions before sampling. More recently, the threshold ionization technique whose principle lies in the adequate choice of the ionizing electron energy associated to an efficient collimating system was utilized for the determination of relative densities of SiHn/SiH3 silicon radicals in silane–argon mixtures.19Remaining difficulties for the analysis of discharges resided in the calibration of ion currents as a function of radical concentration, calibration which is required for quantitative kinetic studies. Usually, the proposed solution resided in the comparison of signal intensities corresponding to ionic and neutral species since the decay of the investigated radicals along the reaction zone is usually related to measurement of the decay of corresponding ion currents. Nevertheless, this correlation can be complicated by the absence of an effective method to calibrate the ion current with the radical concentration. As a matter of fact, in the past thirty years, there were not many examples of procedures for reactive plasma diagnosis, including either ionics, neutrals, or radicals.20–22Concerning flame analysis, difficulties are associated with the fact that a flame is a complex reacting chemical system which contains many interfering species, and, at the same time, can be considered as a flow system with steep gradients of reactive species that can result in substantial concentration differences between different locations of sampling. This involves the need to associate a composition with a precise position in the system. Consequently, the central problem for flame analysis by mass spectrometry lies in obtaining a representative sample and an accurate interpretation of the sample qualitatively and quantitatively within the experimental procedure.4 Schematically, if the objective is the identification of occurring species and the determination of energies at which the observed species appear, flame disturbance becomes less important. Nevertheless, if the aim is to analyze the processes involved, the sampling operation must not disturb the flame and the quantitative nature of the sampling must be scrupulously established. As a matter of fact, and from an experimental point of view, molecular beam mass spectrometry has proven to be particularly well-suited for such investigations as the technique allows the study of both stable and unstable species using the same experimental procedure.23 The difficulty of flame sampling is related to the complexity of the observed processes and the production of non-equilibrium excited species: atoms, ionic and radical species. Meanwhile, the important reaction intermediates in flames are atomic and radical species and these include principally H˙, OH˙, CH3˙ and HO2˙ as quoted in most of the available mass spectrometric studies devoted to hydrocarbon flame analysis.4 At this point, an obvious link appears with the investigations conducted under the fundamental approaches to thermochemical data collection. However, flame analyses are generally conducted with the aim of validating hydrocarbon combustion mechanisms rather than to characterize a particular radical species and, consequently, are more relevant to the field of chemical kinetics than the field of mass spectrometry investigations.24 Nonetheless, this original method has been presented in the particular case of the analysis of large flame polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon radicals with a combination of resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) mass spectrometry to radical scavenging.25,265 Instrumental methods for the collection of thermochemical dataRadical formationA large set of methods has been employed for the generation and study of radicals by mass spectrometry including thermal reactions, pyrolysis, photolysis, flames, and electrically induced plasmas.27–30 Most of these methods are well-established techniques.Among them, thermal decomposition processes involving both heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions have provided a lot of data on free radicals with, as major inconveniences, firstly, the difficulty of finding a suitable precursor to generate the expected radical at a sufficiently low temperature to avoid its rapid decomposition and, secondly, the difficulty of controlling the effective temperature of the radical product.4 Photolysis was presented as a chance of producing, at low temperatures, radicals which are unstable at the usual temperatures necessary for pyrolysis. However, conventional photolytic reactions suffer from relatively low concentrations of radicals relative to stable molecules. The usual low absorption coefficient of organic molecules is responsible for this fact and results in inefficient absorption mechanisms along the physical path lengths of experimental setups. To circumvent the drawbacks of a low concentration of radical species, it was then necessary to resort to mercury-photosensitized decomposition methods, where excited mercury atoms induce higher yields of decomposition, or flash photolysis, where more energy is available for the radical formation process. In addition to the former methods, the intrinsic simplicity and directness of producing radicals by electrical discharges (radio-frequency or microwave-induced plasmas) have served as impetus for their use in studies of free radicals by mass spectrometry and resulted in the constant use of plasmas from the beginning of these investigations.4In parallel, original methods have been introduced to circumvent the difficulties encountered in generating radicals. Recently, a large part of the new radical species have been discovered or studied using gas-phase reactions to generate transient unstable species. Fast atom–molecule reactions have been especially used to this purpose. These experiments have been successfully applied to the selective formation and study of organic free radicals especially for electron-based spectroscopy techniques where this method of radical formation is widely employed besides photolysis as will be seen below.Flow beam reactorA low-pressure flow reactor of a design initially set up by Anderson and Bauer31 has been extensively used in REMPI studies for the generation of hydroxymethyl radicals through abstraction reactions by atomic fluorine.4 Basically, the reactor consisted of three concentric glass tubes, with a skimmer mounted on the end of the largest tube to sample a small portion of the reaction product, which expands into the mass spectrometer ionizer (Fig. 1). Design parameters of the flow reactor are optimized to maximize the intensity of the sample in the ionization region and retain fidelity of composition during the transfer of the sample from the reactor to the mass spectrometer. So, equal areas are required to assure a constant flow velocity within the reactor and the location of the sampling orifice is determined to minimize disturbance in the flow pattern. A dilute mixture of fluorine in a helium buffer (1 ∶ 1000 respectively) passes through a microwave discharge to generate fluorine atoms which travel down to the reactor and react uniformly with the reagent (here, CH3OH) introduced at a pressure of 5 mTorr at the end of the inner central tube.32 The flow velocity of the reactor was estimated to be in the order of 1200 cm s−1 and maximum radical density to be 1010–1011 radicals cm−3. The bulk of the reactants, products, and buffer gas is pumped away and the portion of reactants sampled through the skimmer is photoionized by a laser beam. Fig. 1  Schematic view of a flow-beam reactor consisting of a discharge low-pressure flow reactor and its associated mass spectrometer used for the generation of free radicals through abstraction reactions by atomic reactants. Reprinted with permission from J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 87, 2296. Copyright 1983 American Chemical Society. Fast-beam translational spectrometerIf a wide variety of state-selected methods have been developed to study the photodissociation of stable molecules, which enables one to measure the bond dissociation energy as well as to map out the dissociative electronic states in the original molecule, the extension of these methods to the study of open-shell unstable radicals is more scarce and necessitates to find a way to overcome the experimental difficulties related to the preparation of these species free of contaminants and in quite well-defined quantum states. Photodetachment of a mass-selected negative ion beam has been demonstrated as a solution for the preparation of radical of interests in a proper manner.33,34 Their experiments are based on the idea that the positive electron affinities of free radicals allows to generate very cleanly radicals by laser photodetachment of a mass-selected beam of precursor negative ion.33The principle of the apparatus is based on the neutralization of a fast negative ion beam by photodetachment (Fig. 2). The initial negative ions are produced in a pulsed molecular beam/electron gun source where the reactant gas is expanded through a pulsed valve and a high energy electron beam intercepts the free jet expansion to yield anions by dissociative attachment. Since these anions are generated in the continuum flow region of the free jet expansion of the source, they experience noticeable vibrational and rotational cooling. The ion beam is then accelerated at typically an 8 keV kinetic energy and mass-selected by a time-of-flight analyzer before attaining the photodetachment region of the apparatus. Since the initial kinetic energy of the anions lies in the keV range, the fragments generated by photodissociation of the radical have resulting high kinetic energies permitting their detection with high efficiency on a microchannel plate detector. In addition, the design of the mass selection region reduces kinetic energy spread in the ion beam allowing photofragment time-of-flight measurements. A first excimer-pumped dye laser timed to intercept only the ion mass of interest is operated at a chosen photodetachment wavelength to allow production of only the ground vibrational state of the neutral free radical. The resulting mass-selected fast beam of neutral free radicals is collimated into the dissociation and detection region where a second excimer-pumped dye laser system covering a broad range of dissociation wavelengths is used to photodissociate the neutral beam. The radicals that strike the microchannel plate detector have sufficient laboratory kinetic energy to be detected with a high efficiency. Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of fast radical beam apparatus designed to study the photodissociation of mass-selected radicals. Reprinted with permission from J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 97, 4937. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics. Two types of experiments can be performed with this apparatus: (i) photodissociation cross-section measurements at variable photodissociation laser wavelengths and (ii) photofragment time-of-flight distribution measurements with kinetic energy release determination at fixed photodissociation laser wavelengths. The technique allows one to study the dissociative electronic states of well-characterized radicals with a defined internal energy for avoiding some precursor contamination. In addition, the internal energy of the radicals can be precisely controlled by conducting the photodetachment process near the threshold, assuring the generation of a beam of internally cold free radicals.EAs of several radicals including those of the imidogen radical NH˙, of the isocyanato radical ˙NCO, of the aminogen radical ˙NCN, and of the nitromethyl radical ˙CH2NO2 have been measured using this technique.4 In the most favorable cases, the corresponding ΔH°0 could be derived. Recently, the photodissociation dynamics of the CH2CFO˙ radical following excitation of its ground X2A″ state has been examined using fast beam photofragment spectroscopy.35 In particular, at the photon energies used, among the several dissociation pathways thermodynamically accessible, only the two fragmentation channels CH2F + CO and HCCO + HF have been observed with decay mechanisms characteristic of the presence of dissociation barriers with an internal conversion from the B2 excited state. The F-loss channel, CH2CO + F, which would have be analogous to the H-loss channel observed in the vinoxy radical is absent. Theoretical calculations conducted on the geometry and the energy of this system have shown a fragmentation channel for the CO loss in accord with the existence of an isomerization barrier between the CH2CFO and CH2FCO structures which governs the observed translational energy distributions.Neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry (NRMS)Neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry (NRMS) can be presented as a technique to generate radicals as well as a technique to probe the chemistry of a neutral, taking advantage of the fact that the corresponding ion may have a higher stability to be “trapped” and selected compared to its neutral counterpart.36–38 NRMS is one mass spectrometry area where the mass spectrometer can be thought of as a reactor in which reactions may be carried out, new species generated, and analysis performed on timescales only limited by the path flight time of the ions. In general, the flight times of the generated unstable species between the neutralization and the reionization steps are of the order of microseconds allowing one to consider that species surviving over such a timescale can be considered as stable even if no other means is available to isolate them in a “chemical” sense. Additionally, NRMS presents the advantage of opening up all techniques available for the generation of a precursor ion of interest and, in the particular field of radicals and transient species, allows the investigation of a neutral counterpart without being restricted to thermal or photochemical processes for its formation. The principle of NRMS is based on the idea that elusive species can be generated, in negative mode, through electron removal from a fast anion or, in positive mode, by fast electron transfer from a suitable electron donor to a fast cation beam, depending on the electron distribution in the elusive species. In other words, for an electron-rich intermediate there might exist a way of generating elusive species from the corresponding stable cation. At the opposite, for an electron-deficient intermediate there might be a way of generating elusive species by electron detachment from the stable anion. The timescale of NRMS experiments implies that during the neutralization–reionization processes nuclei do not have time to change interatomic distances so that the generated intermediate can be reasonably considered as having the same structure and geometry as the precursor ion. In case of doubt, especially in the case of polyatomic species, experimental methods exist for confirming similarities in the precursors and the elusive species structures but necessitate subsequent collisional activation of the reionized species (provided that the intensity of the reionized beam allows such an experiment), laser photoexcitation of intermediates39 or by determining unimolecular rate parameters by variable-time kinetic analysis.37,38 Additionally, ab initio calculations have proven extremely helpful in optimizing geometry and in giving valuable insights into possible isomerization pathways and the related energy requirements.The design of the mass spectrometer for NRMS is basically determined by the necessity of performing collisions in the keV kinetic energy range. In a typical experiment (Fig. 3), a beam of ions selected by the first-stage analyzer of a double-focusing mass spectrometer collides at a translational energy of 4–10 keV with a neutral target gas in the first collision chamber under near single-collision conditions. The neutral beam then generated enters the second collision chamber where it is reionized upon collision with a second target gas, typically molecular oxygen. The reionization energy is provided by the kinetic energy content of the fast neutral beam. The reionized beam is then sampled by a second mass analyzer before detection or submitted to subsequent collision experiments. The overall process can be summarized by the following equations, eqns. (13) and (14): M1+˙ 							+ N → M1 							+ N+˙(13) M1 							+ R → M1+˙ 							+ R + e−(14)where N is the neutral target gas and R the reionizing gas. With a kilovolt collision energy range, the ionizing process, eqn. (14), produces M1+˙ with sufficient energy to fragment allowing the resulting mass spectrum of the intermediate M1 species to be used for identification of M1. The resulting neutralization–reionization mass spectrum is generally recognized to be similar to the electron ionization mass spectrum of the molecule M1 or the collision-activated dissociation spectrum of the odd electron cation M1+˙. Obviously, NRMS rapidly appeared as a complementary technique to generate elusive species that, usually, are experimentally detected in the course of spectroscopic measurements using energetic processes such as electrical discharges for their formation. The fast-beam velocity of the neutral (ca. 105 m s−1) minimizing the occurrence of bimolecular perturbing reactions, and the timescale of experiments for both neutral, eqn. (13), (in the µs range providing a crucial test for the stability of the neutral) and ionic species, eqn. (14), (ca. 10−5 s lifetime) are the main advantages presented by the technique.36,37 The NRMS technique has been extended to newly developed methods such as collision-induced dissociative ionization (CIDI), where the neutral beam is obtained from the metastable decomposition of appropriate mass-selected precursor ions, eqn. (15):  [M1A] 							+* 							→ M1 							+ A+(15)and the neutral and ion decomposition difference (NIDD), in which normalized charge reversal spectra are subtracted from neutralization–reionization spectra in order to attribute fragmentations to the neutral M1, eqn. (13), or to the recovered ion M1+˙, eqn. (14). Fig. 3  Schematic representation of a neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry experiment for mass-selected ion beam Iz of charge z 						( 						z 						= 						± charges). Reprinted with permission from Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 347. Copyright 1994 American Chemical Society. Among the other advantages presented by the NRMS when compared with the other experimental approaches used in the detection of transient species lies the versatility in ion preparation for the generation of radical precursors while other methods applicable for the study of such reactive short-lived species are mainly restricted to photochemical or thermal generation of the intermediates.Recently, the new ionization method represented by electrospray ionization has been implemented to a tandem mass spectrometer for neutralization and reionization studies.40 Indeed, applications of NRMS depend critically on the ability to generate precursor ions (cations, anions) in the gas phase. For small molecular systems, precursor ions have been usually generated by dissociative ionization using volatile compounds introduced in the ion source or by means of ion–molecule reactions. Nevertheless, whatever the way chosen for ion formation, generation of fully thermalized ions has always been problematic due to the inherent difficulties associated with the control of the energy of ions generated at a disperse source temperature regime or with the availability of an adequate chemical process leading to well-defined energy products. The advent of electrospray ionization (ESI), as a soft ionization method, provided the desired qualities to circumvent in some way these drawbacks and make possible the generation of a high continuous ion current of ions with internal energies generally considered to be closed to thermal equilibrium in this ionization process. The interest in coupling ESI with NRMS experiments lies in the fact that this ionization technique opens up the field for the studies of compounds barely amenable to ionization in classical source housing and permits the investigation of anion species easily produced through ESI conditions. ESI with NRMS experiments might be used to perform complementary experiments on species derived from precursors of biological interest similar to those studied for topical proton affinity measurements.4,41NRMS has illustrated its potential in the characterization of cumulene-derived species, namely the radical heterocumulene NCCCS˙ and its higher homologue NCCCCS˙.42 In a similar way, the two radical neutral isomers (HCCCS)˙ and (CCCHS)˙ have been formed by one-electron vertical oxidation from their correlated anions (HCCCS)− and (CCCHS)−, generated in the chemical ionization source of a NRMS apparatus by reaction between fluoride anion and synthesized precursors.43 Charge reversal and neutralization–reionization spectra have confirmed their structure and provided experimental evidence to indicate that sulfur migration is reasonably expected from neutral structures generated with sufficient excess energy by an exothermochemical process. Theoretical calculations suggested the possibility for conversion of the (CCCHS)˙ radical into the (HCCCS)˙ radical through either a concerted or non-concerted H rearrangement mechanism.A recent neutralization–reionization investigation on the thiocyanate anion (SCN)− initiated to check for possible similarities with the corresponding cyanate system has shown that if one-electron vertical ionization provided stable thiocyanate radicals (SCN)˙, some of these species were formed with a sufficient energy content to allow for rearrangement to thiofulminate radicals (SNC)˙.44 These results contrasted those obtained previously with the corresponding cyanate (OCN)− and fulminate (ONC)− anions that showed the corresponding stable cyanate (OCN)˙ and fulminate (ONC)˙ radicals for the time frame of the experiments.45The two isomeric radicals (HCCCO)˙ and (CCCHO)˙ can be generated by the neutralization of their ionic precursors (HCCCO)+ and (CCCHO)− in the collision cell of a NRMS apparatus, and subsequent experiments showed that the neutral (HCCCO)˙ could be generated by vertical one-electron ionization whether one-electron oxidation of (CCCHO)− produces a mixture of these two isomeric radicals.46 An exothermic H rearrangement with a concerted mechanism via a four-centered transition state is expected to be responsible for the interconversion of (CCCHO)˙ species into the (HCCCO)˙ radical, as previously observed in the case of energized cumulenes.46 A recent joint experimental and theoretical study47 has been conducted with methyl and phenyl substituted cumulenes to compare their behavior with those already reported in the case of non-substituted cumulenes. Each of the substituted radicals, (CH3CCCO)˙, (CCC(O)CH3)˙ and (CCC(O)Ph)˙, are shown to be stable at the µs time frame of the NRMS experiments. In connection with the previous investigation conducted with non-substituted cumulenes, results suggested in the case of substituted phenyl cumulenes that the neutral radical (CCC(O)Ph)˙ rearranges via a four-centered ipso radical cyclisation–ring opening mechanism to generate the more stable (PhCCCO)˙ isomer without involvement of O atom migration.47NRMS experiments have been conducted to generate radicals containing structural motifs common to carbohydrate radicals in the course of investigations on reactive radicals formed by aging ionizing processes on nucleobases and sugar moieties of DNA.48 This combined experimental and theoretical study concluded with the preferential ring cleavage dissociation of the 2-hydroxyoxolan-2-yl radical chosen as a model system for studying furanose acetal radicals. Dissociations by loss of hydrogen atoms that preserves the oxolane ring structure are less abundant and represent a small fraction of overall fragmentations. Similar experiments have been conducted on 3-hydroxyoxolan-3-yl radical for the modelling of radical intermediates initiating strand breaks in DNA.49In all of these studies, the control of internal energy intervenes obviously as a major parameter which determinates the rates of observed unimolecular dissociations. In the particular case of gas-phase experiments, this parameter cannot be related only to the “bulk parameter” governed by the distribution of energy states following a Maxwell–Boltzman distribution and characterized by the temperature of the experiment. This internal energy is directly related to the mode of excitation. Kinetic isotope effects on dissociation processes during NRMS experiments have been analyzed for this purpose,50 and have confirmed that they could represent reasonably good estimates of internal energy distributions in the case of transient radicals generated through vertical electron transfer in their ground electronic states for the chosen examples of hydropyridinium substituted cations.Electron ionization methodsElectron impact techniques have been widely used over the years in experiments directed towards measurements of ionization energies and appearance energies. Ionization threshold measurements are achieved by the interaction of neutral species with an electron beam, resulting in ionization of the precursor:  R + e− 							→ R+ 							+ 2e−(16)or dissociative ionization:  RX + e− 							→ R+ 							+ X + 2e−(17)This class of techniques suffers however from two main problems : (i) a quite large energy spread of the electron beam used for ionizing the sample due to the Maxwell–Boltzman distribution of velocities of the ionizing electrons emitted from a heated filament, and (ii) a variation of the energy maximum of the beam which can noticeably differ from the nominal expected energy deduced from applied electrode potentials (in addition, for dissociative ionization, the ejected fragments have a kinetic energy which is difficult to define accurately, but nevertheless cannot be ignored). The electron impact techniques used for ionization energy measurements can be ranked into different categories depending on their degrees of refinement and quality related to the utilization of monoenergetic, quasi-monoenergetic and conventional electron beams.4 Using electric fields to produce monoenergetic electron beams appears in principle unavoidable to gain the most reliable results, but offering typical energy spreads varying from 60 to 120 meV at half maximum for an incident electron beam operated between 10 to 30 V. Indeed, experimental values obtained by this method agreed in general within ±0.03 eV of the results of photoionization experiments.4,51 The quasi-monoenergetic and conventional electron impact techniques, due to the use of a broad energy electron beam, offer limited accuracy in a window comprised between less than 0.1 eV to more than 0.5 eV.Moreover, data depend on the differing methods used for extrapolating the threshold values and are consequently subject to large and unpredictable errors in the interpretation of experimental results. Indeed, threshold energy measurements made by electron ionization techniques, and more especially for the conventional techniques, are complicated by the analytical problem of defining a linear threshold law of appearance for which the applicable energy range is generally not known. If electron ionization experiments have potential for accurate measurements, it is reasonable to state that their reliability is correlated to the use of a monochromator to narrow the energy distribution of the ionizing electron beam and is associated with accurate electron energy calibration.51 In addition, the reliability of these data might be more controversial for dissociative ionization processes where kinetic shifts and an excess of internal energy are perturbing factors more difficult to control and assign.The first available values compiled for IEs, heats of formation and DH298s are highly related to the limitations of the techniques in use and their drawbacks, mainly appearing in the low resolved energy of the incident electron beams. Consequently, most of the data published before 1965–1968 are questionable or must be considered with some reserve. However, it is worth noting that the relevant experiments of this first period are for some radicals the only available experiments that report IE or ΔfH° values to date and these works have at least the merit to give insights into their unknown thermochemistry.Following the development of experiments with a better-defined electron beam energy and due to the advent of complementary photoionization experiments, particular attention has been paid to the interpretation of experimental data and to the influence of the internal thermal energy of reagents and products on the accuracy of the measurements, especially in the case of the appearance energy method11,52,53 which was used in determining radical heats of formation from the simple relationship:  ΔfH°(R) 							= 							ΔfH°(RY) 							+ AE(Y+) 							− 							ΔfH°(Y+)(18)obtained in considering the reaction:  RY + e− 							→ R + Y+ 							+ 2e−(19)The requirements for the most precise refinements in the appearance energy method lie in the investigation of a dissociative process which does not imply a significant kinetic shift or reverse energy barrier. However, if satisfied, this condition does not preclude the problem inherent in the accurate estimation of the temperature applicable to the product ion or the radical.Basic difficulties remain in the identification of a meaningful onset energy in the ionization curve and the correction for the contribution of thermal energy to this onset energy. The threshold analysis strategy applied to electron ionization methods usually treats the measured ionization energy IE or the measured appearance energy AE of polyatomic species as a room-temperature value.51 This approach has been advocated by Holmes and co-workers11,53 arguing that the threshold value measured in appearance energy experiments might not represent a threshold value lower than the corrected value taking into account the integration of heat capacities for the dissociative process. These authors, clearly separating the interpretation of data for small and large molecules, question the necessity to consider that all or a major part of the internal thermal energy participates in the activation process for dissociation of polyatomic ions. This argument is supported by the concordant values obtained for the heats of formation ΔfH°298 of a large set of radicals or neutral molecules generated by different processes without such a correction and without providing any precursor-dependent character in the experimental results.52,53 These authors recommend paying greater attention to the temptation to introduce an unjustified correction if no clear evidence for the degree of participation of internal energy in the fragmentation of polyatomic ions appears for the determination of the experimental threshold.53 A counter argument could be however opposed if one suspects that the self-consistency of the quoted examples could be related to the cancellation of internal energy effects and kinetic shifts, which are acting in opposite directions on the position of the measured onset threshold,51 considering in conclusion that, generally, there is no reason for exact cancellation of these two effects. This latter argument tends to be supported by photoionization experiments. However, it is clear that electron ionization methods have shown potential for providing accurate IEs and AEs when associated with an energy-resolved electron impact method. The obtained results were often in good agreement with the photoionization experiments within the relative error inherent in the technique.VUV ionization methodsThe field of vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectroscopy of radicals encompasses a large set of experiments carried out with conventional UV light sources, VUV lasers, more rarely synchroton radiation, and to some extent multiphoton ionization. As stated above, the advent of photoionization methods has been related to the development of light sources with a high photon flux. The current available VUV light sources provide photon flux in the range 1011–1013 photons s−1.The simple threshold law, eqn. (20), generally admitted to depict at least approximately a variety of threshold processes,51 permits the description of sensitive and high-resolution ionization threshold energy measurements: (20)where σ(E) is the cross-section (proportional to ionization probability), σ0 is a scaling factor depending on the intrinsic reaction strength or reaction probability, E0 is the state-to-state threshold energy, and n, m are specific parameters related to the process (ionization, collision, reaction). This simple law can be applied to photoionization processes. However, the density of transient species must be significantly high in the target region to distinguish between zero signal and threshold onset for the measurements of energy. Accurate ionization energies (IE) and electron affinities (EA) of the corresponding precursors may be obtained from the threshold removal of an electron when the photon energy hν is increased, as depicted in eqns. (21) and (22):  M + 							hν 							→ M+ 							+ e− 							   IE = 							hν0(21) M− 							+ 							hν 							→ M + e− 							   EA = 							hν′0(22)The threshold energy measurements, hν0 and hν′0, correspond to the direct measurement of the adiabatic ionization energy and electron affinity, respectively, if the transition intensities are mainly governed by good Franck–Condon overlap between the vibrational states of the precursors and the products at 0 K. This simple picture is often complicated by non-Franck–Condon behavior, like autoionization resonances, eqn. (23), including or not a convergence from Rydberg states to excited vibrational states of the neutral before ionization (hot bands effects), or large geometrical changes during the ionization processes, eqns. (21) and (22):51 M + hν 							→ M* 							→ M+ 							+ e−(23)Obviously, the reliability and accuracy of VUV photoionization techniques compared to the above electron ionization techniques are usually considered to rely on the step-function character of the threshold law for the photoionization of neutrals compared to its linear character for electron ionization.51Two methods of VUV photoionization have rapidly emerged in the field of radical chemistry54—namely, photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) and photoionization mass spectrometry (PIMS). In its usual configuration, PES employs a monochromatic light source, and an electron energy analyzer to measure the kinetic energy spectrum of the ejected photoelectrons, but without concomitant mass analysis. The photon energy is fixed at a value higher than the expected IE or EA and the ejected photoelectron kinetic energy is measured upon the reaction processes under investigation, eqns. (21) and (22). The difference between the incident photon energy, hν, and the expelled electron kinetic energy, eKE, determines the electron binding energy, eBE. The photoelectron spectrum consequently yields information on the structure of the upper charge states of the precursor since the photoelectron spectrum is interpreted as a single electron ejection from the highest occupied molecular orbital and successively deeper ones. The energy difference between the ground states of the neutral and the ion gives the adiabatic values of IE and EA. If vibrational patterns are observed, they indicate that a change in geometrical structure has occurred between the neutral and the cation, and they are usually treated using the Franck–Condon approximation to infer the cation's structure from the neutral's structure if this latter one is known.PIMS uses a tunable VUV light source and records the mass spectrum of generated photoions as a function of the incident VUV source wavelength. Direct measurements of adiabatic ionization potential may be obtained more precisely in part due to the elimination of unwanted species, precursors or impurities. PIMS compared to PES enhances the dynamic range of the experiments54 but does not usually allow a clear attribution of the onset of the excited ionic state as in PES. As a consequence, a combination of these techniques is highly desirable and this took shape in the development of photoion–photoelectron coincidence spectroscopic techniques which, however, are still scarcely employed in the field of radical studies.Not strictly related only to the domain of VUV ionization techniques, multiphoton ionization (MPI) must however reasonably be referred to here for its implications in experiments that have concerned free radicals, and have principally employed resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI). Early on, MPI was revealed to be a simple and efficient technique for recording electronic spectra of molecules, especially providing insight into electronic states not easily amenable to study by conventional spectroscopic methods.55 In addition, for radical studies, the sensitivity of the technique is one of its main advantages since laser powers now available allow only a few molecules to be needed under normal conditions of use of the ionization cell of MPI experiments. The selectivity of the technique, in addition, affirmed it as a powerful method for the elucidation of excited-state structures. Compared to PES, the fact is that REMPI information is carried out by ions accessible to mass spectrometry analysis and, then, provides good opportunity for accurately establishing the identity of radicals involved in the example of a [n 					+ 1] REMPI process, eqn. (24):  M + 							nhν 							→ M* 							+ 							hν′ 							→ M+ 							+ e−(24)where n is an integer, and ν, ν′ are the respective wavelength numbers of the photons involved in photoionization. As a characteristic, REMPI mass spectra seldom show high fragmentation yields, displaying principally the molecular ions certainly related to the consequence that ionization of radicals leads to the formation of stable closed-shell ions unlikely to undergo subsequent photofragmentation.56 Most of the radical electronic states observed under these conditions are Rydberg states.Recording spectra obtained by resonant multiphoton excitation relies on the use of a first laser, fixed at a resonant excitation frequency to populate a selected intermediate vibrational or rotational–vibrational state, and a second tunable laser to subsequently promote the molecule into a high-lying, long-lived Rydberg state. This has the advantage of reducing the spectra complexity in selecting the intermediate state, and of probing the potential energy surface through the population of different intermediate states. However, if this principle works well for atoms and diatomic radicals, satisfying results are less easily attainable for polyatomic radicals due to excited electronic states of short-lifetime rendering resonant excitation difficult. One-photon excitation by tunable VUV radiation is more generally employed, but it is experimentally difficult to produce VUV radiation that is tunable over a range large enough to sample different vibrational states for radicals presenting low ionization energy. Alternatively, synchroton light sources provide tunable wavelengths to overcome these difficulties.The resolution of classical PES experiments and of the latter developed threshold photoelectron techniques is limited by the photoelectron energy analysis in a range lying typically around 0.01–0.015 eV.51 It was of a great interest to perform experiments in which resolution was increased through the properties of forming photoions in a particular energy state with expelled electrons at near zero kinetic energy. In threshold photoelectron spectroscopy, near-threshold photoionization processes are selectively observed through the detection of low-energy photoelectrons. A time-of-flight electron analyzer is fixed at zero kinetic energy and a light source is turned on at the ionization threshold in such a way that a signal is registered only when the photon energy is exactly in resonance with a concordant state of the ion. The related experimental problem is that usually the resolution of the electron energy analyzers is not good enough to resolve individual rotational structures limiting the effectiveness of the technique. Zero-electron kinetic energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy, also referred to as pulsed-field ionization (PFI) photoelectron spectroscopy, was designed to overcome this difficulty. The new idea was residing in the use of a field-free delay time in the order of 1 µs before electron extraction from the ionization region allowing all the kinetic electrons to leave the interaction region prior to detection. Nevertheless, it has since been demonstrated that ZEKE spectroscopy was more precisely relying on pulsed-field ionization of Rydberg states rather than free electron detection.57 Since in these high-n states the electron is far away from the core, it is reasonable to consider that it has no influence on the structure of the neutral that is assumed to be identical to the structure of the cation. Then, from high resolution photoelectron spectra, besides the higher precision offered to IEs and AEs measurements, information on both the neutral precursor and the cation can be gained and, in favorable cases, spectra can reveal details on intermediate state coupling. This sustains the interest in developing experiments with the ZEKE method for radical species investigation.Mass analyzed threshold ionization (MATI) is a very similar technique to ZEKE spectroscopy where, rather than detecting electrons, the cations that result from the expelling of ZEKE electrons are detected. Related experiments are however very few, maybe because of the lower resolution practically obtainable compared to ZEKE experiments. Nevertheless, a few examples are available concerning radical investigation by the mean of the MATI method.58Negative ion photoelectron spectroscopy (NIPES) has been used to measure electron affinities of radicals and to examine the structures of the ground and excited states of the corresponding neutral.14 Compared to PES, the initial mass analysis of the negative ion beam eliminates uncertainties on the assignment of the precursors of the neutral product. The method has also demonstrated its ability to investigate neutrals that are difficult to generate for classical optical techniques. Among the couple of advantages that this technique has to offer is the direct measurement of the electron affinity of the neutral generated during the electron detachment process, eqn. (22), as well as the location of the various electronic and vibrational states in which the neutral is left. The principle of the experiment resides in the formation of a thermalized negative ion beam interacting with a laser of fixed wavelengths (Fig. 4). The energy imparted by the laser causes an electron to be expelled, forming a neutral and a kinetically excited electron. In classical negative ion photoelectron experiments, measurements are carried out with a continuous laser irradiation followed by electron analysis. Typically, a hemispherical electron analyzer measures the kinetic energy of the detached electrons, eKE, which can be simply converted to a measure of electron binding energy, eBE, by subtracting it from the energy of the laser, hν, eqn. (25). eBE = 							hν 							− eKE(25) Fig. 4  Overview of a negative ion photodetachment spectrometer. Negative ions are generated in a microwave discharge ion source and then extracted into a high-vacuum region before mass-selected separation. Electron photodetachment takes place in the laser interaction region. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 231. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. The negative ion beam can be produced from a variety of high-pressure ion sources: formation of negative ions is usually conducted in a discharge ion source or, conveniently, using ion–molecule chemistry in flowing afterglow instruments. The generated ions are extracted into a high vacuum region and focused into a beam sent through a Wien filter to give a mass-selected anion beam finally crossed by a monochromatic laser beam in the laser interaction region. Resolution of the electron energy analyzer lied in the 20–25 meV range (FWHM) but has currently been improved to the 10 meV range (FWHM).14Versatility of a flowing afterglow ion source for the generation of the negative ion beam is demonstrated by the advantages presented by this selective device for the generation of rotationally and vibrationally relaxed anions, and for its increased synthetic ability to generate a wide variety of anions by ion–molecule reactions under well-characterized conditions.59 For both of these experiments, the achieved energy resolution usually lies in the 10 meV range over the entire energy range of analysis.51Besides the photodetachment spectroscopy techniques, ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) mass spectrometry must be quoted since this technique appears as the predominant experimental means to study photodetachment processes of trapped negative ions under ion–molecule reaction conditions. A pulsed-mode of operation of the ICR apparatus has proven the inherent versatility of these types of mass spectrometers for the generation of precursor anions through proton abstraction or electron impact ionization. Nevertheless, ICR mass spectrometry has been extended to the investigation of radicals only in a few studies. Examples of applications in the field of radical investigations and details of the principle of electron photodetachment spectroscopy of trapped negative ions can be found elsewhere.60In general, thermochemical data relating to radicals, like heats of formation, can be derived from the combination of results gained by several experimental techniques including ion–molecule bracketing studies, reaction equilibrium measurements and appearance energy measurements. For example, in principle, the free radical heat of formation can be determined through a positive ion cycle: if the ion heat of formation is known, the radical ionization energy would provide a measure of the radical heat of formation. In case of discrepancy, final discussion can be closed with the use of methods allowing higher resolution for the determination of data. Threshold photoelectron–photoion coincidence (TPEPICO) spectroscopy appeared as the method of choice for the determination of dissociative photoionization onset which allows derivation of thermochemical data by combination of the measured onsets with well-established thermochemical values. TPEPICO investigations have then permitted refinement of the value of the heat of formation of the acetyl radical for which radical heat of formation derived from negative ion cycle was revealed to be unreliable because of geometrical change upon ionization and preferential bond dissociation pattern.61 Similarly, the 0 and 298 K heats of formation of the 1-chloroadamantane radical, 1-C10H15˙, have been derived from the known values of the heat of formation of the corresponding cation and from the IE of C10H15˙ reported previously.62,4Many of the recent work dealing with radical studies has been conducted using VUV related methods.4 It must be underlined that direct single-photon ionization represents one of the most general and applicable method for radical studies either by PIMS or PES. However, progress must be attained in the way of generating as best as possible cold radicals from a stable source, easily applicable and compatible with the high-vacuum requirement of VUV PE spectrometers. Recent progress in the development of a general method of producing rotationally cold radicals by photolysis in a supersonic gas jet for study by VUV photoionization mass spectrometry and PES has been reported for the reinvestigation of ˙NH2, CH2, CH3˙, C2H˙, C2H3˙ and C2H5˙ radicals.63 This source of rotationally cooled radicals allowed a nice determination of the rotational structure of singlet NH2+ in the PFI-ZEKE photoelectron spectrum of the amidogen radical. It is noteworthy that the conception of this radical source by photolysis inside a quartz capillary enables one to adapt the expansion conditions to the reactivity of the radicals and provides a way to study even highly reactive species such as the ethynyl radical.During the past four years, there has been a substantial increase in the use of tunable synchrotron radiation for radical studies. Nevertheless, if VUV radiation is used to photoionize species emanating from a suitable radical source, extraction of information requires measurements of photoionization cross-sections for the analysis of product branching ratios, for example. A general method for the determination of absolute photoionization cross-sections of radicals has been recently demonstrated and applied to the measurement of vinyl and propargyl radicals photoionization cross-sections allowing the photoionization efficiency curves for these species to be placed on an absolute scale in the energy range investigated.64 Strikingly, the absolute photoionization cross-section for the vinyl radical is approximately one third larger than that observed for the propargyl radical. The experiments are conducted on a rotating-source/fixed-detector crossed molecular beam instrument configured for photofragment translational spectroscopy and coupled with tunable VUV-photoionization of the momentum matched photofragments.64 The method has then been applied to the allyl and 2-propenyl radicals via the photolysis of allyl chloride and 2-chloropropene.65Allyl and propargyl radicals have been previously investigated using high resolution ZEKE PES providing in particular refinements of their ionization energy values.66,67,4 The allyl radical is probably one of the best, if not the best, understood hydrocarbon radicals and, therefore, constitutes a model system for radical spectroscopy and dynamics. Studies conducted on the allyl radical have been summarized in a recent feature article68 providing a large scope review of the various laser spectroscopic techniques employed and how the detailed information on such a complex system can be obtained from their combination. Allyl radicals have been subsequently used as an example for the demonstration of the feasibility of pyrolytic generation of radicals in an experiment coupled with a synchrotron radiation source.69In a series of recent articles, the validity of the recommended value for the heat of formation of the hydroxyl radical, ΔfH°(OH˙), has been addressed.70–72 Due to the ubiquity of OH˙ radicals in environmental, atmospheric, and combustion processes, the O–H bond dissociation energy of water, D0(H–OH), is of paramount importance. As well as for the corresponding heat of formation of the hydroxyl radical, ΔfH°(OH˙), its accuracy is fundamental for the computation of thermodynamical data. Two different experimental approaches are proposed for the derivation of these data; one relies on the use of a positive ion cycle and the other relies on spectroscopic measurements. The apparent uncertainty of the positive ion cycle approach appears to depend on the accuracy of the experimental measurement of the appearance energy of OH+ from H2O, while the uncertainty of the spectroscopic approach depends on the determination of the dissociation energy of the radical OH˙. An independent experimental determination of the quoted AE has confirmed and refined the reported values used in the positive ion cycle approach,70,71 while the extrapolation method used to obtain the spectroscopic dissociation energy is questioned.70 Three separate experiments, PIMS, PFI-PES and PEPICO measurements, have been conducted and have resulted in convergence to a consensus for the AE(OH+/H2O) value at 0 K utilized in the positive ion cycle to derive the O–H bond.71 In addition, derived results for the corresponding bond dissociation energies and heat of formation are in good accordance with theoretical calculations performed at a high level on the H2O system.71 The new values affect a large number of other thermochemical quantities which directly or not are correlated to D0(H–OH), D0(OH) and ΔfH°(OH˙).Ion–molecule reaction experimentsOn the route to determining thermochemical data of a neutral unstable species, it is possible to obtain an experimental estimate of the enthalpy change for a particular process by the use of a technique referred to as “ion–molecule reaction bracketing”, in which an ion of interest is reacted with a series of molecules chosen to scale the appropriate thermochemical parameter. Proton affinities, gas-phase basicities and gas-phase acidities have been extensively measured using bracketing techniques. This was been applied in the early days of ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) mass spectrometry and later on in Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR).51,60 Similarly, ion–molecule reaction experiments have been employed for the determination of relevant data for radicals. This approach is based on the preliminary assumption that an endothermic reaction will not be observed due to its low efficiency. Consequently, one expects that the approximate onset energy lies on the energy scale at a point where the rate of reaction starts to rise. The remaining problem is the exact determination of the threshold, which, in particular, is drastically related to the sensitivity of the experiments.51The most illustrative example of experiments used for the determination of data by following this approach is the tandem flowing afterglow (FA) selected ion flow tube (SIFT) drift instrument developed at the University of Colorado, Boulder73 					(Fig. 5). Precursor ions are generated in the flowing afterglow source, extracted and focused into the SIFT quadrupole mass filter and mass-selected before injection into the drift tube where they are reacted with neutral reagents. A flowing afterglow source is chemically versatile and presents the interest of rendering possible the generation of collisionally relaxed ions due to the high number of collisions that the ions of interest experience with the buffer gas maintained at a pressure varying from 0.3 to 1.5 Torr. Energies of the reaction can be controlled by the application of an electric field on the flow-drift tube, varying from thermal to elevated kinetic energies. Typically, gas-phase acidities of radicals are the most illustrative examples derived from kinetic measurements of proton transfer reactions investigated by this technique.4 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a tandem flowing afterglow-selected ion flow tube (SIFT)-drift instrument. Reprinted with permission from Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1987, 81, 85. Copyright 1987 Elsevier Science Publishers. Experiments which involve ion–molecule reaction experiments, and more especially the FA-SIFT technique, are barely employed alone for the determination of thermochemical data relevant to radicals. The obtained data usually enter the general approach consisting in building a thermochemical cycle represented by eqns. (8)–(11) described above. Several thermochemical quantities can then be derived: bond dissociation enthalpies, acidic free enthalpies, heats of formation. An explicit example of the potentialities of such an approach is provided by the NIPES and gas-phase acidity study of two alkyl peroxyl radicals, methyl peroxyl CH3OO˙ and ethyl peroxyl CH3CH2OO˙ respectively.74 Alkyl peroxyl radicals, which are known as oxidation products of saturated hydrocarbons, play an important role in the chemistry of the atmosphere and chemistry of combustion. Among them ethyl peroxyl is known for its implication in several channels resulting in the formation of ethylene, acetaldehyde and oxirane74 for which detailed thermochemistry is still unresolved. Measurements of the negative ion photoelectron spectra of the CH3COO−, CD3COO− and CH3CH2COO− anions and analyzing the kinetic energy of the scattered electrons enabled the determination of EAs of the corresponding peroxyl radicals. Proton-transfer kinetic studies of the corresponding hydroperoxides through the study of the equilibrium: XH + ROO− 							⇆ ROOH + X−(26)allowed measurement of their gas-phase acidities and derivation of the bond enthalpies DH298(ROO–H) as well as ΔfH298(ROO˙) from the combined experimental data.74In a similar way, the heat of formation of the hydroperoxyl radical, ΔfH298(HOO˙), has been derived from a negative ion thermodynamic cycle using NIPES for the measurement of its EA and FA-SIFT experiments for the determination of constants associated with the proton transfer reaction between the hydroperoxyl anion and acetylene.75 The heat of formation has been obtained by means of a method independent of the questioned thermodynamics of the hydroxyl radical OH˙70,71 and, in view of the reported error bar, provided a definite value for ΔfH298(HOO˙) and the deduced ΔfH0(HOO˙).75Due to their implications in numerous chemical systems, ion-free radical reaction studies have been recently initiated using a supersonic pyrolysis nozzle similar to those described previously29,30 coupled to a FA-SIFT instrument.76 This first report has presented some proposals to rationalize the investigated proton transfer and proton abstraction reactions of the allyl radical and the ortho-benzyne diradical.The design and the performances of a new ion-drift tube reactor coupled to a proton transfer mass spectrometer for the characterization of peroxyl radicals and their reactions have been recently reported.77 Water proton clusters, H+(H2O)n 					(n > 3), are used as proton transfer reagents and provided good detection sensitivities for methyl, ethyl and cyclohexyl radicals. The cyclohexyl- and cyclopentyl-peroxy radicals were reacted with NO and the products generated were probed with the proton transfer reagents. Products identified include a wide array of mono-, di-, and tri-functional species containing peroxyl, alcoholic, carbonyl, nitrate, and peroxynitrate functional groups which are in accordance with the current state of knowledge on the oxidation of cyclohexane and cyclopentane.77 Following this preliminary report, a complete description of this new apparatus has been recently published.786 Ion attachment mass spectrometryThe field of radical detection using analytical mass spectrometry has been recently reviewed for its application in the domain of plasma and flame analysis.4 Indeed, due to the complexity of these highly reactive systems, instrumental developments have been mainly focused in the search for original ionization methods likely to give a high yield of radicals characterized in the form of ionized species, using for example low energy electron impact ionization, or through the formation of specific adducts, with trapping molecules to detect radical adducts by chemical ionization79 or original methods based on the formation of stable alkali cation adducts.80 Recently, to the best of our knowledge, except for the proton transfer reaction study reported above which supposed that proton transfer could be used as an efficient method for the detection of radicals bearing heteroatoms,77 no new experiments have been proposed for the characterization of radicals generated in flames and plasmas since the last exhaustive review of the literature.4 In the following we detail ion attachment mass spectrometry, because we believe in its coming contribution to radical chemistry, especially in the dynamic studies of individual free radical species.In 1971, a new method known as alkali metal ion attachment chemical ionization mass spectrometry (ACIMS) was proposed by Beauchamp81 and others82 in this method, alkali metal ions such as Li+, Na+, and K+ form adduct ions (also referred to as cationized molecules) with molecular species through association reactions. Several research groups have actively attempted to detect many organic complexes by attaching alkali metal ions to the sample molecules.83–85 Rollgen and Schulten86 explored this approach for achieving cationization using the field desorption technique. However, all these experiments have generally been employed to investigate chemical ionization reactions rather than to provide a complementary tool to identify the chemical species.13 years ago Fujii and his group developed a novel method for the detection of radical species in the gas phase by use of Li+ ion attachment to chemical species.80 Since the potential of Li ion attachment in mass spectrometry has not yet been realized, they attempted to reveal and explore some of the unique properties of Li ion attachment in mass spectrometry.4,87 It provides mass spectra of quasi-molecular ions formed by lithium ion attachment to the radical species under high pressure. Results are obtained in the form of a trace of Li+ adduct ions (R + Li+) 				(cationized molecules). In general, cationized molecules are more stable than radical molecular ions.Thermal ion attachment (association) reactions are described88,89 by the thermolecular process below, eqn. (27):  A+ 						+ R + N → 						[A–R]+ 						+ N(27)where A+ denotes a positively charged alkali metal ion, R is a radical species, and N acts as a third body. The binding energy of the radical R to the alkali cation A+ is defined by the enthalpy change for the preceding reaction. Deriving primarily from electrostatic forces, the binding energy of the reagent alkali metal ion A+ to the radical must be high enough to permit a significant number of adducts to be formed at the partial pressure used in the experiments. As indicated, most association reactions are reversible, though not necessarily appreciably so for all experimental conditions. The bonding between ionic and neutral species is generally found to be weak relative to normal chemical bond strengths; D0(A–M) is typically 200 kJ mol−1 or less, often much less. It seems likely that the A–M bond derives primarily from electrostatic forces such as ion–dipole attractions.The design and construction of a lithium ion attachment mass spectrometer (Li+MS) that is used to study the occurrence of free radical intermediates and molecular and atomic species (which are not found under ordinary conditions) on a real-time basis in the gas phase are reviewed. The newly developed device, ion attachment mass spectrometry (IAMS), exhibits several advantages over conventional mass spectrometers. The performance of this equipment and unique features are presented in this section. Finally the interesting applications and possible future perspectives of this approach are described.InstrumentationAn overview of the lithium ion attachment mass spectrometer is sketched in Fig. 6.90–92 It is composed of four major functional blocks: the sample inlet system, the reaction chamber, the ion focusing system, and the mass analyzer. Three different vacuum pumps are employed to evacuate various sections of the system: the reaction chamber is maintained at 1–760 Torr by a rotary pump, and the ion focusing system and mass analyzer are held at less than 2 × 10−4 Torr and around 5 × 10−7 Torr, respectively, by two turbomolecular pumps (diffusion pumps). These functional blocks are discussed in more detail in the following sections. Fig. 6  General overview of a quadrupole mass spectrometer with a Li+ ion attachment reaction chamber. Any stream from the sample inlet system whose components one wants to analyze is directed to the reaction chamber. RP: rotary pump, TMP: turbomolecular pump. Sample inlet system. Samples may be introduced into the present mass spectrometric system by several different methods, such as leaks, insertion probes, and on-line combinations with chromatography. Due to the high-vacuum conditions, a controlled leak is a simple method to introduce samples but is restricted to samples with high vapor pressure. Solid and liquid samples can be introduced with a heatable insertion probe via a vacuum lock into the high vacuum. Either gas chromatography or liquid column chromatography can be easily applied as sample inlet systems. In principle, any gaseous sample whose components are to be identified can be introduced into the reaction chamber.Reaction chamber. The reaction chamber (RC) is a cylindrical tube (id 5 cm) with a lithium ion source centered along one side. The chamber can be evacuated through a cone aperture with a rotary pump and can be maintained at high pressure by altering the pumping speed or the carrier gas flow rate.The lithium ion source consists of a lithium ion emitter and a repeller. The Li+ emitter is a small mineral bead (about 0.2 cm in diameter) fused to a 0.25 cm diameter Ir wire; the bead is prepared93 by thoroughly grinding a mixture of Li2O ∶ Al2O3 						∶ SiO2 						(1 ∶ 1 ∶ 1 mole ratio), and primary Li+ ions are produced by heating the bead. The emission of contaminants along with the Li+ ions is unavoidable as emission begins but in due course decreases to less than 0.1% of the total emission. The repeller electrode, consisting of a 1.5 cm diameter stainless steel disk, was placed 1 cm behind the emitter bead; its voltage was maintained at the same potential as the emitter.At a fixed pressure (0.2–1.2 Torr), the Li+ ion current increased linearly, or nearly so, with emitter current. Maximum Li+ ion emission current was around 6 × 10−7 A at a nitrogen carrier gas flow of 13 mL min−1 and pressure of 1.1 Torr; emitter current and gain of the secondary electron multiplier were 3.8 A and 3.8 × 103, respectively.Ion focussing system. Adduct ions from the RC pass through an aperture and are directed into the differentially pumped lens region through a 1 mm diameter orifice drilled into the tip of a skimmer. No potential was applied to the skimmer. The ion focusing system is an electrostatic lens (ELS) system.Mass analyzer and detector. The mass analyzing chamber was equipped with a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) with rods biased below ground by connecting the dc rod driven circuit to separate dc supplies. Two possible modes of ion detection, analog and pulse counting, can be employed using a Channeltron electron multiplier detector. In the pulsed mode, the channeled output from the multiplier is fed to the preamplifier–discriminator–counter system operated in the multichannel scaling mode.Performance and response characteristicsOptimization. Sensitivity is influenced by a large number of factors. Only a limited number of factors, however, can potentially contribute to a significant gain in sensitivity: (i) kinetic energy of the Li+ ion and (ii) Li+ affinity of the sample molecule. For stabilization of the adduct ionic complex, the cationization process should be carried out in a high-pressure environment because the added gas molecules serve as third bodies in the analyte addition reaction with the alkali metal ions. The voltage applied to the repeller provides sufficient kinetic energy to the reactant ion. The relationship between the Li+ ion intensity and the repeller voltage should be considered at various ion source pressures: at higher ion source pressure, more adduct ions are produced at a higher repeller voltage. Low repeller voltage (E) and high ion source pressure (P) favor adduct formation; as E/P is raised, the probability of this process decreases.92 This ion energy dependence is consistent with the reported mechanism of the ion attachment reaction: the initial combination step of an ion–molecule association reaction is brought about by ion–dipole attraction between the reactants without any activation energy.From Li+ affinity data, the relative sensitivity of any organic of interest can be estimated. The production rate of the Li+ adduct depends on the strength of the Li+ affinity of the molecule or radical species under consideration, which ranges up to about 50 kcal mol−1; this value, in turn, is heavily dependent on the polarity or polarizability of the target species. In other words, the chemical species captures the Li+ ions and yields the (M + Li)+ adduct if the Li+ affinities are sufficiently high. Under our Li+MS experimental conditions, compounds with Li+ affinities weaker than 10 kcal mol−1 were barely detectable, even if they were present in abundance. Li+ affinities of molecular species may be helpful in predicting whether the species can be detected using a minimum sample concentration.Experimental sensitivity. When an acetone sample was introduced at a rate of 2.6 × 10−10 g s−1 from the permeation tube at 25 °C, measurement of the adduct ion current was 2.9 × 10−10 A (with an ion multiplier gain of 2 × 103); hence, the sensitivity was calculated as 1.12 A g−1 s.The minimum detectable amount (mda) can be estimated using the actual noise level of the system as the ultimate limitation on the minimum detectable sample size. A signal-to-noise ratio of 10 is a practical and conservative lower limit for quantitative detection; then, in pulse mode, a signal of 100 counts s−1 is required. For acetone, the mda was estimated around 14.2 × 10−18 g s−1. On the other hand, in the analog detection mode, the mda was calculated as 8.93 × 10−15 g s−1 						(with a signal-to-noise ratio of 3), on the assumption that the capability of the ion detection system was around 1 × 10−14 A.Linear response range. The signal response was linear over the chosen range of 7 × 10−11 to 8.2 × 10−10 g s−1. A plot of four introduction rates of acetone versus the corresponding peak heights produced an essentially straight line up to 8.2 × 10−10 g s−1 						(data not shown); at this point, more than 5% of the total Li+ reactant ions have been used for attachment. Since the cationized samples are depleted of alkali metal ion density, the response follows Beer's law, similar to that of the electron capture detector; hence, it could be concluded that for a linear response, the sample size must ensure a large excess of reactant ions in the cationizing chamber.Mass spectrum. The c-C4F8 example was selected94 to show the performance and response characteristics possible with this analytical instrument in the optimal case. Fig. 7 shows a typical mass spectrum in the mass range up to m/z 210. Only peaks due to Li+ adduct molecular ion, with no fragmentation, are observed for the test compound, c-C4F8 						(Fig. 7, upper column); this spectrum is completely different from the 70 eV electron ionization (EI) mass spectrum (Fig. 7, lower column), which shows many fragment ions, such as C2F4+, C3F5+ and CF+ ions, but no molecular ions. Fig. 7  Ion attachment mass spectrum (upper column) obtained from 1000 ppm c-C4F8 in N2 gas, showing c-C4F8Li+ 							(m/z 207). For comparison, the 70 eV electron ionization (EI) mass spectrum (lower column) was measured; the abundant ions observed and their relative intensities are C2F4 							(100), C3F5 							(87), CF (54), CF3 							(25), CF2 							(13), and C3F3 							(6). The background mass spectrum of EI is taken with no c-C4F8 in the N2 carrier gas. Reprinted with permission from Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 2937. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. Features. Some of the essential advantages and applications of the present IAMS system are the following:1. No dissociative ionization takes place. There is no possibility of fragmentation of the adduct ions; Li+MS provides only molecular ions and hence can be exploited for the determination of molecular weight and the analysis of mixtures where no fragmentation is desired.2. Mass spectra from a lithium attachment mass spectrometer tend to be simple and hence, it is easy to determine which form of which radical species is reacting.3. Its sensitivity is high, especially for polar molecules, due to ion–molecule reactions.4. Direct continuous measurement on a real-time basis of many radical species and stable molecules in a dynamic system is feasible.5. It makes possible the analysis of any plasma via identification of both the ionic and neutral radical species and the correlation between them.6. The detection of interstellar species and the identification of unfamiliar species, which would be immensely useful in astrophysical and astrochemical studies, are possible with this method.These features can help to widen the applications of mass spectrometry. In addition to these appreciable advantages, the present technique also has certain limitations. Since identification of radical species or molecules is based only on the mass number, the peak assignment is not free of ambiguity. Unsatisfactory results have been obtained with non-polar molecules or molecules with low polarizability, such as alkanes; these molecules have weak Li+ affinities and are not easily attached. Therefore, even if abundant alkanes are produced in the plasma, they cannot be detected by this method. Also, the Li+MS technique gives no structural information, and so the correct isomer of the detected molecule cannot be directly determined.ApplicationsLi+ ion attachment mass spectrometry has been done already in the interesting application fields of: (i) detection of intermediary free radical species in gas-phase reactions, (ii) diagnosis of plasma, (iii) detection of interstellar species and (iv) identification of unfamiliar complex and unstable species. Some of the studies are presented here.Detection of intermediary free radical species in the gas phase. CH4 discharge. 95,96Although the use of plasma formed in the electric discharge has received considerable attention, the knowledge of radical species occurring in steady state plasmas has advanced considerably little. Typically, in electric discharge, the radical concentration is about 50 to 100 times higher than the ion concentration97 and, as a result, fast radical–molecule reactions may occur.98 Therefore, it is felt that the role of radicals in a reactive discharge must be great and hence, should be studied for the development of discharge processing.99One of the topics widely discussed is the mechanism of the reactions taking place in polymerization.100 Two general approaches can be taken for the chemical mechanism of the methane discharge, namely; ion–molecule reactions101 and radical–molecule reactions.98 There is no clear cut evidence for either model and there are several arguments for each side. Many workers suggest ion–molecule reactions. This is based on the observation that the deposition rate is dependent upon biased potential to the substrate102 and that when a radical scavenger is added to the discharge, no rate change is observed.The detection and evaluation of radicals in the discharge have been investigated by a variety of measurements.103–107 Toyoda et al. have reported the direct observation of methyl radicals using threshold ionization mass spectrometry.104 Other species such as CH2 and CH˙ could not be detected in the same discharge conditions because of the poor sensitivity of mass spectrometry.Rudolph and Moore measured mass spectra105 of free radicals as well as stable molecules from a microwave discharge in a fast flow of methane in argon and in hydrogen and reported many HC radicals such as C2H5˙, C3H3˙, C3H7˙, C4H5˙, C5H7˙, C5H9˙ and C5H11˙. However, the main purpose of their work was not to determine the HC radicals. An electron impact energy of 15 eV was chosen for their work. Presumably, abundant formation of fragment ions from many stable molecules unavoidably hampered the determination of the radical species.Infrared tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy106 is useful in the diagnostics of discharge. It is capable of the detection of a wide variety of radicals and stable molecules found in the CH4 system. Wormhoudt reported the absolute concentration level, for CH3˙ and C2H2 in a CH4 discharge.Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) is a way of measuring the neutral radical species in a discharge. Stanton et al.107 made a LIF study of SiF2˙, which evaluated the reaction constants of SiF2˙ with F2, Cl2, O2 and H2. It offers greater spatial resolution, higher sensitivity and better selectivity than optical spectroscopy. But, to our knowledge, LIF has not been applied to the CH4 discharge.Primarily because of the lack of spectral information for the majority of HC radicals formed in the reaction leading to the formation of higher hydrocarbons, no sufficient studies of the CH4 discharge have been performed with any of the methods; particularly in terms of HC polymer radical detection.The experimental procedure consisted of admitting CH4 gas with a gas flow rate of 10 mL min−1. As a result, the gas pressure of the flow tube and the RC was ca. 1.7 and 0.12 Torr, respectively. The product analysis subtracts from each plasma spectrum its spectrum with no discharge, thereby, enabling analysis of the influence on the whole spectrum of a change in any discharge parameter. Thus, the intensity of any mass peak in the condition of no discharge is subtracted from the corresponding mass peak under the plasma condition. The result shows the particular product peak due to discharge activation.The analysis of the individual spectral peaks was made in terms of mass identification and classification by their formulas. Table 1 shows the identified species which appeared. As far as assignment of the mass spectral peaks goes, validity is based principally on the mass number. Therefore, some species show uncertainty with regard to their assignment. For example, the m/z 36 which was assigned to C2H5Li+ may partially belong to CHOLi+.
Table 1 Analysis of radicala products formed from the microwave discharge plasma of pure CH4 in terms of mass identification, classification by their formula, and the relative intensities (percent values)

TypeChemical speciesa Species possessing an unpaired electron, that is open-shell species.b These closed-shell molecules may have high enough Li+ affinities to be attached by Li+ ions.CnH2n−1C2H3 												(100), C3H5 												(68), C4H7 												(36), C5H9 												(28), C6H11 												(16), C7H13 												(13), C8H15 												(12), C9H17 												(6), C10H19 												(4), C11H21 												(3)CnH2n+1C2H5 												(48), C3H7 												(42), C4H9 												(32), C5H11 												(29), C6H13 												(20), C7H15 												(12), C8H17 												(9), C9H19 												(6), C10H21 												(3), C11H23 												(2)OthersC4H3 												(13), C4H5 												(12), C5H5 												(10), C5H7 												(8), C6H5 												(8), C6H7 												(6), C6H9 												(6)MoleculesbC2H2 												(10), C4H2 												(11), C4H4 												(7), C4H6 												(8), C5H6 												(11), C6H4 												(9), C6H6 												(12), C6H8 												(5), C6H1O (3)Although research grade methane was sampled, methane without any microwave (MW) discharge shows that impurities such as H2O, CO2 and probably C4H10 were detected. N2 and acetone were also detected, as a result of contamination (or small leak) of gas flow lines.At the same CH4 pressure with the MW discharge on, the following radicals and molecules were detected: CnH2n+1˙, CnH2n−1˙, C4H3˙, C5H5, C6H6, etc. A remarkable feature is the appearance of polymer HC radicals. No CH4Li+ was observed under the discharge activation conditions, indicating that almost all the CH4 changed to other species in the MW discharge. Some small (unidentifiable) peaks appeared in the spectrum, but these are not included in Table 1.The occurrence of the polymerization processes taking place is also shown in Table 1 where the relative heights of the m/z peaks representing percent values are normalized with the highest peak of C2H3Li+. If one considers that the major radical constituents are those having relative heights higher than 5%, it is interesting to note that 14 kinds of species with carbon numbers higher than 5 were obtained.It should be noted again that the data showed pronounced trends because of differences in Li+ affinity. Fortunately, preliminary ab initio calculations using the Hartree–Fock method on a 6–31G* basis set, indicated that the HC radicals have such a large Li+ affinity that all the radicals should react with Li+ ions at nearly gas-kinetic collision rates. As far as the radicals are concerned, the effect due to the Li+ affinity caused little mass discrimination.In the following section, the results are compared with the literature results from optical spectroscopy107 and mass spectrometry.104,105 They are discussed separately for each classified species to evaluate the presence of the various chemical species.From the results given in Table 1, it can be concluded that: (1) The CnH2n+1 and CnH2n−1 radicals, where n 							= 2 to 11, have been detected. The intensity trend is clear; species with the higher n number decrease in peak intensities. (2) The plasma of CH4 from the MW discharge leads to a polymerization process100 of higher hydrocarbons, at least, partially through radical–molecule reactions.98Rudolph and Moore105 reported that the MW CH4 discharge provided many HC radicals such as C2H5˙, C3H3˙, C3H7˙, C4H5˙, C5H7˙, C5H9˙ and C5H11˙. We have detected all these species except C3H3˙. However, C2H3˙ and C3H5˙, which exhibited very intense peaks in our spectrum, are absent in their spectrum. These disagreements may be partly because of the different experimental conditions.The CH3˙ radical, commonly observed in the CH4 discharge,106,108 was not detected in this system. The absence of this species is interpreted tentatively as follows: The present measurements have been made in a flow system in which the radical is continuously produced and detected through the attachment reaction in the afterglow region of the MW plasma. The distance between the microwave cavity and the Li+ ion emitter is about 3.2 cm. The chemical species formed in the cavity have to travel longer than this distance without conversion in order to be detected. A distance of 3.2 cm is too great to prevent conversion and therefore allow measurement of CH3˙. The species CH2 and CH˙ also did not appear, even though their production rates may be significant. These results may also be interpreted by the same token. This interpretation is consistent with Kline's finding109 that CH2 is quickly converted to CH˙ in reactions with H atoms and the CH˙ produces C2H5˙ by reacting more rapidly with CH4.Other radical species with carbon numbers n up to 6 may also be produced in the discharge process and detected by the present method. These are: C4H3˙, C4H5˙, C5H3˙, C5H5˙, C5H7˙, C6H5˙, C6H7˙ and C6H9˙. Also some molecules such as C2H2 and C4H4 appeared. Benzene and substituted benzene are also present.Unsatisfactory results are that non-polar molecules or molecules with a low polarizability, such as alkanes, have not been detected. They have weak Li+ affinities81,110 and are not easily attached to the Li+ ions. Therefore, even if abundant alkanes are produced in the plasma, they are not observed by the present method. There appeared OH˙ radicals in the spectrum when the discharge was on. The generation of H2O in the MW discharge, as well as the presence of H2O in CH4 as impurities, may be attributed partly to the formation of OH, because the presence of H2O is associated with the production of OH˙ radicals111 in the discharge.C2H4 discharge. As a continuation of earlier CH4 studies on the detection of gaseous HC radicals, the identification of neutral radical species in a C2H4 							(MW) discharge flow tube is reported.112 The microwave discharge is an important process for the production of novel compounds. Although applications of the discharge are of growing technological importance, the processes that occur in the discharge are poorly understood. This holds also for the C2H4 discharge system; while ethylene has been used as a monomer in polymerization studies, very little is known on the molecular level about its chemistry in the discharge.The detection and evaluation of products in the C2H4 discharge have been investigated from a phenomenological point of view by a number of investigators.113–117 The polymerization taking place is one of the topics widely discussed. In most cases, the product has been measured using mass spectrometry115 and optical emission spectroscopy.113 The high-temperature reactions of ethylene have also been extensively investigated in shock tubes118 and flames. Single-pulse and time-of-flight measurements have established119 the presence and proportions of the polyethylenes C4H2, C6H2, C8H2, and those up to C12H2 have been detected in flames. It seems that a wealth of data from the shock tube studies is available to help in the interpretation of the discharge chemistry.The direct result of IAMS is that the discharge of ethylene by MW leads to the formation of various HC radicals and stable molecules, including the aromatic HCs. These results are significant mainly from two viewpoints: the positive mass spectrometric identification of free radicals such as C4H3˙ and the growing evidence that the reactions in the MW discharge involve the neutral radicals. The ring closure process resulting from the formation of higher hydrocarbon radicals, was confirmed by their direct detection. These radicals may react with each other or with other molecules formed by the discharge or with the C2H4 molecules in order to form benzene and substituted benzene products. The possible pathway is speculated to proceed through a C4H3˙ 							+ C2H2 							→ C6H5˙ route in which the phenyl ring is made. The speculation is consistent with the products in the C2H4 MW discharge.C2H2 discharge. The determination of the ionic and neutral chemical components of the flowing MW discharge of acetylene was performed by Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry.120,121 Mass spectra were obtained with discharge activation in two modes; (i) in the presence of Li+, referred to as A, and (ii) in the absence of Li+, referred to as B. Thus, the intensity of any mass peak in A is subtracted from the corresponding mass peak in B and the results (A − B) show the Li+ adducts of particular neutral products. The mass spectrometric measurements have been performed at the downstream position with respect to the microwave cavity and the direction of the gas flow. The formation and involvement of free radicals in the MW discharge was confirmed also. The reaction schemes for some products have been considered, particularly with regard to the role of radical and ionic condensation reaction processes. An attempt was made to link both the ionic and neutral species to a proposed mechanism. A model which explains the observed phenomena and is consistent with the dependence on discharge parameters, is suggested. The model’s predictions indicate, for example, that the principal ionic condensation reaction can be summarized by the reaction sequence: CnH2+ 							+ C2H2 							→ Cn+2H2+ 							+ H2, (n 							= 2,4,6,8), while the reactions involving a hydrogen atom may be those which lead to the formation of neutral CmHn 							(n > m) species, including free radicals of C2H3˙, C4H5˙ and C6H3˙.CH4–N2 and CH4–O2 discharge. The report on the CH4–O2 plasma,122–124 demonstrates (a) the complete Li+ adduct mass spectrum for identification of the products, (b) evidence that many O-containing neutral chemical species are generated in the plasma, and (c) that the identified species include alcohols, aldehydes, and possibly organic peroxides.The CH4–N2 MW discharge led to the production of various kinds of chemical species, and effectively demonstrated125 that the MW discharge is a method for generating over 50 N-bearing products. They had the formulas CmHnCN, NC(CH2)nCN, CmHnNH2, and CmHnN2H3 with m and n continuing on to 8 and 15. Some interesting products found in this study were H2CNH and NC(CH2)nCN. These components are predicted to be possible products. Direct observation of these species was allowed by the measurement of the Li+ adduct mass spectra. The features of the ion chemistry in the CH4–N2 discharge can be summarized as follows: (a) the N2 							(or N atom) interacts with various HC species to produce nitrogenated polymeric HC, (b) mass spectra show that the neutral species thus produced undergo protonation ion–molecule reactions with proton transfer reagents, presumably CH5+, C2H5+, and so on, including primary electron impact ionization of the corresponding neutral species. The distribution of ionic species from a discharge is, somehow, representative of the neutral being protonated.Diagnosis of plasma. The understanding of the reaction in the plasma is largely impeded due to the complex nature of plasmas.126 The most difficult task is to determine the relative importance of ions and neutral species in the reactions of plasma. During the past 40 years, several reports of mass spectrometric sampling of electric discharge plasma have appeared.127 Few attempts have been made to obtain correlations between the ions and neutral species and the extent of their participation is still unclear. We believe the nature of the plasma can be best studied after the free radicals have been fully identified.Diamond film. In the past several years there have been an increasing number of studies identifying the primary gas-phase diamond growth precursor128–133 in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques, that has been the subject of controversy. The growth rate and film quality of materials synthesized by CVD processes depend critically on the composition of the species generated.Many techniques exist for examining the composition of the species (including radical species) generated in CVD reactors: optical emission spectroscopy (OES),128 FTIR spectroscopy,129 laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy (LIF),130 diode laser infrared absorption spectroscopy,131 and mass spectrometry (MS).132 Each has its own strengths and shortcomings. A major advantage of MS over other techniques is its ability to monitor a wide spectrum of species simultaneously. However, the identities of many reactive species are lost in the case conventional electron impact ionization techniques.Several growth species have been proposed for the CVD environments, including C, CH˙, CH3˙, C2, C2H˙, C2H2, C2H3˙, C2H4 and so on. The earliest studies on gas-phase chemistry in MW plasma assisted diamond deposition systems were conducted with OES to detect electronically excited H˙, CH˙ and C2.128 Mitomo et al.129 used FTIR spectroscopy to study the effect of using various carbon feed gases and confirmed that abundant quantities of C2H2 are formed in the plasma when methane is the HC feed gas. Celii et al.131 detected gaseous compounds by diode laser IR absorption spectroscopy during CVD from a reactant mixture of 0.5% CH4 in H2 and detected C2H2, C2H4 and CH3˙. Harris et al.133 measured the mole fractions of products in the hot filament CVD by mass spectrometry. They indicated that detected compounds were CH4, C2H4 and C2H2, while C2H2 was the major product.A detailed chemical kinetic mechanism was composed to describe the evolution of reaction species134,135 in the pyrolysis of a hydrogen-diluted CH4 mixture, simulating the gas-phase conditions of diamond CVD in the MW reactor. Somewhat surprisingly atomic C is predicted134 to have a large concentration at the surface. C atoms could conceivably play a role in diamond growth.The IAMS technique is applied in a simulation study of a diamond CVD reactor.136 It is most advantageous when the experimenter does not know a priori what species to expect. A second advantage is its adaptability to a wide variety of process environments. To simulate the reacting plasma environment, our sampling aperture, followed by the skimmer, is fixed at the center of the growth substrate (Fig. 8). Mass spectra were obtained (Fig. 9) with plasma activation in two modes: (i) in the presence of Li+, denoted as A, and (ii) in the absence of Li+, as B. Thus, the intensity of any mass peak in A is subtracted from the corresponding mass peak in B and the results (A − B) show the Li+ adducts of particular neutral products. The mass spectrometric measurements have been performed for the 1 ∶ 100 CH4 							∶ H2 plasma at the downstream position with respect to the microwave cavity and the direction of the gas flow. The formation and involvement of free radicals in the MW plasma was confirmed also. Fig. 8  Simulation system for the diagnosis of diamond deposition CVD with Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry. Reprinted with permission from J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 2543. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics.  Fig. 9  Partial mass spectra of Li+ ion adducts over the regions m/z 5–9, 17–21, 29–33 and 34–38. (A) The neutral mode (in the presence of Li+) and (B) the ionic mode (in the absence of Li+). The underlined peaks indicate the radicals observed. Reprinted with permission from J. Appl. Phys,, 2001, 89, 2543. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics. The major species detected in our (1 ∶ 100) CH4–H2 discharges are C, C2, C2H˙, C2H2, C2H3˙, C2H4, C2H5˙ and C3. These are similar to those reported by others with some exceptions. C atoms were detected. However, we could not detect CH3˙ in the plasma, despite the fact that C2H2, C2H3˙, C2H4 and C2H5˙ were observed in the discharge. This is consistent with the findings of Stalder and Homsi132 that significant conversion of methane to C2H2 and C2H4 is observed, as are radicals such as C2H3˙ and C2H5˙.The ionized particles arriving from the MW plasma travel into the QMS. This spectrum shows two characteristic features in the ionic mode. The ions CH4+, CH5+, C2Hn+ with n 							= 1–7 and C3Hn+ with n 							= 1–9 were observed in our mass spectra in small amounts. However, both C+ and C2+ ions are characteristic by their absence, while the neutrals are abundant. Mass spectrometric evidence is given that directly confirms the existence of C, C2, C2H˙, C2H2, C2H3˙, and C2H4 along with other polymer species. We believe that the chemistry of the diamond deposition plasma can best be studied after the component species have been fully identified. One of the most interesting results in this study is the observation of the abundant atomic carbon species, indicating that the incoming CH4 decomposes to C through a loss of H in the gas phase and C species should be taken into account for diamond film growth. This finding is consistent with the Goodwin's calculations,135 which show that a significant amount of atomic carbon could be present in the plasma under diamond deposition conditions.C3N4. Crystalline β-C3N4 is a novel hypothetical compound predicted by Liu and Cohen.137 Great interest has been motivated by its superhardness (maybe harder than that of diamond) and possibility of synthesis.138 Many investigators have put great effort139 into synthesizing the polycrystalline C3N4 thin films by using various technologies, such as rf sputtering, shock compression, pyrolysis, dc sputtering, implantation, electron beam evaporation, laser beam ablation, plasma arc, etc. However no experimental results present evidence for the existence of C3N4 in the gas phase. The presence of a gas-phase C3N4 nitride as a marker could be invaluable in adjusting experimental conditions to optimize the crystalline production.Unexpectedly, the product analysis in microwave C2H2–N2 discharge by Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry,140 has indicated the formation of the C3N4 species. The mass spectra exhibit the Li+ adduct peak at m/z 99. We assign this peak tentatively141 to C3N4. The possibility of production of C3N4 was investigated. The variation of m/z 99 intensities with gas composition confirms the involvement of nitrogen. Furthermore, variation of nitrile species with gas composition and MW discharge power shows simple, clear correlation with that of C3N4. These findings, which are at least consistent with the C3N4 assignment, are additional, indirect evidence that the m/z 99 peak is C3N4Li+.CF4. In non-equilibrium plasmas used for material processing applications, CF4 is one of the most widely used components of feed gas mixtures which serves as a source of reactive species (ions, neutrals, radicals) which are largely responsible for surface reactions in various etching and deposition applications.142 In order to access the behavior of this gas in its many applications, especially in the semiconductor industry, it is necessary to have accurate understanding about the key active products in a discharge process.In this sense, studies carried out on CF4 plasma discharge have been reported by a number of researchers.143,144 The detection and evaluation of radicals in discharge plasma have been investigated by a variety of measurements. Plumb and Ryan144 extensively studied the CF4 and CF4–O2 plasmas and their dissociation products. However a fundamental understanding of the gas-phase chemistry of fluorocarbon radicals has been hampered by the complexity in the composition of plasmas and the technical difficulty inherent in trying to isolate such highly reactive radicals which play a key role in etching and polymerization on surfaces. In fact, many radicals have been detected to date. However, a number of interfering factors which are encountered in practice are unavoidable.With this viewpoint, we have carried out studies on the mass spectrometric detection of neutral species produced in the CF4 plasma. Besides analysis of products, we report some neutral radical species like CHF2˙, CF2 and CF3˙ and some new polymer compounds (that have not been reported so far) produced under MW discharge conditions in a CF4–He discharge gas. The advantages of the present method are: (i) a measure of mass is a guide to radical identity, (ii) adaptability to a condition of higher pressures and (iii) direct continuous measurements of F-containing radicals in dynamic systems can be made. It can be concluded that a pure CF4–He MW discharge results in a high conversion of CF4 to neutral polymer products. The direct result in this work is that the discharge of CF4 by microwaves leads to the formation of various neutral species. The most important result is the first direct mass spectrometric measurement of CF2, CHF2˙ and CF3˙ in dynamic systems by forming Li+ ion adducts. These radicals may react with each other or with other molecules formed by the discharge or with the CF4 molecules in order to form the terminal molecules. The polymerization products of higher fluorocarbon species were directly detected for the first time.Interstellar compounds. The Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometer is potentially relevant to atmospheric chemistry and can be successfully installed in the payload of a spacecraft to enhance our understanding of space.Titan atmosphere. Saturn's satellite Titan has been considered as a very interesting object in the solar system in the field of chemical evolution, organic cosmochemistry and exobiology.145 It should be noted that Titan's organic chemistry has received much attention due to its possible connection with the origin of life. Measurements performed by Voyager during a flyby of Titan146 have revealed a dense atmosphere around Titan mainly composed of N2 with some CH4 and other minor components, including hydrocarbons and organic-nitrogen molecules.A great number of experiments have already been performed, simulating the evolution of gaseous mixtures containing N2 and CH4, when submitted to energy flux. Prior to the Voyager encounter, a few experiments had investigated the gas-phase products of radiation chemistry in N2–CH4 mixtures. Most of this work was done in the context of prebiotic chemistry on Earth.Voyager with an infrared interferometric spectrometer (IRIS) on it146,147 examined Titan’s atmospheric chemistry. Six simple HCs (C2H2, C2H4, C2H6, C3H8, C3H4, C4H2) and three nitriles (HCN, NCCN, HC3N) were found. The concentration of these compounds varied from the 10 ppm range for ethane down to the 1–10 ppb range for C3H4, C4H2, HC3N and C2N2. One important question posed by the Voyager flight is whether these minor organic constituents are really produced from the major constituents (N2 and CH4) in the atmosphere of Titan.After Voyager, simulation experiments have approached an acceptable set of conditions which might apply to the high altitude chemistry of Titan's atmosphere. Based on Voyager and some laboratory data, it is reasonable to assume that other complex organic-nitrogen molecules are formed in Titan's atmosphere. Every gas-phase organic found by Voyager is detected in the simulation. However, most previous experiments have not paid attention to minimizing reactions prior to analysis to allow detection of reactive products.The MW discharge of a 90% N2–10% CH4 gas mixture at 20 Torr was studied to simulate the Titan atmosphere with IAMS,148 demonstrating that over 70 products are detected, including HCs, nitriles, amines, possibly hydrazines and two other N-bearing compounds, H2CNH and H2NCN.In comparing the results with the Voyager IRIS observations and with other laboratory simulations, it has been demonstrated that: (i) all the gas-phase organics found by Voyager are detected in the simulation; the products provide an adequate explanation of the constituents detected by Voyager in the Titan atmosphere, (ii) additional products found from the present study are predicted as a product for future sensitive, remote and in situ observations, (iii) MW plasmas are good analogs for planetary lightning and plasmas associated with impacts of meteors, and (iv) properly conducted laboratory experiments are very relevant to radiation-chemical (charged-particle-induced) processes in planetary atmospheres.The results may also have implications for the chemical evolution of the solar system. Our results suggest that nitriles, amines, hydrazines of higher molecular weight and their derivatives, such as cyano-acetylenes and dinitriles would have been synthesized. The presence of these key compounds as precursors of biologically important compounds on Titan implies that the chemical reactions postulated as the formation processes of bases and amino acids on the primitive Earth may be commonplace in the planetary system.NOx. Interest in NOx species is fueled by a desire to understand their complex spectroscopic characteristics on a fundamental level, as well as by their importance in Earth's atmosphere, especially with regard to key processes relating to ozone (O3), hydroxyl radicals, and acid formation.149 Model calculations indicate that background concentrations of NOx in the troposphere may have risen by as much as 100%, causing a 20% increase in O3 levels during much of the year.150 Johnson et al. reported significant evidence that 30–50% of the NOx in the upper troposphere is due to aircraft emissions.151Although nearly all (>90%) of the NOx in the atmosphere is emitted as NO˙, NO˙ is quickly converted into a variety of other species such as NO2, HNO3, N2O5, HNO2, and HNO3.152 There are indications that all these species may be involved in a complex way in the behavior of NOx. A full understanding of atmospheric NOx has not been achieved, and the existence of ionic NOx+ has not yet been reported. Atmospheric NOx has been studied with the help of simulation experiments using plasma systems.The use of an electric discharge to partially decompose a chemical compound so that the various free radicals, ions, excited molecules, and so on generated by the discharge react almost immediately with the undecomposed parent compound to generate daughter compounds is a technique that should have general applicability.153 MW discharge in an 80% N2–20% O2 gas mixture in the presence of water was used to simulate Earth's atmosphere.154 In addition to the familiar NO˙ and N2O species, significant amounts of gas-phase neutral NO2, NO3, HNO2, and HNO3 were produced and detected in the form of their Li+ adducts. A number of ionic clusters with NO+ and H2O+ produced by gas-phase ion–molecule reactions were also detected.A comparison of our results with field observations revealed that we detected all the gas-phase neutrals found in the troposphere except HO2NO2 and N2O5. The products we observed provide an explanation for the constituents detected in the troposphere. The ionic products found in the present study did not agree with those measured at ground level in a remote desert area. It is predicted that the ionic products found in the present study may in the future be detected in sensitive in situ observations in remote areas. The chemistry of MW plasmas is a good analog of atmospheric chemistry associated with lightning and sunlight. Properly conducted MW plasma laboratory experiments are relevant to investigations of the photochemical and lightning processes in planetary atmospheres.Complex and unstable compounds. Copper complexes Cu(hfac)(tmvs). A new technology, based on Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry has been applied to study of a Cu(1,1,1,5,5,5-hexafluoroacetylacetonate)(trimethylvinylsilane) 							[Cu(hfac)(tmvs)]. This compound, Cu(hfac)(tmvs), is known to deposit quality copper films.155 The analysis has to meet the following challenges: the Cu precursor is thermally labile, corrosive and condensable. An intensive molecular ion has been given for the first time.Fig. 10 shows a typical Li+ adduct mass spectrum of the as-received, reagent CuII(hfac)(tmvs) in the mass range up to m/z 450. This spectrum was acquired by heating the precursor vaporizer and QMS inlet lines. This figure also includes the background peaks. One of the observed peaks is the Li+ adduct molecular ion at m/z 387 for the test compound, Cu(hfac)(tmvs), without any fragmentation, which is completely different from that of electron ionization (EI) mass spectrum (not shown). The 70 eV EI gives many fragment ions such as (tmvs)+, (tmvs)Li+(H2O), (tmvs)2+, H(hfac)+, H(hfac)+(H2O), Cu(tmvs)2, Cu(tmvs)(hfac)+, Cu(tmvs)(hfac)+(H2O) and CF, without molecular ions. Fig. 10  The mass spectrum of the as-received, reagent CuII(hfac)(tmvs). In addition to the observation of the molecular ion, an important feature of IAMS spectrum is the presence of peaks at m/e 							= 107 (tmvs)Li+, 125 (tmvs)Li+(H2O), 207 (tmvs)2Li+, 215 H(hfac)Li+ and 233 H(hfac)Li+(H2O). We believe that these ions do not result from the fragmentation of Cu(tmvs)(hfac)Li+, but are attributed instead to the presence of traces of the (tmvs) and H(hfac) ligands, the ingredients employed in the synthesis of CuII(tmvs)(hfac), in the as-received complex. A novel IAMS method is promising for on-line monitoring of by-products in Cu-CVD process.The presence of hydrogen trioxide H2O3 in the gas phase. The following topic is concerned with the presence of H2O3 in the gas phase.156,157 During the studies on the identification of the principal species produced by the CH4–O2 microwave (MW) discharge, we have succeeded in determining the presence of hydrogen trioxide H2O3 in the gas phase. The Li+ adduct mass spectra of the discharge plasma, obtained by the Li+ ion attachment technique, clearly show the peak m/z 57 (H2O3Li+), giving direct evidence that H2O3 is formed in the plasma environment and detected mass spectrometrically.The technique used is Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry and thereby arrives at concrete evidence of the presence of the hydrogen trioxide. A most important advantage of the present study comes again from the fact that m/z 57, where the mass number of the Li+ adduct complex happens, is virtually free from interference, in contrast with most m/z. The H2O3 densities were evaluated as a function of the CH4–O2 gas pressure and composition, MW power input and distance from the microcavity.The presence of a chemical species, whose molecular weight is 50 amu is denoted by an increase in the current of the Li+ adduct ions (m/z 57). According to a CAS-ONLINE search, there are, surprisingly, only 43 chemical species which have 50 amu as their molecular weight. Under the present experimental conditions, the possible compounds are either H2O3 or C2H3LiO. It is concluded that from the two candidates the peak at m/z 57, due to the Li+ adduct ion, is assigned to H2O3Li+, since the isotopic abundance consideration of the m/z 56 peak relative to the m/z 57 peak indicates containing one Li atom and hence, rules out the possibility of C2H3LiOLi+.In conclusion, direct proof of the presence of H2O3 in the gas phase was provided by the recently developed ion attachment technique incorporated with quadrupole mass spectrometry. Further investigation is desirable to determine the mechanism of production of H2O3 under the present conditions. It also appeared desirable to apply the present approach to the H2O or H2O2 discharge system, which has been investigated for the production of solid H2O3 and related compounds over the last 60 years.A recent ab initio molecular orbital calculation158 predicts the collisional stabilization of H2O3 by the exothermic reaction OH˙ 							+ HO2˙ 							→ H2O3.N3H3˙ and N4H4. A study has been made of the production of gaseous hydronitrogen chemical species in a continuous flow MW plasma discharge excited in hydrazene (N2H4) gas at a pressure of 10 Torr. The product analysis was made by Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry.159A variety of products are formed and identified mass spectrometrically, assigned tentatively to N2, H2, NH3, N2H2, N3H3˙, N4H4, N2H3˙ and so on. The mass spectral analysis exhibits progressions differing by 14 mass units. The interesting product found in this study was N4H2 with which chemical formula no species were listed in the NIST database. Mass spectrometric evidence is given for the elusive chemical compounds triazene (N3H3) and tetrazene (N4H4), and data on the free radicals NH2˙ and N2H3˙, effectively demonstrating that the MW discharge is a method for generating possible new products. Triazene and tetrazene have been postulated as intermediates in the oxidation of hydrazine in solution.ProspectiveRecently a French–Japanese joint group has made a unique development in the area of IAMS. The alkali ion attachment reaction has been applied to ion trap mass spectrometry.160 The quite simple modification required is that the alkali ion emitter be placed at the position of the electron emission filament of the conventional electron ionization ion source and the circuit of the lens gate must be modified to permit injection of positively charged species. Preliminary results have shown high efficiency for the sodium cation attachment reaction in the ion trap mass spectrometer. The time-of-flight mass spectrometry/ion attachment reaction chamber setup seems to be interesting, especially for the analysis of non-volatile and thermally labile compounds. Studies in a number of laboratories are underway to develop this combination.Applications to GC-MS mode are promising analytically in view of the simple mass spectra obtained where pseudo-molecular ions dominate. The compatibility of thermogravimetry (TG) with Li+MS may provide excellent temporal correspondence between TG and mass spectral data and the ability to identify and resolve complex co-evolving products; this method appears to hold great promise for the analysis of non-volatile and thermally labile compounds.7 ConclusionMass spectrometry has made a large contribution to our understanding of fundamental processes involving radicals, providing information on chemical systems that cannot be obtained by other techniques. These features obviously yield mass spectrometry a technique of choice in the study of free radicals.A wide variety of experimental techniques is available for the characterization of gas-phase radicals; one purpose of this review was to introduce them to the reader. The investigations on free radicals by mass spectrometry have already afforded a wealth of data in the domain of thermochemistry where these techniques have provided reliable determinations independent of traditional calorimetric and neutral kinetics methods. This review has attempted to give an overview of the recent developments in mass spectrometry of free radicals in covering the last years of publications in the domain. Two complementary aspects have been tackled: (i) the fundamental aspect which includes the study of radical thermodynamics, and (ii) the analytical aspect encompassed with the characterization of plasmas by IAMS.The examples provided by the advent of scrutinizing studies of uncommon species by neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry was recently presented by the authors as a good illustration of what could be a future aspect of the mass spectrometry of free radicals:4 the recent publications reporting the results obtained by NRMS quoted above seem to corroborate this assumption. Similarly, the application of ion attachment mass spectrometry to the detection of radical intermediates in various systems due to its high sensitivity and its versatility of use under the condition of atmospheric pressure is still promising in terms of developments and future prospects for the detection of free radicals using mass spectrometry. Furthermore, new and original methods reported here, in particular the application of proton transfer mass spectrometry to organic radical studies and the recent developments of SIFT techniques using supersonic jet pyrolysis as a source of radicals, are promising and illustrate well the great creativity that the mass spectrometry community has always shown in the domain of radical chemistry.Glossary of acronymsACIMSalkali metal ion attachment chemical ionization mass spectrometryAEappearance energyCIDIcollision-induced dissociative ionizationD0bond dissociation energy (corrected value at 0 K)DH298bond dissociation energy at 298 KEAelectron affinityEIelectron ionizationESIelectrospray ionizationFAflowing afterglowFTICRFourier transform ion cyclotron resonanceHChydrocarbonIAMSion attachment mass spectrometryICRion cyclotron resonanceIEionization energyLi+MSlithium ion attachment mass spectrometryLIFlaser induced fluorescenceMATImass analyzed threshold ionizationMPImultiphoton ionizationMWmicrowaveNIDDneutral and ion decomposition differenceNIPESnegative ion photoelectron spectroscopyNRMSneutralization–reionization mass spectrometryOESoptical emission spectrometryPAproton affinityPEPICOphotoelectron–photoion coincidencePESphotoelectron spectroscopyPFIpulsed-field ionizationPIMSphotoionization mass spectrometryQMSquadrupole mass spectrometryRCreaction chamberREMPIresonance-enhanced multiphoton ionizationRPDretarding potential differenceSIFTselected ion flow tubeTPEPICOthreshold photoelectron–photoion coincidenceVUVvacuum ultravioletZEKEzero electron kinetic energyReferencesC. P. Ball and P. J. Derrick, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. B., 1994, 90, 21 Search PubMed .C. A. F. Johnson and J. E. Parker, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C., 1997, 93, 333 RSC .A. L. Burlingame, R. K. Boyd and S. J. Gaskell, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 599R CAS .M. Sablier and T. Fujii, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 2855 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Eltenton, J. Chem. Phys., 1942, 10, 403 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Eltenton, J. Chem. Phys., 1947, 15, 455 CAS .J. A. Hipple and D. P. Stevenson, Phys. Rev., 1943, 63, 121 CrossRef .F. P. Lossing, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1957, 67, 499 CrossRef CAS .D. D. M. Wayner and D. Griller, in Advances in Free Radical Chemistry, ed. D. D. Tanner, JAI Press Inc., Stamford, CT,  1990, vol. 1, p. 159 Search PubMed .G. Herzberg, in Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure—Vol. 1: Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar, 2nd edn.,  1998 Search PubMed .J. L. Holmes, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1992, 118–119, 381 CrossRef CAS .S. I. Blanksby and G. B. Ellison, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 255 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Pedley, in Thermochemical Data and Structures of Organic Compounds, Thermodynamic Research Center, Texas A & M University, College Station, TX,  1994 Search PubMed .J. C. Rienstra-Kirakofe, S. Nandi, G. B. Ellison and H. F. Schaeffer, III, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 231 CrossRef CAS .I. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 59 RSC .H. J. Deyerl, I. Fischer and P. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 3441 CrossRef CAS .W. A. Fite, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys., 1975, 16, 109 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Foner, Adv. At. Mol. Phys., 1966, 2, 385 Search PubMed .R. Robertson and A. Gallagher, J. Appl. Phys., 1986, 59, 3402 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Vasile and G. Smolinski, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys., 1973, 12, 133 CrossRef CAS .G. Smolinski and M. J. Vasile, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys., 1975, 16, 137 CrossRef .M. J. Vasile and J. Smolinsky, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys., 1975, 18, 179 CrossRef CAS .B. Crunelle, D. Surdyk, J. F. Pauwels and L. R. Sochet, J. Chim. Phys., 1996, 433 .R. Atkinson, Chem. Rev., 1985, 85, 69 .J. Ahrens, A. Keller, R. Kovacs and K.-H. Homann, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 1823 CAS .A. Keller, R. Kovacs and K. H. Homann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 1667 RSC .T. G. DiGuiseppe, J. W. Hudgens and M. C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 36 CrossRef .M. T. Dulgnan, J. W. Hudgens and J. R. Wyatt, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 4156 CrossRef CAS .P. Chen, S. D. Colson, W. A. Chupka and J. A. Berson, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2319 CrossRef CAS .D. Kohn, H. Clauberg and P. Chen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1992, 63, 4003 CrossRef CAS .G. K. Anderson and S. H. Bauer, J. Phys. Chem., 1977, 81, 1146 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Dulcey and J. W. Hudgens, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 2296 CrossRef CAS .R.
E. Continetti, D. R. Cyr, R. B. Metz and D. M. Neumark, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 182, 406 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Cyr, R. E. Continetti, R. B. Metz, D. L. Osborn and D. M. Neumark, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 97, 4937 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Hoops, J. R. Gascooke, K. E. Kautzman, A. E. Faulhaber and D. M. Neumark, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 8494 CrossRef CAS .N. Goldberg and H. Schwarz, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 347 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Schalley, G. Hornung, D. Schröder and H. Schwarz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 91 RSC .F. Turecek, Transient Intermediates of Chemical Reactions by Neutralization–reionization Mass Spectrometry, Top. Curr. Chem., 2003, 225, 77–129 CAS .M. Sadilek and F. Turecek, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9610 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Seymour, E. A. Syrstad, C. C. Langley and F. Turecek, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228, 687 CrossRef CAS .F. Tureček, J. Mass Spectrom., 1998, 33, 779 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Pedersen, E. Fanghanel and R. Flammang, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2001, 356 RSC .S. Peppe, S. Dua, A. M. McAnoy and J. H. Bowie, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 1879 CrossRef CAS .M. Fitzgerald and J. H. Bowie, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 3668 CrossRef CAS .S. Dua and J. H. Bowie, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 76 CrossRef CAS .S. Peppe, S. J. Blanksby, S. Dua and J. H. Bowie, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5817 CrossRef CAS .S. Peppe, A. M. McAnoy, S. Dua and J. H. Bowie, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18, 1008 CrossRef CAS .S. Vivekananda, M. Sadilek, X. Chen and F. Tureček, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15, 1055 CrossRef CAS .S. Vivekananda, M. Sadilek, X. Chen, L. E. Adams and F. Tureček, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15, 1068 CrossRef CAS .F. Turecek, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 227, 327 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Ervin, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 391 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Holmes and F. P. Lossing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 7343 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Holmes, F. P. Lossing and P. M. Mayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 9723 CrossRef CAS .J. Berkowitz, Acc. Chem. Res., 1989, 22, 413 CrossRef .M. N. R. Ashfold and J. D. Howe, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1994, 45, 57 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Hudgens, Progress in REMPI Spectroscopy of Transient Free Radicals, in Advances in Multi-Photon Processes Spectroscopy, ed. S. H. Lin, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore,  1988, vol. 4, p. 171 Search PubMed .I. Fischer, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 216, 131 CrossRef CAS .H. Dickinson, T. Chelmick and T. P. Softley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 338, 37 CrossRef .P. G. Wenthold and W. C. Lineberger, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 597 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Wetzel and J. I. Brauman, Chem. Rev., 1987, 87, 607 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Fogleman, H. Koizumi, J. P. Kercher, B. Sztaray and T. Baer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5288 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li and T. Baer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 272 CrossRef CAS .B. S. Willitsch, J. M. Dyke and F. Merkt, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2003, 86, 1152 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Robinson, N. E. Sveum and D. M. Neumark, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 5311 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Robinson, N. E. Sveum and D. M. Neumark, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 383, 601 CrossRef CAS .T. Gilbert, I. Fischer and P. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 561 CrossRef CAS .T. Gilbert, R. Pfab, I. Fischer and P. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 2575 CrossRef CAS .I. Fischer and P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 4291 CrossRef CAS .T. Schüßler, H. J. Deyerl, S. Dümmler, I. Fischer, C. Alcaraz and M. Elhanine, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 9077 CrossRef .B. Ruscic, D. Feller, D. A. Dixon, K. A. Peterson, L. B. Harding, R. L. Asher and A. F. Wagner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 1 CrossRef CAS .B. Ruscic, A. F. Wagner, L. B. Harding, R. L. Asher, D. Feller, D. A. Dixon, K. A. Peterson, X. Song, X. Qian, C. Y. Ng, J. Liu, W. Chen and D. W. Schwenke, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 2727 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Joens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 11041 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Van Doren, S. E. Barlow, C. H. DePuy and V. M. Bierbaum, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1987, 81, 85 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Blansky, T. M. Ramond, G. E. Davico, M. R. Nimlos, S. Kato, V. M. Bierbaum, W. C. Lineberger, G. B. Ellison and M. Okumura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9585 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Ramond, S. J. Blansky, S. Kato, V. M. Bierbaum, G. E. Davico, R. L. Schwartz, W. C. Lineberger and G. B. Ellison, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 9641 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, V. M. Bierbaum, G. B. Ellison and S. Kato, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3531 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Hanson, J. J. Orlando, B. Noziere and E. Kosciuch, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 239, 147 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xu, S. Kato, V. M. Bierbaum, M. R. Nimlos and G. B. Ellison, J. Phys. Chem., 2004, 108, 9733 Search PubMed .C. N. McEven, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 1986, 5, 521 CAS .T. Fujii, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1992, 191, 162 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Beauchamp, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1971, 22, 527 CrossRef CAS .P. Kebarle, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1977, 28, 445 CrossRef CAS .D. Bombick, J. D. Pinkston and J. Allison, Anal. Chem., 1984, 56, 396 CrossRef CAS .D. Bombick and J. Allison, Anal. Chem., 1987, 59, 458 CrossRef CAS .R. H. Staley and J. L. Beauchamp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 5920 CrossRef CAS .F. W. Rollgen and H. R. Schulten, Org. Mass Spectrom., 1975, 10, 660 .T. Fujii, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2000, 19, 111 CrossRef CAS .A. Good, Chem. Rev., 1975, 75, 561 CrossRef CAS .A. W. Castleman and R. G. Keesee, Acc. Chem. Res., 1986, 19, 413 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, M. Ogura and H. Jimba, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 1026 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 775 CrossRef CAS .P. C. Selvin and T. Fujii, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2001, 72, 2248 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and M. Ohta, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1995, 28, 1268 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, S. Arulmozhiraja, M. Nakamura and Y. Shiokawa, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 2937 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and K. Syouji, Phys. Rev. A, 1992, 46, 3555 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and K. Syouji, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 3009 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 2803 CrossRef CAS .H. Kobayashi, M. Shen and A. T. Bell, J. Macromol. Sci. Chem. A, 1974, 8, 1345 CrossRef .H. Sugai, H. Kato and T. Okuda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B, 1987, 23, 552 CrossRef .M. R. Havens, M. E. Biolsi and K. G. Mayhan, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1976, 13, 575 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Davis and W. F. Libby, Science, 1964, 144, 991 CrossRef .K. C. Brown and M. J. Copsey, Eur. Polym. J., 1972, 8, 129 CrossRef CAS .P. B. Davies, N. A. Isaacs, S. A. Johnson and D. K. Resell, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 83, 2060 CrossRef CAS .H. Toyoda, H. Kojima and H. Sugai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1989, 54, 1507 CrossRef CAS .R. N. Rudolph and J. H. Moore, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 1990, 10, 45 .J. Wormhoudt, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 1990, 8, 1722 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Stanton, A. Freedman, J. Wormhoudt and P. P. Gaspar, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 57, 1265 .H. Sugai, H. Kojima, A. Ishida and H. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 56, 2616 CrossRef CAS .L. E. Kline, W. D. Partlow and W. E. Bies, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 65, 70 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Keesee and A. W. Castlemann, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1986, 15, 1011 CAS .H. E. Radford, K. M. Evanson and C. J. Howard, J. Chem. Phys., 1974, 60, 3178 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and H. S. Kim, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 268, 229 CrossRef CAS .H. Ehrhardt, R. Kleber, B. Scheppat, A. Fucha, W. Dworschak, J. Scherer and K. Jung, Plasma Surf. Eng., 1988, 2, 1113 Search PubMed .M. R. Havens, M. E. Biolsi and K. G. Mayhan, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1976, 13, 575 CrossRef CAS .G. Smolinsky and M. Vasile, Jr, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys., 1976, 21, 171 CrossRef .H. Kobayashi, A. T. Bell and M. Shen, Macromolecules, 1974, 7, 277 CrossRef CAS .M. Niinomi, H. Kobayashi, M. Shen and A. T. Bell, J. Appl. Phys., 1973, 44, 4317 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Kiefer, S. A. Kapsalis, M. Z. Al-Alami and K. A. Budach, Combust. Flame, 1983, 51, 79 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Kern and K. Xie, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 1991, 17, 191 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 2056 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, Phys. Rev. E., 1998, 58, 6495 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and K. Syouji, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11380 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and K. Syouji, Phys. Rev. E, 1994, 49, 657 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and M. Kareev, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 4923 CrossRef CAS .M. Kareev, M. Sablier and T. Fujii, J. Phys. Chem., 2000, 104, 7218 Search PubMed .A. von Engel, Electric Plasmas: Their Nature and Uses, Taylor and Francis, London,  1983 Search PubMed .J. L. Angus and C. C. Hayman, Science, 1988, 24, 913 CrossRef .J. Wagner, Ch. Wild, F. Pohl and P. Koidl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 106 CrossRef CAS .T. Mitomo, T. Ohta, E. Kondoh and K. Ohtsuka, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 4532 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Raiche and J. B. Jeffries, Appl. Opt., 1993, 32, 4629 CrossRef CAS .F. G. Celii, P. E. Pehrsson, H. Wang and J. E. Butler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 52, 2043 CrossRef CAS .K. R. Stadler and W. Homsi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3710 CrossRef .S. J. Harris, A. M. Weiner and T. A. Perry, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 1605 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Cappelli and P. H. Paul, J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 67, 2596 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Goodwin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 277 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and M. Kareev, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 2543 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Liu and M. L. Cohen, Science, 1989, 245, 841 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou and H. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 634 CrossRef CAS .W. Dawei, F. Dejun, G. Huaixi, Z. Zhihong, M. Xianquan and F. Xiangjun, Phys. Rev. B., 1997, 56, 4949 CrossRef .T. Fujii, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 313, 733 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, J. Muraki, S. Arulmozhiraja and M. Kareev, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 5592 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Kushner, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 2923 CrossRef CAS .G. Ecker and K. U. Riemann, Exp. Tech. Phys., 1987, 35, 119 Search PubMed .I. C. Plumb and K. R. Ryan, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 1986, 6, 11 CAS .S. Chang, T. Scattergood, S. Aronowitz and J. Flores, Rev. Geophys. Space Phys., 1979, 17, 1923 Search PubMed .C. G. Kunde, A. C. Aikin, R. A. Hanel, D. E. Jennings, W. C. Maguire and R. E. Samuelson, Nature, 1981, 292, 686 CAS .R. Hanel, B. Conarth, F. M. Flasar, V. Kunde, W. Maguire, J. Pearl, J. Pirraglia, R. Samuelson and L. Herath, Science, 1981, 212, 192 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and N. Arai, Astrophys. J., 1999, 519, 858 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Crutzen, Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 1979, 7, 443 Search PubMed .D. H. Ehhalt, F. Rohrer and J. Wahner, J. Geophys. Res., 1992, 97, 3725 CAS .C. Johnson, J. Henshaw and G. McInnes, Nature, 1992, 355, 69 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Singh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1987, 21, 320 CAS .C. Niu, Y. Z. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1993, 261, 335 .T. Fujii, K. Iwase and P. C. Selvin, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2003, 108, 4148 .J. Langan, P. Maroulis and R. Ridgeway, Solid State Technol., 1996, 39, 115 CAS .P. A.Giguere and K. Herman, Can. J. Chem., 1970, 48, 3473 .C. Gonzalez, J. Theisen, L. Zhu, H. B. Schlegel, W. L. Hase and E. W. Kaiser, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 6784 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, M. Yashiro and H. Tokiwa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 12280 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii, P. C. Selvin, M. Sablier and K. Iwase, J. Phys. Chem. A., 2002, 106, 3102 CrossRef CAS .T. Faye, A. Brunot, M. Sablier, J. C. Tabet and T. Fujii, Rapid Commun. Mass. Spectrom., 2000, 14, 1066 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:
R + e− 						→ R+ 						+ 2e−	(1)
RX + e− 						→ R+ 						+ X + 2e−	(2)
AE(R) 						= IE(R) 						+ DH298(R–X) 						+ eKE	(3)
A–B → A + B	(4)
DH298(A–B) 						= DH298(A+–B) 						+ IE(AB) 						− IE(A)	(5)
DH298(A–B) 						= AE(A+, AB) 						− IE(A)	(6)
	(7)
R− 						→ R + e− 						   EA(R)	(8)
RH → R− 						+ H+ 						   ΔacidH298(RH)	(9)
H+ 						+ e− 						→ H    −IE(H)	(10)
RH → R + H    DH298(R–H)	(11)
DH298(R–H) 						= EA(R) 						+ 						ΔacidH298(RH) 						− IE(H)	(12)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic view of a flow-beam reactor consisting of a discharge low-pressure flow reactor and its associated mass spectrometer used for the generation of free radicals through abstraction reactions by atomic reactants. Reprinted with permission from J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 87, 2296. Copyright 1983 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of fast radical beam apparatus designed to study the photodissociation of mass-selected radicals. Reprinted with permission from J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 97, 4937. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics.	 
M1+˙ 							+ N → M1 							+ N+˙	(13)
M1 							+ R → M1+˙ 							+ R + e−	(14)
[M1A] 							+* 							→ M1 							+ A+	(15)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of a neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry experiment for mass-selected ion beam Iz of charge z 						( 						z 						= 						± charges). Reprinted with permission from Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 347. Copyright 1994 American Chemical Society.	 
R + e− 							→ R+ 							+ 2e−	(16)
RX + e− 							→ R+ 							+ X + 2e−	(17)
ΔfH°(R) 							= 							ΔfH°(RY) 							+ AE(Y+) 							− 							ΔfH°(Y+)	(18)
RY + e− 							→ R + Y+ 							+ 2e−	(19)
	(20)
M + 							hν 							→ M+ 							+ e− 							   IE = 							hν0	(21)
M− 							+ 							hν 							→ M + e− 							   EA = 							hν′0	(22)
M + hν 							→ M* 							→ M+ 							+ e−	(23)
M + 							nhν 							→ M* 							+ 							hν′ 							→ M+ 							+ e−	(24)
eBE = 							hν 							− eKE	(25)

 	Fig. 4  Overview of a negative ion photodetachment spectrometer. Negative ions are generated in a microwave discharge ion source and then extracted into a high-vacuum region before mass-selected separation. Electron photodetachment takes place in the laser interaction region. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 231. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a tandem flowing afterglow-selected ion flow tube (SIFT)-drift instrument. Reprinted with permission from Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1987, 81, 85. Copyright 1987 Elsevier Science Publishers.	 
XH + ROO− 							⇆ ROOH + X−	(26)
A+ 						+ R + N → 						[A–R]+ 						+ N	(27)

 	Fig. 6  General overview of a quadrupole mass spectrometer with a Li+ ion attachment reaction chamber. Any stream from the sample inlet system whose components one wants to analyze is directed to the reaction chamber. RP: rotary pump, TMP: turbomolecular pump.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ion attachment mass spectrum (upper column) obtained from 1000 ppm c-C4F8 in N2 gas, showing c-C4F8Li+ 							(m/z 207). For comparison, the 70 eV electron ionization (EI) mass spectrum (lower column) was measured; the abundant ions observed and their relative intensities are C2F4 							(100), C3F5 							(87), CF (54), CF3 							(25), CF2 							(13), and C3F3 							(6). The background mass spectrum of EI is taken with no c-C4F8 in the N2 carrier gas. Reprinted with permission from Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 2937. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 


CnH2n−1	C2H3 												(100), C3H5 												(68), C4H7 												(36), C5H9 												(28), C6H11 												(16), C7H13 												(13), C8H15 												(12), C9H17 												(6), C10H19 												(4), C11H21 												(3)
CnH2n+1	C2H5 												(48), C3H7 												(42), C4H9 												(32), C5H11 												(29), C6H13 												(20), C7H15 												(12), C8H17 												(9), C9H19 												(6), C10H21 												(3), C11H23 												(2)
Others	C4H3 												(13), C4H5 												(12), C5H5 												(10), C5H7 												(8), C6H5 												(8), C6H7 												(6), C6H9 												(6)
Moleculesb	C2H2 												(10), C4H2 												(11), C4H4 												(7), C4H6 												(8), C5H6 												(11), C6H4 												(9), C6H6 												(12), C6H8 												(5), C6H1O (3)

 	Fig. 8  Simulation system for the diagnosis of diamond deposition CVD with Li+ ion attachment mass spectrometry. Reprinted with permission from J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 2543. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  Partial mass spectra of Li+ ion adducts over the regions m/z 5–9, 17–21, 29–33 and 34–38. (A) The neutral mode (in the presence of Li+) and (B) the ionic mode (in the absence of Li+). The underlined peaks indicate the radicals observed. Reprinted with permission from J. Appl. Phys,, 2001, 89, 2543. Copyright 1992 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 10  The mass spectrum of the as-received, reagent CuII(hfac)(tmvs).	 
ACIMS	alkali metal ion attachment chemical ionization mass spectrometry
AE	appearance energy
CIDI	collision-induced dissociative ionization
D0	bond dissociation energy (corrected value at 0 K)
DH298	bond dissociation energy at 298 K
EA	electron affinity
EI	electron ionization
ESI	electrospray ionization
FA	flowing afterglow
FTICR	Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
HC	hydrocarbon
IAMS	ion attachment mass spectrometry
ICR	ion cyclotron resonance
IE	ionization energy
Li+MS	lithium ion attachment mass spectrometry
LIF	laser induced fluorescence
MATI	mass analyzed threshold ionization
MPI	multiphoton ionization
MW	microwave
NIDD	neutral and ion decomposition difference
NIPES	negative ion photoelectron spectroscopy
NRMS	neutralization–reionization mass spectrometry
OES	optical emission spectrometry
PA	proton affinity
PEPICO	photoelectron–photoion coincidence
PES	photoelectron spectroscopy
PFI	pulsed-field ionization
PIMS	photoionization mass spectrometry
QMS	quadrupole mass spectrometry
RC	reaction chamber
REMPI	resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization
RPD	retarding potential difference
SIFT	selected ion flow tube
TPEPICO	threshold photoelectron–photoion coincidence
VUV	vacuum ultraviolet
ZEKE	zero electron kinetic energy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
