Stability of the CsPbI 3 perovskite: from fundamentals to improvements  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA01252E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01252E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11124-11144Stability of the CsPbI3 perovskite: from fundamentals to improvements

        
          
            Zhun 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wangen 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Shengzhong (Frank) 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science & Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 710119, P. R. China. E-mail: wgzhao@snnu.edu.cn; liusz@snnu.edu.cn
bDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, iChEM, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, P. R. China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn
Received 
      10th February 2021
    , Accepted 29th March 2021First published on 13th April 2021AbstractOver the past few years, we have witnessed the occurrence and progress of the CsPbI3 semiconductor material as a superstar in photovoltaic fields. By the virtue of its excellent photoelectric properties and solution processability, the all-inorganic CsPbI3 solar cell has the possibility of production at the industrial level, taking into account the low production cost and high photoelectric conversion efficiency. The stability issues are considered as the main obstacles for its further development. In this review, we distinguish four different phase structures from the bond lengths, bond angles and symmetries, and put forward the techniques to identify the different phase structures based on various characterization methods. Subsequently, the stability of the CsPbI3 film is assessed based its intrinsic characters, including thermodynamics, structure and material bonding type, and the external stimulation involving heat, light and moisture where the detailed chemical reaction procedures for the film degeneration are expressed. On this basis, some physical mechanisms to enhance the CsPbI3 stability are proposed and related strategies are designed to delay the phase conversion processing by variance of its own structure (strain, surface energy and dimensionality) or intercepting the outsider interference. Finally, some noteworthy research studies are prospected.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite photovoltaic semiconductors have been progressing rapidly, and have received a great deal of attention compared with other traditional photovoltaic materials in the past few years.1–5 Owing to their excellent photoelectric properties, including large absorption coefficients, low trap-state-densities and long carrier diffusion lengths,2,6,7 the certificated record power conversion efficiency (PCE) has reached 25.5%.8 In typical hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite semiconductors, CH3NH3+ (MA+) or CH3(NH2)2+ (FA+) often occupy the A sites in the ABX3 architecture. Unfortunately, the introduction of organic components gives rise to the thermal instability of perovskite materials. For instance, the CH3NH3PbI3 film will start to decompose into PbI2 and other accompanying products when the temperature climbs to 85 °C,9,10 which significantly constrains the fabrication, storage, and application of the assembled devices.11–15 Therefore, there is an urgent need to explore some semiconductor photovoltaic materials with good thermal stability towards the production of devices at the industrial level. Replacing the organic MA and FA components with inorganic Cs, resulting in the all-inorganic CsPbX3, is a feasible approach.16,17 Compared with organic–inorganic perovskite films, CsPbI3 extends the start of thermal decomposition to 450 °C, which prominently strengthens the heat tolerance. Furthermore, the all-inorganic CsPbX3 possesses excellent photoelectric properties with long carrier diffusion lengths, high photoluminescence (PL) quantum yields and high defect tolerance, which guarantees their exceptional optoelectronic properties.11,18,19 Taking account of the superior photoelectric properties, simple synthetic methods and proximate band gap for single-junction battery applications, CsPbI3 has been recognized as one of the most promising alternative candidates among all CsPbX3 (X = I−, Br−, Cl− or mixed halogens) to solve the poor thermal stability of organic–inorganic perovskites with predicted maximum photoelectrical efficiency.20
Cesium lead iodide (CsPbI3) as a ternary plumbohalide was first discovered by Møller 60 years ago, with an obviously distinctive “perovskite” structure.21 Subsequently, many researchers explored its crystal features, including phase transitions and ionic conductivity, finding it challenging to prepare the black-phase perovskite CsPbI3 under ambient conditions for its being easily converted to a yellow non-perovskite structure, especially in high moisture environments. Until 2015, a series of all-inorganic halide perovskite (CsPbX3) nanocrystals were pioneeringly synthesized by Protesescu et al., and maintained their perovskite structure for several months.22–24 The enhanced phase stability of the metastable state was attributed to the contribution of the quantum-size effect to the surface energy. Inspired by this work, Eperon and coworkers produced a stable cubic CsPbI3 film by similarly reducing the grain size with the addition of HI to cause strain in the CsPbI3 lattice, and successfully assembled it into a perovskite photovoltaic cell with a stabilized PCE of 1.7%.25 Soon after, the Luther group made a tremendous breakthrough in the stabilized efficiency to beyond 10% by assembling α-CsPbI3 quantum dot (QD) photoactive films. This huge enhancement in PCE encouraged researchers and illuminated the prospect of the all-inorganic CsPbI3 in the photovoltaic field.26 Then, more and more scientific researchers were motivated to focus on the investigation of the CsPbI3 perovskite photovoltaic devices to promote their rapid progresses. In 2018, the Liu group prepared all-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells via phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) additives. They obtained a PCE of 15.07% and excellent stability, with the efficiency of the device decreasing by 8% of its original efficiency after two months under ambient surroundings.27 At that time, the two main areas of concern, the efficiency and stability, had both ascended dramatically, and deliverable results were achieved. Soon afterwards, reproducible photovoltaic devices based on CsPbI3 with an auxiliary phenyltrimethylammonium bromide (PTABr) post-treatment with a high PCE of 17.06% were achieved by the Zhao group.28 Following this, a series of optimization strategies were proposed to boost the performance and stability, including superficial modification and topographical optimization. Thus far, the record PCE of the CsPbI3 perovskite solar cell has reached as high as 20.37% in work by the Seok group via methylammonium chloride (MACl) solution (SDMS) surface passivation.29
In this review, we explain the optoelectronic properties and enumerate the superiority of the all-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite as the photoactive material from the fundamentals. Because poor stability is the main factor limiting the development of all-inorganic CsPbI3 towards industrial scale, the causes and mechanisms of the chemical and phase instabilities of the CsPbI3 perovskite material are summarized and derived from its intrinsic characteristics, for instance: the crystal structure and ion migration, and the external environmental stresses of heat, moisture, and light. Among these factors, phase conversion is the toughest problem degrading the stability of the CsPbI3 photovoltaic solar cells. Thus, two concerns must be carefully considered. First, a means of acquiring black CsPbI3 (including the α-, β- and γ-phase) is critical, and high temperature is necessary. The second concern is how to maintain the black perovskite phase for an extended period. The former can be easily realized, whereas the latter is the core issue. Here, a variety of successfully adopted strategies are classified and summarized based on their different physical mechanisms. Finally, there is a discussion of some prospective methods proposed to further enhance the photoelectric properties to accelerate the development towards industrialization.
2. Fundamentals of the CsPbI3 material
This section gives an overview of the fundamental material characteristics of CsPbI3, including its excellent photoelectrical metrics and the concerning phase stability issues. Details and references are provided regarding the virtues of the CsPbI3 semiconductor material in terms of its structural, optical and carrier transport properties. In addition, some specific methods are summarized and listed for carefully distinguishing the four different phases based on their subtle structure variances, especially among the three “black” phase perovskites.
2.1. Structural and photoelectric properties of the CsPbI3 perovskite

2.1.1. Structure. 
The CsPbI3 perovskite is considered as a matter of course to have a characteristic [PbI6]4− octahedral structure, along with three orthogonal directions to extend its infinite three-dimensional [PbI3]− framework by corner-sharing, while the Cs ions function as structural templates and fill in the cage of the [PbI6]4− octahedra.6 CsPbI3 has multiple structural polymorphs, with three photoactive “black” perovskite phases (α, β, and γ) and one yellow non-perovskite phase (δ), depending on the temperature.33,34 These four CsPbI3 phases all have a corner-sharing octahedra framework, but differ slightly in the degree of symmetry. Those corresponding structure models, the distortion of the Pb–I–Pb bond angles and the diverse lattice parameters are exhibited in Fig. 1a. Among them, α-CsPbI3 has the highest symmetry with a cubic structure, and its Pb–I–Pb bond angle is a perfect 180° with undistorted lead iodide octahedra.31 Performing a tetragonal distortion on the ideal cubic structure will generate the β phase CsPbI3, and its relative corner-sharing lead iodide [PbI6]4− octahedra are rotated, which lowers its cubic symmetry. It shows out-of-phase tilting of the polyhedral along the c-axis, adopting the tetragonal space group. The γ-phase is another metastable perovskite phase with a second distortion of the cubic phase, yielding an orthorhombic structure. The further reduced symmetry induces the γ-phase material to adopt a monoclinic crystal system. Fig. 1b–d shows that the band edges and bond lengths increase with the phase transformation from α- to β- to γ-CsPbI3, and it also roughly differentiates the phase structures. The Pb–I–Pb bond angle of γ-CsPbI3 is reduced to 154.74°, which is attributed to the distortion of the cubic structure. The δ-CsPbI3 has an obvious disparity in structure with the other phases, and comprises 1D double chains of PbI64− edge-sharing octahedra with Pb–I–Pb bond angles of 95.09° and 91.40° reduced nearly to half that of the α-CsPbI3 structure with corner-sharing octahedra.35 The fact that the δ-phase has the smallest Pb–I–Pb bond angles is ascribed to its reduced orbital overlap of Pb and I with the weakest antibonding character compared with the other three structural models. Thus, the valence band becomes narrower, yielding to the increase of the band gap. This also indicates that δ-CsPbI3 possesses much more defect transition energy levels than other phases (α, β, and γ). Additionally, the variation in the Pb–I–Pb bond angles is closely associated with the differences in the photoelectric properties, such as the density of states, electronic band structure, exciton binding energy, and electron/hole effective mass. These varied structures are responsible for the differences in the carrier transport, non-radiation recombination rate, and defect tolerance factor, which result in variations in the photoelectric properties.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic presentation of the various polymorphs' structures, and (b) the tilting angle (θ) and bond length. Reproduced with permission.30,31 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) The crystal structure parameters and (d) band structures of the α-, β- and γ-phase CsPbI3 perovskites. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


2.1.2. Optoelectronic properties. 
CsPbI3 is regarded as one of the most promising photovoltaic materials among all the CsPbX3 candidates (e.g., CsPbI3, CsPbI2Br, CsPbBr3) because of its appropriate optical absorption range and excellent optoelectronic properties, allowing for a much reduced thickness necessary to efficiently facilitate the utilization of photons.6 As mentioned above, there are four different CsPbI3 phase structures, and each crystal structure phase exhibits a varied optical absorption. In all of the phase structures, the valence band maximum (VBM) is determined by antibonding reaction derived from the reaction between the Pb 6s and I 5p orbitals, while the chemical character of the conduction band minimum (CBM) only consists of Pb 6p orbitals. On account of Cs having few effects near the band edge, the degree of orbital overlap deriving from the Pb–I–Pb octahedral tilting is the only variable to determining the band gap. Thus, the octahedral tilting of the Pb–I–Pb framework is fully responsible for the variances in the electronic structure near the band edges, which brings out the variation in the band gap energies. For δ-CsPbI3, its lowest overlap between the Pb 6s and I 5p orbitals produces the weakest antibonding character, which makes it tough to lift the VBM energy and gives rise to its wide bandgap of 2.82 eV.36 The large bandgap causes a narrow light absorption spectrum, which cannot cover the whole invisible light region and is not suitable for the photoactive layer. Its yellow non-perovskite structure has absorption up to the tail end below ∼440 nm.35,37 In contrast to δ-CsPbI3, the α-phase CsPbI3 with the highest symmetry has strong antibonding characters, which results in large scattering in the valence bandwidth; thus, the bandgap will be decreased. However, there is no related experimental value due to its phase instability, as it is prone to convert to other phases at room temperature. Most of the materials previously indexed to the α-phase have the assignment amended to γ-CsPbI3. The β-CsPbI3 film was successfully synthesized and exhibited an absorption edge of ∼736 nm with a bandgap of 1.68 eV based on a Tauc plot, nearly covering all of the visible-light region, which makes it a desired light harvester for solar cells.32,38 The band edge emission of black γ-CsPbI3 is 709 nm based on photoluminescence (PL) spectra, which agrees with the bandgap of 1.73 eV, and it has also been widely applied as a photoactive layer.35,39 The relative trend of the band gap is consistent with the values calculated adopting the quasiparticle self-consistent GW theory (scGW) along with spin–orbit coupling (SOC), which yields a gradually increasing trend with values of 1.46, 1.89 and 2.53 eV for the α-, β- and γ-phase CsPbI3 material, respectively, along with the degree of deviation from the cubic perovskite structure, which is consistent with the experimental trend.40


2.1.3. Carrier character. 
Probing the fundamental photophysics is a vital technique for revealing the limiting factor in the photoelectric conversion performance of a photovoltaic device. The exciton binding energy and carrier transport properties are responsible for determining the separation of the exciton and carrier extraction characteristics, which are critical factors affecting the performance of an assembled device (Fig. 2a and b). The former affects the capacity to separate excitons into free carriers, while the latter determines whether the photoexcited carriers can be collected. Protesescu and coworkers calculated the exciton binding energies of CsPbI3 to be 20 meV within the effective mass approximation.23 In principle, these values approach the thermal energies of kBT ∼ 26 meV at ambient temperature (298 K), where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the Kelvin temperature, illustrating that free carriers are in the majority.43 The photogenerated carriers consist of electrons and holes. An electron is generated in the conduction band under exposure to light, and a corresponding hole is produced in the valence band, forming an electron–hole pair.44–46 The charge carrier mobility (μ) and the excited carrier lifetime (τ) are two key parameters for evaluating the carrier transport. A high value of τ means the carrier recombination process in a photovoltaic material is slow, or there are fewer non-radiative recombination channels. A long carrier diffusion length indicates good capability for charge transport, accompanied by superior photoelectric conversion efficiency. Photoluminescence quenching derived from the recombination or depopulation of electrons and holes can accurately determine the diffusion length of the photoexcited electrons and holes, diffusion rate and carrier lifetime of the perovskite films. The one-dimensional diffusion equation, eqn (1), is employed to assess the dynamics through calculating the number and distribution of excitons without any quenching layer. (1)where n(x,t) is the number of photoexcited carriers with the depth x from the surface of the measured sample at a certain time t, D presents the diffusion coefficient, and k1, k2, k3 are the first, second, and third-order recombination rate constants corresponding to the monomolecular, bimolecular, trimolecular recombination processes, respectively. Pump–probe, time-resolved, terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS) was employed to measure the recombination rate constants and the carrier diffusion lengths. It reveals two interesting points: (1) the bimolecular recombination rate of the CsPbI3 films synthesized via solution procedures is abnormally small and is about 3–5 orders of magnitude lower than what is calculated by the Langevin model, and (2) the monomolecular recombination rate is strongly dependent on the sample preparation process, which is also observed for MAPbI3. This dependence arises because monomolecular recombination is a defect-assisted process, and the different production processes generate varied trap state types and densities. It is noteworthy that the monomolecular recombination rate of CsPbI3 is much larger than that of MAPbI3, implying that there are more defects in the CsPbI3 films. Optimization of CsPbI3 by surface/interface passivation will likely improve this variability. The diffusion length is related to the carrier lifetimes and determined using eqn (2). (2)where τ is the carrier lifetime of the photoactive layer without any quencher. The carrier diffusion length for electrons in cubic CsPbI3 was found to exceed 1 μm, and even exceeds 1.5 μm,2,47 which is much longer than those of MAPbI3 (129 nm) and FAPbI3 (813 nm)48,49 illustrating that CsPbI3 is potentially an excellent photovoltaic semiconductor material in terms of the charge separation and transport.
 Fig. 2  (a) Charge extraction routes from the active layer of the device, and (b) charge transport between perovskite nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (c) XRD standard powder patterns for the all-inorganic CsPbI3 with different phase (α, β, and γ) structures. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) XRD patterns acquired from a CsPbI3 thin film and powders scratched from the films. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

2.2. Phase identification
As mentioned above in 2.1.1, there are three “black” perovskite phases. Therefore, some experimental techniques are required to carefully distinguish the phases. Due to subtle differences in these three structures, identifying a certain phase is difficult, especially for a CsPbI3 film with poor crystallinity. For instance, due to the similarity of the phases, most of the earlier literature confirming the synthesis of the cubic α-CsPbI3 was later amended to reassign the material to γ-CsPbI3. In order to clarify this issue, we summarize some differences among these structures, especially the three black perovskite phases.
XRD is a common technique used to identify the crystal phase structure of CsPbI3. For highly crystalline CsPbI3 films, the phases can be recognized according to the peaks of their XRD patterns. Moving from the α-structure to the δ-structure with gradually reduced symmetry, extra diffraction peaks occur. The peaks become broader, indicating much lower symmetry with the increase of distortion, as in Fig. 2c. For example, Zhao et al. adopted powder XRD to identify β-CsPbI3 with an obvious peak splitting at 28° to 29° in Fig. 2d, which is a peculiar phenomenon of the tetragonal phase that does not occur in α- and γ-CsPbI3.32 γ-CsPbI3 has more characteristic peaks owing to its higher disorder compared with α and β-CsPbI3. As for the CsPbI3 nanocrystals, it is more difficult to distinguish the phases due to the broader and much weaker XRD peaks. Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns, which uses a least squares approach to refine a theoretical line profile until it matches the measured profile, is advised to accurately differentiate the phase structure.
Furthermore, the different phases exhibit different optical properties with varied band edges. The bandgaps of the β-CsPbI3 and γ-CsPbI3 black phases are 1.68 eV and 1.73 eV, respectively. When the black phase transforms to δ-CsPbI3, the bandgap widens to 2.82 eV. Therefore, the phase structure can also be recognized from the bandgap value. In addition, the different phases can be synthesized at different annealing temperatures, which can be a simple method to differentiate the phases.
3. Understanding the instability of the CsPbI3 photoactive layer
Although CsPbI3 PCSs have recently attracted great attention due to their high PCEs and ease of fabrication, device stability has been a serious obstacle to commercialization. Thus far, most CsPbI3 films have been prepared in a nitrogen atmosphere owing to their sensitivity to moisture. Park et al. proposed that moisture and temperature are two key factors to be finely controlled to obtain a desirable good-quality photoactive layer.50 Therefore, exploration of the mechanism responsible for the stability or decomposition of perovskites is required in order to help with maintaining or enhancing the phase stability. In this section, we summarize the possible causes of the CsPbI3 film instability categorized into intrinsic characteristics and external conditions, combining the theoretical predictions and experimental results.
3.1. Intrinsic assessment

3.1.1. Thermodynamics. 
To maintain a stable CsPbI3 perovskite polymorph, the following thermodynamic equilibrium equation must be satisfied: ΔμCs + ΔμPb + 3ΔμI = ΔHf(CsPbI3)(3)where Δμ is the chemical potential of the element and ΔHf stands for the calculated formation energy of CsPbI3. Furthermore, to avoid producing the possible secondary phases CsI, PbI2, or other binary CsxIy, further constraints need to be met: ΔμCs + ΔμI < ΔHf(CsI)(4) ΔμPb + 2ΔμI < ΔHf(PbI2)(5) xΔμCs + yΔμI < ΔHf(CsxIy)(6)
According to the above conditions, if the values of ΔμCs and ΔμPb are variable, then the value of ΔμI will be fixed. Therefore, two variables and three constrained equations decide the regions of stability. The equilibrium stable chemical potential regions of the commonly synthesized γ- and δ-phases of CsPbI3 were given by the thermodynamic limitations. In this case, the possible competitive products were proposed as PbI2, CsI, Cs2I8, and the calculated stable chemical potential regions of the γ-phase and δ-phase CsPbI3 are surrounded by points A, B, C and D in Fig. 3a.
 Fig. 3  (a) Calculated stable chemical potential regions for the equilibrium growth conditions of the γ- (left) and δ- (right) phase CsPbI3. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) The phase transition paths between different phase structures. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Schematic diagram of the MAPbI3 decomposition process induced by photo-oxidation. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The CsPbI3 degradation process from the α- to δ-phase. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It has been revealed that the equilibrium growth condition of γ-CsPbI3 has a narrower thermodynamically stable chemical potential region compared with the δ-phase. The narrow window indicates that the synthesized conditions must be finely adjusted to avoid the formation of possible secondary phases. In addition, it was calculated that in all CsPbI3 phases, the δ-phase possesses the lowest energy among the four phases. The lower the formation energy, the more stable the structure. This also explains why black perovskite phase (α, β, γ) CsPbI3 spontaneously transforms into the δ-phase in ambient conditions.


3.1.2. Structural stability. 
Except for the thermodynamic limitations, the structural stability of CsPbI3 has been explored. As early as 1926, Goldschmidt proposed the tolerance factor, t, for semi-empirical prediction of the lattice stability of perovskite materials, basing the idea of dense ionic packing.54 The formula is expressed as follows: t = (RA + RX)/√2(RX + RB)(7)where RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radii of the Cs, Pb, and I, respectively, in the case of CsPbI3.3,8,55 The stability of an all-inorganic perovskite can be estimated by adjusting t to achieving stuctural optimization. With Cs+ as the maximum nonradioactive elemental cation, the calculated t value of CsPbI3 is 0.81.2 It has been usually accepted that a perovskite structure can be stabilized with a t in the range of 0.80–1.10. In fact, it is hard to maintain a stable perovskite structure of Cs-based all-inorganic CsPbI3 at room temperature,56,57 indicating that the perovskite stability cannot be predicted solely according to the tolerance factor. Thus, the octahedral factor (μ) is proposed as a supplementary consideration for perovskite formability, which is expressed in eqn (8):58 (8)
Thus, the stability of a perovskite structure can be estimated from combining t and μ, with suggested ranges of 0.80 to 1.10 and 0.44 to 0.90, respectively.59 If this value lies beyond this range (i.e., t > 0.8 or <1.10), the perovskite lattice will be distorted into the metastable cubic structure (α-CsPbI3).43,60 Once the distortion of the perovskite lattice structure induced by octahedral tilt and macroscopic strain is significantly high, it will produce a non-perovskite phase (δ-CsPbI3), which results in a poor response to the solar spectrum and cannot be adopted as a photoactive layer.61 To date, many groups have successfully prepared metastable α, β, and γ-CsPbI3 films. Although the chemical composition of the metastable structural polymorphs is the same as the corresponding thermodynamically stable δ-CsPbI3 phase, the crystal structure is different. The various metastable structural polymorphs bring out different and even superior electronic and optical properties. Therefore, maintaining the black metastable perovskite phases is significantly vital for a photoactive layer with high photoelectric response.


3.1.3. Material characters. 
As is well known, perovskites are ionic materials with low formation energies and migration activation energies62–64 prone to triggering a large number of vacancy or interstitial defects under external stimulation. The migration of ions to the adjacent contact layers has the result of destroying the perovskite lattice, reducing the charge extracting/transporting ability of the contacting layers and degrading the performance of the device.65–67 In particular, a relatively high temperature induces the perovskite materials to give rise to an ion-screening effect, which seriously damages the assembled device performance.68 Ion migration is an intractable problem due to the ionic character of the material, which cannot be solved by eliminating the external stimulation, such as heat, light and moisture.69,70 Furthermore, the grain boundaries of the perovskite films undergo significantly exacerbated ion migration compared with the interior of the grains.71,72
For the sake of definitely evaluating the ion migration, the ion migration rate (γm) is proposed according to eqn (9): γm = e(−Ea/kBT)(9)where Ea is the ion-hopping activation energy, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature (Kelvin).73 It reveals that the higher level of ion migration at the grain boundaries with the extending defects of perovskites is attributed to its small activation energy. In the CsPbI3 structure, vacancy-mediated diffusion of the iodide ions is the most common process due to its low defect formation energy, and is favorable to vacancy-assisted migration.40 The iodide ions migrate from the illuminated/heated region to the adjacent regions, and the surrounding iodide ions fill the vacancies at the original position driven by mixing entropy74,75 or a concentration gradient.76 Although the iodine vacancy defect is mainly a shallow level defect that does not produce non-radiation recombination centers or affect the photovoltaic performance of the device, it will accelerate the degradation of the perovskite due to ion migration.
In addition to heat and light, the electric field drives the ion migration, which reduces the reliability of the measured PCE at a certain bias voltage for different scan directions/rates due to the hysteresis phenomenon. The Huang group further illustrated the field-switchable photovoltaic effect by positive poling or negative poling the perovskite device with an Au/MAPbI3/Au lateral structure design.77 Their work revealed that poling a perovskite film with a much larger grain size became difficult, and was ascribed to the reduced vacancy concentration due to fewer grain boundaries.77 Therefore, it points out the importance of acquiring a high-quality film with large grain size or using surface/interface passivation to hinder the ion migration.
Although ion migration and electron-transfer reactions of the perovskite material are induced by illumination/heat/electric field, the perovskite material also possesses a “self-healing” ability that leads to partial reversibility.78 However, this partial reversibility cannot return the material to its original state. In addition, it has been revealed that ion migration in an all-inorganic mixed-halide perovskite film will induce halide phase segregation.79 Therefore, ion migration has a serious negative effect on the properties of CsPbI3 perovskite devices, especially the hysteresis and long-term stability.

3.2. Influences of external stimuli
The instability is derived from the material's own internal characteristics, and the external surroundings provide the driving force, with the capacity to accelerate the aging or degeneration. As mentioned above in 3.1.3, ion migration can be aggravated by high temperature, light-soaking or an electric field. It is worth mentioning that phase conversion, as the main limitation for the critical evolution towards high efficiency and long-term stability, has been related to the variation of temperature. Here, we provide a detailed discussion of the heat, light and moisture stability of CsPbI3 and their degraded processes.

3.2.1. Heat. 
For photovoltaic applications, the device operating environment usually exceeds 333 K; therefore, maintaining stability at high temperature for a long time is critically important for commercial application.80 The CsPbI3 perovskite material, as an intrinsically stable material, possesses superior thermal stability compared with its organic inorganic perovskite cousins. The primary origin of the advanced thermal stability of the CsPbI3 perovskite is attributed to the lack of any volatile degeneration among its constituents.9,81,82
Although they have a high thermal-decomposition temperature, single-cation CsPbI3 systems with polymorphic nature often suffer phase instability because these four structures can convert into each other as a function of temperature.33,34,51 The structural phase distortion accompanies a highly anisotropic evolution of the lattice parameters along with different directions. For instance, the thermodynamically stable phase under ambient conditions is the yellow δ-phase (non-perovskite), which can be transformed to optically active status by high-temperature treatments,51 while the “black” perovskite structures of CsPbI3 are metastable at room temperature and spontaneously convert to the yellow phase. Therefore, carefully revealing the process of transformation among the four crystal structures and understanding the mechanism of instability are vital to producing the required phase structure.
Even et al. adopted a high-resolution in situ synchrotron XRD measurement to trace the phase conversion with the changes of temperature.21Fig. 3b shows that the path to thermodynamic stability is realized by a succession of structural distortions, and the black α-CsPbI3 perovskite can be synthesized by many different restructuring paths. The δ-phase can be formed from α-CsPbI3 by gradual structural distortion in the sequence of α-CsPbI3, β-phase and γ-phase by adjusting the cooling condition (path 2). The formation of the high-symmetry α-CsPbI3 can start with the δ-phase (path 1 or path 6) or metastable β, γ-phase (path 5) at RT. Path 3 or 4 reveals the conversion process from α-phase to yellow δ-phase under ambient conditions, which also explains the instability of the CsPbI3 films.83,84 Even and coworkers also found that CsPbI3 perovskite thin films undergo triple phase conversion as the temperature climbs down from 314 °C to 27 °C.21,30 The black α-CsPbI3 (cubic phase) transforms into black β-CsPbI3 (tetragonal phase) at ∼260 °C without breaking the three-dimensional Pb–I network; then, β-CsPbI3 transforms into black γ-CsPbI3 (orthorhombic phase) along with the further decrease of the temperature to ∼175 °C. Finally, the yellow non-perovskite polytypes (δ-phase) appear when the temperature cools to room temperature. Those phase transitions can also proceed in the opposite direction as the temperature rises. The yellow δ-CsPbI3 initially transforms to γ-CsPbI3, then distorts to be β-CsPbI3, and eventually transforms to high-symmetry cubic α-CsPbI3 with the climbing of temperature. At the same time, the unit cell volume of CsPbI3 increases dramatically with conversion of δ-CsPbI3 to α-CsPbI3 by heating. This variation is compensated by the massive thermal movement of iodide ions, proving that corner-sharing [PbI6]2− octahedra display a large dynamic motion.21 In contrast, the highly symmetrical α-CsPbI3 relaxes to β-CsPbI3 and γ-CsPbI3 with less dynamic states as the temperature drops to room temperature (Table 1).
Table 1 Structural parameters of the CsPbI3 perovskite




Phase
Color
Transformation temperature (°C)
Structure
Space group
Lattice parameters (Å)

R
wp





α
Black
320
Cubic

Pmm

a = 6.211
20.11


β
Black
260
Tetragonal

P4/mbm

a = 8.766
16.91



c = 6.214


γ
Black
175
Orthorhombic

Pbnm


a = 8.633
10.73



b = 8.844



c = 12.482


δ
Yellow
25
Orthorhombic

Pnma


a = 10.43





b = 4.79



c = 17.76






3.2.2. Light. 
In the methylamine system, photo-generated electrons have a reaction with molecular oxygen and produce superoxide (O2−) under illumination. As is shown in Fig. 3c, the photogenerated reactive oxygen leads to deprotonation of methylammonium cations in perovskite materials. The decomposition mechanism can be summarized as follows:
First, an O2 molecule gains a photoelectron and generates an O2− anion on the surface of MAPbI3.
Second, the perovskite structure of MAPbI3 is destroyed due to the reaction between MAPbI3 and the O2− anion, accompanied by Pb0 and H2O products.
Third, the generated H2O degrades the perovskite.85
For CsPbI3 material, there are few reports exploring the mechanism. All-inorganic perovskites exhibit a higher stability compared to conventional organic–inorganic perovskites, but also undergo the issue of photochemical oxidation of the iodide species.86 The Pullerits group demonstrated that CsPbI3 QDs exhibit greater photostability compared with bulk film due to its introduction of organic chains.87 Moreover, their work revealed that illumination also induced a bandgap variance of the perovskite films attributed to alterations of the Pb–I–Pb angle and length of the Pb–I bond, resulting in lattice expansion or contraction, and even phase segregation in the mixed halogen perovskite.88,89


3.2.3. Moisture. 
Moisture is a notorious problem and the biggest challenge causing the degradation of the organic–inorganic perovskite materials,90–94 which is attributed to the moisture-sensitive hygroscopic organic component.52,95,96 Leguy et al. adopted ellipsometry measurements to demonstrate that the bandgap of the MAPbI3 single-crystal doubled when exposed to a high moisture environment for a period of time, which indicated that a new phase with a monohydrate species (CH3NH3PbI3·H2O) was produced in this hydration process.85 Then, XRD results showed that the original phase of the MAPbI3 single crystal was recovered by implementation of the drying disposition.90 This conversion is a self-sustainable process at a certain humidity: the monohydrate releases water to convert to the dehydrate, and the released water can combine with the remaining MAPbI3 to transform it into the monohydrate. Irreversible decomposition occurs upon the appearance of separated porous and hexagonal PbI2 platelets in high moisture conditions. The moisture-assisted, α-to-δ phase transition of CsPbI3 films is well known to be a spontaneous process (Fig. 3d). The chemical pathway of the reaction of CsPbI3 to moisture has usually been concealed by its phase instability. It has been illustrated that moisture obviously accelerates the CsPbI3 phase conversion from black perovskite to yellow non-perovskite structure. The moisture-stability of MAPbI3 and CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells was compared by the Yin group,47 with all the devices without encapsulation placed in ambient conditions (humidity, 45–55%) for 500 h. The PCE of the MAPbI3 solar cell dropped dramatically to 70% of the initial efficiency after 500 h. The corresponding CsPbI3 solar cell lost only 25% of its initial efficiency after 500 h. These results indicate that CsPbI3 has relatively better moisture stability.
In all, the heat, moisture, and light are the inducements that stimulate the ion migration to generate material degradation. The intrinsic causes are the ionic character of the CsPbI3 material and its low formation energy of vacancy defects. The charged ions are prone to migration under external force. Therefore, improving the quality of the CsPbI3 films to produce fewer grain boundaries or passivating the active sites at the grain boundaries are the essential processes for achieving long-term stability.

4. Physical mechanisms to enhance the CsPbI3 stability
The CsPbI3 semiconductor material prefers the orthorhombic δ-phase with a bandgap of 2.8 eV to the expected cubic α- and tetragonal β- and orthorhombic γ-perovskite phases, owing to its thermodynamic equilibrium. How to suppress the phase transformation of materials has become an urgent problem to solve in its commercial application. On the basis of understanding the instability of CsPbI3 and detailed decomposition procedures, we draw a conclusion that the instability is derived from the material own and external interference. Thus, improving the stability is also built on these two aspects, regulating the material itself and isolating the material from outside reactions. For the former, there are several tricks based on different physical mechanisms: (1) regulation of the material structure: modifying the tolerance factor or change of strain. (2) Lowering the Gibbs free energy of the CsPbI3 photoactive films. (3) Increasing the hydrophobicity of the CsPbI3 material: surface function or reduced dimensionality. For the latter, two possible strategies are proposed: (1) surface decoration to prevent the invasion of water molecules or other chemically active molecules; (2) encapsulation. Isolating the assembled perovskite devices from a worse operating environment by appropriate encapsulation is an effective method to reduce the photo-oxidation issues or hydrolysis. Among these strategies, increasing the tolerance factor is a common strategy for improving the stability of CsPbI3. Introducing suitable ions into the lattice gap can cause lattice distortion with the results of impeding the ion migration pathways and increasing the ion migration activation energy. Increasing the surface/volume ratio, like forming quantum dots (QDs) or nanocrystals (NCs), could stabilize the black CsPbI3 semiconductor due to the dominant contribution of the surface energy to the total Gibbs free energy.39,97,98 The low-dimensional perovskite presents better phase stability than the 3D perovskite due to their higher hydrophobicity characters. In addition, the defects are most easily formed at the surface, which can absorb oxygen or water molecules into the defect sites and degrade the stability in all types of solar cells.99 Surface passivation can reduce the formation of defects, so that cuts down the reactive sites. Furthermore, surface decoration with long organic chains prevents the water molecule attacks and achieves high-stability films.
5. Adopted strategies
This section gives a detailed discussion about some effective strategies employed to improve the structural and phase stability of CsPbI3 films, according to different physical mechanisms.
5.1. Structure adjustment
Seeking a suitable molecular structure by doping with a larger size A-site cation or smaller B- or X-site cation and anion to increase the tolerance factor is a common strategy for enhancing the stability of CsPbI3 films. Perovskite is prone to form in an orthorhombic structure or cubic structure when t < 0.8 or t > 1, respectively. Consequently, CsPbI3, with a tolerance factor of 0.81, can only be stabilized with the perovskite structure under the appropriate conditions (cubic: 320 °C). At room temperature, the CsPbI3 perovskite film cannot maintain its octahedral cage of the cubic phase, and more easily forms an orthorhombic phase. Therefore, modifying the tolerance factor of CsPbI3 with a suitable cation or anion away from its boundary limitation is necessary.62,68

5.1.1 Cation. 
Sn2+ with the similar electron configuration and reduced ion radius compared with Pb2+ have been first considered to produce a partial or complete substitution, resulting in the shift of tolerance factor towards higher value. It was reported that introducing smaller Sn2+ to partially substitute for Pb2+ gave rise to higher stability. This is attributed to the Sn2+ doping resulting in a slight lattice distortion that can optimally tune the tolerance factor of CsPbI3, and to the reinforced interaction force between Pb2+ and I− ascribed to the improved Pb2+ charge density.100 Furthermore, the partial substitution of Pb2+ is an effective strategy to synergistically enhance the phase stability and optical performance of the CsPbI3 devices. The introduction of Ca2+, Zn2+, Ge2+, or Ti2+ also has the same result. Except for the monovalent cation doping, a partial heterovalent cation also has been brought in the CsPbI3 system, e.g., Sb3+, In3+, Eu3+, and Bi3+. Taking Bi3+ doping for example, a low concentration of Bi3+ doping into the CsPbI3 crystal lattice results in the cubic structure with a slight distortion caused by a small macrostrain. The disappearance of the δ-phase characteristic peaks of the (012), (112), and (122) planes and the appearance of the α-phase characteristic peaks of the (100), (110), (111), and (200) planes clearly demonstrate the phase transition from δ-phase to α-phase.101 Most cation substitutions are considered to occupy the lattice sites of the Pb ions. A peculiar case occurs deriving from the Mn ion doping, which is supposed as the interstitial doping due to their left-shifted XRD patterns. The improved stability is ascribed to its twisted lattice result in an increasing migration activation energy. Furthermore, Cs has the largest radius among the monovalent metals, so replacing the Cs with a larger-radius metal is impossible.


5.1.2 Anion. 
The X-site of the CsPbX3 perovskite material is always occupied by one or more halogen elements, including I−, Br−, and Cl− with ionic radii of 220, 196 and 181 pm, respectively.43 From the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, because the diameter of chlorine is smaller than that of iodine, the appropriate addition of chlorine tends to enhance the perovskite's phase stability.38,116 Dastidar et al. designed a two-step process to synthesize CsPbI3−xClx,116 exhibiting a more stable perovskite phase compared with the pure CsPbI3. This was attributed to the lead being able to form a stronger and more directional bond with chlorine, so the energetic cost of the bond rearrangement for the transition from the black to yellow phase is increased. Similarly, the structural stability can be improved by shrinking the lattice via proper incorporation of relatively smaller Br anions. Substitution of I with Br anions in the CsPbI3 lattice modifies the tolerance factor from 0.8 to 0.84.113,117,118 Nonetheless, the band gap of the material is also increased, which results in decreased light harvesting.119–121 Therefore, it is very important to finely adjust the amount of Br− doping to balance the relationship between the stability of CsPbI3 and the photovoltaic performance. Additionally, Liu et al. introduced a pseudohalide ion (SCN−), whose ionic radius (217 pm)122 is close to that of I (220 pm), to partially replace I ions to attain high-quality crystalline films with fewer crystal defects (Table 2).11
Table 2 Summaries of the substitutions of cation and anion sites or interstitial doping to enhance the phase stability




Type
Doping element
Ionic radius
Configuration
PCE (%)
Stability
Ref.




Cation
Sn2+
112 pm
FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/QD/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
2.90
CsSn0.6Pb0.4I3 QD films without changing for one-month exposure to air

100



Bi3+
103 pm
FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/CuI/Au
13.21
Maintain 68% of the initial PCE for 168 h under ambient conditions

101



Ti2+
86 pm
CsPb0.7Ti0.3I3 QDs@glass
—
—

102



Ca2+
100 pm
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPb1−xCaxI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
9.20
Maintain 80% of its initial PCE after 120 h (RH: 20%)

103







FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPb1-xCaxI3/P3HT/Au
13.50
Maintain 85% of initial PCE for two months (encapsulated, RH: 60–70%)

104



Zn2+
74 pm
ITO/ZnO/polyethylenimine/PNCs/p-type 4,4′,4′′-tris-(carbazol-9-yl)triphenylamine/MoO3/Au
—
Maintained α-CsPbI3 PNCs for 70 days exposure to air

105



Ge2+
73 pm
FTO/TiO2/QD/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
12.15
Maintain 85% of its peak performance over 90 days in dry air

106



Sb3+
76 pm
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/CsPbI3/carbon
5.18
Retains 93% of the initial PCE after 37 days in the air atmosphere (<20% RH)

107



In3+
80 pm
FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/inorganic perovskites/carbon
12.04
Exhibit an excellent stability for over two months in air

108



Eu3+
117 pm
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
6.00
α to δ-CsPbI3 transformation in ambient air for a reasonably long time (>30 days)

109







FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
13.71
Retain 93% of the initial efficiency after 370 h under white light illumination

110



Mn2+
97 pm
FTO glass/TiO2/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au
16.52
Films exhibit a better thermal stability compared to reference in ten days (80 °C)

111



Ba2+
135 pm
ITO/SnO2/perovskite/P3HT/Au
7.23
—

112



Anion
Br−
196 pm
Glass/FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
9.80
—

113



FTO/compact-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
13.09
—

114



Cl−
181 pm
FTO/TiO2/CsPbX3/PTAA/Au
16.07
Retained almost 94% of initial PCE over 60 days in open air (RH: 20–30%)

36



ITO/SnO2/LiF/CsPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
18.64
Maintain 94% of initial efficiency under continuous 1 sun equivalent illumination over 1000 h

115



SCN−
217 pm
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au
17.04
Film with showed a lower decomposition rate compared to reference in 9 days (80 °C)

11





However, those doping materials give rise to phase separation issues through lattice constant expansion or contraction exposed to light, which results in cubic phase distortion and degrades the optical and electrical properties.123,124 Therefore, mixed-halogen strategies work under limit conditions.

5.2. Regulating the surface energy
The total Gibbs free energy with respect to the surface and bulk of the semiconductor material is responsible for the thermodynamic stability of an individual phase.35 Reducing the crystal size would stabilize certain phases that are unstable in the bulk material. This section reviews two strategies proposed to reduce the grain size to several nanometers by forming nanocrystals or quantum dots (QDs), or to control the grain size of the bulk film by adjusting the course of crystallization.

5.2.1. Forming QDs or NCs. 
Semiconductor NCs are a promising class of materials for photovoltaic applications due to their adjustable electronic structures, high luminescence efficiencies,128 low thermal conductivities,129 and small exciton-binding energies. There are differences in many physical properties of the nanometer-sized and bulk crystalline materials with the same chemical constituents.22,26,130 Bulk CsPbI3 film tends to form the thermodynamically stable δ-phase or undergo a phase transformation to stable δ-phase when exposed to ambient conditions. However, a cubic structure of nanometer size was reported under ambient conditions, and successfully applied as the photoactive layer in a perovskite solar cell with an efficiency of over 10% by the Luther group (Fig. 4a).26 The improved cubic stability is ascribed to the large contribution of the surface energy,39,131,132 where the CsPbI3 nanocrystals with a high surface-to-volume ratio increase the surface energy and gradually compensate for the energy of the conversion from the yellow to the black phase.127,133 As a result, the CsPbI3 colloidal nanocrystals can stabilize as the α-phase, while the phase transformation is easily induced in the bulk CsPbI3. Although the CsPbI3 QDs demonstrate a huge improvement in stability compared with the bulk material, their practical application is impeded by the remaining gap compared with other inorganic semiconductor materials.26
 Fig. 4  (a) Normalized adjustable photoluminescence spectra and photographs under UV illumination of the CsPbI3 QDs. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Mn2+ doping into the perovskite lattices of the CsPbX3 QDs. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) PLQYs of the pristine- and ZnBr2–CsPbBr3 NC films. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the NaOAc-assisted ligand exchange. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier, Inc. (e) The flow diagram of the CsPbI3 NC film deposition and subsequent treatments. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Some strategies were developed to ameliorate these issues, including metal substitution or surface decoration. For example, the valid Mn2+ substitution strategy fundamentally stabilizes the perovskite lattice under ambient air conditions, which is ascribed to the successful introduction of Mn2+ into CsPbX3 QDs, enhancing the formation energy, as in Fig. 4b. As a result, the CsPbX3:Mn QDs exhibited much better thermal and moisture stability, making it possible to prepare a series of high-quality CsPbI3 films under ambient conditions.125 The surface circumstances have a direct effect on the photoelectric properties and stability of the CsPbI3 QDs; thus, it is reasonable to try varying the surface ligands.126,134–136 Bakr et al. enhanced the fluorescence quantum yield (PLQY) by superficial bidentate ligand-passivated strategies.130,137–139 The carrier trapping and nonradiative recombination were significantly reduced. Meanwhile, the carrier transport, phase stability and PLQY were improved. In addition to the organic surface passivation strategies, inorganic passivation schemes utilizing post-treatment have been widely applied. For example, Jeong et al. proposed an in situ protocol to enhance the stability by inorganic ZnBr2 passivation to make CsPbX3 NCs with significantly improved stability and PLQY (Fig. 4c).123 Kim and coworkers employed a ligand exchange method to improve the electronic coupling and photovoltaic performance of CsPbI3-QD solids by using sodium acetate (NaOAc) to replace the long-chain hydrocarbons, as shown in Fig. 4d. Compared to the common Pb(NO3)2-treated solar cell, the photovoltaic device with NaOAc-post-treatment gave a lower dark current density, illustrating suppressed carrier recombination owing to a reduction in the number of surface traps via NaOAc treatment. Xie et al. reported a similar improvement by affecting the surface conditions, using a highly iodine-rich surface to make up for the I vacancies.140
In addition, Blackburn et al. modulated the conductivity of the CsPbI3 nanocrystal films by introducing physically adsorbed molecular dopants of the electron-accepter, p-type 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) and n-type electron-donor benzyl viologen (BV) (Fig. 4e). The π-conjugated redox molecular dopants were physisorbed to the CsPbI3 NC surfaces. To maximize the orbital overlap between the molecular π-system and electronic states of CsPbI3 NC, the physisorption method is often carried out in a cofacial fashion, which undoubtedly improves the stability. Moreover, the introduction of the doping molecules tuned the carrier type, mobility and density by electronically coupling to CsPbI3. The effects of the molecular dopants with electron-donor/accepter on the fundamental properties of the nanocrystal CsPbI3 film were exploited and demonstrated that p-type doping can raise the mobility, conductivity, and charge extraction of the perovskite NCs, which is beneficial to the performance of the optoelectronic devices.


5.2.2. Reducing the grain size of the CsPbI3 bulk films. 
As an alternative to synthesizing QDs or nanocrystals, reducing the grain size of the bulk CsPbI3 film also retards the phase transition of CsPbI3 due to the similar variance of the surface energy. The initial report of the stabilized black bulk CsPbI3 perovskite films applied in a photovoltaic solar cell at room temperature was related to the formation of smaller grains causing a strain in the lattice via introducing HI.131 Soon after, a series of stable CsPbI3 films with reduced grain size was synthesized. For instance, the Hu group regulated the CsPbI3 grain size by manipulating a judicious content of H2O through a proton transfer reaction. The author explained the addition of H2O molecules adjusted the equilibrium of the proton transfer reaction and tailored the dimension of the CsPbI3 crystal.35 At the same time, combined with the theoretical calculations and experimental results, it illustrated that the γ-CsPbI3 films became thermodynamically favorable over δ-CsPbI3 when the surface areas were larger than 8600 m2 mol−1, owing to its lower surface energy, and exhibited comparable optoelectronic properties to those of α-CsPbI3.141–143 Meanwhile, the Nazeeruddin group adopted the soft template-controlled growth (STCG) means to prepare high-quality material by reducing the grain size of the CsPbI3 bulk film with the (adamantan-1-yl) methanammonium (ADMA) to assist its crystallization, as in Fig. 5a and b.144 Exposed to continuous light and heating for 3000 h, the STCG-based CsPbI3 device exhibited excellent stability that maintained 90% of its initial efficiency. Jeong and coworkers stabilized black CsPbI3 by introducing poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) into the precursor solution (Fig. 5c).145 The reduced grain size arose because macromolecular PEO chains were coordinated with the cations in the DMSO solution, thus forming intermediate complexes, which efficiently slowed down the ion fluxion in the course of the crystal growth and prevented the seeds of the perovskite crystals from forming during the spin-coating step. Thus, the crystal growth was impeded with the result of CsPbI3 with a crystal size as small as 100 nm. In addition, the Huang group stabilized the black phase by the introduction of sulfobetaine zwitterions during the film preparation process.97 The zwitterions hamper CsPbI3 crystallization with a result of small-grained films. The long organic chains broke the accumulation of colloids in the precursor solution by its steric effect and tailored the PbI2·DMSO colloids into smaller ones, as evidenced by dynamic light scattering. The mechanism of zwitterions affecting the CsPbI3 crystallization is presented in Fig. 5d.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram for the growth of the CsPbI3 film via STCG method, and (b) the structural models of Cs and ADMA adsorbed at the surface of the CsPbI3 crystal. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a perovskite precursor-PEO mixed precursor colloidal solution. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic representation of the CsPbI3 crystal formation process using the zwitterion additive. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, Inc. 
Almost all the above-mentioned strategies were focused on setting up steric hindrance to block the coalescence of different small CsPbI3 grains either at the nanoscale or in bulk film. These introductions of ligands, PEO, STCG or zwitterions with hydrophobicity not only tailored the grain size, but also prevented water molecules from invading. However, these additions were also not beneficial to the carrier transport, degrading the performance of the assembled photoelectric devices. Therefore, the balance between the stability and performance must be finely adjusted.

5.3. Tailoring dimensionality
In chapter 5.2, we presented the enhanced stability achieved through steric hindrance. The introduced additive plays the role of “framework”, limiting the CsPbI3 “fluxion”. The frameworks are usually disordered and have a faint connection with the CsPbI3 crystal, except for the oleylamine or oleic acid ligands. The regular insertion of organic components with a strong reaction with the inorganic crystal is an effective strategy to strengthen the transport of carriers. In a hybrid organic–inorganic system, disconnecting the structural integrity of the three-dimensional (3D) structural framework, and introducing bulkier organic cations into the inorganic framework to act as wells and barriers to form 2D layered perovskites and even lower-dimensioned 1D layered perovskites, is a promising strategy for prolonging their phase stability because the bulkier organic cations are so big that they cannot occupy the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral 3D framework.146,147 2D materials with the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP), Dion–Jacobson (DJ) or alternating cations in the interlayer space (ACI) phases were designed.146,148,149 The ion migration is also prevented by introducing bulkier hydrophobic organic cations.150,151 Moreover, the defects in the 2D perovskite crystal thin films are suppressed. Therefore, the 2D films exhibit better moisture-resistance than the 3D structure.
There has been wide use of n-butylamine (BA) and phenethylamine (PEA) as spacer cations in the 2D RP perovskites.8,152 Similar strategies were adopted in the CsPbI3 system. As is shown in Fig. 6a, the Chen group brought in a moderate amount of phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) into the CsPbX3 structure to produce a two-dimensional RP structure by combining a new precursor pair composed of cesium acetate (CsAc) and hydrogen lead trihalide (HPbX3), other than CsX and PbX2.153 By adjusting the ratio of PEA to Cs, a series of PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 compounds with varied n were synthesized. It is interesting that when n < 5, the perovskite film displays multiple absorption peaks due to its mixed phase components with different n values. In addition, first-principles density functional theory (DFT) simulation was employed to evaluate the stability based on the decomposition energy, and it was found that the decomposition energy gradually decreased with increasing n values, and the quasi-2D perovskites with n = 1 have the largest decomposition energy. Balancing the stability and performance of the assembled devices, PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 with n = 60 delivers both good stability and efficiency.154 The Wu group designed a quasi-2D DJ CsPbI3 perovskite semiconductor by bringing in ethylenediamine cations (EDA2+). DFT calculations and AIMD (ab initio molecular dynamics) simulations clarified that the quasi-2D (EDA) Csn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite film exhibited significantly improved stability ascribed to the much stronger I–H interaction between the diamine cations and I ions, which shortened the interlayer distance. Compared with its 3D analogues, quasi-2D (EDA) Csn−1PbnI3n+1 demonstrated more efficient carrier transport with smaller carrier effective masses. Furthermore, smaller exciton binding accelerated the photo-induced carrier separation, yielding more carrier (Fig. 6c). Etgar et al. made a comparison between the linear and aromatic barrier molecules employed in the 3D CsPbI3 structures.56 The schematic is exhibited in Fig. 6b, and they found that the low-dimensional perovskite with an aromatic barrier molecule as the spacers gave much superior stability than that using a linear barrier molecule, which was attributed to effective charge transport in the aromatic molecule due to the conjugate effect of the benzene ring compared with the linear alkyl molecule. Both molecule spacers displayed improved photostability under continuous light soaking compared with the three-dimension CsPbI3 film. However, the charge transport of the 2D perovskite was blocked by introducing bulkier organic cations, and resulted in relatively poor device performance.56,146,148
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration to stabilize the CsPbI3 structure by dimension cutting or surface decoration. (a) Characteristics of the quasi-2D perovskite films: structural models and stability assessment of PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 with different (n) values-based first-principles density functional theory (DFT). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Elsevier, Inc. (b) Structures of both barrier molecules, (PEA)2CsPb2I7 and (HA)2CsPb2I7. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Polyhedron model of the (EDA)Csn−1PbnI3n+1 PVSKs. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Stability mechanism of the CsPbI3 system decorated with PVP and (e) organic cation surface termination using PEAI. Reproduced with permission.47,162 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Elsevier, Inc. (f) The optimized structural presentation of CsPbI3, CsPbI3-OTG1, CsPbI3-OTG2, and CsPbI3-OTG3 adsorbed with water molecules. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
5.4. Surface functionalization
The defects on the surface of the perovskite film are the active sites that absorb the oxygen or water molecules and channels that they penetrate, thus degrading its stability. In organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs, a few workable surface defect passivation strategies have been proposed.135,155–157 For instance, two-dimensional (2D) perovskite materials, PEA2PbI4 and BA2PbI4, or insulated materials with the thickness of several nanometers scale (such as polystyrene) have been utilized to increase the stability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites by preventing the moisture invasion.158 Furthermore, some water-insensitive compounds were spin-coated or wrapped in situ onto the surface. Those surface modification materials not only are beneficial to the carrier transport, but also enhance the stability of the perovskite films.159 Therefore, similar tricks can be adopted to extend the stability of the all-inorganic CsPbI3, mainly including the formation of a hydrophobic layer or dimension-reduced surface layer to prevent degradation induced not only by humidity or atmospheric gases, but also by ion migration.

5.4.1 Formation of a hydrophobic organic layer. 
The CsPbI3 material is sensitive to moisture, which is prone to induce a phase transition. So, it is logical to consider establishing a hydrophobic protection layer to prevent the attack of humidity. Thus, some researchers have focused on improving the long-term stability of CsPbI3 in the ambient condition by surface modification with a hydrophobic coating. As in Fig. 6d, the Yin group reported the synthesis of extra-long-term stable cubic CsPbI3 by polymer poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) surface modification.47 Their work revealed that the cubic CsPbI3 can be sustained because the acylamino groups of the PVP induce an electron transfer due to its electron-withdrawing capacity, thus enhancing the electron cloud density on the surface of CsPbI3 and lowering their surface energy. Additionally, the Zhao group chose phenylethylamine cation (PEA+) as the surface cation termination, which differs from the formation of 2D PEA2PbI4 in the organic–inorganic perovskite film, for PEAI has a weak reaction with CsPbI3 and is prone to forming surface cation termination (Fig. 6e).162 The organic-cation-surface-terminated CsPbI3 perovskite displays better phase stability, humidity resistance and defect-reduced effects with higher Voc and FF. In addition, the Zhao group utilized effective phenyltrimethylammonium bromide (PTABr) modification of α-CsPbI3 films, and achieved a highly-reproducible photovoltaic performance with a champion efficiency up to 17.06%.28 The phase stability of α-CsPbI3 was enhanced due to surface passivation by the PTA cation and gradient Br doping. Afterwards, dimethylammonium iodine (DMAI) and PTACl synergistically improved the performance of CsPbI3 solar cells, in which the former manipulates the crystallization process, while the latter passivated the interface defects and enhanced the moisture stability. The details are given in 5.5. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 6f, Han and coworkers also proposed another strategy to stabilize the black CsPbI3 structure that involved systematically regulating the distortion of the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− framework via surface organic terminal groups, derived from their steric hindrance of the surface organic terminal groups.147 The authors suggested that these organic terminal groups could maintain the linearity of the Pb–I–Pb bonds, thus suppressing the octahedral tilting of the adjacent [PbI6]4− units in CsPbI3 and increasing the energy barrier for phase conversion between each other, which was verified by XRD measurement and density functional theory calculations. Recently, Choy et al. used multifunctional 4-aminobenzoic acid (ABA) and steric neostigmine bromide (NGBr) to decorate the surface of CsPbI3 to achieve a highly efficient and stable CsPbI3 photovoltaic device with a PCE of 18.27%.163 Furthermore, the introduced surface modifiers not only devitalized the shallow- or deep-level defects in CsPbI3 to observably cut down the defect density, but also accompanied it with enhanced charge transfer owing to the improved energy level alignment.


5.4.2. Establishing a graded broadband layer. 
Although hydrophobic organic layers have stabilized cubic phase CsPbI3 through their large steric hindrance,138,147 every coin has two sides. It is likely that the organic layer impairs the carrier transport due to its insulating character.147 Thus, lowering the interface resistance and achieving benign isolation from humidity is a reasonable consideration. Hydrophobic semiconductor interface materials have been intensively employed to cover the inorganic layer. For example, 0D, 2D, quasi-2D or 3D semiconductors with a wide band gap in constructing the interface is an effective strategy to strengthen the stability of the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite.148,164 In the case of the 2D/3D architecture, the construction of heterostructure perovskites combines the advantages of the high-performance 3D perovskite and the air-stable 2D structure. Jen et al. designed a construction of 0D-Cs4PbI6/3D-CsPbI3. The 0D-Cs4PbI6 was considered to coat the black-phase CsPbI3, reduce the defect states and stabilize the phase stability.165 Such heterostructure was proved to have an ability to acquire a stable all-inorganic perovskite cell with a high PCE of 16.39%. In chapter 5.4.1, we have referred to the use of PTABr to stabilize the α-CsPbI3 films. The enhancement of the phase stability is not the only contribution of the organic terminal group. It also was derived from the formation of the wide bandgap in CsPbI3−xBrx at the interface of the absorbing layer. Recently, the Jin group optimized the CsPbI3 band alignment through guanidine hydrobromide post-treatment.166 The author explained that the thin GA-CsPbIxBry two-dimensional perovskite film was formed at the surface of CsPbI3via ion exchange. The formation of a graded bandgap led to reduced nonradiative recombination and optimized band alignment between CsPbI3 and the interface layer, thus improving the charger collection by decreasing the barrier to electron transport.

5.5. Others
In addition to the above-mentioned strategies, You et al. proposed the solvent-controlled growth (SCG) of the CsPbI3 film by slowing the evaporation rate of the solvent in a dry nitrogen environment, as shown in Fig. 7a.167 The DMSO in the as-prepared films enhanced the mass transport and diffusion, which resulted in the improvement of the film quality. Ho-Baillie et al. produced a γ-phase CsPbI3 film with greater absorption, fewer defects, and better stability by a cation exchange process (CEP), as shown in Fig. 7b.168 The strategy contains three procedures: first, a precursor solution containing mixed cations of MA+ and Cs+ was spin-coated at 100 °C to form the MAPbI3 film. Then, increasing the temperature to 200 °C completed the substitution of MA by Cs. Finally, the film was annealed at 330 °C to achieve γ-phase CsPbI3. The improved properties of CsPbI3 by CEP was ascribed to the MAPbI3 template restricting the growth of CsPbI3, resulting in compact and uniform grains. Additionally, an intermediate Cs4PbI6 phase-transition was developed by Lu et al.50 First, Cs4PbI6 films, which are stable in ambient conditions, were synthesized. Then, the Cs4PbI6 films were blackened by transforming them into α-CsPbI3via subsequent IPA solvent treatment with HI addition. The chemical reactions were expressed as two stages. The first stage is the formation of Cs4PbI6. 4CsI + Pb2 → Cs4PbI6(10)
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3-perovskite crystallization procedures via SCG process and (b) CEG method. Reproduced with permission.167,168 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Perovskite precursor colloid dissolution with varied pH. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, Inc. (d) Diagram for the formation of the DMAI additive-induced black-phase CsPbI3 perovskite. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
The second stage, involving the hot IPA solution, is the formation of α-CsPbI3, which involved three reaction processes expressed as: Cs4PbI6 → α-CsPbI3 + 3CsI(11) 3CsI + 3Pb2 → 3α-CsPbI3(12) Cs4PbI6 + 3Pb2 → 4α-CsPbI3(13)
In addition, a purported intermediate known as hydrogen lead iodide (HPbI3), with an extraordinary and controversial existence in the all-inorganic CsPbI3 film, is worthy of discussion.37,170 “HPbI3” was synthesized by reacting PbI2 in DMF and HI in H2O to form a yellow precipitate. However, in 2018, Kanatzidis et al. raised doubts and corrected the two statements by conjecturing that “HPbI3” did not exist, and it was not pure all-inorganic CsPbI3 film based on the “HPbI3” intermediate compound.37 They referred to the “precipitate” as dimethylammonium, ((CH3)2NH2+), which is a decomposition product of the acidic hydrolysis of DMF catalyzed by HI.169 Thus, the produced film was regarded as cesium dimethylammonium lead iodide (Cs1−xDMAxPbI3). The acidic hydrolysis of DMF is presented in the following reaction eqn (14): HCON(CH3)2 + HI + H2O → (CH2)2NH2I(DMAI) + HCOOH(14)
Upon controlled reaction temperature, the hydrolysis of DMF is further accelerated and coupled with an increase in the solution pH. Furthermore, the increased pH radically reduces the size of the perovskite colloids due to its enhanced solvating strength, as in Fig. 7c. Afterwards, Zhao et al. revealed that DMAI is a volatile additive to participate in the course of the crystallization process of the CsPbI3 perovskite films, and finally is burned off. The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance results showed that it would not alloy into the CsPbI3 perovskite's crystal lattice (Fig. 7d).1 The contradiction was derived from the different annealing temperatures. The Zhao group annealed the as-prepared film at 180 °C and 210 °C for 5 min, while Kanatzidis et al. annealed the film at 100 °C.32 The higher temperature drives out the organic DMA. On the contrary, the low annealing temperature is unable to completely decompose the organic components. Therefore, high temperature is required in producing the CsPbI3 film with HI addition.
Some additive strategies were also successfully used to enhance the stability of CsPbI3 by affecting the course of crystallization. Zhao et al. discovered that a small amount of the ethylenediamine (EDA) cation stabilizes α-CsPbI3 to avoid the undesirable formation of the non-perovskite phase by forming a two-dimensional (2D) EDAPbI4 perovskite.16 The generated EDAPbI4 was also helpful for electron transfer, passivated the surface defects, and led to highly reproducible efficiency. In addition, some metal cations, such as Ba2+, K+,10 and Rb+,171 have been introduced to improve the efficiency and thermal stability of CsPbI3.
6. Summary and outlook
Efficiency and stability are two key metrics that must reach sufficiently high levels to move towards the industrial scale application of a material in solar cells. All-inorganic CsPbI3 is a preferred semiconductor for the top cell in tandem solar cells. Therefore, the optimization of the CsPbI3 film stability and improvement of the PCE of CsPbI3-based solar cells are of profound significance. However, phase conversion is the main obstacle to the long-term stability of CsPbI3 solar cells. For this reason, we have summarized some effective strategies based on physical mechanisms to strengthen the CsPbI3 film stability by modifying the tolerance factor to affect the structure, changing the surface energy via reducing the size or synthesizing nanocrystals or QDs (quantum dots), tailoring the material dimensionality to form 2D or lower dimensionality semiconductors by inserting larger organic spaces, or affecting the interface function, including the formation of a hydrophobic layer or establishing a graded-bandgap surface layer.
Almost all CsPbI3 films with good stability were improved by a long organic chain either by bulk addition or upper-surface modification. These long organic chains enhanced the stability, but impeded the carrier transport. On the one hand, shortening the organic chain is expected to be effective for both stability and carrier transport. On the other hand, the bottom interface between CsPbI3 and the substrate has seen little research due to the employment of “alkahest” DMSO, which can dissolve the interfacial modifier. Therefore, we designed suitable strategies based on the above-mentioned two aspects. Strategies involving in situ wrapping with an inorganic compound can be attempted, like a core–shell structure. The removal of the organic chain greatly improves the charge transport, and the shell, as the protective layer, resists the external stimulation. In addition, a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with two terminal active groups not only has a benign contact with the substrate, but also strongly interacts with the substrate, acting as a “glue” to improve the interfacial contact and preventing the invasion of moisture. In addition, the SAM has an effect on the work function of the substrate. Therefore, choosing a SAM with a suitable energy level alignment can enhance the carrier transport. Thus, the stability and performance will be simultaneously promoted. In addition, the interaction mechanisms between additives and perovskites are not very clear. Many additives are reported to play a positive role in reducing or passivating the defects. However, the defect types are not assigned. Therefore, the subsequent scientific research should strengthen the interaction mechanism, resolving the defect in energy and space, choosing the targeted additives to improve the stability of the CsPbI3 perovskite.
Except for the post-treatment strategies, the crystal growth is the first concern. Understanding the grain growth is beneficial to acquiring high-quality CsPbI3 films by accurately controlling the crystallization process. For example, how to finely adjust the strain in the growth processes of films is important because most jobs of CsPbI3 involve DMA to stabilize the black phases in current jobs. The detailed mechanisms need to be further explored. Furthermore, there are few investigations on the chemical reaction procedures between CsPbI3 and the water and oxygen, and further reactive mechanisms are needed to be proposed. Therefore, there is a long way to explore the stability of CsPbI3 to guide the optimization of the fabrication processes.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the National Key Research Program of China (2016YFA0202403), the Changjiang Scholar and Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the Overseas Talent Recruitment Project (B14041), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61704100), the 111project (Grant No. B21005).
References
Y. Wang, X. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Kan, J. Shi and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16691–16696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiang and W. Tress, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902851 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Xie, G. Kieslich, D. M. Evans, M. A. Carpenter, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 328–332 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, C. E. Beck and H. J. Snaith, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 63–71 RSC .
J. Liang, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700086 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and H. Sun, Small Methods, 2017, 2, 1700252 CrossRef .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-effciency.html, accessed  Mar 2021 Search PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
J. K. Nam, S. U. Chai, W. Cha, Y. J. Choi, W. Kim, M. S. Jung, J. Kwon, D. Kim and J. H. Park, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2028–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yao, Z. Jin, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Ding and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13736–13742 RSC .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, C. Wang, C. Feng, W. Liao, W. Ke, D. Zhao, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1213–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H. S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C. S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 RSC .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, J. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800525 CrossRef .
S. Dastidar, S. Li, S. Y. Smolin, J. B. Baxter and A. T. Fafarman, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2239–2244 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jing, M. Zhang, X. Huang, X. Ren, P. Wang and Z. Lu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7391–7396 RSC .
M. Lai, Q. Kong, C. G. Bischak, Y. Yu, L. Dou, S. W. Eaton, N. S. Ginsberg and P. Yang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1107–1114 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marronnier, G. Roma, S. Boyer-Richard, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu, Y. Bonnassieux, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Even, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3477–3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Cao, D. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Wu and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603996 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yoon, H. Min, J. B. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee and S. I. Seok, Joule, 2021, 5, 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2791–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dutta and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 709–719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Mao, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 56–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Trots and S. V. Myagkota, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, S. F. Jin, S. Huang, N. Liu, J. Y. Ma, D. J. Xue, Q. Han, J. Ding, Q. Q. Ge, Y. Feng and J. S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11716–11725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bian, H. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, Y. Xu, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Ding, S. F. Liu and Z. Jin, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4785 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, H. Wang, J. Feng, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, M. T. Rea, J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Zhao, D. Pan, L. H. Manger, J. C. Wright, R. H. Goldsmith and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8385–8394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, W. J. Yin and Y. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1345–1350 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1803515 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhao, A. Hazarika, L. T. Schelhas, J. Liu, E. A. Gaulding, G. Li, M. Zhang, M. F. Toney, P. C. Sercel and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 238–247 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CrossRef CAS .
C. de Weerd, L. Gomez, A. Capretti, D. M. Lebrun, E. Matsubara, J. Lin, M. Ashida, F. C. M. Spoor, L. D. A. Siebbeles, A. J. Houtepen, K. Suenaga, Y. Fujiwara and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4199 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Smith and D. Binks, Nanomaterials, 2013, 4, 19–45 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schliemann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081301 CrossRef .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Steele, H. Jin, I. Dovgaliuk, R. F. Berger, T. Braeckevelt, H. Yuan, C. Martin, E. Solano, K. Lejaeghere, S. M. J. Rogge, C. Notebaert, W. Vandezande, K. P. F. Janssen, B. Goderis, E. Debroye, Y.-K. Wang, Y. Dong, D. Ma, M. Saidaminov, H. Tan, Z. Lu, V. Dyadkin, D. Chernyshov, V. Van Speybroeck, E. H. Sargent, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Science, 2019, 365, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ouyang, Y. Li, P. Zhu, Q. Li, Y. Gao, J. Tong, L. Shi, Q. Zhou, C. Ling, Q. Chen, Z. Deng, H. Tan, W. Deng and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2275–2282 RSC .
R. Chen, Y. Hui, B. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Huang, Z. Xu, P. Ruan, W. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Zhang, J. Yin, J. Li and N. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9597–9606 RSC .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
M. Afsari, A. Boochani and M. Hantezadeh, Optik, 2016, 127, 11433–11443 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Dayan, B.-E. Cohen, S. Aharon, C. Tenailleau, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8017–8024 CrossRef .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
Z. Li, F. Zhou, Q. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104634 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
J. Kim, J. Kwon, M. Kim, J. Do, D. Lee and H. Han, Polym. J., 2016, 48, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-G. Kim, J.-M. Yang, Y. Yang and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041111 CrossRef .
X. Liu, D. Yu, X. Song and H. Zeng, Small, 2018, 14, e1801460 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou, R. Fu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4122–4128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara, C.-S. Jiang, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
S. Shao, M. Abdu-Aguye, T. S. Sherkar, H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, G. t. Brink, B. J. Kooi, L. J. A. Koster and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8094–8102 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
X. Tang, M. van den Berg, E. Gu, A. Horneber, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, A. J. Meixner, D. Zhang and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2172–2178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. C. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. G. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. S. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
U. B. Cappel, S. Svanstrom, V. Lanzilotto, F. O. L. Johansson, K. Aitola, B. Philippe, E. Giangrisostomi, R. Ovsyannikov, T. Leitner, A. Fohlisch, S. Svensson, N. Martensson, G. Boschloo, A. Lindblad and H. Rensmo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34970–34978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kunitski, N. Eicke, P. Huber, J. Kohler, S. Zeller, J. Voigtsberger, N. Schlott, K. Henrichs, H. Sann, F. Trinter, L. P. H. Schmidt, A. Kalinin, M. S. Schoffler, T. Jahnke, M. Lein and R. Dorner, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, S. Wang, Q. Li, S. V. Kershaw, J. Tian and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 943–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
T. Burwig, W. Franzel and P. Pistor, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4808–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dastidar, C. J. Hawley, A. D. Dillon, A. D. Gutierrez-Perez, J. E. Spanier and A. T. Fafarman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, K. Chen, Y. Cui, Y. Zhang, Y. Tian, B. Tian, Y. Hao, Y. Wu and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 1902012 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. N. Ouedraogo, Y. Chen, Y. Y. Xiao, Q. Meng, C. B. Han, H. Yan and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104249 CrossRef CAS .
R. An, F. Zhang, X. Zou, Y. Tang, M. Liang, I. Oshchapovskyy, Y. Liu, A. Honarfar, Y. Zhong, C. Li, H. Geng, J. Chen, S. E. Canton, T. Pullerits and K. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39222–39227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1507–1514 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruth, M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, Y. V. Morozov, M. Zhukovskyi, B. Janko, P. Zapol and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2321–2328 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
B. Philippe, B.-W. Park, R. Lindblad, J. Oscarsson, S. Ahmadi, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1720–1731 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen and W. C. H. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 221104 CrossRef .
M. Ralaiarisoa, I. Salzmann, F. Zu and N. Koch, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800307 CrossRef .
Z. Yao, W. Zhao, Z. Xu, J. Wen and S. F. Liu, Small, 2020, 16, 2003582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, K. Ren, Q. Wu, J. Wang, J. Lin, Z. Wang, J. Xu, R. F. Oulton, S. Qu and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19536–19540 RSC .
C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, H. Wei, J. Huang and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3513–3522 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, S. H. Kim, B. Jeong, H. C. Kwon, S. C. Yun, G. Jang, H. Yang, C. Park, D. Lee and J. Moon, Small, 2019, 15, e1900219 CrossRef PubMed .
X. P. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. J. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Z. Lin, H. T. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. S. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. S. Ripolles, T. Kamisaka, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai, M. Yanagida, H. Noguchi and Q. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16708–16719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, F. Bai, X. Liu, Q. Ji, X. Miao, T. Qiu and S. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2219–2227 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Shen, H. Zhang, L. Ding, G. Shao, X. Liang and W. Xiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, J. Xu, S. Zhou, Z. Li, B. Zhang, X. Xia, X. Liu, S. Dai and J. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1808986 CrossRef .
C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, J. Zheng, J. Kim, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. Bing, B. Wilkinson, L. Hu, R. Patterson, S. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5580–5586 RSC .
X. Shen, Y. Zhang, S. V. Kershaw, T. Li, C. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Wang, D. Li, Y. Wang, M. Lu, L. Zhang, C. Sun, D. Zhao, G. Qin, X. Bai, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1552–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. Kamisaka, Q. Zhao, J. M. Luther, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, B. Zhang, S. Dai, J. Jiang, S. Tao and Q. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 798–807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiang, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu and H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9996–10004 RSC .
J. Liang, X. Han, J. H. Yang, B. Zhang, Q. Fang, J. Zhang, Q. Ai, M. M. Ogle, T. Terlier, A. A. Marti and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1903448 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yao, W. Zhao, S. Chen, Z. Jin and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5190–5197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajal, G.-H. Kim, C. W. Myung, Y. S. Shin, J. Kim, J. Jeong, A. Jana, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21740–21746 RSC .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
Z. Li, X. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Liao, H. Zhao, B. Zhang, S. F. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4587–4595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ye, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, F. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Chu, Z. Yin, P. Gao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1905143 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dastidar, D. A. Egger, L. Z. Tan, S. B. Cromer, A. D. Dillon, S. Liu, L. Kronik, A. M. Rappe and A. T. Fafarman, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3563–3570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, S. Huang, X. Wen, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502202 CrossRef .
C. Y. Chen, H. Y. Lin, K. M. Chiang, W. L. Tsai, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605290 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ruess, F. Benfer, F. Bocher, M. Stumpp and D. Schlettwein, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 204–213 CrossRef .
F. Peña-Camargo, P. Caprioglio, F. Zu, E. Gutierrez-Partida, C. M. Wolff, K. Brinkmann, S. Albrecht, T. Riedl, N. Koch, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2728–2736 CrossRef .
M. Daub and H. Hillebrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11016–11017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Woo, Y. Kim, J. Bae, T. G. Kim, J. W. Kim, D. C. Lee and S. Jeong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7088–7092 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14202–14205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zou, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. Liu, R. Feng, F. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng, M. Hong and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443–11450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, B. Koo, W. H. Kim, J. Choi, C. Choi, S. J. Lim, J.-S. Lee, D.-H. Kim, M. J. Ko and Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104130 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Gaulding, J. Hao, H. S. Kang, E. M. Miller, S. N. Habisreutinger, Q. Zhao, A. Hazarika, P. C. Sercel, J. M. Luther and J. L. Blackburn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902250 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, I. Mekis, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, O. Benson and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18826–18831 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Harman, Science, 2002, 297, 2229–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Q. Zhong, W. Chen, B. Sang, Y. Wang, T. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900991 CrossRef .
S. Xiang, Z. Fu, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu, R. Zhang and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1824–1831 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, A. S. Chesman and J. J. Jasieniak, Chem. Commun., 2016, 53, 232–235 RSC .
M. Koolyk, D. Amgar, S. Aharon and L. Etgar, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6403–6409 RSC .
S. Fu, W. Zhang, X. Li, L. Wan, Y. Wu, L. Chen, X. Liu and J. Fang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 676–684 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, L. Zhang, C. Bi, M. Wang and J. Tian, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800188 CrossRef .
J. Pan, Y. Shang, J. Yin, M. De Bastiani, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, A. M. El-Zohry, M. N. Hedhili, A. H. Emwas, O. F. Mohammed, Z. Ning and O. M. Bakr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 562–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, W. Luan, M. Liu and L. Turyanska, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2381–2387 RSC .
J. K. Sun, S. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. Xu, Q. H. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, D. J. Xue, J. C. Xu, J. Y. Ma, J. Ding, Q. Q. Ge, L. Gu, X. H. Fang, H. Z. Zhong, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11705–11715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Cai, H. R. Wang, Y. Li, L. Wang, Y. Lv, X. Y. Yang and R. J. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 881–889 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tai, K.-C. Tang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2375–2405 RSC .
J. M. McHale, Science, 1997, 277, 788–791 CrossRef CAS .
A. Navrotsky, Geochem. Trans., 2003, 4, 34 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Y. Yang, X. Xia, Y. Ding, Z. Arain, S. An, X. Liu, R. C. Cristina, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903751 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jeong, H. Han, Y. J. Choi, S. H. Cho, E. H. Kim, S. W. Lee, J. S. Kim, C. Park, D. Kim and C. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706401 CrossRef .
D. Thrithamarassery Gangadharan and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2860–2889 RSC .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, D. Cui, T. Wang, X. Meng, E. Bi, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900605 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Raghavan, T.-P. Chen, S.-S. Li, W.-L. Chen, C.-Y. Lo, Y.-M. Liao, G. Haider, C.-C. Lin, C.-C. Chen, R. Sankar, Y.-M. Chang, F.-C. Chou and C.-W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3221–3228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, J. Dai, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, X. Zheng, S. Tang, P. N. Rudd, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 684–688 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. Wu, H. C. Cheng, G. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6933–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T.-B. Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 982–990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
F. Li, Y. Pei, F. Xiao, T. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. Xu, J. Sun, B. Peng and M. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318–6322 RSC .
H. Zhu, Y. Liu, F. T. Eickemeyer, L. Pan, D. Ren, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, B. Carlsen, B. Yang, X. Dong, Z. Wang, H. Liu, S. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar, X. Li and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1907757 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, T. Wu, J. Wang, J. Zhai, M. J. Shearer, Y. Zhao, R. J. Hamers, E. Kan, K. Deng, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4405–4414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, C. Zuo, J. Shi, Q. Meng and L. Ding, J. Semicond., 2021, 42, 050203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bai, Y. Lin, L. Ren, X. Shi, E. Strounina, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Zheng, Y. Lin, Z.-G. Chen, Y. Du, L. Wang and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 1231–1240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shpatz Dayan, B.-E. Cohen, S. Aharon, C. Tenailleau, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8017–8024 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, M. Shang, Y. Zheng, T. Zhang, Z. Du, G. Wang, X. Duan, K.-C. Chou, C.-H. Lin, W. Yang, X. Hou and T. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1042–1050 RSC .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, T. Wang and Y. Zhao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2065–2075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, G. Chen, D. Ouyang, X. He, C. Li, R. Ma, W. J. Yin and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2020, e2000186 CrossRef .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bai, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, H. Liu, X. Li, C. C. Chueh, H. Yan, Z. Zhu and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1904735 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Yan, Z. Z. Li, Y. Sun, J. Zhao, X. C. Huang, J. L. Yang, Z. P. Ci, L. M. Ding and Z. W. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10346–10353 RSC .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. J. Lau, Z. Wang, N. Sakai, J. Zheng, C. H. Liao, M. Green, S. Huang, H. J. Snaith and A. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901685 CrossRef .
B. R. Sutherland, Joule, 2017, 1, 221–223 CrossRef .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic presentation of the various polymorphs' structures, and (b) the tilting angle (θ) and bond length. Reproduced with permission.30,31 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) The crystal structure parameters and (d) band structures of the α-, β- and γ-phase CsPbI3 perovskites. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Charge extraction routes from the active layer of the device, and (b) charge transport between perovskite nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (c) XRD standard powder patterns for the all-inorganic CsPbI3 with different phase (α, β, and γ) structures. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) XRD patterns acquired from a CsPbI3 thin film and powders scratched from the films. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
ΔμCs + ΔμPb + 3ΔμI = ΔHf(CsPbI3)	(3)
ΔμCs + ΔμI < ΔHf(CsI)	(4)
ΔμPb + 2ΔμI < ΔHf(PbI2)	(5)
xΔμCs + yΔμI < ΔHf(CsxIy)	(6)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Calculated stable chemical potential regions for the equilibrium growth conditions of the γ- (left) and δ- (right) phase CsPbI3. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) The phase transition paths between different phase structures. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Schematic diagram of the MAPbI3 decomposition process induced by photo-oxidation. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The CsPbI3 degradation process from the α- to δ-phase. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
t = (RA + RX)/√2(RX + RB)	(7)
	(8)
γm = e(−Ea/kBT)	(9)

α	Black	320	Cubic	
Pmm	
a = 6.211	20.11
β	Black	260	Tetragonal	
P4/mbm	
a = 8.766	16.91

c = 6.214
γ	Black	175	Orthorhombic	
Pbnm
	
a = 8.633	10.73

b = 8.844

c = 12.482
δ	Yellow	25	Orthorhombic	
Pnma
	
a = 10.43	


b = 4.79

c = 17.76

Cation	Sn2+	112 pm	FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/QD/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	2.90	CsSn0.6Pb0.4I3 QD films without changing for one-month exposure to air	
100

Bi3+	103 pm	FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/CuI/Au	13.21	Maintain 68% of the initial PCE for 168 h under ambient conditions	
101

Ti2+	86 pm	CsPb0.7Ti0.3I3 QDs@glass	—	—	
102

Ca2+	100 pm	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPb1−xCaxI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	9.20	Maintain 80% of its initial PCE after 120 h (RH: 20%)	
103


	
	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CsPb1-xCaxI3/P3HT/Au	13.50	Maintain 85% of initial PCE for two months (encapsulated, RH: 60–70%)	
104

Zn2+	74 pm	ITO/ZnO/polyethylenimine/PNCs/p-type 4,4′,4′′-tris-(carbazol-9-yl)triphenylamine/MoO3/Au	—	Maintained α-CsPbI3 PNCs for 70 days exposure to air	
105

Ge2+	73 pm	FTO/TiO2/QD/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	12.15	Maintain 85% of its peak performance over 90 days in dry air	
106

Sb3+	76 pm	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/CsPbI3/carbon	5.18	Retains 93% of the initial PCE after 37 days in the air atmosphere (<20% RH)	
107

In3+	80 pm	FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/inorganic perovskites/carbon	12.04	Exhibit an excellent stability for over two months in air	
108

Eu3+	117 pm	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	6.00	α to δ-CsPbI3 transformation in ambient air for a reasonably long time (>30 days)	
109


	
	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	13.71	Retain 93% of the initial efficiency after 370 h under white light illumination	
110

Mn2+	97 pm	FTO glass/TiO2/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au	16.52	Films exhibit a better thermal stability compared to reference in ten days (80 °C)	
111

Ba2+	135 pm	ITO/SnO2/perovskite/P3HT/Au	7.23	—	
112

Anion	Br−	196 pm	Glass/FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	9.80	—	
113

FTO/compact-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	13.09	—	
114

Cl−	181 pm	FTO/TiO2/CsPbX3/PTAA/Au	16.07	Retained almost 94% of initial PCE over 60 days in open air (RH: 20–30%)	
36

ITO/SnO2/LiF/CsPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	18.64	Maintain 94% of initial efficiency under continuous 1 sun equivalent illumination over 1000 h	
115

SCN−	217 pm	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au	17.04	Film with showed a lower decomposition rate compared to reference in 9 days (80 °C)	
11


 	Fig. 4  (a) Normalized adjustable photoluminescence spectra and photographs under UV illumination of the CsPbI3 QDs. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Mn2+ doping into the perovskite lattices of the CsPbX3 QDs. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) PLQYs of the pristine- and ZnBr2–CsPbBr3 NC films. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the NaOAc-assisted ligand exchange. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier, Inc. (e) The flow diagram of the CsPbI3 NC film deposition and subsequent treatments. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic diagram for the growth of the CsPbI3 film via STCG method, and (b) the structural models of Cs and ADMA adsorbed at the surface of the CsPbI3 crystal. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a perovskite precursor-PEO mixed precursor colloidal solution. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic representation of the CsPbI3 crystal formation process using the zwitterion additive. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration to stabilize the CsPbI3 structure by dimension cutting or surface decoration. (a) Characteristics of the quasi-2D perovskite films: structural models and stability assessment of PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 with different (n) values-based first-principles density functional theory (DFT). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Elsevier, Inc. (b) Structures of both barrier molecules, (PEA)2CsPb2I7 and (HA)2CsPb2I7. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Polyhedron model of the (EDA)Csn−1PbnI3n+1 PVSKs. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Stability mechanism of the CsPbI3 system decorated with PVP and (e) organic cation surface termination using PEAI. Reproduced with permission.47,162 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Elsevier, Inc. (f) The optimized structural presentation of CsPbI3, CsPbI3-OTG1, CsPbI3-OTG2, and CsPbI3-OTG3 adsorbed with water molecules. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 
4CsI + Pb2 → Cs4PbI6	(10)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3-perovskite crystallization procedures via SCG process and (b) CEG method. Reproduced with permission.167,168 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Perovskite precursor colloid dissolution with varied pH. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, Inc. (d) Diagram for the formation of the DMAI additive-induced black-phase CsPbI3 perovskite. Reproduced with permission.1 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 
Cs4PbI6 → α-CsPbI3 + 3CsI	(11)
3CsI + 3Pb2 → 3α-CsPbI3	(12)
Cs4PbI6 + 3Pb2 → 4α-CsPbI3	(13)
HCON(CH3)2 + HI + H2O → (CH2)2NH2I(DMAI) + HCOOH	(14)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
