BiVO 4 optimized to nano-worm morphology for enhanced activity towards photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA07353A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07353A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21207-21221BiVO4 optimized to nano-worm morphology for enhanced activity towards photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Kajal Kumar 
            Dey
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Soniya 
            Gahlawat
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Pravin P. 
            Ingole
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India. E-mail: ppingole@chemistry.iitd.ac.in;  Fax: +91 11 2658 1102;   Tel: +91 11 2659 7547
bRajendra Singh Institute of Physical Sciences for Studies and Research, V. B. S. Purvanchal University, Jaunpur 222003, India
Received 
      8th July 2019
    , Accepted 19th August 2019First published on 20th August 2019AbstractThe article reports the preparation of unique worm-like BiVO4 nanoparticles through hydrothermal treatment of scheelite tetragonal BiVO4 obtained by a simple precipitation method. The as-obtained nano-worms were ∼3–6 nm in width and ∼12–20 nm in length. Their time dependent growth evolution was studied via transmission electron microscopy and coupled with our observations from the XRD analysis a growth-morphology-mechanism was proposed. The as-obtained BiVO4 nanoparticles were deposited on an ITO coated glass substrate and the resultant films were investigated for efficiency in photoelectrochemical water splitting. The BiVO4 nanoworms outperformed all the other BiVO4 structures obtained at different times of growth evolution by having both the highest anodic photocurrent densities and the lowest onset potential. Subsequent EIS and Mott–Schottky analysis revealed comparatively low interfacial charge transfer resistance and a cathodic shift in the flat band potential of the nanoworms led to their better photoelectrochemical performance. Our analysis indicates that a decrease in resistive photoelectron trapping surface states associated with the BiVO4 nanoworms leads to their excellent photoelectrochemical activity.
1. Introduction
Over the last few decades, since the pioneering demonstration of photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting by Fujishima and Honda,1 hydrogen (H2) produced via solar water splitting has gained tremendous attention among the scientific community as a potential renewable and carbon-free energy carrier.2–5 Photo water splitting can, in principle, adopt two different mechanisms where solar light is utilized in aiding electrolyzing water. One mechanism can involve a coupled solar cell-water electrolysis system, but efficiency lost between the two component systems and high installation cost make it a mediocre commercial option. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) procedures provide an alternative and economically viable route where the functions of a solar cell and electrolyzers are integrated in a single device.6,7 In a typical PEC cell, a light absorbing semiconductor electrode is irradiated by incoming photons of energy equal to or higher than its band gap to generate electron–hole pairs that carry out the water reduction–oxidation process on the surface of the electrode. O2 evolution or water oxidation which involves a four-hole transfer process, is considered to be the rate determining step of PEC water splitting. Thus, most of the research in the field of PEC water splitting has focused on PEC water oxidation.8,9
The selection of the semiconducting material is of paramount importance in order to fabricate an effective electrode. The chosen material should have an appropriate band gap (∼2.0 eV, to cover the water dissociation energy of 1.23 eV and associated loss of potential), strong visible light absorption, a suitable band edge position in order to carry out the water oxidation and reduction reactions (valence band (VB) maxima ≥1.23 V vs. Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE) for the oxidation reaction; conduction band minima ≤0 V vs. RHE for the reduction reaction), chemical, electrochemical and photostability in aqueous medium, fast charge carrier (electron and hole) transport properties and low cost, just to name a few essential qualities.6,10 Among the many semiconducting materials reported in the literature, scheelite BiVO4 satisfies most of those criteria mentioned above. It absorbs a substantial portion of visible light with a relatively small optical band gap of ∼2.4–2.5 eV.11,12 It has a very favorable band edge position where the conduction band (CB) edge is close to the thermodynamic redox potential of the H+/H2 reaction resulting in BiVO4, reportedly, having the lowest onset potential for the oxygen evolution reaction among n-type semiconducting materials having small enough band gaps to absorb visible light.2 It is non-toxic in nature and is fairly stable against both photoelectrochemical and chemical corrosions in aqueous medium, particularly around the neutral pH region.2,13 However, poor charge transport properties with an extremely low carrier mobility of ∼10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1,14,15 high charge carrier recombination leading to ordinary electron–hole separation and sluggish water oxidation kinetics often act as major bottlenecks against fully realizing its PEC performance.16–18
A great deal of effort utilizing various modes of modification has been made in the recent past to address all of these issues, such as metal doping in order to improve the charge transport properties.19–21 Very good photocurrent results have been obtained utilizing W and Mo dopants with Park et al. reporting that consecutive doping of W and Mo, which act as shallow donors and thus allow for better charge separation in BiVO4, could enhance the photocurrent by almost 10 times.22 Other ways to modulate the PEC performance of BiVO4 are engineering band edge positions,23 non-metal doping to improve the absorption properties as well as to decrease the band gap,2 forming heterojunction composites with different components for the betterment of charge separation17,24–27 and surface modification for quenching surface states that could potentially act as carrier trapping centers.28,29 The morphology of semiconductors with details such as size, shape, orientation, connectivity, etc. can also impact the interfacial kinetics and charge transfer properties. Thus, an understanding of the morphological significance and the ability to exploit it continue to be an effective strategy for enhancing the PEC activity of BiVO4 or any photoelectrode for that matter. For example, shape control of monoclinic scheelite BiVO4 to tailor exposed (010) facets12,30 which are accepted to be the preferred atomic planes for the water reduction reaction, or selectively depositing water reduction and oxidation reaction co-catalysts on (010) and (110) facets respectively,31 have proven to be useful in enhancing the solar water splitting performance of BiVO4. Porous microstructures, typically, tend to have an enhanced surface area and a bigger fraction of depletion region, resulting in an augmented surface reaction and lower recombination respectively, which in turn, produce a better PEC response.18,32,33 Jeong et al. reported a temperature dependent morphology optimization of BiVO4 photoanodes fabricated by pulsed laser deposition where the porous morphology obtained at comparatively lower temperatures provided a reduced diffusion length for the photogenerated electrons resulting in better photocurrent.34 One dimensional nano-morphologies such as nanorods and nanowires have been reported to produce relatively better photocurrent properties owing to their short axial dimensions leading to shorter and faster charge transport properties.35,36 Also, compared to bulk semiconducting materials, nanostructured arrays usually demonstrate improved PEC performance due to direct pathways for carrier transport and a larger area for electrode–electrolyte contact. He et al. showed that BiVO4 nanoflake films had better PEC water oxidation properties than nanoparticle films due to the better electrode/electrolyte contact owing to their flake morphology.37 Zhang et al. reported the formation of a 3D WO3/BiVO4 structure where the BiVO4 layer deposited in the void spaces within the inverse opal (IO) morphology of WO3 provided excellent charge transfer properties and as a result excellent PEC water splitting properties.38 A similar IO morphology comprising BiVO4/FeVO4 with a superior photocurrent response was also reported by Balamurugan et al., and they attributed the photocurrent enhancement to a synergistic effect between the presence of the FeVO4 shell layer effectively shifting the light absorbance onset favorably to a lower wavelength compared to bare BiVO4, and also the presence of oxygen vacancies in the IO structure.39
In this paper, we report the synthesis of unique worm-like BiVO4 nanoparticles through a simple hydrothermal procedure. The growth morphology of the nano-worms was optimized through time dependent hydrothermal treatment of BiVO4 scheelite tetragonal nanosheets. These nanoparticles were deposited on an ITO substrate and their photoelectrochemical water oxidation was evaluated against simulated white light. One of the most effective ways to alleviate charge carrier trapping centers that can act as recombination centers and consequently lower the PEC activity is to have anisotropic nanostructures with small dimensions that are comparable to the short hole diffusion length of BiVO4. The worm-like semi 1-D morphology of traditionally photoelectrochemically active metal oxide semiconductors such as BiVO4 and α-Fe2O3 (hematite) has previously been reported to exhibit even better PEC performance compared to their more conventional anisotropic counterparts such as nanorods.10,40 Kim et al., starting from β-FeOOH nanorods, managed to fabricate hematite nano-worms with single crystalline characteristics, and reported exceptional photoelectrochemical water oxidation performance for the same which they attributed to the dual effect of the single crystalline nature of the particles leading to minimal charge trapping centers and excellent connectivity of the particles owing to the worm like morphology.10 Another report highlighted the formation of highly porous worm like BiVO4 microstructures through microwave annealing of amorphous BiVO4 films.40 But the excellent PEC activity was attributed largely to the porous morphology in their case. However, the in situ growth of photoelectrode films with wormlike morphological features is not comparable to synthesizing and optimizing BiVO4 particles with definite worm-like morphology, which is what we have been able to achieve in this undertaking. Here, the hydrothermally obtained BiVO4 nano-worms produced a better photoelectrochemical response compared to the other morphologies observed during various periods of their growth evolution. Additionally, based on our time dependent morphology evolution study through high resolution electron microscopy we have proposed a tentative mechanism behind the growth of such wormlike nanostructures. Rationalization behind the superior PEC performance of the BiVO4 nano-worms has been proposed through detailed structural, microstructural and electrochemical characteristic analysis.
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Synthesis of the BiVO4 nano-worms
0.09 g NH4VO3 (AR; Thomas Baker, Mumbai) was dissolved in 35 mL 1 (M) ammonia (Fisher Scientific) to prepare ‘solution 1’. 0.075 g Bi(NO3)3·5H2O (GR; Merck, Mumbai) was dissolved in 35 mL 1 (M) HNO3 (CDH, New Delhi) to prepare ‘solution 2’. Simple aqueous solution was not utilized in both cases as NH4VO3 is sparingly soluble whereas Bi (NO3)3 would be hydrolyzed into oxynitrate in aqueous solution. ‘Solution 1’ was added to ‘solution 2’ in a dropwise manner from a burette with sustained stirring. A faint yellow turbidity starts to appear with the continued addition of solution 1 indicating the formation of BiVO4 particles. Subsequently, the entire mixture was transferred to a 100 mL Teflon lined steel autoclave and was subjected to hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 18 hours. The resultant orange precipitate was filtered out and washed repeatedly with distilled water and ethanol to remove impurities. The particles were dried at 60 °C under vacuum for 12 hours.
Morphological evolution leading to the eventual nano-worms (BVNWs) was investigated through performing the hydrothermal treatment for various intermediate time durations such as 0 hours (i.e. no hydrothermal treatment), 6 hours and 12 hours and the materials were designated as BV0, BV6, BV12 and BVNWs (i.e. BV18).
2.2 Characterization
Surface morphological features of the samples were recorded on a Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM; FEI Quanta 200F) operating at an accelerating voltage of 20.0 kV. Microstructural characteristics, lattice fringe spacing and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were studied using a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM; FEI Tecnai TF20) operating at an accelerating voltage of 200.0 kV. Crystallographic phase identification of the resultant samples was carried out through powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) via an advance diffractometer (Bruker D8) utilizing Cu-Kα radiation (Ni filter, λ = 1.5409 Å). Solid state thermal stability and any possible thermal phase transition were studied within a temperature range of 50–500 °C via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) methods in the presence of N2 at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 on a Diamond PerkinElmer simultaneous TG/DTA system. Raman spectra were recorded at room temperature on a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope at a wavelength of 514 nm (Ar laser) and at 300 mW laser power. The optical absorption properties were investigated through diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) on a Shimadzu UV-2401 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating accessory sphere and utilizing BaSO4 as a diffuse reflectance standard. The Kubelka–Munk function was utilized to convert reflectance into absorbance data. The absorbance values were used in Tauc analysis according to the formula (αhν)2 = hν − Eg, where α = absorption coefficient, hν is the corresponding photon energy and Eg is the band gap of the semiconductor. Exponent 2 indicates a direct band-gap semiconductor. The intercept of the linear portion of the curves on the horizontal axis reveals the band gap of the materials.
2.3 Photoelectrochemical property evaluation
For electrochemical and photoelectrochemical studies, a single compartment three electrode quartz cell consisting of the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl (3M NaCl) reference electrode and a Pt wire counter electrode was employed. The working electrodes were prepared by dropcasting the BiVO4 powder samples on conductive Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates (15–20 Ω sq−1). Initially, the substrates were cut into 1 × 2 cm2 pieces and were cleaned ultrasonically in distilled water and isopropanol. Typically, 1 mg of BiVO4 was suspended in a mixture of 90 μL isopropanol and 10 μL Nafion solution (5 wt%; Sigma Aldrich) and was ultrasonicated to prepare a uniform dispersion. 10 μL of this dispersion was deposited onto a 1 × 0.5 cm2 area of the cleaned ITO substrate. For improving the adhesion of BiVO4 particles on the substrate, the films were annealed at 150 °C for 4 hours in a muffle furnace. Electrical contacts were made through copper wire attached by silver conductive paint (RS components, UK). The entire substrate sans the deposited film was sealed via Hysol epoxy resin (RS components, UK) to avoid any interference from the substrate. N2 saturated 0.1 (M) potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.00) was utilized as the electrolyte throughout the electrochemical measurements. The working electrode was illuminated from the backside via simulated white light from a xenon arc lamp (300 W, Optosolar GmbH). Backside illumination was preferred as typically in the case of backside illumination, photogenerated electrons would have to travel a shorter distance to reach the substrate and there would be less probability of recombination, so there would be higher photocurrent generated when the electrode is subjected to backside illumination as opposed to front side illumination. Additionally, for drop-cast films with relatively lower surface uniformity/smoothness frontside illumination can lead to a substantial loss of incident light compared to backside illumination due to the higher scattering effect of the catalyst film. Moreover, backside illumination reduces the possibility of photocorrosion and generation of other chemically reactive species in the solution as a result of the photochemical processes. The current potential (I–V) curves were recorded using a CHI 608E electrochemical analyzer at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) with a sinusoidal perturbation amplitude of 5 mV was recorded at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl within the frequency range of 100 mHz to 1 MHz and ZSimpWin software was applied to fit the data. The Mott–Schottky analysis was carried out under dark conditions within a potential range of −1.0 to +1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl at a frequency of 1 kHz.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 reveals the TEM image of the BiVO4 nanoparticles synthesized through 18 hours of hydrothermal treatment. The image depicts entangled uniform worm-like nanostructures of ∼3–6 nm width (Fig. 1(a)). A magnified image of a single nano-worm taken at a high resolution is provided in Fig. 1(b). The image reveals an individual BVNW forming an open loop-like orientation. The width of the particle was ∼3 nm and the length of the loop or the length of the particle was ∼16 nm. The presence of well delineated continuous lattice planes was observed without any grain boundary, indicating that the individual BVNWs were single-crystalline. A high resolution TEM micrograph consisting of several such nano-worm particles is provided in the ESI (Fig. S1†). Analysis of the lattice fringes of the individual particles also leads us to believe that the nano-worm particles originated with uniform lattice orientation throughout the domain of each of the particles (Fig. S1†). The bulk surface morphology of the sample recorded on a FESEM is provided in the ESI (Fig. S2†).
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM micrograph revealing the entangled worm-like BiVO4 nanostructures (BVNWs) synthesized via 18 hours of hydrothermal treatment. (b) High resolution TEM micrograph showing an individual BVNW particle. 
A systematic study of the growth evolution to this nano-worm morphology was carried out via TEM investigation of the obtained samples corresponding to various time stipulated hydrothermal treatment as mentioned in the synthesis section. XRD and Raman spectroscopy have also been performed in order to further shed light on the crystallographic transformation concomitant with the said morphology evolution.
Phase compositional analysis of the samples is presented via the XRD diffractograms (Fig. 2). The diffraction peak positions of the hydrothermally treated samples (i.e. BV6, BV12 and BVNWs) correspond well to the single-phase monoclinic scheelite structure of BiVO4 (JCPDS 75-1866) which is the more catalytically photoactive phase of BiVO4 because of its comparatively smaller optical band-gap.12 The XRD pattern for BV0, however, matches well with the tetragonal scheelite structure of BiVO4 (JCPDS 75-2481). The diffraction patterns of the monoclinic from the tetragonal scheelite could be difficult to distinguish because of the close proximity of their respective diffraction peaks. But a careful examination of the split peaks at 2θ values ∼19° (101/011), 35° (200/020) and 47° (204/024) present in the diffraction pattern for the monoclinic materials could readily discern them from the diffraction pattern of the tetragonal scheelite materials where the said splittings do not occur.41 The Fig. 2 inset provides a magnified view of the 101 peak of BV0 splitting into 101/011 peaks post its hydrothermal treatment to obtain BV6, BV12 and BVNWs. The monoclinic-scheelite to tetragonal-scheelite reversible solid-state phase transition usually takes place at 255 °C.41 In fact, the TGDTA profile of BV0, as provided in the ESI (Fig. S3†), was featureless within our synthesis temperature of 180 °C indicating no thermal phase transition took place during the hydrothermal treatment. So, we could speculate that a dissolution–recrystallization mechanism accompanying the hydrothermal reaction leads to the phase transition in our case. A few other observations deserve our attention. Low temperature (room temperature) synthesis of BiVO4 generally provides the zircon-type tetragonal phase,16 though in our case we obtained the Scheelite tetragonal structure for the room temperature precipitated sample (BV0). Although, the synthesis method and conditions are known to be factors in determining the structure, e.g. both higher pH solution and mechanical stress favor the formation of scheelite or favor the conversion of zircon-type to the monoclinic scheelite polymorph,42 it is difficult for us to pin-point the exact driving factors behind the anomaly observed in our case as the reaction precursors and conditions used are pretty regular. The Scheelite tetragonal phase on the other hand is thermodynamically the less stable polymorph of the scheelite varieties and its formation over the monoclinic polymorph was rationalized by Tokunaga et al. to be a kinetically favored reaction at a sudden increase in pH.43 We believe that the dropwise addition of the alkaline vanadate solution triggers a sudden pH elevation in its localized region leading to the formation of the tetragonal scheelite BiVO4 particles. Another interesting observation was the change of relative intensities of the (112) and (004) planes in the XRD pattern. Hydrothermal treatment of BV0 at 180 °C apparently intensifies the growth along the (004) crystal plane compared to the (112) plane which is usually the dominant hkl plane in monoclinic BiVO4, signaling that the said treatment caused anisotropic growth of the crystals with a preferential orientation along the [001] direction. Previous studies have indicated the dependence of (004)/(112) ratio on the reaction pH, though no consistent conclusions were achieved. Tan et al., while studying the effect of synthesis pH on BiVO4, obtained more intense (004) peaks within a certain range of acidic pH11 whereas, Thalluri et al. reported the same to happen at basic pH.44 Reaction precursors, concentration and temperature were obviously the other determining factors besides the reaction pH. What could be agreed upon is that during the anisotropic growth the more thermodynamically stable (004) planes probably disappear at a slower rate compared to the (112) planes leading to the predominance of (004) planes.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the BiVO4 nanoparticles synthesized via different time durations of hydrothermal treatment. Corresponding JCPDS file has also been provided along with. The inset provides a magnified view of the splitting of the 101 peak observed in BV0 into 101 and 011 peaks observed in the samples BV6, BV12 and BVNWs. 
Morphology evolution during different periods of growth is depicted in Fig. 3 through the TEM images. Fig. 3(a) presents a TEM micrograph of BV0 which is the as-obtained BiVO4 nanoparticles through precipitation and not subjected to any hydrothermal treatment. The image shows small particles of ∼15–20 nm size spread over sheets of BiVO4 in a spatially random manner. Usually, under acidic conditions the vanadate (VO43−) ions could polymerize to form polyvanadate ions ((HnV10O28)(6−n)−; the value of n would depend on the concentration of H+ ions), which would in turn materialize in the form of sheets. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern obtained from a portion of the said sheets (Fig. S4(b)†) is provided in the ESI, Fig. S4(c).† The featureless diffused SAED pattern indicates the sheets to be non-crystalline. The individual particles, however, were well crystalline with clear fringes corresponding to the (112) lattice planes (d = 0.31 nm) of tetragonal scheelite BiVO4 (Fig. 3(b) inset). Interestingly, Fig. 3(b) also shows a portion of the sheets protruding and forming particles with a partial crystalline and partial amorphous nature. The crystalline component, as depicted by a magnified segment in the Fig. 3(b) inset (left portion of the inset), was characterized by a lattice spacing of 0.29 nm corresponding to the (004) fringes. Upon hydrothermal treatment, the scheelite tetragonal BV0 sheets get converted to the monoclinic scheelite sheets or large particles. More small particles seem to form through gradual disintegration of the sheets as observed in Fig. 3(c), presenting the TEM micrograph of the material obtained having BV0 subjected to 6 hours of hydrothermal reaction (i.e. BV6). The corresponding high-resolution image in Fig. 3(d) reveals crystallite regions that could be assigned to the (112) and (004) lattice planes of the monoclinic scheelite system. Fig. 3(e) reveals the TEM micrograph of BV12. The presence of extremely thin (∼3 nm) and short (∼5–10 nm) rod like shapes was detected. The lattice fringes in the HRTEM image (inset) were separated by 0.29 nm which, again, agreed well with the (004) spacing of monoclinic scheelite BiVO4. Fig. 3(f) depicts the TEM micrograph of the BiVO4 nanoparticles obtained by a hydrothermal reaction for 18 hours. Plenty of small worm like nanoparticles were visible in this image. The corresponding HRTEM image (Fig. 3(g)) shows loopy or bent worm like shapes with clear (004) lattice fringes having a 0.29 nm interplanar spacing.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM micrograph of BV0 showing the coexistence of sheet-like structures and particles, (b) high resolution image of selected particles of BV0 showing clear lattice fringes; inset provides a magnified fragment of the fringes (c) TEM micrograph of BV6 and (d) corresponding high resolution image, (e) HRTEM micrograph of BV12 with the inset showing the magnified version of two neighboring particles, (f) TEM micrograph of the BVNWs showing the presence of ultrasmall worm-like BiVO4 nanoparticles and (g) the corresponding HRTEM image revealing a few of those particles with their lattice fringes in full view. 
The micrographic results indicate that the sheet like structures eventually lead to worm like structures with the hydrothermal treatment. The initial phase transformation could be attributed to a dissolution–recrystallization mechanism following which the monoclinic sheets/large particles (Fig. 3(c)) break down and under a sustained hydrothermal reaction, form the BVNWs. Also, the initial association of the (004) planes with the sheets as opposed to the small particles (Fig. 3(b)) could indicate that the nano-worms originate from the sheets and not due to the transformation of the particles. Furthermore, coming back to the change in relative intensities of the (004) and (112) planes as observed in the XRD patterns of the samples (Fig. 2), it could be suggested that the highly intense (004) peaks in BVNWs would correspond to the nano-worm particles dominating other co-existing polycrystalline BiVO4 particles where (112) planes would be the strongest peak. The above assumption allows us to achieve a rough estimation of the nano-worm particles in BVNWs, derived from the comparison of the relative intensities of the (004) and (112) planes in BV6 particles and BVNWs. The estimated percentage of nano-worm particles in BVNWs was roughly 55. Details of the assumptions and calculations are provided in the ESI.†
Based on the above observation, a conceptualized representation of the morphology evolution is proposed in an illustrative manner in Scheme 1. At this point, we don't have sufficient information to pin-point the thermodynamic driving force behind the evolution to worm-like morphology. The seemingly distorted and bent lattice planes, as observed in the high-resolution micrographs of the BVNWs (Fig. 3(g), S1†), are novel in the case of BiVO4 and we haven't found similar morphologies in any other metal oxides. So, without any pre-existing mechanistic/energetic interpretation, and not enough data for us to go by, we can merely speculate but cannot ascertain the corresponding thermodynamic and kinetic aspects for the same. However, similar loopy worm like lattice structures have been accepted as a feature of carbon nanostructures such as graphite, fullerenes, carbon onions, diamond, etc.45–47 and like in the case of those materials it is possible that stacking faults play an important role in creating the unique BiVO4 nano-worms. Another aspect that we would like to clarify is that the BiVO4 nano-worm morphology encompasses a variety of shapes in addition to the loopy morphology as clearly visible from Fig. S1.† One common factor in all of them is the presence of bent lattice planes which provides the illusion of a worm-like morphology.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the morphology evolution leading to the formation of BiVO4 nano-worms. 
Raman spectroscopy was employed to study the changes in the local structure of the materials resulting from the hydrothermal treatment of BV0. Fig. 4(a) presents the Raman spectra of the samples obtained through 514 nm green laser excitation. Raman bands around 207, 331, 368, 702 and 822 cm−1 were observed for all the samples. These are characteristic vibrational bands of BiVO4.13,48,49 The 207 cm−1 band can be ascribed to the external mode (rotation/translation) of BiVO4 and thus very little structural information can be available from it. The peaks at 331 and 368 cm−1 are assigned respectively to the antisymmetric (δas, Ag) and symmetric (δs, Bg) deformation modes of the V–O bonds of the VO43− tetrahedron. The remarkable feature about these bands is that for the BV0 sample instead of two separate bands we observe one broad band in the range of 330–370 cm−1. This phenomenon is actually in agreement with our findings from the XRD data as the two bands occur because of two different V–O bond lengths in the monoclinic structure, R1 and R2, but the tetragonal scheelite structure has only one such bond length resulting in overlap of the two bands. Raman bands at 702 and 822 cm−1 correspond to the symmetric stretching modes of the two different V–O bonds. The band at 702 cm−1 is broad and weak so much so that it could be perceived as a shoulder to the 822 cm−1 band. The position and shapes of these bands can provide us with valuable information regarding the structure of the materials. For example, a positive shift from 817 cm−1 in BV0 to 822 cm−1 in BV12 and BVNWs was observed. A functional relationship between the V–O Raman stretching frequencies and the metal–oxygen bond length in the local structure can be empirically represented via the following equationν (cm−1) = 21349exp (−1.9176R (Å))50where ν is the stretching frequency and R is the bond length. A calculation of the V–O bond length from the above expression suggests that the V–O bond length decreased from 1.702 Å in BV0 to 1.698 Å in BV12 and BVNWs. Also, the intensity of the Raman bands increased with hydrothermal treatment as clearly observed from Fig. 4(a) suggesting improved crystallinity in BV12 and BVNWs compared to BV0, which agrees well with our findings of non-crystalline regions in the BV0 sample from the TEM micrographs (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 4  (a) Raman spectra of BV0, BV12 and BVNWs excited by a 514 nm laser. (b) Normalized absorbance spectra and the inset shows Tauc plots of the BiVO4 particles synthesized under different durations of hydrothermal treatment. Corresponding band gaps estimated from the Tauc plots have been provided besides the individual sample marker. 
The light absorption properties of the as-synthesized materials were evaluated utilizing the UV-Vis absorbance spectra as provided in Fig. 4(b). All the samples had an absorption edge around 600 nm which indicates their ability to absorb a significant portion of the visible spectrum. The Fig. 4(b) inset shows the corresponding Tauc plots of the samples. The optical band gap measured from the horizontal axis intercept of the linear portion of the Tauc plot reveals the band gaps to be similar for all the samples and agreeing with the generally accepted band gap for the monoclinic scheelite BiVO4 structure (∼2.4 eV corresponding to the Bi 6s/O 2p → V 3d charge transfer transition16). Although the similarity in band gaps indicates that all the materials absorb a similar portion of the visible spectrum, due to the variation in synthesis parameters the inherent absorption coefficient or absorbance intensity may vary slightly between them. As observed in Fig. 4(b) the absorption band centered around 470 nm for the hydrothermally treated samples (BV6, BV12 and BVNWs) is more pronounced compared to BV0.
In order to evaluate their PEC activities, we compared the photocurrent densities of the electrodes prepared from the BiVO4 nanoparticles BV0, BV6, BV12 and BVNWs, as a function of chopped light illumination with regular on/off cycles, as displayed in Fig. 5(a). All the photoanodes beyond their photocurrent onset potential show excellent photoswitching performance with reasonably fast response and recovery times. It can be clearly seen that the BVNWs give the best result with a photocurrent density of 9.3 μA cm−2 against 1.1 V applied bias which compares favorably against BV12 with 6.9 μA cm−2, BV6 with 4.4 μA cm−2 and BV0 with 5.7 μA cm−2 photocurrent density at the same bias. The relatively low PEC activity of BV6 could be rationalized as a result of being in the initial phase of morphology evolution leading to plentiful defect centers hindering its charge transport, probably functioning as trapping centers. A HRTEM micrograph revealing several defect areas within the BV6 particles is provided in the ESI (Fig. S6†). The grain boundaries present there could be the apparent source of potential drop. Apart from the photocurrent density increase, a clear cathodic shift in the anodic photocurrent onset potential was observed for the more mature hydrothermally treated samples with rod or worm-like morphologies. The onset potential cathodically shifted by about 340 mV to 0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl for both BVNWs and BV12 as compared to either BV0 or BV6.
 Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the BiVO4 electrodes measured in 0.5 (M) phosphate buffer at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 under 1.5 G simulated solar light under chopped light conditions, (b) corresponding applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE%) for various BiVO4 photoanodes, (c) amperometric photocurrent-time profile for various BiVO4 photoelectrodes under the same simulated light, also under chopped light (on/off) conditions and at a bias of 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. 
To further evaluate the performance of the photoelectrochemical cells we calculated their efficiency. The efficiency of PEC water splitting could be expressed in terms of applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of the photoanodes which is generally estimated by the following equation,18,51  where JPh is the photocurrent density at the applied potential, Vapp is the applied potential between the working and the reference electrode and Pin is the power density of the illuminating light (100 mW cm−2 in our case). The plot of ABPE% efficiency as a function of the applied potential is displayed in Fig. 5(b). Apparently, the efficiency of BVNWs and BV12 is superior to that of BV0 and BV6 for the entire potential range. BVNWs have a peak efficiency of 0.002% at around 0.5 V bias. The maximum efficiencies for the other electrodes were significantly anodically shifted compared to BVNWs which indicates that the formation of the nano-worm morphology enhances their photoconversion efficiency by boosting the maximum photocurrent. It should be noted that the calculated efficiency in our case is lower than some of the previously reported literature results for BiVO4.16 The primary reason for the low efficiency could be attributed to the choice of not employing high temperature annealing/sintering of the as prepared films which can iron out a lot of defects and introduces Sn doping from the ITO/FTO substrates17,19,33,35 that enhances the conductivity of the films remarkably and thus result in high photocurrent. We wanted our discussion to be clearly confined within the morphological details and their impact on the PEC properties, and thus high temperature treatment was avoided so as not to further complicate our analysis. The stability of the photoanodes was examined by the amperometric photocurrent versus time profile under the same simulated solar light under chopped illumination conditions at an applied bias of 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 5(c)). Photocurrent observed for all three photoanodes BV0, BV12 and BVNWs was pretty consistent with what we observed in the LSV profiles (Fig. 5(a)) for the corresponding bias, with BVNWs showing nearly 4 times the photocurrent of BV0 and almost 2.5 times that of BV12. BV6, being the weakest performing sample anyway, was exempted from this experiment. Both BVNWs and BV12 showed a photocurrent spike under initial illumination which was relaxed to the steady state following recombination/hole transfer, a phenomenon that was not clearly observed in the BV0 sample beyond the initial chopping measurement, leading us to conclude that the initial charge separation and transport to the electrolyte interface in the case of BV0 is considerably slower compared to that of either BVNWs or BV12.
To shed light on the kinetics of the charge transfer process electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the photoelectrodes was performed under simulated solar light. Fig. 6(a) displays the corresponding Nyquist diagrams obtained from the EIS data. All the BiVO4 photoanodes were best fitted to an R(QR) circuit model (Fig. 6(a) inset) which contains one resistor RS which is the series resistance, Q, which is the constant phase element associated with the depletion region of the BiVO4 film in contact with the electrolyte and RCT, the charge transfer resistance between the BiVO4 films and electrolyte. Water oxidation, which is energetically the most demanding process in water splitting, occurs at the anode–electrolyte interface in the PEC system. Thus, the biggest resistance and capacitance values are also usually associated with the charge transfer across that interface. The semicircular curvature of the Nyquist plot corresponds to the charge transfer at the BiVO4/electrolyte interface and the radius of the curvature indicates the charge transfer resistance. Apparently, RCT follows the sequence BVNWs < BV12 < BV0 < BV6 which confirms that charge transfer across the BVNW and electrolyte interface is very facile compared to the other materials. Data associated with the electrical components of the simulated circuit are provided in the ESI (Table S1†). BVNWs also have the highest value of Q which in the circuit is analogous to capacitance built at the electrode/electrolyte interface and a large value of capacitance there would render higher photocurrent. Thus, the sequence agrees well with our observed photocurrent for different BiVO4 electrodes. BV6 also has a high value of interface capacitance compared to BV12 and BV0, but the advantage is offset by similarly large RCT that diminishes its photocurrent.
 Fig. 6  (a) Characteristic Nyquist plots obtained from the EIS experiments of the BiVO4 photoelectrodes under illumination. Inset provides the equivalent circuit utilized to simulate the experimental data. (b) Bode phase plots of the photoelectrodes. Inset provides the magnified representation of the selected portion of the plots. (c) Mott–Schottky plots of the BiVO4 electrodes recorded in the dark at 1000 Hz; the inset displays the histogram representation of the corresponding Debye lengths. 
Another important parameter in evaluating the photoelectrochemical activity is the lifetime (τn) of the charge carriers. The lifetime of the electrons before recombination can be correlated with the corresponding maximum frequency peaks (fmax) by the following equation17τn = 1/(2πfmax)
The maximum frequency values of the four photoanodes can be observed in the Bode phase plots (Fig. 6(b)). The inset shows the magnified image of a selected portion of the Bode plots, containing the neighborhoods of the characteristic maxima, revealing that the maximum frequency values of BVNWs and BV12 to be smaller, indicating a longer lifetime and in turn, lower recombination rate compared to BV0 and BV6. Interestingly, fmax for BV12 is a fraction below the fmax for BVNWs, however, the differences are minimal and the almost overlapping nature of the plots points to the extremely close proximity of fmax values to have any significant effect on the overall PEC performance.
For a further in-depth understanding of the comparative PEC performances including the onset potential, Mott–Schottky (M–S) analysis was performed. M–S plots were crafted utilizing the equation29,52  where Cs is the space charge layer capacitance, e is the electronic charge, ϵ is the relative permittivity of the semiconductor; ∼86 for BiVO4,26ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, V is the applied potential, Vfb is the flat band potential, A is the electrode surface area, Nd is the carrier density and kT/e is a temperature dependent correction term. The plot of A2/C2 against V is referred to as the typical M–S plot and its horizontal axis intercept provides the flat band potential of the electrode material. Fig. 6(c) contains the M–S plots for the BiVO4 photoanodes BV0, BV12 and BVNWs. A clear positive slope of the linear portion of the plots demonstrates n-type behavior of the electrodes meaning electrons are the majority charge carriers. Moreover, a quantitative correlation between the cathodic shift in the onset potential observed in BVNWs and BV12 with respect to BV0, and the shift in Vfb was noticed. The Vfb shifted by 340 mV from −0.18 V in BV0 to −0.52 V in both BVNWs and BV12 and such a shift towards a more negative potential resembles the onset potential shift observed in Fig. 5(a). A cathodic shift in Vfb is favorable for electrons to pass through the circuit to the counter electrode thus resulting in the decrease of the onset potential for anodic photocurrent. We also obtained the charge carrier density (Nd) by using the slope of the M–S plot using the following equation26  
The calculated charge carrier densities were 7.5 × 1019 cm−3 (BV0), 12.42 × 1019 cm−3 (BV12) and 10.05 × 1019 cm−3 (BVNWs). It should be noted that this charge carrier density is mostly associated with the space charge layer of the electrodes and apparently BV12 has higher charge carrier density compared to BVNWs even though the latter produces a higher photocurrent density. The Debye length (LD) or the distance over which the local electric field affects the distribution of charge carriers can be calculated from Nd using the equation53  
The calculated LD values are provided in the inset in Fig. 6(c). Clearly, the Debye length is inversely proportional to the square of Nd and furthermore, the Schottky barrier model demonstrates that the charge carrier transit time through the space charge layer is proportional to the square of Debye length. Thus, a shorter Debye length results in a shorter transit time and in turn less recombination of the charge carriers. Our results show that BV12 has a slightly better carrier density and lower transit time compared to BVNWs, so it should have the least bulk recombination rate among the electrodes which is again consistent with our earlier findings from the Bode phase plots (Fig. 6(b)). The space charge region width can be calculated from the equation53  
Plots of the width of the space charge region calculated at different applied potentials are provided in Fig. S7.† A larger width is generally seen as a manifestation of greater band bending and as such higher efficiency in the charge separation. BVNWs have a greater space charge region width than BV12 over the entire range of potentials. However, BV0 although starts smaller at lower applied biases, it surpasses BV12 and subsequently BVNWs at higher applied biases. From the above observations, we can infer that both BVNWs and BV12 have much better photoelectrochemical water oxidation characteristics as compared to BV0. The reason can originate from their higher charge carrier density and the cathodic shift in their flat band potential as compared to BV0 resulting in a higher photocurrent and lower onset potential, the two parameters that define the effectiveness of PEC water oxidation catalysts.
However, both BVNWs and BV12 have a similar onset potential and the charge carrier density (Nd) of BV12 is greater than that of BVNWs. But, the nano-worms of BiVO4 form the electrodes with the highest photocurrent density, not the BV12 electrodes in spite of having a comparatively better charge carrier density. The obvious rationalization behind this can be the low interfacial charge transfer resistance (RCT) of BVNWs as compared to BV12, as observed from the EIS spectra of the two photo-electrodes (Fig. 6(a)); which more than compensates for having lower charge carrier density. Another additional explanation could be better surface water oxidation kinetics due to the presence of more electrochemically active sites on BVNWs. Obviously, both these factors could very well be correlated, but nevertheless, we, for the time being will treat them separately. To quantify the effect of active surface sites, we measured the electrochemically active surface areas (ECSA) of BV12 and BVNWs from their electrochemical double layer-capacitance (Cdl) calculated from the cyclic voltammetry curves (Fig. S8†). The calculated values of Cdl for BVNWs and BV12 were 269.54 and 253.42 μF cm−2 respectively. Apparently, although evolution to the nano-worm morphology increases the active area slightly, the enhancement is simply not enough to significantly impact the photocurrent performance and explicate the difference of PEC performance between the two photoelectrodes. The difference in the interfacial resistance seems to be the deciding factor behind the relative PEC performance between BV12 and the nano-worm electrodes. So, what could be the reason behind BVNWs having a lower RCT as compared to BV12? We are here suggesting that the lower charge transfer resistance of BVNWs can be attributed to the difference in surface states in the electrode/electrolyte interface arising due to the evolution to worm-like morphology. These surface states (SS) can be photoelectron trapping states where they impede the charge transfer and act as resistive states, or they can also act as facilitators for hole transfer and thus act as aiding states for water oxidation. Since we are trying to analyze the comparative charge transfer resistance, let us focus on the resistive trap states (r-SS) present at the surface of the BiVO4 electrodes BV12 and BVNWs. The presence of resistive or trap surface states would manifest themselves through less efficient interfacial hole transfer between the electrode surface and the electrolyte and also result in faster decay of the initial photocurrent as a result of frequent surface recombination of the charge carriers. To elucidate the comparative hole transfer efficiencies, charge transport efficiencies (ηtrans) of BV12 and BVNWs were calculated using sodium sulfite as the hole scavenger in the electrolyte.18 The corresponding chopped J–V curves for the two BiVO4 photoanodes are displayed in Fig. 7(a) and (b). Details of the calculation of ηtrans are provided in the ESI.† Sulfite oxidation is a faster and more facile electrochemical process compared to water oxidation and thus the retarding effects of surface recombination of the charge carriers as well as the kinetic limitations could be ignored for analytic purposes. On the basis of the assumption that addition of sulfite aids in 100% hole transfer from the electrode surface to the electrolyte the calculated charge transport efficiencies for both BV12 and BVNWs as a function of applied potentials are shown in Fig. 7(c). Compared to BV12, ηtrans for BVNWs is clearly improved which is consistent with the J–V characteristics of these two photoanodes, as we observed previously (Fig. 5(a)). Initially, at lower potentials, both the electrodes display comparable charge transport efficiencies but the difference becomes increasingly larger at higher applied potentials. BVNWs, impressively, exhibit ηtrans consistently near or above 0.8 throughout the experimental potential window (0 to 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl).
 Fig. 7  Chopped J–V curves for (a) BV12 and (b) BVNW photoanodes in phosphate buffer solution (PBS) without and with the addition of sodium sulfite (0.5 (M)). (c) Charge transport efficiencies (ηtrans) of BV12 and BVNWs as a function of applied potential. 
Fundamentally, charge transport or charge injection efficiency estimates the fraction of the ‘total number of holes that have reached the electrode/electrolyte interface’ being able to be transferred to the electrolyte for water oxidation without suffering recombination at various surface traps. A reduction in the recombination itself or the factors aiding in charge carrier recombination would therefore improve upon the charge transport efficiency. Another critical factor that impacts the photoelectrochemical performance of the photoanodes with similar band gaps is the overall charge separation efficiency (ηsep), which is basically the fraction of charge carriers initially formed upon illumination, being able to reach from the bulk to surface without suffering recombination. This parameter, for materials with similar band gaps, can be mathematically represented as functions of the light harvesting efficiency and the photocurrent in scavenger solution. Since the light harvesting efficiencies of BVNWs is almost identical to that of BV12, which is only slightly superior (Fig. S9†), ηsep could effectively be represented by their photocurrent in the presence of the scavenger solution (Na2SO3 in this case). The comparative J–V curves in sulfite solution under chopped illumination conditions are provided in Fig. S10.† At lower potentials (up to ∼0.6 V) BVNWs clearly have better charge separation performance as the number of charge carriers being able to reach the interface is significantly higher. On increasing the potential, BV12 exhibits increasingly superior charge separation efficiency and actually begins to record higher charge separation at ∼0.75 V. However, the normal photocurrent response of BVNWs is consistently much higher than that of BV12 over the entire scanned potential range up to 1.1 V (Fig. 5(a)). So, the inferior photocurrent response of BV12 as compared to BVNWs could primarily be attributed to the higher charge transport characteristics due to lower surface recombination in the case of the nanoworms. As the higher ηtrans of BVNWs is attributed to the low concentration of resistive surface states, it is worth studying the photocurrent decay and transient time constant of the two photoelectrodes, which, if agrees with the findings from ‘charge transport efficiency measurement’ would complement the above results. Typically, following the anodic photocurrent spike (II) due to bulk separation of charge carriers upon sudden illumination, a photocurrent decay occurs as a result of surface recombination of the said carriers. The decay continues until a stabilized/equilibrium photocurrent (IEQ) is reached (Fig. 8(a)). A quantitative expression for the charge recombination behavior can be provided by the parameter D, whereD = (It − IEQ)/(II − IEQ)21It is the photocurrent at time t. The parameter transient time constant (τ) is defined as the time at which lnD = −1 (Zhong et al., 2018) in the normalized plot. From Fig. 8(b) the τ value was estimated to be 3.42 s for BVNWs and 8.49 s for BV12, indicating that surface charge recombination was rather suppressed in the nano-worm electrodes compared to BV12, further corroborating that evolution to nano-worm morphology significantly diminishes the resistive surface states.
 Fig. 8  (a) Transient photocurrent responses for BV12 and BVNWs (data taken from Fig. 6(c)), and (b) normalized plots of photocurrent-time dependence for both BV12 and BVNW photoanodic transients. 
These states can be chemical redox states of inherent nature or arising due to doping, or simply physical states originating from various crystallographic or morphological irregularities. For BiVO4, inherent chemical surface states arise primarily due to redox reactions involving V5+ both in the bulk and on the surface of the electrode.54 In order to investigate the possibility of the existence of such states, CV measurements of the photoelectrodes were carried out by a method prescribed by Klahr et al.,55 where the electrodes were illuminated for 90 seconds at a constant potential of 1.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) before recording the CVs in the dark. The voltammograms of both BV12 and BVNWs (Fig. 9) show redox waves at ∼−0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) that could be attributed to the V5+/V4+ redox process in the bulk.56 Previous studies have shown that the formation of these redox states could involve trapping and de-trapping of photoelectrons according to the following equations54-Vbulk5+ + H+aq + e−trapping → Vbulk4+ + H+bulkVbulk4+ + H+bulk → Vbulk5+ + H+aq + e−detrapping
 Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms of different BiVO4 electrodes recorded in phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.00) at a scan speed of 100 mV s−1. 
Although the apparent reversible nature of the redox process implies that trapping and de-trapping occur fast and therefore are not likely to act as recombination centers, the trapping process could lead to the formation of oxygen vacancies on the surface which would in turn facilitate absorption of negatively charged species such as hydroxyl or oxide ions from the solution resulting in enhanced hole transfer from the surface of the photo-anodes to the electrolyte.57,58 Such a phenomenon has been viewed as assisting towards water oxidation.54 The V5+/V4+ redox waves for BV12 appear to be slightly more prominent compared to BVNWs (Fig. 9), which would, in fact, imply friendlier redox characteristics for BV12 towards water oxidation. So, the superior PEC properties of BVNWs, as we speculated, can be strongly related to the presence (or diminished presence to be more accurate) of the resistive trap states present on the surface of BVNWs. The cyclic voltammograms (CV) of both the BiVO4 electrodes did not detect any other perceptible redox behavior, indicating that resistive chemical surface states, which are generally characterized by an irreversible redox signature, are either extremely weak to make any significant impact on the photoelectrochemical behavior or they are simply non-existent. Shi et al. previously reported one such inherent cathodic peak for BiVO4 corresponding to the surface redox reaction of VO2+ to VO2+, which could correspond to an electron trapping mechanism and thus act as a resistive surface state.54 So, presumably, in our case, the variation in r-SS between BV12 and BVNWs would evolve as a function of the surface structural features. The single crystalline nature of individual nano-worms (Fig. S1†) would present channels on the BVNW electrodes with minimal potential drop as compared to BV12. Consequently, the nano-worm electrodes would show better surface to electrolyte charge transport and slower photocurrent decay, as we have already observed (Fig. 7 and 8), leading to a better photocurrent response upon illumination. A comparative presentation of high resolution TEM micrographs containing a single fully developed nanoworm in one image and a significant portion of a relatively wide BV12 nanorod in another is provided in the ESI (Fig. S11†). Structural differences between both the particles are pretty obvious there, with the BV12 particle containing several structural irregularities such as lattice distortion and multiple grains that could function as resistive surface states (r-SS). It is worth mentioning that although such defects are likely to exist even in the bulk structures, the higher charge separation efficiency of BV12 (Fig. S10†) above the mid-level potential range clearly demonstrates that the effects are a lot more muted; whereas, as surface artifacts they exert more resistance towards surface to electrolyte hole transfer. A mechanism consistent with the above analysis is pictorially presented in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Illustrative representation of the proposed mechanism of charge transfer for different BiVO4 electrodes. ‘A’ represents the photocurrent of the individual electrodes and relative size of the associated circles is associated with their relative photocurrent density. 
4. Conclusions
We synthesized wormlike BiVO4 nanostructures by a simple hydrothermal treatment of precursor-BiVO4, prepared by a precipitation method. Closer inspection reveals that the nano-worms of BiVO4 are single crystalline maintaining a uniform lineation of (004) lattice planes throughout individual particles. XRD analysis revealed that the hydrothermal treatment causes the as-precipitated scheelite-tetragonal BiVO4 to transform into a scheelite monoclinic polymorph. The morphology evolution leading to the worm-like appearance was investigated by TEM imaging of different samples prepared at different intermediate time durations and it was revealed that the initial large sheets slowly disintegrate and eventually produce nanoworms with a preferred growth along the (004) lattice planes. Studying the optical properties of the particles revealed that the nanoworms and all the other particles synthesized at different time durations had very similar absorbance profiles and an optical band gap of ∼2.4 eV, although the Raman study revealed that the V–O bonds shrank slightly post the hydrothermal treatment. The samples were deposited on ITO substrates to prepare the BiVO4 electrodes which would be investigated for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water oxidation efficiency aided by white light simulated by a 300 W xenon lamp. It was found that the BiVO4 with its wormlike nanostructures easily showed the best performance both in terms of anodic photocurrent and onset potential at 0.05 V against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. EIS analysis revealed that the nanoworms have the lowest interfacial charge transfer resistance while the Mott–Schottky analysis showed that the flat band potential of the nanoworms had a cathodic shift resulting in a low onset potential. Charge transport characteristics indicated that the nanoworm photoelectrode possesses a significantly higher ability for surface to electrolyte hole injection. Based on the results obtained from EIS, Mott–schottky measurements, charge transport analysis and microstructural characterization we suggested that the better PEC performance of the BiVO4 nanoworms could be attributed to decreased surface photoelectron trapping states and a cathodic shift in their flatband potential.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Central Research Facility (CRF) and Nanoscale Research Facility (NRF) of IIT Delhi for providing various characterization facilities. KKD is thankful to DST-SERB (India) for providing him with a research fellowship (SERB-NPDF; File No. PDF/2016/001035 dated 05/07/2016). We would also like to thank Prof. Raja Ram Yadav, Vice-Chancellor, Veer Bahadur Singh Purvanchal University, Jaunpur, for his periodic invaluable discussions and suggestions.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K. S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Pham, Y. Ping and G. Galli, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 401–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, R. Wang, C. Xie, H. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3572 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Bhandary, A. P. Singh, S. Kumar, P. P. Ingole, G. S. Thakur, A. K. Ganguli and S. Basu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 2816–2823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
S. Ye, C. Ding, R. Chen, F. Fan, P. Fu, H. Yin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, P. Du and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3250–3256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
J. Li, X. Gao, Z. Li, J. H. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Yin, Y. Wang, X. B. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808079 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J. W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tan, L. Zhang, H. Ren, S. Wei, J. Huang and A. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5186–5193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Tan, X. Wen, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, D. Meng, X. Wu, A. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18548–18559 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Butler, B. J. Dringoli, L. Zhou, P. M. Rao, A. Walsh and L. V Titova, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18516–18523 RSC .
J. W. Jang, D. Friedrich, S. Müller, M. Lamers, H. Hempel, S. Lardhi, Z. Cao, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, R. Heller, R. Eichberger, R. van de Krol and F. F. Abdi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701536 CrossRef .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603840 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Jeong, H. M. Shin, Y. R. Jo, Y. J. Kim, S. Kim, W. J. Lee, G. J. Lee, J. Song, B. J. Moon, S. Seo, H. An, S. H. Lee, Y. M. Song, B. J. Kim, M. H. Yoon and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7088–7093 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, Y. Liu, T. Jing, B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2058–2063 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, H. He, M. Yang, G. Ke, Z. Zhao, F. Dong, B. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Shi and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10456–10465 RSC .
H. S. Park, K. E. Kweon, H. Ye, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17870–17879 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Jo, H. J. Kang, K.-J. Kong, Y. S. Lee, H. Park, Y. Lee, T. Buonassisi, K. K. Gleason and J. S. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2015, 112, 13774–13778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, D. Yan, X. Tong and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705512 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5623–5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Ye, X. Yu, Z. Qiu, Y. Zhu, X. Lu and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34152–34156 RSC .
J. S. Yang and J. J. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, R. P. Antony, S. Y. Chiam, F. F. Abdi and L. H. Wong, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2022–2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Li, J. Bai, Q. Zeng, L. Xia, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Q. Xu and B. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18378–18386 RSC .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893–1895 RSC .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432–1437 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046–4051 RSC .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 RSC .
S. Y. Jeong, K. S. Choi, H. M. Shin, T. L. Kim, J. Song, S. Yoon, H. W. Jang, M. H. Yoon, C. Jeon, J. Lee and S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 505–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, L. Guo, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 856–861 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Guo, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, S. P. Berglund, A. J. E. Rettie, W. D. Chemelewski, P. Xiao, Y. Zhang and C. B. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9371–9379 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603840 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Balamurugan, G. Yun, K. S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7625–7634 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jo, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17623–17631 RSC .
Y. K. Kho, W. Y. Teoh, A. Iwase, L. Mädler, A. Kudo and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Bhattacharya, K. K. Mallick and A. Hartridge, Mater. Lett., 1997, 30, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Thalluri, C. Martinez Suarez, S. Hernández, S. Bensaid, G. Saracco and N. Russo, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 245, 124–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartelmess and S. Giordani, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 1980–1998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Evans, T. Guo, Y. Sun, W. Liu, L. Peng, Z. Xu, C. Gao and S. He, Carbon, 2018, 135, 248–252 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mykhailiv, H. Zubyk and M. E. Plonska-Brzezinska, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2017, 468, 49–66 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, L. X. Pang, W. G. Qu, C. A. Randall, J. Guo, Z. M. Qi, T. Shao and X. Yao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5009–5014 RSC .
J. Yu and A. Kudo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Hardcastle and I. E. Wachs, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 5031–5041 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shaban, M. Rabia, A. M. A. El-sayed, A. Ahmed and S. Sayed, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14100 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Bhandary, A. P. Singh, P. P. Ingole and S. Basu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35239–35247 RSC .
C. Fàbrega, D. Monllor-Satoca, S. Ampudia, A. Parra, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20517–20524 CrossRef .
Q. Shi, S. Murcia-López, P. Tang, C. Flox, J. R. Morante, Z. Bian, H. Wang and T. Andreu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3331–3342 CrossRef CAS .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7626–7636 RSC .
B. J. Trześniewski and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2919–2926 RSC .
J. Hu, X. Zhao, W. Chen, H. Su and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18702–18709 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, H. Duan, H. Li, C. Sun and H. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24519–24526 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07353aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM micrograph revealing the entangled worm-like BiVO4 nanostructures (BVNWs) synthesized via 18 hours of hydrothermal treatment. (b) High resolution TEM micrograph showing an individual BVNW particle.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the BiVO4 nanoparticles synthesized via different time durations of hydrothermal treatment. Corresponding JCPDS file has also been provided along with. The inset provides a magnified view of the splitting of the 101 peak observed in BV0 into 101 and 011 peaks observed in the samples BV6, BV12 and BVNWs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM micrograph of BV0 showing the coexistence of sheet-like structures and particles, (b) high resolution image of selected particles of BV0 showing clear lattice fringes; inset provides a magnified fragment of the fringes (c) TEM micrograph of BV6 and (d) corresponding high resolution image, (e) HRTEM micrograph of BV12 with the inset showing the magnified version of two neighboring particles, (f) TEM micrograph of the BVNWs showing the presence of ultrasmall worm-like BiVO4 nanoparticles and (g) the corresponding HRTEM image revealing a few of those particles with their lattice fringes in full view.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the morphology evolution leading to the formation of BiVO4 nano-worms.	 
ν (cm−1) = 21349exp (−1.9176R (Å))50

 	Fig. 4  (a) Raman spectra of BV0, BV12 and BVNWs excited by a 514 nm laser. (b) Normalized absorbance spectra and the inset shows Tauc plots of the BiVO4 particles synthesized under different durations of hydrothermal treatment. Corresponding band gaps estimated from the Tauc plots have been provided besides the individual sample marker.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the BiVO4 electrodes measured in 0.5 (M) phosphate buffer at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 under 1.5 G simulated solar light under chopped light conditions, (b) corresponding applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE%) for various BiVO4 photoanodes, (c) amperometric photocurrent-time profile for various BiVO4 photoelectrodes under the same simulated light, also under chopped light (on/off) conditions and at a bias of 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Characteristic Nyquist plots obtained from the EIS experiments of the BiVO4 photoelectrodes under illumination. Inset provides the equivalent circuit utilized to simulate the experimental data. (b) Bode phase plots of the photoelectrodes. Inset provides the magnified representation of the selected portion of the plots. (c) Mott–Schottky plots of the BiVO4 electrodes recorded in the dark at 1000 Hz; the inset displays the histogram representation of the corresponding Debye lengths.	 
τn = 1/(2πfmax)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Chopped J–V curves for (a) BV12 and (b) BVNW photoanodes in phosphate buffer solution (PBS) without and with the addition of sodium sulfite (0.5 (M)). (c) Charge transport efficiencies (ηtrans) of BV12 and BVNWs as a function of applied potential.	 
D = (It − IEQ)/(II − IEQ)21

 	Fig. 8  (a) Transient photocurrent responses for BV12 and BVNWs (data taken from Fig. 6(c)), and (b) normalized plots of photocurrent-time dependence for both BV12 and BVNW photoanodic transients.	 
Vbulk5+ + H+aq + e−trapping → Vbulk4+ + H+bulk
Vbulk4+ + H+bulk → Vbulk5+ + H+aq + e−detrapping

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms of different BiVO4 electrodes recorded in phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.00) at a scan speed of 100 mV s−1.	 

 	Scheme 2  Illustrative representation of the proposed mechanism of charge transfer for different BiVO4 electrodes. ‘A’ represents the photocurrent of the individual electrodes and relative size of the associated circles is associated with their relative photocurrent density.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07353a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
