Pyrolyzed M–N x catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction: progress and prospects  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00142F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00142F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2158-2185Pyrolyzed M–Nx catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction: progress and prospects

        
          
            Ergui 
            Luo†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuyi 
            Chu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoping 
            Shi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Siyuan 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liyuan 
            Gong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Junjie 
            Ge
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Chang Hyuck 
            Choi
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Changpeng 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Xing
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Jilin Province Key Laboratory of Low Carbon Chemical Power, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: gejj@ciac.ac.cn; liuchp@ciac.ac.cn; xingwei@ciac.ac.cn
bSchool of Applied Chemistry and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chchoi@gist.ac.kr
Received 
      14th January 2021
    , Accepted 17th February 2021First published on 20th February 2021AbstractFuel cells, a sustainable technology that assures a cleaner earth, once experienced disillusion due to the issue of economic viability associated with the massive usage of Pt-based catalysts. To address this issue, research on cost-effective catalysts, especially on the cathode side, has been intensively carried out where the latest achievements have made the M–Nx/C material on its verge of application. Here, we present a comprehensive overview of the fundamental chemistry of oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the progress of the M–Nx/C catalysts. Efforts aimed at clarifying the nature of catalytic sites are summarized, highlighting the indispensable role of advanced characterization tools. A variety of successful attempts are exemplified to describe the synthetic methodologies, followed by close tracking of newly emerging single-atom or dual-atom sites. Future directions for this research area are believed to be the rational and/or controllable synthesis of catalysts with adequate active sites and the use of strategies to substantially alleviate catalyst degradation.
Ergui Luo
Ergui Luo is a doctor graduated from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), under the supervision of Prof. Changpeng Liu and Prof. Wei Xing. Her research interests focus on the design and application of carbon-based electrocatalysts for fuel cells.
Yuyi Chu
Yuyi Chu is currently a master's student in Physical Chemistry at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Wei Xing. She received her bachelor's degree at Nanjing University of Science and Technology (NJUST) in 2019. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of non-precious metal catalysts for oxygen reduction in fuel cells.
Junjie Ge
Dr Junjie Ge is a Professor of Chemistry in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. She received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from CIAC in 2010 and completed postdoctoral training at the University of South Carolina (2010–2012) and University of Hawaii (2012–2015). She joined CIAC in 2015 as a professor. She has published over 100 peer-reviewed papers and several posters, abstracts and presentations. Her current research interests comprehend hydrogen energy and fuel cells, basic electrochemistry, and electrocatalysis, mainly concentrating on proton exchange membrane-based energy conversion systems.
Chang Hyuck Choi
Dr Chang Hyuck Choi received his BS (2007) and PhD (2012) degrees in the Department of Chemical Engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea. He was a postdoctoral fellow at KAIST from 2012 to 2014. From 2014 to 2016, he worked as a Humboldt research fellow at Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung (MPIE), Germany. He is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Korea. His research interests mainly focus on the fundamental understanding of electrocatalysis for energy conversion.
Changpeng Liu
Prof. Changpeng Liu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry and joined Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002. His research interests focus on the design, preparation technology and performance of catalysts, electrodes/MEAs and stacks in the fields of PEMFC, DMFC and electrolysis of water.
Wei Xing
Prof. Wei Xing is currently the director of Clean Energy Laboratory in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinses Academy of Sciences. After receiving his PhD in Physical Chemistry at CIAC in 1995, he worked at Hong Kong Productivity Council (HKPC), researching electrochemical treatment of metal surfaces. In 2001, he joined CIAC as a professor and devoted his work to advanced chemical power sources. He has published over 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals and applied over 30 patents. His research areas currently involve proton exchange membrane fuel cells from fundamental electrocatalytic processes to relevant fuel cell assembly and testing.

Broader context
With growing concern over energy crisis and urban air pollution, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are among the most efficient and cleanest alternatives to conventional internal-combustion engines. However, the high cost of platinum group metal (PGM) catalysts severely hampers the sustainable deployment of PEMFCs due to the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode. To address this issue, nonprecious metal catalysts, especially M–Nx/C catalysts, have been intensively explored with remarkable progress achieved in recent years. In this review, the history of M–Nx/C catalysts and the rational design in active site structures are comprehensively discussed, and the advanced technologies for identifying active sites and the main recent breakthroughs are also reviewed. To realize the future commercialization of high-performance M–Nx/C catalysts, several key challenges are summarized with possible research directions proposed to overcome the bottlenecks.

1. Introduction
Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are promising next-generation power sources.1–6 Given that only green hydrogen is used, i.e., H2 is generated by harvesting sustainable solar and wind energies or from biomass waste degradation, the PEMFC technique allows for absolutely zero-emission, making it an ideal choice for energy conversion to a healthy and sustainable future.7–11 However, the practical maturity of PEMFCs has been greatly retarded by the inherent thermodynamic limitations of the cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). ORR comprises multi-elemental reaction steps involving multiple intermediates (*OOH, *O, and *OH), the binding energies of which are linearly correlated and therefore cannot change independently. This scaling relationship has excluded the possibility of an ideal catalyst on which zero overpotential can be achieved since it necessitates each intermediate to be at its optimal binding energy. Consequently, even with the state-of-the-art Pt-based catalysts, a sizeable overpotential higher than 0.20 V is observed.1,12–14 Meanwhile, a large amount of Pt is currently demanded for the reaction to occur at an appreciable rate, which accounts for nearly 80% of the total Pt usage and 40–50% of the overall fuel-cell stack cost, thus imposing substantial limitations on the cost reduction of the PEMFC technique.7,15–17 While lowering Pt loading is a viable pathway to address this issue,18–20 developing nonprecious metal catalysts (NPMC) alternative to Pt is a more ambitious route and calls for prolonged effort. The NPMC research was initiated as early as 1960s, by which MN4-based (M is the metal ion and N is the metal coordinated nitrogen) macrocyclic compounds were revealed to deliver certain ORR catalysis behavior.21 The advantage of the MN4-based sites lies in that they resemble the respiratory catalytic site in nature, as the biological systems use the same hem center (MN4) to efficiently catalyze O2 reduction. Meanwhile, unlike the biological system, a number of parameters of the macrocyclic compounds (such as the metal center, the chelation structure, and the pendants) could be tuned to manipulate the adsorption/catalysis behavior. Due to this merit, the chemical bonding level understanding of the structure–activity relationship has been gained on such catalysts, with the “activity volcano” being well identified.22–24 Despite these appealing features, these catalysts performed far from satisfactory until scientists discovered that the catalytic activity could be substantially boosted by means of a pyrolysis process, thus leading to an era of the M–Nx/C catalysts (M = Fe, Co, etc.).25–28 The M–Nx/C catalysts are now mostly prepared from the readily available mixed materials comprising metal salts, C-rich and N-containing molecules, or an integrated precursor, for example, modified metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).29–34
The early-stage studies on M–Nx/C catalysts went through great difficulties due to the lack of knowledge on the essential structure of the active species. Thanks to the advanced characterizing tools and the innovative synthesis strategies, the past ten years have witnessed dramatic progress in both active site identification and catalytic performance. A wealth of atomic-level microscopic and spectroscopic data support that the M–Nx moieties are most likely the active sites of the M–Nx/C catalysts. This indicates the high thermo-stability (800–1100 °C) of the M–Nx coordination structure and the resemblance of the active center from heme and the MN4-macrocyclic compounds. As for the origin of the higher intrinsic catalytic activity than MN4-macrocyclic compounds, the preferable regulation of the electronic structure of the central metal and the M–O2 binding energy induced by carbon based surroundings are claimed to be responsible.35 The fact that the central metal atom serves as the catalysis center makes the M–Nx/C catalysts actually a member of the class of single-atom catalysts (SACs). In addition, similar to other SACs, achieving a high active site density while simultaneously maintaining the single-atom nature is imperative.7,36 Strategies such as spatial confinement and atomic isolation were shown to be effective to withstand the proximity of metal atoms during pyrolysis, leading to successful fabrication of SACs at high site densities.37–40 As a result, the state-of-the-art M–Nx/C catalysts exhibit ORR activity approaching that of Pt/C in certain cases.41,42
While the catalytic activity is greatly boosted, the M–Nx/C catalysts suffer seriously from degradation. Specifically, Fe-based catalysts exhibit the highest initial activity among the M–Nx/C contemporaries and have been the major research subject ever since the beginning. However, Fe also catalyzes the decomposition of H2O2 (an ORR intermediate) via the Fenton mechanism to form reactive oxygen species (ROS), thus inducing serious carbon corrosion and ultimately leading to poor stability.43 This problem has impelled increasing studies with emphasis on developing more durable M–Nx/C catalysts by either suppressing the Fenton reaction or seeking for non-iron active centers.
In this review, we firstly retrospect the history of M–Nx/C catalysts and the identification of catalytic sites, and then systematically summarize the synthetic methodologies leading to increased intrinsic activity, density and availability of ORR-active M–Nx species. Recent successes in proofing the neoteric single-atom or dual-atom sites are also intensively introduced. Besides, we address a special discussion on the degradation mechanisms responsible for the stability issue of M–Nx/C catalysts, especially the Fe-based one. Finally, a brief outlook regarding the future challenges and the directions our efforts should be directed toward is presented. We expect that this comprehensive overview will provide the readers with a more profound understanding of M–Nx/C catalysts and the design guidelines for achieving high performance, as well as the inspiration of endeavor to expedite further advancement in this field.
2. Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and origin of M–Nx/C catalysts
2.1 Mechanisms for ORR
According to the typical model for the multielectron ORR proposed by Wroblowa et al.,44 O2 may undergo either a direct 4e− reduction to H2O (eqn (1.1)) or a 2e− reduction to H2O2 (eqn (1.2)). The generated H2O2 may be further reduced to H2O involving 2 electrons on another site (eqn (1.3)), which is considered as a sequential pathway (Fig. 1a). O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O(1.1) O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(1.2) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O(1.3)
 Fig. 1  (a) Wroblowa model for the ORR. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram showing the possible ORR intermediates and mechanisms. Activity volcano correlations versus the (c) MIII/MII redox potential and (d) M–O2 adsorption energy. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
The direct 4e− pathway is generally appreciated due to its high energy-conversion efficiency and the absence of the detrimental effect induced by H2O2. A study by Ohsaka's group demonstrated that 2e− and 4e− reduction sites coexisted in the Fe/N/C catalyst, which resulted in an apparent 4e− pathway at high catalyst loading and the dominance of the 2e− pathway at low loading. In the case of the Pt/C catalyst, there were only 4e− reduction active sites, enabling the ORR to proceed via a direct 4e− pathway.45 Choi et al. identified the active-site nature for hydrogen peroxide reduction in Fe/N/C catalysts, i.e. FeNxCy and Fe@N-C species, which further corroborated the possibility of the sequential (or indirect 4e−) pathway.46 Many other studies have also supported the fact that ORR follows parallel pathways on most nonprecious metal catalysts, thus making the selectivity for 4e− transfer a vital indicator for evaluating the ORR catalysts.45,47,48
The detailed elemental reaction step in ORR is far more complex, as it involves not only multiple intermediates, but also other influential factors such as the proton coupled electron transfer process and the potential dependent electrode structure variation.49,50 Our current understanding is mainly based on theoretical calculations corresponding to the experimental observations, although the ability of such a method to fully elucidate the ORR mechanism is still very limited. The proposed possible ORR intermediates and pathways are schematically shown in Fig. 1b. Briefly, in the 4e− pathway to form a H2O molecule, several mechanisms distinguished by how the O–O bond breaks are presented in eqn (2.1)–(4.4), which are denoted as O2 dissociation (eqn (2.1)–(2.5)), OOH dissociation (eqn (3.1)–(3.4)), and HOOH dissociation (eqn (4.1)–(4.4)) pathways (Fig. 1b).51–53
O2 dissociation: O2 + * → O2*(2.1) 1/2O2* → O*(2.2) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(2.3) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*(2.4) H2O* → H2O(2.5)
OOH dissociation: O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*(3.1) OOH* → O* + OH*(3.2) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(3.3) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *(3.4)
HOOH dissociation: O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*(4.1) OOH* + H+ + e− → HOOH*(4.2) HOOH* → 2OH*(4.3) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *(4.4)
In the case of the 2e− pathway, OOH* is formed from O2* and further reacts with hydrogen and an electron to generate H2O2 (eqn (5.1) and (5.2)). O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*(5.1) OOH* + H+ + e− → H2O2*(5.2)
The rate-determining step and even the kinetic pathway in ORR are yet under debate as they depend highly on the catalytic sites and ambient conditions. Unlike that under high pH conditions, which enables the outer-sphere electron transfer mechanism or facile displacement of OH− species on active sites by molecular O2 (discussed in Section 5.1), the initial adsorption of O2 is critical for ORR catalysis in acidic electrolytes, necessitating an optimal binding energy, that is, neither too strong nor too weak. Too strong binding hinders the removal of intermediates, whereas too weak binding makes the catalytic center inefficient in the activation of O2. This strict requirement limits the materials for high-rate ORR catalysis to precious metals such as Pt, which possess the best d-band electronic structure and geometric features among the metal elements.12,54–56 On Fe–N4, Co–N4 and Mn–N4 sites, the OOH dissociation pathway has been predicted to predominate.57 For M–Nx/C catalysts, the redox transition of the central metal is usually involved in the ORR process, to which the adsorption/desorption of O2, ORR intermediates, and/or products on metal cation is directly related. It was revealed in Mukerjee's publications that the catalytic Fe–N4 surface is occupied by the hydroxyl species formed via water activation at high potential. A too large adsorption energy between Fe3+–N4 and oxygen species blocks the initial adsorption of molecular O2 until the site is reduced to the Fe2+–N4 form with the hydroxyl species removed.35,58 However, Holby et al. predicted that *OH binding would spontaneously form under aqueous conditions, modifying the multi-metal-atom site to make ORR thermodynamically more favorable, rather than poisoning the active site.59 The recent calculation results from Zhou's group showed that the single-atom Fe site in Fe–Nx/C catalysts was also covered by OH* over a wide potential range from 0.28 to 1.00 V and the OH* species could optimize the binding of ORR intermediates. A similar self-adjusting mechanism was found on Mn–Nx/C as well.60 Overall, the exact mechanism of ORR on M–Nx/C catalysts is still open for discussion due to the uniqueness of the M–Nx coordination structure combined with the impact of other factors such as local carbon substrate.57,61
2.2 Molecular MN4 catalysts
Inspired by the enzymes for O2 activation/reduction in biological systems, Jasinski initiated the NPMC research for ORR using cobalt phthalocyanine in 1964, which sparked more than 50 years of intensive research.21 A variety of metal macrocyclic complexes characterized by central M–N4 coordination structures have been confirmed to be active towards O2 reduction.23,62–65 To improve the transportation of reactants and electrons, metal macrocyclic complexes were usually adsorbed or grafted on carbon support.66 The reactivity of MN4 complexes is strongly correlated with the adsorption strength of the metal center to reaction intermediates, which essentially depends on the nature of both the metal center and its chelation environment. It is generally believed that ORR on M–N4 sites is a redox-catalyzed reaction with the central metal ions undergoing very fast redox transition during the ORR catalysis (MIII − OH + e− → MII + OH−).67 The MIII/MII redox potential has been suggested as a reactivity descriptor in the literature. For various MN4 complexes with different metal center or chelation structures, plotting the activity versus the MIII/MII redox potential gave volcano-shaped curves (Fig. 1c).62,63 The MIII/MII redox potential is further found to correlate linearly with the M-O2 binding energy Eb(O2), which is probably due to a combination of the following: (i) the MIII/MII transition is controlled by the binding strength of –OH; (ii) the binding energies of different oxygen-containing intermediates follows a scaling relationship (i.e., linear correlation) on the same active site.63,68–72 Similar to metal electrodes, the activity of molecular MN4 catalysts follows the Sabatier principle, where a moderate Eb(O2) that approaches the apex of the volcano plot is needed to achieve the maximum activity (Fig. 1d). The two legs of the volcano, which are separated by the apex, represent two main categories. The complexes on the ascending leg such as Fe and Mn complexes bind the intermediates strongly and catalyze the 4e− O2 reduction, while the release of strongly adsorbed –OH is a critical step that determines the final activity, whereas those on the descending leg (weak binding side), represented by Co and Ni complexes, catalyze the 2e− O2 reduction. However, Co cofacial dinuclear porphyrins and dimeric Co porphyrins can catalyze O2 reduction via a 4e− pathway in acids because the splitting of O–O bond is facilitated by O2 binding to two Co centers.73–77
The pendent groups on the macrocyclic molecules, whether attached to the central metal atom or its surrounding N4 ring, greatly influence the location of the M–N4 sites on the activity volcano.62,78–81 For instance, though sharing the same Fe–N4 coordination, iron phthalocyanine and iron porphyrin show very different catalytic activities. The ligand bridging atoms (N for iron phthalocyanine and C for iron porphyrin) were found to hugely affect the O2 binding mode and the Fe–O bond length. The longer Fe–O bond length for iron phthalocyanine (2.6 Å) compared to that for iron porphyrin (2.4 Å) suggests the weaker O2 adsorption and accounts for the enhanced ORR activity.82 In the octahedral MN4 complexes, four N-based ligands constitute a square plane. Once the axial position is occupied by an additional ligand, the symmetric field will be perturbed. The thus caused shift in energy levels have a profound impact on the binding strength between M and O2.83 Apart from the prominent role of ligands, an extensive study on MPc with various peripheral substituents has shown that the electron-withdrawing groups such as F and SO3− can positively shift the MIII/MII redox potential and accelerate the ORR kinetics, while electron-donating groups exhibit the opposite effect.84–86 The tunable electronic structure of MN4 driven by peripheral substituents leaves a certain space for us to improve the performance, such as introducing electron-withdrawing groups to Fe complexes, most of which locate on the strong binding side.
2.3 M–Nx/C catalysts
Most of the early studied molecular MN4 catalysts suffered from insufficient activity and stability, especially in acidic conditions. This problem was not addressed until 1976, when Jahnke et al. revealed the importance of a further heat treatment (500–900 °C) step,87 which led to a preferred class of pyrolyzed M–Nx/C catalysts (also denoted as M/N/C catalysts). Another major breakthrough came in 1989, when Yeager's group achieved a more promising catalyst by pyrolyzing the mixture comprising a metal salt, a nitrogen containing compound and high-surface area carbon.27 The employment of diverse precursors eliminated the problem of the dependence on often-expensive macrocyclic complexes, thus reducing the cost of raw materials and making the design of catalysts more flexible. In the following decades, various combinations of M, N, C sources have been used to prepare such catalysts, with great advances in both intrinsic activity and stability.
M–Nx/C catalysts were mainly the subject of fundamental research until Dodelet's group demonstrated that the catalysts could deliver appreciable PEMFC performance in 2009, where the obtained optimal Fe/N/C catalyst offered a practical volumetric activity of 99 A cm−3 at 0.8 V. The active sites were believed to be Fe2+ coordinated by four pyridinic N anchored in micropores.26 In 2011, the same group adopted the microporous zeolitic-imidazolate-framework (ZIF) as the primary precursor, leading to a much higher volumetric activity of 230 A cm−3, which is very close to the 2015 DOE performance target (300 A cm−3) for NPMC.88 In the same year, Zelenay et al. obtained excellent M/N/C catalysts (M = Fe and/or Co) derived from Ketjenblack, polyaniline and metal precursors. The best-performing catalyst showed a half-wave potential that is only 60 mV negative than that of the Pt/C catalyst in acidic electrolyte, along with very promising durability in fuel-cell performance tests.89 Since then, M–Nx/C catalysts ushered an era of fast pace development.
2.4 Identification of M–Nx active sites
In an attempt to obtain catalysts with necessary activity required for fuel cell application, it is crucial to gain an in-depth knowledge of the active center and catalytic mechanism. Although the composition of the active sites of M–Nx/C catalysts remains controversial, it is recognized that the presence of metal components in the catalyst is necessary to achieve high performance, especially in acidic media.90,91 During the synthesis of M–Nx/C catalysts, the high-temperature pyrolysis often leads to component inhomogeneity. Transition metals may exist in various forms such as M–Nx, metal carbides or oxides, making the identification of active sites quite lengthy.92–95 There exist two viewpoints on the nature of active site in acidic media: (1) carbon-encapsulated metal or metal carbide particles; (2) M–Nx structure similar to the original metal macrocyclic complexes. The proposition of the former type came from the fact that obvious metal nanoparticles were observed in many recently obtained best-performing M–Nx/C catalysts, especially for pyrolysis temperatures ≥ 800 °C.96–100 These particles are coated with a thin carbon shell and can survive the pickling process. However, with a wealth of experimental evidence, the M–Nx is increasingly recognized as the most likely origin of the ORR activity.25,26,35,38,101,102
The M–Nx structure refers to the complex structure embedded in the carbon matrix and the value of x may be 2, 4 or 2 + 2, being firstly proposed by Dodelet's group.92 In their study, Fe/N/C catalysts were analyzed by Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF SIMS) and FeN4Cy+, FeN3Cy+, FeN2Cy+ and FeN1Cy+ ions were detected. The relative intensity of ΣFeN1Cy+, ΣFeN3Cy+, and ΣFeN4Cy+ followed a similar variation versus pyrolysis temperature, which were believed to have the same origin, i.e. the FeN4/C catalytic site. The only odd species revealed is FeN2Cy+ ions, which originated from the other site labeled FeN2/C. Ten years later, three different states for FeN4-like sites were detected by 57Fe Mossbauer spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 2a.103 D1 is assigned to the Fe–N4 structure in the low spin (S = 0), with Fe coordinated by four pyrrolic N atoms. D2 is assigned to the four pyridinic N atom coordinated Fe ion in the intermediate spin (S = 1), where the sites are hosted in micropores and bridges two graphitic sheets on edges. In D3, the FeII ion (in a high spin state, S = 2) does not stay in plane with its four coordinating pyridinic N atoms and is axially bonded with a fifth N atom. Only D1 (FeN4/C) and D3 (N–FeN2+2/C or its composite version with a nearby basic protonable nitrogen, i.e., N–FeN2+2⋯Nprot/C) were considered active to catalyze the ORR. The 3dz2 orbital in the Fe(II) ion, which is reputed as the orbital to bind O2 through end-on configuration, is completely occupied for D2, making it unable to adsorb molecular O2 by accepting an electron. They also found that D3 appeared to exist exclusively in NH3-treated Fe/N/C catalysts and such a site, especially N–FeN2+2⋯Nprot/C, is possibly the most active site.
 Fig. 2  (a) Top and side views of the proposed structures of Doublet D1 (FeN4/C), Doublet D2 (FeN2+2) and Doublet D3 (N–FeN2+2). Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SWV profiles of the Fe–Nx catalyst supported on black pearl carbon before and after pyrolysis at 800 °C in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M NaOH. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1.0, Fe0.5, Fe0.5-900 and Fe0.5-950. (d and e) Active sites identified by Zitolo et al. through K-edge XANES fitting. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group (NPG). 
While the above studies emphasized the importance of site configuration in determining the final catalytic behavior, other researchers found that the change in the micro-environment of Fe–N4 is vital for the performance enhancement from FeN4 macro-molecules to M–Nx/C catalysts. An insightful study by Mukerjee's group has highlighted the decisive role of carbon substrate in the dramatically enhanced activity of pyrolyzed Fe–Nx/C catalysts over FeN4 complexes.35 They showed that the pyrolysis step converted the environment of the Fe–N4 active site from π-electron-rich macrocycle ring to relatively π-electron-deficient carbon basal plane, the electron-withdrawing nature of which gave rise to a sharp positive shift in the redox potential of the central metal (Fig. 2b). This shift in redox potential is in accord with the weakening of the oxygen adsorption energy, thereby prompting the Fe–Nx/C catalysts more approximate to the apex of the volcano plot on the left leg.
By introducing modern characterization techniques, such as X-ray adsorption spectroscopy, precise identification of M–Nx active sites became possible, especially when facilitated with advanced synthesis techniques to ensure the homogeneity of active species. In 2015, by optimizing the synthesis conditions, Zitolo et al.38 obtained excellent Fe–Nx/C catalysts free or quasi-free of crystallographic Fe structures, demonstrating that the moieties centered on single-atom Fe predominantly contribute to the ORR activity (Fig. 2c). Regardless of the atmosphere during pyrolysis (Ar or NH3), the obtained Fe–Nx/C catalysts showed identical or nearly identical Mössbauer spectra and X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) spectra, and only two doublets of D1 and D2 attributed to square-planar Fe(ii)N4 coordination were observed. Based on the best fitting of K-edge XANES spectra from the experiment and theoretical modeling, two possible active sites with FeN4 porphyrinic structures were identified, that is, the FeN4C12 moiety with one or two axial O2 molecules adsorbed in side-on and end-on modes, respectively (Fig. 2d and e). It was also found that, despite the identical active sites, the NH3-pyrolysed Fe–Nx/C catalyst indeed showed much superior ORR activity to Ar-pyrolysed one. This phenomenon was interpreted to be associated with the increased number of basic N-groups facilitated by NH3 pyrolysis, endowing the FeN4C12 moieties with enhanced intrinsic activity through electronic or chemical effects.
Mukerjee's group104,105 provided the first evidence for the switching behavior of Fe–Nx configuration during ORR by collecting XAS spectra under varying potentials (in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy technique). The results confirmed that the non-planar Fe(II)–N4 moiety (D1) embedded in a disordered carbon matrix is the dominating active center. When the applied potential anodically crosses the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox potential, D1 reversibly switches to an in-plane Fe(III)–N4 structure with axially absorbed O species through Fe atom moving toward the N4-plane. That is to say, the ORR catalysis is governed by the redox transition and the ORR activity of the Fe–Nx/C catalyst essentially depends on the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox potential. The biomimetic Fe–N switching of D1 can balance the site-blocking effect and O2 dissociation, accounting for the higher Fe2+/Fe3+ redox potential and thus enhanced ORR activity compared to the intact square-planar Fe(II)–N4 site (D2).
The structural origin of the activity of Co–Nx/C catalysts has not been explored as much as that of Fe-based ones, but the existing evidence points to Co–Nx (x = 2, 4) active sites for acidic ORR.106,107 The study of Ziegelbauer et al. using a comprehensive set of electrochemical and spectroscopic techniques indicated that the Co–N4 stoichiometry was retained after pyrolyzing the Co(II)TMPP-based precursor at 600–700 °C and efficiently catalyzed the ORR via a full 4e− pathway, whereas pyrolysis up to 800 °C resulted in the dominance of the Co–N2 structure and much higher H2O2 production.108 The DFT computations of Kattel et al. predicted that Co–N2 was unstable at high potentials and thus Co–N4 was most likely the main catalytic center. However, the complete O2 reduction on Co–N4 was not favored as Co–N4 interacts weakly with H2O2, which calls for a second site for further reduction of H2O2 to support a 2 × 2e− pathway.109 Wang et al. have recently achieved high performance on a Co–Nx/C catalyst without any Co aggregates. HAADF-STEM and EELS at an atomic scale were combined to show the Co–N coordination, which was further verified in the form of Co–N4 by X-ray absorption spectroscopy.110
In short, although there is still debate on the details of the fine active-site configuration, consensus has been reached on the point that M–Nx is the basis of active sites.
3. Characterization techniques for active-site identification
3.1 Transmission electron microscopy
Electron microscopy technology is fundamental for active site observation. Metallic particles and even clusters can be identified through high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). However, in visualizing single atom dispersed metal species, aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (ac-STEM) under high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) is necessitated.111–113 The prerequisite for the effectivity of such a technique is that the element to be distinguished has an atomic number differentiated greatly from the substrate. In carbon-based catalysts, the metal atoms are mapped out as bright spots and, thus, the single metal atoms, metal clusters and nanoparticles can be readily identified. Since the signal intensity of the HAADF-STEM image reflects the information of Z contrast (Z refers to the atomic number), metals with larger atomic numbers such as precious metals can be displayed more clearly.114–116 To go a step further, using electron microscopy in combination with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) or energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is capable of acquiring the elemental information closely around the central metals. The most representative example by Chung et al.102 shows the clearly identified atomically dispersed Fe atoms in the ac-HAADF-STEM images of the (CM + PANI)–Fe–C catalyst (Fig. 3a). High-resolution EELS along with further quantification analysis in the regions of individual Fe atoms demonstrated the presence of N around each Fe atom with an average Fe-to-N atomic ratio of 1:4, thus providing the compositional evidence for the Fe–N4 moiety (Fig. 3b). Nowadays, ac-STEM has been generally used as the first step of active site characterization for M–Nx/C catalysts.37,117–120 However, ac-HAADF-STEM images may not be able to truly reflect the holistic metal distribution because the ranges of observation are usually quite narrow to ensure the desired atomic resolution. Meanwhile, major concerns have been raised over the chemical nature and precise geometric configuration of metal centers in M–Nx/C catalysts, which cannot be extracted by electron microscopy.
 Fig. 3  (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of individual Fe atoms in a few-layer graphene sheet. (b) EELS collected from single Fe atoms (labeled 1, 2) and few-layer graphene (labeled 3). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) XANES spectra of FePhenMOF–ArNH3 dry powders, Fe(II)Pc, Fe(III)PcCl and Fe(III)TPPCl. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Fe K-edge XANES spectra (d), FT-EXAFS spectra (e) and wavelet transform (f) of Fe-ISAs/CN, Fe foil, and Fe2O3. (g) EXAFS r space fitting curves of Fe-ISAs/CN. (h) Schematic model of the Fe-centered moiety in Fe-ISAs/CN. Fe, orange; N, blue; O, red; C, gray. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2 Synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy
Synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) plays a key role in resolving the chemical state and detailed local coordination information of the element to be explored.122,123 This section presents the fundamental principle of this technique, and the functions and application of various XAS analysis methods, and describes a general strategy for structural identification.
The XAS technique is based on the X-ray absorption characteristics of the material. To be specific, when the incident X-ray with a specific energy range scans through the material, the inner shell electrons of the probed element can be excited to unoccupied continuum level. Then, the excited electrons are further scattered by neighboring atoms. These two stages correspond to the sharply raised absorption at the edge and the oscillatory structures in a typical XAS spectrum, respectively. Therefore, the XAS, also described as X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS), can be treated as two parts, namely X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).122–125 It should be noted that the XAS technique usually requires a synchrotron radiation source for its high intensity and continuously adjustable energy. Since the metal K-edge XAFS can generally provide the information required for atomic structural recognition in M–Nx/C catalysts, it is the most mature application in the literature and thus it is the focus of our discussion in this section.

3.2.1 Probing the chemical states and spatial structure by XANES. 
Although XANES contains a wealth of chemical and structural information in principle, the spectral interpretation is relatively complicated. Thus, two features on the spectrum are generally of our most concern. Firstly, the edge energy position is sensitive to the oxidation state. A higher oxidation state corresponds to a positive edge energy position, and the average valence state of the probed atom can be therefore identified with some standard samples as reference. Secondly, the shoulder features on the edge of XANES are closely related to the coordination symmetry. Taking the work of Mukerjee's group104 for example, as shown in Fig. 3c, the XANES profile of a pyrolyzed FePhenMOF–ArNH3 catalyst is more analogous to those of Fe(III)PcCl and Fe(III)TPPCl, rather than that of Fe(II)Pc, indicating the Fe3+ nature. Meanwhile, a distinct shoulder at 7117 eV is noticed in the XANES curve of Fe(II)Pc, which is caused by the 1s-4pz transition with simultaneous charge transfer from the ligand to the metal center and signifies the typical square-planar Fe–N4 configuration with high D4h symmetry. However, this fingerprint is not perceptible in the XANES profile of FePhenMOF–ArNH3, suggesting the break of D4h symmetry and thus the existence of additional adsorbates or ligands. Zitolo et al.38 have also noticed such a slight disparity in pre-edge features on the XANES spectra of a pyrolyzed Fe–Nx/C catalyst and Fe(II)Pc, where the difference from the above work is the number of axially adsorbed oxygen atoms. Similar phenomena have been observed for most other reported Fe–Nx/C and Ru–Nx/C catalysts.38,117,126 However, the XANES profile of the pyrolyzed Cr–Nx/C catalyst showed an evident pre-edge peak, which showed a strict square-planar Cr–N4 configuration.127 It should be emphasized that the above data are certainly not acquired from XANES alone, but the result of the complementarity between XANES and EXAFS.


3.2.2 Detecting the local geometry structure by EXAFS. 
As mentioned above, the oscillatory structures in EXAFS are associated with the scattering of excited photoelectrons between the probed atom and neighboring atoms, making it highly valuable in deciphering the local bonding environment.122 For qualitative analysis, Fourier transform (FT) is necessary to separate backscattering atoms by providing their radial locations from the central atom, according to which the coordination atoms can be estimated. Generally, the corresponding spectra of the metal oxide and foil are used as the analytical basis for better determination of single atom sites. It is worth noting that the signals of different types of backscattering atoms may overlap at the same radial location and thus indistinguishable in the FT-EXAFS profile. In this scenario, wavelet transform (WT) plays a vital role because it presents powerful resolutions in both the k-space (related to the elemental nature) and the R-space (related to the radial distance).128,129 Further quantitative analysis to acquire precise structural information including the coordination number and bond distance is based on modeling and least-squares EXAFS fit.
A recent study by Li's group is given below as an example to illustrate the general strategy for coordination structure identification in M–Nx/C catalysts.121 The valence state of Fe in the prepared Fe-ISAs/CN catalyst can be readily estimated by comparing the near-edge absorption energy in XANES with those of Fe2O3 and Fe foil standards (Fig. 3d). In the FT-EXAFS curve, the main peak was located at about 1.5 Å, which was assigned to Fe–N(O) scattering paths, and the peak at about 2.2 Å assignable to Fe–Fe from Fe particles was indiscernible (Fig. 3e). In the WT contour plots, different locations of the intensity maximum of Fe-ISAs/CN from the Fe foil, as well as a discrepancy in the number of intensity maxima between Fe-ISAs/CN and Fe2O3, were observed (Fig. 3f). These data cooperatively confirmed the atomic dispersion of Fe in Fe-ISAs/CN. Furthermore, the best least-squares EXAFS fitting result showed that the coordination number of Fe was about 5 and thus the Fe-centered moiety was identified as Fe–N4 with a perpendicularly adsorbed O2 molecule (Fig. 3g and h). In some cases, the scattering path from carbon atoms in the second shell, i.e., Fe–(N)–C, is observable (2.2–2.6 Å), which should be prudently differentiated from the Fe–Fe contribution.38,104 In the FT-EXAFS curves of dual-metal or binuclear site catalysts, special metal–metal scattering paths can be detected, while the identification of the precise geometric structure relies on more elaborate calculations and fittings.41,130,131 It is worth noting that the derived fine structure will be more accurate if the EXAFS analysis is combined with XANES simulation and fitting, although there are some difficulties because it necessitates trial and error until an excellent agreement between theoretical and experimental spectra is achieved.122 In addition, XAFS provides the bulk-averaging information. Therefore, more accurate and valuable results can be obtained when homogeneous samples are tested.132


3.2.3 
            In situ XAS. 
Although ex situ XAS does allow us to know the primary moieties in dry catalyst powders, it may not reflect the true active centers because the electrode potential has not been taken into account. In contrast, the in situ XAS technique enables the real-time monitoring of catalytic sites under operating conditions.133 As mentioned above regarding the research of Mukerjee's group,104ex situ XAS results suggested that the D1 in FePhenMOF–ArNH3 is Fe3+–N4 with oxygen adsorbate. However, they have captured the oxidation and coordination geometrical changes during ORR catalysis by in situ XAS jointly with Δμ-XAS studies. As shown in Fig. 4, identical Fe K-edge XANES spectra of FePhenMOF–ArNH3 were obtained in O2/N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4, and the absorption energy positively shifted as the applied potential increased from 0.1 to 1.0 V. The Fe–N/O scattering peak in FT-EXAFS enhanced concurrently, which was confirmed by EXAFS fittings to be associated with the adsorption of OHads. Meanwhile, the Fe–N bond distance reduced from 2.07 Å (at 0.1 V) to 1.99 Å (at 1.0 V). These results pointed to the Fe2+–N4/Ox–Fe3+–N4 transition together with the out-of-plane Fe center moving toward the N4-plane, which was controlled by the redox potential. The ex situ XAFS data were found to nearly overlap with those of in situ XAFS at 1.0 V, that is, potentials above the redox potential. This may explain the contradiction between the coordination saturation of the O2–Fe–N4 site, as identified by Zitolo et al.,38 and the high activity of Fe–Nx/C catalysts, as the true active site is the reduced Fe2+–N4 at potentials below the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox potential, rather than the Fe3+–N4 covered by oxygen adsorbates, which is recognized under ex situ conditions or in situ at high potentials.
 Fig. 4  
Ex situ and in situ XANES (a) and FT-EXAFS (b) spectra of the FePhenMOF–ArNH3 catalyst. (c) XANES spectra of Fe–Nx/C catalysts pyrolyzed from various precursors collected at 0.1 V in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4; the XANES spectra of FePc is also shown as a reference of D2. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed local structure of D1 and the Fe–N switching behavior. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.3 Chemical probes
Beyond the characterization techniques described above to ascertain M–Nx moieties, just as important is further confirmation of whether these moieties are ORR-active sites, which can be addressed by a series of control experiments or using chemical probes. Yeager's group have originally demonstrated the poisoning effect of cyanide on unpyrolyzed Fe and Co macrocycles towards catalyzing alkaline ORR, where CN− coordinated with the central metal in the axial position and thus blocked the interaction between O2 and the metal.134 Later, the research of Thorum et al. provided evidence for the poisoning effect of cyanide on pyrolyzed FePc, showing a significant negative-shift of onset potential by ∼200 mV after adding KCN.135 Despite the strong affinity of CN− to transition metal centers, other probes are generally preferred in acidic solution due to the generation of very extremely toxic HCN when using CN−. Wang et al.136 investigated the sensitivity of a pyrolyzed Fe–Nx/C catalyst to a wide variety of potential probes and found that the ORR activity was almost impervious to CO and NOx, which are, although, poisoning species to iron heme structures. In view of the strong binding of CO to FeII porphyrins, but not to FeIII porphyrins, the authors therefore claimed FeIII as the active site. In contrast, the ORR activity of Fe–Nx/C was notably suppressed by halide ions (e.g., Cl−, F−, and Br−) and low valence state S-containing species (e.g., SCN−, SO2, and H2S) with the degree poisoned by SCN− being the most pronounced (Fig. 5a). Actually, SCN− is currently the most widely used probe to facilely evidence the metal-centered activity of single atom M–Nx/C catalysts.121,139–141 The precaution of using SCN− is that the collected polarization curve needs to be subtracted by N2-background, as SCN− suffers oxidation issue at E > 0.77 V.136
 Fig. 5  (a) ORR activity of the PmPDA-FeNx/C (950 °C) catalyst in 0.1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 5 mM SCN−. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) CO uptake (nmol mgcatalyst−1) versus ORR mass activity Im at 0.8 V (mA mgcatalyst−1) of catalysts in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Normalized TPD profiles of different catalysts. Conditions: CO adsorption at 193 K, desorption ramp: 20 K min−1 to 693 K. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, The Author(s). (d) ORR activity of the catalyst before, during and after nitrite adsorption. (e) Narrow baseline scan in the nitrite reductive stripping region and (f) expansion of the region associated with nitrite stripping. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2016, The Author(s). 
In fact, much higher expectations have been placed on an ideal molecular probe on account of the demand for quantification of the active sites that are really valid.142 Sahraie et al.137 performed low-temperature CO pulse chemisorption and temperature programmed desorption (TPD) on a series of Fe and Mn based M/N/C catalysts. The positive correlation of the amount of adsorbed CO with the ORR activity implied that CO adsorbed mainly on ORR-active sites (Fig. 5b). Thus, mass-based surface site density (MSD) can be calculated from the amount of adsorbed CO per unit mass of the catalyst. Besides, the TPD data showed that CO desorption started at 260 K for the Fe/N/C catalyst, which explained the previous failed efforts to probe or block the Fe–Nx sites at room temperature (Fig. 5c).143 A nitrite adsorption/stripping method for easy quantification of surface active sites has been demonstrated by Malko et al.,138 the superiority of which is the in situ electrochemical methodology that can directly correlate to the catalytic activity. Specifically, nitrite can poison Fe–Nx sites and the formed adducts survive within the potential range of ORR. The performance difference (Δik) of the catalyst before and after poisoning can therefore be measured. Combined with the reduction charge of nitrite stripping, which is realized by scanning at more negative potentials, the utilized sites can be calculated and, furthermore, the turnover frequency of active sites can be evaluated (Fig. 5d–f). This method has been adopted in many studies on Fe–Nx/C catalysts.144,145
3.4 Mössbauer spectroscopy
Compared with XAS, which necessitates high species homogeneity of samples to ensure accuracy, Mössbauer spectroscopy is a technique that can resolve the complex composition in Fe–Nx/C catalysts. By detecting the nuances of energy states of the 57Fe nuclei, this technique even allows one to distinguish electronically different Fe species of a similar coordination environment, such as FeN4 moieties in phthalocyanines or porphyrins.15,94,146,147 A representative Mössbauer spectrum from Kramm's works was fitted with the presence of one singlet, six doublets and three sextets.94 The singlet and sextets were identified as superparamagnetic iron, iron metal, and nitride/carbide. In another study, Kramm made a successful attempt to remove inorganic iron phases by secondly pyrolyzing Fe–Nx/C catalysts in forming gas (N2/10% H2) with further acid-leaching, as evidenced by the vanishing of the singlet in the Mössbauer spectrum after purification treatment.148 Except the D6 assignable to FexN, other five doublets were related to the FeN4 structure, with D1 being assigned to low-spin FeIIN4, D2 assigned to mid-spin FeIIN4 like FePc, and D3 to D5 assigned to FeN4 with specific axial ligands, oxidation states and/or the local environment.94 Among these Fe species observed, only D1 is the well-accepted site active for ORR, while protonated D3 (N–FeN2+2⋯NH+), once considered to possess the highest TOF value, suffers fast deactivation during operation.103,137,149
3.5 Scanning tunneling microscopy
Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), which is based on the electron tunnel effect, has attracted attention due to its high sensitivity to surface structure and high spatial resolution.150–152 With the correlation between tunnel current (I) and sample-tip distance (z), STM can image the local surface electronic state of the sample. In particular, when the tip used is thin enough (only a few atoms), the imaging resolution can reach an atomic scale. Combined with theoretical simulations, different atoms on the surface can be identified. In this regard, STM shows good prospect in characterizing SACs. Using this technique together with simulations, Bao's group have successfully identified Fe–N4 sites anchored on the graphene matrix.153 In the obtained atomic resolution STM image, the brightest dots were assigned to Fe and the neighboring atoms also showed higher brightness than distant C atoms, suggesting that the Fe atom altered the density of states of adjacent atoms. Furthermore, Pfisterer and co-workers validated that STM can be used for direct observation of catalytic processes and identification of catalytically active surface sites.154 These works imply that STM is potentially applied to explore the accurate structure and catalytic behavior of M–Nx based ORR catalysts. Despite various advantages, the application of STM has certain requirements. For instance, the samples need to be conductive and the surface roughness is supposed to be less than micron. Thus, it is only well suited to characterizing uniformly flat structured catalysts. It should be noted that STM does not image atoms, it images electronic states. Therefore, the analysis and interpretation of STM images is essential.
4. Rationally designed M–Nx/C catalysts

Fig. 6 presents the general synthesis process of M–Nx/C catalysts. The acid washing step can remove unstable metal species, reduce the pollution to the electrolyte, as well as improve the stability of the catalyst.155 The second pyrolysis step is only employed in some reports and often found not to alter the nature of active species, but affects other factors that are related to the ORR activity such as surface N functionalities and the abundance of active sites.156 With the established understanding of active centers in M–Nx/C catalysts, subsequent work aiming at designing high-performance catalysts is essentially directed at the aspects in terms of the density, accessibility and intrinsic activity of M–Nx sites. Several considerations should be included during the implementation.
 Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the synthesis process of typical M–Nx/C catalysts. 
4.1 Manipulation of precursors for favorable formation of M–Nx sites
There are two key elements for the design of precursors, namely, to ensure the excellent dispersion of metal in the precursor and to try to prevent metal aggregation during pyrolysis. In early works, M–Nx/C catalysts were generally prepared by pyrolyzing the compound involving N-containing small molecules (or NH3), organic or inorganic metal sources and commercial carbon support. This method enabled high utilization of active sites due to their enrichment in the superficial layer. However, in the absence of suitable pores or surface functional groups for anchoring metal atoms, the metal easily aggregates during pyrolysis, which may have contributed to the presence of obvious nanoparticles in M–Nx/C catalysts reported earlier. Sa et al.157 coated the surface of iron porphyrin adsorbed carbon nanotube (CNT) with silica protective layer to suppress the formation of Fe-based particles and preferentially generate Fe–Nx sites. The resulting catalyst, CNT/PC, showed excellent performance in both three-electrode and PEMFC tests.
The use of simple multi-carbon small molecules instead of carbon black as the C source makes the synthesis method more flexible. However, the associated problems are the high loss ratio of elements and serious structure collapse during pyrolysis, which not only causes metal aggregation, but also leads to stack-structured product with numerous inaccessible active sites. Since it was found that polyaniline can be used as both C and N sources to obtain a highly ORR active Fe, Co/N/C catalyst, various N-rich polymers have been widely studied.158 The reason for the high activity of catalysts derived from such precursors may be that these polymers are rich in uniformly distributed N groups, which makes the metal better dispersed and promotes the formation of M–Nx. Meanwhile, these catalysts have a higher content of pyridinic nitrogen.159,160
Recent reports have demonstrated the superiority of metal–organic–frameworks (MOFs) as precursors to synthesize highly porous and M–Nx-enriched catalysts, where ZIFs are the most preferred.50,57,161 Li's group designed a type of Zn/Co bimetallic MOF precursor with Zn2+ and Co2+ homogeneously coordinated with 2-methylimidazole at a proper ratio (Fig. 7a).37 The insertion of Zn created a spatial barrier between adjacent Co atoms, and Zn atoms were eliminated through volatilization at high temperature (>800 °C). These concept and strategy are worthy of reference for the general synthesis of pyrolyzed SACs. Low-temperature sacrificial Cd has been recently adopted instead of Zn to help preserve single atoms.162
 Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication of Co–Nx/C SACs from the Zn/Co bimetallic MOF. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fabrication of Cu–Nx/C SACs via a gas-migration/NH3-mediated strategy. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
During the preparation of Fe-doped ZIF precursors, Fe2+ can be easily oxidized to Fe3+ by ambient O2, while Fe3+ has a stronger hydrolysis tendency than Fe2+ and the hydrolysis will lead to Fe aggregates in the resultant catalyst. In this regard, Wang et al.40 stabilized Fe2+ by performing Fe doping under Ar protection. The obtained Fe–Nx/C catalyst showed uniform Fe dispersion without any Fe-based particles and displayed very high ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.82 V in acidic media. Gao et al.39 have also pointed out the importance of Fe sources with a low hydrolysis extent for the preferential formation of Fe–Nx active sites. Chen et al.121 and Xiao et al.163 revealed the confinement effect of micropores in ZIFs for facilitating the formation of single-atom dispersed Fe–Nx/C catalysts. The ZIF crystal size-dependent feature of the ORR activity of Fe–Nx/C catalysts was also presented by Wu's group.164 At the optimum particle size of 50 nm, the best ORR activity was attained with a half-wave potential up to 0.85 V in 0.5 M H2SO4. Their recent work has highlighted the significance of appropriate Fe content in the ZIF precursor for achieving high-performance Fe–Nx/C catalysts. By optimizing the doping level, they obtained an even more active catalyst with exclusively Fe–N4 sites, which offered a half-wave potential of 0.89 V. It was demonstrated that excessive Fe was not effective due to the loss of Fe–Nx by forming inactive clusters or nanoparticles during pyrolysis.42 More recently, our group presented a systematic study on the effect of the Fe doping strategy on the activity of ZIF-derived Fe–Nx/C catalysts. We showed that, interfered by the excessive Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, the most commonly-used one-pot method necessitated a massive dose of Fe source where the hydrolysis tendency of Fe ions induces the formation of undesirable metallic particles. The post-adsorption method greatly alleviated such issues, and the best-performing catalyst was achieved by introducing an Fe source into the carbonization product from ZIF, rather than ZIF itself. We attributed this to the strong confinement effect of carbonaceous micropores, allowing high-density single-atom sites.165 Jiao et al.166 developed a mixed-ligand strategy, in which Fe-TCPP (TCPP = tetrakis (4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin) and H2-TCPP were simultaneously used as ligands to construct the porphyrinic MOF precursor. A proper proportion of H2-TCPP can effectively inhibit the Fe aggregation by expanding the distance of adjacent Fe atoms. The obtained SAC, FeSA-N-C, exhibited decent ORR activity in both acidic and alkaline media. In addition to MOFs, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) and metallic polyphthalocyanine have also proved to be promising precursors.167,168 The facile synthesis of a series of single-atom M–Nx/C catalysts was realized by using predesigned bimetallic Zn/M polyphthalocyanine. Bearing a similar rationale to ZIF-based ones, the intentional addition of Zn was beneficial for the formation of M–Nx sites.168
An ingenious gas-migration/NH3-mediated strategy to directly transform bulk Cu into single-atom Cu–N4 sites has been reported.169 In this route, a first duration of pyrolysis in the Ar stream to convert ZIF-8 into defective N-doped carbon support was followed by the atmosphere switching to NH3. The NH3 molecules reacted with Cu to form volatile Cu(NH3)x species, which were trapped by the defects on the downstream pyrolysed ZIF-8 (Fig. 7b). This strategy avoided the tedious precursor processing, showing great potential for the mass production of SACs, through which ∼2 g of the Cu-SAs/N-C product was accessed by the authors. The same approach or a similar concept has been successfully generalized to the construction of other single metal atoms including Co, Ni, Pt, Au and Pd.116
4.2 Regulation of pore structure and active site distribution
In addition to the sufficient density of active sites, their maximized utilization is highly desired. M–Nx moieties are mainly populated in micropores, and it has been proved that the activity of Fe–Nx/C catalysts is almost linear with the micropore surface area.170,171 Micropores themselves can hardly contact with ORR-related species, leading to a number of active sites acting as spectators during the O2 reduction. On the contrary, the presence of mesopores and macropores makes the smooth mass transportation possible. Therefore, constructing a hierarchical porous structure for improving the utilization of active sites has been reported. Stariha et al.172 prepared several model Fe–Nx/C catalysts with iron nitrate and different N-containing polymers as precursors and silica nanospheres as templates. It was concluded that better pore connectivity in both catalysts themselves and the MEA catalyst layer were crucial to fuel cell performance. Shui et al.173 prepared an interconnected porous nanonetwork Fe–Nx/C catalyst by means of electrospinning. Benefiting from the abundant catalytic sites in each microporous nanofiber, combined with the promoted mass transfer by macroporous voids between the interconnected nanofibers, the volumetric activity extrapolated at 0.8 ViR-free offered by the catalyst reached 450 A cm−3 in the single cell test (Fig. 8). Shang et al.174 developed a silica-protected calcination strategy, in which the mesoporous-silica coating on Zn, Co-ZIF effectively prevented the undesired aggregation of catalyst particles and promoted the generation of mesopores. In view of the inevitable use of strong alkali or highly toxic HF to remove SiO2, NaCl hard template seems to be more environmentally friendly and safe. It was demonstrated by Zhang et al.175 that the introduction of NaCl resulted in a better performing Fe–Nx/C catalyst by increasing the specific surface area and porosity, as well as promoting the N doping and the creation of Fe–Nx. Pure microporosity is one of the disadvantages of ZIF derivates, which may leave behind plenty of unavailable deeper active centers. In one representative work by Bao's group,176 the Fe source (ammonium ferric citrate) was modified on the surface of the prepared ZIF-8 with the assistance of a solvent. The pyrolysis product displayed much superior ORR activity to that prepared from bulk functionalization of ZIF-8 with the Fe source. This was imparted by the enrichment of the Fe–Nx moiety on the catalyst surface, enabling a higher exposure of active sites.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depiction of the macropore–micropore structure and charge/mass transfer in the Fe/N/CF catalyst. (b) Tafel plot for the kinetic activity of Fe/N/CF in a H2–O2 fuel cell. (c) Power density curves of fuel cells with Fe/N/CF, commercial 20 wt% Pt/C, or Fe/N/KB as the cathode catalyst. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences. 
4.3 Roles of heteroatoms
Non-nitrogen heteroatomic ligands directly affect the energy level of the metal center. Our group has demonstrated that the high-spin Ox–Fe3+–N4 was reduced to HO–*Fe(2+)–N4 below the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox potential, which acted as the actual active site in our prepared Fe–Nx/C catalyst with an ultrahigh TOF of 1.71 e s−1 sites−1. The spontaneously formed *OH, as an electron-withdrawing modifier, promoted the ORR by lowering the activation barrier.163 In our later work, we intentionally employed O-rich precursor to introduce a more stable O modifier, forming an Fe–O–Fe bridge via two adjacent FeN4 sites. The O modifier in Fe–O–Fe withdrew electrons from the d orbital of Fe and thus weakened the adsorption strength of the ORR intermediates. The obtained Fe(Zn)–N–C exhibited admirable ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.83 V, and the novel sites delivered an exciting TOF of 3.2 e s−1 sites−1, vastly outperforming the normal FeN4 sites (0.32 e s−1 sites−1) on the same carbon substrate.177 The type of N atom also affects the ORR activity of M–Nx/C catalysts. Yang et al.33 performed DFT calculations on two models of Fe–N4 coordination, namely Fe@pyridine-N and Fe@pyrrole-N, which revealed that the reaction intermediates can be adsorbed on Fe@pyrrolic N(C), but not on Fe@pyridinic N(C). Consequently, Fe@pyrrolic-N itself offered higher activity and aroused the adjacent eight carbon atoms to be active for ORR, whereas this synergistic effect was absent in Fe@pyridinic-N. Using in situ spectroscopy and electrochemical methods, Chen et al.178 deduced that protonated and hydrogenated N can catalyze the reduction of O2 to H2O2, which can be further reduced to H2O on pyridinic N. Xie and co-workers29 reported the formation of high-purity pyrrole-type FeN4 sites via an ammonia assisted pyrolysis strategy. DFT calculations confirmed the preferred O2 adsorption energy and high 4e− reduction selectivity on pyrrole-type FeN4 sites that are responsible for excellent ORR activity.
Another case is the heteroatom doping, which means that some carbon atoms are intentionally substituted to induce charge redistribution at the active centers in virtue of the differences in atomic size and electronegativity. Even the nitrogen atoms that are not involved in constituting the Fe–Nx sites can affect the intrinsic activity. As previously mentioned, NH3-pyrolysed Fe–Nx/C catalysts tend to perform better, which is given by the increased basic N-groups. Sulfur is the most widely studied heteroatom in addition to nitrogen. Combining the template sacrificing method with the use of sublimed sulfur, Guo's group179 obtained a S-doped Fe–Nx/C catalyst (Fe/SNC), with Fe being atomically dispersed and S giving a C–S–C structure. The authors attributed the much superior ORR activity in the acidic medium to the S-free counterpart to the synergistic effect between C–S–C and Fe–Nx sites, where C–S–C facilitated the 4e− O2 reduction by reducing the electron localization around the Fe center. A more recent work by Mun et al.140 has validated the feasibility of tuning the intrinsic activity of the Fe–N4 site by simple S-doping. In the studied system, the single Fe–N4 site without the contribution of the S dopant bound to the ORR intermediates very strongly. By varying the dosage of the S precursor, the ratio between oxidized S (C–SOx) and thiophene-like S (C–S–C) changed and the E1/2 was positively correlated with this ratio. As a matter of fact, the S dopants in these two configurations behaved differently in affecting the electronic properties of the carbon plane supporting the Fe–N4 sites. The electron-withdrawing C–SOx caused a downshift in the d-orbital energy of the Fe center, thus weakening the binding of O-species to Fe–N4 sites and consequently expediting the O2 reduction, whereas the C–S–C, which possesses an electron-donating ability, exerted a negative effect (Fig. 9). Some researchers have noticed the roles of S beyond the electronic effect. Chen et al.118 reported a sulfur facilitated route to achieve a single atom Fe–Nx/C catalyst. In the presence of S, the aggregate in the pyrolyzed product was Fe sulfide, which could be more easily etched by acid than the commonly formed Fe carbides. In the majority of reports investigating the role of S doping, it was similarly found that S could give rise to an enlargement in specific surface area. Several studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of B doping for boosting the ORR activity of the Fe–Nx/C catalyst by favoring O2 adsorption.180,181 Besides the single heteroatom doping effect, the synergy between different heteroatoms is also suggested. For instance, Chen et al. observed that P,S-codoping could decrease the charge of Fe (Feδ+) to facilitate the removal of the adsorbed OH species, the generally accepted rate-limiting step for ORR.182 To sum up, exactly how heteroatom doping electronically affects the binding strength of M-intermediates remains elusive. Results from different studies even seem to be contradictory, which is, however, explicable when taking into account that the locations of Fe–N4 sites from different synthesis methods on the volcano plot are not consistent.
 Fig. 9  (a) The design concept for tuning the kinetic activity of the Fe–N4 site by controlling electron-withdrawing/donating sulfur functionalities. (b) Relationship between the d-band center and the amount of charge transfer from the functional groups. (c) Correlation of adsorption energy of various intermediates with the d-band center. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
5. Challenges of M–Nx/C catalysts in demanding applications
5.1 Activity discrepancy in acidic and alkaline media
Although more desirable, oxygen reduction is generally far more difficult on M–Nx/C catalysts in acidic media compared to their alkaline counterparts.183–185 On this point, Mukerjee's group put forward some insights from the perspective of the electrode–electrolyte interface.35,186 To explain the activity gap between acid and alkaline media on M–Nx/C catalysts, it may be better to start with Pt/C catalysts. Pt/C shows a higher overpotential and a much higher peroxide yield for ORR in 0.1 M NaOH relative to 0.1 M HClO4. Meanwhile, a sharp increase in the ring current is observed in the 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte with the potentials almost corresponding to the Pt–OH formation/reduction. It is therefore proposed that the chemisorbed O2 molecule is reduced via an inner-sphere electron transfer (ISET) mechanism in acidic media, leading to a 4e− pathway, while, in alkaline media, ORR can proceed via both the ISET mechanism on the oxide-free Pt site and the outer-sphere electron transfer (OSET) mechanism on the oxide Pt site where the adsorbed OH species act as a bridge for electron transfer to solvated molecular O2 to promote a 2e− pathway (Fig. 10a). The existence of OSET accounts for the higher peroxide production and slower kinetics of Pt based catalysts at high pH, but it also opens the gate to use various nonprecious metals and their oxides as catalysts for alkaline ORR.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the double-layer structure during ORR in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) conditions. Insets a and b illustrate the ISET and OSET processes. (b) Proposed 4e− electrocatalytic ISET mechanism in dilute alkaline media. (c) ORR and (d) HRR activities of the FeTPP/C catalyst (pyrolyzed at 800 °C) in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M NaOH. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, however, many nonprecious metal catalysts manifest significantly higher activity (3–4 orders of magnitude higher on Fe–Nx/C as reported by Ramaswamy et al.35) and a lower peroxide yield in alkaline media than those in acidic ones, implying that the OSET mechanism is inhibited. A 4e− electrocatalytic ISET mechanism in alkaline media was then proposed wherein OHad, which behaves differently from that on Pt/C, is labile and thus can be readily displaced by molecular O2. This is enabled by the redox mechanism involving the Fe2+/3+ couple where (H)O–Fe3+–N4 can be reduced to Fe2+–N4 for the direct chemisorption of O2 to promote the ISET mechanism (Fig. 10b). However, under acidic conditions, due to the much lower Fe2+/3+ redox potential, the ISET pathway should only be available at a more negative potential, when the axial coordination is unleashed to enable direct O2 chemisorption (Fig. 2b). Further, it was also emphasized that the stability of the peroxide intermediate on active sites played a decisive role in the catalytic cycle. The predominant peroxide species in alkaline media (pH > 12) is HO2−, the Lewis basic nature of which ensures its stabilization on Lewis acidic Fe2+ active sites, thereby promoting complete 4e− transfer. Contrarily, such a facility is clearly absent in acidic media where the peroxide intermediate exists as H2O2. The weak binding or destabilization of H2O2 on Fe–Nx/C active sites in acidic media is evidenced by the identical potential at which both the ORR (disk current) and peroxide oxidation (ring current) commence and the unfavorable kinetics for hydrogen peroxide reduction (Fig. 10c and d). Besides, another hypothesis exists which correlates the pH-dependent ORR activity of Fe–Nx/C catalysts with the protonation of basic N-groups under acidic conditions, especially for the pyridinic N.149,187,188
In short, the superiority of most nonprecious metal ORR catalysts in alkaline media but not in acidic media is a well-known observation, the fundamental reasoning for which has, however, not been thoroughly understood. In spite of the lower activity observed in acidic media, the development of nonprecious metal catalysts for acidic ORR with both high activity and stability is of higher scientific meaning and technical importance, taking the higher maturity of PEMFC technology than the alkaline anion-exchange membrane fuel cells into account.189,190
5.2 Stability issues of Fe–NX/C catalysts
Although Fe–Nx/C materials have offered the greatest potential in replacing precious metal catalysts for ORR with respect to the initial activity, their poor stability under acidic conditions remains a headache. Several mechanisms were proposed to be responsible for the rapid active site deterioration: (i) protonation of the composite FeN4⋯N active site, followed by anion binding, (ii) demetalation, and (iii) carbon oxidation. According to the first mechanism, which was initially considered by Herranz et al., the protonation of basic N-groups near the Fe center but not involved in Fe coordination allows anion binding, resulting in a noteworthy decline of TOF for the ORR of FeN4.149 However, whether such a mechanism predominantly accounts for the deactivation of the catalyst is still elusive, as some more recent attempts failed to provide the compelling evidence.191,192 In contrast, the mechanisms regarding demetalation and carbon oxidation have been well documented.93,193,194

5.2.1 Demetalation. 
The responsibility of demetalation for the deactivation of the catalyst has been affirmed in the literature.193,195 However, the explanation is not as intuitive as that Fe dissolution disintegrates the active sites. Choi and collaborators used an operando SFC/ICP-MS technique to demonstrate that Fe leaching from the ORR-inactive Fe particles occurred during the PEMFC operation (Ecathode < 0.7 VRHE), whereas no noticeable demetalation from Fe–Nx moieties was observed. Although demetalation from Fe particles per se does not decrease the ORR activity in the short-term durability test, the leached Fe ions catalyze the degradation of both catalysts and membrane upon reactions with H2O2, thereby irreversibly degrading the cell and hindering their real-world application.196,197 Thus, the authors strongly suggested either synthetic or postsynthetic strategies to achieve Fe–Nx/C catalysts free of Fe particles and ultimately to minimize the detriment resulting from operando demetallation.198 However, Chenitz et al.199 put forward a specific mechanism that supports the demetalation of Fe–N4 sites in open-end micropores. They claimed that Fe–N4 sites were thermodynamically stable in stagnant solution. However, under PEMFC operating conditions, the humidified air streaming fed through the cathode drove the quick flow of water (carrying dissolved H+ and O2) in the open-end micropores (d > 7 nm). The normal FeN4/Fe2+ equilibrium was no longer applicable in this case, according to the Le Chatelier principle, as the iron ion, once formed, was prone to being flushed out by the water flow. This specific demetalation was used to explain the initial performance decay of Fe–Nx/C catalysts.


5.2.2 Carbon oxidation. 
Carbon oxidation by electrochemical or chemical means alters the surface chemical and/or electronic properties of the support and even leads to the destruction of active sites. Electrochemical oxidation of carbon usually occurs under extreme operating conditions of PEMFCs such as startup/shutdown or fuel starvation, where the cathode or anode can experience high potentials.200–204 The root cause of cathodic carbon oxidation during the startup/shutdown processes is the formation of the hydrogen/air interface at the anode, as described by the typical reverse-current mechanism.205 This thereby raises the interfacial potential difference in the corresponding local cathode region to a value as high as 1.44 V and endangers the cathodic carbon material. Therefore, carbon corrosion is a big issue to be considered for the cathode catalysts, especially for the M–Nx/C catalysts with abundant micropores and low stability. To this end, a carbon material with a higher graphitization degree should be considered for further application. Nevertheless, under normal operating conditions (i.e., 0.4–0.8 V), the problem of oxidative attack by ROS should be addressed most urgently. Due to the lack of another powerful attachment atom to drag the O–O bond, the formation of H2O2 is much more favored on single atom M–Nx sites than Pt/C. Fe (surface iron ions) and the byproduct H2O2 from incomplete O2 reduction constitute the typical Fenton reagent to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). The generated aggressive ROS, especially hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), damage the catalysts as well as the membrane.7,198 This route was viewed by Choi et al. to account for the main deactivation of Fe–Nx/C catalysts, the detailed explanation of which was given in their recent report (Fig. 11a and b).43 Remarkable decreases in both the ORR activity and 4e− selectivity of the Fe–Nx/C catalyst were observed after H2O2-treatment in 0.1 M HClO4 (Fig. 11c–e). This was ascribed to the Fenton reaction between Fe and H2O2, making the carbon substrate severely attacked by ROS. The thus triggered chemical oxidation leads to the formation of surface oxygen groups such as hydroxyl and epoxy, decreasing the TOF of the Fe–N4 site by weakening the O2-binding. However, the performance of the Fe–Nx/C catalyst was negligibly affected by H2O2-treatment in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 11f). The knowledge behind it is that Fenton reactivity is much stronger under acidic conditions. A more recent work by Choi's group has extended this investigation to the entire pH range, i.e. from 0 to 14, wherein a strong pH-dependent nature of the H2O2-induced deactivation on the Fe–Nx/C catalyst was revealed. The deactivation reached its maximum at pH 2 for H2O2-treatment and thereafter reduced continuously with increasing pH.206 The pH dependence of Fenton reaction leads to depressed oxidation corrosion of the carbon substrate and may account for the high stability of M–Nx/C catalysts in a strongly alkaline electrolyte.207 Fenton reaction is an intrinsic property of Fe-based materials, which is the Achilles’ heel of Fe–Nx/C catalysts for application in PEMFCs unless rational strategies to minimize the ROS level are developed.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the ROS-induced carbon oxidation of Fe–Nx/C catalysts. (b) First-principles DFT analysis of the effect of adjacent oxygen-functionalities on the O2-binding energy and electron work function of an FeN4 site. (c) ORR activity and (d) selectivity of the FeNC-1 catalyst before and after acidic H2O2-treatment. ORR polarization curves of the FeNC-1 catalyst before and after (e) acidic or (f) alkaline H2O2-treatment, measured in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Based on the insights from the aforementioned studies, demetalation and carbon oxidation are most likely the main mechanisms of Fe–Nx/C catalyst degradation, and they affect each other. Dissolved iron ions are more likely to induce Fenton reaction and thus cause oxidative corrosion of carbon. The corrosion of carbon next to Fe–N4 sites or, even more seriously, the bulk carbon further exacerbates the Fe demetalation, creating a vicious circle. Therefore, as mentioned earlier, the prior removal of Fe-based particles is of great significance, as the gain in ORR activity from them cannot compensate for the loss in catalyst durability. In spite of the higher H2O2 generation, research studies conducted by Wu's group have stepped up the use of high-performance Co–Nx/C catalysts, based on the fact that Co is a less powerful Fenton's reagent.110,208,209 It was observed that Co–Nx/C catalysts exhibited a different degradation behavior from Fe–Nx/C catalysts, where only the initial activity decay was pronounced and excellent stability was maintained afterwards.110,210 The adoption of ceric oxide (CeO2), one of the most feasible ROS scavengers in chemical biology, has resulted in preliminary success in prolonging the lifetime of Pt-based fuel cells and improving the stability of Fe–Nx/C catalysts.211,212

5.3 Performance evaluation at RDE and MEA levels
In science labs, the first-gate screening of newly developed ORR catalysts is commonly achieved by thin-film rotating disk (or ring-disk) electrode (abbreviated as RDE or RRDE) methodology, with state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C as the benchmark.213–216 Typically, the electrolyte is aqueous 0.1 M HClO4 or 0.5 M H2SO4 for M–Nx/C catalysts, whereas HClO4 is preferable for precious metal catalysts due to weak ClO4− adsorption. Before obtaining the ORR kinetic activity, three key data processing steps are needed, including background-correction, mass-transport-correction by Koutecky–Levich analysis to extract kinetic current, and iR-correction. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves recorded under inert-gas (N2 or Ar)-saturation can be used to quantify the hydrogen underpotential deposition (HUPD)-derived electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of Pt-based catalysts. The catalytic capability is finally evaluated by comparing the specific activity or mass activity at, commonly, 0.9 V (versus RHE), which is given by normalizing the kinetic current with ECSA and precious metal loading (in consideration of the expensiveness), respectively. Another metric for describing the performance is half-wave potential (E1/2), which has been highly valuable in reflecting the activity trend of a series of isogenous catalysts in the same study and particularly prevalent in the nonprecious metal catalyst community. But this metric is somewhat questionable in the comparison between studies when taking the different catalyst loadings into account.217 The loading dependence of E1/2 entices most studies to use a higher NPMC loading (600–800 μg cm−2), sometimes resulting in an illusion that M–Nx/C catalysts can compete with Pt/C whose loading on RDE is restricted (for instance, generally 20–40 μgPt cm−2 for 20 wt% Pt/C). A high M–Nx/C catalyst loading, which implies a thick catalyst film, may also mislead the assessment of ORR selectivity by the RRDE technique due to a higher probability of the H2O2 intermediate to be further reduced during its migration. On the other hand, the measured ORR activity and selectivity of precious metal catalysts are highly sensitive to the ink formulation, film quality, system cleanliness and test protocols. This leads to the unsatisfactory reproducibility and large variation in across-laboratory results even for the identical Pt/C catalyst. Aware of these, standardization of the RDE test and analysis methodologies for both M–Nx/C and precious metal catalysts is being emphasized for reliably evaluating novel catalyst candidates.218–220
Ideally, each newly synthesized catalyst should be tested in MEA under single cell and even stack conditions to give the most representative data. However, the attendant time-consuming practice and need of expensive materials and facilities make this approach impractical.214,221 In comparison, the RDE technique is a feasible high-throughput research platform in the early phase of catalyst R&D towards rapid screening of catalyst candidates that may be promising when integrated into MEA.222,223 In the context that the activity of M–Nx/C catalysts has seemingly reached the commercially relevant level, the related community is shifting the focus to translating the observed high performance from RDE to fuel cell devices. The assembly and evaluation of MEA is essentially much more complex than that of RDE. The utilization efficiency of catalyst/active sites in MEA, where ORR only proceeds at the triple-phase boundary, is unlikely to be as high as that on the thin-film RDE in an aqueous half-cell electrochemical system. The RDE technique only provides good performance at very low current densities due to the limited oxygen solubility in HClO4, but cannot predict the information at high current densities common in fuel cell operation.215,224,225
From a cost viewpoint, the performance of Pt-based cathodes is typically reported as mass activity (A gPt−1) at 0.9 V and benchmarked against the targets set by the United States Department of Energy (DOE).226 For nonprecious metal cathodes, volumetric activity (A cm−3 cathode, reported at 0.8 V or 0.9 V) was specifically defined as arising from the main limiting factor being activity.227,228 The current density at such high potentials increases with cathode catalyst loading within a certain range. However, in order to pursue the power performance target, the cell performance at a higher current density (PEMFC operating point of typically 0.6–0.7 V) is of interest, where the mass- and charge-transport limitations cannot be overlooked.215,228 These practical limitations are much more impactful for M–Nx/C cathodes since the low active-site density necessitates the use of a much higher loading (generally 4 mgM–Nx/C cm−2), leading to a much thicker catalyst layer (≈100 μm), compared to the usual Pt-based counterparts with a typical loading of 0.4 mgPt cm−2 (≈10 μm).88,229,230 The O2-transport issue in thick catalyst layers is particularly severe in the case of the H2/air mode.88,102 Mass transport limitations can mainly explain why some M–Nx/C catalysts show very close performance to the Pt/C reference in RDE and even in the kinetic region (low current density region) in the fuel cell, but exhibit considerable gaps in the high current density region. At present, the evaluation parameter of M–Nx/C cathodes has not yet been harmonized, with relatively few reported data available. Many studies also emphasized the value of peak power density (Pmax).29,210,231
Overall, the most suitable near-term position of M–Nx/C catalysts in the commercial PEMFC market will likely be portable products with relatively low operating current densities and that may experience poor air quality (one of the primary strengths of these catalysts is the improved tolerance to contamination232,233). Indeed, in September 2017, the close cooperation between Ballard and Nisshinbo gave birth to the world's first commercial PEMFC stack utilizing a nonprecious metal cathodic catalyst, Ballard's FCgen-micro (NPMC) (30 W, operating at a current density of <0.5 A cm−2), for back-up or emergency power.234 For more demanding applications such as automotive, extensive efforts are required to maximize the volumetric activity of M–Nx/C catalysts and minimize the mass-transport loss in M–Nx/C cathode layers, wherein the stability demand should be covered synchronously. While challenging, ongoing practices demonstrate great optimism with preliminary results achieved, for instance, by tuning the ionomer content or using the electrospinning technique.7,144,173,231,235–237
6. Active sites other than Fe–N4 and Co–N4
As mentioned above, while Fe–Nx/C catalysts dominate the prospective substitutes to the costly Pt-based one, they are still plagued by the intrinsic poor stability possibly arising from Fenton reactivity. Meanwhile, the optimized Fe–Nx and Co–Nx sites still lag considerably behind the apex of the Volcano plot. Therefore, active sites other than conventional Fe–N4 and Co–N4 configurations have been intensively investigated for the breakthrough in the boundary of M–Nx/C catalysts (Table 1).
6.1 Single atom M–Nx sites
Wu's group238 designed a single-atom Mn–Nx/C catalyst with the MnN4 moiety acting as the catalytic site, which exhibited an E1/2 value of 0.8 V vs. RHE and outstanding stability in acid solution, with a loss of E1/2 by only 17 mV after 30000 potential cycles. The key to the promising activity lies in the two-step doping strategy, making full use of the structural advantages of ZIF and its derivatives to increase the number of active sites (Fig. 12a and b). Another publication reported a polyaniline-derived Mn–Nx/C catalyst, which similarly delivered encouraging activity as well as durability in acidic conditions. The combination of theoretical and experimental studies confirmed that the Mn–N4 site did not significantly lag behind Fe–N4 in intrinsic activity.239 A systematic DFT computational study on the ORR activity of various types of Mn–Nx models has been performed by Zhu et al.240 Their results pointed to the much higher catalytic efficiency of 3D five-coordination sites than 2D three- or four-coordination ones due to the weakened binding strength of key intermediates on metal centers. Especially, (Cyan)Mn–N4/D is positioned even closer than Pt(111) to the apex of the ηSHEvs. ΔG*OH volcano plot. In our recent work, Cr ions were first confined in the micropores of ZIF-8 via post-adsorption and successfully converted into Cr single atoms with Cr–N4 coordination upon pyrolysis. Despite the inactive nature of its macrocyclic counterpart, which arises from the overly strong binding to oxygen, the Cr–N4/C catalyst presented a very impressive E1/2 value of 0.773 V in 0.1 M HClO4. This firmly confirms the strong tuning effect of carbon substrate on the electronic properties of M–Nx sites as well as the value in searching for SACs that were initially claimed to be inert in macrocyclic surroundings. Using UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy along with the ABTS probe, the Fenton reactivity of Cr SAC was measured to be 23 times lower than that of the Fe counterpart, and thus the Cr SAC demonstrated superb stability with E1/2 negatively shifting by only 15 mV after 20000 cycle tests (Fig. 12c and d).127 Strasser's group reported a p-block Sn-based catalyst for acidic ORR.241 Contrary to the typical concept that closed d shells limit the surface catalytic reactivity, the SnNC catalyst rivaled the similarly prepared FeNC counterpart in performance. Theoretical studies revealed that the chemisorption strength of reactive oxygen intermediates on SnNx active sites did not follow the usual linear relationships as observed in conventional d-block M–Nx moieties, which made the high activity and four-electron selectivity of SnNx possible.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the atomically dispersed MnN4 site catalyst. (b) ORR polarization plots of 20Mn-NC-second and 20Fe-NC-second catalysts initially and after 30000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Polarization curves of Cr/N/C-950 and Fe/N/C-950 before and after 20000 cycles. Electrolyte: 0.1 M HClO4. (d) Measurements of the ROS production level on Cr/N/C-950 and Fe/N/C-950. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Song and co-workers synthesized a family of ZnNx/C catalysts with Zn being atomically dispersed in the form of Zn–N4, demonstrating comparable catalytic activity to commercial Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH. Through DFT calculations, the high activity of Zn–N4 was attributed to the low overpotential of O adsorption, which was the rate-limiting step.120 Unlike Fe and Co, Zn is highly volatile during high-temperature annealing, making the increased density of Zn–Nx sites generally difficult. Given this restriction, Wei's group successfully fabricated a single-atom Zn–Nx/C catalyst with an ultrahigh Zn loading (9.33 wt%, determined by EDX) by controlling the annealing rate to be very low (1° min−1), which presented E1/2 of 0.746 V in acidic and 0.873 V in alkaline solutions.242 Besides, the calculation results revealed that Zn–N4 is electrochemically more robust than Fe–N4 in acidic medium due to a higher level d orbital occupancy of Zn(3d104s2) than that of Fe(3d64s2), rendering it more prone to Fe(OH)x formation. Inspired by the biochemically active Mg cofactors in enzymes, Liu et al.243 predicted the ORR catalytic activity of MgNxC (x from 2 to 4) by DFT simulations and revealed the enormous potential of MN2C, with a near-optimal binding strength of oxygen species, as a highly active site. Experimentally, a Mg-based catalyst with Mg–N2 coordination was then obtained, which exhibited commendable performance with E1/2 of 0.91 V in alkaline and 0.79 V in acidic electrolytes. The gas-migration/NH3-mediated strategy developed by Qu et al.169 (described in Section 4.1) has resulted in a single-atom Cu–N4/C catalyst showing even superior ORR activity to Pt/C (E1/2: 0.895 V vs. 0.87 V) in alkaline media. Nevertheless, both much weaker activity and lower selectivity of the four-electron process were observed in acidic media. Baek's group synthesized a single-atom Cu–Nx/C catalyst for alkaline ORR with an unprecedented high Cu loading (20.9 wt%) and revealed the suitable O2 and OOH adsorption as well as improved O–O bond stretching on Cu active sites, especially Cu–N2.244 Chen et al.245 deliberately synthesized a group of single-atom W/N/C catalysts with varying W–N coordination numbers. Although both W–N3 and W–N4 were observed to poorly catalyze the ORR, the W–N5/C catalyst demonstrated an impressive E1/2 value of 0.88 V in 0.1 M KOH and 0.77 V in 0.1 M HClO4, which was attributed to the moderate adsorption strength of OH− on single W atoms. Additional single-atom sites based on M–Nx (M = Ni, Mo, etc.) have been reported as well for efficient alkaline ORR catalysis.246,247 The above examples show more intuitively that, not limited to Fe- and Co-based centers, many of the M–Nx/C catalysts, although perform outstandingly in alkaline media, still leave much to be desired under acidic conditions.
Besides, functional adjustment to the coordination environment of metal centers in virtue of heteroatoms (such as S, O, and P) has become a versatile way to tune the local electron distributions. For a recent example, Zhang et al.248 developed a series of N and S dual-coordinating catalysts, which all exhibited good ORR performance in alkaline solution (Fe-SAs/NSC > Co-SAs/NSC > Ni-SAs/NSC). Despite the identical synthesis approach, S atoms located at the second coordination shell of the Fe center, whereas they directly formed bonds with Co and Ni centers. DFT calculations proved that the higher charge density of Fe in the model of FeN4S2 than that of Co in CoN3S1 and Ni in NiN3S1 made the energy barriers of key intermediates evolve into a low state, explaining the origin of the more active feature. Yuan and co-workers designed a catalyst rich in highly active Fe-N3P sites, which outperformed the Pt/C benchmark in both the three-electrode system and Zn–air battery.249 The excellent performance was ascribed to the asymmetric N/P coupling effect, allowing proper adsorption/desorption of oxygen intermediates on active sites and thus helping achieve better activity than the FeN4 structure. Until now, other multi-heteroatom coordinated metal sites such as Co–N2P2, Mn–N2C2, and Cu–S1N3 have been constructed, leading to improved ORR activity in alkaline media.250–254
6.2 Dual-metal sites
Apart from a variety of single-atom centers mentioned above, dual-metal sites were deliberately designed and identified, which demonstrated extraordinary ORR electrocatalytic activities. Wang et al.41 reported a novel Fe–Co dual-metal site shown in Fig. 13a. This type of configuration provided two binding sites for O atoms, which activated the O–O bond from 1.23 Å to 1.40 Å and resulted in a facile cleavage of the O–O bond. Thus, (Fe,Co)/N–C was featured with both high ORR activity and high selectivity of four-electron path under acidic conditions, exhibiting unparalleled E1/2 of 0.863 V in RDE evaluation, and a maximum power density of 0.98 W cm−2 in the H2/O2 fuel cell test (Fig. 13b and c). Our group highlighted the critical role of spontaneously formed *OH in promoting the catalysis course of the Fe–Co binuclear site, where the absorption of *OH on FeCoN5via water dissociation is exothermic that makes it a stable modifying ligand during the entire ORR process (Fig. 13d–f). Using the Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox potential as the binding energy indicator, the thermodynamically favorable bridge bonded OH was found to be a perfect ligand to weaken the Fe-O binding strength from both DFT calculations and in situ XANES. The resulted FeCoN5-OH binuclear site exhibited activity more than 20 times higher than the single-atom FeN4.31 Lu et al.131 fabricated a Zn/CoN-C catalyst with both Zn–Co atomic pairs and individual atoms, which showed E1/2 of 0.861 and 0.796 V in alkaline and acid media, respectively. The main active site was considered as the ZnCoN6 structure, more exactly, ZnCoN6(OH). The O–O bond of adsorbed O2 on this site was stretched to 1.43 Å, much more significantly than those on ZnN4 (1.29 Å) and CoN4 (1.30 Å), which was therefore favored for the scission of the O–O bond. By precisely controlling the ratio of Co in the ZnCo-ZIF precursor, our group designed a binuclear Co2N5 site. This novel active center delivered ORR catalytic activity about 12 times higher than that of conventional CoN4 and endowed the catalyst with E1/2 of 0.79 V in acidic electrolyte (Fig. 13g–i).130 Xiong's group257 reported a strategy for facilely tuning the number of Fe nuclei, which was achieved by in situ encapsulating specific inorganic compounds (mononuclear Fe(acac)2, binuclear Fe2(CO)9 and trinuclear Fe3(CO)12) in the cavity of ZIF-8 prior to pyrolysis. In particular, benefiting from the comprehensive superiority in the adsorption mode of O2, the graphitization degree and N species, Fe2–N–C displayed the optimal acidic ORR activity. A N-coordinated Fe,Ni dual-doped carbon has also been shown to demonstrate much superior activity to single-atom counterparts for acidic ORR. The quantitative XANES fitting and DFT calculations cooperatively confirmed that the dominating active moiety was FeNi–N6, in which Fe and Ni were bridged by two N atoms, and each metal was coordinated with two other N atoms.258
 Fig. 13  (a) Proposed configuration of Fe-Co dual sites. (b) LSV curves of (Fe, Co)/N-C, Fe SAs/NC, Co SAs/N-C and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (c) H2/O2 fuel cell polarization plots with (Fe,Co)/N-C as the cathode catalyst. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Gibbs free energy diagrams at (d) 1.23 V and (e) 0.62 V on CoN4, FeN4, and FeCoN5–OH sites. (f) Proposed ORR mechanism on the FeCoN5–OH site. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Co–N–C-10. (h) Mass-specific activity of Co–N–C-x catalysts. (i) Comparison of the mass-specific activity of the Co particle, CoN4 and Co2N5 sites. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
Table 1 Summery of RDE and/or PEMFC measurement results in recent publications of M–Nx/C and related catalysts




Catalysts
Active sites
RDE performance
Durability test ΔE1/2
PEMFC performance Pmax
Ref.



E
1/2

Electrolyte




Note: some data are not directly given in the literature but excavated from corresponding curves.




(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
FeN4
0.80 V
0.5 M H2SO4
—
H2/O2: 0.87 W cm−2;

102



H2/air: 0.42 W cm−2


TPI@Z8(SiO2)–650–C
FeN4
0.823 V
0.5 M H2SO4
—
H2/2.5 bar O2: 1.18 W cm−2;

144



H2/air: 0.42 W cm−2


Co–N–C@F127
CoN4
0.84 V
0.5 M H2SO4
40 mV (30k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.87 W cm−2;

208



H2/air: 0.28 W cm−2


Co(mIm)–NC
CoN4
0.82 V
0.5 M H2SO4
8 mV (10k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.64 W cm−2;

259



H2/air: 0.32 W cm−2


20Mn–NC–second
MnN4
0.80 V
0.5 M H2SO4
17 mV (30k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.46 W cm−2

238



Cr/N/C–950
CrN4
0.773 V
0.1 M HClO4
15 mV (20k cycles)
—

127



SnNC
SnNx
∼0.73 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
—

241



(Fe,Co)/N–C
FeCoN6
0.863 V
0.1 M HClO4
∼0 mV (50k cycles)
H2/O2 (0.2 MPa): 0.98 W cm−2;

41



H2/air: 0.505 W cm−2


FeCoNX/C
FeCoN5–OH
0.86 V
0.1 M HClO4
13 mV (5k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.819 W cm−2

31



H2/O2: 0.418 W cm−2

130



Co–N–C–10
Co2N5
0.79 V
0.1 M HClO4
12 mV (20k cycles)






Ru–SSC
RuN4
0.824 V
0.1 M HClO4
17 mV (20k cycles)
H2/1.5 bar O2: 0.64 W cm−2

126



Ir–SAC
IrN4
0.864 V
0.1 M HClO4
∼0 mV (5k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.932 W cm−2

255



Pt1-N/BP
g-P–N1–Pt1
0.76 V
0.1 M HClO4
3 mV (10k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.68 W cm−2

260



LP@PF–1
Pt–Co, Co–Nx–Cy
∼0.94 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
H2/O2: ∼1.05 W cm−2;

256



H2/air: ∼0.74 W cm−2


LP@PF–2
Pt–Co, Co–Nx–Cy
0.96 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
H2/O2: ∼1.42 W cm−2;




H2/air: ∼0.8 W cm−2


Fe2–N–C
Fe2–N–C
0.78 V
0.5 M H2SO4
20 mV (20k cycles)
—

257



0.905 V
0.1 M KOH
—


Zn/CoN–C
ZnCoN6
0.796 V
0.1 HClO4
∼0 mV (10k cycles)
H2/O2: 0.705 W cm−2

131



0.861 V
0.1 M KOH
9 mV (10k cycles)


Cu–SAs/N–C
CuN4
∼0.73 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
—

169



0.895 V
0.1 M KOH
∼0 mV (5k cycles)


Mg–N–C
MN2C
0.79 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
—

243



0.91 V
0.1 M KOH
∼0 mV (5k cycles)
—


Zn–N–C
ZnN4
0.746 V
0.1 M HClO4
19.9 mV (1k cycles)
—

242



0.873 V
0.1 M KOH
0.54 mV (1k cycles)


WN5
WN5
0.77 V
0.1 M HClO4
—
—

245



0.88 V
0.1 M KOH
∼10 mV (10k cycles)


S,N–Fe/N/C–CNT
Fe–Nx
0.85 V
0.1 M KOH
∼0 mV (10k cycles)
—

118



Fe-SAs/NSC
FeN4
0.87 V
0.1 M KOH
∼0 mV (5k cycles)
—

248





6.3 Single precious metal sites and synergistic catalysis
Given the unique properties of M–Nx sites, the research on relevant precious metal-based SACs has been intensified as well, hoping to maximize the utilization efficiency of the precious metal atom. Xu and co-workers synthesized a carbon black-supported Pt single-atom catalyst (Pt1-N/BP), which was highly active for ORR with Pt utilization up to 0.13 gPt kW−1 in an acidic fuel cell. Besides, Pt1-N/BP overwhelmed nonprecious metal catalysts in durability and traditional Pt nanoparticle-based catalysts in CO/methanol tolerance. Based on theoretical calculations, single Pt atoms anchored by pyridinic-N were deemed as the main effective sites.260 By annealing trace Ru decorated GO in an NH3 atmosphere, Zhang et al.117 obtained a single-atom Ru-N/G catalyst exhibiting encouraging activity for ORR in an acidic medium (Eonset and E1/2 of 0.89 V and 0.75 V, respectively), combined with tolerance toward methanol and CO poisoning. Detailed XAFS analysis and DFT calculations indicated that Ru-oxo-N4, that is, Ru–N4 with an axial oxygen, was preferably the origin of high activity. Our group designed a single-atom Ru–Nx/C catalyst (Ru-SSC) via a microporous MOF confined strategy. With RuN4(OH) confirmed as the ORR-active center, which permitted an appropriate adsorption free energy of OH*, Ru-SSC delivered a turnover frequency of 4.99 e− s−1 sites−1 which is far beyond that of the Fe-SSC counterpart (0.816 e− s−1 sites−1). Even more remarkable was the excellent stability with E1/2 shift by only −17 mV after 20000 potential cycles, as a result of its weak Fenton reactivity.126 Another successful case is the design of Ir–Nx/C SAC motivated by the highest efficiency of iridium porphyrins among metal porphyrins for homogeneous ORR catalysis in acid. The optimal adsorption energy of key intermediates on Ir–N4 active sites conferred exceptionally high activity on Ir-SAC, with a TOF of 24.3 e− site−1 s−1 and a mass activity of 12.2 A mg−1Ir, which far surpassed other SACs reported at that time, the commercial Pt/C benchmark and the Ir nanoparticle-based counterpart (Fig. 14a–c).255
 Fig. 14  (a) ORR polarization curves of Ir-SAC and counterparts in 0.1 M HClO4. Gibbs free energy diagram for ORR on (b) IrN4 and (c) Ir19 clusters. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) LSVs of different catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (e) Cathodic MA Tafel plots derived from fuel cell measurements. (f) Free-energy diagram of the ORR pathways. (I) * or # + O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, (II) OOH* or OOH# + 3H+ + 3e−, (III) O* or O# + H2O + 2H+ + 2e−, (IV) * + H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−, (V) 2OH# + 2H+ + 2e−, (VI) OH* or OH# + H2O + H+ + e−, and (VII) * or # + 2H2O, where * and # denote the binding site on Co–N4 embedded in graphene and the binding site on a strained Pt(111) facet, respectively. Reproduced with permission.256 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
A noticeable publication by Liu's group has shed light on the synergistic catalysis between Pt–Co alloy nanoparticles and atomically dispersed Co–Nx–Cy sites (Fig. 14d–f).256 Two representative ultralow-Pt-loading catalysts (2.72 wt% for LP@PF-1 and 2.81 wt% for LP@PF-2) were prepared by applying a Pt source to pyrolyzed ZIF-67 or ZIF-8@ZIF-67, followed by preliminary reduction and subsequent heat-treatment under NH3. The strained Pt-Co core–shell nanoparticles and Co–Nx–Cy sites performed direct ORR catalysis, and concurrently the H2O2 generated from nearby Co–Nx–Cy sites was further reduced to H2O by Pt–Co nanoparticles, thereby endowing the catalysts with improved activity and durability. In addition to the ultrahigh E1/2 of 0.96 V obtained in the RDE test, LP@PF catalysts achieved record-high fuel cell-based mass activities of 1.08 A mgPt−1 and 1.77 A mgPt−1 at 0.9 ViR-free, far exceeding the 2020 target set by the DOE (0.44 A mgPt−1). This sort of synergistic catalysts based on non-precious metal M–Nx and trace precious metal clusters or nanoparticles seem to be more practical.261
7. Conclusions and perspectives
7.1 Summary
The sluggish O2 reduction due to its multi-electron transfer feature makes it the heart of fuel-cell chemistry. Our desire to find non-precious metal alternatives to Pt-based ORR electrocatalysts is strong for more affordable and applicable PEMFCs. In this respect, as the predecessor of pyrolyzed M–Nx/C catalysts, molecular MN4 catalysts played a heuristic role and served as versatile models to get insights into the fundamental catalysis behavior of M–Nx sites. The pyrolyzed M–Nx sites are usually structurally stable and possess unique electronic properties to offer high intrinsic activity. By reviewing the ongoing progress in M–Nx/C materials, some insights can be extracted with a view to realizing their practical application in the more demanding PEMFCs.
After years of debate, the answer to active-site conundrum of M–Nx/C catalysts has gradually become clear, although it is still not fully understood. The present consensus is that nitrogen coordinated single metal atom or dual-metal atoms are dominantly responsible for the catalytic activity. The cardinal principle for acquiring M–Nx/C materials with active sites at a high density is the precise control of synthesis parameters to isolate and stabilize metal atoms at any stage. To this end, many creative design strategies are worthy of reference, including preventing the hydrolysis of metal sources, confining metal atoms in micropores, segregating metal atoms by zinc, and trapping volatile metal species by defects. MOFs, especially ZIFs, and polyaniline appear to be the most effective precursors, from which the state-of-the-art M–Nx/C catalysts have been synthesized with the activity approaching that of Pt/C in the three-electrode measurement. It is undeniable that these achievements owe much to the application of advanced characterizing tools for active sites, such as atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM and XAFS, as well as theoretical calculations. To shed light on the real active configuration, in situ characterization methods are strongly encouraged.
By examining various molecular MN4 catalysts, several activity volcano correlations have been built, of which the one versus Eb(O2) is the most often used one. Appropriate O2 binding is needed to achieve high activity, where the nature of the metal center is the first determinant. The majority of FeN4-macrocycles bind O2 too strongly which hinders the removal of key intermediates, whereas CoN4-macrocycles bind O2 too weakly and yield H2O2, even though they are the two most active and intensively studied groups. An exceptional case is the dimeric and cofacial dinuclear CoN4-macrocycles, which can catalyze O2 reduction via a 4e− pathway because the O2 molecule can bind to two metal centers. The substitutions on the MN4 core or the macrocyclic framework is also a decisive factor, where the electron withdrawing groups decrease the O2-binding capacity of the metal center. The knowledge from molecular MN4 catalysts enables us to deliberately enhance the intrinsic activity, with the focus on engineering electronic structures of metal centers through specific functionalities or synergy between two metal atoms to tailor the adsorption of critical intermediates.
Limited by the high-temperature synthesis, during which metal atoms tend to aggregate into particles, the active site density in M–Nx/C catalysts is usually not very high. Thus, the cooperation of hierarchical pores is highly desirable to maximize the availability. Through mesopores and macropores, ORR-related species move towards and away from the catalytic sites, which are mainly hosted in micropores. It is also advisable to enrich active sites in the superficial layer of catalysts to shorten the mass transfer distance.
The finite density of active sites means a much higher M–Nx/C catalyst loading than that required for commercial Pt/C and the transition into MEA cathodes is plagued by the mass transfer issue due to the thick catalyst layer. This is mainly responsible for the discrepancy of the performance gaps between M–Nx/C and Pt/C catalysts in the fuel cell and in RDE. Hence, extra effort in MEA assembling techniques is worthwhile. Besides, it would be desirable to develop a more reasonable method than RDE for facile evaluation that takes into account both mass transfer and intrinsic activity. From the perspective of more realistic applications, synergistic catalysts composed of non-precious metals and trace precious metals are recommended for further exploration.
7.2 Insights on improving catalyst stability
The stability issue of M–Nx/C catalysts (particularly the best-performing Fe-based one) in acidic media has aroused growing concern. The rapid catalyst deterioration has been imputed to several interactional mechanisms, where the chemical carbon corrosion is likely the major culprit under normal operating conditions. In essence, Fe reacts with the H2O2 intermediate via the Fenton mechanism and generates destructive ROS to oxidatively corrode the carbon surface. Unlike the Pt/C catalysts, the carbon substrate in M–Nx/C materials acts not only as the electronic conductor, but also as the host or/and ingredient of active sites. Involatile carbon oxidation decreases the oxygen affinity of M–Nx centers, thereby lowering the TOF for ORR. Complete carbon oxidation, more seriously, disintegrates the M–Nx active sites. This urgently calls for effective strategies to substantially suppress the Fenton reaction or to remedy the consequences caused. However, judging from the current efficiency, much more efforts need to be made in the future.

Future directions. 
The suggested approach for the remediation is multi-faceted: (1) Minimizing Fenton's reagent. Given that leachable metal atoms are more prone to trigger the Fenton(-like) reaction, as a preparatory precaution, it is recommended to avoid any less-active and inactive metallic bystanders, which could be partly achieved by post-acid washing or using an ingenious synthetic methodology. Additionally, it seems feasible to stabilize the active-metal sites, for instance, by strengthening the metal-N bonds or grafting a Pt atom onto the iron center.262 As another component of Fenton's reagent, reducing the concentration of H2O2 may be an effective way to weaken the reactivity, wherein a precisely designed active-site structure with a promoted 4e− pathway for ORR is the prerequisite. Some dual-metal sites have been reported to manifest low H2O2 production and high stability even under single cell operation, although the exact reason was not emphasized.41 Another case in point is the hybrid catalysts with low Pt loading proposed recently, where the Pt–Co NPs can further reduce the H2O2 intermediate detached from Co–Nx, leading to improved catalyst durability.256 (2) Suppressing the ROS level. An imperative and arduous task will be enhancing the intrinsic activity by atomic-level regulation and synchronously maximizing the active-site density of Fe-free M–Nx/C (M = Co, Mn, Cr, Sn, etc.) catalysts. In addition to the endogenic amelioration, proper introduction of radical scavengers can block the path for ROS to attack the carbon substrate. The success in protecting the membrane in fuel cells is an exemplification for the effectiveness of CeOx, a well-accepted ROS scavenger. Besides, after balancing cost and performance, introducing a second Pt-compound with a low loading might exhibit an equivalent ROS-quenching behavior.263 (3) Enhancing carbon corrosion resistance. A highly graphitic carbon substrate is preferred due to its less susceptibility to oxidation. The high stability of the Mn–Nx/C catalyst, as reported by Wu's group, has been partly attributed to the increased graphitization catalyzed by Mn.238 On the premise of a seriously considered trade-off between the enhancement of oxidation resistance and the loss of active sites, pyrolysis at higher temperature is more recommended. Tactics for planting a dense population of active sites on highly ordered carbon such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) will likely be helpful to form efficient catalysts with enhanced stability. Surface modification may also be an approach of choice. Fluorination of the Fe/N/C catalyst was recently shown to suppress carbon corrosion, which was connected with the hydrophobic and electron-withdrawing properties.264


Challenges. 
Hitherto, how to precisely control the metal speciation during synthesis remains a conundrum. The critical point between the maximum active-site density and the formation of metal aggregates is still difficult to reach. In most scenarios, the highly active catalysts obtained are empirical and lack the proof that there are no inactive but potentially detrimental metal species. Despite the intensified research on alternative Fe-free M–Nx/C catalysts in parallel, the developed ORR activities remain generally poorly competitive with the Fe-based counterparts. Given this status quo, ROS scavengers seem to show a brighter future. In fact, however, there have been only few reports of ROS scavengers being used in M–Nx/C catalysts until now, where the main dilemma may lie in how to improve the catalyst stability markedly without sacrificing the activity. Moreover, the ROS quenching site can only be effective when designed near the M–Nx sites in view of the short life of free radicals. Lastly, the stability study of M–Nx/C catalysts is still in the early stage and representative data are far from enough. No standard aging protocol for either potential cycling or chronoamperometry has been established to reliably compare the results from different laboratories.


Perspectives. 
There should be a growing awareness that a wide range of studies under fuel cell conditions are required to better understand the degradation mechanism. The majority of currently presented data are based on aqueous electrochemical cells, wherein the key parameters (e.g., mass transfer and H2O2 environment) differ intrinsically from those in MEA studies. Under the circumstance of long-term PEMFC operation, the impact of the Fenton reaction is likely to be even more severe. By degrading the local ionomer and making the carbon-based catalyst more hydrophilic, the mass transfer issue already faced by the thick M–Nx/C catalyst layer will be further exacerbated. Hence, from the engineering standpoint, more efforts are supposed to be exerted on optimizing the catalyst layer architecture and composition. It is also desired to differentiate which degradation mechanism is dominant under varying operation protocols, so as to devise targeted mitigation strategies. Besides, changes of both catalyst per se and triple-phase boundary from the beginning to end of life need to be investigated. Real-time monitoring would be more desirable, which depends, of course, highly on the development of advanced in situ/operando characterization techniques, integrated with modeling and simulation. Altogether, the stability issue of M–Nx/C catalysts is increasingly concerned where the current momentum has promised to address this problem. It is reported that a strategy has been developed at PNNL which can integrate N-doped CeOx sites for H2O2 scavenging with M–Nx ORR active sites in close proximity.207,265 Reports on more detailed results are expected.

7.3 Other concerning issues
Although all are elementally composed of metals, nitrogen and carbon, the M–Nx/C catalysts obtained using different precursors and methods perform quite differently from one another. The performance analysis of catalysts in the literature mostly focuses on their respective systems. So far, few systematic works have established the comprehensive correlation between the expression of catalytic activity and synthesis parameters. However, such a universal law will be of guiding significance for rationally designing M–Nx/C catalysts with close-to-optimal activity.
The evaluation of M–Nx/C catalysts should be more all-around and objective. We tend to feel satisfied with the low-cost in elemental composition of final catalysts, but ignore whether the synthetic route is economical. The goal of reducing the cost of fuel cells will not be achieved if very expensive precursors are used, or the catalyst yield is too low due to excessive waste during the synthesis. Energy consumption in the synthesis process cannot be ignored considering the need for high temperature pyrolysis. The synthetic method to produce homogeneous and efficient M–Nx/C catalysts in a large scale can ease this problem and is also required for pursuing industrial fabrication. Preference should be given to less expensive raw materials while ensuring performance, and suitable methods to effectively recycle the reactants need to be designed. Besides, the solid phase synthesis reported in some works seems to be more economical.266,267 Similarly, environmental friendliness in the preparation process of catalysts is also expected with the original intention of utilizing clean energy.
In short, M–Nx/C materials display great potential to dominate the oxygen reduction electrocatalysis in the future fuel-cell technology. Despite the challenges still ahead, we optimistically believe that the deep methodological, technical, and theoretical knowledge will eventually push the comprehensive performance of M–Nx/C catalysts to a satisfying level and that the outcome is worthy of our persistent efforts over the past half century. In addition to ORR, M–Nx/C catalysts have demonstrated impressive activity for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)268,269 and CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR),270–275 and held a special position even in the whole field of electrocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project (2016YFB0101202), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21633008, 21875243, U1601211), Jilin Province Science and Technology Development Program (20200201001JC, 20190201270JC, 20180101030JC), and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (NRF-2019M3D1A1079309).
Notes and references
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Norskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian, A. Morozan, M. T. Sougrati, M. Lefevre, R. Chenitz, J. P. Dodelet, D. Jones and F. Jaouen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6867–6870 CrossRef .
S. Kartha and P. Grimes, Phys. Today, 1994, 47, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Offer, D. Howey, M. Contestabile, R. Clague and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 24–29 CrossRef .
D. Banham, T. Kishimoto, Y. Zhou, T. Sato, K. Bai, J. I. Ozaki, Y. Imashiro and S. Ye, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar7180 CrossRef PubMed .
N. P. Brandon and Z. Kurban, Phil. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2017, 375, 2098 CrossRef .
I. K. Kapdan and F. Kargi, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 38, 569–582 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chandrasekhar, S. Kumar, B. D. Lee and S. H. Kim, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 302, 122920 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Saxena, D. K. Adhikari and H. B. Goyal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 167–178 CrossRef .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Huang, J. Wei, D. Zhou, J. Cai, Z.-D. He and Y.-X. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 96, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
U. Martinez, S. Komini Babu, E. F. Holby, H. T. Chung, X. Yin and P. Zelenay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806545 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang, R. Zou and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2650–2676 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Wang, N. Zhao, B. Fang, H. Li, X. T. Bi and H. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3433–3467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nie, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2168–2201 RSC .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS .
F. V. d. Brink, E. Barendrecht and W. Visscher, Recl. Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas, 1980, 99, 253–262 CrossRef .
J. H. Zagal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1992, 119, 89–136 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Bouwkamp-Wijnoltz, W. Visscher, J. A. R. van Veen, E. Boellaard, A. M. van der Kraan and S. C. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12993–13001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefevre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, D. Tryk, I. Bae, W. Aldred and E. Yeager, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1989, 19, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre, J. P. Dodelet and P. Bertrand, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11238–11247 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, M. Chen, H. Feng, R. Yuan, C. A. Zhong, W. Yan, Y. Tian, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 111–118 RSC .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, T. Langenhahn, M. Ye, G. Tian, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3274–3280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao and H. L. Jiang, Chem., 2019, 5, 786–804 CAS .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6626–6631 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, C. He, Z. Y. Wu, L. J. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Yang, L. Gu, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1278 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443–15449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Wu, Y. Niu, C. Dai, M. Xu and W. Hu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 711–717 RSC .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Gao, M. L. Xiao, Z. Jin, C. P. Liu, J. Zhu, J. J. Ge and W. Xing, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1668–1673 CrossRef .
X. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Lin, S. Gupta, C. Wang, Z. Tao, H. Fu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, G. Wu and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Zhang, H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, S. Wagner, U. I. Kramm, K. L. More, P. Zelenay and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2548–2558 RSC .
C. H. Choi, H. K. Lim, M. W. Chung, G. Chon, N. R. Sahraie, A. Altin, M. T. Sougrati, L. Stievano, H. S. Oh, E. S. Park, F. Luo, P. Strasser, G. Drazic, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3176–3182 RSC .
H. S. Wroblowa, Y. C. Pan and G. Razumney, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1976, 69, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muthukrishnan, Y. Nabae, T. Okajima and T. Ohsaka, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5194–5202 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, O. Kasian, A. K. Mechler, M. T. Sougrati, S. Bruller, K. Strickland, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and F. Jaouen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8809–8812 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bonakdarpour, M. Lefevre, R. Yang, F. Jaouen, T. Dahn, J.-P. Dodelet and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Silvioli, N. R. Sahraie, W. Ju, J. Li, A. Zitolo, S. Li, A. Bagger, L. Arnarson, X. Wang, T. Moeller, D. Bernsmeier, J. Rossmeisl, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12372–12381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Keith, G. Jerkiewicz and T. Jacob, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2779–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
H. Singh, S. Zhuang, B. Ingis, B. B. Nunna and E. S. Lee, Carbon, 2019, 151, 160–174 CrossRef .
Z. Duan and G. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20178–20187 RSC .
N. Ramaswamy and S. Mukerjee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11945–11979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Norskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897–2901 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tripkovic, E. Skulason, S. Siahrostami, J. K. Norskov and J. Rossmeisl, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7975–7981 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. He, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1619–1633 CrossRef CAS .
U. Tylus, Q. Jia, K. Strickland, N. Ramaswamy, A. Serov, P. Atanassov and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8999–9008 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Holby and C. D. Taylor, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9286 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. J. Tang and K. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14115–14119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martinez and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15639–15643 RSC .
J. A. R. van Veen, J. F. van Baar, C. J. Kroese, J. G. F. Coolegem, N. De Wit and H. A. Colijn, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 693–700 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zagal, M. Paez, A. A. Tanaka, J. R. Dossantos and C. A. Linkous, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 339, 13–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collman, L. Fu, P. C. Herrmann and X. Zhang, Science, 1997, 275, 949–951 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collman, N. K. Devaraj, R. A. Decreau, Y. Yang, Y. L. Yan, W. Ebina, T. A. Eberspacher and C. E. Chidsey, Science, 2007, 315, 1565–1568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zagal, M. J. Aguirre and M. A. Páez, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 437, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
F. Beck, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1977, 7, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal, M. Gulppi, M. Isaacs, G. Cárdenas-Jirón and M. J. S. Aguirre, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 1349–1357 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal, F. Javier Recio, C. A. Gutierrez, C. Zuñiga, M. A. Páez and C. A. Caro, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 24–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2710 RSC .
H. He, Y. K. Lei, C. Xiao, D. R. Chu, R. R. Chen and G. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16038–16046 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, A. Alsudairi, Z. F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal, S. Griveau, J. F. Silva, T. Nyokong and F. Bedioui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2755–2791 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shi, B. Steiger, M. Yuasa and F. C. Anson, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 4294–4295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chang, H. Y. Liu and I. Abdalmuhdi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 2725–2726 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collman, P. Denisevich, Y. Konai, M. Marrocco, C. Koval and F. C. Anson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 6027–6036 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kadish, L. Fremond, J. Shen, P. Chen, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, M. El Ojaimi, C. P. Gros, J. M. Barbe and R. Guilard, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2571–2582 CrossRef CAS .
F. Van Den Brink, W. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 175, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, K. Shigehara, A. Yamada and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 297, 489–498 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Cárdenas-Jirón, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 3202–3206 CrossRef .
M. S. Liao, T. Kar, S. M. Gorun and S. Scheiner, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 7151–7161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Sabelli and C. A. Melendres, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 4342–4346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alt, H. Binder and G. Sandstede, J. Catal., 1973, 28, 8–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baker, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6906–6919 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Golovin, P. Seymour, K. Jayaraj, Y. S. Fu and A. B. P. Lever, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 1719–1727 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh, F. Razmjooei and J. S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20095–20119 RSC .
H. Jahnke, M. Schonborn and G. Zirnmermann, Top. Curr. Chem., 1976, 61, 133–181 CrossRef CAS .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J. P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, H. Liang, K. Parvez, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, X. Zhuang, C. Yang, J. Cao, Z. Yao, Y. Tang, J. Jiang, D. Wu and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1981–1987 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre, J. P. Dodelet and P. Bertrand, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8705–8713 CrossRef .
H. Schulenburg, S. Stankov, V. Schünemann, J. Radnik, I. Dorbandt, S. Fiechter, P. Bogdanoff and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9034–9041 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, D. Schmeisser and J. P. Dodelet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 978–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Artyushkova, I. Matanovic, B. Halevi and P. Atanassov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2836–2843 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, J. E. Fulghum and P. Atanassov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, S. Ci, F. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Cui, S. Mao, S. Luo, Z. He and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. J. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, J. S. Hu, Z. Wei and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Strickland, E. Miner, Q. Jia, U. Tylus, N. Ramaswamy, W. Liang, M. T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen and S. Mukerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Koslowski, I. Abs-Wurmbach, S. Fiechter and P. Bogdanoff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15356–15366 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, J. Herranz, N. Larouche, T. M. Arruda, M. Lefevre, F. Jaouen, P. Bogdanoff, S. Fiechter, I. Abs-Wurmbach, S. Mukerjee and J. P. Dodelet, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11673–11688 RSC .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. Ma, X. Yuan, Z.-F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418–2432 RSC .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496–12505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D. J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Ziegelbauer, T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, F. Alamgir, C. Jaye, P. Atanassov and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8839–8849 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 148–153 RSC .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef .
J. M. Lebeau and S. Stemmer, Ultramicroscopy, 2008, 108, 1653–1658 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1460–1472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 34–59 CrossRef .
J. N. Tiwari, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, T. Yoon, N. N. Li, M. R. Ha, A. M. Harzandi, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, S. S. Chandrasekaran, W. G. Lee, V. Vij, H. J. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, G. Lee, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 773–782 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, A. M. Harzandi, M. Ha, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, P. Thangavel, A. N. Singh, P. Sharma, S. S. Chandrasekaran, F. Salehnia, J. W. Jang, H. S. Shin, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1900931, 1900931 CrossRef .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, X. Zou, N. Zhao, H. Yu, Z. Jiang, E. Ringe, B. I. Yakobson, J. Dong, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6930–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Xing, K. Xu, Y. Tong, H. Xie, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 610–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R. A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W. C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, M. Luo, X. Z. Liu, W. Xing, W. L. Xu, Z. Jiang and L. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700802 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
J. J. Rehr and R. C. Albers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2000, 72, 621–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano and V. K. Yachandra, Photosynth. Res., 2009, 102, 241–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukerjee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1409–1422 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Jin, C. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li, J. Ge, Q. He, Z. Wu, Z. Chen and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19800–19806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Luo, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Gao, L. Gong, T. Zhao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, C. Liu and W. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS .
H. Funke, A. C. Scheinost and M. Chukalina, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 094110 CrossRef .
H. Funke, M. Chukalina and A. C. Scheinost, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2007, 14, 426–432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Gao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 396–403 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ogino, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1481–1488 CrossRef .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
S. Gupta, C. Fierro and E. Yeager, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 306, 239–250 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Thorum, J. M. Hankett and A. A. Gewirth, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Y. Zhou, Y. J. Lai, Y. You, J. G. Liu, X. L. Wu, E. Terefe, C. Chen, L. Song, M. Rauf, N. Tian and S. G. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10882–10885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Sahraie, U. I. Kramm, J. Steinberg, Y. Zhang, A. Thomas, T. Reier, J. P. Paraknowitsch and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8618 CrossRef CAS .
D. Malko, A. Kucernak and T. Lopes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, P. Liu, E. Velasco, G. Yao, Z. Tian, L. Zhang and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1808193 CrossRef .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6254–6262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-C. Hu, Z.-Y. Wu, S.-Q. Chu, H.-W. Zhu, H.-W. Liang, J. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2208–2215 RSC .
M. Primbs, Y. Sun, A. Roy, D. Malko, A. Mehmood, M.-T. Sougrati, P.-Y. Blanchard, G. Granozzi, T. Kosmala, G. Daniel, P. Atanassov, J. Sharman, C. Durante, A. Kucernak, D. Jones, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2480–2500 RSC .
L. Birry, J. H. Zagal and J.-P. Dodelet, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 628–631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, X. Liu, Y. Li, R. Yu, L. Zheng, W. Yan, H. Wang, M. Xu and J. Shui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kumar, L. Dubau, M. Mermoux, J. Li, A. Zitolo, J. Nelayah, F. Jaouen and F. Maillard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3235–3243 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, I. Abs-Wurmbach, I. Herrmann-Geppert, J. Radnik, S. Fiechter and P. Bogdanoff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B69 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, W. Chen, J. Yang, M. Liu, X. Liu and J. Shui, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 304–315 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, I. Herrmann-Geppert, J. Behrends, K. Lips, S. Fiechter and P. Bogdanoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 635–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herranz, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, U. I. Kramm, E. Proietti, J. P. Dodelet, P. Bogdanoff, S. Fiechter, I. Abs-Wurmbach, P. Bertrand, T. M. Arruda and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16087–16097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Tao and P. A. Crozier, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3487–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu, P. Du, R. Si, J. Wang, X. Cui, H. Li, J. Xiao, T. Xu, J. Deng, F. Yang, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Li, X. Pan and X. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. K. Pfisterer, Y. Liang, O. Schneider and A. S. Bandarenka, Nature, 2017, 549, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Kramm, A. Zana, T. Vosch, S. Fiechter, M. Arenz and D. Schmeißer, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 969–981 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mamtani, D. Singh, J. Tian, J.-M. M. Millet, J. T. Miller, A. C. Co and U. S. Ozkan, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 1749–1770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, Z. W. Chen, K. Artyushkova, F. H. Garzon and P. Zelenay, ECS Trans., 2008, 16, 159–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, B. Zhang, Z. Feng and D. S. Su, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, H. B. Chen, D. G. Yang, Y. Gao and H. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 97259–97265 RSC .
C.-C. Hou, H.-F. Wang, C. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1658–1693 RSC .
T. Al-Zoubi, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, B. Janicek, C. Sun, C. E. Schulz, X. Zhang, A. A. Gewirth, P. Huang, P. Zelenay and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5477–5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. He, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Su, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824–2832 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Karakalos, L. Luo, Z. Qiao, X. Xie, C. Wang, D. Su, Y. Shao and G. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14143–14149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Luo, C. Wang, Y. Li, X. Wang, L. Gong, T. Zhao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2420–2426 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Ren, J. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25875–25880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, A. Han, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, Q. Zhang, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Qu, Z. J. Li, W. X. Chen, Y. Lin, T. W. Yuan, Z. K. Yang, C. M. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Y. Zhou, Z. B. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. D. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, J. P. Dodelet and M. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5553–5558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jaouen, J. Herranz, M. Lefevre, J. P. Dodelet, U. I. Kramm, I. Herrmann, P. Bogdanoff, J. Maruyama, T. Nagaoka, A. Garsuch, J. R. Dahn, T. Olson, S. Pylypenko, P. Atanassov and E. A. Ustinov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1623–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stariha, K. Artyushkova, M. J. Workman, A. Serov, S. Mckinney, B. Halevi and P. Atanassov, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shui, C. Chen, L. Grabstanowicz, D. Zhao and D. J. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 10629–10634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shang, H. Yu, X. Huang, T. Bian, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L.-B. Huang, W.-J. Jiang, X. Zhang, Y.-Y. Chen, Z. Wei, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7781–7787 RSC .
Y. F. Ye, F. Cai, H. B. Li, H. H. Wu, G. X. Wang, Y. S. Li, S. Miao, S. H. Xie, R. Si, J. Wang and X. H. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gong, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. Luo, K. Li, L. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. Wu, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, C. Liu and W. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13923–13928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, I. Matanovic, E. Weiler, P. Atanassov and K. Artyushkova, ACS Appl. Energy Mater, 2018, 1, 5948–5953 CrossRef .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, K. Zang, J. Luo, L. Wang, S. Gao, X. Mamat, G. Hu, T. Wagberg and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13800–13804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yuan, S. Sfaelou, M. Qiu, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, X. Zhuang, Y. Chen, C. Yuan, X. Feng and U. Scherf, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 252–260 CrossRef .
H. Sun, M. Wang, X. Du, Y. Jiao, S. Liu, T. Qian, Y. Yan, C. Liu, M. Liao, Q. Zhang, L. Meng, L. Gu, J. Xiong and C. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20952–20957 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10126–10141 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Peng, F. F. Liu, X. J. Liu, S. J. Liao, C. H. You, X. L. Tian, H. X. Nan, F. Luo, H. Y. Song, Z. Y. Fu and P. Y. Huang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3797–3805 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ramaswamy and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18015–18026 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, X. Li, P. Ganesan and B. N. Popov, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2853–2858 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rauf, Y.-D. Zhao, Y.-C. Wang, Y.-P. Zheng, C. Chen, X.-D. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 73, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Mustain, M. Chatenet, M. Page and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2805–2838 RSC .
S. Sultan, J. N. Tiwari, A. N. Singh, S. Zhumagali, M. Ha, C. W. Myung, P. Thangavel and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900624 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, R. Chenitz, M. Lefèvre, S. Sun and J.-P. Dodelet, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 111–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. P. Dodelet, G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807615 CrossRef .
D. Banham, S. Ye, K. Pei, J.-I. Ozaki, T. Kishimoto and Y. Imashiro, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 334–348 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre and J.-P. Dodelet, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2749–2760 CrossRef .
M. Ferrandon, X. Wang, A. J. Kropf, D. J. Myers, G. Wu, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 110, 282–291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gubler, S. M. Dockheer and W. H. Koppenol, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B755 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Coms, H. Liu and J. E. Owejan, ECS Trans., 2019, 16, 1735–1747 CrossRef .
C. H. Choi, C. Baldizzone, G. Polymeros, E. Pizzutilo, O. Kasian, A. K. Schuppert, N. R. Sahraie, M. T. Sougrati, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and F. Jaouen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3136–3146 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chenitz, U. I. Kramm, M. Lefèvre, V. Glibin, G. Zhang, S. Sun and J.-P. Dodelet, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 365–382 RSC .
I. Martinaiou, A. Shahraei, F. Grimm, H. Zhang, C. Wittich, S. Klement, S. J. Dolique, H. J. Kleebe, R. W. Stark and U. I. Kramm, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 243, 183–196 CrossRef CAS .
V. Goellner, C. Baldizzone, A. Schuppert, M. T. Sougrati, K. Mayrhofer and F. Jaouen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18454–18462 RSC .
Y. Yu, H. Li, H. Wang, X.-Z. Yuan, G. Wang and M. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 10–23 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Lee and Y. Tak, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 674–678 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. de Bruijn, V. A. T. Dam and G. J. M. Janssen, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 3–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Reiser, L. Bregoli, T. W. Patterson, J. S. Yi, J. D. Yang, M. L. Perry and T. D. Jarvi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bae, M. W. Chung, S. G. Ji, F. Jaouen and C. H. Choi, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8485–8495 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, V. Prabhakaran, X. Xie, S. Park, Y. Wang and Y. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2020, e1908232,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201908232 .
Y. H. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Y. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. J. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. F. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
T. Kinumoto, M. Inaba, Y. Nakayama, K. Ogata, R. Umebayashi, A. Tasaka, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, S. Liu, C. Priest, Q. Shi and G. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3484–3524 RSC .
V. Prabhakaran, C. G. Arges and V. Ramani, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, X. Su, J. Liu, J. Tian, Z. Wang, K. Sun, Z. Rui, W. Yang and Z. Zou, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 88, 19–23 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kocha, K. Shinozaki, J. W. Zack, D. J. Myers, N. N. Kariuki, T. Nowicki, V. Stamenkovic, Y. Kang, D. Li and D. Papageorgopoulos, Electrocatalysis, 2017, 8, 366–374 CrossRef CAS .
V. Di Noto, E. Negro, A. Nale, G. Pagot, K. Vezzù and P. Atanassov, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 25, 100626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martens, L. Asen, G. Ercolano, F. Dionigi, C. Zalitis, A. Hawkins, A. Martinez Bonastre, L. Seidl, A. C. Knoll, J. Sharman, P. Strasser, D. Jones and O. Schneider, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 274–284 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. L. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806296 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Beltrán and S. Litster, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1158–1161 CrossRef .
Y. Garsany, J. Ge, J. St-Pierre, R. Rocheleau and K. E. Swider-Lyons, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F628–F640 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shinozaki, J. W. Zack, R. M. Richards, B. S. Pivovar and S. S. Kocha, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1144–F1158 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shinozaki, J. W. Zack, S. Pylypenko, B. S. Pivovar and S. S. Kocha, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1384–F1396 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, L. Lin, H.-T. Chung, S. Komini Babu, U. Martinez, G. M. Purdy and P. Zelenay, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 1273–1281 CAS .
M. Chourashiya, R. Sharma and S. M. Andersen, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 14181–14187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inaba, A. W. Jensen, G. W. Sievers, M. Escudero-Escribano, A. Zana and M. Arenz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 988–994 RSC .
L. Zhang, D. P. Wilkinson, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 326–336 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2020, 4, 45–68 CrossRef CAS .
D. Banham and S. Ye, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 629–638 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, D. Jones, N. Coutard, V. Artero, P. Strasser and A. Kucernak, Johnson Matthey Technol. Rev., 2018, 62, 231–255 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Thompson and D. Papageorgopoulos, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 558–561 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Owejan, J. E. Owejan and W. Gu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F824–F833 CrossRef CAS .
Q. R. Shi, Y. H. He, X. W. Bai, M. Y. Wang, D. A. Cullen, M. Lucero, X. H. Zhao, K. L. More, H. Zhou, Z. X. Feng, Y. Y. Liu and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3544–3555 RSC .
D. Malko, T. Lopes, E. Symianakis and A. R. Kucernak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 142–152 RSC .
T. Reshetenko, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova, I. Matanovic, S. Sarah and P. Atanassov, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 556–571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Banham, J. Y. Choi, T. Kishimoto and S. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804846 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, H. Guo, S. Hwang, X. Yang, Z. He, J. Braaten, S. Karakalos, W. Shan, M. Wang, H. Zhou, Z. Feng, K. L. More, G. Wang, D. Su, D. A. Cullen, L. Fei, S. Litster and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003577 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kabir, S. Medina, G. Wang, G. Bender, S. Pylypenko and K. C. Neyerlin, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. Wang, X. Yang, Q. Shi, Z. Qiao, M. Lucero, Q. Ma, K. L. More, D. A. Cullen, Z. Feng and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21698–21705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Li, M. J. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Y. Wang, B. Y. Li, K. X. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, H. G. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. X. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. F. Wang, Z. B. Wang and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Liu, Z. Qiao, S. Hwang, Z. Y. Liu, H. G. Zhang, D. Su, H. Xu, G. Wu and G. F. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 195–203 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, F. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wei and W. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 12826–12836 RSC .
F. Luo, A. Roy, L. Silvioli, D. A. Cullen, A. Zitolo, M. T. Sougrati, I. C. Oguz, T. Mineva, D. Teschner, S. Wagner, J. Wen, F. Dionigi, U. I. Kramm, J. Rossmeisl, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1215–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Tao, M. Huang, M. Zuo, Y. Yang, K. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
Z. Chen, W. Gong, Z. Liu, S. Cong, Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Ma, H. Yu, G. Li, W. Lu, W. Ren and Z. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 394–403 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Wang, D. D. Wang, S. Liu, P. Jiang, Z. Y. Lin, P. P. Xu, K. Yang, J. Lu, H. G. Tong, L. Hu, W. J. Zhang and Q. W. Chen, J. Catal., 2020, 389, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, P. Du, W. Liang, H. Zhang, P. Wu, C. Cai and Z. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15012–15022 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. C. Huang, C. L. Dong, C. J. Chen, R. S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yuan, D. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, M. K. H. Leung, Y. Chen and U. Scherf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, D. Zheng, M. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Fan, B. Gao, L. Gu, Y. Guo, J. Qin, J. Wei, Y. Zhao and G. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14639–14646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, W. Sun, R. Sui, J. Pei, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5443–5450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, X. Zhou, J. Dong, A. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Pei, Z. Li, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Yang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, T. Sun, X. Yang, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, J. Li, W. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. Wang, R. Xu, W. Chen, L. Zheng, A. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2348–2352 RSC .
Z. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Shang, W. Chen, T. Sun, H. Li, J. Dong, J. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Wang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, Z. Yang, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3508–3514 RSC .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, G. Li, N. Li, S. Li, Z. P. Cano, L. Ma, P. Cui, P. Xu, G. Jiang, H. Jin, S. Wang, T. Wu, J. Lu, A. Yu, D. Su and Z. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9640–9645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chong, J. Wen, J. Kubal, F. G. Sen, J. Zou, J. Greeley, M. Chan, H. Barkholtz, W. Ding and D. J. Liu, Science, 2018, 362, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ye, S. Chen, Y. Lin, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Zheng, Z. Qi, C. Wang, R. Long, M. Chen, J. Zhu, P. Gao, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem, 2019, 5, 2865–2878 CAS .
Y. Zhou, W. Yang, W. Utetiwabo, Y. M. Lian, X. Yin, L. Zhou, P. Yu, R. Chen and S. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1404–1410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, C. He, B. Li, Y. He, D. A. Cullen, E. C. Wegener, A. J. Kropf, U. Martinez, Y. Cheng, M. H. Engelhard, M. E. Bowden, M. Song, T. Lemmon, X. S. Li, Z. Nie, J. Liu, D. J. Myers, P. Zelenay, G. Wang, G. Wu, V. Ramani and Y. Shao, Nat. Catal, 2020, 3, 1044–1054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ao, W. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Ding, G. Nam, L. Soule, A. Abdelhafiz, C. Wang and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3032–3040 RSC .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
A. K. Mechler, N. R. Sahraie, V. Armel, A. Zitolo, M. T. Sougrati, J. N. Schwämmlein, D. J. Jones and F. Jaouen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F1084–F1091 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Wang, P.-F. Zhu, H. Yang, L. Huang, Q.-H. Wu, M. Rauf, J.-Y. Zhang, J. Dong, K. Wang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1914–1921 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, V. Prabhakaran, Y. He, Y. Shao and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805126 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Armel, S. Hindocha, F. Salles, S. Bennett, D. Jones and F. Jaouen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 453–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Liu, L. Zheng and J. Shui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1204–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, X. F. Hao, Z. Jiang, X. P. Sun, D. Xu, J. Wang, H. X. Zhong, F. L. Meng and X. B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15070–15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, X. Huang, A. Goswami, R. Silva, B. R. Sathe, E. Mikmekova and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4372–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, C.-S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G. P. Hao, A. S. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. Roldan Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 944 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Pan, H. Zhang, K. Liu, D. Cullen, K. More, M. Wang, Z. Feng, G. Wang, G. Wu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3116–3122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
C. Yan, H. Li, Y. Ye, H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. Xiao, S. Miao, S. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC .
T. Möller, W. Ju, A. Bagger, X. Wang, F. Luo, T. Ngo Thanh, A. S. Varela, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 640–647 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Ergui Luo
	Ergui Luo is a doctor graduated from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), under the supervision of Prof. Changpeng Liu and Prof. Wei Xing. Her research interests focus on the design and application of carbon-based electrocatalysts for fuel cells.

Yuyi Chu
	Yuyi Chu is currently a master's student in Physical Chemistry at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Wei Xing. She received her bachelor's degree at Nanjing University of Science and Technology (NJUST) in 2019. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and characterization of non-precious metal catalysts for oxygen reduction in fuel cells.

Junjie Ge
	Dr Junjie Ge is a Professor of Chemistry in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. She received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from CIAC in 2010 and completed postdoctoral training at the University of South Carolina (2010–2012) and University of Hawaii (2012–2015). She joined CIAC in 2015 as a professor. She has published over 100 peer-reviewed papers and several posters, abstracts and presentations. Her current research interests comprehend hydrogen energy and fuel cells, basic electrochemistry, and electrocatalysis, mainly concentrating on proton exchange membrane-based energy conversion systems.

Chang Hyuck Choi
	Dr Chang Hyuck Choi received his BS (2007) and PhD (2012) degrees in the Department of Chemical Engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea. He was a postdoctoral fellow at KAIST from 2012 to 2014. From 2014 to 2016, he worked as a Humboldt research fellow at Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung (MPIE), Germany. He is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Korea. His research interests mainly focus on the fundamental understanding of electrocatalysis for energy conversion.

Changpeng Liu
	Prof. Changpeng Liu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry and joined Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002. His research interests focus on the design, preparation technology and performance of catalysts, electrodes/MEAs and stacks in the fields of PEMFC, DMFC and electrolysis of water.

Wei Xing
	Prof. Wei Xing is currently the director of Clean Energy Laboratory in Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinses Academy of Sciences. After receiving his PhD in Physical Chemistry at CIAC in 1995, he worked at Hong Kong Productivity Council (HKPC), researching electrochemical treatment of metal surfaces. In 2001, he joined CIAC as a professor and devoted his work to advanced chemical power sources. He has published over 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals and applied over 30 patents. His research areas currently involve proton exchange membrane fuel cells from fundamental electrocatalytic processes to relevant fuel cell assembly and testing.

Broader context
With growing concern over energy crisis and urban air pollution, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are among the most efficient and cleanest alternatives to conventional internal-combustion engines. However, the high cost of platinum group metal (PGM) catalysts severely hampers the sustainable deployment of PEMFCs due to the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode. To address this issue, nonprecious metal catalysts, especially M–Nx/C catalysts, have been intensively explored with remarkable progress achieved in recent years. In this review, the history of M–Nx/C catalysts and the rational design in active site structures are comprehensively discussed, and the advanced technologies for identifying active sites and the main recent breakthroughs are also reviewed. To realize the future commercialization of high-performance M–Nx/C catalysts, several key challenges are summarized with possible research directions proposed to overcome the bottlenecks.

O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O	(1.1)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2	(1.2)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	(1.3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Wroblowa model for the ORR. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram showing the possible ORR intermediates and mechanisms. Activity volcano correlations versus the (c) MIII/MII redox potential and (d) M–O2 adsorption energy. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 
O2 + * → O2*	(2.1)
1/2O2* → O*	(2.2)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(2.3)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*	(2.4)
H2O* → H2O	(2.5)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*	(3.1)
OOH* → O* + OH*	(3.2)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(3.3)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *	(3.4)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*	(4.1)
OOH* + H+ + e− → HOOH*	(4.2)
HOOH* → 2OH*	(4.3)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *	(4.4)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*	(5.1)
OOH* + H+ + e− → H2O2*	(5.2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Top and side views of the proposed structures of Doublet D1 (FeN4/C), Doublet D2 (FeN2+2) and Doublet D3 (N–FeN2+2). Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SWV profiles of the Fe–Nx catalyst supported on black pearl carbon before and after pyrolysis at 800 °C in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M NaOH. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1.0, Fe0.5, Fe0.5-900 and Fe0.5-950. (d and e) Active sites identified by Zitolo et al. through K-edge XANES fitting. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group (NPG).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of individual Fe atoms in a few-layer graphene sheet. (b) EELS collected from single Fe atoms (labeled 1, 2) and few-layer graphene (labeled 3). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) XANES spectra of FePhenMOF–ArNH3 dry powders, Fe(II)Pc, Fe(III)PcCl and Fe(III)TPPCl. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Fe K-edge XANES spectra (d), FT-EXAFS spectra (e) and wavelet transform (f) of Fe-ISAs/CN, Fe foil, and Fe2O3. (g) EXAFS r space fitting curves of Fe-ISAs/CN. (h) Schematic model of the Fe-centered moiety in Fe-ISAs/CN. Fe, orange; N, blue; O, red; C, gray. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Ex situ and in situ XANES (a) and FT-EXAFS (b) spectra of the FePhenMOF–ArNH3 catalyst. (c) XANES spectra of Fe–Nx/C catalysts pyrolyzed from various precursors collected at 0.1 V in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4; the XANES spectra of FePc is also shown as a reference of D2. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed local structure of D1 and the Fe–N switching behavior. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) ORR activity of the PmPDA-FeNx/C (950 °C) catalyst in 0.1 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 5 mM SCN−. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) CO uptake (nmol mgcatalyst−1) versus ORR mass activity Im at 0.8 V (mA mgcatalyst−1) of catalysts in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Normalized TPD profiles of different catalysts. Conditions: CO adsorption at 193 K, desorption ramp: 20 K min−1 to 693 K. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, The Author(s). (d) ORR activity of the catalyst before, during and after nitrite adsorption. (e) Narrow baseline scan in the nitrite reductive stripping region and (f) expansion of the region associated with nitrite stripping. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2016, The Author(s).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the synthesis process of typical M–Nx/C catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication of Co–Nx/C SACs from the Zn/Co bimetallic MOF. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fabrication of Cu–Nx/C SACs via a gas-migration/NH3-mediated strategy. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depiction of the macropore–micropore structure and charge/mass transfer in the Fe/N/CF catalyst. (b) Tafel plot for the kinetic activity of Fe/N/CF in a H2–O2 fuel cell. (c) Power density curves of fuel cells with Fe/N/CF, commercial 20 wt% Pt/C, or Fe/N/KB as the cathode catalyst. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The design concept for tuning the kinetic activity of the Fe–N4 site by controlling electron-withdrawing/donating sulfur functionalities. (b) Relationship between the d-band center and the amount of charge transfer from the functional groups. (c) Correlation of adsorption energy of various intermediates with the d-band center. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the double-layer structure during ORR in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) conditions. Insets a and b illustrate the ISET and OSET processes. (b) Proposed 4e− electrocatalytic ISET mechanism in dilute alkaline media. (c) ORR and (d) HRR activities of the FeTPP/C catalyst (pyrolyzed at 800 °C) in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M NaOH. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the ROS-induced carbon oxidation of Fe–Nx/C catalysts. (b) First-principles DFT analysis of the effect of adjacent oxygen-functionalities on the O2-binding energy and electron work function of an FeN4 site. (c) ORR activity and (d) selectivity of the FeNC-1 catalyst before and after acidic H2O2-treatment. ORR polarization curves of the FeNC-1 catalyst before and after (e) acidic or (f) alkaline H2O2-treatment, measured in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the atomically dispersed MnN4 site catalyst. (b) ORR polarization plots of 20Mn-NC-second and 20Fe-NC-second catalysts initially and after 30000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Polarization curves of Cr/N/C-950 and Fe/N/C-950 before and after 20000 cycles. Electrolyte: 0.1 M HClO4. (d) Measurements of the ROS production level on Cr/N/C-950 and Fe/N/C-950. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Proposed configuration of Fe-Co dual sites. (b) LSV curves of (Fe, Co)/N-C, Fe SAs/NC, Co SAs/N-C and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (c) H2/O2 fuel cell polarization plots with (Fe,Co)/N-C as the cathode catalyst. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Gibbs free energy diagrams at (d) 1.23 V and (e) 0.62 V on CoN4, FeN4, and FeCoN5–OH sites. (f) Proposed ORR mechanism on the FeCoN5–OH site. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Co–N–C-10. (h) Mass-specific activity of Co–N–C-x catalysts. (i) Comparison of the mass-specific activity of the Co particle, CoN4 and Co2N5 sites. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 



(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	FeN4	0.80 V	0.5 M H2SO4	—	H2/O2: 0.87 W cm−2;	
102

H2/air: 0.42 W cm−2
TPI@Z8(SiO2)–650–C	FeN4	0.823 V	0.5 M H2SO4	—	H2/2.5 bar O2: 1.18 W cm−2;	
144

H2/air: 0.42 W cm−2
Co–N–C@F127	CoN4	0.84 V	0.5 M H2SO4	40 mV (30k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.87 W cm−2;	
208

H2/air: 0.28 W cm−2
Co(mIm)–NC	CoN4	0.82 V	0.5 M H2SO4	8 mV (10k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.64 W cm−2;	
259

H2/air: 0.32 W cm−2
20Mn–NC–second	MnN4	0.80 V	0.5 M H2SO4	17 mV (30k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.46 W cm−2	
238

Cr/N/C–950	CrN4	0.773 V	0.1 M HClO4	15 mV (20k cycles)	—	
127

SnNC	SnNx	∼0.73 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	
241

(Fe,Co)/N–C	FeCoN6	0.863 V	0.1 M HClO4	∼0 mV (50k cycles)	H2/O2 (0.2 MPa): 0.98 W cm−2;	
41

H2/air: 0.505 W cm−2
FeCoNX/C	FeCoN5–OH	0.86 V	0.1 M HClO4	13 mV (5k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.819 W cm−2	
31

H2/O2: 0.418 W cm−2	
130

Co–N–C–10	Co2N5	0.79 V	0.1 M HClO4	12 mV (20k cycles)	
	

Ru–SSC	RuN4	0.824 V	0.1 M HClO4	17 mV (20k cycles)	H2/1.5 bar O2: 0.64 W cm−2	
126

Ir–SAC	IrN4	0.864 V	0.1 M HClO4	∼0 mV (5k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.932 W cm−2	
255

Pt1-N/BP	g-P–N1–Pt1	0.76 V	0.1 M HClO4	3 mV (10k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.68 W cm−2	
260

LP@PF–1	Pt–Co, Co–Nx–Cy	∼0.94 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	H2/O2: ∼1.05 W cm−2;	
256

H2/air: ∼0.74 W cm−2
LP@PF–2	Pt–Co, Co–Nx–Cy	0.96 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	H2/O2: ∼1.42 W cm−2;	

H2/air: ∼0.8 W cm−2
Fe2–N–C	Fe2–N–C	0.78 V	0.5 M H2SO4	20 mV (20k cycles)	—	
257

0.905 V	0.1 M KOH	—
Zn/CoN–C	ZnCoN6	0.796 V	0.1 HClO4	∼0 mV (10k cycles)	H2/O2: 0.705 W cm−2	
131

0.861 V	0.1 M KOH	9 mV (10k cycles)
Cu–SAs/N–C	CuN4	∼0.73 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	
169

0.895 V	0.1 M KOH	∼0 mV (5k cycles)
Mg–N–C	MN2C	0.79 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	
243

0.91 V	0.1 M KOH	∼0 mV (5k cycles)	—
Zn–N–C	ZnN4	0.746 V	0.1 M HClO4	19.9 mV (1k cycles)	—	
242

0.873 V	0.1 M KOH	0.54 mV (1k cycles)
WN5	WN5	0.77 V	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	
245

0.88 V	0.1 M KOH	∼10 mV (10k cycles)
S,N–Fe/N/C–CNT	Fe–Nx	0.85 V	0.1 M KOH	∼0 mV (10k cycles)	—	
118

Fe-SAs/NSC	FeN4	0.87 V	0.1 M KOH	∼0 mV (5k cycles)	—	
248


 	Fig. 14  (a) ORR polarization curves of Ir-SAC and counterparts in 0.1 M HClO4. Gibbs free energy diagram for ORR on (b) IrN4 and (c) Ir19 clusters. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) LSVs of different catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (e) Cathodic MA Tafel plots derived from fuel cell measurements. (f) Free-energy diagram of the ORR pathways. (I) * or # + O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, (II) OOH* or OOH# + 3H+ + 3e−, (III) O* or O# + H2O + 2H+ + 2e−, (IV) * + H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−, (V) 2OH# + 2H+ + 2e−, (VI) OH* or OH# + H2O + H+ + e−, and (VII) * or # + 2H2O, where * and # denote the binding site on Co–N4 embedded in graphene and the binding site on a strained Pt(111) facet, respectively. Reproduced with permission.256 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
