Recent advances and future perspectives in MOF-derived single-atom catalysts and their application: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA08735A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA08735A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 3315-3363Recent advances and future perspectives in MOF-derived single-atom catalysts and their application: a review

        
          
            Siyi 
            Ma
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weigao 
            Han
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiliang 
            Han
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Dong
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Zhicheng 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, National Engineering Research Center for Fine Petrochemical Intermediates, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China. E-mail: tangzhicheng@licp.cas.cn; dongfang@licp.cas.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China
cDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China
Received 
      8th November 2022
    , Accepted 4th January 2023First published on 9th January 2023AbstractMetal–organic-framework-derived single-atom catalysts are widely used in the catalysis field due to their special structure and superior performance. In general, there is a strong relationship between the precise control of the interaction between the carriers and metals to design efficient MOF-derived single-atom catalysts (SACs). In this paper, the synthesis of SACs from multiple MOF derivatives, the formation mechanism of various single-atom sites, and their application in the catalysis field were reviewed in detail. We concluded that the different kinds of MOF substrates were used to construct coordination environments with different anchoring conditions. Simultaneously, the related catalytic mechanisms through the introduction of metal active centers in different coordination environments are discussed in detail. Subsequently, the use of MOF-derived SACs in the fields of electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and thermocatalysis is also introduced as well as some important characterization methods. Eventually, the field’s future potential and challenges were also outlined. How to regulate accurately the coordination environment of the central atoms from many aspects is addressed, so as to improve the catalytic performance of the catalysts and build a reasonable catalytic mechanism. Herein, we believe that this review can provide a good foundation for the future development and application of single-atom catalysts.Siyi MaSiyi Ma received her B.E. degree from Northwest Normal University in 2021. She is now a doctoral candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhicheng Tang of the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. At present, her main research direction is noble metal single-atom catalysts and their application in thermocatalysis.Weigao HanWeigao Han received his B.E. degree from Liaoning Petrochemical University. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Zhicheng Tang in 2022. His research direction is exploiting the preparation of high-performance environmental catalytic materials derived from MOFs.Weiliang HanWeiliang Han is a project associate researcher at the Lanzhou Institute of Physical Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He graduated from Lanzhou University of Technology with a M.S. degree in 2012. Since 2012, he has worked at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2021, he received his Ph.D. degree from Northwest Normal University. At present, he is mainly engaged in basic research and application research on catalytic elimination of VOCs, CO, and indoor air purification.Fang DongFang Dong is an associate researcher at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She received her Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Yulei Zhu in 2016. Her research is focused on exploiting the preparation of high-performance environmental catalytic materials, and she has a wealth of experience in the design, synthesis, optimization, characterization, and reaction mechanism research of high-performance catalytic materials derived from MOFs.Zhicheng TangZhicheng Tang is a professor and doctoral supervisor at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2008, he received his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has published more than 140 SCI papers as the first author or corresponding author. He is committed to the research of environmental catalysis and his main research includes flue gas denitration, waste incineration for dioxin removal, VOC treatment, CO low-temperature catalytic oxidation, indoor air purification, etc.
1. Introduction
Single-atom catalysts (SACs), a class of materials prepared by anchoring single metal atoms on a carrier and prepared by various efficient methods, show excellent features in heterogeneous catalytic reactions because of their maximum atom utilization. In 2011, Zhang's team prepared a new catalytic material by limiting Pt single atoms (Pt-SAs) on an FeOx support,1 thus proposing the concept of single-atom catalysts, which caused a stir among global researchers and promoted a qualitative leap in the field of catalysis. In a short period of more than a decade, the preparation,2 characterization,3 and application4 of SACs have achieved remarkable results. Generally speaking, the synthesis methods of SACs mainly include the wet chemical method (impregnation method,5 co-precipitation method,6etc.), atomic layer deposition method (ALD),7,8 pyrolysis method, and mass-separation soft landing method.9 Currently, various metal-based SACs have been successfully developed, incorporating metals such as platinum,10 cobalt,11 iron,12 copper,13,14 bismuth,15 palladium,16 ruthenium,17 nickel,10 and silver,18 and their various applications are also introduced. For the characterization of SACs, it is tough to efficiently distinguish the existence of single metal atoms. Therefore, more advanced and precise characterization instruments were used, such as X-ray absorption fine spectroscopy (XAFS) and high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM).19 Moreover, compared with traditional metal nanoparticles (Me NPs) and metal cluster catalysts, SACs can effectively improve the dispersity of metal atoms, so as to obtain the maximum atom utilization efficiency. Due to the existence of new characteristics such as unsaturated coordination environment, high surface free energy, and local electronic structure adjustment of single atoms,20–22 they exhibit excellent selectivity, activity, durability, and other catalytic performances for various catalytic reactions. Of course, an efficient coordination environment is inseparable from the induction of carriers, such as metal oxides,23–25 graphene,26,27 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),28,29 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),30 metal–organic polyhedra (MOP),31 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which is essential for the local environmental regulation of metal single atoms (Me-SAs) in SACs. Besides, the successful synthesis of SACs also significantly reduces the cost of preparation. However, the problems and challenges faced by SACs are also need to be studied by the scholars all the time. On the one hand, in view of the high surface free energy and easy movement of single atoms (SAs), one of the difficulties in preparing highly active and stable SACs is how to firmly fix single atoms to prevent agglomeration or even sintering in subsequent different environments.32 On the other hand, with the rapid development of SACs, the preparation of catalysts with high loadings about single atoms has been put on the agenda. Therefore, to increase the content of single atoms, the design of SACs with strong anchoring ability, uniform atomic active centers, and high density of single atoms is the main research focus at present. In this paper, relatively new metal–organic framework derivatives will be introduced as the support materials, contributing to the research progress of SACs.33
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have excellent properties of functional ligands, tunable pore size, and high porosity, which are widely used in catalysis,34 gas storage and separation,35,36 and energy storage-conversion technology.37 MOFs were created by the Xu team,38 and are composed of metal nodes and organic ligands, and it has been explored that MOF derivatives can inherit some properties of MOF precursors. In other words, MOF derivatives can improve the defects in some directions of pure MOFs and effectively expand the application field of MOF materials, especially under certain harsh conditions.39 With the rapid development of MOF materials, functional nanomaterials constructed by traditional methods could not meet the current catalytic direction. Previously, Zitolo et al.40 confirmed the availability of MOF derivatives in the preparation of SACs. Naturally, MOF-derived materials have emerged as ideal materials in the field of SACs. It is well known that the biggest difference between SACs and other catalysts lies in their extraordinary single-atom structure, which not only improves the efficiency of atom utilization but also improves the process of adsorption and activation of reactants.7 In view of the original properties that MOF carriers can retain, MOF-derived materials are mostly used to construct porous carbon materials, including carbides and phosphates.41 SACs are an emerging era, and SACs derived from MOFs have also become promising materials with great prospects in catalytic research.42 To date, multifunctional MOF-derived SACs have made significant progress, especially in electrocatalysis, and interested scholars may refer to these review papers.43,44
So far, the precise regulation of unsaturated coordination, size effects, and local electron density around metal atoms has been developed at the level of single atoms.45–47 Therefore, the detection of single atoms cannot be outdone. Generally, high-resolution performance and advanced characterization technology are used for catalyst detection. HAADF-STEM could be utilized to prove the coexistence about single atoms and nanoparticles on the surface of catalysts.48,49 However, it is quite challenging to clearly express the catalytic mechanism and other laws at the atomic scale with existing characterization methods.3 At present, it is mainly based on the analysis of the site and then extended to the exploration of the mechanism. The active site, a place where catalytic reactions take place, is made up of a central metal and its surrounding coordination atoms. Notoriously, the catalytic performance of SACs is intimately associated with the active sites.50 Due to the controllability of the coordination environment of metal ions,51 it provides a feasible way to extensively design atomic-level studies. However, due to the highly complex and unpredictable growth process of MOF crystals, it is hard to control and determine the location of metal precursors, and it is still difficult to give a definitive answer to the catalytic mechanism of the active sites obtained by characterization. Naturally, the auxiliary method of theoretical calculation comes into being. The proposal of functional theories, such as quantum mechanics and so on,52 provided researchers with powerful theoretical calculation and simulation tools. Theoretical calculation can systematically study the active sites, such as revealing the catalytic reaction mechanism at the sites,53 calculating the energy barrier of transition states of single atoms,54 and it can also analyze the dispersion behavior of metal atoms.55 At the moment, there are many theoretical calculation methods, but density functional theory (DFT) is the main method adopted. Some groups mainly focus on purely theoretical calculations.56,57 With the help of these calculations, they can further understand the relationship between metal atoms and coordination atoms, and even the relationship between catalytic activity and selectivity. However, how to generate realistic theoretical models and establish a close relationship between catalytic performance and coordination states remains a major challenge. Therefore, basic information can be provided by means of a variety of characterization techniques, and theoretical analysis can be provided by means of computational simulation. The combination of theory and experiment is becoming the growing trend of single atoms.
In this paper, through various synthesis and treatment methods, we established a suitable coordination environment for metal ions from functionalized MOF materials and then introduced the connection between single-atom active sites and catalytic reaction mechanisms. Finally, the article summarized the research progress in electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and thermocatalysis of MOF-derived SACs in recent years, and introduced the main characterization techniques of single-atom identification in SACs. Most importantly, the role of active sites of MOF-derived SACs in the catalytic pathway was introduced from coordination and electronic environment in combination with theoretical calculations. At the same time, it also puts forward the existing shortcomings and challenges and provided constructive suggestions for the future of SACs. The purpose of this review was to provide some practical directions for studying MOF-derived SACs, so as to facilitate the understanding of others' research results and the construction of innovative ideas.
2. The synthesis and coordination environment of SACs derived from MOF nanocages
Up to now, the preparation strategies for SACs have been rich and colorful. However, SACs are prone to aggregation during the process of preparation and use, which makes it difficult to provide maximum atom utilization and thus reduces catalytic performance. Therefore, it has become a hot topic to improve the stability and loading capacity of single atoms by changing preparation methods, carriers, and metal types. The emergence of MOFs and their derivatives have solved this difficulty for many research studies. Most of the MOF-derived SACs are obtained through pyrolysis, and in the pyrolysis process, the difference in internal and external pressure of MOF material promotes the appearance of the derived carbon and nitrogen structure, thus expanding the cavity of the MOFs.58 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1, these catalysts showed excellent performance in various catalytic reactions, combined with the advantages of SACs and MOF derivatives.59–61 On the one hand, the abundant pore structure in MOFs contributes to the exposure of more active sites. On the other hand, the pore structure can also promote the migration of substances,62 so that the active species can fully contact with active sites for a long time, thus improving the catalytic efficiency.63 Meanwhile, it is precisely because of the advantages of single metal sites, tunable functional ligands (e.g., organic ligands rich in nitrogen or oxygen species), and rich pore structures that MOF derivatives can boost SACs to the next level. Now, the main preparation methods of MOF-derived SACs are direct pyrolysis and post pyrolysis (secondary pyrolysis, acid etching, and top-down preparation from bulk) according to the methods of forming single atoms.
 Fig. 1  The advantages of MOF-derived SACs. 
Besides, according to the structural classification of anchoring single atoms, the strategies for preparing MOF-derived SACs can be divided into the metal node strategy, organic link capture strategy, and encapsulation strategy. MOF derivatives can firmly control single atoms on the carriers to prevent agglomeration due to their unique properties of anchoring, which led to their widespread use in the preparation of SACs. To date, ZIF materials are the most popular MOF precursors.64,65 The original inorganic nodes of the materials can obtain single atoms by high-temperature pyrolysis or acid treatment, and it is easy to make the target metals replace part of zinc, so the metals will be evenly distributed on the MOF derivatives in the form of M–Nx. Importantly, the carbon–nitrogen structures derived from MOFs can anchor target single atoms tightly to effectively avoid their migration and aggregation. In order to further explore the coordination environments provided by MOF precursors for single atoms and to achieve the anchoring operation of single atoms after pyrolysis, the following part would concentrate on introducing various SAC preparation strategies proposed in recent years based on various MOF substrates. This will help future researchers in this field by offering insightful information.
Zeolite-like imidazole frameworks (ZIFs) can be synthesized by the reaction of zinc or cobalt species with imidazole ligands.66,67 As ZIF materials have multiple modification methods, good specific surface area and other advantages, the SACs derived from such MOF materials have been extensively studied, as shown in Table 1. Therefore, the interaction between metal ions and the coordination environment was mainly introduced below from the direction of synthesis of Me-SAs by adding target metals to ZIF materials and their own metals.
Table 1 Summary of ZIF-derived SACs




ZIF precursor
Metal sites
Metal configuration
Morphology
Preparation methods of single atoms
Performance (vs. RHE)
Ref.




NTU-70
Co
Co–Nx
Nanosheet
First heated to 300 °C and then pyrolysis at higher temperature under N2 gas

E
1/2 = 0.78 V in 0.1 M KOH

68



Fe-doped ZIF8
Fe
Fe–N4
Nanorods
Pyrolysis at 900 °C under N2 gas

E
1/2 = 0.91 V in 0.1 M KOH and E1/2 = 0.77 V in 0.1 M HClO4

69



ZIF-67@DCD
Co
Co–N4
Carbon nanotubes
Pyrolysis at 750 °C under Ar gas and acid treatment with 2 M HCl
ORR E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M KOH; OER overpotential value = 410 mV in 0.1 M KOH

70



UNT ZIF-67
Co
Co–N4
Urchin-like nanotube
Pyrolysis at 500 °C in vacuum
ORR Eonset = 0.97 V and E1/2 = 0.89 V in; OER Tafel slope = 70 mV dec−1

71



Cd-based DABCO-TPA MOF
Fe
Fe–Nx
Orthorhombic morphology
Pyrolysis at 750 °C in an ammonia

E
1/2 = 0.70 V in 0.1 M HClO4

72



Cu-phen/ZIF-8
Cu
Cu–N4
—
Pyrolysis at 1050 °C in Ar flow
FY(EtOH) = 55% in 0.1 M CsHCO3 at −1.2 V

73





Zn/Co species in ZIF materials can be used to prepare Me-SAs. Zhou and Yang et al.58 proposed the vacuum pyrolysis method to enlarge the MOF cavity to construct a 3D graphene framework so that the ligands could effectively bind cobalt ions and achieve atomic dispersion on the framework in the form of metal nodes (Fig. 2A and B). In addition, Yang et al.5 used the original zinc ions in ZIF materials and made them into Zn-SAC with a high load (11.3 wt%). They used the template method and pyrolysis method to prepare ZIF materials into hollow structures and combined them with N-rich ligands to promote the preparation of high-density active-sites catalysts as shown in Fig. 2C. Subsequently, a zinc single-atom catalyst was successfully prepared and it was obvious that the prepared spherical catalyst had hollow structure according to various electron microscope images (Fig. 2D). The inner voids of hollow structure can effectively reflect light,74 and then form photothermal effect, which significantly improves the catalytic performance of catalysts. Moreover, the construction of composite substrates also provided constructive assistance for the coordination environments of Me-SAs. Guo et al.75 also designed a Zn-SAC derived from ZIF materials to construct three-dimensional ordered large pores through the hard template-assisted strategy. They added a composite material SiO2-CCT (colloidal crystal template) into the zinc precursor solution, formed a ZIF-8 single crystal in the gap of hard template SiO2-CCT, and then pyrolyzed and carbonized in an inert atmosphere and removed the template to prepare the Zn–N-HOPCPs catalyst (Fig. 2E). SEM and HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 2F and G) showed that the catalyst retained a hierarchical, interconnected three-dimensional macroporous structure, and was distributed on the support in the form of Zn-SAs. In fact, SiO2-CCT can play a physical isolation role, not only preventing material collapse but also effectively inhibiting the agglomeration of metal species during calcination.76 Therefore, with the isolation of SiO2-CCT, the catalyst inhibited the migration of zinc ions at high temperature, and with the help of the large specific surface area and templates of MOFs, more internal metal ions could be exposed, thus generating more single-atom active centers, creating a feasible path for designing other MOF-derived SACs with a hierarchical structure. Obviously, ZIF materials can be directly pyrolyzed to generate SACs by virtue of the effective combination of organic ligands and metal ions, that is, organic ligands will produce porous N-doped carbon (NC) frameworks22 with rich-nitrogen characteristics during pyrolysis and carbonization, and metal ions can be captured67 under high-temperature environment to build stable Me-SAs, so ZIF materials themselves can be used as an excellent precursor of MOF-derived SACs.
 Fig. 2  (A) Fabrication of Co SAs/3D GFs and (B) four possible atomic configurations. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (C) Showing the synthetic process of the HPC and (D) the graphs of (a) SEM, (b) TEM, (c) HAADF-STEM images of HPC-800, and (d) the corresponding elemental mapping of the selected area in (c). Reprinted with permission.5 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (E) The route of synthesis of the Zn–N-HOPCPs. (F) The SEM image and (G) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Zn–N-HOPCPs (Zn single atoms are signed with light-yellow circles). Reprinted with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
ZIF materials certainly have a special feature that zinc ions in ZIFs (boiling point 907 °C) are easily vaporized at high temperatures, allowing additional target Me-SAs to replace the zinc metal sites and be distributed uniformly over the MOF-derived substances, and the remaining metal ions can be regarded as a ‘barrier’ to widen the distance between target atoms. In this way, single-atoms aggregation can be effectively avoided.77 In 2020, a Co-SAC showed good formic acid dehydrogenation activity, suggesting that Co2+ of another target species could be isolated on ZIF materials with the help of Zn2+ (Fig. 3a) and that the target metal also replaced part of the Zn sites and formed single atoms through subsequent pyrolysis on account of the evaporation of Zn.78 Furthermore, Chen's group79 also designed a Fe-SAC that partially replaced zinc with iron (Fig. 3b). They added iron ions to stimulate the Kirkendall effect, resulting in a large number of large mesoporous structures that facilitated mass transfer and allowed adsorption to contact the active sites. SACs can also be designed by subsequent addition of the target metal and two-step pyrolysis (Fig. 3c and d).80 In conclusion, the substitution of Zn metal sites is of great significance for strengthening the stability of SAs. In other words, the capture of target metal ions by organic ligands is also important.
 Fig. 3  (a) The illustration of the synthesis process of SACs and NPs. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (b) The picture of the catalytic mechanism of FeSAs/CNF-900. Reprinted with permission.79 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Synthesis of low-coordination Ni–N3–C via a PSMS strategy and (d) SEM image of Ni–N3–C. Reprinted with permission.80 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, the particularity of ZIF materials is also applicable to the study of dual single-atom catalysts (DSACs). Wang et al.81 first doped copper into ZIF-8, and then calcined it at high temperature to make copper replace the position after zinc evaporation and coordinate with nitrogen in the carrier to obtain the C-ZIF-Cu material. Then, the C-ZIF-CuPt alloy catalyst was prepared by reducing platinum on C-ZIF-Cu with ascorbic acid. In the other case, Zhang, Li, and Jiang82 used other two kinds of non-precious metals to explore the ORR. They designed the Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC catalyst with an Fe/Ni atom coordination environment synthesized on the basis of the ZIF structure (Fig. 4a and b). Moreover, the different solvents may also affect the coordination environment of MOFs and thus alter the catalytic activity. Gao and his colleagues83 designed Co-SACs with different micro morphologies (polyhedral, layered, accordion-like) using different solvents. The experimental proved that the change of ZIF morphology was mainly attributed to the fact that the aqueous solution of acetate (OAc) could effectively isolate metal ions in space and form large pores, so as to coordinate multiple ligands of Co ions, and the water formed hydrogen bonds with the amines in the ligands, so that Co ions cross-linked with the ligands, leading to the formation of layered structures. There is no doubt that the interaction between the target metal and the coordination environment also has a great influence on the morphology of the catalyst. In addition, an alternative is to confine the target metal to a cage of ZIF materials. Guo et al. used the pore structure of MOFs to fabricate SACs through a space-limiting strategy.84 They first encapsulated iron precursors into cages of ZIF-8 and then the ZIF material produced N-doped carbon material by calcination, and anchored single atoms in the cage by the metal–N interaction to obtain catalytic materials with different iron loads. In addition, Han and Wang's team85 reported the DSAC (Fe–N4/Pt–N4@NC) based on ZIF materials. They first encased the target metal ions in the nanocages of MOFs, followed by pyrolytic carbonization to anchor single atoms in the MOF-derived framework through metal-N interactions (Fig. 4c and d). Understandably, the design of DSACs with special coordination environments may have unexpected surprises.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the preparation process for Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC and (b) AC-HAADF-STEM image of the as-synthesized Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC. Reprinted with permission.82 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Synthesis process of Fe–N4/Pt–N4@NC and (d) the average intensity profiles of Fe/Pt atoms (indicated by dashed rectangles) reveal the distance between Pt and Fe is ca. 5.2 Å. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
In fact, there are already a large number of ZIF-derived SACs, so how to stand out from the numerous materials is a problem that researchers need to consider. Surprisingly, metal ions can be anchored with the help of defects in the carriers. As previously mentioned in the DSAC,82 the ZIF material in this paper has been vulcanized and treated with hydrogen peroxide to produce a coordination environment rich in nitrogen, sulfur, and defects, which was conducive to the coordination of target metal ions and improved the stability of SAs. And SACs were also prepared by the pyrolysis strategy of salt-sealed precursor (ZIFs) with a nitrogen-doped three-dimensional interconnected structure that was rich in defects.86 In addition, Li and colleagues proposed a new strategy to prepare SACs by applying salt to MOF materials.87 With the introduction of iron phthalocyanine (FePc) molecules, Fe SAC (SA-Fe-NGM) was produced by the addition of potassium chloride/lithium chloride (KCL) to produce ultrathin 2D materials (NGM). It was clear that the salt-treated NGM material was rich in topological defects and could anchor Fe–Nx maximally, achieving not only high power density (634 mW cm−2) but also high metal loading (8.36 wt%) in H2/O2 fuel cell tests. Furthermore, Wu's team88 designed a ZIF-derived catalyst (Co–ZnO/NC) with a layered pyramid structure of Co single atoms (Co-SAs) interacting with ZnO through high-temperature pyrolysis. By adjusting the appropriate Zn/Co ratio, they achieved a high dispersion of ZnO nanoparticles on the NC material and anchored the target cobalt ions with the ZnO (100) facet, that is, ZIF derivatives achieved a high dispersion of Co SAs. The rhombic dodecahedral shape of the ZIF precursor was well preserved by electron microscopy (Fig. 5A and B). In this study, the preparation method was relatively simple, but the suitable Zn/Co ratio was the key for the synthesis of pyramid structure (Fig. 5C). It has been proved that metal ions can also be trapped in different coordination environments such as carriers' defects and oxide crystal planes. MOF-derived SACs were also synthesized by the supercritical CO2 assisted method (scCO2-FeC@FeNC) (Fig. 5D). Gao and Yang et al.89 added ZIF-8 and iron solution together into the supercritical reaction reactor, injected CO2 until the pressure and temperature reached a certain condition and continued to react for a period of time. Then, they released the gas to obtain scCO2-Fe@ZIF-8, and the precipitate was pyrolyzed and treated with acid to produce the required catalyst. Supercritical gas cut the carrier and formed new fragments to provide a large amount of exposure, and due to its low viscosity, high diffusivity, and near zero surface tension, the metal ions will be evenly distributed on the ZIF materials, creating enough anchoring sites.
 Fig. 5  (A) SEM (a1) and TEM (a2) images of ZnCo-ZIF; (B) SEM (b1) and TEM (b2) images of Co–ZnO/NC; (C) illustration of the Co–ZnO/NC synthesis. Reprinted with permission.88 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (D) Schematic illustration of supercritical synthesis principle for scCO2-FeC@FeNC catalysts. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (E) Composite image of the fabrication of the Co-NPs catalyst and (F) the schematic image for the fabrication of the Co-SAs by etching treatment. Reprinted with permission.90 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (G) Schematic of the formation of Fe-ISAs/H-CN; (H) AC-HAADF-STEM enlarged image of the Fe-ISAs/H-CN catalyst. Reprinted with permission.91 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The preparation of SACs from composite materials is also a focus of attention in the research field. Materials combined with electrospinning technology are a relatively new research area. Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofibers prepared by electrospinning facilitated the formation of independent, conductive and porous N-doped carbon nanotubes (CNT). Gao and colleagues90 prepared ZIF-derived Co-SAC using PAN as a template and showed good activity in Fenton-like catalytic oxidation of peroxymonosulfate (PMS). They primarily prepared the starting template by electrostatic spinning, then added 2-methylimidazole and cobalt salt at intervals to make ZIF-67 grow evenly on the PAN film, and finally added dicyandiamide (DCDA) after pyrolysis and acid treatment to obtain Co-SAC (SAs-Co@NC) (Fig. 5E and F). Among them, DCDA was introduced to provide self-pyrolytic reduction gas to promote the formation of conductive CNT. In the catalytic process, SAs-Co@NC showed the highest degradation rate (81.6%) in a certain time, which was significantly higher than NPs-Co@NC (54.4%) and Co–C (33.1%). However, it was difficult to guarantee the stability of the catalyst, so the subsequent research can start from the durability of the catalyst to effectively degrade organic pollutants. In addition, Wang et al.91 derived Fe-ISAs/H-CN catalyst from a mixture of polypyrrole (PPy) and MOF. They successively added iron solution (Fe(acac)3) and a certain amount of pyrrole (Py) to the ZIF-8 carrier and then pyrolyzed to obtain Fe-SAC with a cage structure (Fig. 5G and H). The iron precursor was favorable for initiating pyrrole polymerization to form the shell structure, which destroyed the ZIF-8 structure, enlarging the pore and promoting the formation of the hollow structure. The nanocages catalyst prepared with the help of pyrrole achieved the encapsulation of metal ions, thus limiting the migration of metal ions. It also showed higher half-wave potential (E1/2 = 0.87 V), high stability, and excellent tolerance to methanol. In addition, the target metal-doped ZIF material was pyrolyzed at high temperature and then aminated with ammonia to prepare a metal single-atom stable and uniformly dispersed SAC.92
Nowadays, MOF-derived SACs are mainly based on ZIFs. First of all, ZIF derivatives can effectively anchor metal ions and improve the stability of single atoms by virtue of their nitrogen-rich coordination environment to provide a basis for the coordination of metal ions. Second, the special coordination environment of the ZIF material also provides a guarantee for the fixation of metal ions, which can not only effectively block the migration and aggregation of metal ions, but also realize the preparation of polymetallic SACs. Moreover, the nanocages of MOF materials can also anchor atoms through spatially confined metal ions. Most importantly, the ZIF materials can be externally modified to achieve the anchoring of metal ions by carrier defects and crystal planes. Of course, ZIF materials are widely used in MOF-derived SACs due to their excellent properties, whether they have their own or additional target metal ions. How to propose more innovative preparation methods requires the redoubled efforts of the majority of researchers to extract the power from the ordinary, and find the unique from the common.
The octahedral isoreticular metal–organic frameworks (IRMOFs) composed of [Zn4O]6+ inorganic groups and a series of aromatic carboxylic acid organic ligands,93 which can also achieve anchoring of the target metal precursors. Zhang's team94 first impregnated Fe species into the IRMOF-3 carrier, then pyrolyzed in an inert atmosphere, and finally treated with acid to obtain the O–Fe–N–C catalyst, and also prepared a comparison sample (Fe–N–C catalyst) (Fig. 6a). Obviously, the strategy of using the IRMOF-3 carrier, together with the proof of the density functional theory (DFT) calculation (Fig. 6b), had realized the heteroatom coordination at a specific position at the atomic level and through the heteroatom to adjust the coordination environment to destroy the original symmetric electronic structure, creating an axial coordination environment for gold ions and providing a new research path for the precursor of MOFs rich in heteroatoms. In addition, Li and his colleagues95 designed a Co-SAC with a high loading capacity (7.35 wt%) derived from MOF-74 as a carrier. They prepared Co-MOF-74 precursor, then added glucose, sulfur dopant (Na2S2O3), and Co precursor, and pyrolyzed the mixture in a molten salt system to obtain the Co–S/C-SAC catalyst with a Co–S4 coordination environment (Fig. 6c and d). The presence of Co atoms in the form of Co2+ was confirmed using EXAFS spectra (Fig. 6e), and the existence of Co–S4 site structure was confirmed by various characterization methods. Through this study, it can be recognized that, compared with inorganic cobalt salt, Co-MOF-74 effectively alleviated the volatilization of Co species in the pyrolysis process to reduce the loss of metal content. There was one point that the addition of salt and sulfur dopants can improve the structure of the materials, prevent Me-SAs agglomeration, and accelerate the mass transfer capacity in the catalytic reaction process. It's been proven that the SACs significantly improved the catalytic activity and photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of the reaction of I3− to I− (IRR), and developed carbon-based SACs that catalyze IRR efficiently to achieve sustainable energy conversion.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of O–Fe–N–C; (b) top view and side view optimized adsorption configuration on simulated O–Fe–N–C (Fe, O, N, and C atoms are represented in purple, red, blue, and gray, respectively) are placed along the graphitic structures. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (c) Preparation of Co–S/C-SAC; (d) atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of Co–S/C-SAC; (e) corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at R space, with the inset showing the schematic mode. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The preparation process and proposed formation mechanisms of Co@DMOF; (g) AC HAADF-STEM image of Co@DMOF-900. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
And the addition of chelating elements can effectively improve the metal coordination environment, and the defect structure also contributes to anchor atoms. Yuan's team96 proposed a defective MOF-derived SAC (Co@DMOF). They synthesized a rod-like crystalline MOF (DMOF) carrier by adding triethylenediamine (DABCO) as a support on the basis of the preparation method of IRMOF. The catalyst was then prepared by introducing the Co species at high temperatures using a gas transport method that uses nitrogen purge to bring the Co-containing powder placed upstream of the tubular furnace downstream of the DMOF. The presence of a defective carrier can not only fully improve the defect degree but also optimize the coordination environment of transition metal (TM) sites, which can improve the catalytic reaction (Fig. 6f and g). Studies97 have shown that at a certain temperature, the carboxylic acid part of MOF dissociated from the aromatic ring and formed COx, which may lead to the appearance of defects and thus affect the coordination environment of the catalytic active metal ions. So the team explored and compared the difference in catalysts synthesized at different temperatures. It turned out that high temperatures did avail the formation of defects, but too high a temperature caused the gathering of single atoms. In conclusion, the carrier structure of IRMOF materials can be changed by simply substituting organic ligands, or they can even have some of their attributes altered to make them better for study. Crucially, adding heteroatoms to the material can increase conductivity and even expose more metal ion coordination environments by increasing the defect structure.
Generally, UiO materials formed by the combination of regular octahedral metal-containing material [M6(μ3O)4(μ3-OH)4] and terephthalic acid organic ligand have a three-dimensional octahedral cage structure.98,99 The material was pioneeringly discovered in the form of a zirconium-based MOF, and there are many other metal forms, such as UiO-66 (Ce).100 Most importantly, UiO materials have the advantages of strong photoactivity, defect generation, and high stability, which can improve the catalysts' capacity to absorb the light.101–103 You can also adjust their chemical structures at the metal oxide node to fine-control interaction with their single atoms.100,104 For example, the functionalized UiO-66-NH2 material can adjust the electronic environment of metal ions.105 The target metal can also be anchored to the defect sites of the zirconium clusters in UiO-66 to control the agglomeration of Me-SAs,106 so as to improve the stability of single atoms. Obviously, the application of single-atom catalysts derived from UiO materials in photocatalysis is a major development trend.10,105 Of course, it is also involved in the field of electrocatalysis,13 but there are relatively few studies based on MOF-derived materials. It has previously been reported that direct anchoring could be used to make the UiO chelate ligand more receptive to the target metal ions, effectively inhibiting particle formation. Lin and his colleagues107 successfully prepared MOF-derived SACs (Fe SAC/N–C) with Fe–N5 sites by virtue of the advantages of UiO (Fig. 7a). Subsequently, Chen et al.108 mixed tungsten and MOF precursors to prepare precipitates of UiO-66-NH2 coated tungsten species, which were then pyrolyzed in an inert atmosphere and treated with acid to obtain W-SAC (Fig. 7b). The characterization of HAADF-STEM and EXAFS specified the formation of W atoms (Fig. 7c and d), and the existence of amino coordination environment effectively dispersed metal ions and inhibited the aggregation of W species, thus presenting a good application of W-SACs in the HER. At present, it is not common for UiO derivatives to be used to prepare SACs. Composite materials109,110 may also be a way to expand the research on the derivatives of this material. It is worth mentioning that UiO materials easily produce defect structures and carry amino functional groups. It is worth introducing the research in the field of SACs derived from UiOs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure of UiO(bpdc) and UiO(bpdc)–FeCl3. Reprinted with permission. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of synthesis of W-SAC; (c) the HAADF-STEM image of the W-SAC; (d) k3-weight FT-EXAFS fitting curves of the W-SAC at W L3-edge and atomic structure model of the W-SAC (inset). Reprinted with permission.108 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Materials of institute Lavoisier frameworks (MILs) refer to substances with certain flexibility synthesized using different transition metal elements and a series of dicarboxylic acid ligands.111 The pore of the materials can contract or expand, which facilitates the collection of the target species. MILs can be considered as a carbon source to anchor metal atoms.112 However, the low specific surface area after derivation is not beneficial to the uniform distribution of metal atoms, and then other carriers with rich surface area need to be often added.113 Xie and colleagues114 obtained the Fe SAC-MIL-101-1000 catalyst by using pyrolysis and acid treatment to obtain NH2-MIL-101(Al). The NH2-MIL-101 (Al) precursor was first pyrolyzed, followed by acid treatment to remove some of the aluminum, and then the iron complex was uniformly impregnated on the support (Fig. 8a). The catalyst was pyrolyzed again to produce a rod-like Fe-SAC-MIL101-T catalyst (T indicates the temperature of the first pyrolysis). The existence of Fe-SAs was confirmed by various characterization results, and the coordination of Fe atoms with four N atoms (FeN4) was obtained with the help of EXAFS fitting (Fig. 8b). NH2-MIL-101(Al)derived materials provided a site for the coordination of metal ions with their good mesoporous structure. According to previous reports,115 a micropore structure is conducive to loading the active sites, while a mesopore structure is conducive to the transfer of reaction molecules. Therefore, the catalyst adopts the characteristics of the MOF structure to introduce the mesopore structure and combines the advantages of micropores and mesopores to help the transfer of related species to the active sites and realize the utilization of iron single atoms. MIL materials with functional groups can also construct defective structures to prepare SACs. Li and colleagues116 prepared Cu-SACs with a defective structure by using carriers with functional groups. They synthesized the NH2-MIL-125 (Ti) carrier by a hydrothermal method, then added Cu solution (Cu(acac)2) and combined copper with an uncoordinated functional group (–NH2) through the Mannich reaction, and finally formed the SAs–Cu–TiO2/CN catalyst with copper loading of 1.1 wt% through high-temperature pyrolysis. And the catalysts without the –NH2 functional group could not anchor the Cu atoms well, leading to the agglomeration of particles. Moreover, XAFS characterization technology was used to laterally prove that the –NH2 functional group can effectively stabilize and uniformly disperse Cu single-atom metal ions on TiO2 defects. Nevertheless, in order to overcome the low surface derived from MIL materials, SACs with double MOF structure (ZIF/MIL-x-900) have also been prepared. Xu et al.113 synthesized ZIF-8 solid and MIL-101 (Fe) solid, and then mixed them and prepared a series of ZIF/MIL-x powders with different mass ratios (the mass ratio of ZIF to MIL is expressed as x) by a mechanical grinding method. They were then pyrolyzed in a N2 atmosphere and the solid acid finally was treated and vacuum dried to obtain the final product ZIF/MIL-x-900. It was evident from comparing ZIF/FeCl3 contrast samples (Fig. 8c) that the double MOF strategy was capable of capturing iron ions in the MIL material itself with the aid of N-doped carbon materials formed from ZIF materials, in addition to successfully improving the low surface of the carrier. More interestingly, the ORR activity of the ZIF/MIL-x-900 catalyst showed a volcanic distribution (Fig. 8d and e) with different mass ratios of ZIF/MIL-10-900 catalyst, in which ZIF/MIL-10-900 showed the highest E1/2 at 0.78 V, and the ORR of the ZIF/MIL-10-900 catalyst followed the four-electron path. In fact, the dual MOF strategy holds great promise for building inexpensive SACs. In general, MIL-derived materials can generate a variety of metal carriers. In addition to their mesoporous structures, functional groups, and the addition of additional materials, they can build a good coordination environment for metal–carrier interaction, providing a certain direction for the stability of single atoms.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe SAC-MIL101-T; (b) EXAFS R-space fitting curve for Fe SAC-MIL101-1000 (inset: the model of FeN4 configuration in Fe SAC-MIL101-1000. The gray, blue, and orange spheres represent C, N, and Fe atoms, respectively). Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c) The inferred synthetic process of the dual-MOFs strategy; polarization and power density curves of catalysts: (d) 0.5 M CH3OH, (e) 3 M CH3OH. Reprinted with permission.113 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Pocket-channel frameworks (PCNs) are a kind of three-dimensional porous material with cubic octahedral cage-channel topology in space,117 which are important materials to combine metal ions with organic connectors and generate single atoms. The materials are mainly represented by the zirconium (Zr)–porphyrin MOF, which are made up of porphyrin ligands and Zr clusters, and can also provide rich nitrogen coordination for metal anchoring. Besides, they are easy to synthesize defective structures, and the metal ions can be stabilized in the porphyrin center,118 making this kind of MOF conducive to the preparation of SACs. For more information on organic connectome, please refer to the review paper by Xu and Zou's team.60 Using PCN-222 as a precursor, He and colleagues119 generated a series of metal single-atom catalysts (Me-SACs) and proposed a general synthesis strategy. In this design, a series of DPCN222(Co)-X (X represents the ratio of adding water) catalysts (Fig. 9) were prepared by mixing zirconium salts, compounds containing the target metal (Co), ligands, and precipitation with different proportions of water through pyrolysis and pickling. Co-SAs/NC-Y (Y represents the pyrolysis temperature) with different structures were obtained by changing the pyrolysis temperature. Finally, the comparison samples of different metal SACs were synthesized by changing the target metal species (Cu and Mn) (Fig. 10a). The reason was to explore a method that can regulate MOFs to adjust the distance between adjacent coordinated target metals, that is, to change the coordination environment of target metal ions with the help of ligands to reduce the aggregation of single atoms in the high-temperature process. The experiment well increased the yield of single metal atoms by nearly 70%, and various characterizations also proved the existence of Co single atoms and could still maintain a single atomic state after use. Similarly, Jiao and colleagues120 prepared a variety of Me-SACs based on PCN materials. They selected porphyrin MTV-MOFs (M = Co, etc.) synthesized from M-TCPP and H2-TCPP as precursors, and then prepared the required catalysts by pyrolysis (Fig. 10b and c). The diversified MOF matrix can control the pore structure and other microscopic factors of its derivatives, and it is helpful for the construction of high-density active sites suitable for the environment of the coordination of metal ions. Moreover, by comparing these samples, the Ni1–N–C catalyst showed the best CO2RR performance, which also contributed to the wide application of Ni-based SACs in the CO2RR.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) Illustration of the relationship between structural defects and the average distance of active metal sites between adjacent Co-TCPP ligands in DPCN-222(Co)-X (X = 0, 25, 35, and 45). (e–h) Corresponding FESEM images of DPCN-222(Co)-X. (i–l) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images for Co SAs/NC(X) derived from corresponding DPCN-222(Co)-X. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of metal SACs through the defect engineering strategy in MOFs. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration showing the general fabrication of single-atom M1–N–C catalysts based on MTV-MOFs for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction; (c) EXAFS fitting of Ni1–N–C and optimized coordination environment of Ni atoms (inset). Reprinted with permission.120 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the nanocasting-assisted fabrication of FeSA–N–C from PCN-222(Fe); (e) EXAFS fitting for FeSA–N–C. Inset: schematic model of Fe coordination environment in FeSA–N–C. The red, blue, and gray spheres represent Fe, N, and C atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission.122 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
It has been reported that silica (SiO2) can stabilize single atoms on the carrier by reducing the surface energy of Me-SAs, which has a protective effect on target metal ions.121 Therefore, Jiao, Zhang, and Wan122 synthesized Fe-SAC (FeSA–N–C) catalysts by adding SiO2 into the porphyrin material (PCN-222(Fe)). They used trifluoroacetic acid (CF3COOH) instead of benzoic acid to improve the original preparation, in order to facilitate the introduction of ethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). Then, TEOS was added into the prepared PCN-222 (Fe), and TEOS was hydrolyzed in the hole by HCl steam treatment to obtain the SiO2@PCN-222(Fe) composite. Finally, SiO2@PCN-222(Fe) was pyrolyzed and treated with acid to synthesize FeSA–N–C (Fig. 10d and e) with an Fe content of 3.46 wt%. According to characterization analysis, SiO2 was successfully confined into PCN-222(Fe) and the ORR half-wave potential of the catalyst was 0.8 V, far better than that of FeNP–N–C (0.67 V) and N–C (0.51 V). It is obvious that SiO2 can be easily introduced into the pore structure of MOFs and interacts with metal ions, which is very beneficial for the construction of stable single-atom sites. However, the disadvantage is that the synthesis process of the catalyst is relatively complex, and the used hydrofluoric acid is more harmful, so the nano-casting strategy can be improved in an environment friendly way, which is also a direction of development. Generally, MOF materials are not only doped with SiO2 but also use polyaniline (PANI) to form a composite material with a strong protective function. Meng and his colleagues123 reported MOF-derived SAC (PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900) wrapped PANI with PCN-224(Fe) (Fig. 11a). The synthesis diagram illustrated the preparation process of SAC in detail. It should be noted that the purpose of packaging PANI is to prevent the formation of impurities, and according to PXRD and EDS (Fig. 11b–d), PANI can effectively inhibit the aggregation of Fe species during pyrolysis. It is clear that PANI acted as a protective barrier in the preparation, not only controlling the migration of metal species but also promoting electron transfer, which enabled PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900 composite to have superior properties and high activity. PCNs are famous for their organic linkers with controllable coordination sites. In addition to the original sites in MOFs, they can also use post-synthesis to connect the linkers to the chelate groups, and design new organic linkers with a strong coordination environment to stabilize the target metal ions. However, at present, the SACs derived from PCNs mainly use porphyrin ligands, and other organic ligands need to be developed.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of single-atom Fe catalyst PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900 via migration–prevention strategy and the PCN-224(Fe) derived PCN-224(Fe)-900; (b) PXRD of three catalysts; (c) AC HAADF-STEM image of PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900; (d) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding Fe, C, and N elemental mappings of PANI@PCN224(Fe)-900. Reprinted with permission.123 Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MNi-HF (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
However, it was also found that SACs can be derived from Hofmann type MOFs (Fig. 11e), a bimetallic organic framework material.124 With its layered structure, this type of MOF coordinated each metal ion with six nitrogen atoms to form octahedral geometry. In general, the MOF material is a porous material and can provide an effective coordination environment to limit metal ions, thus achieving high stability of single atoms. Apparently, in the extraction of SACs from numerous MOF precursors, ZIF materials are the most prominent and gradually systematized application, no matter the direction of metal species or the addition of other materials. Pyrolysis is the most commonly used method to form single metal atoms from MOF precursors containing target metal species, although the methods are relatively simple. But it is usually accompanied by acid etching to remove metal NPs and ensure uniformity of single atoms. In addition, the mixed metal strategy and composite strategy show more favorable changes in the coordination environment of the target metal ions and facilitate the construction of high-density SACs. Research on composite materials is largely to protect metal ions to achieve the stability of single atoms at high temperature. Loading of various metal types can be studied in this direction to achieve high-density single atoms. Most noticeably, ZIFs have been extensively studied, and too much reliance on ZIF carriers is not conducive to systematically expanding the catalytic mechanism about MOF-derived SACs. There is no doubt that it is necessary to vigorously develop other types of MOF precursors. Among them, IRMOF-derived materials can provide a heteroatom coordination environment, MIL-derived materials can provide a carbon source, UiO materials can produce abundant defect sites, and PCN materials can realize coordination between different organic linkages and metal ions. All these materials can achieve MOF-derived SACs well. The optimization of MOF-derived SACs requires more attention from researchers, including how to increase metal loading and dispersion. Of course, the most important research is contributed to the catalytic mechanism research about MOF-derived SACs. Typically, the MOF derivatives will form the structure of carbon and nitrogen and strong interaction with the metal to build a stable M–Nx key. Therefore, proving M–Nx is the catalytic reaction of main active centers and how to promote the reaction mechanism are necessary. The following is mainly from the active site atomic level structure to explore the catalytic mechanism of the reaction.
3. The formation mechanism of SAC active sites via the pyrolysis of MOFs
With the further research of SACs, we have stepped into the stage of precise regulation of the coordination environment, electronic structure of metal atoms, and the existence of metal active sites is the mapping of the coordination environment of metal atoms. Usually, the metal active site consists of a target metal atom and multiple non-metal atoms around it; among them, the coordination configuration is critical to the reaction performance of the catalysts, even for the process of catalytic mechanism also can produce a very significant impact.125 Common types of active sites are shown in Fig. 12.45 The formation of these different site structures depends on the regulation of preparation methods. It is obvious that the exploration of active sites reflects the quality of catalyst preparation at the microscopic level. A study of Liu et al.126 thought in the center of the dual-core Ni metal–organic network that hydrogen adsorption could adjust and control the electronic structure, spin, and magnetic field of Ni on the surface confirmed the coordination environment of different impact on Me-SAs. In addition, He and his colleagues119 believed that introduced water would compete with certain ligands, thus promoting crystal nucleation and forming structural defects.127 Through the comparison of different Co atomic loads, it was confirmed that structural defects could isolate individual active sites, and a reasonable number of defects was conducive to expanding the average distance of the structure to increase the concentration of Me-SAs, but the excessive presence was not conducive to the anchoring of metal, resulting in the loss of a small part of the metal. This provides constructive suggestions for enhancing the load density of single atoms on the carrier. Moreover, the synergy between bimetallic nanoparticles can also be referenced in the study of SACs.128
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration about atomic interface regulation of atomic interface sites. Red ball: M1; gray ball: C; blue ball: N; yellow ball: O; pink ball: M2. Reprinted with permission.45 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, it is of great significance for the active sites of single atoms to clarify the catalytic mechanism and the description of the interaction between metal–carriers.129 Although precise regulation at the atomic level is an ideal concept, it can be well solved by means of theoretical calculation and configuration simulation. The emergence of theoretical calculation allows one to search for the active sites of reaction130 and its mechanism of action131 at a higher level. Zhang's team1 made rational use of theoretical calculations in the catalytic mechanism, which further convinced researchers that SACs have broad potential advantages in heterogeneous catalysis. At present, most research papers are accompanied by the verification of theoretical calculation, and the combination of experiments and theory makes the content of a paper more convincing. In the following, various types of active sites generated by MOF-derived SACs in different coordination environments are summarized, and the catalytic effect of active sites is proved by theoretical calculation.
3.1 Active sites of metal atoms with symmetrical structures (M–N4)
Types of metal and ligand, atomic local electronic structure, and other factors on the catalytic performance of the active sites have a significant influence; it is easy to understand that the coordination environment of metals can be precisely regulated from the above directions to affect the site. M–N4 is a common active site, mainly from N-rich organic ligands, and its symmetric electronic structure is conducive to single atom stability.
Up to now, M–N4 symmetric structure and related types of SACs have been widely applied. For example, Wang and his colleagues132 reported a multi-scale structure of an Fe–N–C catalyst containing an Fe–N4 site. They believed that the micro-scale skeletons, nano-scale ordered mesopores, and atomic-scale abundant carbon edge defects at the atomic level could increase the number of sites (Fe–N4) significantly. In particular, the abundance of edge defects favored anchoring a single Fe atom, resulting in the formation of dense Fe–N4 sites, as shown in Fig. 13a. Therefore, defects can also be used to construct high-density sites, thus enhancing the utilization rate of Fe single atoms. In addition, Xie et al.133 further studied the influence of ligands on single-atom sites. The introduction of MOF-5 support by a ligand-mediated method not only increased the single-atom loading capacity but also subtly increased the number of FeNx active sites, facilitating material transport. They further studied the electronic structure and local environment of Fe atoms in Fe SAC-MOF-5 by XAFS, and confirmed that Fe species are in a +3 valence state (Fig. 13b).134 EXAFS fitting calculation showed that Fe SAC-MOF-5 had Fe–N4 configuration in the central iron sites (Fig. 13c). There is no doubt that the Fe-SAC-MOF-5 catalyst had an E1/2 at 0.83 V (vs. RHE), which was far better than that of other Fe-SACs prepared by the same synthesis step, and significantly demonstrated high ORR activity.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of Fe–N4 moieties distributed in 3D Fe–N–C catalyst with abundant edge defects. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (b) Fourier-transformed k2-weighted EXAFS spectra for Fe SAC-MOF-5 and reference samples; (c) R space (the inset is a typical model of FeN4 configuration for Fe SAC-MOF-5). Reprinted with permission.133 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (d) ORR free-energy paths of optimized intermediates calculated by DFT (blue line, Fe–N4–C configuration; red line, VFe–N4–C configuration). Reprinted with permission.135 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Optimized structure of a perfect FeN4 site (left) and divacancy defect models 6, 6a, 6I, and 6II (right); (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams of ORR on a perfect FeN4 site, 6, 6a, and 6I; (g) the schematic frontier orbital diagram of Fe–N4, O2, and O2@Fe–N4. Reprinted with permission.136 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (h) Schematic model of the Cr-centered configuration in Cr/N/C-950. Cr, green; N, blue; C, gray. Reprinted with permission.137 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
Apart from the Fe–N4 symmetric type, Hou and colleagues135 demonstrated that the ORR satisfies the four-electron mechanism at the active Fe–N4–C site. With theoretical calculation, the final electron transfer step was the rate-determining step (RDS) of the ORR at the Fe–N4–C site, and the required endothermic energy was 0.57 eV. In the catalyst without iron sites, the oxygen adsorption step was the RDS of the ORR, and the required energy is 1.52 eV (Fig. 13d). Obviously, with the help of the Fe–N4–C site, the Fe/OES catalyst could change the RDS of the ORR, thus speeding up the reaction. Here, they also proposed that because of the over-hang-eave morphology of the catalyst, more three-phase interfaces were generated to rapidly transfer the substance to the active Fe–N4–C site to achieve site utilization. Fe-based symmetric sites have been widely used in the study of ORR activity, so Liu and colleagues136 provided a detailed view of how the Fe–N4 site on the Fe–N–C catalyst affected the ORR activity, theoretically revealing the relationship between sites and activity (Fig. 13e–g). They constructed the Fe–N4 model and accurately described the association with ORR performance by means of DFT theoretical calculations. They suggested that it was because of the hybridization between orbitals that the ORR activity of the catalyst was triggered, which should be looked at by interested researchers for new insights.
Iron-based catalysts, however, don’t necessarily guarantee better stability, so Luo and Zhang137 for the first time in 2019 designed an embedded cadmium single atom carbon Cr/N/C-950 catalyst with Cr–N4 interchange structural sites (Fig. 13h). In addition to Fe forming the Fe–N4–C site, Co also plays a role in a similar site structure. Yuan and colleagues96 revealed the catalytic mechanism of the ORR at the active site of Co–N4 in combination with DFT calculations. It was found that Co–N4-6r-c2 was the most favorable for the reaction. They believed that the catalytic mechanism on Co–N4 conformed to the four-electron transfer process and that there were four possible models (Fig. 14a) that produced large defects induced by the introduction and induction of decarboxylate. The combination of these defects reduced the adsorption-free energy of the intermediate *OOH at the site and accelerated the formation of products by the ORR (Fig. 14b). Besides, Zhou and Yang et al.58 proposed ORR electrocatalysts with special active sites (Co SAs/3D GFs) that were similar to the active site structure reported by Yuan et al.96 and by means of DFT, they simulated multiple sets of models, and finally determined a possible defect CoN4 structure model (CoN4-5r-c1) (Fig. 14c), and confirmed that the site structure had a lower overpotential, indicating that adjacent defects would affect Co-SA (Fig. 14d). Moreover, the coordination environment of single atoms could also be changed by adding dopants. Li and colleagues95 prepared Co-SACs with Co–S4 sites, and they used a sulfur dopant (Na2S2O3) to add sulfur species for coordination, which not only helped anchor Co atoms but also regulated the surrounding coordination environment. The Co–N4 site could also be used to explore the CO2RR mechanism,138 and compared with other transition metals (Mn, Fe, or Ni), it had a lower energy barrier for the formation of intermediate *COOH and the desorption process of intermediate * CO, which was more favorable for the reaction.
 Fig. 14  (a) The model of atomic Co–N4 configurations with different degrees of defects (5r or 6r represents the 5- or 6-membered Co–N heterocyclic ring, respectively; c1 or c2 denotes the absence of 1 or 2 C atoms adjacent to Co–N4 site); (b) free-energy diagrams of the above models calculated at U = 0 V (vs. SHE). Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c) Possible atomic configurations of CoN4-5r-c1 and (d) free energy diagram of different configurations along the 4 e− ORR pathway. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
Obviously, in recent years, symmetric structural sites are mainly applied to the exploration of ORR and CO2RR mechanisms. Relevant studies on symmetric active sites are also mentioned in Table 2, but are not introduced in detail here.
Table 2 Summary of non-noble metal MOF-derived SACs




Catalysts
Metal sites
Metal configuration
Application
Activity
Stability
Ref.




Fe SAC/N–C
Fe
Fe–N5
ORR

E
1/2 = 0.89 V in 0.1 M KOH
No major change after 5000 cycles

107



scCO2-FeC@FeNC
Fe
Fe–N4
ORR

E
onset = 1.04 V and E1/2 = 0.91 V in 0.1 M KOH
A 9.4% loss of potential under 24 h

89



Fe-SA-NC@CC
Fe
Fe–Nx
ORR

E
onset = 0.97 V and E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M KOH

E
1/2 lost 6.1% mV after 10000 s

161



Fe/C950
Fe
Fe–Nx
ORR

E
onset = 0.96 V and E1/2 = 0.84 V in 0.1 M HClO4
—

162



Fe–N–C
Fe
Fe–N4
ORR

E
onset = 0.95 V and E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M HClO4

E
1/2 lost 24.5 mV and no evident change of Eonset after 30000 cycles

163



CoNi-SAs/NC
CoNi
Co–Ni–N
ORR

E
onset = 0.93 V and E1/2 = 0.76 V in 0.1 M KOH
ORR activity > 90% after 16 hours of operation

156



OER
The required overpotential value is 340 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope is 58.7 mV dec−1
—


Co-SAs/3D GFs
Co
CoN4-5r-c1
ORR

E
onset = 1.03 V and E1/2 = 0.84 V in 0.1 M KOH
No major change about E1/2 after 5000 cycles

58



Fe-SAs/NLPC
Fe
Fe–Nx
ORR

E
highest = 0.96 V in 1 M KOH and j = 33.32 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V
A weak attenuation of current after 20000 s

86



Fe/ZIF-8@SiOx
Fe
Fe–N4
ORR

E
1/2 = 0.85 V in 0.1 M KOH
A weak attenuation of current after 3000 CV cycles

164



CuNC-DCD
Cu
Cu1/Cu13
CO2RR
FECO = 93.5% at −0.50 V in 0.5 M KHCO3

j
total lasted for 10 h at −0.50 V in 0.5 M KHCO3

165



Ni–N4–O/C
Ni
Ni–N4–O/C
CO2RR
FECO = 99.2% at −0.9 V and TOF = 11187 h−1
FECO above 90% within 20 h

147



Ni–N3–C
Ni
Ni–N3–C
CO2RR
FECO = 95.6% at −0.65 V and TOF = 1425 h−1
Unchanged current density and FECO for 10 h

80



Ni–NG-acid
Ni
Ni–N–C
CO2RR
FECO ≥ 90% from −0.6 V to −1.2 V
Unchanged current density and FECO for 10 h at −0.9 V

166



Ni–N4/C–NH2
Ni
Ni–N4/C–NH2
CO2RR
The CO FE ≥ 90% from −0.6 V to −0.9 V
The CO FE ≥ 90% for 10 h at −0.8 V

92





3.2 Active sites of metal atoms with asymmetric structures (M–Nx)
Asymmetric site structures (such as M–Nx, M–Nx–C, and M–Nx–O) are formed due to the use of different synthetic conditions including organic ligands and even the addition of additional heteroatoms. For instance, the M–N4 site has a symmetrical planar structure, and it will be chemically inert to a certain extent.139 The unsaturated chemical environment can induce the spin redistribution of the site (such as Fe–N3, Co–N3, Mn–N3), thus changing the adsorption activity of the intermediate.140 In addition, the doping of heteroatoms is a very favorable factor to regulate the catalytic active center and the coordination environment of the metal, so the design of an asymmetric active center with high doping or unsaturated coordination is effective to improve the catalytic performance.141
Previously, Chen et al.108 designed a W-SAC with an asymmetric structural site (W1N1C3) and explored the asymmetric site of M–N1. Combined with theoretical calculations, they found that the most favorable catalytic activity center in the W-SAC catalyst is the coordinated C atom close to the N atom, as shown in Fig. 7d. Moreover, compared with other possible catalytic sites (W1NxCy), W1N1C3 had a low ΔGH* value (0.033 eV), so it was more suitable for the study of the HER. To further explore the mechanism of activity, they analyzed the associated density of states (DOS), which proved that W-SAC had a higher DOS near the Fermi level and enhanced the stability of H, thus promoting HER activity. Then, the structure of the M–N3 asymmetric site is described. A highly defective Mn–N3 was designed for ORR studies (Fig. 15A).142 Theoretical simulation showed that the free energy barrier of the Mn–N3 catalytic process decreased obviously compared with Mn–N4, and the onset potential of Mn–N3 was 0.36 V, which was far better than Mn–N4 (0.24 V), indicating that Mn–N3 had higher intrinsic activity. There is no doubt that the unsaturated structure of Mn–N3 could optimize the electronic structure and reduce the ORR overpotential.
 Fig. 15  (A) Calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for Mn–N3 and Mn–N4 in an alkaline solution with the inset showing the schematic mode of Mn–N3. Reprinted with permission.142 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (B) FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra of Cu ISAS/NC and the reference samples; (C) corresponding FT-EXAFS fitting curves of Cu ISAS/NC; (D) top view of the optimized structures of the models of (a) Cu–N3, (b) Cu–N3–C and (c) Cu–N3–V with DFT calculation. Gray, blue, and orange represent C, N, and Cu atoms, respectively. (E) Free energy diagram for the ORR process on these three models at the equilibrium potential (U = 0.40 V vs. NHE or U = 1.23 V vs. RHE) at pH = 14. Reprinted with permission.143 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (F) Fourier transform (FT) of the Co K-edge for CoSA–N–C, CoPc, and Co foil; (G) the corresponding EXAFS R space fitting curves of CoSA–N–C. Inset: schematic model of CoSA–N–C, Co (pink), N (blue), and C (gray) and free energy paths of the ORR on Co–N3C, Co–N4, and Co nanoparticles at (H) U = 0 V and (I) U = 1.23 V. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Of course, by improving the M–N3 site, coordination environments with different sites can be constructed. For example, Zhang143 designed a catalyst with a Cu–N3–V site structure containing vacancies. Based on EXAFS analysis (Fig. 15B), they mainly considered three site models (Cu–N3, Cu–N3–C, and Cu–N3–V) and verified the importance of Cu–N3–V in Cu-ISAS/NC ORR catalysts through theoretical calculations. It could be seen from Fig. 15D and E that, first of all, according to the association mechanism, the RDS at Cu–N3–V and Cu–N3–C was the formation of OOH*, while the RDS at Cu–N3 was the removal of OH*. Secondly, the presence of defects would affect the uneven distribution of charges around Cu-SAs, resulting in the synergistic effect of defects around Cu-SAs and N coordination, which ultimately promoted the reaction. Zhou et al.144 designed a hybrid MOF-derived SAC (CoSA–N–C) with a site structure of Co–N3–C. Using the characterization techniques of EXAFS (Fig. 15F and G), they demonstrated that the site structure of Me-SAs was composed of one Co atom coordinated with three N atoms and one C atom, which may be caused by insufficient N coordination after MOF hybridization. In this study, DFT calculation was used to further study the effects of coordination environment and electronic structure of the Co center on the ORR (Fig. 15H and I). Compared with Co NPs, the presence of Co–N3–C active sites generated new electronic states, which was conducive to orbital hybridization, and had lower free energy (0.63 eV) at the RDS (*O reduced to *OH). Traditionally, the RDS of the Co–N4 structure was the reduction of *O from *OOH, indicating that a change in the site structure could also lead to a change in the RDS, and replacing a nitrogen atom with a carbon atom could reduce the activation energy and improve the catalytic performance of the ORR. Besides, the Co–N3–C structural site is also suitable for researching the catalytic mechanism of the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). Qin et al.145 explored the number of Co–Nx sites generated in different N coordination environments with the help of different Zn/Co mole ratios. Moreover, the yield of NH3 showed a linear relationship with the Zn/Co mole ratio. In addition, the poisoning experiment further confirmed that N2 fixation was related to Co–Nx. According to EXAFS fitting (Fig. 16a), the structural parameter of Co was about 3, and combined with DFT theoretical calculation, it indicated that the NRR tended to favor the Co–N3–C structure in various Co–Nx–C models, because N2 adsorption took priority over H adsorption in this structure. By calculating the energy barrier of each NRR process, it was concluded that the reaction on Co–N3–C tended to be a distal pathway, while the reaction on N–C and Co–N was mainly an alternate pathway, which may be part of the reason why Co–N3–C was the key active center. Combined with theoretical calculation, NRR mainly passed through NN → *NN → *NNH → *NNH2 → *N → *NH → *NH2 → *NH3 → NH3 under the catalysis of the Co–N3–C site (U = −0.97 V) (Fig. 16b). Undoubtedly, the role of the Co–N3–C site is to reduce the reaction energy barrier and effectively suppress the hydrogen evolution reaction.
 Fig. 16  (a) The Fourier transform of FT-EXAFS measurements of Co–Nx–C and Co foil, the red line represents the corresponding EXAFS R space fitting curves of Co–Nx–C; (b) the free energy diagrams for the N2RR through the distal pathway at applied potential (−0.97 V) on Co–N3–C structure. Reprinted with permission.145 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves for the O–Fe–N–C sample (Fe, O, N, and C atoms are represented in red, blue, orange, and black, respectively); (d) free energy profiles for the CO2RR to CO at 0 V (vs. RHE); (e) projected density of states (PDOS) of Fe over O–Fe–N–C and FeN4 surfaces. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. 
Surprisingly, the coordination of chelating elements, such as P and O, can be realized through the rational addition of organic ligands with functional groups. Zhang et al.94 prepared FeN4 active centers with axial coordination of oxygen on organic ligands by introducing nitrogen-rich and oxygen-rich IRMOF-3. EXAFS indicated that there were five coordination atoms around the Fe single atom (Fig. 16c). Therefore, after thermal decomposition, the MOF precursor simultaneously chelated Fe–O and Fe–N, thus constructing a site where Fe SA coordinated with four N atoms and connected an axial –OH ligand. With the help of the DFT calculation of the three-step reaction path of the reduction of CO2 to CO (Fig. 16d), obviously, compared with the traditional Fe–N4 site where CO desorption was difficult (ΔG = 0.89 eV), the potential determination step (PDS) of the FeN4–O site was the formation of COOH* intermediate (ΔG = 0.48 eV). In addition, the predicted density of states (PDOS) (Fig. 16e) and HER-free energy distribution were calculated, and it was confirmed that the rapid CO desorption was due to the negative shift of the d orbital of Fe caused by axial O and the inhibition of HER. There is no doubt that the introduction of highly electronegative oxygen can enhance electronic metal–support interaction (EMSI) on M–N4.146 In addition, the Ni-SAC (Ni–N4–O/C) reported by Wang and colleagues147 further promoted the construction of axial oxygen species coordination. DFT calculation showed that the axial O atom could improve the coordination environment of the Ni–N4 structure and enhance the polarization effect of charge, thus improving the activity of the catalyst.
In addition, the addition of some additional substances in order to introduce various heteroatoms (O, S, P) for coordination is also a regulatory measure. Chen, Gao, and their team148 simulated a model of Co coordination of N, P, and S atoms and designed MOF-derived SACs (Co1–N3PS/HC) with Co1–N3PS sites. To figure out the relationship between active sites and catalytic performance, the configurations of seven different single-atom active sites were compared with the help of DFT and electrochemical analysis, and the most stable and active site structure was CoN3PS@PS. From Fig. 17A, combined with the ORR reaction mechanism, O2* adsorption energy (ΔGO2), Bader charge, charge density difference, and state fraction density (pDOS), it was speculated that only the synergistic coordination of P and S species could promote the activity. Moreover, because P and S were electron donors and N was the electron acceptor, such doping could precisely regulate the electronic structure of Co atoms, resulting in the change of electron density, thus destroying the symmetry of the Co–N4 structure. And Tan et al.149 prepared MnN3S1 active center by adding 3-mercaptopropionic acid (C3H6O2S), in which part of the sulfur may form a S–O bond to stabilize *COOH and accelerate the output of CO (Fig. 17B). In addition, Sun et al.150 constructed an unsaturated coordination structure of Fe–N2P by adding ionic liquid (IL) to achieve a higher O2 concentration at the catalyst interface, which was conducive to the formation of OOH* and improved the activity of ORR. And some heteroatoms can be provided by the original MOF precursor, while some heteroatoms can be added by some modification means.
 Fig. 17  (A) DFT study for the ORR activity on different single-atom Co catalysts. (a) The linear relationship as a function of the O2* adsorption energy (ΔGO2) at URHE = 1.23 V; (b) the inverse volcano plots of ORR overpotential for the Bader charge of active center Co atom, the negative value represents electron donation; (c) the charge density difference of Co atom in the seven catalyst models, the units for the scale bar is a.u.−3; (d) the partial density of states (pDOS) of Co atom in the models, the d-band center is inserted with the grey font and dotted line. Reprinted with permission.148 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic of the intermediate *COOH absorbed on the MnSA/NC (left side) and MnSA/SNC (right side). The white, gray, blue, red, yellow, and purple balls represent H, C, N, O, S, and Mn atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission.149 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (C) Top view of three Fe-SACs models with various coordination environments. Green, grey, blue, red, and pink represent Fe, C, N, O, and H, respectively; (D) free energy diagrams of ORR processes of the three models from (C) under overpotential of 0.4 V. Volcano plot of the relation between catalytic activity and ΔEO is depicted in the inset. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
The asymmetric site (Fe–N5) has also been designed to study the catalytic mechanism. Lin and colleagues107 designed Fe SAC/N–C catalysts with Fe–N5 active sites by introducing chelating ligands. Combined with XANES, EXAFS, and total multiple scattering calculations (Fig. 17C), they confirmed the existence of the Fe–N5 structure, which was more consistent with experimental results than Fe–N4, and confirmed that the Fe–N5 site was responsible for the catalyst activity by the ORR activity test. Then, to explore the mechanism of action of Fe–N5 sites, they used DFT for analysis. With the help of various ideal models (Fig. 17D), the RDS of the reaction process was the generation of *OOH and satisfied the four-electron oxygen reduction pathway. Obviously, the presence of ligand strengthens the interaction between oxygen and Fe, which made them have strong binding energy and thus effectively promoted the ORR. However, the generality of the catalyst was well developed for mechanism studies that advance the application of various metals.
In conclusion, the presence of special active sites can optimize the catalytic performance of MOF-derived SACs and encourage the activation of reactants or the production of intermediates. It has been demonstrated that SACs with asymmetric active-site structures also exhibit remarkable activity and selectivity. MOF-derived SACs are very sensitive to the active sites given by varied coordination environments. Thus, it is feasible to explore single-atom catalytic sites with a variety of coordination configurations, and it is also useful to further examine the catalytic reaction mechanism, by correctly altering the coordination environment of metal ions to change various single-atom active sites.
3.3 Bimetal M1–M2 atomic interface sites
At present, relevant atomic-level studies mainly concentrate on regulating the local environment about the active sites, and few studies extend the exploration to the synergistic interactions between adjacent active sites.151 According to reports,152 the catalysts with multiple Me-SAs have been shown to provide better catalytic performance than corresponding SACs containing only one metal type, that is, synergies between the active sites of different Me-SAs contribute to catalytic reactions. In dual SACs, the synergistic effect of dimetal includes two types. On the one hand, the two metal sites promote each other in the catalytic process and act on different stages of the same reaction catalytic mechanism respectively. On the other hand, the two metal sites don't interfere with each other and produce different effects for different reactions.45 Obviously, the addition of another suitable metal can effectively improve the coordination environment and electronic structure of the original metal. With the help of bimetallic sites, the catalytic reaction can be orderly conducted. However, it is still a major challenge to study the synergistic effect of adjacent single-atom active sites, especially since there are few SACs based on two or more metal sites of MOF-derived SACs.153
Wang et al.154 constructed the diatomic active site (Fe2–N6–C–O), in which the orbital coupling of diatoms would cause the orbital energy level drop and the delocalization of electronic states (Fig. 18a), thus promoting the desorption of *CO, and achieving excellent CO2RR performance. In addition to the construction of the same type of double single-atom sites, the CO selectivity of bimetallic single-atom electrocatalyst Fe1–Ni1–N–C could also achieve 96.2% at −0.5 V by combining Fe–N4 and Ni–N4 sites.155 Through theoretical simulation, Fe–N4 mainly activated CO2 in the CO2RR process, and the formation of intermediate (COOH*) on Fe–N4 was lower (Fig. 18b and c), which proved that the Ni atom could activate the Fe atom on account of the proximity of the two active sites. In addition, XANES spectra (Fig. 18d) showed the energy transfer between iron and nickel, confirming the electron transfer phenomenon from Ni to Fe. This work proved that CO2RR performance could be obviously improved by adding an appropriate second metal and cooperating with each other. Han and Wang85 also used DFT to reveal the influence of Pt–N4 on Fe–N4 sites in DSAC. According to the analysis of electrons and orbitals in Fig. 19, it can be concluded that Fe–N4 was the main active center in the bimetallic site system, while Pt–N4 was treated as the electronic regulator of Fe–N4. The most important point was that the RDS at the diatomic site was the generation of the O* intermediate, which was different from the RDS on Fe–N4.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of orbital interaction between Fe-3d (dz2 and dxz/dyz) and adsorbed CO (5σ and 2π*) for Fe1–N4–C and Fe2–N6–C–O. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) Electron density difference analysis of CO2 adsorbed on Fe–N4 sites of Fe1–Ni1–N–C (yellow and cyan stands for charge accumulation and depletion); (c) free energy diagrams of the CO2RR. (d) Fe K-edge XANES spectra of the catalysts. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 19  (a) O2 adsorption models of Fe–N4 and Fe–N4/Pt–N4. (b) Gibbs free energy diagram for the ORR on Fe–N4 and Fe–N4/Pt–N4. (c and d) Computed projected density of states of Fe–N4 (c) and Fe–N4/Pt–N4 (d) after OOH* adsorption. (e and f) Computed projected density of states of Fe–N4 (e) and Fe–N4/Pt–N4 (f) after OH* adsorption. s and p represent the bonding molecular orbitals between the d orbital of Fe and p orbital of O. s* and p* represent the antibonding molecular orbitals between the d orbitals of Fe and p orbital of O. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
The construction of cobalt–nickel single-atom sites also leads to excellent properties.156 Han and co-workers synthesized a bifunctional SAC (CoNi SAs/NC) with a bimetallic site (Co–Ni–N). The ORR and OER proceed by opposite mechanisms at the active site, respectively, and OOH*, O*, and OH* were the main intermediates in the reaction process. As shown in Fig. 20a–d, it was obvious that Co–Ni–N had a lower energy barrier in the ORR reaction compared with other models (NC and Ni–N), especially at the equilibrium potential of 1.23 V, the RDS (protonation of OH*) of CoNi SAs/NC of the ORR changed, and the RDS of other models were all hydrogenation of molecular O2. More interestingly, at 0.76 V potential, the reaction steps at the Co–Ni–N site could proceed spontaneously, while the RDS of the other two models still existed, which further confirmed that the diatomic site was conducive to promoting the ORR and showing superior performance. Similarly, in the process of exploring the OER mechanism, the RDS on NC and Ni–N was the adsorption of OH*, while Co–Ni–N could lower the barrier of this step and accelerate the reaction process. In addition, DSAC (FeMn-DSAC) with adjacent Fe–N4 and Mn–N4 sites was prepared by Cui, Wang, and Ye,157 and the catalyst was also applied in the ORR and OER. Here, the ORR catalytic mechanism process was introduced in detail, according to the model calculation, due to the coexistence of FeN4 and MnN4 sites, the synergistic effect between them was conducive to *OOH dissociation, which was more consistent with the measured half-wave potential. The site structure model shown in Fig. 20e–g, combined with calculation, indicated that FeMnN6 was the most likely active site in FeMn-DSAC. There is no doubt that the bimetallic single-atomic site (Co–Ni) showed a synergistic effect in the two reactions, which also provided a theoretical basis for the excellent dual function of CoNi-SAs/NC in alkaline media. The synergistic action of bimetallic sites can be either one metal as an auxiliary agent and the other metal as the main active site, or two metals acting together in the reaction mechanism.
 Fig. 20  (a) Optimized atomic configurations of oxygen intermediates (OOH*, O*, and OH*) adsorbed on Co–Ni–N models; free energy diagram of (b) two models at 0 and 1.23 V, (c) ORR, and (d) OER processes on NC, Ni–N, and Co–Ni–N. Reprinted with permission.156 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. The theoretical Gibbs free energy profile for the ORR process on OH-decorated (e) FeMnN6 and (f) Fe2N6 clusters embedded within graphene lattice; (g) the splitting of absorbed *OOH on FeMnN6 cluster with an energy barrier of 0.10 eV. Reprinted with permission.157 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. 
Now the active sites of M–Nx configuration have been popularized and show superior performance in the CO2RR, ORR, and other directions. Moreover, the catalytic mechanism of related reactions has been explained in detail from the aspects of reaction rate-limiting steps, energy barriers, and interactions. However, because the interaction between bimetals is difficult to explore, there are relatively few studies on the catalytic mechanism at the active site of M1–M2, which is also the direction that researchers need to jointly research. On the other hand, the wide popularity of MOF-derived electrical SACs has led to a thorough study of its catalytic mechanism. However, based on thermal catalysis and photocatalysis, there are relatively few MOF-derived SACs. Therefore, great efforts should be made to expand the mechanism system of these two directions.
In short, symmetric (M–N4) and asymmetric (M–N4) active sites, as well as bimetallic (M1–M2) active sites, play a critical role in controlling the orientation of the monatomic coordination environment in order to improve the catalytic activity of the catalyst. Of course, altering the type of metal active centers, the type of ligands, the type of solvents, or the morphology of the carriers to incorporate heteroatoms (O, S, or P) can improve the ability of MOF-derived materials to anchor single metal atoms. In addition, the electronic structure of the metal center can be effectively improved to achieve the construction of diversified active sites, allowing for the precise control of the coordination environment of single atoms to improve the activity of active sites. These are effective improvement measures. But it is still necessary to conduct in-depth research on the MOF-derived SACs to understand the complex relationship between the microstructure and reactivity of SACs and even to realize further systematic research on the mechanism because there are few research directions on the regulation of single-atom active sites at the atomic level.
4. The application of SACs derived from MOFs in the catalysis field
Up to now, MOF-derived SACs have been widely used in the field of catalysis. SACs not only make full use of the active metal centers at the single-atomic sites but also reduce the metal load, providing broad prospects for the stable and efficient development of industrial catalysis.158 Various preparation methods of MOF-derived SACs and the mechanisms of action of diverse metal active sites were introduced previously. Combined with their significant advantages, it is indisputable that such catalysts are prosperous. At present, the field of electrocatalysis has achieved relatively mature development, while thermocatalysis and photocatalysis still need to be carefully considered. In order to deepen the understanding of MOF-derived SACs and realize the optimization of SACs as soon as possible, the application of MOF-derived SACs in electrocatalysis, photocatalysis and thermocatalysis will be introduced in detail below.
4.1 Electrocatalysis
In clean energy, electrocatalysis has shown great application potential and made a great contribution to green development. In the direction of electrocatalysis, traditional metal nanoparticle catalysts, metal cluster catalysts, etc., also have excellent activity, but with the unique properties of single-atom catalysts being discovered, they have gradually become a new research area in electrocatalysis. The existence of MOFs and their derivatives provides strong support for the immobilization of single atoms, thus realizing the ideal single-atom electrocatalysts. Not only are the original advantages of MOF materials retained, but also this type of catalyst can make full use of the metal atoms on the carriers even under the conditions of low metal loading, thus improving the catalytic activity and excellent turnover frequency value. There has been much use of MOF-derived SACs in electrocatalysis, for example, precious metal-based (Pt, Ru) materials can effectively promote electrochemical reactions.159,160 However, because of the high cost, the research is turned to the invention of non-noble metal SACs, as shown in Table 2, which mainly summarizes the research progress of some non-noble metal SACs in recent years. In this module, we summarize the application of MOF-derived SACs in electrocatalysis, such as the electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR).

4.1.1 The electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). 
The excessive consumption of fossil fuels leads to excessive generation of carbon dioxide (CO2), and the conversion of CO2 into a series of chemicals (carbon organic matter, etc.), so as to turn waste into treasure, is considered a green treatment method. With the development of the CO2RR, SACs have been developed due to their isolated metal sites and maximum atomic efficiency. Due to the relatively high price of precious metal (Pt, Ir, Ru) single-atom catalysts, various non-precious metal catalysts are emerging. Currently, non-noble metal elements mainly used for the preparation of single atom catalysts are mainly concentrated in transition metal elements (Mn, Fe, Co). But owing to the limitations of the reaction itself and the influence of the HER,167,168 developing long-term stability, low overpotential, and high-efficiency materials for the CO2RR as potential electrocatalysts remains a challenging task. In addition, the emergence of MOFs, a new material with high surface area, high porosity, and fully exposed active sites, improves the process of mass and energy transfer in the CO2RR. There is no doubt that various improvement measures frequently appear, and the research of MOF-derived SACs is a hot field at present. According to literature reports, carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methanol (CH3OH), methane (CH4), and ethanol (C2H5OH) are the main products of the CO2RR.26,45,169 Therefore, in the following section, we will focus on products to introduce the current research status of the electrocatalytic CO2RR.
Under electrification conditions, there are generally only three steps to convert CO2 into CO: (i) CO2 + H+ + e− → *COOH; (ii) *COOH + H+ + e− → *CO + H2O; (iii) *CO → * + CO. H2 is a by-product accompanying production, so limiting the HER is also an important part of the design of CO2RR catalysts. Currently, some non-noble metal (Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts can replace the precious metal catalyst well.170 More importantly, the emergence of MOF-derived SACs also provides a feasible research for reducing the cost of noble catalysts.
Zhang and colleagues94 designed Fe-SACs with a CO FE of 95.0%. They formed an FeN4 site structure with axial O coordination through Fe–N and Fe–O chelation, resulting in Fe-SACs with FeN4–O active centers with a maximum CO FE of 95% at −0.50 V (Fig. 21a). DFT theoretical calculation showed that O doping not only reduced CO binding energy, but also effectively inhibited the HER (Fig. 21b). The high electronegativity of oxygen not only broke the electron symmetry but also enhanced the strength of the metal–carrier electron interaction (EMSI) at the M–N4 position.171 Unfortunately, traditional calcination methods are difficult to accurately control the coordination configuration of oxygen atoms. It has been proved that the highly electronegative oxygen not only broke the electron symmetry but also enhanced the strength of EMSI on M–N4.172 Therefore, the addition of heteroatoms to Fe for coordination is helpful to promote the performance of the catalysts.
 Fig. 21  (a) Total current density and (b) FE of CO at various potentials. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. Electrochemical performances for CO2 reduction: (c) linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) tests, (d) FEs of CO, (e) the JCO for catalysts in 0.5 M KHCO3; (f) the stability measurement for Fe1–Ni1–N–C at −0.5 V. Zn–CO2 battery measurements: (g) illustration for the aqueous rechargeable Zn–CO2 battery employing Fe1–Ni1–N–C at the cathode; (h) FE of CO and H2 under various discharge currents; (i) discharge–charge stability test at 1.1 mA. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
MOF-derived SACs containing one metal atom have achieved remarkable results. However, since the construction of adjacent atomic sites is currently in its infancy,173 it is still difficult to design electrocatalytic CO2RR SACs with multiple metals. Wang and colleagues reported electrocatalysts with diatomic Fe sites,154 providing a basis for an in-depth understanding of structure–property relationships at the atomic scale. In addition, Jiao and his team155 designed a catalyst (Fe1–Ni1–N–C) with zinc assisting iron and nickel atomization and then bridged Fe and Ni SAs via N. Compared with other samples, Fe1–Ni1–N–C (Fig. 21c–f) showed higher current density, lower energy consumption, and higher CO bias current density (JCO = 2.4 mA cm−2 at −0.5 V), faster CO2RR kinetics (Tafel slope = 83 mV dec−1) and the CO selectivity of Fe1–Ni1–N–C reached 96.2% at a certain voltage, which was mainly attributed to the synergy between Fe and Ni atoms and the stabilizing effect of the carrier on the single atom. When Fe1–Ni1–N–C (Fig. 21g–i) was added to the Zn–CO2 battery, it still showed high selectivity (CO FE = 93.4%) and maintained high stability for 15 h during discharged–charge processes. Under the interaction of DSAC, the Fe–Ni-SAC promoted the formation of intermediate (COOH*), thus speeding up the high FE for CO production.
With the further exploration of SACs, the composite materials have gradually begun to involve the electrochemical reaction of the CO2RR. Yang and Zhang et al.174 prepared a nickel composite for the study of the CO2RR. Their study showed that under certain conditions (Fig. 22), the CO FE of each catalyst followed a certain rule (Ni/N-CNTs > Ni/NC-D > Ni/NC), in particular, the first two catalysts showed more than 96% of CO FE at −0.67 V, suggesting that the activity was related not only to Ni–Nx, but also to the valence state of Ni. In addition, a copper SAC (CuNC-DCD) has also been constructed by doping the support with dicyandiamide (DCD), which had a CO selectivity of 93.5%, but the active sites here were mainly composed of Cu-SAs and Cu clusters.165 In addition, the introduction of electrostatic spinning to prepare the fiber membrane Ni-SAC made the Faraday efficiency of 88% up to 120 hours.175
 Fig. 22  The performance of the electrochemical CO2 reduction on the as-prepared Ni/NC, Ni/NC-D, and Ni/N-CNTs catalysts. (a) Faradaic efficiency, (b) geometric partial current density, and (c) mass partial current density of CO as a function of potential; (d) faradaic efficiency and potential as a function of testing time for Ni/N-CNTs. Reprinted with permission.174 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The commonly used non-noble metal SACs mentioned above effectively solved the problem of high cost. Therefore, Wang and colleagues176 compared the electric CO2RR catalytic performance of three non-noble M-SACs (M = Ni, Fe, Co). In the M–N–C type electric CO2RR catalyst, the CO FE of Ni–N–C was close to 100% within a certain potential range, indicating that the selectivity order was Ni > Co > Fe. Interestingly, Co–N–C exhibited higher Co current density and TOF (7182 h−1) over a wide potential range, so the main order of activity was Co > Ni > Fe. As shown in Table 2, in addition to the common iron, cobalt, and nickel-based SACs, efforts are being made to expand the application of other transition metals. For example, a single atom of manganese metal was added to the ZIF materials modified by sulfur to achieve the reduction of CO2.149 As is known to all, ZIF materials have good adsorption capacity for CO2 and have been widely used in CO2-related studies.177 Therefore, researchers are striving to design more complete catalysts for the CO2RR on this basis.
In addition to CO obtained by CO2 reduction, the catalytic synthesis of other CO2RR products from MOF-derived SACs has also been reported. As early as 2019, Yang et al.178 mentioned MOF-derived Cu-SAC from the electric reduction of CO2 to methanol. Shang, Wang, and Pei179 also designed an indium-based SAC for the conversion of CO2 into formate. According to the free energy diagram (Fig. 23), the formate generation process mainly produced intermediate *HCOO−, and the CO generation process mainly produced intermediates (COOH* and CO*). Moreover, In-SAS/NC had the lowest free energy to form these intermediates. Interestingly, the JHCOO− of In-SAS/NC was 8.52 mA cm−2, about 40 times that of In-NPS/NC (0.21 mA cm−2). It is obvious that In-based catalysts have good application potential in the direction of CO2RR. There is no doubt that promoting In-SACs to produce formic acid is of practical significance. Subsequently, Guan and his colleagues180 reported that Cu-SAC was applied to the reaction of CO2 to generate CH4, and the Cu–Nx configuration was affected by roasting temperature, and it was confirmed that isolated Cu sites were conducive to the generation of CH4, and adjacent Cu sites were conducive to the generation of C2H4. However, due to the formation process of methane it is difficult to generate the inter-domain intermediate *CHO at a higher energy barrier, and this reaction is still a huge challenge. In addition, C2 series products are also involved, in which the generation of ethanol mainly involves the step of 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O. Dilan and colleagues73 designed a CO2RR electrocatalyst (Cu–N–C) for ethanol production. Within a certain potential range, the Faraday yield (FY) of CO increased with the increase of metal ion size. However, the disadvantage of MOF-derived SACs was that Cu-SAs could be converted into Cu NPs after use, even though this process was reversible, with more or less loss of active sites.
 Fig. 23  (a) FEs and TOF of HCOO− at different potentials; (b) the current density of HCOO− for samples; the calculated potential free-energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to (c) formate. Reprinted with permission.179 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 


4.1.2 The electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
The ORR at an air cathode is a very important electrochemical reaction. Typically, in acidic media, the reaction pathways fall into two categories,181 the two-electron pathway of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and the four-electron pathway of water (H2O). Among them, the four-electron reduction path is preferable for the ORR, because harmful peroxides will be produced in the two-electron reduction process, which is not conducive to the stability of the battery.182 There is no doubt that the efficient control of the production of intermediates in the ORR is the key to accelerate the reduction of O2, especially the regulation of the adsorption energy of intermediates.183 Therefore, it is necessary to effectively adjust the electronic structure of the catalytic center to reduce the overpotential of the reaction and achieve rapid transformation. At present, MOF-derived precious metal-based (platinum, gold, iridium) SACs are relatively advanced electrocatalysts in the market. Liu et al.184 summarized the effects of active sites of precious metals (PMs) with different loads on the ORR. However, high cost and poor toxicity resistance inhibit the development, so there is an urgent need to develop O economical ORR catalysts, with strong tolerance, and high activity. In addition, in order to prepare high active sites for MOF-derived SACs, two aspects are mainly explored to change the metal or adjust the structure of the carriers. Therefore, the application of MOF-derived SACs to the ORR will be introduced from these two directions.
Fe–N–C SACs are currently expected to be one of the substitutes for platinum-based catalysts. It is widely believed that the Fe–Nx structure with uneven charge distribution plays a role in promoting oxygen adsorption and reducing the O–O bond energy in the ORR.185 For example, Wang and colleagues132 designed a MOF-derived Fe-SAC with a three-dimensional structure. As shown in Fig. 24a–c, Fe–N–C with a 3D structure containing 1.70 wt% Fe had higher onset potential (Eonset) and half-wave potential (0.90 V and 0.82 V, respectively) under acidic conditions than the most advanced Pt/C. In addition, the ORR on 3D Fe–N–C satisfied the four-electron reaction path, indicating that O2 is completely converted to H2O. After 10000 cycles, the E1/2 of 3D Fe–N–C did not have a large shift. It was precisely because of their micro/nano structures that hydrophobic surfaces were constructed to facilitate the transport of reactants. Besides, Zheng and colleagues186 investigated the application of Fe-SACs with a two-dimensional lamellar structure to the ORR in acidic and alkaline electrolytes. By introducing g-C3N4 as a nitrogen source and Fe-SAs as the stabilizer, an Fe/N–PCNS catalyst with rich active sites (Fe–N4) was prepared. The E1/2 in acidic and alkaline solutions was 0.86 V and 0.79 V, respectively, and was much larger than the contrast samples prepared. And their ORR durability was superior to that of Pt/C catalysts from the market (Fig. 24d–g).
 Fig. 24  (a) ORR polarization curves in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1; (b) electron transfer number and H2O2 yield of 3D Fe–N–C catalyst and (c) the ORR LSV curves of 3D Fe–N–C before and after 10000 cycles between 0.6 and 1.0 V at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 of 3D Fe–N–C and solid Fe–N–C catalysts. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. LSV ORR curves of samples in (d) 0.1 M KOH and (e) 0.1 M HClO4; 20000 s stability test of the Fe/N-PCNs and Pt/C catalysts in (f) 0.1 M KOH and (g) 0.1 M HClO4. Reprinted with permission.186 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. The corresponding LSV curves were recorded in (h) O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH and (i) 0.1 M HClO4 at 1600 rpm. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
The multilayer structure of the MOF material can change the catalytic performance of the reaction. Naturally, the change in the size of the carrier will also have a certain influence on the performance of the catalyst. Some people would use the template method to construct regular MOF supports, so as to effectively improve material transfer efficiency. Not all single-atom sites are exposed to easily accessible places, but exposed sites can also be called active sites, thus resulting in waste of active sites to a certain extent.187 Therefore, the template method has been widely introduced into the preparation of catalysts because it can retain the ordered layered structure and increase the utilization rate of active sites. And using different raw materials on the substrate would also affect the morphology of the formed carrier and even effectively increase the number of active sites,86 so as to construct efficient ORR electrocatalysts.
In theory, cobalt-based SACs are also considered as effective substitutes for noble metal catalysts owing to their high catalytic activity and economic benefits and are also widely used at present. Zhou and colleagues144 realized MOF-derived SACs (CoSA–N–C) with a star structure by preparing MOF precursors with a special shape to construct a unique coordination environment (Co–N3–C). It has been proved that the synthesized Co-SAC showed high ORR activity in various solutions (Fig. 24h and i).
Similarly, Co-based composites are also suitable for the preparation of ORR electrocatalysts. Dilpazir et al.70 doped dicyandiamide (DCD) into ZIF-67 carrier to synthesize a CoSAs@CNTs catalyst of Co-SAs uniformly dispersed on carbon nanotubes. With the help of DCD, the catalyst formed had a regular tube structure and stable Co single-atom site. As can be seen from the ORR performance results (Fig. 25a and b), CoSAs@CNTs had a higher Eonset (0.99 V), a higher E1/2 (0.86 V), and a lower Tafel slope (99 mV dec−1). And the addition of electrospinning also added fun to the study of Co-SACs, which can enrich the research content of SACs. He et al.188 prepared Co-SACs (Co–N–PCNF) through the Co-doping of electrospinning and ZIF, and then Co–N–PCNF was treated with two-step pyrolysis. With the help of electrostatic spinning, a unique porous fiber morphology and layered structure were formed, which dispersed the sites to significantly improve ORR activity and durability (Fig. 25c and d). The results of DFT showed that the ZIF derivatives decreased the activation energy of the *OOH dissociation step in the ORR process by changing the charge density around the single-atom site. Obviously, electrospinning can also be well applied to single-atom materials.
 Fig. 25  (a) Polarization curves measured at 1600 rpm at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and (b) RRDE measurements for determination of average electron transfer number and percentage H2O2 yield regarding ORR activity of CoSAs@CNTs in alkaline medium. Reprinted with permission.70 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Steady-state ORR polarization plots of catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 25 °C; (d) potentiostatic tests @ 0.85 VRHE. Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
Similar to the nanoparticle catalyst, the ORR performance can also be significantly improved under the catalysis of DSACs. Zhao and Liang et al.189 designed a fusion-foaming approach to make DSACs derived from energetic MOF materials (EMOF) (CoFe@C). The layered porous carbon structure obtained by the decomposition of the carrier and the release of gas dispersed Me-SAs evenly, so as to prepare ORR electrocatalysts (CoFe@C) with high catalytic performance as shown in Fig. 26. In addition, Zhu and his colleagues190 designed iron/nickel-based double SACs for the ORR study. The regular ordered macropores of this kind of DSAC (Fe/Ni–Nx/OC) were prepared by the combination of wet chemistry and pyrolysis, which was conducive to SAs anchoring in the interconnected channel, so that it could be more convenient to create a collaborative environment. And Zhang and co-workers82 reported a Fe, Ni-SAC (Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC) that introduced SiO2 and thiourea in the preparation of the carrier. Due to the synergistic action of Fe–Ni bimetallic atoms, the ORR properties were excellent in both alkaline and neutral media.
 Fig. 26  (a) ORR polarization curves of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm (revolutions per minute) in 0.1 M KOH; (b) ORR polarization curves of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm in 0.5 M H2SO4; (c) long-term chronoamperometric responses of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 1600 rpm. Top: at 0.77 V in 0.1 M KOH. Bottom: at 0.50 V in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission.189 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
According to Table 2, in addition to Fe-SACs, Co-SACs, and Ni-SACs, which have been widely studied, scholars are also working on other metal species. For example, Lu et al.191 designed a MOF-derived copper monatomic catalyst (Cu-SAs/NSs) with carbon nanosheet morphology. The design mainly introduced nitrogen-rich molecules (melamine) to generate rich Cu–N4 active sites, and Cu-SAs/NSs also showed the best alkaline ORR performance (Eonset = 1.05 V, E1/2 = 0.9 V vs. RHE, jd = 5.63 mA cm−2) and also the lowest Tafel slope compared with other types of catalysts. In addition, Jiang et al.192 designed a W-SAC with a loading capacity of 4.34 wt% for the ORR. Compared with the N–C sample without tungsten doping (0.78 V), the ORR peak of W–N–C was 0.86 V. Fig. 27 proved that W–N–C had excellent performance with an E1/2 of 0.86 V and an Eonset of 1.13 V and could work 50000 s, indicating that the addition of the W atom was beneficial. The durability test of the catalyst showed that W–N–C still maintained a high relative current after, and also showed good methanol resistance. Meanwhile, with the help of the Tafel slope (71 mV dec−1), the W–N–C catalyst facilitated the rate of the first electron transfer and thus accelerated the ORR.193 There is no doubt that W-SAC, a transition metal with 5d electrons, would help advance the application of ORR catalysis and lay the foundation for exploring a wider range of non-noble metal catalysts.
 Fig. 27  (a) CV curves and (b) LSV curves of N–C, W–N–C, and LSV curves of 20% Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH with a rotation rate of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1; (c) comparison of Eonset and E1/2 with previously reported catalysts; (d) chronoamperometric stability test of catalysts. Reprinted with permission.192 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Imagine that when a catalyst is designed that can be applied in multi-directional research studies, it will have significant implications for advancing industrialization. Chen and his colleagues79 successfully developed MOF-derived Fe-SACs that were efficiently applied to the ORR and CO2RR. The FeSAs/CNF-900 catalyst with abundant sites (Fe–Nx) and large mesoporous structures was prepared. The onset potential (Eonset = 1.01 V) and half-wave potential (E1/2 = 0.89 V) were higher in the ORR, and in the CO2RR, the Faraday efficiency (FE) of CO of FeSAs/CNF-900 was 86.9% at −0.47 V. In addition, FeSAs/CNF-900 showed the largest TOF value at 639.9 h−1 (under −0.77 V). Of course, these excellent properties were attributed to the addition of mesoporous materials and the emergence of more active sites, which not only facilitated the material transfer but also increased the probability of approaching the single atomic iron sites. So, it is proved that the MOF-derived SACs are expected to become multi-application catalysts, which also provides a feasible way for the development of multi-functional catalysts with high catalytic performance and high economic benefits. More information about difunctional SACs derived from MOFs can be obtained from Chang's work.194 The bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts involved in this paper have a wider range and more substantial content.


4.1.3 Electrochemical water splitting. 
Electrochemical water splitting is considered as a renewable hydrogen energy technology. The electrolysis process of water is mainly divided into two half reactions, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Electrocatalysts are needed for the hydrolysis reaction, and efficient catalysis can reduce overpotential and accelerate product generation.195 Traditionally, the Tafel slope is used to determine the kinetics of the HER and OER, which is ideal if you can get a small Tafel slope. At present, precious metals (platinum, ruthenium, and silver) are relatively efficient catalysts in the directions of the OER and HER,196,197 but their high cost and limited resources limit the development of hydrolysis. Therefore, suitable catalysts, with low cost and high activity, have been sought by a large number of scholars. MOF-based SACs have made a breakthrough in the direction of water cracking. This section mainly describes the progress related to MOF-derived SACs for water splitting and provides a thorough comprehension of the role of catalytic active centers.
The OER is a reaction occurring at the anode of the water cracking process and plays an important role in many electrochemical devices. Under acidic and alkaline conditions, O2 production has completely different mechanisms. Intermediates (O*, HO*, HOO*) that play a key role in catalytic activity are generated in the reaction process. The weak binding of oxygen makes the oxidation of HO* become the rate-determining step (RDS), while the strong binding of oxygen makes the formation of HOO* become the RDS,198 so it is difficult to control the oxygen binding process. Furthermore, SACs derived from MOFs mainly form carbon and nitrogen materials, which will fully combine with carbon, resulting in poor OER performance.199 Therefore, for the sake of improving the performance of OER catalysts, it is of practical meaning to regulate the formation of intermediates and effectively inhibit the binding of carbon, which means to control the coordination environment of the active centers, so as to accurately regulate the binding of oxygen and carbon.
For example, Wang and Wu et al.124 used Hofmann-type MOF materials to design a Fe–NiHF catalyst with 290 mV overpotential, which had the best OER performance compared with other samples. Compared with Co–NiHF (65 mV dec−1) and Ni–NiHF (60 mV dec−1), the Tafel slope of Fe–NiHF (44 mV dec−1) was the lowest in Fig. 28a, indicating that the catalytic OER step was the fastest. In addition, the charge transfer resistance of Fe–NiHF was 2.97 Ω, showing the lowest resistance, as can be seen from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) diagrams (Fig. 28b). Through theoretical simulation, it was proved that the Fe–Ni active center was more efficient for the formation of intermediates (OH* and O*). There is no doubt that with the help of MOF nanosheets, electron conduction was beneficial and electron transfer was promoted in the OER.
 Fig. 28  (a) Tafel plots and (b) electrochemical impedance curves and equivalent circuits of OER catalysts. Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (c) Oxygen evolution curves. Reprinted with permission.200 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) OER polarization curves, (e) Tafel plots, and (f) OER potential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (EI = 10), E1/2, and ΔE of prepared catalysts. Reprinted with permission.156 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
Recent OER studies also involve bi-functional MOF-derived SACs. As previously reported, Zhang and colleagues200 designed a nanosheet SAC (NC–Co SA), which showed a lower OER overpotential (360 mV) (Fig. 28c) and was well used as a novel non-binder air cathode in zinc–air batteries. By calculating the difference between the OER voltage and the ORR half-wave potential (ΔE), it was confirmed that the ΔE was smaller, the performance of the catalyst as a reversible oxygen electrode was better and the ORR and OER kinetic rates were faster. There is no doubt that the NC-Co SA catalyst was a good dual-application material. In addition, the research of OER single-atom composites is gradually developed under the influence of the environment. By introducing dicyandiamide (DCD), ZIF-derived single-atom composites (CoSAs@CNTs) were synthesized.70 Surprisingly, during the pyrolysis process, DCD repeated the carbon structure to form a tubular structure and effectively dispersed the Co-SAs, resulting in the formation of electrocatalytic OER SACs with low overpotential (0.78 V) and low Tafel slope (85 mV dec−1). Moreover, the cobalt-based catalyst was a dual-application material. Its ORR performance also showed high efficiency under alkaline conditions. Another example is the application of composite materials with dopamine (DPA) in OER electrochemical studies (Fig. 28d–f).156 Of course, the development of diatomic catalysts is also a hot topic at present, and how to construct a bimetallic single-atom active center is also a research direction. Zhang, Li, and Jiang82 reported a DSAC (Fe, Ni-SAs/DNC) with a dual application, which provided new ideas for the construction of DSACs with special coordination environments. Above all, the most noteworthy is the preparation of SACs which can be applied to a variety of catalytic reactions. It is well known that in the air pole of a metal–air secondary battery, the ORR occurs during discharge and the OER occurs during charge, and both have high overpotential and slow dynamics. Therefore, in order to meet the requirements of both reactions, the intrinsic and apparent activity must be improved.201 Obviously, the construction of bi-functional SACs is mainly realized from the microstructure morphology and electronic structure or it depends on the synergy between components, which also lays a foundation for the research and development of other advanced bi-functional materials.
Molecular hydrogen (H2) is a kind of renewable and clean fuel, which is helpful to solve the energy crisis. It can be directly generated by the HER, and the HER is the reaction occurring at the cathode in the process of water cracking, which is conducive to the production of high-purity hydrogen. There are two main reaction pathways in the HER, the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism (H+ + e− → H*; H* + H+ + e− → H2 + *) and the Volmer–Tafel mechanism (H+ + e− → H*; 2H* → H2 + 2*).33,202 Currently, Pt/C catalysts are mainly used in the market as high catalytic materials for the HER. Due to the high cost and other factors, other methods, such as the emergence of SACs, have been developed to replace expensive catalysts. Among them, MOF-derived SACs have made some progress as HER electrocatalysts.
Xing and Gao203 produced a MOF-derived electrocatalyst (Ru-ZIF-900) for the HER with atom-dispersed Ru sites using in situ domain limiting and showing better performance than a commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst in alkaline media. They confirmed the existence of Ru atomic sites using XAFS technology. Ru-ZIF-900 was shown to have higher TOF (9.38 H2 per s), lower overpotential (51.6 mV), larger ECSA (147 cm2), and excellent activity and stability (Fig. 29). Because the ruthenium atom site was located on a unique structure, the free energy of water dissociation in the HER step was significantly optimized, resulting in improved performance. In addition, W-SAC derived from the UiO material only needs to satisfy the overpotential (η10) of 85 mV in HER to obtain a high current density. Compared with other comparison samples, Chen et al.108 also confirmed that the catalyst was more conducive to hydrogen evolution from the perspective of the Tafel slope (53 mV dec−1), mainly because W-SAC had a faster charge transfer ability. After durability testing, W-SAC did not show significant activity decline, which was believed to be due to the strong interaction between W-SAs and the carrier with the help of unique active sites like W1N1C3, leading to high stability. Subsequently, they also carried out extended research and prepared SACs based on In and Sn under the same synthesis conditions. It has been proved that this project has good universality and provides unique insights for the development of electrochemical HER.
 Fig. 29  (a) HER polarization curves of different electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH. (b) The corresponding Tafel plots of different HER electrocatalysts. (c) The comparison of overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope for different electrocatalysts. (d) The fitting lines by plotting the difference of current density between the anodic and cathodic scans at 0.2 V (vs. RHE) against the scan rate. (e) LSV curves of Ru-ZIF-900 before and after the addition of 10 mM KSCN into 1.0 M KOH or recovery. Inset: schematic illustrations of single Ru–N4 sites poisoned or not by SCN− ions. (f) Free-energy diagrams of the water dissociation process for the four models. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.4 The electrochemical nitrogen reduction (NRR). 
Ammonia gas (NH3) is a reactant in all kinds of important industrial processes (fertilizer, nitric acid) and efficient NH3 output efficiency is the main goal now. At present, more than 90% of NH3 is derived from the Haber–Bosch reaction, but the reaction conditions require high temperature (573–773 K) and high pressure (100–200 atm). Therefore, scholars are working on an alternative method, such as the reduction of NH3 by fixing N2 under mild conditions. The emergence of electrochemistry has realized the desire of the NRR to generate NH3 under environmental conditions. The reduction of N2 to NH3 involves the transfer of multiple protons and electrons.204 In the MOF-derived SACs discussed now, single atoms mostly exist in the form of positive valence,205 which can effectively inhibit proton adsorption and improve N2 adsorption capacity. Therefore, combined with the advantages of porous materials, MOF-derived SACs can be a good candidate for catalysts required by the NRR.
In 2018, Geng's team206 achieved a record high yield of NH3 (120.9 μgNH3 mgcat−1 h−1), which was a good indication of the future of NRR. Later, Qin et al.145 prepared catalysts for Co–Nx–C by coprecipitation and pyrolysis. Although not as good as Geng's team, they also contributed to the development of the NRR. Surprisingly, the ammonia production rates of Co–Nx–C at −0.9 V and −1.0 V are 37.6 μg mg−1 h−1 and 33.2 μg mg−1 h−1, respectively, which are higher than those of the Pt/C catalyst. The great properties depend on the Co–N3–C active site, which reduces the activation energy of the RDS of the NRR, favored N2 adsorption, and effectively controlled the occurrence of hydrogen evolution reaction, thereby promoting N2 reduction.
In summary, the electrochemical application of MOF-derived SACs includes the CO2RR, ORR, OER, HER, and NRR. The main research directions are the ORR and CO2RR, and reviews based on the two directions have been widely circulated.159,207 Fe, Co, and other non-noble metals are mostly used in the study of the ORR, while Ni-based SACs are mostly used in the study of the CO2RR, and the CO2RR electrocatalysts are mainly used in the study of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO, while relatively little research has been done on other products. On the one hand, how to speed up the process of multi-electron transfer may be a difficult link to overcome. On the other hand, the formation of multi-carbon products depends on the affinity of CO, and the activation energy of the C–C bond is high. The fracture of the C–H bond and the C–O bond is relatively dominant, which is not conducive to the coupling of CO. This greatly limits the application scope of SACs for the CO2RR. It should be noted that for the OER and HER in water cracking reaction, these metal SACs or DSACs are often used in alkaline media and are unstable under acidic conditions, which is also the reason why it is difficult to overcome at present. To solve this problem, the concept of non-carbon SACs has been proposed, but it has not been implemented in the experiment. For the NRR, higher overpotential and stronger NN bond both affect the performance efficiency of the NRR.208 In addition, there is serious competition between the HER and NRR.209 And the HER needs to be suppressed in the reduction process of N2. Therefore, the development of advanced catalysts that can improve the adsorption of reactants, suppress side reactions, and improve faradaic efficiency is the primary focus of the NRR at present. Comparatively speaking, it is easier to prepare MOF-derived SACs applied to the ORR and CO2RR, and it is also easier to build the corresponding catalytic mechanism system, which is convenient for future generations to learn.

4.2 Photocatalysis
Photocatalysis is a redox process in which the catalysts absorb photons to generate electrons and holes.210 Photocatalytic reactions mainly involve three steps: light collection, catalysis, and charge generation and separation. There are many SACs based on photoreaction, such as noble metal-based SACs for selective reduction of CO2 to methane.211,212 Based on MOF materials, especially UiO materials,10 as the carriers of photocatalysts, they are also materials with relatively great potential. After all, they can use themselves and their derivatives to restrict single atoms to prepare various SACs. Therefore, it is very feasible to use MOF derivatives to prepare single-atom photocatalysts.213 The synergy between organic ligands and inorganic metals in MOFs can provide ligand-to-metal charge transfer/metal-to-ligand charge transfer (LMCT/MLCT), reflecting their good light absorption properties.214 In addition, single-atom photocatalysts (SAPCs) with single metal atom active sites can collect shorter distance charge transfer carriers than catalysts synthesized by metal nanoparticles, thus improving the charge dynamics of the carriers. Moreover, the special coordination environment and electronic structure of single atoms can effectively change the metal–carrier interaction, thus regulating the interfacial species conversion via improving charge transfer properties.28
In general, stable metal ions can be reduced to atoms by photogenerated electrons in photocatalysis.215 Therefore, the introduction of SACs in photocatalysis combined with the interaction between Me-SAs and carriers can affect the three steps mentioned above. At present, SACs have made remarkable progress in electrocatalysis, but photocatalysis is still in the early stage. It is precisely because the MOF matrix is an ideal photosensitive material for photocatalysis. Due to the existence of organic ligands, it has a large range of light absorption, and the advantage of the porous structure of MOFs can further reduce the recombination probability of electron–hole (e–h) volume pair in the semiconductor, thus promoting the photocatalytic reaction. SACs based on MOFs are an ideal photocatalytic materials with a wide range of functions.216 If you are interested in single-atom photocatalytic materials based on original MOFs, please refer to the articles of Liang207 and Liu.217 SACs combine single atoms as electron acceptors and catalytically active centers with various MOFs as photosensitizers and stabilizers, which help to significantly enhance the photocatalytic reduction reaction.61,218 However, up to now, MOF-derived SAPCs are still in the process of gradual exploration, so it is worth exploring for researchers.
As we all know, due to a series of problems caused by excessive emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2),219 carbon neutrality has been strongly advocated and various emission reduction measures have been widely applied. From the perspective of green and sustainable, it is a wise choice to absorb solar energy to catalyze the conversion of CO2 into valuable chemicals, such as CH4 (ref. 220) and so on, referring to the photosynthesis of plants. However, the establishment of efficient catalytic systems needs to be put on the agenda. Recently, some scholars221 realized CO2 reduction and hydrogen production with SACs prepared from triazinyl covalent frameworks (CTFs), which has solved some difficulties for photocatalysis. Currently, MOF-derived SACs are considered as potential CO2RR photocatalysts due to their maximum atomic efficiency and the advantage of MOFs in collecting sunlight.222 Classically, photocatalysts can absorb light energy to activate CO2 and convert light energy to chemical energy.223 Therefore, mass transfer and light absorption efficiency have a great influence on photocatalysts, both of which depend on specific surface area and porous structure.224 Therefore, efficient CO2RR photocatalysts constructed for the complex reduction reaction of CO2 (ref. 207) can start from the carrier material. For example, Zhang's team225 used a ligand replacement method to prepare Co-MOLs which increased the specific surface area, and obtained a variety of g-C3N4-MOLs catalysts by mixed pyrolysis with urea. In particular, when g-C3N4-MOLs-30 was used in the CO2RR, 9.28 μmol CO and 1.85 μmol H2 were reduced and the CO selectivity was 83.4% (Fig. 30). The photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4-MOLs-30 was much better than that of many g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, thanks to the fact that the active site of Co(II) was fixed on g-C3N4, which improved its optical performance and promoted the transfer of photogenerated charge so that the CO2 molecules adsorbed on the surface gained electrons and reduced to CO. It is worth mentioning that this design opens up a new way to establish a simple and economical field of photochemical energy conversion.
 Fig. 30  (a) Time-dependent CO and H2 generation over g-C3N4-MOLs-30. (b) CO evolution with different catalysts tested. Reprinted with permission.225 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
With the help of SACs, CO2 can also participate in efficient conversion of the cycloaddition reaction. Guo and colleagues75 prepared a MOF-derived photocatalyst with an ordered macroporous structure (Zn–N-HOPCPs). With the help of a hard template material (SiO2-CCT), they synthesized Zn-SAC with large pores of three-dimensional ordered interconnection, which exhibited a wide light absorption range (230–800 nm). Moreover, with the help of tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB) cocatalyst, the catalyst showed excellent photocatalytic performance (Fig. 31) in the cycloaddition reaction of catalyzing CO2 and propylene oxide, with the yield as high as 95%. Compared with N-HOPCPs (33% yield) without Zn addition, it was clear that Zn atoms were essential as Lewis acid sites. In addition, Zn–N-HOPCPs with a larger surface area (1128 m2 g−1) were superior to Zn–N-HOPCM with a yield of 87%, which was prepared by homogeneous crystallization with a specific surface area of 983 m2 g−1. There is no doubt that Zn–N-HOPCPs had the best catalytic activity among the six catalysts. Of course, this was mainly due to the large pore structure of Zn–N-HOPCPs, which exposed more single atomic active sites and had an efficient light-trapping performance. This opens a way to study MOF-derived SAPCs for CO2 cycloaddition reactions under mild conditions.
 Fig. 31  (a) Time–yield plots of various catalysts for the cycloaddition reaction. (b) Structure advantage of the hierarchically ordered porous structure compared with the bulk counterpart. (c) Proposed mechanism for CO2 cycloaddition with epoxides catalyzed by Zn–N-HOPCPs. (d) Catalytic recyclability of Zn–N-HOPCPs for the CO2 cycloaddition with propylene oxide. Reprinted with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
In the direction of nitrogen fixation, people have studied many methods for N2 fixation, such as enzyme catalysis and so on. Not only electrocatalysis can generate NRR under ambient conditions, but the emergence of a photocatalytic N2 reduction system also provides a direction for finding a mild method,226,227 in particular photocatalytic nitrogen reduction (NRR) has achieved great progress in nitrogen fixation. Because the catalysts contain uniformly dispersed atoms, there are many clear active sites, which can greatly improve catalytic performance.24 Moreover, it has been reported228 that single atoms have a significant effect on electron transfer, which is crucial for molecular adsorption and activation, so it emphasizes the great potential of SACs in the field of photocatalytic NRR, especially the addition of MOF materials with light collection ability and porous structure in the catalyst. Generally, there are three reaction pathways for N2 reduction to NH3, including dissociation, enzyme promotion, and association.229 The electrocatalyzed NRR and Haber–Bosch reactionis are mostly dissociation and enzyme mechanism, while the photocatalytic NRR is the association mechanism.
Shang's team230 designed MOF-derived Al-PMOF(Fe) SACs using the porphyrin ligand, which was a photosensitive agent that efficiently traps light, and applied them to the NRR under light. The NH3 yield and formation rate of Al-PMOF(Fe) are 635 μg−1 and 127 μg h−1 g−1, respectively, which are 82% and 50% higher than those of the iron-free single-atom Al-PMOF catalyst (Fig. 32a and b), respectively. Moreover, Al-PMOF(Fe) exhibited good hydrolysis stability and three photocatalytic NRR cycles had been carried out. The reason was that the presence of Fe–N active sites could effectively promote the absorption of N2 by Al-PMOF(Fe), and the key was to delay the electron–hole recombination so that the SAC showed high catalytic performance. Meanwhile, the catalytic mechanism of the NRR reaction was explored in combination with DFT theory, as shown in Fig. 32c and d. They used associative alternation and distal pathways to explore the specific catalytic mechanism at the active site and confirmed that the RDS of the reaction was the activation of N2 and that the activation of N2 was significantly reduced with the help of Fe–N sites. During the reaction, the energy barrier of the alternating process was lower and the distal pathway showed higher free energy in subsequent steps. There is no doubt that the association alternating mechanism was the main reaction pathway of NRR under the action of the Al-PMOF(Fe) photocatalyst. In this work, they explored the efficient catalytic reduction of N2 by Fe-SACs derived from porphyrins under light conditions and adopted the method of combining experimental and theoretical calculation, which has guiding significance for constructing the reaction mechanism of the NRR.
 Fig. 32  (a) NH4+ yield and 1H NMR spectrum (inset) of Al-PMOF(Fe) and (c) photocatalytic NRR rate of AlPMOF and Al-PMOF(Fe) under N2, air, and Ar atmosphere, respectively. (b) Three cycles of photocatalytic NRR experiments using Al-PMOF(Fe), showing a negligible decrease in NRR yield and steady photocatalytic activity. The free energy diagram of the associative (c) alternating and (d) distal pathways in Al-PMOF(Fe). Reprinted with permission.230 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
In the field of hydrogen evolution, MOF-derived SACs are also involved. Zhang et al.231 developed a CuSA–TiO2 photocatalyst derived from MIL-125, which resulted in a H2 precipitation rate of 101.7 mmol g−1 h−1 and achieved a quantum efficiency of 56% at 365 nm. In another study,232 the same team mentioned that the coupling of Cu single atoms (Cu-SAs) with O atoms on the surface accelerated the transfer of photo-generated charge carriers from TiO2 to Cu-SAs, ultimately increasing the rate of hydrogen evolution. Of course, the excellent hydrogen evolution activity is mainly due to the existence of copper single atoms capable of in situ self-healing and MOF carriers with a high specific surface, which facilitates effective charge separation. Obviously, MOF-derived SACs can also be well applied to the CO2RR, NRR, HER, and other reactions in the field of photocatalysis, which opens the way for the design of advanced materials with excellent photocatalytic activity and durability.
4.3 Thermocatalysis
From the development of the current situation, MOF-derived SACs develop slowly in the direction of thermal and photocatalysis, but people still focus on the study of efficient MOF-derived thermal SACs, such as hydrogenation or dehydrogenation of some organic compounds. The following was mainly from the hydrogenation reaction and oxidation reaction corresponding to the MOF-derived SACs used in the direction of thermocatalysis.
Aniline derivatives derived from catalytic hydrogenation of nitroaromatic hydrocarbons are very important in organic synthesis and mainly involved in the production of dyes, drugs, pigments, and other chemicals.233 He's team119 synthesized a SAC named Co SAs/NC-800 for the nitro aromatics hydrogenation reaction. Under the condition of a certain amount of H2, the yield of aniline synthesized by the catalyst (Fig. 33a–c) was as high as 99.8%, and the TOF was 18.2 h−1, which was significantly different from the comparison sample. More importantly, Co SAs/NC-800 had higher catalytic activity than many previous non-noble metal catalysts. The catalytic activity of Co SAs/NC-800 was mainly attributed to the existence of the Co–N site. Moreover, after 5 cycles, the conversion rate and selectivity remained basically unchanged. In addition, Co SAs/NC-800 could also catalyze the selective hydrogenation of nitroaromatic hydrocarbons with different substituents (yield > 90%). For one thing, the addition of Co SAs increased the specific surface area of contact, which was beneficial to the adsorption and dissociation of H2. For another, pyrolysis changed the coordination environment of the active sites to generate a larger porous structure and cause Co atoms to form Co–Nx coordination, thereby accelerating the electron transfer of Co to H2. In addition, Sun and his team234 also designed a Co-SAC based on the SiO2 template method and applied in the hydrogenation reaction of nitroaromatic hydrocarbons. They conducted comparative experiments under different conditions and revealed that the hydrogenation performance of Co@mesoNC catalyst (Fig. 33e and f) depended on H2 pressure and reaction temperature. In addition, Co@mesoNC showed excellent nitrobenzene conversion and aniline selectivity under certain conditions. In fact, the high Zn/Co mole ratio in BIMZIF precursors and the silica protection strategy were critical to prevent the formation of cobalt nanoparticles and to generate atomically dispersed Co–Nx sites that facilitated the rate of catalytic hydrogenation. MOF-derived SACs could also be applied to quinoline hydrogenation (QHR). Guo et al.235 prepared a Co-SAs@NHOPC thermocatalyst with an orderly structure and applied it to selective hydrogenation of quinoline by template method. Under certain circumstances, the selectivity of the catalyst remained above 99% and the conversion of quinoline was 100%. However, compared with Co-NPs@NHOPC (82%), Co-SAs@NC (66%), and Co-NPs@NC (42%), the Co-SAs@NHOPC catalytic reaction yielded 99%, showing a significant advantage (Fig. 33g and h). Experiments have shown that the size and distribution of metal particles had a great effect on the performance of catalysts. Moreover, Co-SAs@NHOPC had lower temperature and hydrogen pressure than other cobalt-based catalysts at the same yield. Moreover, the yield did not decrease significantly after 5 cycles, indicating that Co-SAC showed good stability and repeatability. The purpose of this work is to make SACs with a hierarchical structure more widely applied.
 Fig. 33  (a) Comparison of the nitrobenzene hydrogenation performance for different catalysts; (b) reusability of Co SAs/NC-800; (c) energy distribution curves of H2 dissociation on Co SAs/NC-Y at 298 K. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (d) Catalysts with different pyrolysis temperature and their normalized catalytic gas production rates per Co in FA dehydrogenation. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Time–conversion plots for the filtration test and first run of the hydrogenation reaction over Co-SAs@NHOPC; (f) catalytic recyclability of Co-SAs@NHOPC for the selective hydrogenation of quinolines. Reprinted with permission.234 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (g) Time–conversion plots for the filtration test and first run of the hydrogenation reaction over Co-SAs@NHOPC; (h) catalytic recyclability of Co-SAs@NHOPC for the selective hydrogenation of quinolines. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
Naturally, SACs can also be used for the oxidation of some organic compounds. A Co-based catalyst for the dehydrogenation of formic acid (FA) has been reported previously, but due to the coexistence of single atoms and nanoparticles, no active species have been identified.236 Subsequently, Li and colleagues78 designed a Co-SAC with good FA dehydrogenation activity. Their work (Fig. 33d) illustrated that Co–N–C (SACs) had different hydrogen selectivity in different solvents, especially in propyl carbonate (PC), where the yield of Co–N–C(SACs) was increased by about 150% compared with Co–N–C(NPs) at 98 °C. In addition, Co-SAC exhibited high acid resistance and activity at a low temperatures of 75 °C compared to other inactive catalysts. In combination with various characterization techniques, it was suggested that CoIINx was the best active site for the FA dehydrogenation catalyst, and the stability of the catalyst was tested. Only slight inactivation of Co–N–C(SACs) was found after 120 h of catalytic reaction. However, excessive HCOOH at high temperature could cause the loss of CoNx, which was an inevitable problem. But in general, this work provides some insights for exploring the application of MOF-derived SACs in thermal catalysis. In addition, Sun and colleagues237 prepared an Fe1–N–C single-atom catalyst using ZIF material and used it in the reaction of oxidizing aromatic alcohol to nitrile. The reaction was carried out at a certain temperature. Compared with other inactive catalysts, Fe1–N–C showed more than 99% conversion and >99% yield after 24 h. Moreover, the catalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde was the rate-determining step for the generation of nitrile.
In conclusion, MOF-derived SACs are now mostly applicable to a small number of reduction reactions (hydrogenation of nitroaromatic hydrocarbons and quinoline) and oxidation reactions in the realm of heat catalysis (dehydrogenation of formic acid and oxidation of aromatic alcohols to nitrile). As a result, the application of MOF-derived SACs in thermocatalysis still needs to be explored for a long time, and the development of MOF-derived thermal SACs is the top priority in the area of thermocatalysis.
5. The characterization techniques of SACs derived from MOFs
As research on SACs progresses, various advanced characterization techniques with high-resolution performance are gradually established and improved. To verify the relationship between microstructure and performance of MOF-derived SACs, we need powerful techniques, that is, it is necessary to carefully identify the structure of MOF-derived single-atom sites in order to further explore their catalytic performance. This will allow us to provide accurate phenomena of the catalytic process and reveal the reaction mechanism as much as possible. Currently, the study of single-atom active sites has expanded to include some other high-tech technologies in addition to traditional characterization techniques like transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric (TG), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), infrared spectroscopy (IR), etc., including the scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), high angle ring dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD), X-ray fine absorption structure (XAFS), surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), surface interrogation scanning electrochemical microscopy (SI-SECM), Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Since there have been many evaluations of these ex situ and in situ operando techniques3,19,238 and because the structure of MOF-derived SACs varies during the reaction process, it is challenging for ex situ operando techniques to provide reliable real-time information. So the majority of references239,240 are about in situ operando characterization methods. In this section, we give a brief introduction to the use of HAADF-STEM, XAFS, and other identification methods in MOF-derived SACs, mainly dealing with the advantages and disadvantages of each characterization method and suggesting the necessity of a combination of characterization techniques to confirm the microstructure of SACs.
HAADF-STEM is able to visually represent the distribution of single atoms on the carriers.33 Compared with the images of TEM, the images obtained by HAADF-STEM are more sensitive to the atomic number but not to the thickness of the catalyst, making the heavy and light atoms show different bright and dark regions, which can be used to recognize the presence of single atoms on the carriers. For example, Sun et al.150 used the HAADF-STEM technique to identify a clear high density of isolated bright spots (Fe atoms) around Co nanoparticles, and it was also clear that Fe atoms were uniformly dispersed on the carbon layer by combining EDX. In another study, Zhang et al.231 confirmed the presence of Cu atoms only in Ti vacancies by the HAADF-STEM method and also clarified the stability of Cu single atoms located on TiO2 by comparing the HAADF-STEM of the catalyst after photocatalytic reaction, laterally responding to the porous nature of MIL-125 (Tiv) and the strong anchoring of Cu ions by unsaturated bonds. Furthermore, Ma et al.232 analyzed the results by using XPS, XRD, and HAADF-STEM to conclude that Cu SAs in MOF-derived SACs replaced certain Ti atoms and were anchored by O atoms to produce +2 and +1 valences. HAADF-STEM, however, has flaws as well and is only appropriate for the examination of a few chosen places rather than the overall analysis of the samples.
In addition, the implementation of SACs derived from MOFs likewise heavily relies on XAFS technology. A potent approach for verifying the presence of single atoms in catalysts is the introduction of XAFS in combination with HAADF-STEM. As is well known, XAFS can be divided into X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES)45 and extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (EXAFS).47 XANES can detect the oxidation states, coordination states, and electronic structures of Me-SAs, and EXAFS can simulate the quantitative structural information of metal coordination number and bond length. For instance, Wang et al.176 inferred the oxidation states of various metals in M–N–C materials by using the XANES measurement method, and confirmed the absence of metal–metal bonds with the help of EXAFS technology, and accomplished the anchoring of Me-SAs, most notably by fitting the results to show the formation of M–N4 structures. The combination of XPS and XAFS results then clarified the presence of a single atom with four pyridine N atoms coordinated in the catalyst. In other examples, Han and his colleagues156 clarified the synthesis of diatomic Co–Ni coordination with the help of XAFS technology, and the resulting data were subjected to DFT calculations to construct a possible dual single-atom model. However, the data processing of XAFS is quite complicated, and a peak may be the superposition of multiple ligating atoms, and a peak at the same position in different samples does not necessarily represent the same coordination, thus limiting the repeatability of XAFS results.
In conclusion, this section mainly provided a brief introduction to HAADF-STEM and XAFS techniques, both of which played a crucial role in the identification of SAs. Of course, it was also necessary to fully study the microstructure of MOF-derived SACs in combination with a variety of characterization methods in order to correlate with the catalytic activity. For example, the EELS energy spectrum can not only be used to determine the types of light elements and measure the thickness of samples but also can be combined with HAADF-STEM images to achieve the analysis of element valence states, chemical bond, and other information.241 In addition, STM is applicable to the dispersion of SAs on the surface of catalysts.242 Most notably, in situ FTIR can provide relevant information about active sites, is highly sensitive to CO molecules adsorbed on single-atom sites, and can propose a reaction path of CO catalysis on SACs.240 Although the combination of these technologies can obtain more accurate conclusions, these cannot clarify the relationship between the properties of catalytic sites and structure–properties. Therefore, it is urgent to develop powerful characterization tools that can reveal the catalytic mechanisms at the active sites of SAs.
6. Summary and outlook
The MOF derivatives can maintain some characteristics of MOF precursors, coupled with the excellent properties of SACs. Therefore, MOF-derived SACs have shown great advantages in bridging the difference between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. In this paper, it is first introduced that derivatives based on different MOF carriers can provide different coordination environments to effectively anchor metal ions, and then the subsequent introduction of different MOF-derived SACs can result in different active sites, which can affect the catalytic mechanism and the performance of catalysts. Specially, the application of electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and thermocatalysis in recent years is reviewed and the important characterization methods for the identification of SACs are briefly introduced. MOF-derived SACs are still the focus of future development due to their excellent catalytic capacity. There are still some challenges in the future.
(1) It is not yet mature to precisely control the coordination environment of single metal atoms. At present, the theoretical modeling and calculation of catalysts can be used as a means to study the mechanism of catalytic reaction, but completely relying on theoretical means to explore the coordination environment of metal single atoms and the catalytic effect of electronic structure, can lead the researchers to reduce the exploration of the actual structure. Therefore, increasingly advanced characterization instruments should be fully utilized to provide detailed structural information to make the theory more plausible.
(2) At present, the types of MOF derivatives need to be expanded. Now, only a few MOF materials such as ZIFs, IRMOFs, UiOs, PCNs, and MILs are used as precursors for the construction of SACs. Expanding the species is conducive to the preparation of diverse MOF-derived SACs, and it is also possible to extensively study MOF derivatives doped with other species. For example, in the study of composite materials, the synergy between the metals and the carriers is used to change the binding site provided by the carrier to adjust the coordination environment of single atoms. MOF-derived catalysts with a variety of Me-SAs can also be studied. Each metal has different properties. For the complex system of multiphase catalysis, the characteristics of each metal species can be fully utilized, such that the presence of Ce species is conducive to the oxygen storage function of the catalysts, so as to realize the optimization of the catalysts. However, it is still necessary to consider the problem that a variety of single atoms are easy to aggregate or even deactivate, and the proportion of different single atoms is difficult to control. In addition, different MOF carriers have different coordination for different Me-SAs, which make the development of this type of catalyst more difficult. Therefore, the research on MOF-derived SACs still has a long way to go, and there is an urgent need to develop diversified and even multifunctional catalysts to contribute to the progress in this direction.
(3) High-density single-atom strategies are necessary to improve catalytic performance. However, studies have reported that the metal loading in SACs basically does not exceed 1.5 wt%. Of course, many researchers have designed SACs with high loadings, which also provide high-loading single-atom catalysts in a feasible direction. In addition, the preparation of high-load SACs should meet the actual demand of metal single atom and energy conversion, which requires the prevention of single-atom aggregation, and the coordination environment of metal sites should be regulated to meet the demand, so as to provide suggestions for improving the catalytic performance of SACs.
(4) The general system is not yet widespread. A universal method has been established for anchoring Me-SAs with MOF derivatives, including the application of single metal atoms or even multiple metal atoms, such as the domino reaction strategy, cascade anchoring strategy, and template-assisted strategy previously reported. These strategies can systematize the preparation methods of SACs, and also ensure that the prepared SACs have excellent activity, stability, selectivity, and high loading capacity, which can be used for reference to the manufacture of MOF-derived SACs to improve the general system.
In addition, most of the MOF-derived single-atom catalysts are currently used for electrocatalytic applications, while directions of photocatalytic and thermocatalytic are still in the preliminary research stage. The reasons for this are as follows: firstly, not all MOF materials are suitable for photocatalysis. At present, UiOs, MILs, and other materials are mainly used, and most of them need the help of other materials to produce composite materials better for photocatalytic reactions. Second, only a few MOF-derived SACs have been used in thermocatalytic studies, mainly involving evolution hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, and alcohol oxidation. For thermocatalysis, the density of single-atom active sites is obviously particularly important. However, due to the high density of metal nodes in MOFs, the metals are easily agglomerated, which leads to the reduction of metal single-atom active sites. Therefore, researchers still need to achieve precise regulation of single atoms. Furthermore, the mechanism of MOF-derived SACs on photo- and thermal catalysis is not well defined, which makes it difficult to carry out the reactions on a large scale. Therefore, it is relevant to explore the strategies applicable to light photo- and thermo-catalysis to broaden the direction of MOF-derived SACs. It is of practical significance to explore general strategies for photo- and thermal catalysts to broaden the direction of MOF-derived SACs.
In conclusion, the diversity of MOF structures leads to MOF-derived SACs with strong application prospects in the catalysis field. The relationship between the structure and performance of SACs derived from MOFs has been investigated in detail and strengthened the understanding of heterogeneous catalysis. More importantly, it is vitally significant to design and prepare more efficient catalytic materials, which can be suitable for large-scale production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52070182), the DNL Cooperation Found, CAS (DNL202004), LICP Cooperation Foundation for Young Scholars (HZJJ21-02), Talents of Innovation and Entrepreneurship Project of Lanzhou, China (2022-RC-26), Major Program of the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, CAS (No. ZYFZFX-10), and Key Talent Project of Gansu Province.
References
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysis of CO oxidation using Pt1/FeOx, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiong, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Thermally stable single-atom heterogeneous catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Heterogeneous single-atom photocatalysts: fundamentals and applications, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12175–12216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Liu, D. Cao and D. Cheng, Carbon-based material-supported single-atom catalysts for energy conversion, iScience, 2022, 25, 104367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, C. C. Yang, C. H. Lin and H. L. Jiang, Metal-organic-framework-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon with ultrahigh concentrations of single Zn atoms for efficient carbon dioxide conversion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3511–3515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Chai and G. Henkelman, Selectivity for ethanol partial oxidation: the unique chemistry of single-atom alloy catalysts on Au, Ag, and Cu(111), J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23868–23877 RSC .
J. Li, Y. F. Jiang, Q. Wang, C. Q. Xu, D. Wu, M. N. Banis, K. R. Adair, K. Doyle-Davis, D. M. Meira, Y. Z. Finfrock, W. Li, L. Zhang, T. K. Sham, R. Li, N. Chen, M. Gu, J. Li and X. Sun, A general strategy for preparing pyrrolic-N4 type single-atom catalysts via pre-located isolated atoms, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cheng and X. Sun, Single atom catalyst by atomic layer deposition technique, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1508–1514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Catalysis by supported single metal atoms, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 34–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, H. Liu, W. Yang, G. Mao, L. Zheng and H. L. Jiang, Modulating coordination environment of single-atom catalysts and their proximity to photosensitive units for boosting MOF photocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 12220–12229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Iqbal, S. Ali, G. Yasin, S. Ibraheem, M. Tabish, M. Hamza, H. Chen, H. Xu, J. Zeng and W. Zhao, A novel 2D Co3(HADQ)2 Metal-organic framework as a highly active and stable electrocatalyst for acidic oxygen reduction, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. F. Yuk, J. Zheng, M. T. Nguyen, M. S. Lee, J. Szanyi, L. Kovarik, Z. Zhu, M. Balasubramanian, V. A. Glezakou, J. L. Fulton, J. A. Lercher, R. Rousseau and O. Y. Gutierrez, Environment of metal-O-Fe bonds enabling high activity in CO2 reduction on single metal atoms and on supported nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 5540–5549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, W. H. Li, W. Jiang, J. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Ou, Z. Zhuang, M. Chen, X. Sun, D. Wang and Y. Li, MOF encapsulating N-heterocyclic carbene-ligated copper single-atom site catalyst towards efficient methane electrosynthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114450 CAS .
S. Wei, X. Jiang, C. He, S. Wang, Q. Hu, X. Chai, X. Ren, H. Yang and C. He, Construction of single-atom copper sites with
low coordination number for efficient CO2 electroreduction to CH4, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6187–6192 RSC .
D. Yao, C. Tang, A. Vasileff, X. Zhi, Y. Jiao and S. Z. Qiao, The controllable reconstruction of Bi-MOFs for electrochemical CO2 reduction through electrolyte and potential mediation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18178–18184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tiburcio, R. Greco, M. Mon, J. Ballesteros-Soberanas, J. Ferrando-Soria, M. Lopez-Haro, J. C. Hernandez-Garrido, J. Oliver-Meseguer, C. Marini, M. Boronat, D. Armentano, A. Leyva-Perez and E. Pardo, Soluble/MOF-supported palladium single atoms catalyze the ligand-, additive-, and solvent-free aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohols to benzoic Acids, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2581–2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Li, Z. Hu, F. Dong, Y. Hu, H. Wang, L. Wang, K. K. Ostrikov and Z. Wu, Single-atom Ru-implanted metal-organic framework/MnO2 for the highly selective oxidation of NOx by plasma activation, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10185–10196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Yang, W. Yu, G. Li, Z. Rao, Z. Huang, F. Wang, C. Yuan and Y. Zhou, Regulating the spin state of single noble metal atoms by hydroxyl for selective dehydrogenation of CH4 direct conversion to CH3OH, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 13344–13351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qi, J. Wang, X. Djitcheu, D. He, H. Liu and Q. Zhang, Techniques for the characterization of single atom catalysts, RSC Adv., 2021, 12, 1216–1227 RSC .
W. Shi, Y.-C. Wang, C. Chen, X.-D. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, A mesoporous Fe/N/C ORR catalyst for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1103–1108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, C. Dai, L. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Hao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Feng, S. Yuan and L. Wang, Metal-triazolate-framework-derived FeN4Cl1 single-atom catalysts with hierarchical porosity for the oxygen reduction reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 27324–27329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, J. Wang, B. Cui, X. Zheng, J. Lin, Y. Deng and X. Han, Atomically dispersed selenium sites on nitrogen-doped carbon for efficient electrocatalytic oxygen reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114441 CAS .
J. Chen, L. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Rao, J. Sun, A. Chen and X. Xie, Rare-earth single atoms decorated 2D-TiO2 nanosheets for the photodegradation of gaseous O-xylene, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 605, 674–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Luo, C. Ling, Y. Shi, G. Zhan, H. Li, H. Gu, K. Wei, F. Guo, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Rare earth La single atoms supported MoO3-x for efficient photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 301, 120766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, C. Wang, P. Cui, C. Li, B. Zhang, L. Gan, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhou, Z. Sun, K. Wang, Y. Duan, H. Li, K. Zhou, H. Huang, A. Li, C. Zhuang, L. Wang, Z. Zhang and X. Han, Ultrahigh photocatalytic CO2 reduction efficiency and selectivity manipulation by single-tungsten-atom oxide at the atomic step of TiO2, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2109074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Hung, A. Xu, X. Wang, F. Li, S. H. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Wicks, E. G. Cervantes, A. S. Rasouli, Y. C. Li, M. Luo, D. H. Nam, N. Wang, T. Peng, Y. Yan, G. Lee and E. H. Sargent, A metal-supported single-atom catalytic site enables carbon dioxide hydrogenation, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, Q. Wang, S. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Cheng, H. Tang, L. Ma, X. Min, C. Tang, S. P. Jiang, F. Wu, Y. Lei, S. Ciampic, S. Wang and L. Dai, Sublayer-enhanced atomic sites of single atom catalysts through in situ atomization of metal oxide nanoparticles, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1183–1191 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Qu, B. Qu, L. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. D. Yang, W. Zhang, L. Jing and H. Fu, Construction of six-oxygen-coordinated single Ni sites on g-C3N4 with boron-oxo species for photocatalytic water-activation-induced CO2 reduction, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hu, S. Wang and Y. Zhuo, Fe-catalyzed CO2 adsorption over hexagonal boron nitride with the presence of H2O, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 1056–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Li, F. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Yu, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, H. Zheng, G. Henkelman and L. Wei, Intrinsic activity of metal centers in metal-nitrogen-carbon single-atom catalysts for hydrogen peroxide synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21861–21871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ghosh, A. Legrand, R. Rajapaksha, G. A. Craig, C. Sassoye, G. Balazs, D. Farrusseng, S. Furukawa, J. Canivet and F. M. Wisser, Rhodium-based metal-organic polyhedra assemblies for selective CO2 photoreduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 3626–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Marcinkowski, S. F. Yuk, N. Doudin, R. S. Smith, M.-T. Nguyen, B. D. Kay, V.-A. Glezakou, R. Rousseau and Z. Dohnálek, Low-temperature oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde on a model single-atom catalyst: Pd atoms on Fe3O4(001), ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10977–10982 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis, X. Fu, J. L. Luo and X. Sun, Recent advances in MOF-derived single atom catalysts for electrochemical applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001561 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H.-Q. Xu, L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Metal-organic frameworks for catalysis: State of the art, challenges, and opportunities, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100005 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, N. Y. Huang, X. W. Zhang, H. He, R. K. Huang, Z. M. Ye, Y. Li, D. D. Zhou, P. Q. Liao and X. M. Chen, Selective aerobic oxidation of a metal-organic framework boosts thermodynamic and kinetic propylene/propane selectivity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 7774–7778 CrossRef .
D. Alezi, Y. Belmabkhout, M. Suyetin, P. M. Bhatt, Ł. J. Weseliński, V. Solovyeva, K. Adil, I. Spanopoulos, P. N. Trikalitis and A.-H. Emwas, MOF crystal chemistry paving the way to gas storage needs: aluminum-based soc-MOF for CH4, O2, and CO2 storage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13308–13318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Metal-organic framework-derived materials for electrochemical energy applications, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, Metal-organic framework as a template for porous carbon synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Wei, M. Zhang, M. Kitta, Z. Liu, S. Horike and Q. Xu, A single-crystal open-capsule Metal-Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7906–7916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M.-T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Identification of catalytic sites for oxygen reduction in iron-and nitrogen-doped graphene materials, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, Q. Zhang and J. Guan, Applications of metal-organic framework-derived materials in fuel cells and metal-air batteries, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 409, 213214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, K. Shen, F. Chen and Y. Li, Metal-organic frameworks as a good platform for the fabrication of single-atom catalysts, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6579–6586 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, Y. S. Wei, C. C. Hou, C. Li and Q. Xu, Single-atom catalysts derived from metal-organic frameworks for electrochemical applications, Small, 2021, 17, 2004809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qin, P. Liu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Strategies for stabilizing atomically dispersed metal catalysts, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700286 CrossRef .
D. Zhou, X. Li, H. Shang, F. Qin and W. Chen, Atomic regulation of metal-organic framework derived carbon-based single-atom catalysts for the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23382–23418 RSC .
Z. Zhai, W. Yan, L. Dong, S. Deng, D. P. Wilkinson, X. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Catalytically active sites of MOF-derived electrocatalysts: synthesis, characterization, theoretical calculations, and functional mechanisms, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20320–20344 RSC .
X. Liang, Z. Li, H. Xiao, T. Zhang, P. Xu, H. Zhang, Q. Gao and L. Zheng, Two types of single-atom FeN4 and FeN5 electrocatalytic active centers on N-doped carbon driving high performance of the SA-Fe-NC oxygen reduction reaction catalyst, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 5542–5554 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Allard, A. Borisevich, W. Deng, R. Si, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and S. H. Overbury, Evolution of gold structure during thermal treatment of Au/FeOx catalysts revealed by aberration-corrected electron microscopy, J. Electron Microsc., 2009, 58, 199–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. Xing, Q. Shentu, Y. Huang, W. Lv and Y. Yao, Well-dispersed iron and nitrogen co-doped hollow carbon microsphere anchoring by g-C3N4 for efficient peroxymonosulfate activation, Chemosphere, 2021, 280, 130911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, X. Feng, J. Deng, C. He, M. Douthwaite, Y. Yu, J. Liu, Z. Hao and Z. Zhao, Atomic-scale insights into the low-temperature oxidation of methanol over a single-atom Pt1-Co3O4 catalyst, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902041 CrossRef .
S. Li, J. Liu, Z. Yin, P. Ren, L. Lin, Y. Gong, C. Yang, X. Zheng, R. Cao, S. Yao, Y. Deng, X. Liu, L. Gu, W. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Wen, B. Xu and D. Ma, Impact of the coordination environment on atomically dispersed
Pt catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 907–913 CrossRef .
K. Burke, Perspective on density functional theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 150901 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, J. Zhao, W. Li, C. Zhu, L.-F. Mao and Q. Huang, First-principles investigation on the behavior of Pt single and triple atoms supported on monolayer CuO (1 1 0) in CO oxidation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 564, 150435 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Yan, X. Kong, S. Liu and X. Zhao, Metal-organic-framework-based single-atomic catalysts for energy conversion and storage: Principles, advances, and theoretical understandings, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 6, 2100281 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Z. Zhao and Q. Liu, Mechanistic insight into the dispersion behavior of single platinum atom on monolayer g-C3N4 in single-atom catalysts from density functional theory calculations, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 566, 150697 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xue, X. Song and D. Mei, Theoretical insights into CO oxidation over MOF-808-encapsulated single-atom metal catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 17097–17108 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cui, G. Qin, W. Wang, K. R. Geethalakshmi, A. Du and Q. Sun, Novel two-dimensional MOF as a promising single-atom electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction: A theoretical study, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 500, 143993 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Yang, Z. Kou, L. Shen, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Du, J. Xu, M. Chen, L. Tian, W. Guo, Q. Wang, H. Lv, W. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, D. He and Y. Wu, Negative pressure pyrolysis induced highly accessible single sites dispersed on 3D graphene frameworks for enhanced oxygen reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20465–20469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Li, L. Wang and B. Wang, Turning metal-organic frameworks into efficient single-atom catalysts via pyrolysis with a focus on oxygen reduction reaction catalysts, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Wei, M. Zhang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Metal-organic framework-based catalysts with single metal sites, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12089–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Metal-organic-framework-based single-atom catalysts for energy applications, Chem, 2019, 5, 786–804 CAS .
H. Hu, J. Wang, B. Cui, X. Zheng, J. Lin, Y. Deng and X. Han, Atomically Dispersed Selenium Sites on Nitrogen-Doped Carbon for Efficient Electrocatalytic Oxygen Reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114441 CAS .
S. H. Lee, J. Kim, D. Y. Chung, J. M. Yoo, H. S. Lee, M. J. Kim, B. S. Mun, S. G. Kwon, Y.-E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Design principle of Fe-N-C electrocatalysts: how to optimize multimodal porous structures?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2035–2045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Huang, Y. Y. Lin, J. P. Zhang and X. M. Chen, Ligand-directed strategy for zeolite-type metal-organic frameworks: zinc (II) imidazolates with unusual zeolitic topologies, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1557–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, Z. Ni, A. P. Côté, J. Y. Choi, R. Huang, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. K. Chae, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Exceptional chemical and thermal stability of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186–10191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, A. P. Côté, H. Furukawa, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Colossal cages in zeolitic imidazolate frameworks as selective carbon dioxide reservoirs, Nature, 2008, 453, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao and X. Wang, Direct transformation of bulk copper into copper single sites via emitting and trapping of atoms, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Duan and W. Jin, Ultrathin 2D catalysts with N-coordinated single Co atom outside Co cluster for highly efficient Zn-air battery, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129719 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Yang, X. Wang, H. Zhu, L. Cao, A. Chen, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, L. Zheng and H.-P. Liang, Green synthesis of a highly efficient and stable single-atom iron catalyst anchored on nitrogen-doped carbon nanorods for the oxygen reduction reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 9, 137–146 CrossRef .
S. Dilpazir, H. He, Z. Li, M. Wang, P. Lu, R. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Gao and G. Zhang, Cobalt single atoms immobilized N-doped carbon nanotubes for enhanced bifunctional catalysis toward oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. Sun, S. Gu, Z. Liang, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, P. Wei, J. Peng, Y. Xu, C. Fang, Q. Li, J. Han, Z. Jiang and Y. Huang, High-performance single atom bifunctional oxygen catalysts derived from ZIF-67 superstructures, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
T. Al-Zoubi, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, B. Janicek, C. Sun, C. E. Schulz, X. Zhang, A. A. Gewirth, P. Huang, P. Zelenay and H. Yang, Preparation of nonprecious metal electrocatalysts for the reduction of oxygen using a low-temperature sacrificial metal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5477–5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Karapinar, N. T. Huan, N. Ranjbar Sahraie, J. Li, D. Wakerley, N. Touati, S. Zanna, D. Taverna, L. H. Galvão Tizei and A. Zitolo, Electroreduction of CO2 on single-site copper-nitrogen-doped carbon material: selective formation of ethanol and reversible restructuration of the metal sites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15098–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, K. Zhao, G. Li, Y. Gao, H. Zhao, R. Yu and Z. Tang, Multi-shelled CeO2 hollow microspheres as superior photocatalysts for water oxidation, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4072–4077 RSC .
Y. Guo, L. Feng, C. Wu, X. Wang and X. Zhang, Confined pyrolysis transformation of ZIF-8 to hierarchically ordered porous Zn-N-C nanoreactor for efficient CO2 photoconversion under mild conditions, J. Catal., 2020, 390, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, S. Zhao, W. Chen, D. Zhai, J. Dong, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, A. Han, L. Gu and R. Yu, Single-atomic cobalt sites embedded in hierarchically ordered porous nitrogen-doped carbon as a superior bifunctional electrocatalyst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 12692–12697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong and Z. Deng, Single cobalt atoms with precise N-coordination as superior oxygen reduction reaction catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 10958–10963 CrossRef .
X. Li, A. E. Surkus, J. Rabeah, M. Anwar, S. Dastigir, H. Junge, A. Bruckner and M. Beller, Cobalt single-atom catalysts with high stability for selective dehydrogenation of formic acid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15849–15854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, D.-D. Ma, B. Chen, K. Zhang, R. Zou, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Metal-organic framework-derived mesoporous carbon nanoframes embedded with atomically dispersed Fe-N active sites for efficient bifunctional oxygen and carbon dioxide electroreduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H. L. Jiang, Rational fabrication of low-coordinate single-atom Ni electrocatalysts by MOFs for highly selective CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Kuai, W. Cao, H. Singh, A. Zakharov, Y. Niu, H. Sun and B. Geng, Highly dispersed Cu atoms in MOF-derived N-doped porous carbon inducing Pt loads for superior oxygen reduction and hydrogen evolution, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130749 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Jiang, J. Wei, X. Ding, C. Zhu, H. He, H. Lai and J. Shi, Engineering the coordination environment in atomic Fe/Ni dual-sites for efficient oxygen electrocatalysis in Zn-air and Mg-air batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130758 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, K. Hu, X. Lin, G. Xie, X. Liu, K. M. Reddy, Q. Yuan and H. J. Qiu, MOF Structure Engineering to Synthesize Co–N–C Catalyst with Richer Accessible Active Sites for Enhanced Oxygen Reduction, Small, 2021, 17, 2104684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, G. Song, Y. Zheng, J. Gu, S. Li and M. Zhou, Single iron atoms embedded in MOF-derived nitrogen-doped carbon as an efficient heterogeneous electro-Fenton catalyst for degradation of carbamazepine over a wide pH, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 302, 122141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Han, X. Wang, K. Tang, Z. Zhang, C. Ye, K. Kong, H. Hu, L. Zheng, P. Jiang, C. Zhao, Q. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, An adjacent atomic platinum site enables single-atom iron with high oxygen reduction reaction performance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19262–19271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Tao, R. Chen, H. Li, H. Su, N. Zhang, Q. Liu and S. Wang, Atomically dispersed Fe on nanosheet-linked, defect-rich, highly N-doped 3D porous carbon for efficient oxygen reduction, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 453–458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Xia, J. Tang, Y. Gao, C. Jiang, Y. Jia, T. Chen, Z. Hou, R. Qi, D. Jiang, T. Asahi, X. Xu, T. Wang, J. He and Y. Yamauchi, Metal-Organic Framework-Derived Graphene Mesh: a Robust Scaffold for Highly Exposed Fe-N4 Active Sites toward an Excellent Oxygen Reduction Catalyst in Acid Media, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 9280–9291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, C. Zhu, K. Liu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Zhu, Y. Cao, S. Zhang, S. Zhuo, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nano-pyramid-type Co-ZnO/NC for hydrogen transfer cascade reaction between alcohols and nitrobenzene, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 300, 120288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, H. Yang, D. Rao, N. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li, S. Rao, C. Maouche, Z. Wu, B. Li, Y. Zhou and J. Yang, Supercritical CO2 assisted synthesis of highly accessible iron single atoms and clusters on nitrogen-doped carbon as efficient oxygen reduction electrocatalysts, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 134460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, C. Yang, M. Zhou, C. He, S. Cao, Y. Long, S. Li, Y. Lin, P. Zhu and C. Cheng, Transition Metal and Metal–Nx Codoped MOF-Derived Fenton-Like Catalysts: A Comparative Study on Single Atoms and Nanoparticles, Small, 2020, 16, 2005060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Zhong, T. Feng, Y. Liu, S. Feng, N. Zhang, L. Shen, K. Zhang and B. Yang, Hollow mesoporous carbon nanocages with Fe isolated single atomic site derived from a MOF/polymer for highly efficient electrocatalytic oxygen reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22095–22101 RSC .
Z. Chen, X. Zhang, W. Liu, M. Jiao, K. Mou, X. Zhang and L. Liu, Amination strategy to boost the CO2 electroreduction current density of M-N/C single-atom catalysts to the industrial application level, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2349–2356 RSC .
M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Systematic design of pore size and functionality in isoreticular MOFs and their application in methane storage, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, X. Han, H. Liu, M. Biset-Peiró, J. Li, X. Zhang, P. Tang, B. Yang, L. Zheng, J. R. Morante and J. Arbiol, Site-specific axial oxygen coordinated FeN4 active sites for highly selective electroreduction of carbon dioxide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111446 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, C. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Jing, J. Hu, C. Hao and Y. Shi, Single-atom-catalyst with abundant Co-S4 sites for use as a counter electrode in photovoltaics, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5302–5305 RSC .
S. Yuan, J. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Li, S. Li, Y. Gao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, W. Yang, X. Feng and B. Wang, Decarboxylation-induced defects in MOF-derived single cobalt atom@carbon electrocatalysts for efficient oxygen reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21685–21690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Healy, K. M. Patil, B. H. Wilson, L. Hermanspahn, N. C. Harvey-Reid, B. I. Howard, C. Kleinjan, J. Kolien, F. Payet and S. G. Telfer, The thermal stability of metal-organic frameworks, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 419, 213388 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, A new zirconium inorganic building brick forming metal organic frameworks with exceptional stability, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13850–13851 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lammert, M. T. Wharmby, S. Smolders, B. Bueken, A. Lieb, K. A. Lomachenko, D. De Vos and N. Stock, Cerium-based metal organic frameworks with UiO-66 architecture: synthesis, properties and redox catalytic activity, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12578–12581 RSC .
N. Nagarjun, P. Concepcion and A. Dhakshinamoorthy, Influence of oxophilic behavior of UiO-66 (Ce) metal-organic framework with superior catalytic performance in Friedel-Crafts alkylation reaction, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, e5578 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, J. Ren, S. Chen, C. Shen, Y. Chen, M. Zhang and C.-j. Liu, The metal-organic framework UiO-66 with missing-linker defects: A highly active catalyst for carbon dioxide cycloaddition, Appl.
Energy, 2020, 277, 115560 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Elshamy and E. M. EI-Fawal, Synthesis of NiFe2O4@AC/UiO-66 (Zr) for enhancement of the photocatalytic performance of alizarin yellow R under visible-light, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 995–1007 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Yang, J. Wang, J. Xie, M. Fu and Y. Hu, TiO2@UiO-66 composites with efficient adsorption and photocatalytic oxidation of VOCs: Investigation of synergistic effects and reaction mechanism, ChemCatChem, 2020, 13, 581–591 CrossRef .
M.-C. Dul, E. Pardo, R. Lescouëzec, Y. Journaux, J. Ferrando-Soria, R. Ruiz-García, J. Cano, M. Julve, F. Lloret and D. Cangussu, Supramolecular coordination chemistry of aromatic polyoxalamide ligands: A metallosupramolecular approach toward functional magnetic materials, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2281–2296 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Hao, L.-W. Chen, J. Li, Y. Guo, X. Su, M. Shu, Q. Zhang, W.-Y. Gao, S. Li and Z.-L. Yu, Metal-organic framework membranes with single-atomic centers for photocatalytic CO2 and O2 reduction, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Abdel-Mageed, B. Rungtaweevoranit, M. Parlinska-Wojtan, X. Pei, O. M. Yaghi and R. J. Behm, Highly active and stable single-atom Cu catalysts supported by a metal-organic framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5201–5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, P. Liu, E. Velasco, G. Yao, Z. Tian, L. Zhang and L. Chen, Fabricating single-atom catalysts from chelating metal in open frameworks, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808193 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, J. Mao, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Single tungsten atoms supported on MOF-derived N-doped carbon for robust electrochemical hydrogen evolution, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sui, H. Liu, S. Hu, K. Sun, G. Wan, H. Zhou, X. Zheng and H. L. Jiang, A general strategy to immobilize single-atom catalysts in metal-organic frameworks for enhanced photocatalysis, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2109203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Qian, X. Zheng, S. Q. Chu, Y. Yang, C. Ding, X. Wang, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Precise fabrication of single-atom alloy co-catalyst with optimal charge state for enhanced photocatalysis, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Férey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S. Surblé and I. Margiolaki, A chromium terephthalate-based solid with unusually large pore volumes and surface area, Science, 2005, 309, 2040–2042 CrossRef PubMed .
Q.-L. Zhu, W. Xia, L.-R. Zheng, R. Zou, Z. Liu and Q. Xu, Atomically dispersed Fe/N-doped hierarchical carbon architectures derived from a metal-organic framework composite for extremely efficient electrocatalysis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Xia, X. Zhang, R. Sun, X. Sun, H. Li, C. Wu, J. Wang, S. Wang and G. Sun, Atomically dispersed Fe-N-C derived from dual metal-organic frameworks as efficient oxygen reduction electrocatalysts in direct methanol fuel cells, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, L. Peng, H. Yang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Shang and T. Zhang, MIL-101-derived mesoporous carbon supporting highly exposed Fe single-atom sites as efficient oxygen reduction reaction catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Q. Xu, W. Chen, S. Tian, Y. Wang, W. Yan, J. Luo, D. Wang and Y. Li, Mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon-nanosphere-supported isolated single-atom Pd catalyst for highly efficient semihydrogenation of acetylene, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901024 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, N. Qin, Z. Ji, Q. Gan, Z. Wang, Y. Li, L. Cao, H. Yuan, D. He, Z. Chen, G. Luo, K. Zhang and Z. Lu, Single copper sites dispersed on defective TiO2-x as a synergistic oxygen reduction reaction catalyst, J. Chem. Phys., 2021, 154, 034705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, D. Sun, J. M. Simmons, C. D. Collier, D. Yuan and H.-C. Zhou, Metal-organic framework from an anthracene derivative containing nanoscopic cages exhibiting high methane uptake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, L. Jiao, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Metal-organic framework-derived FeCo-N-doped hollow porous carbon nanocubes for electrocatalysis in acidic and alkaline media, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3019–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, N. Li, Z. G. Li, M. Zhong, Z. X. Fu, M. Liu, J. C. Yin, Z. Shen, W. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Chang and X. H. Bu, Strategic defect engineering of metal-organic frameworks for optimizing the fabrication of single-atom catalysts, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, W. Yang, G. Wan, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Single-atom electrocatalysts from multivariate metal-organic frameworks for highly selective reduction of CO2 at low pressures, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 20770–20776 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Jia, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, Q. Wang, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Silica-protected ultrathin Ni3FeN nanocatalyst for the efficient hydrolytic dehydrogenation of NH3BH3, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702780 CrossRef .
L. Jiao, R. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Yang, X. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Shui, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Nanocasting SiO2 into metal-organic frameworks imparts dual protection to high-loading Fe single-atom electrocatalysts, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Meng, C. H. Chen, J. D. Yi, Q. Wu, J. Liang, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Migration-prevention strategy to fabricate single-atom Fe implanted N-doped porous carbons for efficient oxygen reduction, Research, 2019, 2019, 1768595 CAS .
T. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Han, P. Xu, Y. Pang, X. Feng, H. Yang, W. Ji and T. Cheng, Hofmann-type metal-organic framework nanosheets for oxygen evolution, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nanocrystals from solutions: catalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2112–2124 RSC .
B. Liu, G. Miao, W. Zhong, X. Huang, N. Su, J. Guo and W. Wang, Manipulating the electronic and magnetic properties of coordinated nickel atoms in metal-organic frameworks by hydrogenation, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 2147–2153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Trickett, K. J. Gagnon, S. Lee, F. Gándara, H. B. Bürgi and O. M. Yaghi, Definitive molecular level characterization of defects in UiO-66 crystals, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11162–11167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Synergistic effect of well-defined dual sites boosting the oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
B. Xia, Y. Zhang, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Single-atom photocatalysts for emerging reactions, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 39–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Chang, X. Lin, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Theoretical insights into single-atom catalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8156–8178 RSC .
C. Liu, Q. Li, C. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Single-boron catalysts for nitrogen reduction reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2884–2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhao, L. Yang, P. Yin, J. Mao and T. Ling, Multiscale structural engineering of atomically dispersed FeN4 electrocatalyst for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, L. Shang, X. Xiong, R. Shi and T. Zhang, Fe single-atom catalysts on MOF-5 derived carbon for efficient oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2102688 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and H. Sun, General synthesis and definitive structural identification of MN4C4 single-atom catalysts with tunable electrocatalytic activities, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hou, L. Zou, L. Sun, K. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, C. Li, R. Zou, J. Yu and Q. Xu, Single-atom iron catalysts on overhang-eave carbon cages for high-performance oxygen Reduction Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7384–7389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, J. Fu, Y. Lin, T. Luo, G. Ni, H. Li, Z. Lin and M. Liu, Insights into the activity of single-atom Fe-N-C catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–8 CAS .
E. Luo, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Gao, L. Gong, T. Zhao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, C. Liu and W. Xing, Single-atom Cr-N4 sites designed for durable oxygen reduction catalysis in acid media, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Xia, S. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Yang, Z. Tie and Z. Jin, Single-atom metal anchored Zr6-cluster-porphyrin framework hollow nanocapsules with ultrahigh active-center density for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 3340–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Chen, X. Yan, X. Sun, Q. Zhu, P. Li, Y. Li, S. Liu, J. Ma and Y. Huang, Boosting CO2 electroreduction over a cadmium single-atom catalyst by tuning of the axial coordination structure, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 20971–20978 CrossRef .
H. Xu, H. Jia, H. Li, J. Liu, X. Gao, J. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sun, S. Chou and F. Fang, Dual carbon-hosted Co-N3 enabling unusual reaction pathway for efficient oxygen reduction reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H. L. Jiang, Rational fabrication of low-coordinate single-atom Ni electrocatalysts by MOFs for highly selective CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, Z. Ou, C. Xu, J. Liu, Q. Lan, R. Jin, X. Xu, C. Guo, H. Li and Y. Si, Highly accessible single Mn-N3 sites-enriched porous graphene structure via a confined thermal-erosion strategy for catalysis of oxygen reduction, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 440, 135850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, B. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Qu, F. Zhou, C. Zhao, Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, X. Duan and Y. Wu, Directly transforming copper (I) oxide bulk into isolated single-atom copper sites catalyst through gas-transport approach, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, P. Zhou, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, P. Gao and S. Guo, 3D star-like atypical hybrid MOF derived single-atom catalyst boosts oxygen reduction catalysis, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 55, 355–360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, X. Li, G. Gan, L. Wang, S. Fan, Z. Yin and G. Chen, Boosting electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation with Co-N3 site-decorated porous carbon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13430–13439 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, A. Huang, K. Yu, T. Cui, Z. Zhuang, S. Liu, J. Li, R. Tu, K. Sun and X. Tan, Fe1N4−O1 site with axial Fe–O coordination for highly selective CO2 reduction over a wide potential range, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3430–3437 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, S. Zhang, L. Shuai, B. Yang, Z. Li, J. Chen, L. Lei, N. M. Adli, M. K. H. Leung, M. Qiu, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Dynamic activation of adsorbed intermediates via axial traction for the promoted electrochemical CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4192–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, R. Gao, S. Ji, H. Li, K. Tang, P. Jiang, H. Hu, Z. Zhang, H. Hao, Q. Qu, X. Liang, W. Chen, J. Dong, D. Wang and Y. Li, Atomic-level modulation of electronic density at cobalt single-atom sites derived from metal-organic frameworks: Enhanced oxygen reduction performance, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3212–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Tan, S. C. Lin, J. Wang, C. J. Chang, S. C. Haw, K. H. Lin, L. D. Tsai, H. C. Chen and H. M. Chen, MOF-templated sulfurization of atomically dispersed manganese catalysts facilitating electroreduction of CO2 to CO, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52134–52143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H. Xue, L. Lu, M. Gao, N. Guo, T. Song, H. Dong, J. Zhang, L. Wu and Q. Wang, Atomic-level modulation of local coordination environment
at Fe single-atom sites for enhanced oxygen reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 313, 121429 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Yang, W. Zang, Z. Kou, Y. Ma, M. Waqar, X. Liu, L. Zheng, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Liu, X. J. Loh, L. Shen and J. Wang, Quasi-paired Pt atomic sites on Mo2C promoting selective four-electron oxygen reduction, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2101344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q.-a. Huang, J. Wang, J. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Supported dual-atom catalysts: preparation, characterization, and potential applications, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 783–798 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, D. Zhang, C.-J. Chen, Q. Zhang, R.-S. Liu, Z. Xia, L. Dai, R. Amal and X. Lu, Harnessing the interplay of Fe–Ni atom pairs embedded in nitrogen-doped carbon for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. J. Park, V. K. Paidi, R. Huang, Y. Lee, K.-J. Noh, K.-S. Lee and J. W. Han, Precisely constructing orbital coupling-modulated dual-atom Fe pair sites for synergistic CO2 electroreduction, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 640–649 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, S. Zhou, A. Li, C. Xie, X. Zheng, W. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Non-bonding interaction of neighboring Fe and Ni single-atom pairs on MOF-derived N-doped carbon for enhanced CO2 electroreduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19417–19424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Atomically dispersed binary Co–Ni sites in nitrogen-doped hollow carbon nanocubes for reversible oxygen reduction and evolution, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cui, Y. P. Wang, T. Ye, J. Wu, Z. Chen, J. Li, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Engineering dual single-atom sites on 2D ultrathin N-doped carbon nanosheets attaining ultra-low-temperature zinc-air battery, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202115219 CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Single-atom catalysts: emerging multifunctional materials in heterogeneous catalysis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, D. Xue, S. Jiang, H. Xia, Y. Yang, W. Yan, J. Hu and J. Zhang, Rational confinement engineering of MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts toward CO2 reduction and O2 reduction reactions, InfoMat, 2021, 4, e12257 Search PubMed .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Yu, J. Liu, W. Chen, A. Li, H. Rong, R. Lin, S. Ji, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, C. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Bismuth single atoms resulting from transformation of metal-organic frameworks and their use as electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16569–16573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, W. Zang, Y. Ma, C. Zhu, D. Cai, H. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Yu, Q. Zou, L. Wu and C. Guan, 
            In situ formation of isolated iron sites coordinated on nitrogen-doped carbon coated carbon cloth as self-supporting electrode for flexible aluminum-air battery, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Al-Zoubi, Y. Ma, H.-W. Hsiao, C. Zhang, C. Sun, J.-M. Zuo and H. Yang, Boosting the activity of non-platinum group metal electrocatalyst for the reduction of oxygen via dual-ligated atomically dispersed precursors immobilized on carbon supports, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106547 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Yang, M. Wang, S. Hwang, S. Karakalos, M. Chen, Z. Qiao, L. Wang, B. Liu and Q. Ma, Single-iron site catalysts with self-assembled dual-size architecture and hierarchical porosity for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119400 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hou, L. Zou, L. Sun, K. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, C. Li, R. Zou, J. Yu and Q. Xu, Single-atom iron catalysts on overhang-eave carbon cages for high-performance oxygen reduction reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 7454–7459 CrossRef .
L. Yan, X. D. Liang, Y. Sun, L. P. Xiao, B. A. Lu, G. Li, Y. Y. Li, Y. H. Hong, L. Y. Wan, C. Chen, J. Yang, Z. Y. Zhou, N. Tian and S. G. Sun, Evolution of Cu single atom catalysts to nanoclusters during CO2 reduction to CO, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2488–2491 RSC .
H. Wang, G. Liu, C. Chen, W. Tu, Y. Lu, S. Wu, D. O'Hare and R. Xu, Single-Ni sites embedded in multilayer nitrogen-doped graphene derived from amino-functionalized MOF for highly selective CO2 electroreduction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 3792–3801 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. Chen, X. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Song, K. Li, P. Ning and H. He, Single atom Fe in favor of carbon disulfide (CS2) adsorption and thus the removal efficiency, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 258, 118086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, H. Wang, K. Wan, L.-J. Guo, T. He and X. Shi, Water–gas shift reaction on titania-supported single-metal-atom catalysts: The role of cation (Ti) and oxygen vacancy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 8620–8629 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, X. Yu, M. Huang, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Rh single atoms embedded in CeO2 nanostructure boost CO2 hydrogenation to HCOOH, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2022, 43, 62–69 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, B. Johannessen, J. P. Veder, M. Saunders, M. R. Rowles, M. Cheng, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm and R. De Marco, Atomically dispersed transition metals on carbon nanotubes with ultrahigh loading for selective electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706287 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Luan, Y. Qu and L. Jing, Modification strategies with inorganic acids for efficient photocatalysts by promoting the adsorption of O2, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22727–22740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Pan, H. Ning, H. Wang, D. Guo, W. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Zhao, B. Zhang and L. Zheng, Hierarchically micro-and meso-porous Fe-N4O-doped carbon as robust electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118630 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, H. Li, G. Cui, J. Li, Y. Song, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Y. Lee, M. Shao and M. Wei, NiSn atomic pair on an integrated electrode for synergistic electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 7458–7464 CrossRef .
S. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Peng, M. Asgari, D. Stoian, I. Kochetygov, W. Luo, E. Oveisi, O. Trukhina, A. H. Clark, D. T. Sun and W. L. Queen, A metal-organic framework/polymer derived catalyst containing single-atom nickel species for electrocatalysis, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 10991–10997 RSC .
H. Yang, Q. Lin, C. Zhang, X. Yu, Z. Cheng, G. Li, Q. Hu, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Carbon dioxide electroreduction on single-atom nickel decorated carbon membranes with industry compatible current densities, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Hu, X. Hu, X. Liu, Q. Guan, R. Hao, Y. Liu and W. Li, Typical transition metal single-atom catalysts with a metal-pyridine N structure for efficient CO2 electroreduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, J. Zhao, Y. Tian, B. Zhang and Y. Wu, Preparation and performances of ZIF-67-derived FeCo bimetallic catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation to light olefins, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 455 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Lin, Q. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Scalable production of efficient single-atom copper decorated carbon membranes for CO2 electroreduction to methanol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, T. Wang, J. Pei, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Dong, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Design of a single-atom indiumδ+–N4 interface for efficient electroreduction of CO2 to formate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22465–22469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. Quan, C. Peng, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, C. Yang, Y. Ji, L. Qian, X. Xu and G. Zheng, Boosting CO2 electroreduction to CH4via tuning neighboring single-copper sites, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Lai, J. Zhu, J. Zhong, Z. Tang, Y. Luo and Y. Liang, Controllable construction of core-shell polymer@zeolitic imidazolate frameworks fiber derived heteroatom-doped carbon nanofiber network for efficient oxygen electrocatalysis, Small, 2018, 14, 1704207 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Razzaq, X. Yuan, Y. Chen, J. Hu, Q. Mu, Y. Ma, X. Zhao, L. Miao, J.-H. Ahn and Y. Peng, Anchoring MOF-derived CoS2 on sulfurized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers for high areal capacity lithium-sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1298–1306 RSC .
C. A. Etogo, H. Huang, H. Hong, G. Liu and L. Zhang, Metal-organic-frameworks-engaged formation of Co0.85Se@C nanoboxes embedded in carbon nanofibers film for enhanced potassium-ion storage, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 167–176 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Li, L. Zheng, J. Shang, X. Liu, R. Yu and J. Shui, Sequential synthesis and active-site coordination principle of precious metal single-atom catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction and PEM fuel cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000689 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, M. Wu, J. Sun, J. Xu and T. Zhao, Atomically dispersed Fe–Nx active sites within hierarchical mesoporous carbon as efficient electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20132–20138 RSC .
L. Zheng, S. Yu, X. Lu, W. Fan, B. Chi, Y. Ye, X. Shi, J. Zeng, X. Li and S. Liao, Two-dimensional bimetallic Zn/Fe-metal-organic framework (MOF)-derived porous carbon nanosheets with a high density of single/paired Fe atoms as high-performance oxygen reduction catalysts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13878–13887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-H. Lee, S. Park, M. Kim, A. K. Sinha, S. C. Lee, E. Jung, W. J. Chang, K.-S. Lee, J. H. Kim and S.-P. Cho, Reversible and cooperative photoactivation of single-atom Cu/TiO2 photocatalysts, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 620–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, H. Guo, S. Hwang, X. Yang, Z. He, J. Braaten, S. Karakalos, W. Shan, M. Wang, H. Zhou, Z. Feng, K. L. More, G. Wang, D. Su, D. A. Cullen, L. Fei, S. Litster and G. Wu, Single cobalt sites dispersed in hierarchically porous nanofiber networks for durable and high-power PGM-free cathodes in fuel cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, S. Gao, C. Yang, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, C. Qu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Puffing up energetic metal-organic frameworks to large carbon networks with hierarchical porosity and atomically dispersed metal sites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, H. Yin, Y. Wang, C. H. Chuang, L. Xing, M. Dong, Y. R. Lu, G. Casillas-Garcia, Y. Zheng, S. Chen, Y. Dou, P. Liu, Q. Cheng and H. Zhao, Coexisting single-atomic Fe and Ni sites on hierarchically ordered porous carbon as a highly efficient ORR electrocatalyst, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lu, K. Fan, L. Cui, Y. Yang, W. Wang, G. Zhang, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, B. Li, L. Zong and L. Wang, Cu-N4 single atoms derived from metal-organic frameworks with trapped nitrogen-rich molecules and their use as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133242 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, H. Sun, T. Yuan, W. He, C. Zheng, H.-J. Zhang, J. Yang and S. Zheng, Framework-derived tungsten single-atom catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 8173–8180 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. C. Li, S. Ding, Z. Lyu, S. Feng, H. Tian, C. Huyan, M. Xu, T. Li and D. Du, 2D Single-atom catalyst with optimized iron sites produced by thermal melting of metal-organic frameworks for oxygen reduction reaction, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, L.-N. Shi, Y.-H. Chen, P.-F. Wang and T.-F. Yi, Advanced MOF-derived carbon-based non-noble metal oxygen electrocatalyst for next-generation rechargeable Zn-air batteries, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 473, 214839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Q. Chen, J. Li, P. Rao, R. Li, Y. Du, C. Jia, W. Huang, J. Luo and P. Deng, Progress in the development of heteroatom-doped nickel phosphates for electrocatalytic water splitting, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 607, 1091–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song and J. Li, Atomic layer deposited Pt-Ru dual-metal dimers and identifying
their active sites for hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Single-atom catalysts: from design to application, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .
Q. Zha, F. Yuan, G. Qin and Y. Ni, Cobalt-based MOF-on-MOF two-dimensional heterojunction nanostructures for enhanced oxygen evolution reaction electrocatalytic activity, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1295–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Chang, A. A. Kashale, C. M. Lee, S. L. Chu, Y. F. Lin and I. W. P. Chen, Single atomically anchored iron on graphene quantum dots for a highly efficient oxygen evolution reaction, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 20, 100693 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, Single Co atoms anchored in porous N-doped carbon for efficient zinc-air battery cathodes, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Micro-nanostructural designs of bifunctional electrocatalysts for metal-air batteries, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 390–403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, The hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline solution: from theory, single crystal models, to practical electrocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xing, H. Gao, G. Hai, Z. Tao, J. Zhao, D. Jia, X. Chen, M. Han, S. Hong, L. Zheng, X. Huang, W. Dong, G. Wang and X. Shu, Atomically dispersed ruthenium sites on whisker-like secondary microstructure of porous carbon host toward highly efficient hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3203–3210 RSC .
Y. Wan, J. Xu and R. Lv, Heterogeneous electrocatalysts design for nitrogen reduction reaction under ambient conditions, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 69–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, M. Cui, Z. Yin, J. Xiong, L. Mi and Y. Li, Single-atom and dual-atom electrocatalysts derived from metal organic frameworks: Current progress and perspectives, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 73–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Achieving a record-high yield rate of 120.9 μgNH3 mgcat−1 h−1 for N2 electrochemical reduction over Ru single-atom catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, S. Ji, Y. Chen and D. Wang, Synthetic strategies for MOF-based single-atom catalysts for photo- and electro-catalytic CO2 reduction, iScience, 2022, 25, 104177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, The challenge of electrochemical ammonia synthesis: a new perspective on the role of nitrogen scaling relations, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, M. Ji, J. Xia and H. Zhu, Recent advanced materials for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical synthesis of ammonia from dinitrogen: one step closer to a sustainable energy future, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902020 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, J. Wang, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Coordination chemistry in the design of heterogeneous photocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2799–2823 RSC .
L. Zeng, J.-W. Chen, L. Zhong, W. Zhen, Y. Y. Tay, S. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L. Huang and C. Xue, Synergistic effect of Ru–N4 sites and Cu–N3 sites in
carbon nitride for highly selective photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methane, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121154 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Gao, X. Hong, J. Zhu, G. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Zeng and X. Zheng, Synergy between palladium single atoms and nanoparticles via hydrogen spillover for enhancing CO2 photoreduction to CH4, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. Cheng, Y. Dai and B. Huang, 
            In situ growth of Ti3C2@MIL-NH2 composite for highly enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 411, 128446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, P. Zhang, V. K. Sharma, X. Ma and H.-C. Zhou, Metal-organic frameworks for environmental applications, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, S.-F. Hung, Z.-R. Tang, H. M. Chen, Y. Xiong and Y.-J. Xu, Dynamic evolution of atomically dispersed Cu species for CO2 photoreduction to solar fuels, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4824–4833 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Metal-organic framework (MOF) compounds: photocatalysts for redox reactions and solar fuel production, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Cheng, Y. Liu, J. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Li, L. Du, G. Wang, S. Yang and X. Wang, Single atoms meet metal–organic frameworks: collaborative efforts for efficient photocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3722–3749 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Cheng, M. Cheng, Z. Liu, D. Huang, G. Zhang, B. Shao, Q. Liang, S. Luo and T. Wu, The application of Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) and their derivatives based materials for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and pollutants treatment, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 127914 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Wang, Q. Huang, C.-T. He, Y. Chen, J. Liu, F.-C. Shen and Y.-Q. Lan, Oriented electron transmission in polyoxometalate-metalloporphyrin organic framework for highly selective electroreduction of CO2, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Ulmer, T. Dingle, P. N. Duchesne, R. H. Morris, A. Tavasoli, T. Wood and G. A. Ozin, Fundamentals and applications of photocatalytic CO2 methanation, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, G. Lin, Q. Niu, J. Bi and L. Wu, Covalent triazine-based frameworks confining cobalt single atoms for photocatalytic CO2 reduction and hydrogen production, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2022, 116, 41–49 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Chen, W.-F. Fu and X.-J. Lv, Single-atom catalysts for photocatalytic reactions, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6430–6443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Hao, L. W. Chen, J. Li, Y. Guo, X. Su, M. Shu, Q. Zhang, W. Y. Gao, S. Li, Z. L. Yu, L. Gu, X. Feng, A. X. Yin, R. Si, Y. W. Zhang, B. Wang and C. H. Yan, Metal-organic framework membranes with single-atomic centers for photocatalytic CO2 and O2 reduction, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, X. Tan, J. Lei, H. Chen, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Ga-doped and Pt-loaded porous TiO2-SiO2 for photocatalytic nonoxidative coupling of methane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6592–6600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Zhang, W. Yang, M. Zhang, H.-J. Wang, R. Si, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Metal-organic layers as a platform for developing single-atom catalysts for photochemical CO2 reduction, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105542 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Xu, Y. Xue, L. Liu and M. K. Leung, Bimetallic Mo-Co nanoparticles anchored on nitrogen-doped carbon for enhanced electrochemical nitrogen fixation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9091–9098 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Kong, L. Zheng, X. Guo, X. Liu and J. Shui, Rare earth single-atom catalysts for nitrogen and carbon dioxide reduction, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1093–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, C. Zhou, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Efficient photocatalytic nitrogen fixation over Cuδ+-modified defective ZnAl-layered double hydroxide nanosheets, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1901973 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qing, R. Ghazfar, S. T. Jackowski, F. Habibzadeh, M. M. Ashtiani, C.-P. Chen, M. R. Smith III and T. W. Hamann, Recent advances and challenges of electrocatalytic N2 reduction to ammonia, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5437–5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shang, W. Xiong, C. Yang, B. Johannessen, R. Liu, H. Y. Hsu, Q. Gu, M. K. H. Leung and J. Shang, Atomically dispersed iron metal site in a porphyrin-based metal-organic framework for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 9670–9678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Wang, B. Xiao, W. Zhang, X. Zhao, T. Lv, M. Thangamuthu, J. Zhang, Y. Guo, J. Ma, L. Lin, J. Tang, R. Huang and Q. Liu, Single-atom Cu anchored catalysts for photocatalytic renewable H2 production with a quantum efficiency of 56, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, T. Lv, B. Xiao, X. Kuang, X. Deng, J. Zhang, J. Zhao and Q. Liu, In situ Cu single atoms anchoring on MOF-derived porous TiO2 for the efficient separation of photon-generated carriers and photocatalytic H2 evolution, Nanoscale, 2022, 15889–15896 RSC .
H.-U. Blaser, H. Steiner and M. Studer, Selective catalytic hydrogenation of functionalized nitroarenes: An update, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 210–221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, A. I. Olivos-Suarez, D. Osadchii, M. J. V. Romero, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Single cobalt sites in mesoporous N-doped carbon matrix for selective catalytic hydrogenation of nitroarenes, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 20–28 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, F. Liu, L. Feng, X. Wang, X. Zhang and J. Liang, Single Co atoms anchored on nitrogen-doped hierarchically ordered porous carbon for selective hydrogenation of quinolines and efficient oxygen reduction, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, A. E. Surkus, F. Chen, M. M. Pohl, G. Agostini, M. Schneider, H. Junge and M. Beller, A stable nanocobalt catalyst with highly dispersed CoNx active sites for the selective dehydrogenation of formic acid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16616–16620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, H. Shan, H. Neumann, G. P. Lu and M. Beller, Efficient iron single-atom catalysts for selective ammoxidation of alcohols to nitriles, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Chen, A. G. Walsh, Y. Li and P. Zhang, Single-Atom Catalysts Supported by Crystalline Porous Materials: Views from the Inside, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, P. Li, Z. Fang and G. Yu, Emerging Electrochemical Techniques for Probing Site Behavior in Single-Atom Electrocatalysts, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 759–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, 
            In Situ/Operando Techniques for Characterization of Single-Atom Catalysts, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2521–2531 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Koshy, A. T. Landers, D. A. Cullen, A. V. Ievlev, H. M. Meyer III, C. Hahn, Z. Bao and T. F. Jaramillo, Direct characterization of atomically dispersed catalysts: nitrogen-coordinated Ni sites in carbon-based materials for CO2 electroreduction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001836 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kraushofer, N. Resch, M. Eder, A. Rafsanjani-Abbasi, S. Tobisch, Z. Jakub, G. Franceschi, M. Riva, M. Meier and M. Schmid, Surface Reduction State Determines Stabilization and Incorporation of Rh on α-Fe2O3 (102), Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2001908 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Siyi Ma	Siyi Ma received her B.E. degree from Northwest Normal University in 2021. She is now a doctoral candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhicheng Tang of the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. At present, her main research direction is noble metal single-atom catalysts and their application in thermocatalysis.
Weigao Han	Weigao Han received his B.E. degree from Liaoning Petrochemical University. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Zhicheng Tang in 2022. His research direction is exploiting the preparation of high-performance environmental catalytic materials derived from MOFs.
Weiliang Han	Weiliang Han is a project associate researcher at the Lanzhou Institute of Physical Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He graduated from Lanzhou University of Technology with a M.S. degree in 2012. Since 2012, he has worked at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2021, he received his Ph.D. degree from Northwest Normal University. At present, he is mainly engaged in basic research and application research on catalytic elimination of VOCs, CO, and indoor air purification.
Fang Dong	Fang Dong is an associate researcher at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She received her Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Yulei Zhu in 2016. Her research is focused on exploiting the preparation of high-performance environmental catalytic materials, and she has a wealth of experience in the design, synthesis, optimization, characterization, and reaction mechanism research of high-performance catalytic materials derived from MOFs.
Zhicheng Tang	Zhicheng Tang is a professor and doctoral supervisor at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2008, he received his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has published more than 140 SCI papers as the first author or corresponding author. He is committed to the research of environmental catalysis and his main research includes flue gas denitration, waste incineration for dioxin removal, VOC treatment, CO low-temperature catalytic oxidation, indoor air purification, etc.

 	Fig. 1  The advantages of MOF-derived SACs.	 

NTU-70	Co	Co–Nx	Nanosheet	First heated to 300 °C and then pyrolysis at higher temperature under N2 gas	
E
1/2 = 0.78 V in 0.1 M KOH	
68

Fe-doped ZIF8	Fe	Fe–N4	Nanorods	Pyrolysis at 900 °C under N2 gas	
E
1/2 = 0.91 V in 0.1 M KOH and E1/2 = 0.77 V in 0.1 M HClO4	
69

ZIF-67@DCD	Co	Co–N4	Carbon nanotubes	Pyrolysis at 750 °C under Ar gas and acid treatment with 2 M HCl	ORR E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M KOH; OER overpotential value = 410 mV in 0.1 M KOH	
70

UNT ZIF-67	Co	Co–N4	Urchin-like nanotube	Pyrolysis at 500 °C in vacuum	ORR Eonset = 0.97 V and E1/2 = 0.89 V in; OER Tafel slope = 70 mV dec−1	
71

Cd-based DABCO-TPA MOF	Fe	Fe–Nx	Orthorhombic morphology	Pyrolysis at 750 °C in an ammonia	
E
1/2 = 0.70 V in 0.1 M HClO4	
72

Cu-phen/ZIF-8	Cu	Cu–N4	—	Pyrolysis at 1050 °C in Ar flow	FY(EtOH) = 55% in 0.1 M CsHCO3 at −1.2 V	
73


 	Fig. 2  (A) Fabrication of Co SAs/3D GFs and (B) four possible atomic configurations. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (C) Showing the synthetic process of the HPC and (D) the graphs of (a) SEM, (b) TEM, (c) HAADF-STEM images of HPC-800, and (d) the corresponding elemental mapping of the selected area in (c). Reprinted with permission.5 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (E) The route of synthesis of the Zn–N-HOPCPs. (F) The SEM image and (G) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Zn–N-HOPCPs (Zn single atoms are signed with light-yellow circles). Reprinted with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The illustration of the synthesis process of SACs and NPs. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (b) The picture of the catalytic mechanism of FeSAs/CNF-900. Reprinted with permission.79 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Synthesis of low-coordination Ni–N3–C via a PSMS strategy and (d) SEM image of Ni–N3–C. Reprinted with permission.80 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the preparation process for Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC and (b) AC-HAADF-STEM image of the as-synthesized Fe, Ni-SAs/DNSC. Reprinted with permission.82 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Synthesis process of Fe–N4/Pt–N4@NC and (d) the average intensity profiles of Fe/Pt atoms (indicated by dashed rectangles) reveal the distance between Pt and Fe is ca. 5.2 Å. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) SEM (a1) and TEM (a2) images of ZnCo-ZIF; (B) SEM (b1) and TEM (b2) images of Co–ZnO/NC; (C) illustration of the Co–ZnO/NC synthesis. Reprinted with permission.88 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (D) Schematic illustration of supercritical synthesis principle for scCO2-FeC@FeNC catalysts. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (E) Composite image of the fabrication of the Co-NPs catalyst and (F) the schematic image for the fabrication of the Co-SAs by etching treatment. Reprinted with permission.90 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (G) Schematic of the formation of Fe-ISAs/H-CN; (H) AC-HAADF-STEM enlarged image of the Fe-ISAs/H-CN catalyst. Reprinted with permission.91 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of O–Fe–N–C; (b) top view and side view optimized adsorption configuration on simulated O–Fe–N–C (Fe, O, N, and C atoms are represented in purple, red, blue, and gray, respectively) are placed along the graphitic structures. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (c) Preparation of Co–S/C-SAC; (d) atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of Co–S/C-SAC; (e) corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at R space, with the inset showing the schematic mode. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The preparation process and proposed formation mechanisms of Co@DMOF; (g) AC HAADF-STEM image of Co@DMOF-900. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure of UiO(bpdc) and UiO(bpdc)–FeCl3. Reprinted with permission. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of synthesis of W-SAC; (c) the HAADF-STEM image of the W-SAC; (d) k3-weight FT-EXAFS fitting curves of the W-SAC at W L3-edge and atomic structure model of the W-SAC (inset). Reprinted with permission.108 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe SAC-MIL101-T; (b) EXAFS R-space fitting curve for Fe SAC-MIL101-1000 (inset: the model of FeN4 configuration in Fe SAC-MIL101-1000. The gray, blue, and orange spheres represent C, N, and Fe atoms, respectively). Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c) The inferred synthetic process of the dual-MOFs strategy; polarization and power density curves of catalysts: (d) 0.5 M CH3OH, (e) 3 M CH3OH. Reprinted with permission.113 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) Illustration of the relationship between structural defects and the average distance of active metal sites between adjacent Co-TCPP ligands in DPCN-222(Co)-X (X = 0, 25, 35, and 45). (e–h) Corresponding FESEM images of DPCN-222(Co)-X. (i–l) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images for Co SAs/NC(X) derived from corresponding DPCN-222(Co)-X. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of metal SACs through the defect engineering strategy in MOFs. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration showing the general fabrication of single-atom M1–N–C catalysts based on MTV-MOFs for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction; (c) EXAFS fitting of Ni1–N–C and optimized coordination environment of Ni atoms (inset). Reprinted with permission.120 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the nanocasting-assisted fabrication of FeSA–N–C from PCN-222(Fe); (e) EXAFS fitting for FeSA–N–C. Inset: schematic model of Fe coordination environment in FeSA–N–C. The red, blue, and gray spheres represent Fe, N, and C atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission.122 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of single-atom Fe catalyst PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900 via migration–prevention strategy and the PCN-224(Fe) derived PCN-224(Fe)-900; (b) PXRD of three catalysts; (c) AC HAADF-STEM image of PANI@PCN-224(Fe)-900; (d) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding Fe, C, and N elemental mappings of PANI@PCN224(Fe)-900. Reprinted with permission.123 Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MNi-HF (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration about atomic interface regulation of atomic interface sites. Red ball: M1; gray ball: C; blue ball: N; yellow ball: O; pink ball: M2. Reprinted with permission.45 Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of Fe–N4 moieties distributed in 3D Fe–N–C catalyst with abundant edge defects. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (b) Fourier-transformed k2-weighted EXAFS spectra for Fe SAC-MOF-5 and reference samples; (c) R space (the inset is a typical model of FeN4 configuration for Fe SAC-MOF-5). Reprinted with permission.133 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (d) ORR free-energy paths of optimized intermediates calculated by DFT (blue line, Fe–N4–C configuration; red line, VFe–N4–C configuration). Reprinted with permission.135 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Optimized structure of a perfect FeN4 site (left) and divacancy defect models 6, 6a, 6I, and 6II (right); (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams of ORR on a perfect FeN4 site, 6, 6a, and 6I; (g) the schematic frontier orbital diagram of Fe–N4, O2, and O2@Fe–N4. Reprinted with permission.136 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (h) Schematic model of the Cr-centered configuration in Cr/N/C-950. Cr, green; N, blue; C, gray. Reprinted with permission.137 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The model of atomic Co–N4 configurations with different degrees of defects (5r or 6r represents the 5- or 6-membered Co–N heterocyclic ring, respectively; c1 or c2 denotes the absence of 1 or 2 C atoms adjacent to Co–N4 site); (b) free-energy diagrams of the above models calculated at U = 0 V (vs. SHE). Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c) Possible atomic configurations of CoN4-5r-c1 and (d) free energy diagram of different configurations along the 4 e− ORR pathway. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

Fe SAC/N–C	Fe	Fe–N5	ORR	
E
1/2 = 0.89 V in 0.1 M KOH	No major change after 5000 cycles	
107

scCO2-FeC@FeNC	Fe	Fe–N4	ORR	
E
onset = 1.04 V and E1/2 = 0.91 V in 0.1 M KOH	A 9.4% loss of potential under 24 h	
89

Fe-SA-NC@CC	Fe	Fe–Nx	ORR	
E
onset = 0.97 V and E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M KOH	
E
1/2 lost 6.1% mV after 10000 s	
161

Fe/C950	Fe	Fe–Nx	ORR	
E
onset = 0.96 V and E1/2 = 0.84 V in 0.1 M HClO4	—	
162

Fe–N–C	Fe	Fe–N4	ORR	
E
onset = 0.95 V and E1/2 = 0.86 V in 0.1 M HClO4	
E
1/2 lost 24.5 mV and no evident change of Eonset after 30000 cycles	
163

CoNi-SAs/NC	CoNi	Co–Ni–N	ORR	
E
onset = 0.93 V and E1/2 = 0.76 V in 0.1 M KOH	ORR activity > 90% after 16 hours of operation	
156

OER	The required overpotential value is 340 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope is 58.7 mV dec−1	—
Co-SAs/3D GFs	Co	CoN4-5r-c1	ORR	
E
onset = 1.03 V and E1/2 = 0.84 V in 0.1 M KOH	No major change about E1/2 after 5000 cycles	
58

Fe-SAs/NLPC	Fe	Fe–Nx	ORR	
E
highest = 0.96 V in 1 M KOH and j = 33.32 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V	A weak attenuation of current after 20000 s	
86

Fe/ZIF-8@SiOx	Fe	Fe–N4	ORR	
E
1/2 = 0.85 V in 0.1 M KOH	A weak attenuation of current after 3000 CV cycles	
164

CuNC-DCD	Cu	Cu1/Cu13	CO2RR	FECO = 93.5% at −0.50 V in 0.5 M KHCO3	
j
total lasted for 10 h at −0.50 V in 0.5 M KHCO3	
165

Ni–N4–O/C	Ni	Ni–N4–O/C	CO2RR	FECO = 99.2% at −0.9 V and TOF = 11187 h−1	FECO above 90% within 20 h	
147

Ni–N3–C	Ni	Ni–N3–C	CO2RR	FECO = 95.6% at −0.65 V and TOF = 1425 h−1	Unchanged current density and FECO for 10 h	
80

Ni–NG-acid	Ni	Ni–N–C	CO2RR	FECO ≥ 90% from −0.6 V to −1.2 V	Unchanged current density and FECO for 10 h at −0.9 V	
166

Ni–N4/C–NH2	Ni	Ni–N4/C–NH2	CO2RR	The CO FE ≥ 90% from −0.6 V to −0.9 V	The CO FE ≥ 90% for 10 h at −0.8 V	
92


 	Fig. 15  (A) Calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for Mn–N3 and Mn–N4 in an alkaline solution with the inset showing the schematic mode of Mn–N3. Reprinted with permission.142 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (B) FT k3-weighted EXAFS spectra of Cu ISAS/NC and the reference samples; (C) corresponding FT-EXAFS fitting curves of Cu ISAS/NC; (D) top view of the optimized structures of the models of (a) Cu–N3, (b) Cu–N3–C and (c) Cu–N3–V with DFT calculation. Gray, blue, and orange represent C, N, and Cu atoms, respectively. (E) Free energy diagram for the ORR process on these three models at the equilibrium potential (U = 0.40 V vs. NHE or U = 1.23 V vs. RHE) at pH = 14. Reprinted with permission.143 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (F) Fourier transform (FT) of the Co K-edge for CoSA–N–C, CoPc, and Co foil; (G) the corresponding EXAFS R space fitting curves of CoSA–N–C. Inset: schematic model of CoSA–N–C, Co (pink), N (blue), and C (gray) and free energy paths of the ORR on Co–N3C, Co–N4, and Co nanoparticles at (H) U = 0 V and (I) U = 1.23 V. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The Fourier transform of FT-EXAFS measurements of Co–Nx–C and Co foil, the red line represents the corresponding EXAFS R space fitting curves of Co–Nx–C; (b) the free energy diagrams for the N2RR through the distal pathway at applied potential (−0.97 V) on Co–N3–C structure. Reprinted with permission.145 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves for the O–Fe–N–C sample (Fe, O, N, and C atoms are represented in red, blue, orange, and black, respectively); (d) free energy profiles for the CO2RR to CO at 0 V (vs. RHE); (e) projected density of states (PDOS) of Fe over O–Fe–N–C and FeN4 surfaces. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) DFT study for the ORR activity on different single-atom Co catalysts. (a) The linear relationship as a function of the O2* adsorption energy (ΔGO2) at URHE = 1.23 V; (b) the inverse volcano plots of ORR overpotential for the Bader charge of active center Co atom, the negative value represents electron donation; (c) the charge density difference of Co atom in the seven catalyst models, the units for the scale bar is a.u.−3; (d) the partial density of states (pDOS) of Co atom in the models, the d-band center is inserted with the grey font and dotted line. Reprinted with permission.148 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic of the intermediate *COOH absorbed on the MnSA/NC (left side) and MnSA/SNC (right side). The white, gray, blue, red, yellow, and purple balls represent H, C, N, O, S, and Mn atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission.149 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (C) Top view of three Fe-SACs models with various coordination environments. Green, grey, blue, red, and pink represent Fe, C, N, O, and H, respectively; (D) free energy diagrams of ORR processes of the three models from (C) under overpotential of 0.4 V. Volcano plot of the relation between catalytic activity and ΔEO is depicted in the inset. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of orbital interaction between Fe-3d (dz2 and dxz/dyz) and adsorbed CO (5σ and 2π*) for Fe1–N4–C and Fe2–N6–C–O. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) Electron density difference analysis of CO2 adsorbed on Fe–N4 sites of Fe1–Ni1–N–C (yellow and cyan stands for charge accumulation and depletion); (c) free energy diagrams of the CO2RR. (d) Fe K-edge XANES spectra of the catalysts. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) O2 adsorption models of Fe–N4 and Fe–N4/Pt–N4. (b) Gibbs free energy diagram for the ORR on Fe–N4 and Fe–N4/Pt–N4. (c and d) Computed projected density of states of Fe–N4 (c) and Fe–N4/Pt–N4 (d) after OOH* adsorption. (e and f) Computed projected density of states of Fe–N4 (e) and Fe–N4/Pt–N4 (f) after OH* adsorption. s and p represent the bonding molecular orbitals between the d orbital of Fe and p orbital of O. s* and p* represent the antibonding molecular orbitals between the d orbitals of Fe and p orbital of O. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Optimized atomic configurations of oxygen intermediates (OOH*, O*, and OH*) adsorbed on Co–Ni–N models; free energy diagram of (b) two models at 0 and 1.23 V, (c) ORR, and (d) OER processes on NC, Ni–N, and Co–Ni–N. Reprinted with permission.156 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. The theoretical Gibbs free energy profile for the ORR process on OH-decorated (e) FeMnN6 and (f) Fe2N6 clusters embedded within graphene lattice; (g) the splitting of absorbed *OOH on FeMnN6 cluster with an energy barrier of 0.10 eV. Reprinted with permission.157 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Total current density and (b) FE of CO at various potentials. Reprinted with permission.94 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. Electrochemical performances for CO2 reduction: (c) linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) tests, (d) FEs of CO, (e) the JCO for catalysts in 0.5 M KHCO3; (f) the stability measurement for Fe1–Ni1–N–C at −0.5 V. Zn–CO2 battery measurements: (g) illustration for the aqueous rechargeable Zn–CO2 battery employing Fe1–Ni1–N–C at the cathode; (h) FE of CO and H2 under various discharge currents; (i) discharge–charge stability test at 1.1 mA. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  The performance of the electrochemical CO2 reduction on the as-prepared Ni/NC, Ni/NC-D, and Ni/N-CNTs catalysts. (a) Faradaic efficiency, (b) geometric partial current density, and (c) mass partial current density of CO as a function of potential; (d) faradaic efficiency and potential as a function of testing time for Ni/N-CNTs. Reprinted with permission.174 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) FEs and TOF of HCOO− at different potentials; (b) the current density of HCOO− for samples; the calculated potential free-energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to (c) formate. Reprinted with permission.179 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) ORR polarization curves in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1; (b) electron transfer number and H2O2 yield of 3D Fe–N–C catalyst and (c) the ORR LSV curves of 3D Fe–N–C before and after 10000 cycles between 0.6 and 1.0 V at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 of 3D Fe–N–C and solid Fe–N–C catalysts. Reprinted with permission.132 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. LSV ORR curves of samples in (d) 0.1 M KOH and (e) 0.1 M HClO4; 20000 s stability test of the Fe/N-PCNs and Pt/C catalysts in (f) 0.1 M KOH and (g) 0.1 M HClO4. Reprinted with permission.186 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. The corresponding LSV curves were recorded in (h) O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH and (i) 0.1 M HClO4 at 1600 rpm. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Polarization curves measured at 1600 rpm at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and (b) RRDE measurements for determination of average electron transfer number and percentage H2O2 yield regarding ORR activity of CoSAs@CNTs in alkaline medium. Reprinted with permission.70 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Steady-state ORR polarization plots of catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 25 °C; (d) potentiostatic tests @ 0.85 VRHE. Reprinted with permission.188 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) ORR polarization curves of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm (revolutions per minute) in 0.1 M KOH; (b) ORR polarization curves of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm in 0.5 M H2SO4; (c) long-term chronoamperometric responses of CoFe@C and Pt/C at 1600 rpm. Top: at 0.77 V in 0.1 M KOH. Bottom: at 0.50 V in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission.189 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) CV curves and (b) LSV curves of N–C, W–N–C, and LSV curves of 20% Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH with a rotation rate of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1; (c) comparison of Eonset and E1/2 with previously reported catalysts; (d) chronoamperometric stability test of catalysts. Reprinted with permission.192 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Tafel plots and (b) electrochemical impedance curves and equivalent circuits of OER catalysts. Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (c) Oxygen evolution curves. Reprinted with permission.200 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) OER polarization curves, (e) Tafel plots, and (f) OER potential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (EI = 10), E1/2, and ΔE of prepared catalysts. Reprinted with permission.156 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) HER polarization curves of different electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH. (b) The corresponding Tafel plots of different HER electrocatalysts. (c) The comparison of overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope for different electrocatalysts. (d) The fitting lines by plotting the difference of current density between the anodic and cathodic scans at 0.2 V (vs. RHE) against the scan rate. (e) LSV curves of Ru-ZIF-900 before and after the addition of 10 mM KSCN into 1.0 M KOH or recovery. Inset: schematic illustrations of single Ru–N4 sites poisoned or not by SCN− ions. (f) Free-energy diagrams of the water dissociation process for the four models. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Time-dependent CO and H2 generation over g-C3N4-MOLs-30. (b) CO evolution with different catalysts tested. Reprinted with permission.225 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Time–yield plots of various catalysts for the cycloaddition reaction. (b) Structure advantage of the hierarchically ordered porous structure compared with the bulk counterpart. (c) Proposed mechanism for CO2 cycloaddition with epoxides catalyzed by Zn–N-HOPCPs. (d) Catalytic recyclability of Zn–N-HOPCPs for the CO2 cycloaddition with propylene oxide. Reprinted with permission.75 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) NH4+ yield and 1H NMR spectrum (inset) of Al-PMOF(Fe) and (c) photocatalytic NRR rate of AlPMOF and Al-PMOF(Fe) under N2, air, and Ar atmosphere, respectively. (b) Three cycles of photocatalytic NRR experiments using Al-PMOF(Fe), showing a negligible decrease in NRR yield and steady photocatalytic activity. The free energy diagram of the associative (c) alternating and (d) distal pathways in Al-PMOF(Fe). Reprinted with permission.230 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Comparison of the nitrobenzene hydrogenation performance for different catalysts; (b) reusability of Co SAs/NC-800; (c) energy distribution curves of H2 dissociation on Co SAs/NC-Y at 298 K. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (d) Catalysts with different pyrolysis temperature and their normalized catalytic gas production rates per Co in FA dehydrogenation. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Time–conversion plots for the filtration test and first run of the hydrogenation reaction over Co-SAs@NHOPC; (f) catalytic recyclability of Co-SAs@NHOPC for the selective hydrogenation of quinolines. Reprinted with permission.234 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (g) Time–conversion plots for the filtration test and first run of the hydrogenation reaction over Co-SAs@NHOPC; (h) catalytic recyclability of Co-SAs@NHOPC for the selective hydrogenation of quinolines. Reprinted with permission.235 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
