Atomic spectrometry update. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B309420K View PDF VersionPrevious Article  DOI: 10.1039/B309420K
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 1297-1316Atomic spectrometry update. X-ray fluorescence spectrometryPhilip J. Potts*a, Andrew T. Ellisb, Peter Kregsamerc, John Marshalld, Christina Strelic, Margaret Weste and Peter WobrauschekcaDepartment of Earth Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK MK7 6AAbOxford Instruments Analytical Ltd., Halifax Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK HP12 3SEcAtominstitut der Österreichischen Universitäten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020, Vienna, AustriadGlasgow Caledonian University, City Campus, Glasgow Caledonian University, Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow, UK G4 0BAeWest X-ray Solutions Ltd, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield, UK S11 9NFReceived 6th August 2003First published on 19th September 2003Contents1 Reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources2.2 Detectors3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysis3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence5 Synchrotron radiation5.1 Beamlines and optics5.2 Fluorescence analysis5.3 Applications6 TXRF6.1 Instrumentation and quantification6.2 Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)6.3 Surface analysis6.4 Applications7 Portable and mobile XRF8 On-line XRF9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques9.2 Geological9.3 Environmental9.4 Archeological and forensic9.5 Industrial9.6 Clinical and biological9.7 Thin films9.8 Chemical state analysis and speciationReferencesAbstractThis annual review of X-ray fluorescence covers developments over the period 2002–2003 in instrumentation and detectors, matrix correction and spectrum analysis procedures, X-ray optics and microfluorescence, synchrotron XRF, TXRF, portable XRF and on-line applications as assessed from the published literature. The review also covers a survey of applications, including sample preparation, geological, environmental, archaeological, forensic, biological, clinical, thin films, chemical state and speciation studies. During the current review period, trends were noted in the increased use of principal component analysis in the assessment of environmental data and chemometrics in the interpretation of XRF data in general, meticulous experimentation to model the emission spectra of X-ray tubes to improve the accuracy of FP correction procedures, a slowdown in reports on the development of ultra-high resolution cryogenic ED detectors, the use of EXAFS and XANES in fluorescence, as opposed to the more traditional absorption mode, continued interest in SR sources and interesting artefact measurements performed using XRF and related instrumentation.1 ReviewsX-ray fluorescence has had another buoyant year as judged by the range and quality of published work available for review. However, it is appropriate to start this year's ASU review by marking the passing during June, 2002, of one of the great communicators of modern XRF, Ron Jenkins, whose work must have touched all that contribute to this topic.1The Analytical Chemistry review of X-ray spectrometry was published during the current review period by Szaloki et al.265 Although there is some topic overlap with the present review, the Analytical Chemistry review extends to subjects such as EPMA, PIXE and XAS. Other XRF topic reviews included one by Munk2 on sub-ppm levels of trace elements in Trends in Analytical Chemistry and the preparation and use of reference materials for quality assurance in inorganic trace analysis,3 which covered the preparation and role of natural matrix reference materials of biological origin whose suitability extends to microanalytical techniques.A number of XRF contributions highlighting national capabilities were published, including a special issue of X-ray Spectrometry4 with contributions from countries of the former Soviet Union, a further review of developments in XRF analysis in Russia266 and an overview of X-ray spectrometry at research centres in Chile.5Further review contributions included an overview of the methodology of nuclear analytical techniques for speciation studies of trace elements in biological and environmental samples by Chai et al.,6 which included SRXRF, a review of present and future developments in XRF,267 and a review of trends in the X-ray emission spectrometry published literature over the period 1990–2000.2682 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sourcesSeveral developments in the design of commercially availableX-ray spectrometers feature in the literature during this review period. An EDXRF system269 that exploits the benefit of polarising Cartesian geometry was introduced to the market. In this instrument the primary beam from a 600 W Gd anode X-ray tube, powered by a 100 kV generator, was used to irradiate a polarising target before reaching the sample. A reduction in spectral background of an order of magnitude, compared with non-polarising excitation optics, was reported to provide lower detection limits. Bonvin et al.7 described, in a French language publication, continuous improvements in WDXRF spectrometer design. The reader was offered a choice between a reduction in analysis time and a reduction in tube power; the latter option obviating the need for external cooling water. Zhizhin et al.309 described analytical parameters for the increasingly popular benchtop configurations. The history and development of X-ray spectrometers in the former USSR and Russia were presented in an overview from 1964 to the present.8 Whilst modern spectrometers are stable instruments, Rousseau9 described a method for the correction of medium and long term drift, a feature of considerable interest to analysts intent on the validation of calibration procedures. Those troubled by sharp changes in count-rates may benefit from a new correction method proposed by Belousov et al.270 Formation features of radiation from X-ray tubes were described in two publications by Russian workers: Pavlinksy and Portnoy10 considered the impact of backscattered electrons to a grounded cathode tube and Duhanin et al.271 compared grounded anode with grounded cathode systems. Kitov et al.272 considered the spectrum of pulsed X-ray tubes with transmitting anodes in a study of distributions of tube Bremsstrahlung when comparing direct current and pulse voltage. Adams et al.11 described an experiment with short-pulse X-ray sources that could lead to femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy with an absolute reference energy level and to femtosecond X-ray detectors.2.2 DetectorsThis year was again a disappointment for advances and reports in very high resolution cryogenic X-ray detectors. The only area of activity seems to have been superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) devices. A two-stage adiabatic dilution refrigerator was used to cool an STJ device placed at the end of a 230 mm cold finger, which was needed to position the detector in the sample chamber used for XRF work at BESSY-2.12 The detector exhibited an excellent energy resolution of 12 to 25 eV in the energy range from 100 to 900 eV and the authors reported that collimation of the beam to match the detector area better improved the energy resolution by 10%. The detector could be used at count rates up to 18 kcps. The absolute detection efficiency in the low energy range studied was established by means of monochromatised SR from an undulator in the beamline. A so-called on-chip coil integrated STJ device was reported13 to yield a high-quality junction having an ultra low leakage current (a few nA) for a device of 100 × 100 µm2 cooled to 400 mK. The device remains to be fully characterised for its X-ray detection performance. A 100 × 100 µm2 Nb/Al/AlOx/Al/Nb STJ was used14 for X-ray spectroscopy in the energy range 500–900 eV of X-rays produced by the collision of highly charged ions with solid targets. An energy resolution of 20–30 eV was obtained in the energy range of interest and the device could be operated successfully at a count rate >500 cps, which is an advantage over the microcalorimeter type of cryogenic detectors that do not feature at all in this year's review.Silicon-based energy dispersive detectors remain of central importance to EDXRF spectrometry and this area has again been active during the review period. The benefits to be gained in terms of reduced Compton background in high energy X- and gamma-ray detection through the use of thinner (300 µm) Si PIN diode detectors rather than the regular 3 mm thickness Si(Li) detectors were reported.15 Sokolov and colleagues16 reported improvements in the challenging area of Peltier-cooled Si(Li) detectors. The authors reduced the cryostat volume and incorporated an efficient five-stage Peltier cooler that provided an impressive ΔT of 130 °C. Circular Si(Li) sensors of 4–4.5 mm thickness with active areas of 12–100 mm2 were produced, which provided energy resolution values of 158–253 eV at 5.9 keV. The authors also reported rectangular devices of 60 mm2 active area having a somewhat poorer energy resolution of 255 eV. Whilst interesting, these latter rectangular devices are more likely to be used in XRD than XRF spectrometry as they may have asymmetric fields that could result in poorer charge collection and spectrum artefacts. An impressive 50 mm2 silicon drift detector with an energy resolution of <150 eV and a claimed maximum count rate in excess of 1 Mcps was also proposed by Barkan et al.273 for use in XRD but this device would also, of course, make a valuable EDXRF detector. Bertuccio and Casiraghi17 reported their theoretical studies on the use of silicon carbide-based PIN diode and drift semiconductor energy dispersive detectors. Although theoretically interesting in their predicted characteristics when operated at room temperature and significantly above, the estimated energy resolution of 700 and 1300 eV for 1 and 10 mm2 devices, respectively, is disappointing. The response function for Si(Li) detectors has long-remained an important area for investigation as such studies offer both possibilities for more accurate and robust peak fitting and also insights into detector fabrication and the consequential improvements. The response function was established for two Si(Li) detectors by Puc et al.,18 whose method was satisfactory for peaks in the energy range 4–10 keV when used for PIXE measurements of single element thin film samples. The Bremsstrahlung from the samples made the method unsuitable for energies less than 4 keV, which is unfortunately where a reliable and accurate response function becomes increasingly important. For truly standardless EDS and EDXRF spectrometry, the true solid angle of the detector is an important parameter and Hopman and Campbell19 described a method for its determination to greater accuracy. The method, in which a point source was scanned across the detector, was refined to account for the oft-ignored effects of finite source-size, collimator “channeling” and X-ray attenuation by air. Using the improved methodology the authors claimed that they could establish the window-to-crystal distance with an accuracy of 0.2 mm, which corresponds to only a 3% error in solid angle for a sample/source-to-detector distance of 25 mm.Pixellated X-ray detectors from which X-ray energy distribution is obtained, in addition to spatial information for imaging, remained an interesting area of investigation. There are many large area X-ray imaging plates used to replace conventional X-ray sensitive film in radiography but X-ray charge coupled devices (CCD) and silicon-PIN detector arrays remain as the detectors of most interest for X-ray spectrometry. Gruner et al.20 reviewed comprehensively X-ray CCD detectors including all the various combinations of them with components such as phosphors, fibre optics and image intensifiers. The problem of charge sharing in a silicon PIN detector array was investigated in detail over the energy range 13–36 keV.21 The impressive device used was an array of 300 µm square × 300 µm thick pixel detectors bump bonded to individual, matching readout electronics. When operated at room temperature, the energy resolution was reported to be an impressive 265 eV at 5.9 keV. Models that included the complete X-ray interaction and subsequent charge transfer were developed by means of two software packages in order to quantify the extent of charge sharing with neighbouring pixels. The charge sharing was observed experimentally to rise from 2% at 13 keV to 4.5% at 36 keV, providing the lower energy threshold was set to 4 keV. Using the model, the authors predicted that as much as 50% of the charge from a 36 keV X-ray interaction may be lost to neighbouring pixels when the pixel size is reduced to 55 µm. Although designed for research into solar axions, a silicon-PIN array developed by Namba et al.22 was not without interest. The detector comprised an array of 16 silicon PIN diodes, each of 11 × 11 × 0.3 mm3 and each coupled to its own tailor-made preamplifier. The sensors were operated at 60 K as the front end had to be mounted in the cryostat of a superconducting magnet but still only managed a disappointing energy resolution of 1 keV; although the large size of the individual sensors must be borne in mind. A hard X-ray detector array in the form of a compound eye was developed for the ill-fated ASTRO-E mission that failed at launch. The detector comprised an array of silicon PIN diodes some 2 mm thick that covered the energy range 10–60 keV and offered a dismal (for EDXRF purposes) energy resolution of around 3.5 keV.23 Behind the silicon PIN sensors lay an array of scintillation detectors that covered the energy range 13–600 keV and whose light yield was significantly improved through the use of a cerium-doped gadolinium silicic oxide crystal.24 Finally, a large area, position and energy sensitive CCD was reported25 for use in the detection of characteristic X-rays in the few keV range from exotic atoms produced during experiments in a particle accelerator. The detector was built up from an array of six high-resistivity CCDs and offered excellent opportunities for background rejection through both energy and topographic discrimination.Gas proportional and microstrip X-ray detectors also offer opportunities for X-ray imaging where X-ray energy information is also required. The design details and performance of a (100 mm × 100 mm) 2-D multi-wire position-sensitive gas proportional detector were described26 in which the authors reported an improvement in energy resolution from 18 to 12% at 5.9 keV when the gas pressure was increased from 100 to 300 kPa. The authors also reported improved spatial resolution for their new design. Penning gas mixtures were used successfully to improve the gas gain by a factor of 70 in a system used as an optical imaging capillary gas proportional counter.27 Bateman28 reported how wall effects could be eliminated through controlled operation of a gas microstrip detector. When operated in this mode, the detector response was found to be extremely stable, which allowed peaks to be fitted using a log-normal function to achieve a positional accuracy of a few eV. This permitted more-complex overlaps to be resolved with greater reliability. Finally, Sipila274 presented a poster at the 2002 Denver conference in which he described how the background in a gas proportional counter could be dramatically reduced by means of an anti-coincidence shield. The signal from this shield was used to veto the main signal, thereby eliminating signals that would otherwise have been incompletely collected. A reduction in the detected background of more than a factor of 10 was claimed and this offered a substantial advantage in some applications such as sulfur in oil.The use for X-ray holography of a cooled avalanche photodiode detector was reported29 in which the first and second neighbour atoms around an emitter could be viewed. The detector offered an adequate resolution of 10% but mainly provided the ability to operate at a very high count rate in the SR experiment for which it was used.3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysisThe use was reported30 of a classical Nelder–Mead downhill Simplex optimisation process to establish true peak areas using a model for the silicon PIN diode detector response that included a Hypermet function. The combined procedure was used to fit the K series spectrum of the elements in the Z range 22–27. Thin-film single-element standards were irradiated in 45°/45° geometry by monochromatised SR in the range 6–12 keV. The XRF signals were detected using a commercially available silicon PIN diode detector of 7 mm2 active area and 300 µm thickness, with an energy resolution of 287 eV at 5.9 keV. The infinitely thin samples were chosen in order to minimise absorption and multiple scattering effects but also permitted the authors to ignore spectrum background, which clearly simplified processing of spectra and is a convenience denied to most EDXRF practitioners. The reduced chi-squared value from fitting the Hypermet function was 4.8, which was a significant improvement, as expected, over the value of 14.6 obtained using a simple Gaussian peak model. Much manual refinement of the fitting process was used in order to be sure that the true solution minimum was attained and that the starting values were suitable. A useful by-product resulting from the work was the estimation of the Kβ/Kα peak intensity ratios once all the other parameters had been refined. The results of this study were in very good agreement with previously published data. Although demonstrating that this procedure can work, the many and extensive omissions and simplifications made by the authors render this approach far from practicably demonstrated on real samples in which severe overlaps and varying backgrounds are the norm.The challenge of fitting the Compton scatter peak was taken up by Van Gysel et al.31 at UIA, Antwerp. The authors used Monte Carlo (MC) simulations and comparison to a range of real spectra to develop a model for the Compton scatter peak comprising a Gaussian modified by two exponential tail functions. The broadening of the Compton peak was shown to be the result of Doppler broadening and scattering over a wide range of angles. The combination of the model with a non-linear least squares fitting procedure gave a reliable and accurate estimate of Ag K series Compton peak areas for a variety of spectra collected using an HPGe detector.Spectrum interference coefficients were used275 to obtain pure element peak intensities from thin film samples of oceanic nodules. The authors established coefficients for the range of neighbouring elements from Z
− 3 to Z
+ 5 by measuring pure mono-element standards. As thin film samples were used, the complications of matrix corrections were conveniently avoided. Once established, the coefficients were used in a straightforward algorithm that evaluated the spectrum by moving from the lowest Z element to the highest Z and applying all the coefficients for the Z
− 3 to Z
+ 5 elements in a stepwise manner. A process of successive approximation was then carried out a further four times, each iteration updating the latest peak area estimates. The process had no explicit correction for overlaps, tailing or escape peaks, but incorporated all of these effects within the single empirical interelement coefficient. Through careful adjustment of the position and width of the Co K region of interest, the authors reported that the LOD could be improved by 15–70% to 0.032% m/m Co. The authors claimed the procedure to be highly versatile, but it is very unlikely to supplant existing least squares peak fitting procedures, which are truly very widely applicable, particularly to bulk, multielement samples that most users will encounter.3.2 Matrix correction and calibration proceduresChemometric methods continue to be applied for matrix corrections and spectrum processing in XRF spectrometry. Luo276 adopted a neural network (NN) approach for matrix correction of WDXRF spectra. The approach was compared with several others for the analysis of 11 types of alloy with a wide composition range. The key feature of this work was the combination of the NN with a fundamental parameter (FP) approach, which permitted the creation of 75 calculated standards that were used as a training set. When 40 of the alloy standards were used as the training set, the NN and NN-FP methods were not significantly different, but when only 17 of the standards were used, the NN-FP method had a relative standard error of prediction based on the remaining 33 standards that was 1.4–17 times better than the NN approach alone. When the NN-FP method was compared to the conventional Lachance–Trail alphas, FP and COLA algorithms using the same 17 standards and 33 unknowns, the NN-FP method was consistently more accurate. As a general purpose tool for delivering accurate quantitative analysis for non-linear, multi-element systems the NN-FP method is attractive. In a study of several chemometric methods32 a back-propagation NN approach yielded the lowest standard errors for samples of soil and plant material. Members of the same group also described33 the use of partial least squares to overcome the spectrum interference encountered in samples containing As, Br and Pb. Finally, Cherkashin et al.277 claimed to have incorporated artificial intelligence into their software system for selecting standards and constructing the analytical calibration.The accurate description of the X-ray tube primary spectrum is a key requirement for improving the accuracy of fundamental parameter (FP) correction procedures. Ebel278 continued the excellent work at TU Vienna on tube spectra and developed a semi-empirical model of the complex 13 line L emission spectra from targets of molybdenum, rhodium, silver, tin, gadolinium, erbium, tungsten, gold and bismuth. The author presented a useful and comprehensive derivation of the new model, which was based on that of Love and Scott for the generation of X-rays by electrons, and included an invaluable listing of all the essential data required to populate the model. The accuracy of the model was confirmed by measuring spectra from targets excited in an SEM with a normal incident beam at 10, 20 and 30 kV accelerating voltages. The spectra were measured with a conventional Si(Li) detector at a takeoff angle of 35°. Excellent agreement was found between calculated and measured spectra, and although some deviations were found, these were attributed to incorrect literature values of transition probabilities, e.g., Ag Lβ2, or to uncorrected incomplete charge collection in the detector. The new model was effective and widely applicable and generated an X-ray spectrum in which the flux could be computed in absolute terms. The additional flux, particularly at longer wavelengths, due to the return of backscattered electrons to the anode/target at a high voltage in a grounded cathode end-window X-ray tube was studied.10 A model was developed that included this effect and good agreement was shown between the calculated spectrum and that measured from a commercially available 3 kW end-window X-ray tube operated at 45 kV. The results from a rhodium target tube operated at 60 kV showed an enhancement due to backscattered electrons of 21, 37 and 35% for Rh K, Rh L and integrated Bremsstrahlung, respectively. Delgado34 reported an indirect method for establishing the X-ray tube primary spectrum in which the spectrum was related by a Volterra equation of the first kind to the spectrum obtained from a set of thick target pure element standards. The full mathematical derivation was described, its use with the Sherman equations explained and the method was validated experimentally using simple binary samples of silver bromide and silver iodide. The author claimed significant benefits from this indirect approach over the alternatives of measured, direct spectra and of the many and widely used parameter-based models. Finally, Kitov279 derived a formula to describe the spectrum from an X-ray tube scattered by a homogeneous, flat polariser.The Compton scattered peaks remain invaluable for matrix correction procedures in wide-range, low-Z samples. A quadratic rather than a linear relationship was established35 between the mass absorption coefficient for the Rh Kα primary exciting radiation and the inverse of the Compton peak intensity. The author proposed a new correction method based on this quadratic relationship and showed accuracy to be improved two-fold for the determination of trace Sr in geological samples. An experimental study was reported36 in which the Compton/Rayleigh ratios were established for elements in the Z range 26–82 irradiated by 59.5 keV photons from an 241Am radioisotope source. Parameters such as scatter cross-sections were extracted from the data and these are valuable data for use in matrix corrections calculations. Scattering cross-sections were also reported for elements in the Z range 22–82 excited with Ag Kα1 radiation37 and for a number of low-Z materials such as plastics, bone, fat and water.38An effective absorption correction is one of the major requirements of matrix correction procedures due to its typically large magnitude in XRF spectrometry. A method for calculating the self-absorption correction factor for elements excited by Bremsstrahlung from a silver target X-ray tube operated from 10 to 100 kV was described.280 The theoretical principles and calculation process were described in useful detail, as were the ways in which computation time could be reduced significantly. Results were shown for the correction factors for Si Kα and Cu Kα lines over the whole tube kV range and the parameters used were reported. The authors claimed the method was suitable for general use with any tube kV and for any X-ray fluorescence line. A simple technique as an alternative to the frequently used emission–transmission (E–T) method was described39 for the determination of the absorption correction in samples of intermediate thickness. The new method used measurements in conventional geometry of analyte XRF intensities for two samples of identical composition but different mass thickness. This approach yielded results comparable to those using other methods and allowed samples to be mounted on thin or thick substrates or to have no substrate, which is a significant advantage. Perplexingly, the authors chose to analyse geological samples by fusing then grinding the beads and preparing as thin films rather than stopping with beads, which is already the preferred method for wide range oxide calibrations in which all interelement corrections are routinely dealt with. A correction procedure for self-absorption artefacts in the interesting field of X-ray Compton tomography was described281 that was applied successfully to the difficult case of X–Y scanning, which is much more sensitive to self-absorption effects than the more commonly used translation–rotation technique.The original fundamental parameter (FP) expressions considered only photoelectric interactions of primary photons with inner shell electrons and disregarded XRF generated by multiple scattering of both the incoming and outgoing beams. Four such second order processes were considered282 using the mathematical formalism based upon that of Loomis and Keith, to which was applied an assumption of monochromatic excitation. The authors reported that the total contribution from double interaction processes to the Al Kα XRF intensity rose from 0.65% to 52% at incident excitation energies of 5 and 120 kV, respectively. The effects were less for Ag Kα, showing a range of 4–13% in the incident energy range 30–120 kV. The deviations from the previous formalism of Loomis and Keith were attributed to the new approach, which in particular included an improved description of the Compton interactions. Good agreement was reported with values calculated from the transport theory. Accuracy of the parameters such as the mass attenuation coefficients, fluorescence yields and jump ratios limits the accuracy of all FP corrections procedures. Through the careful selection of these parameters, Zhuo et al.283 were able to improve the accuracy of analysis using a modified version of the NRLXRF program into which the selected parameters were substituted. The improved version (NRL301) was also able to use fewer calibration standards (1) than NRLXRF (7) yet achieved comparable results for a cement reference material. Results from fused rock reference materials were 1.5–2 times more accurate using NRL301 with its carefully selected fundamental parameters, the sources of which were clearly and usefully identified by the authors. The use of X-ray optics is common in XRMF, which means that convergent and divergent X-ray beams are the general rule rather than the exception. This situation violates one of the basic assumptions in FP corrections that the incident and detected beams are parallel. A Monte Carlo approach was described in detail284 for calculating X-ray fluorescence intensities in three different XRMF configurations with varying beam geometry. The authors were able to propose a new “equivalent angle” approach that allowed for correction of beam divergence effects in FP calculations. A similar problem, albeit in X-ray microprobe analysis, was addressed40 in which a correction method was proposed for the effect of secondary fluorescence near grain boundaries. The correction accounted for the secondary fluorescence in one mineral generated by X-ray fluorescence from a neighbouring mineral phase. Monte Carlo simulations were used to validate the proposed correction procedure.4 X-ray optics and microfluorescenceAn innovative X-ray optic comprising a square-pore microchannel plate in a radial channel packing geometry was described by Price et al.41 By using the correct radii of curvature, the device formed a conic approximation to the Wolter Type I grazing incidence mirror X-ray optic, providing a large effective area and low mass suited to space flight applications. X-ray diffraction effects in submicrometre slits and channels were investigated by Ognev.42 The devices investigated were narrow channels formed by pressing two ‘weakly rough’ surfaces together (‘slitless collimator’) and three layered structures (e.g., Cr–C–Cr), the middle layer of which was a low atomic number film. Measurements were designed to investigate the influence of channel shape distortion and surface quality on the transmitted beam.A new method was described by Grigorieva and Antonov285 for producing strongly bent highly orientated pyrolytic graphite to make a crystal of almost any arbitrary shape, although with some thickness limitations. The method, based on acoustic microscopy, was capable of producing HOPG X-ray optical devices at a cost equivalent to that of flat HOPG monochromators of good quality. An EDXRF instrument that incorporated a toroidal focusing system made of HOPG was used by Kolmogorov and Trounova43 to investigate a number of geochemical problems associated with ultrabasic and basic rocks. These authors presented EDXRF results for clinopyroxene compared to laboratory ICP-MS measurements.Other developments in X-ray optics were described by Tawara et al.44 who developed a telescope that used multilayer ‘supermirrors’ for directing the hard (20–40 keV) X-ray spectrum onto a CdZnTe imaging detector. This device was designed for measuring the cosmic X-ray spectrum from the sky with the instrument flown to the appropriate height in a balloon. An innovative XRF spectrometer designed to achieve high energy resolution, high spatial resolution and a high detection rate for X-ray mapping applications was described by Longoni et al.45 The device was based on a monolithic annular array of Si drift detectors. The X-ray excitation beam was transported to the sample using capillary optics passing through a hole in this ring of detectors, so optimising the solid angle for the collection of the XRF spectrum.A new method for microfluorescence imaging without scanning was discussed by Sakurai and Eba46 in which the sample was excited using a combination of a wide beam grazing incidence excitation geometry and parallel beam optics for detecting XRF spectra. This technique was claimed to be capable of detecting an XRF image of 1 M pixels with a spatial resolution ‘similar to’ 20 µm in 1–2 min, an important potential new application being not just element imaging, but element movies.A different approach to imaging was followed by Tsuji and Delalieux,47 who investigated the effect of pinhole-to-sample distance on lateral resolution using a cone shaped pinhole aperture (of inner diameter 0.3 mm with an outer cone slope of 60°). This pinhole was coupled to a molybdenum anode X-ray tube using a single capillary; the gap between pinhole collimator and sample was adjusted to less than 0.5 mm. Not surprisingly, results showed that best spatial resolution and highest XRF intensities were observed in ‘quasi-contact’ mode.One interesting application of XRMF is in the chemical dating of monazite from the proportion of U, Th and Pb present. Using a ‘mini-probe’ XRF instrument, Engi et al.48 reported detection limits for these elements of about 10 mg kg−1 for 10 min count times and found that a measurement time of 40 min was sufficient to date single monazite grains as young as 15 Ma. The reliability of this method was evaluated by comparing results with determinations made by conventional U–Pb TIMS, which showed that populations of measurements made by mini-XRF agreed within error with the TIMS data. In a companion paper, Scherrer et al.49 further evaluated this technique by comparing mini-probe XRF data with results by electron microprobe analysis and LA-MC-ICP-MS (208Pb/232Th), all on polished thin sections. As an example, XRF microprobe measurement precisions of 5%
(2s) in age determinations of 54 Ma were obtained after 90 min integration time at a spatial resolution of 90 µm.In reviewing other applications of X-ray microfluorescence, depleted uranium particles were analysed by Danesi et al.50 using a range of techniques, including XRMF. Soil samples were collected from locations in Kosovo, where depleted uranium ammunition was expended during the 1999 Balkan conflict, and this investigation found hot-spots where hundreds of thousands of particles (mostly <5 µm diameter) were present in a few mg of contaminated soil. Merigoux et al.51 used XRMF imaging to investigate the calcium status in human scalp hair shafts and identified two different binding types. In one type, the Ca was easily removed by hydrochloric acid and was associated with Ca containing soap; the other type of Ca appeared to be bound to proteins. Anyone interested in second hand books or historic manuscripts will have heard of foxing stains, those reddish-brown, brown or yellowish spots that appear on paper. Bicchieri et al.52 artificially induced this type of stain and investigated the phenomenon using a number of techniques, including XRMF, on paper that had been artificially aged after treatment with iron(III) chloride and iron(II) sulfate solutions. The outcome of this study was that foxing was related to the strong oxidation of the cellulose chain with a clear relationship between iron valency and calcium displacement. Powell286 used X-ray microanalysis to localise and identify aluminosilicate particles in biological samples in a study designed to contribute to the characterisation of these ubiquitous environmental particles that have been implicated in human disease. Sun et al.,53 in a contribution to heterogeneous catalysis, used XRMF to measure the adsorption of metal salts by porous gamma-alumina beads. Skurat et al.54 examined about 60 samples from the space station ‘MIR’ to assess the degree of surface contamination that had occurred in low Earth orbit. X-ray microfluorescence was one of a number of techniques used to assess surface contamination and substrate erosion of the various materials by particles comprised predominantly of Si, with Ca and K. In another materials characterisation application, Istratov et al.55 reviewed the advantages and limitations of a number of novel and emerging techniques used to understand phenomena and defects that limit the lifetime of solar cells. Of interest were defects (e.g., dislocations) and impurities (transition metals) that can be elucidated by techniques such as X-ray microfluorescence, X-ray absorption spectromicroscopy and X-ray beam induced current measurements.5 Synchrotron radiation5.1 Beamlines and opticsThe installation of new beamlines for XRF analysis has not grown as fast during the current review period as during recent years. However, Simon et al.56,57 described a new experimental station for X-ray fluorescence and topography at ANKA (Karlsruhe), a recently constructed third generation synchrotron radiation facility, giving details of the design, characteristics (e.g., white light, band pass operation and beam profiles) and performance parameters. In the section of this beamline dedicated to X-ray fluorescence, TXRF and microprobe experiments could be performed using a multilayer monochromator, for which the energy range and sensitivities attainable were described. At the ESRF (Grenoble), a new end station, ID18F, was described by Somogyi et al.58 This end station is mainly dedicated to precise and reproducible quantitative analysis at the µg g−1 level and with micrometre size spatial resolution, giving an impressive performance demonstrated by absolute detection limits in the attogramme range.5.2 Fluorescence analysisIn reviewing this year's publications, a trend is apparent in the use of the fluorescence mode (rather than the absorption mode) in extended X-ray absorption fine structure analysis
(EXAFS). This was emphasized by studies of iron in Prussian Blue by Glatzel et al.,59 and Cr and As in ferromagnetic ‘zinc-blende CrAs’, and Tb ions implanted in SiO2 on Si, in separate articles, both by Ofuchi et al.60,61 This latter study of Tb ions implanted in SiO2 revealed the coexistance of two local structures in which 2 and 6 oxygen atoms, respectively, were coordinated around the Tb ions.X-ray fluorescence holography yields the 3-dimensional local environment around a certain element. Hayashi et al.62 used a cylindrical LiF analyser and avalanche photodiode detector for bulk samples and a multi-element solid state detector for impurity samples to overcome the problem that the holographic signal is only 0.3% of the background isotropic fluorescence radiation. Under these conditions a conventional system based on an ED detector would take months to record a complete hologram. Here, they probed a gold single crystal and Zn atoms doped in a GaAs wafer, while in a further publication from the same group, Takahashi et al.63 probed Fe in a 20 nm thick FePt film and reconstructed the local atomic structure around the iron atoms. Both these studies were undertaken at the Spring-8 (Harima, Japan) storage ring. Chukhovskii et al.64 examined an iron single crystal to illustrate the theory of atom resolving XRF holography for imaging electron charge density distributions. A new transformation algorithm was used and compared with Barton's reconstruction algorithm.Synchrotron micro-XRF was used to study the nature and degree of heterogeneity of inorganic trace constituents in solid materials by Kempenaers et al.65 Microheterogeneity was studied in the certified reference materials NIST SRM 613 (trace elements in a 1 mm glass wafer) and NIST SRM 1577a (trace elements in bovine liver), and a Monte Carlo model was used to calculate the minimum representative mass. In order to study the sample heterogeneity with depth of Cu in a layered sample, the difference in matrix absorption of the Kα and Kβ lines was exploited by Zavarin and Doner66 to yield information on the average elemental depth. Chukalina et al.287 reconstructed the spatial distribution of elements (tomography) inside laser-ablated resin samples used as substrates for ICP-MS. Samples were excited with a 22.5 keV X-ray beam and a spot size of 2.5 × 10 µm2. The reconstruction procedure was used to calculate the ‘effective’ elemental concentration, which allowed, for the first time, a correction for the attenuation of the incident and fluorescence radiation. Barroso et al.67 proposed the use of synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction, for matrix characterisation, in combination with EDXRF for the quantitative analysis of thick samples. Vekemans et al.68 described the quantitative XRF analysis at the microprobe beamline ID18F at ESRF (Grenoble), using a two stage quantification procedure. In the first stage the collected spectra were deconvoluted using AXIL software, then line intensities were input into a Monte Carlo simulation programme taking into account experimental conditions and sample characteristics such as absorption and enhancement effects, topology and heterogeneity of samples.Schnier69 proposed the use of XRF and mass spectrometry to verify the hypothesis that superheavy elements cause radioactive halos which may be observed in some minerals as a result of their radioactive decay. We believe that this is a challenging area in which experimental results may not be able to provide a resolution to this controversy.5.3 ApplicationsCarvalho et al.70 evaluated the Bi, Cu, Fe, Hg, Pb, Mn and Zn distribution from root to enamel in human teeth treated by dental amalgam. Results showed that Hg was only found in restored teeth, with the highest concentrations adjacent to the amalgam region and a strong decrease to the inner part of the tooth. No significant changes in the concentration of Fe and Mn were observed between healthy and restored teeth. However, the levels of Cu and Zn were higher in restored teeth.The study was conducted with a 100 µm resolution beam and energy of 18 keV at LURE (Saclay, France).A number of reports described the analysis of human tissue. For example, Geraki et al.71 quantified the levels of Cu, Fe and Zn in breast tissue specimens by investigating healthy tissue and breast carcinomas. Statistical analysis of results indicated elevated levels of all three elements in diseased tissue. Kwiatek et al.72 compared, in a preliminary study, the distribution of Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ti, V, Se and Zn in cancerous and non-cancerous kidney tissue, together with Fe in the serum of these patients. Differences in trace element distributions were found, including lower concentrations of all these elements, except for Mn, found in diseased tissue. Ishihara et al.73 mapped elements in single neurons from human brain tissue, affected by Alzheimer's disease, and obtained clear images of Ca, Fe and Zn. Another study by members of the same group,74 investigated the distribution and chemical state of Fe within a single neuron in patients suffering from Parkinson's disease. They found that excessive accumulation of Fe could be seen in melanised neurons and additional XANES measurements showed some change in the oxidation state of Fe. In a contrasting study, Nicolis et al.75 studied the As content in the hairs of leukemia patients treated with arsenic trioxide.Turning now to other biological applications, iodine deficiency can result in irreversible damage to the brain during the fetal and neonatal stages of development. Zhang et al.76 studied the relative contents and distribution of Br, Cl, Cu, Fe, and Zn in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of new-born rats, influenced by different iodine intake. Xie et al.77 found interest in the concentration profiles in transverse sections of bone from the Adelie penguin collected in maritime Antarctica and suggested further studies to establish an SRXRF database for polar and non-polar animals. Shen et al.78 investigated the accumulation of metal ions in Euglena gracilis algae by XRF and EXAFS and reported the effect on other elements following the uptake of REE and Mn by these cells. SRXRF and PIXE techniques were used79 in a homogeneity test of 2 candidate reference materials, lichen IAEA-338 and algae IAEA-413, with results showing good homogeneity and a minimum sampling mass of 10 mg.Cohen et al.80 demonstrated at the advanced photon source APS in Chicago the complementary methods of PIXE and SR X-ray techniques for the characterization of urban air pollution. They directed their interest to particles with diameters below 2.5 µm and first made broad beam studies with tuned beam energies to resolve peak overlaps, and then used a focused beam to analyse individual fine particles. Pinzani et al.81 were interested in Cd speciation in municipal solid waste fly ash. XANES measurements on the K-absorption edge of Cd (26.72 keV) and XRMF on micrometre-sized spots of individual fly ash particles were obtained, indicating Cd to be preferentially located in some small areas at higher concentration and in the oxidation state +2.Manceau et al.82 showed how SRXRF, XRD and EXAFS could be used in parallel to determine the structural form of trace elements in heterogeneous matrices at the µm-scale. As an example the authors studied how Ni is sequestered in ferromanganese nodules in soil to draw attention to the benefits of this combination of techniques in the analysis of natural matrices that have a complex microheterogeneous structure.In the characterization of other types of materials, Klockenkämper et al.83 recorded line profiles of Co across ion-implanted conductor paths in silicon wafers. The authors claimed that a 0.1 µm thin Ti foil as internal standard represented a simple and effective way of compensating for long term drift and fluctuation of the synchrotron beam to facilitate the examination of buried layers to µm resolution and with a concentration discrimination of better than 1% . A diamond-anvil cell for the in situ analysis of fluids and melts at high temperatures and pressures was designed by Schmidt and Rickers84 and used to determine the solubility of AgCl in water. Veiga and Figueiredo85 studied, using synchrotron XRF, tubular glass beads from the 16th century, which had been recently excavated in Lisbon, to ascertain their provenance.6 TXRFDuring the review period the 9th Conference on TXRF and Related Techniques took place. Hence, the proceedings will be published later this year which may explain the reduced number of publications dealing with TXRF in this review in comparison with the last review period.6.1 Instrumentation and quantificationA number of enhancements in TXRF instrumentation were reported in the current review period. Tsuji and Wagatsuma86 achieved an improvement in TXRF intensity by using an additional reflector which was attached just above the Si sample carrier. This reflector focused the primary X-rays on the analyzed area by multi-reflection effects between reflector and sample carrier. The enhancement effect was verified by measuring a thin Au layer on a silicon wafer, but the effect on detection limits of droplet samples was not reported. Tiwara et al.87 reported the development of a new TXRF spectrometer for ultra-trace analysis as well as for surface characterization, which was claimed to be simple and fairly inexpensive. The system was portable as it was equipped with a Peltier cooled solid state detector. The reported detection limits ranged from 100 pg to 5 ng even under low power operating conditions (30 kV, 5 mA) using a copper target fine focus tube. These results were a factor of 10 worse in comparison with other portable TXRF spectrometers.A new procedure for intensity and detection limits determination was reported by Bennun et al.88 based on the method of “maximum likelihood”, which is appropriate for the analysis of signals suffering from interference and, in the case of small signals, within a noisy background. The method was tested by analyzing traces of Hg in the presence of a strong Au signal and an impressive detection limit of 100 ng g−1 was achieved.6.2 Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)Sakurai et al.89 described a new SR-TXRF facility at an undulator beamline at SPring 8, the world's most powerful synchrotron radiation source. This setup differed from the standard SR-TXRF setups as it used a Johansson-type WD spectrometer. This provided energy resolution 20 times better than ED spectrometers and high count rate performance. The reported detection limits reached the particularly low value of 3.1·10−16 g or 3.1 pg g−1 for a 0.1 µl droplet of pure water. This value is lower than all reported values on other SR-TXRF facilities using ED spectrometry, but the SR source, as noted, is the world's most intense. This spectrometer was also used by Awaji86 for the structural characterization of giant magnetoresistance (GMR) multilayers, confirming that excessive thermal treatment caused a roughening of the inter-layer interfaces, which degraded the magnetic properties of a GMR head.Finally, there were some interesting other applications of SR-TXRF at the Brazil SR facility (NSLS) where nuclear materials were analyzed by Simabuco et al.90 with detection limits of 0.1–20 ng ml−1 without using a preconcentration technique or matrix separation. The same group91 determined Cu, Fe, and Zn in colostrum milk also without preconcentration, concluding that the technique was suitable for the investigation of trace elements in milk samples. Trace elements in small amounts of drugs of abuse were investigated by Muratsu et al.92 Picogram quantities of trace elements in 10 µg of various drugs could be detected after placing droplets of solutions containing cocaine or heroin, leaflets of marijuana or opium soft lumps on silicon wafers as sample carriers. The authors were able to identify the different drugs by means of their trace element fingerprints derived from the TXRF data.6.3 Surface analysisGohshi93 reported a summary of the ISO/TC 201 Standard VI ISO 14706: 2000, surface chemical analysis–determination of surface elemental contamination on silicon wafers by TXRF. After several years of work this standard was finally completed and it specifies TXRF procedures for the measurement of the atomic surface density of elemental contamination on chemomechanically polished or epitaxial silicon wafer surfaces. It specifies the detectable element range (S to U) and the accessible atomic surface density range: 1010–1014 atoms cm−2 for direct analysis and 5 × 108–5 × 1012 atoms cm−2 using the vapor phase decomposition specimen preparation method. This standardization is a very valuable contribution for the application of TXRF to quality assurance in the semiconductor industry.Klockenkämper et al.94 compared various methods and their features for depth profiling of shallow implanted layers in silicon wafers. The obtained profiles differed by a factor of up to 3 in depth, width and dose. The reason was found, mainly, to be a result of unsuitable calibration. The most consistent profiles were shown by RBS and TXRF techniques when combined with wet etching.Studies on surface characterization were performed by two groups. In the first study Perez et al.95 presented an algorithm for the calculation of X-ray propagation at grazing angles using a matrix approach. The method was used to study surface oxidation of copper and roughness of glass surfaces. In the second, Alov and Oskolok310reported the influence of heterogeneous surface morphology on analytical signal formation in TXRF, showing that TXRF can be effectively applied for the identification of nucleation and growth mechanisms of metal and alloy thin films.6.4 ApplicationsThe review period saw an encouraging number of reports in which TXRF was used in many different fields. Determination of traffic-related platinum group metals
(Pd, Pt, Rh) was performed in the aquatic biosphere by Sures et al.96 Since automobile catalysts have been installed, an increase in these metals has been observed and one question raised is whether they are accumulated in the aquatic biosphere? Zebra mussels were chosen as a biomarker and it was revealed for the first time that all three catalyst-emitted metals were accumulated by the mussels in the order Rh < Pt < Pd. The bonding state of Pd in phytosystems was determined by Alt et al.97 The authors studied the binding of Pd to organic ligands in leaves from contaminated endive that were prepared for analysis by cell breakdown in a buffer and centrifugation and by using gel permeation chromatography. Three-way catalysts that had been subjected to 59000 km of driving were investigated by Fernandez-Ruiz et al.98 TXRF was shown to be a rapid, precise and simple method for this type of analysis, as it did not require chemical manipulation. Axial and radial profiles of the elements were determined. By comparing used and fresh catalysts, information was gained concerning loss of active elements and the retention of contaminating elements as a consequence of the working conditions. Finally, the determination of Pd, Pt and Rh in pharmaceuticals was reported by Lasztity et al.99Turning to the analysis of organic material, the Argentinian group headed by Vazquez investigated impurities in scleroglucan aqueous systems.100 In a comparative study of three final purification methods for polysaccharide systems, TXRF spectrometry was evaluated for the determination of trace elements. Particular advantages of TXRF were found to be the small quantity of sample required and the avoidance of digestion of the organic material. The same group101 attempted to classify polymers using chemometric tools in which TXRF spectra were used to retrieve matrix information from coherent and incoherent scatter peaks. A combination of principal component analysis and cluster analysis was used to visualize the differences in composition of the various analyzed polymers.In the field of medical and biochemical applications, Viksna et al.102 analyzed whole blood and placenta to investigate the possible influence of high levels of environmental pollutants during pregnancy. Samples from people living in both highly polluted and less polluted areas were analyzed and the results showed that the level of essential elements like Zn and Se were lower in the polluted area samples while the levels of toxic elements like Cd and Pb were higher. The distribution of Cd, Fe, Ni and Pb between cytoplasm and cell walls of cucumber roots was determined by Varga et al.103 after applying a special sample preparation procedure. The authors reported that the heavy metals influenced the concentration and distribution of accumulated Fe.An application in fine arts was published by Bruni et al.,104 who investigated field and laboratory spectroscopic methods, including TXRF, for the identification of pigments in an XIth century fresco. The advantages and limitations of each technique in its application to the study of fresco pigments were discussed.7 Portable and mobile XRFIt is, perhaps, developments in detector technology that have had the greatest impact in recent years on the development of portable XRF technology. The most recent developments to improve the sensitivity of X-ray detectors for higher energy X-rays for field applications were considered by Redus et al.,105 based on recent research at a commercial manufacturer. These developments include larger volume Si-PIN detectors with two stage coolers, CdTe M-pi-n detectors integrated with a thermoelectric cooler and dual detectors comprising a Si-PIN diode for high resolution at low energies coupled to a high-Z semiconductor detector for higher sensitivity at higher energies.Although X-ray excitation using radioactive sources or X-ray tubes is almost universally used in portable XRF instrumentation, an interesting ‘proof-of-concept’ instrument using focused electron excitation was described by Feldman et al.106 This instrument incorporated a thin electron transmissive membrane to isolate the vacuum of the electron source from the ambient atmosphere and was evaluated in the non-destructive analysis of metal and mineral samples to a spatial resolution of better than several hundreds of micrometres.Other developments in portable XRF technology included a laser activated X-ray tube system, designed to switch the tube cathode on/off to extend tube and battery life,288 reviews of currently available instrumentation from one manufacturer107,108and an interesting development by Wegrzynek et al.109 in the backscatter FP method that used coherently and incoherently scattered peaks of primary radiation to estimate the ‘dark’ matrix of the analysed sample (that is the low Z elemental components that cannot be detected normally owing to low energy X-ray detection limitations of instrumentation).One of a number of applications of portable XRF instrumentation in the current review period is the work of Ferrero et al.,110 who reviewed work in the analysis of pigments from Spanish works of art using a tube excited portable XRF instrument fitted with a Si-PIN detector. The artefacts of interest included altar pieces, frescoes, canvas, and sculptures, with the aim of identifying pigments to contribute to restoration and to contribute to a database of pigments used in pictorial materials. The analysis of mineral pigments in mural paintings was also of interest in a Chinese language publication by Shimoyama et al.,111 in which the virtues of 55Fe excitation were extolled to extend measurements to the elements Si to K. Additional applications in art archaeology were also described.112 Finally, Fiorini et al.113 incorporated an interesting laser photo-ablation technique into a device for in situ studies of elemental distribution in multilayers of painted works of art. Laser ablation was achieved with a 2.94 µm Er-YAG laser operating at a repetition rate of 8 Hz in a Q-switching mode. The spectrometer used was a portable system with a W anode X-ray tube and a Peltier cooled Si drift detector with 155 eV FWHM energy resolution at 5.9 keV.Portable XRF instrumentation can also make significant contributions in health related studies, as exemplified by the work of Reames and Lance,114 who evaluated instrumentation for testing lead in soil to contribute to an investigation on childhood lead poisoning. A portable XRF instrument was used to measure soil Pb in the yards of houses in the San Francisco Bay Area and it was reported that results were highly correlated with laboratory data. It was concluded that to optimise measurements for regulatory screening, the portable XRF instrument should either be used for surface measurements, or a sample should be collected, prepared and analysed in the field by crushing with a pestle and mortar and placing in a test cup—the advantage of the latter procedure being that the sample can then be submitted to a laboratory for confirmatory analysis. Harper et al.115 reported work to determine whether the proficiency analytical test (PAT) materials from the American Industrial Hygiene Association can be used to provide quality data for PXRF analysis of lead on dust wipe surface samples. They also compared the PXRF data with laboratory ICP analysis of the wipes and looked to see if differences existed between different wipe materials. New approaches for the assessment of occupational exposure to metals were reported by Nygren,116 who used a new generation of portable electronic micro-balance and PXRF to provide short term sampling for the monitoring of exposure variations during a work shift as well as exposure during individual tasks of short duration. This approach provided an effective tool for the assessment of workplace improvements and staff training. Potts et al.117 also investigated a potentially hazardous element, in this case arsenic. The authors surveyed the presence of arsenic contamination at a heritage site in Cornwall that had been used as an arsenic works. Of particular interest was the absorption of arsenic by porous and semi-porous building materials that had been in contact with arsenic-rich flue gases and the surface contamination of building materials caused by the leaching of this material by weathering processes.Space research is the ultimate justification for portable XRF instrumentation and an instrument (CheMin) designed to search for ice and hydrous minerals at the lunar poles and combining XRD and XRF measurements was described by Sarrazin et al.118 The capabilities of this instrument would be considerably enhanced if combined with a drilling system capable of penetrating a few tens of centimetres of the lunar regiolith. Elemental mapping by XRF of a near-Earth asteroid (1989ML) from the MUSES-C orbiter was considered by Okada et al.,119 who described the characteristics of the XRF instrument and the observation plan during the mission. Turning now from projected to actual measurements, Dennerl120 reported the detection, for the first time, of X-rays from Mars correlated with the fluorescent scattering of solar X-rays. The X-ray spectrum was dominated by a single narrow emission line; most likely the oxygen Kα line.8 On-line XRFAlthough hardly a flood of publications, at least this year there are two on-line publications to review (last year there were none!). Eisgruber et al.121 described a novel, in situ XRF composition sensor for the real-time, closed-loop control of the deposition of thin films, which was applied to the control of CuInGa(1 −
x)Se2 thin films. A number of novel features were claimed for this device, including protection of the sensor from the deposition environment, optimisation of sensor-to-sample distance, use of low cost components operating at room temperature and a calibration procedure based on a single standard. In a contrasting application, Eslava-Gomez and Parry289 described the use of photon energies between 20 and 30 keV in order to determine the concentration of pairs of metals (selected from Cr, Cu, Hg, Pb, Zn) in aqueous solution passing through a pipe of fixed diameter. The method depended on differential attenuation of the selected X-ray energies with maximum sensitivity being demonstrated by Cr/Pb, not surprisingly the elements that showed the greatest X-ray attenuation contrast.9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniquesThe preparation of powdered materials continues to feature in the literature. In the past, particle size effects have been extensively studied with several models available for the calculation of fluorescence intensity from polydisperse materials. However, the autoadhesive interactions of particles and the consequent variation in density of the powder pellets dependent on particle size and the compacting load applied has not received such attention. Zagorodniy290 provided readers with a timely reminder that analysts should understand these technological and physical–mechanical characteristics of powders and their effects on the fluorescence intensity of characteristic analyte lines of interest. The study was conducted on iron powder and ferroalloys–FeMn, FeNb, FeSi, FeTi and SiMn, which are by no means the easiest of powders to analyse. Equipment and consumables required to prepare powders can make a significant contribution to laboratory costs. A team in Argentina122 offered an improved method for the preparation of small pressed powder pellets of muscovites and potassium feldspars. Those charged with the quest for continuous improvement in analytical methods will be familiar with the debate—to fuse or not to fuse. Coedo et al.123 presented RSD values for both compressed pellets and fused beads, showing that the difference found between the data sets may be explained in terms of random errors. If the fusion technique appears attractive, Duimakaev et al.291 advised on the effect of partially volatile components on the resultant beads.Preparation techniques normally associated with other analytical disciplines have been applied to XRF investigations. Fiorini et al.113 incorporated a laser photo-ablation technique into a device for in situ studies of chemical element distribution in multilayers of painted works of art, as described in Section 7 (Portable and mobile XRF).A team from Brazil124 offered a preconcentration method for the determination of Th in natural water by WDXRF. Polyurethane foam loaded with 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid reagent as the solid phase was reported to hold up to 50%
(w/w) of the reagent. 4 mg l−1 and 10 mg l−1 detection and quantification limits, respectively, were achieved for Th, with a RSD of 4.2% at 21.7 mg l−1. The results were in agreement with reference values of water samples at 95% confidence limits. Gordeeva et al.125 extracted Co, Cu, FeIII, Ni, Pb, VIV and Zn from solutions on cellulose filters in the form of pyrrolidinedithiocarbamates. Detection limits were 0.1, 1.2, 0.4, 0.2, 0.2, 0.4 and 0.3 µg, respectively, on the filter.9.2 GeologicalThe use of XRF in geological applications continues to be explored, and while the volume of work reported remains high, truly original developments are harder to find. Roelandts126 published a geochemical reference sample bibliography drawn from 7500 new results in thirty journals in the twenty-first in a series of annual surveys. Also, a bibliographic review of geostandards and geoanalysis has been published by Valladon.127 A wide-ranging statistical evaluation of analytical methods, including XRF, for the determination of REE in geological reference materials was carried out by Verma et al.128 It was noted that XRF is not recommended for this type of application without a preconcentration step prior to analysis.The results of a new international proficiency-testing programme for microprobe laboratories engaged in silicate analysis were published by Potts et al.129 The sample used for the study was TB-1, a basaltic glass fused and prepared by the USGS. Thirty-nine laboratories contributed to the programme, mostly using EPMA for the determination of major elements and LA-ICP-MS for traces. Assigned values were derived from the median results of nine laboratories that analysed the powdered bulk materials by conventional XRF, ICP-MS and INAA techniques. A comparison of the results obtained by the bulk and microprobe techniques for the analysis of this basaltic glass showed good agreement, and significant bias was only obtained for the determination of magnesium oxide.Hettipathirana and colleagues292 studied analytical errors in XRF arising from loss of weight on sample fusion (e.g., from volatilisation of C, N and O compounds) prior to the XRF analysis of limestone. They reported that this effect could be eliminated using a special matrix correction procedure known as “loss eliminated alphas” or LEAs. In this procedure, samples were analysed as received and the difference between 100% and the measured sum of the elemental oxides yielded the loss on fusion. The LEAs were dependent on the nominal weight of sample and flux specified and the effect of using weights other than nominal were corrected by use of a proportionality factor. It was reported that the procedure could be applied to the analysis of limestone where losses on fusion are as high as 40–45%. Good agreement was obtained between results achieved using the procedure and certified values for the analysis of NIST SRM 1c argillaceous limestone. Borkhodoev130 studied the accuracy of the fundamental parameter (FP) method for the XRF analysis of rocks. In order to improve the model of characteristic X-radiation, the significance of photoelectrons and the effects of divergence of primary beam radiation were assessed. Fundamental parameters uncertainties were investigated and equations were derived to calculate the mean electron energy and spectrum intensity of tube radiation. A numerical integration algorithm was optimised by wavelength, taking into account the effect of tube Bremsstrahlung radiation. A programme was then developed to calculate characteristic element line intensities and composition for use in the study of rock samples. Savichev and Sorokin131 described an EDXRF procedure for the analysis of soils and rocks using a simplified FP approach. The method involved a calibration based on correction of observed line intensity only for sample absorption. The best accuracy was achieved for major element oxides when K was used as a reference element. Elsewhere, Revenko293 assessed the efficacy of absorption-enhancement correction procedures in the XRF analysis of rocks, soils and sediments. A new approach was developed and applied in the determination of nineteen trace elements in reference samples: SKD-1 (quartz diorite), SSv-1(sviatonossite), BIL-1 and BIL-2 (Baikal sediments), yielding good agreement with certificate values in most cases. The method was used in the analysis of 1500 carbonate sediment samples from the Siberian Platform Foldbelt and was found to overcome a number of problems arising in XRF determinations in this type of matrix.An analytical scheme for the estimation of trace elements in soils by EDXRF was reported by Saini and colleagues.132 Fifteen elements of interest were classified into two groups: medium Z elements (Co, Cr, Cu, Ga, Ni, V and Zn) and the rest (Nb, Pb, Rb, Sr, Th, U, Y and Zr). Operating, excitation and detection conditions were optimised for each group and these were then applied to the analysis of well-characterised soil and sediment reference samples. The accuracy and precision of the approach was assessed and it was claimed that the scheme was useful for the analysis of a large number of samples. Custo et al.133 published a procedure for the non-destructive analysis of soils by WDXRF. The approach was applied to the multi-element characterisation of major and minor constituents of certified soil reference materials and satisfactory agreement was obtained with certificate values. The data thus produced were used in a model of Argentine soil classification employing chemometric analysis. The speciation of elements in soil samples was the subject of an investigation by Baranowski, Rybak and Baranowska.134 A five-step extraction procedure was applied to CRM S-1 prior to analysis by WDXRF. Results obtained from the direct analysis of sediments were also reported.The quantitative multi-element analysis of titaniferous magnetites was investigated using PIXE and EDXRF in an investigation by Nayak et al.135 Iron mineral phase characterisation and the determination of Fe2+
∶ Fe3+ ratio was also carried out using Mössbauer spectroscopy. The concentrations of nineteen minor and trace elements were quantified using EDXRF and 18 elements were determined by PIXE. The results obtained were used in interpreting the physicochemical conditions of the source depositional basin in the Central Indian Ocean. A multi-technique approach to the characterisation of zircon from Mediterranean beach black sands was described by Helal and colleagues.136 Laser-ablation ICP-MS, Rutherford back-scattering spectroscopy and EDXRF were used to determine the trace element content of the separated zircon grains. It was concluded that while the EDXRF method could be carried out directly without sample preparation, the precision and accuracy achieved was inferior to that obtained by the sample-fusion based LA-ICP-MS method.9.3 EnvironmentalX-ray analysis continues to feature extensively in analytical techniques used to study the repercussions of human activity on our planet. Developments in spectrometer design have provided investigators with a more powerful tool for multi-element analysis with improved resolution and lower limits of detection.The consequences of industrial activity were monitored in a risk assessment of roads covered over a period of 50 years with slags from the Belgian non-ferrous industry.137 Heavy metals in ambient air were collected on membrane filters and analysed using calibration curves set up with laboratory generated reference samples. Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) confirmed that both reference samples and dust filters with concentration levels below 3.3 µg cm−2 were homogeneously distributed. However, filters loaded with total suspended particles (TSP) reflected an inhomogeneous distribution of the analysed element on the filter. Whilst the TSP fraction is less inhalable, it can contain harmful species and be deposited on surrounding soil and vegetation. Workers in Finland138 also reported non-uniform distribution of heavy metals in the TSP collected on glass fibre filters using a high-volume sampler in the vicinity of an opencast chrome mine. A study of airborne respirable silica near a sand and gravel facility in central California139 added to knowledge concerning the transport of airborne quartz from source to receptor, thereby helping to distinguish anthropogenically generated quartz from the natural background in a receptor sample. Sasaki et al.140 used a combination of XRF and XRD to study the vertical distribution and mobility of heavy metals and other elements in sediment core samples from landfill of abandoned mine tailings. Heavy metals were characterised from soils, sediments and solid wastes around a major crude-oil production terminal in the Niger Delta in Nigeria.141 Fourteen elements—Ba, Br, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, Pb, Rb, Sr, Ti, Zn and Zr—were detected and their concentrations and enrichment factors determined. The study confirmed the need for close monitoring of waste disposal in order to minimise environmental pollution. Work by Yan et al.142 helped to develop methods for the control and possible elimination of agglomeration problems in a fluidised multi-waste incinerator. Camerani et al.143 reported Cd speciation in biomass fly ash particles after size separation using a centrifugal Splitt fractional cell. A readily leachable fraction was found only in municipal solid waste fly ash. Workers in Budapest144 investigated adsorbed Hg distribution in silver coated filters using micro-XRF, TXRF and conventional XRF. They concluded that the TXRF method was accurate to within ±10% when counting statistics were not the limiting factor. Electric arc furnace steel slags145 were found to have a high affinity for P in an investigation into the suitability of slag material as a medium for long-term P removal in constructed wetland systems.WDXRF and AAS techniques were used by Oluyemi and Asubiojo146 to produce elemental concentrations for factor analysis enabling source profiling and chemical mass balance modelling of ambient air particulates in Lagos, Nigeria. A study in California's San Joaquin Valley147 identified six types of geological dusts that contributed to the PM10 source profiles for 40 elements. The XRF analysis resulted in the detection of alkali and rare earth elements. Ba, Ga, Sn and Zr were found in some paved road dust profiles; toxic species such as As, Cd, Mo, Sb and U were found in salt deposits from canal drainage and Pd, Rb, Sr and Tl were found in construction dust. Soil in Hong Kong is considered important for profiling air pollution and the assessment of Asian dust storms. 19 elements were analysed by EDXRF148 to characterise soils in the city and rural areas.The growth in use of EDXRF systems in place of WDXRF continues with ED spectrometers being the configuration of choice for environmental studies of particulate matter in urban areas. Many studies now demonstrate the usefulness of separating atmospheric PM into fine and coarse components and their association with mass. Readers new to this technique would benefit from reading the work of Wilson et al.149 who provided a background on size distribution and properties of PM relevant to the differences between fine and coarse particles. Decisions on how to collect, separate and measure PM were discussed, also problems that may be encountered in collecting semi-volatile PM and weighing atmospheric PM collected on filters were described. Time spent in reading these practical hints and tips may save many hours of sampling and work in the laboratory. Claiborn et al.150 examined the associations between ambient particulates and respiratory problems amongst residents in Spokane, Washington. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to examine the influence of sources on the daily variability of chemical composition in particulate samples. The EDXRF analysis revealed a statistically significant association between hospital emergency visits for asthma and increased combustion products, air stagnation and fine Zn particulates. A Swedish study151 used EDXRF to measure roadside fine and ultra-fine particles at a four-lane, straight road in Goteborg. With a traffic intensity of almost 20000 cars per workday and 13000 vehicles per day at weekends, the use of <10 µg g−1 S fuel showed that diesel engines passing the site contributed less to particulate emissions than in earlier studies. Airborne particulate samples collected from various reference sites in Hong Kong152 were analysed for 19 elements in a PCA study which showed vehicular emissions to be the main air pollutant. Profiles of street dust in the city153 revealed 23 elements associated with various levels of traffic and pedestrian flow. Ho et al.154 extended their analyses of paved road dust and soil with additional information from ion chromatography for water soluble chloride, nitrate and sulfate; AAS for water soluble K and Na; automated colorimetric analysis for ammonia and thermal/optical reflectance analysis for carbon. A comparison of black carbon, mass and EDXRF analyses of airborne particles between a typical industrialised city in Sweden and a rural village in Botswana155 showed that absorption of sunlight by sub-micrometre particles was an important factor in climate modelling. Factors influencing mass concentration and chemical composition of fine aerosols during a high pollution episode were studied in Milan and Erba in Northern Italy.156 Daily variability in mass concentration values and the PM2.5 ∶ PM10 ratio appeared to be strongly dependent upon meteorological and atmospheric stability conditions and, in particular, wind regimes. A similar conclusion was reported by Janhall et al.157 from EDXRF measurements on samples from a vertical distribution at Gustavii cathedral in Goteborg, Sweden. XRF was used to confirm laser ablation/ionisation mass spectrometry of PM from an on-line characterisation study in urban Toronto.158The measurement of lead pollution continues to feature in the literature,159 with post-abatement levels of atmospheric Br and Pb in urban and rural Germany not exceeding concentrations in background aerosols sampled at a Baltic Sea coastal site by more than a factor of 3. Vehicular traffic emissions were found to be no longer predominant. A study of PM2.5 ∶ PM10 concentrations in ground level ambient air160 confirmed that the transition to unleaded fuel was reflected in negligible concentrations of Br and Pb. However, environmental Pb contamination is still a concern, as shown in a study by Gasana and Chamorro161 of measurements in urban Miami. 121 homes were inspected with representative samples collected from floors, window wells, tap water, soil and air. Pb in paint was identified by in situ PXRF analysis. More than half the houses exhibited unacceptably high levels of lead in dust and soil in areas where children live and play. EDXRF was used to determine concentrations of elements in aerosol samples collected in the workplace of a secondary lead smelter in Nigeria.162 Pb levels between 2.98 and 538 µg m−3 were found; the high Pb concentration being a danger signal to the health of the factory workers. Seven other elements were also identified: Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ti and Zn. Shotyk et al.163 examined a peat core collected at an ombrotrophic bog in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland for organolead species using GC-MIP-AES, Pb isotopes using TIMS and total Pb using XRF. The earliest occurrence of quantifiable alkyllead was found at a depth of 24 cm, which was dated at AD1946 ± 3. This is consistent with the introduction of leaded gasoline in Switzerland in 1947.The combined might of ion chromatography, nuclear and spectrochemical techniques were used for the elemental determination of trace and major elements in seaside aerosols on the Western Black Sea coast of Turkey.164 A German team165 sampled aerosol particles in the size range 0.1–25 µm, which were characterised using TXRF, SEM with EDXRF and also TEM with EDXRF and electron diffraction. Some 15500 particles were classified into 10 different groups: ammonium sulfates, calcium sulfates, sea salt, metal oxides/hydroxides, carbonates, silicates, soot, biological particles, carbon/sulfate mixed particles and carbon rich particles. Size distribution and refractive index of the total aerosol were calculated and found to be in good agreement with the results of photometer measurements of dried filter samples.Interest continues in the mechanism for the sequestration of trace metals in soils at the molecular scale. Such information is useful in developing a scientific basis for maintaining soil quality and formulating effective remediation strategies. Speciation of Ni and Zn in ferromanganese nodules from loess soils of the Mississippi Basin166 was linked to the observed enrichment of Ni in oceanic manganese nodules. A study of the As content of different paddy soils in Bangladesh167 during the period 1967–1995 was used as a pollution indicator. Radioactivity and heavy metal composition were evaluated in Nigerian phosphate rocks in an evaluation of the possible use of these rocks as fertilizer.168 A team in Argentina294 developed a WDXRF method for the determination of traces of Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni and Zn in the vegetable endive to assess the potential use of sewage sludge as an agricultural fertilizer. Anjos et al.169 used EDXRF for the analysis of soil and radish samples from areas treated with organic compost of recycled waste.Publications during this review period reflect various multi-disciplinary approaches adopted for investigations into the sensitivity of biomonitors in the evaluation of soil, air and coastal water pollution. A Canadian study170 of metal bioavailability used two disciplines; XRF mapping at the micrometre scale to examine metal distribution within the roots and rhizosphere of poplar trees and XANES for the effects of earthworms' digestion on metal coordination. It was concluded that soil biota were a better monitor of health risks associated with soil than bulk analysis. Bjelland and Thorseth171 used HPLC, SEM, XRD and XRF to study the colonisation and biodegradation of four lichen species on sandstones. The information was used in the increasingly popular principal component analysis to assist in the understanding of weathering effects. Two papers by Senhou et al.172,173 used 14 MeV-NAA, K(0)-NAA and EDXRF to compare lichens, mosses and tree barks as biomonitors in air pollution studies. Three lichen species exposed on substratum-free supports were assessed by Cercasov et al.174 in a trace element air monitoring study using INAA and EDXRF. Levels of Br, Cu, Fe, Pb, Sr and Zn in the edible parts of mussels were measured using XRF and the distribution of Pb210 and Po210 activities measured by radiometric methods in a Turkish study175 of toxic elements in the coastal waters of Western Anatolia.Atmospheric, domestic and industrial wastewaters contain a variety of dissolved or suspended inorganic and organic impurities. Eksperiandova et al.176 proposed an XRF method for their analysis to assist in quality control of waters prior to drainage into reservoirs and purification plants. The method overcame many problems familiar to analysts performing direct XRF analysis on solutions, namely: the limitation to those characteristic emission lines that can penetrate the chosen support film of a specimen cell; the inability to analyse under vacuum; bubble release and heating of the solution during analysis. Methods of specimen preparation based on agar quasi-solids, organo-gels, thin polymer films or glassy saccharose were proposed for the determination of Ag, As, Bi, Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ga, Ni, Pb, Se and Zn impurities. A Mexican study177 used ICP and XRF to monitor heavy metals in waste water sludge from a solid waste incinerator. The efficiency and mechanisms of As removal from contaminated water were monitored by a group in Thailand178 working with a laboratory scale electro-chemical precipitation process to reduce As to within the WHO drinking water standard of 0.01 mg l−1 in 20 min. Analysis of riverbank sediment179 offered a new approach by merging elemental concentrations obtained by XRF with the abundance of particle classes from single particle EPMA into one data set for principal component analysis. Surface sediments were analysed to detect anthropogenic influences in a semi-enclosed marine area in Greece,180 whereas a team in Brazil181 studied bottom sediment from the catchment areas of 13 stations of water treatment of river basins through identification of the mineralogical matrix and its correlation with potential bioavailable metal concentrations.The mineral particle content of snow at Summit in Greenland182 deposited from 1987 to 1991 was found to exhibit very large seasonal variations. XRF and TEM were used to obtain a chemical profile of the snow pit. The mineralogy indicated a high contribution of an Asian source linked to changes in atmospheric parameters. A study of solid sediments in snow was also carried out by Belozerova et al.295 to provide indicators of environmental pollution.Otherenvironmental applications included a report by Stipp et al.183 on the effectiveness of waste treatment strategies using iron compounds. XRF was also one technique used by Bozzano et al.184 to monitor the effects of climate and seasonal temperature contrasts that amplify atmospheric turbulence and stimulate storminess. An overview of XRF analysis in the Russian State Agrochemical Service185 gave an insight into instrumentation and methods used in the former USSR compared with more recent success in soil analysis with PXRF instruments. Gerbish and Bayarmaa296 offered their experiences of development and application of EDXRF systems with different excitation modes for the analysis of environmental samples in Mongolia.9.4 Archeological and forensicThe use of elemental composition information to establish the provenance of archeological artefacts is becoming increasingly common. In this regard, Constantinescu and co-workers186 utilised XRF and PIXE in provenance studies of Neolithic tools from Transsylvania. Two dimensional scatter plots of Ti/Mn versus Rb/Zr and Ba/Ce versus Y/Zr were used to establish source indicator metrics. The majority of the prehistoric tools examined on this basis were found to have originated from either the Hungarian or the Slovakian Tokaj mountains. Wu et al.187 utilised XRF in the non-destructive determination of major and trace element constituents of ancient Chinese porcelain. Samples were investigated using an ED Si(Li) detector fitted with a 12 µm beryllium window. A collimator was used to mask selectively smaller flat regions for analysis in order to reduce errors caused by surface irregularities. The sample to detector distance was 45 mm. Calibration was achieved using a set of pelleted standard samples containing 19 elements. A measurement time of 600 s was used for all samples. The results from the examination of 47 specimens of Yue ware were subjected to multivariate statistical analysis and it was found that the compositional patterns identified were different for different production sites. In particular, a small number of key element concentrations could be used to identify specimens of verdant celadon known as Mi Se (mysterious colour) ware. LaBrecque and co-workers in Caracas297 investigated majolica ceramics assigned to the Puebla provenance using XRF. A 109Cd radioisotope source was employed for the excitation in the non-destructive determination of Rb, Sr and Zr in samples of these ceramics. Principal component analysis was used to interrogate the resulting analytical data. It was reported that this combined approach could only separate samples in one out of four groups. However, when the data from thermoluminescence studies were also combined in the statistical analysis, the XRF data could be used to confirm and separate the samples of the four groups and this suggested that the clay and/or temper materials from the four groups were different. Although the above examples indicate the potential of XRF when combined with multi-element statistical discrimination procedures for provenance investigations, care must be taken to ensure that the results are valid. The outcome of an interlaboratory calibration study for analytical techniques (XRF, NAA, ICP-OES, ICP-MS) applied to archaeological provenance studies of ceramics may be of interest in this context.188 The application of PIXE, SEM-EDX, XRF and XRD to the non-destructive characterisation of a burial object from an archeological excavation may also be of some interest.189The elemental composition of ancient artefacts may also be used to estimate the age of objects. For example, Broll and Frezouls190 referred to a methodology for the characterization of pigment in paint that allowed the century of the painting of a work of art to be established. Ramos et al.191 dated ceramic tiles by analysis of the enamels using XRF, AAS and SEM-EDX. In this investigation, XRF was used to identify the oxides responsible for the different colours and the pigments used over large areas of the tiles (white and green) and to study homogeneity of application. The state of conservation was established, including the degree of efflorescence, allowing estimates to be made of the date of the materials.Energy dispersive XRF was also used in support of conservation and restoration of works of art from Spain by Ferrero et al..298 A portable instrument employing an X-ray tube for excitation and a non-cryogenic Si(PIN) detector was used to perform non-destructive elemental analysis of the stone, pigments and preparation layer of a polychrome sculpture from the Iberian period, and of a mural painting from the 14th/15th century. The examination of a partially burnt mediaeval altarpiece permitted the composition of pigments from the damaged and non-damaged areas to be established. A systematic study of the EDXRF analysis of canvas pigments from the work of Joaquin Sorolla was carried out with the objective of establishing a database of pictoral materials. Samples of archaeological shoe leather from a waterlogged 13th century site in North Yorkshire, UK, were subjected to XRF analysis and cross-sectional EDX mapping. Clustering and segregation of Ca, Fe and S was found to be correlated with the type of shoe part, particularly uppers and soles. Mineralisation effects in samples of modern leather that has been subject to storage in soil from the same type were also investigated as a precursor to work on reduced mineral species of relevance in conservation work.299X-ray fluorescence is widely used for the analysis of metals, and its application to the characterisation of silver and copper coins is a logical extension of this capability. Thus, Sandor et al.192 described the use of a ring shaped iodine isotopic source excited EDXRF system for the determination of these elements in ancient coins. Strategies for the elimination of matrix effects and other bias resulting from variations in sample geometry were investigated. Certified reference materials of alloys were used to ensure the accuracy of the approach and the results obtained compared with prompt gamma activation analysis. An XRF method based on an α-correction procedure was described for the determination of the main components of gold–silver–copper containing jewellery by Fesenko and Milovzorov.300 The error of the method matched the requirements for the criminal study of gold jewellery!9.5 IndustrialIndustrial applications of XRF continue to be described in a high percentage of the abstracts received in the year under review, and the key advances in technique are highlighted here. Interested readers should also refer to the companion ASU review “Industrial analysis: metals chemicals and advanced materials” by Fisher et al.193The structural impact of deep heat treatment of solar cells was studied by XRF by Heske and co-workers.194 Soft X-ray analysis was used to investigate ZnO/CuIn (S, Se)
(2) and ZnO/CdS/CuIn (S, Se) interfaces within the cells. A comparison of S K-line spectra obtained from pristine and deep heated samples revealed the formation of sulfate at these interfaces for the treated samples. By studying the signal intensity as a function of zinc oxide film thickness, it was found that sulfur diffused into the film bulk leading to the formation of zinc sulfate in the window layer of heat treated Cu(In, Ga)
(S,Se)
(2)–based solar cells.A Bremsstrahlung-induced probe system was devised for the non-destructive XRF analysis of materials, as described by Selim et al.195 An electron beam from a 6 MeV pulsed source operated at energies below the neutron emission threshold was used in a high penetration mode to create positrons via pair production inside the analyte material. These positrons annihilated in situ, emitting 511 keV gamma radiation and inducing X-ray fluorescence. The system was applied to the detection of heavy metals and to probe defects in material samples by means of ED detection. In a related vein, hard X-rays produced from a laser-produced plasma were utilised for the elemental analysis of steels.196 A femtosecond krypton fluoride laser pulse was used to generate the plasma and the emitted X-rays were detected using a single photon counting X-ray detector fitted with a multi-channel analyser. The Kα lines observed in the X-ray emission spectrum were used for the calibration of Fe response. It was noted that a continuum band overlapped the sharp Kα lines in the spectrum, making the assignment of weak lines arising from minor elements difficult. This effect was overcome by employing a pre-pulse technique that shifted the continuum band to lower energies, thus allowing improved observation of characteristic K lines.Sieber and co-workers from NIST197 published information concerning the certification of reference materials for cements. These materials are widely used to support the implementation of ASTM C 114-00 Standard Test Methods for Chemical Analysis of Hydraulic Cement. This paper described the procedures for the preparation and testing of new candidate reference materials including homogeneity testing, the XRF methodology and the statistical data analysis that allowed the assignment of composition values. X-ray fluorescence was also used as one of a number of techniques for the characterization of frit reference materials by Gazulla et al.198 The purpose of the work was to calibrate and validate working methods for frits used on an industrial scale. Seventeen elements (including Al, B, Ba, Ca, Fe, Hf , K, Li, Mg, N, Na, Pb, Si, Ti, and Zn) were determined in the frits using XRF, ICP-OES, AAS and titrimetry.The control of chemical composition of raw materials is an important factor in the quality of production of glass and ceramic products. An XRF method was described by Falcone et al.199 for the analysis of silicate and carbonate raw materials. A glass bead was prepared by melting the ignited sample with a lithium metaborate flux, and the study examined the influence of sample preparation, sample-to-flux ratio, the reproducibility of the fusion process and stability of the resulting beads on the analytical performance of the method. It was reported that the method was sufficiently flexible to allow the generation of a set of regression curves covering concentration ranges from trace to major component levels in a single programme, and achieved valid results. A study investigating the relationship between elemental composition and properties of lignocellosic briquettes and related ashes was published by Miguez and colleagues.200 Wavelength dispersive XRF was used to determine major (Ca, K, P, Si) and minor (Fe, Mg, Mn, Na, Ti, Zn) components of samples, and relationships were developed with production parameters such as ash, volatile matter and superior heat value.Blassino and co-workers in Florida201 reported that XRF has significant potential for sorting chromated copper arsenate treated wood from other types of waste. In a pilot scale evaluation in both laboratory and field settings, the XRF approach was found to be superior to a chemical stain method. The XRF method was able to distinguish treated and untreated wood (as As) in less than 2 s per sample. A detection limit in the range 3–5% of the additive was reported. The development of the application to on-line sorting was considered feasible.The quality control of commercial products was investigated using XRF by Salvador et al.,202 whose interest lay in the analysis of tea. Samples were excited using a molybdenum X-ray tube operated at 25 kV and 10 mA with a zirconium filter and the X-rays generated from the sample were detected without dispersion by a Si(Li) detector coupled to a multi-channel analyser. The concentration of Co, Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn were estimated in five kinds of commercial tea from six commercial suppliers. Titanium was also detected in some samples. Elemental compositions derived from this investigation were used in the fingerprinting and quality control of commercial products. A preconcentration method for the XRF determination of trace elements in commercial rum was published by Almeida et al.203 The rum samples from Brazil, were preconcentrated using APDC in order to determine Cu, Fe and Zn. The effect of sucrose was also studied using a 40% m/v multi-element standard solution in ethanol. The LODs reported for the metals were in the ng ml−1 range.Energy dispersive XRF was used by Bhat204 as an ore prospecting tool for the identification of commercially exploitable sources of Ga. Optimum efficiency was achieved using mono-energetic X-rays from a molybdenum tube. The gallium content of bauxite ore samples were determined using a FP method. It was observed that the Ga content of bauxites was strongly correlated with depth and this was attributed to sample weathering. A method for the determination of the quartz composition of bauxite by a combination of XRF and XRD may be of interest in this context.205 Ruiz et al.206 published a method for the determination of Fe, Mn, Nb and Ta in ores and related materials from ore pressure acid leaching. Samples were pelletted and examined by XRF. Results obtained were statistically acceptable when compared with those from a reference method.Schramm207 reported an improved XRF method that utilised polarised X-ray excitation for the determination of trace elements in lubricants. It was found that the reduction of spectrum background that resulted gave rise to an improvement in LODs by up to a factor of 10 in comparison with the conventional XRF approach. As a result, LODs (3σ) for Cl and S were reported as 1 µg ml−1. It was reported that all elements from Mg to U could be determined simultaneously in lubricating oils, and that a screening approach could be adopted for the quantitative analysis of waste or used oils with an unknown water content. It is well known that methods for the determination of wear metals in lubricating oil may suffer from bias due to variability in particle size in samples. An approach that was claimed to overcome this problem was reported by Yang, Hou and Jones.208 A small aliquot of sample was deposited onto a C18 solid phase extraction disk and dried. The disk was then analysed directly by EDXRF. It was reported that because the protocol adopted provided a homogeneous and reproducible sample surface to the instrument, the effects of uneven particle size distribution and sedimentation could be avoided and improved accuracy and reproducibility could be achieved. A further advantage of the approach was that the disks thus prepared could also be stored and re-analysed or extracted at a later date. Calibration curves constructed from measurements on the disks were stable for at least two months. Detection limits for Cr, Cu, Fe, Pb and Zn were reported in the range 1–4 µg g−1 and recoveries were given in the range 92–110% for these elements. The application of the method to the analysis of two reference materials yielded results that were consistent with those obtained by ICP-OES.Glass, when surface treated with silver compounds and an aluminosilicate and exposed to elevated temperatures, may be coloured using appropriate agents. The process for the manufacture of coloured silver stained glass was investigated using XRF by Jembrih-Simburger and co-workers.209 Samples of soda glass modified with a variety of silver compounds (oxide, sulfate, nitrate, phosphate) were fired at around 600 °C and analysed by EDXRF, PIXE and electron microscopy. The XRF results indicated that the lowest amount of Ag on the glass could be detected when the chloride or oxide forms were used, and that a low kiln temperature (563 °C) correlated with a higher silver concentration at the surface and a lower degree of penetration into the bulk material. The diffusion profiles for Ag in soda-lime–silica glass were determined using non-destructive XRF by Bos and colleagues at Twente University.210 For penetration times between 300 and 3600 s at a temperature of 633 K the diffusion coefficient was reported as ranging between 1.1 × 10−10 and 1.6 × 10−10 cm2 s−1.One of the major limitations of XRF as a technique for inorganic analysis is that while it provides information on elemental composition, it is unable to provide, without prior separation, information on the chemical form of the species present. Kessler and co-workers at Darmstadt301 reported a method for the identification of chemical compounds by multivariate analysis of their X-ray fluorescence spectra. Additional information derived from the Compton and Rayleigh scattering spectrum regions were incorporated in a principal components approach to yield a discriminant analysis classification. The approach was developed to include the physical aspects of sample presentation such as position, grain size and thickness.Methods for the determination of the metal content of polymerisation catalysts were compared in an investigation by Bichinho et al.211 The techniques used were XRF, Rutherford backscattering spectrometry and X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS). Catalysts were prepared by grafting metallocene onto bare silica or onto silica chemically modified with methylalumionane. Catalysts were compressed as self-supporting pellets for examination by XRF and RBS. It was reported that RBS was unable to resolve signals corresponding to Nb and Zr, or Al and Si, whereas a completely resolved spectrum was obtained by XRF. Good agreement was achieved between the two techniques for the determination of Zr in the catalysts.9.6 Clinical and biologicalThe companion ASU review on Clinical and Biological Materials, Foods and Beverages212 highlighted the growth of interest in the use of XRF for in vivobone Pb measurements. Developments in this area of research have continued since that review was published and applications include studies of the relationship between blood and bone Pb levels,213–216 the effect of bone Pb levels in pregnancy,217–221 bone Pb levels in delinquents222 and occupational exposure to Pb.223,224 Few of these abstracts report significant development in technique but focus instead on novel applications of existing technology. A noteable exception to this trend was in the research published by Todd and co-workers,225 who continued to assess accuracy and precision of in vivo XRF measurements of Pb in bone. In this commendably realistic study, the results of L-shell XRF (LXRF) measurements of Pb in cadaver bones were compared directly with an ETAAS method based on acid digestion of the samples. The Pb content was estimated for intact legs and for dissected tibia following removal of overlying tissue. The proximal–distal variability of the core and surface tibia Pb were considered in the study. It was shown that there was no clear proximal–distal variability in the LXRF measured concentrations and that the variability in actual tibia Pb levels was far less than the XRF measurement uncertainty. It was reported that measurement uncertainty was dominated by counting statistics and exceeded the estimate of Pb concentration in most cases. The agreement between LXRF and AAS was reasonably good for bare bones, but poor for intact leg measurements. Disconcertingly, given the increasing use of the technique referred to above, it was concluded that the variability of the LXRF measurements was large enough for both bare bone and intact leg samples to yield grave concerns about the analytical use of the technique in vivo. Pejovic-Milic et al.226 applied ultrasound measurement of overlying tissue in an attempt to compensate XRF signal attenuation in the quantification of elements such as Sr in human bone. It was indicated that there was a significant linear correlation between the subject's body mass index and overlying tissue at the finger and heel bone, and that this might be a criterion for performing XRF measurements.Other clinical applications of XRF spectrometry including the determination of the spatial distribution of trace elements of emboli (clots) in the vascular system were reported by Ates and Ertugrul.227 Radioisotope sources (241Am and 55Fe) were used for the excitation of samples and a Si(Li) detector to detect the characteristic Kα lines. An investigation of cave therapy for the treatment of asthma using XRF and EPMA may be of some interest.228 Aerosols collected in a therapeutic cave were analysed and classified according to chemical composition and morphology. Aluminosilicate, calcium carbonate and quartz particle classes were identified. Lung deposition modeling indicated that about 41% of the particles would be deposited in the lung. Of this, approximately 39% would be deposited in areas usually most affected in an asthmatic lung, potentially explaining the healing effects observed.Finally, the characterization of elemental composition of plants continues to be a subject of research using XRF. In particular, the effect of ageing of reference standards for the determination of Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, S and Si in plants by Gunicheva and Cuparina302 may be of particular interest. The study drew on 7 years of archive data, and a means of reducing the ageing effect was proposed. Other applications of XRF to the analysis of plant materials reported during the year under review included: the effect of Cd on cation concentration in sycamore cells,229 the composition of trace and essential elements in Nigerian medicinal plants,230 preconcentration and determination of trace Cr in medicinal herbs231 and the elemental analysis of tobacco and related ash.2329.7 Thin filmsXRF continues to contribute to the development and understanding of thin films in both research and commercial production endeavours. Information on the chemical composition of layer(s) produced by a variety of deposition techniques feature in the literature under review. Mai et al.233 investigated the elemental distribution of Co, Mn and Ni in NiMn/Co and Co/NiMn interfaces of ultra-thin NiMn/Co multilayers and that of Bi in Cu[NiFe/Bi/FeMn/Cu] multilayers using both RAFS and XRF methods. EDXRF investigations234 assisted, in a multi-disciplinary approach, studies of C60–Pd films formed by electro-reduction. Dejene and Alberts235 found large variations in elemental concentration with sample depth after selenisation of thermally evaporated InSe/Cu/GaSe precursors in a two stage process to grow Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films. Dakhel236 studied the effect of annealing temperature on Eu oxides films prepared by vacuum evaporation onto glass substrates. Workers in Japan237 also investigated post-annealed films of p-type layered oxysulfide thin films produced by rf sputtering. XRF and AAS were used in Russia238 to study the influence of complexing agents on ion exchange Ag in thin polycrystalline PbS films in order to develop a model of the sorption kinetics involved. Mathiyarasu et al.239 reported an understanding of the dissolution and passivation of 70/30 cupronickel alloy after studies using XRD, XPS and XRF. A team in South Korea240 overcame problems familiar to many readers where the element of interest is present in both the coating and the substrate. The difference in critical depth for Zn Kα and Zn Lα lines was used to separate the Fe contained in Zn coated steel from that in the substrate. WDXRF was used in Poland241 to determine the composition of nano-crystalline ferro-electric powders. Fluorescence yield near-edge spectroscopy (FYNES)242 was used to measure soft X-ray absorption in the 270–330 eV energy range to assist in polymer conversion measurements of diacetylene-containing thin films and monolayers. Lim et al.243 compared in situ and ex situ plasma treated metal-organic chemical vapour deposited TiN films using XPS and XRF. Fe and Ru ratios were determined244 in monolayers and Langmuir–Blodgett films of amphiphilic tetracyano Ru complexes. Marquez et al.245 reported atomic force microscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance and XRF studies of well ordered linear patterns of Mn oxides deposited on glass and quartz surfaces.Some thin films are characterised by thickness as well as composition. Ebel et al.246 measured the total electron yield of electrons emitted by X-ray excitation from layered AlxGa1 −
xAs–GaAs structures. An X-ray source with tuneable monochromator (10 eV steps) enabled a TEY jump to be observed as the photon energy was stepped across the absorption edges. The method was used to determine thin film thicknesses up to 100 nm. Workers in Turkey247 offered a method for the determination of coating thickness on a metallic substrate by measuring incoherent scattered radiation in an EDXRF system. Draxler et al.248 presented a method for the characterisation of ultra-thin Cr layers sputtered onto commercial PET films in an industrial web coater. Whilst low energy Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (LE-RBS) is a powerful tool for such investigations, it was not considered suitable for production control. A set of layers of different thickness was measured by LE-RBS for subsequent use as reference samples in XRF determinations on a routine basis.XRF is established in the semiconductor industry as a tool for the characterisation of elements implanted in Si. A multi-disciplinary approach249 was adopted for the certification of layers of Sb atoms implanted with an energy of 40 keV and a nominal dose of 5 × 1016 atoms cm−2 into a high purity Si wafer. The areal density (atoms cm−2) was determined by RBS, INAA, ICP-ID-MS and synchrotron XRF. Wang et al.250 reported results of Z-contrast imaging and X-ray microanalysis mapping of implanted As in Si using HAADF and EDXRF techniques in a TEM. Park and Ishiwara251 used XRF to measure the ratio of La to Al for LaAlO3 films on Si (100) substrates. The Pb content in PLZT films deposited at low temperatures were measured by XRF by Kikuchi et al.,252 whilst a team in South Korea253 used XRF to study the effects on PbTiO3 seeding layers for lowering the PZT crystallisation temperature. Growth and electrical characteristics of ZrTiO4 thin layers deposited on a p-type Si substrate were studied in India254 using XRD and EDXRF. Takahashi et al.255 demonstrated that XRF holography has potential for the evaluation of local atomic structure of 3 atomic layers thick, Ge film, on Si, demonstrating the variety of ways in which XRF continues to serve the semiconductor industry.9.8 Chemical state analysis and speciationA review by Kurmaev et al.303 of soft X-ray emission spectroscopy
(XES) for the study of electronic structure and chemical bonding of advanced materials gave an insight into the ways in which different materials, such as transition metal compounds, layered superconductors, conducting polymers, metal/polymer interfaces and ion implanted insulators, may be characterised. XES is free from sample charging effects, giving it an important advantage when studying semiconductors and insulators. Furthermore, fluorescence spectra provide high contrast and less radiation damage, making the technique attractive for workers interested in organic biomaterials. The authors also led a team256 to investigate local electronic structures of dopants in semiconductors. Galakhov304 used XES with electron excitation in a study of solid phase reactions in Si based interfaces. Si L2,3 emission spectra were shown to be sensitive to changes in the chemical states of materials and variation of the electron excitation energy provided the analysis of depth profiles. Magnetic effects on the resonant inelastic soft X-ray scattering in transition metal oxides were reported by Grebennikov.305 Cr structural positions in spinels were investigated by Vilissov et al.,306 where a combination of XES and results of cluster DV calculations provided an evaluation of the dependence between Cr site co-ordination and the structure of Cr 3d states in a contribution to the understanding of inverse spinels.X-ray intensity ratios from different compounds of an element are recognised as a means of characterisation in the fields of atomic and nuclear physics. They provide valuable data for comparison with theoretical values for speciation studies. Workers in Turkey307 used an Am241 source to study Kβ : Kα X-ray intensity ratios for Br and I compounds. Sakurai and Eba257 used ratios between Kβ lines of Mn for their speciation studies. A team at the Turkey Ataturk University reported three speciation studies258–260 using a secondary excitation method and a Si(Li) detector. Ratios of Lα/Lβ/Lγ fluorescent intensities were used by Salah261 in speciation studies for 12 rare earth elements.Other applications included high resolution X-ray spectroscopy of Cu, Cu2O and CuO262 to measure Cu Lα1,2 and Cu Lβ1 spectra and compare them with Cu 2p XPS spectra. Uda et al.263 reported a simulation to reproduce the fine structure of Fe Lα in PIXE induced XRF spectra to distinguish chemical species in a very small amount of aerosol. In a separate publication264 the Japanese team studied photo-excited F Kα satellite spectra of CaF2. A group in Germany308 studied different Al and Ti inclusions and precipitates in steel by investigating Al Kβ and Ti L lines to speciate carbides, nitrides, oxides and sulfides.10 ReferencesR. Van Grieken, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(4), 287 CrossRef CAS .R. Munk, Trends Anal. Chem., 2002, 21(8), XI .R. Dybczynski, Food Addit. Contam., 2002, 19(10), 928 CrossRef CAS .P. Hoffmann, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 193 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Romo-Kroger, L. Cornejo-Ponce, J. R. Morales, M. I. Dinator, M. J. Avila, V. H. Poblete, J. Galvez, A. Goldschmidt, A. Trier, J. Valdes, C. M. Rojas, M. E. Cantillano, R. Vera, R. Figueroa and M. Garcia, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 128 CrossRef .Z. F. Chai, X. Y. Mao, Z. H. Hu, Z. Y. Zhang, C. Y. Chen, W. Y. Feng, S. M. Hu and O. Y. Hong, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 372(3), 407 CrossRef CAS .D. Bonvin, R. Yellepeddi and G. Matula, J. Phys. IV, 2002, 12(PR6), 77 Search PubMed .I. A. Brytov and A. N. Mezhevich, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 195 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Rousseau, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 401 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Pavlinsky and A. Y. Portnoy, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 247 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Adams, M. F. DeCamp, E. M. Dufresne and D. A. Reis, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73(12), 4150 CrossRef CAS .M. Veldkamp, B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegaulf, G. Ulm, M. Frank, S. Friedrich and S. E. Labov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 487(3), 450 CrossRef CAS .T. Taino, K. Kikuchi, M. Nanme, H. Nakagawa, M. Aoyagi, H. Sato, H. Akoh, K. Maehata, K. Ishibashi, C. Otani, T. Ikeda, T. Oku, H. Kato, K. Kawai, H. Miyasaka, Y. Takizawa, H. Watanabe and H. M. Shimizu, Physica C, 2002, 372, 403 CrossRef .T. Ikeda, Y. Nakai, C. Otani, H. Sato, H. Oyama, Y. Kanai, Y. Takizawa, Y. Iwai, Y. Morishita, T. Oku, N. Oshima, H. Watanabe, H. Miyasaka, K. Kawai, H. Kato, H. M. Shimizu and Y. Yamazaki, Physica C, 2002, 372, 391 CrossRef .A. G. Karydas, C. Zarkadas, A. Kyriakis, J. Pantazis, A. Huber, R. Redus, C. Potiriadis and T. Paradellis, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 93 CrossRef CAS .A. Sokolov, V. Gostilo, A. Loupilov and V. Zalinkevich, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2002, 49(5), 2427 CrossRef CAS .G. Bertuccio and R. Casiraghi, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2003, 50(1), 175 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Puc, M. Budnar, M. Kavcic and P. Pelicon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 123 CrossRef CAS .T. L. Hopman and J. L. Campbell, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(5), 345 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Gruner, M. W. Tate and E. F. Eikenberry, Rev.
Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73(8), 2815 Search PubMed .K. Mathieson, M. S. Passmore, P. Seller, M. L. Prydderch, V. O'Shea, R. L. Bates, K. M. Smith and M. Rahman, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 487(1–2), 113 CrossRef CAS .T. Namba, Y. Inoue, S. Moriyama and M. Minowa, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 489(1–3), 224 CrossRef CAS .M. Tashiro, T. Kamae, K. Makishima, T. Takahashi, T. Murakami, Y. Fukazawa, M. Kokubun, K. Nakazawa, M. Nomachi, A. Yoshida, Y. Ezoe, N. Isobe, N. Iyomoto, J. Kataoka, J. Kotoku, M. Kouda, S. Kubo, A. Kubota, Y. Matsumoto, T. Mizuno, G. M. Madejski, Y. Okada, N. Ota, H. Ozawa, G. Sato, M. Sugiho, M. Sugizaki, I. Takahashi, H. Takahashi, T. Tamura, C. Tanihata, Y. Terada, Y. Uchiyama, S. Watanabe, K. Yamaoka and D. Yonetoku, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2002, 49(4), 1893 CrossRef CAS .T. Kamae, Y. Fukazawa, N. Isobe, M. Kokubun, A. Kubota, S. Osone, T. Takahashi, N. Tsuchida and H. Ishibashi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 490(3), 456 CrossRef CAS .N. Nelms, D. F. Anagnostopoulos, O. Ayranov, G. Borchert, J. P. Egger, D. Gotta, M. Hennebach, P. Indelicato, B. Leoni, Y. W. Liu, B. Manil, L. M. Simons and A. Wells, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 484(1–3), 419 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Desai, J. N. Joshi and A. M. Shaikh, Pramana-J. Phys., 2002, 59(4), 611 Search PubMed .T. Masuda, H. Sakurai, Y. Inoue, S. Gunji and K. Asamura, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2002, 49(2), 553 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Bateman, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 488(3), 610 CrossRef CAS .K. Hayashi, Y. Takahashi, E. Matsubara, S. Kishimoto, T. Mori and M. Tanaka, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 196(1–2), 180 CrossRef CAS .A. Carreras, R. Bonetto, G. Stutz, J. Trincavelli and G. Castellano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 173 CrossRef CAS .M. Van Gysel, P. Lemberge and P. Van Espen, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 139 CrossRef CAS .F. Schmidt, M. Bueno and R. J. Poppi, Quim. Nova, 2002, 25(6A), 949 Search PubMed .N. Nagata, M. Bueno and R. J. Poppi, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 224, 172 .V. Delgado, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(5), 353 CrossRef CAS .S. X. Bao, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(6), 616 RSC .O. Icelli and S. Erzeneoglu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(8), 1317 CrossRef .A. C. Mandal, D. Mitra, M. Sarkar and D. Bhattacharya, Phys. Rev. A, 2002, 66(4),  CrossRef CAS .D. V. Rao, T. Takeda, Y. Itai, T. Akatsuka, R. Cesareo, A. Brunetti and G. E. Gigante, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(3), 327 Search PubMed .R. Sitko and J. Jurczyk, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 113 CrossRef CAS .X. Llovet and G. Galan, Am. Miner., 2003, 88(1), 121 CAS .G. J. Price, A. N. Brunton, M. W. Beijersbergen, G. W. Fraser, M. Bavdaz, J. P. Boutot, R. Fairbend, S. O. Flyckt, A. Peacock and E. Tomaselli, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 490(1–2), 276 CrossRef CAS .L. I. Ognev, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 274 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kolmogorov and V. J. Trounova, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 432 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tawara, Y. Ogasaka, K. Tamura, K. Haga, T. Okajima, S. Ichimaru, S. Takahashi, A. Gotou, H. Kitou, S. Fukuda, Y. Tsusaka, H. Kunieida, J. Tueller, P. J. Serlemitsos, Y. Soong, K. W. Chan, S. M. Owens, B. Barber, E. Dereniak and E. E. Young, Sci. Balloon. Next Century: Goals Challenges, 2002, 30(5), 1313 Search PubMed .A. Longoni, C. Fiorini, C. Guazzoni, A. Gianoncelli, L. Struder, H. Soltau, P. Lechner, A. Bjeoumikhov, J. Schmalz, N. Langhoff and R. Wedell, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2002, 49(3), 1001 CrossRef CAS .K. Sakurai and H. Eba, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(2), 355 CrossRef CAS .K. Tsuji and F. Delalieux, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1405 RSC .M. Engi, A. K. Cheburkin and V. Koppel, Chem. Geol., 2002, 191(1–3), 225 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Scherrer, M. Engi, A. Berger, R. R. Parrish and A. Cheburkin, Chem. Geol., 2002, 191(1–3), 243 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Danesi, A. Markowicz, E. Chinea-Cano, W. Burkart, B. Salbu, D. Donohue, F. Ruedenauer, M. Hedberg, S. Vogt, P. Zahradnik and A. Ciurapinski, J. Environ. Radioact., 2003, 64(2–3), 143 CrossRef CAS .C. Merigoux, F. Briki, F. Sarrot-Reynauld, M. Salome, B. Fayard, J. Susini and J. Doucet, Biochim. Biophys. Acta-Gen. Subj., 2003, 1619(1), 53 Search PubMed .M. Bicchieri, S. Ronconi, F. P. Romano, L. Pappalardo, M. Corsi, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti and E. Tognoni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(7), 1235 CrossRef .Y. P. Sun, B. C. Chan, A. Ramnarayanan, W. M. Leventy, T. E. Mallouk, S. R. Bare and R. R. Willis, J. Comb. Chem., 2002, 4(6), 569 CrossRef CAS .V. E. Skurat, G. D. Tantsyrev, N. G. Beriozkina, A. V. Volkov, A. N. Jigatch, I. O. Leipunsky, P. A. Pshechenkov, P.
V. Samsonov, V. P. Toropov, S. A. Demidov, S. F. Naumov and S. P. Sokolova, High Perform. Polym., 2001, 13(4), 337 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Istratov, H. Hieslmair, O. F. Vyvenko, E. R. Weber and R. Schindler, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 72(1–4), 441 CrossRef CAS .R. Simon and A. N. Danilewsky, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 550 CrossRef CAS .R. Simon, G. Buth and M. Hagelstein, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 554 CrossRef CAS .A. Somogyi, M. Drakopoulos, B. Vekemans, L. Vincze, A. Simionovici and F. Adams, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 559 CrossRef CAS .P. Glatzel, L. Jacquamet, U. Bergmann, F. M. F. de Groot and S. P. Cramer, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41(12), 3121 CrossRef CAS .H. Ofuchi, M. Mizuguchi, K. Ono, M. Oshima, H. Akinaga and T. Manago, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 227 CrossRef CAS .H. Ofuchi, Y. Imaizumi, H. Sugawara, H. Fujioka, M. Oshima and Y. Takeda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 231 CrossRef CAS .K. Hayashi, Y. Takahashi and E. Matsubara, Mater. Trans., 2002, 43(7), 1464 Search PubMed .Y. Takahashi, K. Hayashi, E. Matsubara, T. Shima, K. Takanashi, T. Mori and M. Tanaka, Scr. Mater., 2003, 48(7), 975 CrossRef CAS .F. N. Chukhovskii, D. V. Novikov, T. Hiort and G. Materlik, Opt. Commun., 2002, 209(4–6), 273 CrossRef CAS .L. Kempenaers, K. Janssens, L. Vincze, B. Vekemans, A. Somogyi, M. Drakopoulos, A. Simionovici and F. Adams, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(19), 5017 CrossRef CAS .M. Zavarin and H. E. Doner, Geochem. Trans., 2002, 3, 51 RSC .R. C. Barroso, M. J. Anjos, R. T. Lopes, E. F. O. de Jesus, D. Braz, C. R. F. Castro and A. Uhl, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2002, 65(4–5), 501 CrossRef CAS .B. Vekemans, L. Vincze, A. Somogyi, M. Drakopoulos, L. Kempenaers, A. Simionovici and F. Adams, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 396 CrossRef CAS .C. Schnier, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 209 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Carvalho, J. P. Marques, J. Brito, C. Casaca and A. S. Cunha, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 196(1–2), 148 CrossRef CAS .K. Geraki, M. J. Farquharson and D. A. Bradley, Phys. Med. Biol., 2002, 47(13), 2327 CrossRef CAS .W. M. Kwiatek, T. Drewniak, M. Gajda, M. Galka, A. L. Hanson and T. Cichocki, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 2002, 16(3), 155 Search PubMed .R. Ishihara, A. Ide-Ektessabi, K. Ikeda, Y. Mizuno, S. Fujisawa, T. Takeuchi and T. Ohta, Neuroreport, 2002, 13(14), 1817 Search PubMed .S. Yoshida, A. Ide-Ektessabi and S. Fujisawa, Struct. Chem., 2003, 14(1), 85 CrossRef CAS .I. Nicolis, P. Dacher, F. Guyon, P. Chevallier, E. Curis and S. Benazeth, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(4), 565 Search PubMed .F. Zhang, N. Q. Liu, X. Q. Zhao, A. J. Zuo, L. Yang, Q. Xu, X. F. Wang, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and Z. F. Chai, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2002, 90(1–3), 227 Search PubMed .Z. Q. Xie, L. G. Sun, N. Y. Long, L. Zhang, S. X. Kang, Z. Q. Wu, Y. Y. Huang and X. Ju, Polar Biol., 2003, 26(3), 171 Search PubMed .H. Shen, Q. G. Ren, Y. Mi, X. F. Shi, H. Y. Yao, C. Z. Jin, Y. Y. Huang, W. He, J. Zhang and B. Liu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 506 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sha, P. Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Y. Huang and G. C. Li, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 107 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Cohen, R. Siegele, E. Stelcer, D. Garton, A. Stampfl, Z. Cai, P. Ilinski, W. Rodrigues, D. G. Legnini, W. Yun and B. Lai, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 100 CrossRef CAS .M. C. C. Pinzani, A. Somogyi, A. S. Simionovici, S. Ansell, B. M. Steenari and O. Lindqvist, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(14), 3165 CrossRef CAS .A. Manceau, N. Tamura, M. A. Marcus, A. A. MacDowell, R. S. Celestre, R. E. Sublett, G. Sposito and H. A. Padmore, Am. Miner., 2002, 87(10), 1494 CAS .R. Klockenkamper, A. von Bohlen, M. Radke, A. Knochel and L. Palmetshofer, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(5), 373 CrossRef CAS .C. Schmidt and K. Rickers, Am. Miner., 2003, 88(2–3), 288 CAS .J. P. Veiga and M. O. Figueiredo, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(4), 300 CrossRef CAS .N. Awaji, Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J., 2002, 38(1), 82 Search PubMed .M. K. Tiwari, B. Gowrishankar, V. K. Raghuvanshi, R. V. Nandedkar and K. J. S. Sawhney, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2002, 25(5), 435 Search PubMed .L. Bennun, E. D. Greaves and J. J. Blostein, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(4), 289 CrossRef CAS .K. Sakurai, H. Eba, K. Inoue and N. Yagi, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(17), 4532 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Simabuco, C. Vazquez, S. Boeykens and R. C. Barroso, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 167 CrossRef CAS .R. S. S. da Costa, M. D. T. do Carmo, C. Saunders, R. T. Lopes, E. F. O. de Jesus and S. M. Simabuco, J. Food Compos. Anal., 2002, 15(1), 27 CrossRef .S. Muratsu, T. Ninomiya, Y. Kagoshima and J. Matsui, J. Forensic Sci., 2002, 47(5), 944 Search PubMed .Y. Gohshi, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 33(4), 369 CrossRef CAS .R. Klockenkamper, H. W. Becker, H. Bubert, H. Jenett and A. von Bohlen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(10), 1593–1599 CrossRef .R. D. Perez, H. J. Sanchez and M. Rubio, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(4), 296 CrossRef CAS .B. Sures, S. Zimmermann, J. Messerschmidt and A. Von Bohlen, Ecotoxicology, 2002, 11(5), 385 CrossRef CAS .F. Alt, G. Weber, J. Messerschmidt, A. von Bohlen, B. Kastenholz and K. Guenther, Anal. Lett., 2002, 35(8), 1349 CrossRef CAS .R. Fernandez-Ruiz, M. Furio, F. C. Galisteo, C. Larese, M. L. Granados, R. Mariscal and J. L. G. Fierro, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(21), 5463 CrossRef CAS .A. Lasztity, A. Kelko-Levai, I. Varga, K. Zih-Perenyi and E. Bertalan, Microchem. J., 2002, 73(1–2), 59–63 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Boeykens, N. D. Temprano and C. Vazquez, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(2), 283 Search PubMed .C. Vazquez, S. Boeykens and H. Bonadeo, Talanta, 2002, 57(6), 1113 CrossRef CAS .A. Viksna, E. S. Lindgren, I. Kjellmer and J. Bursa, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(4), 553 Search PubMed .A. Varga, G. Zaray and F. Fodor, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2002, 89(1–2), 149 CrossRef CAS .S. Bruni, F. Cariati, L. Consolandi, A. Galli, V. Guglielmi, N. Ludwig and M. Milazzo, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56(7), 827 CAS .R. Redus, J. Pantazis, A. Huber and T. Pantazis, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2002, 49(6), 3247 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Feldman, J. Z. Wilcox, T. George, D. N. Barsic and A. Scherer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74(3), 1251 CrossRef CAS .V. Thomsen and D. Schatzlein, Spectroscopy, 2002, 17(7), 14 Search PubMed .V. B. E. Thomsen and D. Schatzlein, Adv. Mater. Process., 2002, 160(8), 41 Search PubMed .D. Wegrzynek, A. Markowicz and E. Chinea-Cano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 119 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Ferrero, C. Roldan, D. Juanes, E. Rollano and C. J. Morera, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 441 CrossRef CAS .S. Shimoyama, Y. Noda and N. Kuchitsu, Bunseki Kagaku, 2002, 51(11), 1045 CAS .T. Pantazis, Spectroscopy, 2003, 27 Search PubMed .C. Fiorini, A. Gianoncelli, A. Longoni, D. Comelli, C. D'Andrea and G. Valentini, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74(2), 1048 CrossRef CAS .G. Reames and L. L. Lance, J. Environ. Health, 2002, 64(8), 9 Search PubMed .M. Harper, T. S. Hallmark and A. A. Bartolucci, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(6), 1025 RSC .O. Nygren, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(5), 623 RSC .P. J. Potts, M. H. Ramsey and J. Carlisle, J. Environ.
Monit., 2002, 4(6), 1017 Search PubMed .P. Sarrazin, D. Blake, D. Bish, D. Vaniman, S. Chipera, S. A. Collins and S. T. Elliott, Planet. Space Sci., 2002, 50(14–15), 1361 CrossRef CAS .T. Okada, M. Kato, K. Shirai, Y. Yamamoto, T. Matsuda, H. Tsunemi and S. Kitamoto, Exploration of Small Solar System Objects: Past, Present and Future, 2002, 29(8), 1237 Search PubMed .K. Dennerl, Astronom. Astrophys., 2002, 394(3), 1119 Search PubMed .I. L. Eisgruber, B. Joshi, N. Gomez, J. Britt and T. Vincent, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 408(1–2), 64 CrossRef CAS .J. D'Angelo, E. Strasser, E. Marchevsky and E. Perino, Chem. Anal., 2002, 47(6), 913 Search PubMed .A. G. Coedo, T. Dorado, I. Padilla and F. J. J. Alguacil, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 424 CrossRef CAS .M. S. de Carvalho, M. D. F. Domingues, J. L. Mantovano and J. da Cunha, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 253 CrossRef CAS .V. P. Gordeeva, M. A. Statkus, N. M. Sorokina, G. I. Tsizin and Y. A. Zolotov, J. Anal. Chem., 2002, 57(8), 701 CrossRef CAS .I. Roelandts, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 101 .M. Valladon, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 313 .S. P. Verma, E. Santoyo and F. Velasco-Tapia, Int. Geol. Rev., 2002, 44(4), 287 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts, M. Thompson and S. Wilson, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 197 CrossRef CAS .V. Y. Borkhodoev, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 209 CrossRef CAS .A. T. Savichev and S. E. Sorokin, Eurasian Soil Sci., 2002, 35(12), 1282 Search PubMed .N. K. Saini, P. K. Mukherjee, M. S. Rathi, P. P. Khanna and K. K. Purohit, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(4), 539 Search PubMed .G. Custo, S. Boeykens, D. Cicerone and C. Vazquez, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 132 CrossRef CAS .R. Baranowski, A. Rybak and I. Baranowska, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2002, 11(5), 473 Search PubMed .P. K. Nayak, D. Das, S. N. Chintalapudi, P. Singh, S. Acharya, V. Vijayan and V. Chakravorty, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(2), 351 CrossRef CAS .A. I. Helal, N. F. Zahran, R. A. Mohamed, H. T. Mohsen, J. S. Becker, A. P. Kobzev and A. H. Hashad, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 221(2), 139 CrossRef CAS .G. Vanhoof, H. Chen, P. Berghmans, V. Corthouts, N. De Brucker and K. Tirez, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 129 CrossRef .R. Poykio, P. Peramaki and H. Ronkkomaki, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(4), 476 CAS .R. Shiraki and B. A. Holmen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(23), 4956 CrossRef CAS .K. Sasaki, T. Haga, T. Hirajima, K. Kurosawa and M. Tsunekawa, Mater.
Trans., 2002, 43(11), 2778 Search PubMed .E. I. Obiajunwa, D. A. Pelemo, S. A. Owalabi, M. K. Fasasi and F. O. Johnson-Fatokun, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 194(1), 61 CrossRef CAS .R. Yan, D. T. Liang, K. Laursen, Y. Li, L. Tsen and J. H. Tay, Fuel, 2003, 82(7), 843 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Camerani, B. M. Steenari, R. Sharma and R. Beckett, Fuel, 2002, 81(13), 1739 CrossRef CAS .S. Kurunczi, S. Torok and J. W. Beal, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 291 CrossRef CAS .A. Drizo, Y. Comeau, C. Forget and R. P. Chapuis, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(21), 4642 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Oluyemi and O. I. Asubiojo, Bull. Chem. Soc. Ethiop., 2001, 15(2), 97 Search PubMed .J. C. Chow, J. G. Watson, L. L. Ashbaugh and K. L. Magliano, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(9–10), 1317 CrossRef CAS .K. N. Yu, Z. L. L. Yeung, L. Y. L. Lee, M. J. Stokes and R. C. W. Kwok, Appl. Radiat. Isotope, 2002, 57(2), 279 CrossRef CAS .W. E. Wilson, J. C. Chow, C. Claiborn, F. S. Wei, J. Engelbrecht and J. G. Watson, Chemosphere, 2002, 49(9), 1009 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Claiborn, T. Larson and L. Sheppard, Environ. Health Perspect., 2002, 110, 547 CAS .P. Molnar, S. Janhall and M. Hallquist, Atmos. Environ., 2002, 36(25), 4115 CrossRef CAS .A. K. M. Chu, H. H. Cheng, R. C. W. Kwok and K. N. Yu, Appl. Radiat. Isotope, 2003, 58(3), 333 CrossRef CAS .Z. L. L. Yeung, R. C. W. Kwok and K. N. Yu, Appl. Radiat. Isotope, 2003, 58(3), 339 CrossRef CAS .K. F. Ho, S. C. Lee, J. C. Chow and J. G. Watson, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(8), 1023 CrossRef CAS .K. Moloi, S. Chimidza, E. S. Lindgren, A. Viksna and P. Standzenieks, Atmos. Environ., 2002, 36(14), 2447 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Marcazzan, G. Valli and R. Vecchi, Sci. Tot. Environ., 2002, 298(1–3), 65 Search PubMed .S. Janhall, P. Molnar and M. Hallquist, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(2), 209 CrossRef CAS .S. Owega, G. J. Evans, R. E. Jervis, J. Tsai, M. Fila and P. V. Tan, Environ. Pollut., 2002, 120(1), 125 CrossRef CAS .G. Lammel, A. Rohrl and H. Schreiber, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2002, 9(6), 397 Search PubMed .D. G. Shendell and L. P. Naeher, Environ. Int., 2002, 28(5), 375 CrossRef CAS .J. Gasana and A. Chamorro, J. Expo. Anal. Environ. Epidemiol., 2002, 12(4), 265 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Obiajunwa, F. O. Johnson-Fatokun, H. B. Olaniyi and A. F. Olowole, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 194(1), 65 CrossRef CAS .W. Shotyk, D. Weiss, M. Heisterkamp, A. K. Cheburkin, P. G. Appleby and F. C. Adams, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(18), 3893 CrossRef CAS .D. Karakas, I. Olmez and G. Tuncel, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2002, 82(10), 705 CAS .M. Ebert, S. Weinbruch, A. Rausch, G. Gorzawski, P. Hoffmann, H. Wex and G. Helas, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2002, 107, art. no. 8121 Search PubMed .A. Manceau, N. Tamura, R. S. Celestre, A. A. MacDowell, N. Geoffroy, G. Sposito and H. A. Padmore, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37(1), 75 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Ali, H. Ishiga and T. Wakatsuki, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 2003, 49(1), 111 Search PubMed .P. O. Ogunleye, M. C. Mayaki and I. Y. Amapu, J. Environ. Radioact., 2002, 62(1), 39 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Anjos, R. T. Lopes, E. F. O. Jesus, J. T. Assis, R. Cesareo, R. C. Barroso and C. A. A. Barradas, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2002, 65(4–5), 495 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Naftel, R. R. Martin, F. Courchesne, V. Seguin and R. Protz, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2002, 47(2), 36 Search PubMed .T. Bjelland and I. H. Thorseth, Chem. Geol., 2002, 192(1–2), 81 CrossRef CAS .A. Senhou, A. Chouak, R. Cherkaoui, Z. Moutia, M. Lferde, A. Elyahyaoui, T. El Khoukhi, M. Bounakhla, K. Embarche, A. Gaudry, S. Ayrault and M. Moskura, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(2), 343 CrossRef CAS .A. Senhou, A. Chouak, R. Cherkaoui, M. Lferde, A. Elyahyaoui, T. El Khoukhi, M. Bounakhla, K. Embarche, X. Bertho, A. Gaudry, S. Ayrault and D. Piccot, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 247 CrossRef CAS .V. Cercasov, A. Pantelica, M. Salagean, G. Caniglia and A. Scarlat, Environ. Pollut., 2002, 119(1), 129 CrossRef CAS .A. Ugur, G. Yener and A. Bassari, Appl. Radiat. Isotope, 2002, 57(4), 565 CrossRef CAS .L. P. Eksperiandova, A. B. Blank and Y. N. Makarovskaya, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 259 CrossRef CAS .J. Vite-Torres, M. Vite-Torres, J. Guerrero-Diaz and C. Carreno-Leon, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2002, 17(3), 243 Search PubMed .A. Pinisakul, C. Polprasert, P. Parkpian and J. Satayavivad, Water Sci. Technol., 2002, 46(9), 247 Search PubMed .J. Osan, S. Kurunczi, S. Torok and R. Van Grieken, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(3), 413 CrossRef .A. P. Karageorgis, A. I. Sioulas and C. L. Anagnostou, Geo-Mar. Lett., 2002, 21(4), 200 Search PubMed .M. J. D. Lemes, P. M. Figueiredo and M. A. F. Pires, Quim. Nova, 2003, 26(1), 13 Search PubMed .E. Drab, A. Gaudichet, J. L. Jaffrezo and J. L. Colin, Atmos. Environ., 2002, 36(34), 5365 CrossRef CAS .S. L. S Stipp, M. Hansen, R. Kristensen, M. F. Hochella, L. Bennedsen, K. Dideriksen, T. Balic-Zunic, D. Leonard and M. J. Mathieu, Chem. Geol., 2002, 190(1–4), 321–337 CrossRef CAS .G. Bozzano, H. Kuhlmann and B. Alonso, Paleogeogr. Paleoclimatol. Paleoecol., 2002, 183(1–2), 155 Search PubMed .A. V. Pukhovski, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 225 CrossRef CAS .B. Constantinescu, R. Bugoi and G. Sziki, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 373 CrossRef CAS .J. Wu, J. P. L. Leung, Z. Li and M. J. J. Stokes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 408 CrossRef CAS .A. Hein, A. Tsolakidou, I. Iliopoulos, H. Mommsen, J. B. I. Garrigos, G. Montana and V. Kilikoglou, Analyst, 2002, 127(4), 542 RSC .M. E. E. Magarino, A. R. De Arellano, M. A. T. Rodriguez, A. R. Conde and P. J. S. Soto, Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidr., 2002, 41(6), 531 Search PubMed .N. Broll and J. M. Frezouls, J. Phys. IV, 2002, 12(PR6), 97 Search PubMed .S. S. Ramos, F. B. Reig, J. V. G. Adelantado, D. J. Y. Marco and A. D. Carbo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(4), 689 CrossRef .Z. Sandor, S. Tolgyesi, I. Gresits and Z. Kasztovszky, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(2), 283 CrossRef CAS .A. Fisher, M. W. Hinds, S. N. Nelms, D. M. Penny and P. Goodall, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(12), 1624 RSC .C. Heske, U. Groh, L. Weinhardt, O. Fuchs, B. Holder, E. Umbach, C. Bostedt, L. J. Terminello, S. Zweigart, T. P. Niesen and F. Karg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81(24), 4550 CrossRef CAS .F. A. Selim, D. P. Wells, J. F. Harmon, J. Kwofie, R. Spaulding, G. Erickson and T. Roney, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 495(2), 154 CrossRef CAS .N. Takeyasu, Y. Hirakawa and T. Imasaka, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56(9), 1161 CAS .J. Sieber, D. Broton, C. Fales, S. Leigh, B. MacDonald, A. Marlow, S. Nettles and J. Yen, Cem. Concr. Res., 2002, 32(12), 1899 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and M. Orduna, Glass Sci. Technol., 2002, 75(4), 184 Search PubMed .R. Falcone, S. Hreglich, M. Vallotto and M. Verita, Glass Technol., 2002, 43(1), 39 Search PubMed .J. L. Miguez, E. Granada, L. M. L. Gonzalez, J. Xiberta and P. Fernandez, Renew. Energy, 2002, 27(4), 575 CrossRef CAS .M. Blassino, H. Solo-Gabriele and T. Townsend, Waste Manage. Res., 2002, 20(3), 290 Search PubMed .M. J. Salvador, G. N. Lopes, V. F. Nascimento and O. Zucchi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 141 CrossRef CAS .E. Almeida, V. F. Nascimento, E. P. E. Valencia and R. Silva, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 252(3), 541 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Bhat, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2002, 65(3), 193 CrossRef CAS .F. R. Feret and D. Roy, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(3), 551 CrossRef .M. D. Ruiz, M. H. Rodriguez, E. Perino and R. A. Olsina, Miner. Eng., 2002, 15(5), 373 CrossRef CAS .R. Schramm, Ind. Lubr. Tribol., 2002, 54(5), 234 Search PubMed .Z. Yang, X. D. Hou and B. T. Jones, Talanta, 2003, 59(4), 673 CrossRef CAS .D. Jembrih-Simburger, C. Neelmeijer, O. Schalm, P. Fredrickx, M. Schreiner, K. De Vis, M. Mader, D. Schryvers and J. Caen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(4), 321 RSC .M. Bos, B. A. Boukamp and J. A. M. Vrielink, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 459(2), 305 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Bichinho, G. P. Pires, F. C. Stedile and J. H. Z. dos Santos, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 1877 CrossRef .A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(4), 414 RSC .S. F. Elmarsafawy, S. W. Tsaih, S. Korrick, J. H. Dickey, D. Sparrow, A. Aro and H. Hu, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2002, 42(1), 38 CrossRef .F. Gerr, R. Letz, L. Stokes, D. Chettle, F. McNeill and W. Kaye, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2002, 42(2), 98 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Korrick, J. Schwartz, S. W. Tsaih, D. J. Hunter, A. Aro, B. Rosner, F. E. Speizer and H. Hu, Am. J. Epidemiol., 2002, 156(4), 335 CrossRef .S. Oliveira, A. Aro, D. Sparrow and H. Hu, Arch. Environ. Health, 2002, 57(5), 466 Search PubMed .H. Hu and M. Hernandez-Avila, Am. J. Epidemiol., 2002, 156(12), 1088 CrossRef .S. J. Rothenberg, V. Kondrashov, M. Manalo, J. Jiang, R. Cuellar, M. Garcia, B. Reynoso, S. Reyes, M. Diaz and A. C. Todd, Am. J. Epidemiol., 2002, 156(12), 1079 CrossRef .B. L. Gulson, K. J. Mizon, M. J. Korsch, J. M. Palmer and J. B. Donnelly, Sci. Tot. Environ., 2003, 303(1–2), 79 Search PubMed .M. Hernandez-Avila, K. E. Peterson, T. Gonzalez-Cossio, L. H. Sanin, A. Aro, L. Schnaas and H. Hu, Arch. Environ. Health, 2002, 57(5), 482 Search PubMed .M. Hernandez-Avila, T. Gonzalez-Cossio, J. E. Hernandez-Avila, I. Romieu, K. E. Peterson, A. Aro, E. Palazuelos and H. Hu, Epidemiology, 2003, 14(2), 206 CrossRef .H. L. Needleman, C. McFarland, R. B. Ness, S. E. Fienberg and M. J. Tobin, Neurotoxicol. Teratol., 2002, 24(6), 711 CrossRef CAS .J. A. A. Brito, F. E. McNeill, C. E. Webber, S. Wells, N. Richard, M. L. Carvalho and D. R. Chettle, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(2), 194 RSC .F. Kamel, D. M. Umbach, T. L. Munsat, J. M. Shefner, H. Hu and D. P. Sandler, Epidemiology, 2002, 13(3), 311 CrossRef .A. C. Todd, S. Carroll, C. Geraghty, F. A. Khan, E. L. Moshier, S. Tang and P. J. Parsons, Phys. Med. Biol., 2002, 47(8), 1399 CrossRef CAS .A. Pejovic-Milic, J. A. Brito, J. Gyorffy and D. R. Chettle, Med. Phys., 2002, 29(11), 2687 CrossRef CAS .A. Ates and M. Ertugrul, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2002, 30(4), 449 CrossRef CAS .B. Alfoldy, S. Torok, I. Balashazy, W. Hofmann and R. Winkler-Heil, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(5), 363 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Carvalho, L. Silveira and A. Casimiro, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(8), 827 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Obiajunwa, A. C. Adebajo and O. R. Omobuwajo, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 252(3), 473 CrossRef CAS .R. E. L. de Ruiz, R. A. Olsina and A. N. Masi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(2), 150 CrossRef .U. Cevik, E. Ergen, G. Budak, A. Karabulut, E. Tirasoglu, G. Apaydin and A. I. Kopya, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., 2003, 78(3–4), 409 Search PubMed .Z. H. Mai, G. M. Luo, C. X. Liu, M. H. Li, H. W. Jiang, W. Y. Lai, J. Wang, Y. F. Ding, T. P. A. Hase, B. D. Fulthorpe and B. K. Tanner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 494 CrossRef CAS .K. Winkler, K. Noworyta, A. de Bettencourt-Dias, J. W. Sobczak, C. T. Wu, L. C. Chen, W. Kutner and A. L. Balch, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13(3), 518 RSC .F. D. Dejene and V. Alberts, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2003, 14(2), 89 Search PubMed .A. A. Dakhel, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 80(1), 186 CrossRef CAS .H. Hiramatsu, K. Ueda, H. Ohta, M. Orita, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411(1), 125 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Umarova, N. I. Movchan, R. A. Yusupov and V. F. Sopin, Russ. J. Phys. Chem., 2002, 76(8), 1341 Search PubMed .J. Mathiyarasu, N. Palaniswamy and V. S. Muralidharan, Indian J. Chem. Technol., 2002, 9(6), 519 Search PubMed .J. H. Hong and S. J. Kwon, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2003, 42(3), 413 Search PubMed .J. Jurczyk, B. Zawisza, R. Sitko, F. Buhl, K. Osinska and M. Plonska, Chem. Anal., 2002, 47(6), 925 Search PubMed .C. E. Evans, A. C. Smith, D. J. Burnett, A. L. Marsh, D. A. Fischer and J. L. Gland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(35), 9036 CrossRef CAS .B. K. Lim, H. S. Park, A. K. H. See, E. Z. Liu and S. H. Wu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2002, 20(6), 2219 CrossRef CAS .K. Kobayashi, T. Mitoma, K. Okamoto and A. Yamagishi, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 419(1–2), 40 CrossRef CAS .M. Marquez, J. Robinson, V. Van Nostrand, D. Schaefer, L. R. Ryzhkov, W. Lowe and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14(4), 1493 CrossRef CAS .H. Ebel, R. Svagera and M. F. Ebel, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(6), 437 CrossRef CAS .N. Ekinci, Y. Kurucu, E. Oz and Y. Sahin, Radiat. Meas., 2002, 35(3), 223 CrossRef CAS .M. Draxler, S. Zoister, F. Kastner, M. Bergsmann and P. Bauer, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 34(1), 763 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Ecker, U. Watjen, A. Berger, L. Persson, W. Pritzkow, M. Radtke and H. Riesemeier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 188, 120 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Wang, A. G. Cullis, E. J. H. Collart, A. J. Murrell and M. A. Foad, Microsc. Semicond. Mater., 2001, 2001(169), 357 Search PubMed .B. E. Park and H. Ishiwara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82(8), 1197 CrossRef CAS .S. Kikuchi, Y. Miyaguchi, T. Jimbo, I. Kimura, M. Tanimura, K. Suu and M. Ishikawa, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2002, 46, 105 Search PubMed .K. M. Lee, K. S. Park, S. D. Nam, S. W. Lee, S. H. Joo, J. S. Seo, Y. D. Kim, S. L. Cho, Y. H. Son, H. G. An, H. J. Kim, Y. J. Chung, J. E. Heo, M. S. Lee, S. O. Park, U. I. Chung and J. T. Moon, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2002, 48, 171 Search PubMed .P. Victor, J. Nagaraju and S. B. Krupanidhi, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18(2), 183 CrossRef CAS .Y. Takahashi, K. Hayashi and E. Matsubara, Mater. Trans., 2002, 43(7), 1475 Search PubMed .E. Z. Kurmaev, A. Moewes, N. D. Zhigadlo, E. Takayama-Muromachi, I. A. Nekrasov, O. A. Bureev, G. T. Woods, T. A. Callcott, Y. M. Yarmoshenko, S. N. Shamin, D. L. Ederer and M. Yanagihara, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2002, 9(2), 1345 CAS .K. Sakurai and H. Eba, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 199, 391 CrossRef CAS .E. Baydas, O. Sogut, Y. Sahin and E. Buyukkasap, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(2), 375–380 CrossRef .E. Baydas, O. Sogut, Y. Sahin and E. Buyukkasap, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., 2002, 75(4), 473 Search PubMed .E. Baydas, Y. Sahin and E. Buyukkasap, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., 2003, 77(1), 87 Search PubMed .W. Salah, Eur. Phys. J.-Appl. Phys, 2002, 19(1), 69 Search PubMed .K. Kawatsura, N. Takeshima, T. Imaoku, K. Takahiro, Y. Mokuno, Y. Horino, T. Sekioka and M. Terasawa, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 193, 877 CrossRef CAS .M. Uda, D. Yamashita, Y. Nakajima and H. Nakamatsu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 39 CrossRef CAS .M. Uda, T. Yamamoto, Y. Ogyu, D. Yamashita, R. C. C. Perera and T. Mukoyama, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 89 CrossRef CAS .I. Szaloki, S. B. Torok, J. Injuk and R. Van Grieken, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 2895–2918 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Revenko and S. B. Dabagov, Ind. Lab., 2002, 68(5), 3–14 Search PubMed .A. G. Revenko, Proc. SPIE, 2002, 4765, 110–121 Search PubMed .J. Injuk and R. Van Grieken, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 35–39 CAS .PANalytical B.V., XRF Globe, 2003, 1 Search PubMed .M. P. Belousov, O. V. Ignatyev and A. D. Pulin, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6(4), 434–440 Search PubMed .A. Yu. Duhanin, G. V. Pavlinsky, A. Yu. Portnoy and A. V. Khun, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6($), 383–389 Search PubMed .B. I. Kitov and Yu. S. Mukhachev, Proc. SPIE, 2002, 4765, 189–193 Search PubMed .S. Barkan, J. S. Iwancyzk, B. E. Patt, L. Feng, C. R. Tull and G. Vilkelis, Denver X-ray Conference,  2002, poster D025 .H. Sipila, Denver X-ray Conference,  2002, poster F04 .V. V. Ivaneneko, V. N. Kustov and A. Yu. Metelev, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 52–56 .L. Luo, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 332–338 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Cherkashin, T. Yu. Cherkashina and E. V. Khudonogova, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6, 454–462 Search PubMed .H. Ebel, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 46–51 CAS .B. I. Kitov, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6, 395–399 Search PubMed .A. C. Mandal, S. Santra, D. Mitra, M. Sarkar and D. Bhattacharya, Nucl. Instrum. Meth., 2002, 197, 179–184 Search PubMed .A. Brunetti, B. Golosio and R. Cesario, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 377–382 CrossRef CAS .G. Tirao and G. Stutz, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 13–24 CAS .S. Zhuo, G. Tao and A. Ji, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 8–12 CAS .W. Malzer and B. Kanngiesser, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .I. G. Grigorieva and A. A. Antonov, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 64–68 CAS .J. J. Powell, Analyst, 2002, 127, 842–846 RSC .M. Chukalina, A. Simionovici, A. Snigirev and T. Jeffries, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 448–450 CrossRef CAS .New products, Spectrosc. Eur., 14(5), 33 Search PubMed .A. Eslava-Gomez and S. J. Parry, Analyst, 2002, 127, 847–851 RSC .V. V. Zagorodniy, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 40–45 CAS .Sh. I. Duimakaev, A. A. Duimakaev, T. G. Duimakaev and A. S. Vershinin, Ind. Lab., 2002, 68(12), 28–29 Search PubMed .T Hettipthirana, N. Grey and R. Naidu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58, 85–89 CrossRef .A. G. Revenko, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 264–273 CrossRef CAS .C. Vazquez, N. Barbaro and S. Lopez, X-ray
Spectrom., 2003, 32, 57–59 Search PubMed .O. Yu. Belozerova, G. P. Koroleva and L. A. Pavlova, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6(4), 477–484 Search PubMed .Sh. Gerbish and J. Bayarmaa, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6(4), 408–409 Search PubMed .J. J. LaBrecque, J. E. Vaz and J. M. Cruxent, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 25–28 CAS .J. L. Ferrero, C. Roldan, D. Juanes, E. Rollano and C. Morera, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .A. J. W. Yates, K. Durose, C. Caple, P. Clogg and I. Hovmand, ‘EDX profiling of cross-sectioned archaeological leather’, Institute of Physics Conference Series, Electron Microsc. Anal.,  2001, vol. 168, 93––96 Search PubMed .A. V. Fesenko and N. G. Milovzorov, Ind. Lab., 2002, 68(2), 3–5 Search PubMed .T. Kessler, P. Hoffman, T. Grieve and H. M. Ortner, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .T. N. Gunicheva and E. V. Cuparina, Anal. Kontrol, 2002, 6(5), 557–565 Search PubMed .E. Z. Kurmaev, A. Moewes and D. L. Ederer, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Galakhov, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Grebennikov, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2003, 258, 241–243 CrossRef .V. A. Vilissov, M. V. Ryzhkov, D. V. Vilissov and V. P. Moloshag, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31, 252–258 CrossRef CAS .A. Kucukonder, O. Sogut, E. Buyukkasap, E. Kucukonder and H. Cam, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 60–63 CAS .J. Reisel, J. Geyer, J. Flock and D. Sommer, X-ray Spectrom., 2003, 32, 29–34 CAS .I. P. Zhizhin, B. D. Kalinin, A. V. Rudnev and L. A. Safonov, Anal. Kontrol., 2002, 6(4), 463–469 Search PubMed .N. V. Alov and K. V. Oskolok, X-ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 235–238 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
