How do plants see the world? – UV imaging with a TiO 2 nanowire array by artificial photosynthesis   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR00041G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00041G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8443-8450How do plants see the world? – UV imaging with a TiO2 nanowire array by artificial photosynthesis†

        
          
            Ji-Hoon 
            Kang‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Thibault 
            Leportier‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Min-Chul 
            Park
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Sung Gyu 
            Han
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Jin-Dong 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyunsu 
            Ju
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yun Jeong 
            Hwang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Byeong-Kwon 
            Ju
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ting-Chung 
            Poon
          
        
      *f
aCenter for Opto-Electronic Materials and Devices, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea. E-mail: minchul@kist.re.kr
bDisplay and Nanosystem Laboratory, College of Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
cDivision of Nano & Information Technology, KIST School, Korea University of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea
dClean Energy Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Physics, College of Science, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
fBradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg VA 24061, USA. E-mail: tcpoon@vt.edu
Received 
      3rd January 2018
    , Accepted 8th March 2018First published on 12th March 2018AbstractThe concept of plant vision refers to the fact that plants are receptive to their visual environment, although the mechanism involved is quite distinct from the human visual system. The mechanism in plants is not well understood and has yet to be fully investigated. In this work, we have exploited the properties of TiO2 nanowires as a UV sensor to simulate the phenomenon of photosynthesis in order to come one step closer to understanding how plants see the world. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first approach to emulate and depict plant vision. We have emulated the visual map perceived by plants with a single-pixel imaging system combined with a mechanical scanner. The image acquisition has been demonstrated for several electrolyte environments, in both transmissive and reflective configurations, in order to explore the different conditions in which plants perceive light.
Introduction
Humans see the world through their eyes. Light entering the eye passes through the cornea and the pupil, and forms an image on the retina. In the retina, a number of photoreceptor cells, which contain a protein molecule called opsin, transmit visual signals to the brain. Even though it may seem very different from the human visual system, we can also talk about vision in the case of plants involving a general process of capturing light. For plants, vision is one of the most important senses. One unique characteristic of plants illustrating plant vision is phototropism. Phototropism refers to the phenomenon in which plants grow in the direction of or the opposite direction of light. The principle of phototropism is based on the fact that auxin, a plant growth hormone, moves toward the shaded side1 when the plant is exposed to light. Plants may not see the world like humans do, but they are sensitive to their visual environment, and it is even a key factor for their survival. In the case of the human vision system, light plays a role only as a medium for transferring information related to the position, movement, shape, and colour of objects. On the other hand, light is not only the source of growth for plants but also a vector of information. It is therefore important for plants to acquire information regarding the amount, the main direction, and the spectral composition of the surrounding light.2 As a result, plant vision has evolved in a quite different way from the human visual system. Because of the difficulty of understanding plant vision, the field of plant vision has not yet been extensively investigated.
Vision is a reaction to light. Photosynthesis is one of the various phenomena where light induces a response from plants. It is believed that photosynthesis plays a major role in plant vision because plants store energy in carbohydrate molecules using photosynthesis for their survival. Photosynthesis is a process that produces oxygen and compounds using light energy, and it is an essential process for plants to obtain energy. Photosynthesis has two stages, light-dependent reaction and light-independent reaction. In the light-dependent reaction, light energy is captured and used to make energy storage molecules, ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and NADPH, the reduced form of NADP+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). In the light-independent reaction, carbon dioxide is converted into sugars by using ATP and NADPH, which are produced under the light-dependent reaction.
In this work, we have used the principle of the light-dependent reaction among the two stages of photosynthesis to investigate the potential of plant vision. We have tried to emulate the image maps seen by plants by measuring photocurrents generated by the splitting of water under the light-dependent reaction. However, since there is a limit in configuring electronic circuits and imaging systems based on the photosynthesis of actual plants, we have conducted experiments using artificial photosynthesis. In the experiments, we have attempted to investigate the various factors that affect photosynthesis such as the spectrum, intensity, directivity, and presence or absence of light. With the design of an imaging system based on artificial photosynthesis, we expect to move one step closer to understanding the mechanism of plant vision.
Photosynthesis takes place in organelles called chloroplasts, and the chloroplasts contain green pigments called chlorophyll. Chlorophyll absorbs light most strongly in the blue/UV-A region of the spectrum (λ = 350–500 nm),3 followed by the red/far-red region (λ = 600–800 nm).4 For artificial photosynthesis, several studies have been conducted with 1-D materials.5–7 Among the various 1-D materials, we have used a titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanowire array. The TiO2 nanowire array, one of the popular photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices, has high sensitivity in the UV-A region, similar to chlorophyll, due to its large bandgap (3.0 eV). Since Honda and Fujishima8 introduced TiO2 as a water-splitting photocatalyst in 1972, TiO2 has been extensively studied with a focus on its properties for PEC hydrogen production.9–17 Photo-electrolysis or solar water splitting converts water into gaseous O2 and H2 as described by the following equation:8 (1)where 2hν is the incident light energy.
We have used the TiO2 nanowire array as a single-pixel sensor with images captured with a mechanical scanner to simulate a 2D sensor array. In image scanning, two types of optical configuration have been used: transmissive and reflective configurations.
Results and discussion
Photoelectrochemical measurement
We have calculated the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the TiO2 nanowire array to verify the functionality of TiO2 in simulating a plant's vision, and to investigate the effect of the spectrum on photosynthesis. The IPCE (1.5 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) of the TiO2 nanowire array as a function of the incident light wavelength is shown in Fig. 1. Similar to chlorophyll in plants, TiO2 shows high sensitivity in the UV-A region,18,19 and the maximum IPCE was observed at the wavelength band of 360 nm to 380 nm.
 Fig. 1  IPCE (1.5 V vs. RHE) of the TiO2 nanowire array electrode as a function of the incident light wavelength. 
The current–voltage characteristic and photoresponse switching behaviour have been studied to investigate the influence of the presence or absence of light on photosynthesis. Fig. 2a shows the current–voltage (I–V) curves for the TiO2 nanowire array in the dark and under illumination (λ = 365 nm). TiO2 has shown an excellent photovoltaic performance without any external bias because a built-in potential established from the semiconductor/electrolyte interface separates the photo-generated electron–hole pairs, thereby producing the photocurrent.20 The TiO2 nanowire array exhibited a clear photocurrent response when the UV light was switched on and off for a period of 10 s, as shown in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical measurement of the TiO2 nanowire array. (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the TiO2 nanowire array in the dark and under UV illumination (λ = 365 nm). (b) The photocurrent response of the TiO2 nanowire array measured at 0 V bias under UV illumination (λ = 365 nm) switched on/off for a period of 10 s. (c) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical mechanism in the dark and under illumination. 

Fig. 2c depicts the PEC mechanism of the TiO2 nanowire array when the UV light is turned on and off for the photocurrent response measurement. Band bending is formed under dark conditions to reach equilibrium between the semiconductor and electrolyte solution. This semiconductor/electrolyte interface is a Schottky-type contact that can separate photogenerated charges. When the TiO2 nanowire array is illuminated with UV light, electrons are excited from the valence band into the conduction band, and electron–hole pairs are generated within the semiconductor.21 There is a quasi-Fermi level split due to the excess concentration of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Regarding the thermal equilibrium populations of carriers, the excess hole population significantly changes the minority-carrier distribution, while the excess electrons hardly affect the majority-carrier numbers. As a result, the hole quasi-Fermi level (EF,p) shifts substantially as compared to insignificant change in the electron quasi-Fermi level (EF,n).22
Image scanning of shadow mask with transmissive configuration
Image scanning has been carried out in a transmissive configuration with a mechanical scanner to investigate the effect of the presence or absence of light on photosynthesis. The presence or absence of light has been simulated by putting a shadow mask carved with the letter “S” in front of the TiO2 nanowire array. In general, different plants live in different environments. Some plants prefer acidic soil, and some plants grow in alkaline or neutral soil, whereas some plants such as algae live in water. Several studies have reported that the pH condition influences photosynthetic rates.23–25 In this experiment, electrolytes with different conditions, i.e. acidic, alkaline, and neutral, have been tested to simulate the diverse environmental conditions where plants live. The electrolytes used are as follows: 1 M KOH (pH 13.73), 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.42), neutral solution (phosphate buffer solution, pH 6.68), seawater (pH 7.91), and water (tap water, pH 7.33). In general, the pH suitable for plant growth is between 4 and 8. We have chosen neutral solution (phosphate buffer solution, pH 6.68), seawater (pH 7.91), and water (tap water, pH 7.33) to satisfy the suitable pH conditions for plants. Furthermore, we have also tested 1 M KOH (pH 13.73) and 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.42), which are popular electrolytes in photoelectrochemical water splitting application.

Fig. 3 depicts the images acquired by artificial photosynthesis with the TiO2 nanowire array immersed in various electrolytes. Images are shown with the same scale ranging from the minimum photocurrent measured to the maximum. Each pixel value corresponds to the current measurement obtained at the corresponding scanner position. The letter “S” is clearly visible in all conditions. The difference in brightness between the images represents the different photocurrent amount from TiO2 which can be affected by the variation of pH and ion concentration of the electrolyte solution. Strong acidic and alkaline conditions can affect the band edge and surface charge properties of the TiO2 nanowire array due to the adsorption of the ion species or different water oxidation mechanisms depending on the pH of the electrolytes. The charge accumulated at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface from the activity of protons at the surface can affect the charge separation on the surface.26 The pH of electrolytes affects the composition of Ti–O− and Ti–OH groups that exist on the surface of the TiO2 nanowire array. These surface groups go through an acid–base equilibrium, with alkaline solutions leading to deprotonation of surface hydroxyl groups.27Fig. 3c–e show the different brightness of the images even under similar pH electrolyte conditions, which can be affected by the variation of ion species or the concentration of the electrolyte solution. The photocurrents obtained from the five different conditions are compared in Table S1 and Fig. S1.†
 Fig. 3  Images acquired from mechanical image scanning with the TiO2 nanowire array immersed in various electrolytes. (a) 1 M KOH (pH 13.73), (b) 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.42), (c) neutral solution (phosphate buffer solution, pH 6.68), (d) seawater (pH 7.91), and (e) water (tap water, pH 7.33). 
Image scanning of transparent object with transmissive configuration
In addition to acquiring images with a shadow mask, we have conducted additional acquisition to obtain the image of a transparent object to investigate the influence of light intensity on photosynthesis in plant vision. Fig. 4b shows the resulting image obtained from the scanning operation of the transparent object. The intensity of light varies with the change of transmittance, which depends on the structure of the object. The change in light intensity is represented by a grayscale level, and the character is clearly visible in the resulting image.
 Fig. 4  (a) The transparent statue used in the scanning operation. (b) The results obtained from the scanning operation of the transparent object. The change in light intensity is represented by grayscale levels. 
Image scanning with reflective configuration
Since the process of vision is based not only on transmitted light but also on reflected light, image scanning with a reflective configuration has been carried out. In the image scanning operation with the reflective configuration, we have used a flower as the scanned object. The flower has UV absorbing and reflective patterns called floral guides or nectar guides to attract pollinators such as bees and butterflies.28–30Fig. 5a–c show the images of Kalanchoe blossfeldiana captured by different sensors. Although the image taken by the proposed image scanning with the TiO2 nanowire array presents lower resolution as compared to the images taken by the two different CCDs, the UV absorbing pattern is clearly seen, as shown in Fig. 5c. The spatial resolution is limited by the size of the light spot incident on the flower, which is directly related to the size of the pinhole employed. A compromise has to be found between sensitivity and resolution. With a small pinhole, the spatial resolution improves, but the amount of light focused on the flower becomes too weak to be detected. In addition, the light has been focused on the flower through a lens. Since the flower is not flat, the centre and the edges of the flower have been located at different depths. Hence, the light spot is out of focus on some parts of the object. This effect has been minimized as much as possible by focusing the light in the middle of the depth range defined by the centre and the edges of the flower.
 Fig. 5  The images of Kalanchoe blossfeldiana captured by (a) a colour CCD camera, (b) a monochromatic CCD camera equipped with a UV band-pass filter, and (c) the proposed image scanning with the TiO2 nanowire array. 
Experimental
TiO2 nanowire photo-anode preparation
The TiO2 nanowire array was grown on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrate by using the hydrothermal method described in a previous report.15 The precursor solution was prepared by mixing deionized (DI) water (30 mL) and concentrated hydrochloric acid (30 mL; 36.5–38 wt%, Sigma Aldrich) followed by dropwise addition of titanium isopropoxide (1 mL; TTIP; Sigma Aldrich 97%). We stirred the mixture solution for at least two hours before transferring it to a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. We cleaned the FTO substrate by sonicating in acetone, isopropanol, and DI water, successively, and then dried it with nitrogen gas flow. The FTO substrate was partially soaked in the precursor solution, so that the upper part of the FTO substrate could be used for the contact during PEC measurements. Hydrothermal growth occurred in an oven at a temperature of 200 °C for 150 minutes, and the autoclave was slowly cooled outside of the oven. After the TiO2 nanowires grew on the FTO substrate, we rinsed the substrate with DI water and dried it with nitrogen gas flow. Finally, the substrate was annealed at 450 °C for 1 hour in air. TiO2 nanowires grew only on the side of the FTO substrate that was soaked in the growth solution. Fig. 6 shows the top view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the TiO2 nanowire array grown on the FTO substrate. We observed that the TiO2 nanowire array completely covered the substrate, and the average length of the nanowire array was 1.8 (±0.1) μm.
 Fig. 6  (a, b) Top view and (c) cross-sectional SEM images of the TiO2 nanowire array grown on the FTO substrate. 
Photoelectrochemical measurement
For the calculation of the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the TiO2 nanowire array, photocurrents have been measured with a potentiostat (EG&G, model 273A). Ag/AgCl and platinum (Pt) mesh were used as reference and counter electrodes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7 and in Fig. S2.† A 1000 W Xe lamp (Newport, 6271) was used as a light source, and was coupled with a diffuser (Newport, 77330), which provided uniform illumination over the entire TiO2 nanowire electrode area (approximately 2.6–2.8 cm2). The 1000 W Xe lamp was also coupled with a monochromator (Newport, Cornerstone 130 1/8 m). The TiO2 nanowire array was illuminated through a quartz window of a glass cell in 1 M KOH electrolyte, assuming a plant growing on an alkaline soil. The bias was applied at the reference electrode, i.e., RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode), and the IPCE was calculated from the photocurrents measured at 1.5 V vs. RHE according to the following equation:15 (2)where λ is the wavelength of the incident light, Iph is the photocurrent density, and Pmono is the power intensity of monochromatic illumination in mW cm−2.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the current–voltage characteristic and photo-response switching behaviour measurement. 
In the current–voltage characteristic and photoresponse switching behaviour measurements, we employed a two-electrode configuration and a 6 W UV lamp (Vilber Lourmat, VL-6.LC) was used as a light source as shown in Fig. 7. A three-electrode system could have been used for higher accuracy, but the two-electrode configuration was sufficient because the electrolyte employed had low resistance. For the current–voltage characteristic measurement, the bias voltage was applied between TiO2 nanowire and Pt electrodes, and the currents were measured in the dark and under UV illumination (λ = 365 nm) in 1 M KOH electrolyte. The photoresponse switching behaviour was measured at 0 V bias under a UV illumination (λ = 365 nm) switched on and off for a period of 10 s.
Image scanning of a shadow mask with transmissive configuration

Fig. 8a depicts the schematic illustration of the scanning system in the transmissive configuration and Fig. 8b depicts the shadow mask carved with the letter “S”. The shadow mask was attached to an x–y planar moving stage. The ranges of the scan in the x- and y-directions were 9.2 mm and 10.8 mm, respectively, with an increment of 200 μm, and the stage was controlled by a stepping motor controller (D250 Motor controller). UV light with a wavelength of 365 nm was used as a light source. The position of the shadow mask was in the plane where the image of the pinhole was formed through the use of a UV lens. Because the size of the image of the pinhole spot influenced the resolution of the acquired image, the spot was made as small as possible while keeping it large enough to obtain sufficient light to induce a signal. The diameter of the spot was less than 1 mm in practice. The TiO2 nanowire array was close enough to the mask to receive all the light coming from the pinhole spot. Both the TiO2 nanowire electrode and the Pt mesh counter electrode were soaked in the electrolyte. The TiO2 nanowire array did not require any external bias to generate photocurrents because a built-in potential established by the TiO2 nanowire array separated the electron–hole pairs.20 Therefore, 0 V bias was applied to both the electrodes in the mechanical image scanning process. A semiconductor parameter analyzer (Hewlett Packard, 4145B) was used to measure photocurrents. The entire image scanning procedure was programmed with LabVIEW.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the image scanning system with the transmissive configuration. (b) Shadow mask carved with the letter “S”. 
Image scanning of a transparent object with transmissive configuration
The basic optical configuration is the same as that of the one with the shadow mask depicted in Fig. 8a. 1 M KOH was used as an electrolyte, and the mask was replaced by a transparent statue, as shown in Fig. 4a. The transparent statue was made of crystal engraved by a 3D crystal laser engraving machine. The intensity of light was modulated by the presence of the small bubbles inside the crystal that scattered the incident light. The light power reaching the sensor was then weaker as compared to the case where the light passed directly through the object without scattering. The light source was also changed to a 3 W UV LED (λ = 365 nm), so that the intensity of the light could be properly maintained even after the light passed through the transparent object.
Image scanning with reflective configuration
In the image scanning operation with the reflective configuration, 3 W UV LED (λ = 365 nm) and UV lenses were used to concentrate enough light on the TiO2 nanowire array even after being reflected from the scanned object as shown in Fig. 9. 1 M KOH was used as an electrolyte and the step size in scanning was set to 200 μm.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the image scanning system with the reflective configuration. 
Conclusions
In this work, we have been able to exploit the artificial photosynthesis properties of a TiO2 nanowire array to obtain images with our proposed imaging system based on mechanical scanning. By utilizing a mechanical scanner, a 2D sensor array has been simulated with a single TiO2 nanowire array. Light is essential for photosynthesis. Experiments on several factors of light have been conducted to explore plant vision. The presence or absence of light has been simulated with a shadow mask, and the letter “S” was clearly visible in the results. Different kinds of electrolytes have been tested to investigate the environmental effects on photosynthesis in plant vision. The change in light intensity has been simulated by a transparent object and visualized in grayscale. Finally, with the reflective configuration in the scanning operation, we could obtain a fine image comparable to that captured by a commercial CCD sensor. Although it has not been investigated how plants interpret the images acquired from their vision in this study, we could nonetheless emulate the image maps seen by plants with our proposed imaging system. A limitation of this study is that plant vision is emulated based on artificial photosynthesis with a water-splitting photo-catalyst rather than actual plants. However, several studies have reported on harvesting photocurrents from plant cells generated by photosynthesis.31–37 Along with these studies, we expect further studies conducted with actual plant cells to reveal more about plant vision. Furthermore, the findings could shed new light on the numerous mechanisms of plants and reveal their secrets.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research study was partly supported by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism (MCST) and the Korea Creative Content Agency (KOCCA) in the Culture Technology (CT) Research & Development Program 2018 (R2017060005, Development of AR Platform based on Hologram). M.-C. Park acknowledges the financial support from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) Institution Program (Grant No. 2E28180).
References
J. M. Christie and A. S. Murphy, Am. J. Bot., 2013, 100, 35–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. E. Kendrick and G. H. Kronenberg, Photomorphogenesis in plants, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Ahmad and A. R. Cashmore, Plant Mol. Biol., 1996, 30, 851–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Quail, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 1998, 353, 1399–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, C. Han, M. Q. Yang and Y. J. Xu, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 35, 1–36 CrossRef CAS .
B. Weng, S. Q. Liu, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12685–12700 RSC .
S. Q. Liu, Z. R. Tang, Y. G. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053–5075 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Nature, 1975, 257, 383–386 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan and K. S. Raja, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8677–8685 CAS .
K. Juodkazis, J. Juodkazyte, E. Jelmakas, P. Kalinauskas, I. Valsiunas, P. Miecinskas and S. Juodkazis, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A147–A160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. D. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chae, H. Jung, H. S. Jeon, B. K. Min, Y. J. Hwang and O.-S. Joo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11408–11416 CAS .

          M. S. McDonald, Photobiology of higher plants, J. Wiley, Chichester, England,  2003, ch. 1, pp. 14–17 Search PubMed .

          B. J. Atwell, P. E. Kriedemann and C. G. N. Turnbull, Plants in action: adaptation in nature, performance in cultivation, Macmillan Education Australia, South Yarra, Vic.,  1999, ch. 1, pp. 35–37 Search PubMed .
Y. R. Xie, L. Wei, G. D. Wei, Q. H. Li, D. Wang, Y. X. Chen, S. S. Yan, G. L. Liu, L. M. Mei and J. Jiao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 188 CrossRef PubMed .
R. van de Krol, Y. Q. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .

          L. Vayssieres, On solar hydrogen & nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons (Asia), Singapore,  2009, ch. 1, pp. 19–20 Search PubMed .
G. C. Papageorgiou and J. Isaakidou, FEBS Lett., 1982, 138, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schonknecht, S. Neimanis, E. Katona, U. Gerst and U. Heber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1995, 92, 12185–12189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gerloff-Elias, E. Spijkerman and T. Proschold, Plant, Cell Environ., 2005, 28, 1218–1229 CrossRef CAS .

          M. D. Archer and A. J. Nozik, Nanostructured and photoelectrochemical systems for solar photon conversion, Imperial College Press, London,  2008, ch. 9, pp. 560–564 Search PubMed .

          M. X. Tan, P. E. Laibinis, S. T. Nguyen, J. M. Kesselman, C. E. Stanton and N. S. Lewis, in Progress in Inorganic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  1994, vol. 41, pp. 21–144 Search PubMed .
L. L. Orban and C. M. S. Plowright, Insectes Soc., 2014, 61, 325–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Horth, L. Campbell and R. Bray, Biol. Open, 2014, 3, 221–230 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Koski and T. L. Ashman, Funct. Ecol., 2014, 28, 868–877 CrossRef .
L. H. Kim, Y. J. Kim, H. Hong, D. Yang, M. Han, G. Yoo, H. W. Song, Y. Chae, J. C. Pyun, A. R. Grossman and W. Ryu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7679–7689 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ryu, S. J. Bai, J. S. Park, Z. B. Huang, J. Moseley, T. Fabian, R. J. Fasching, A. R. Grossman and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Gizzie, J. S. Niezgoda, M. T. Robinson, A. G. Harris, G. K. Jennings, S. J. Rosenthal and D. E. Cliffel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3572–3576 CAS .
G. LeBlanc, E. Gizzie, S. Y. Yang, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10990–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. LeBlanc, G. P. Chen, E. A. Gizzie, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5959–5962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, J. Wasserman, A. Trifonov, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 742 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Calkins, Y. Umasankar, H. O'Neill and R. P. Ramasamy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891–1900 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00041g‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  IPCE (1.5 V vs. RHE) of the TiO2 nanowire array electrode as a function of the incident light wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical measurement of the TiO2 nanowire array. (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the TiO2 nanowire array in the dark and under UV illumination (λ = 365 nm). (b) The photocurrent response of the TiO2 nanowire array measured at 0 V bias under UV illumination (λ = 365 nm) switched on/off for a period of 10 s. (c) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical mechanism in the dark and under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  Images acquired from mechanical image scanning with the TiO2 nanowire array immersed in various electrolytes. (a) 1 M KOH (pH 13.73), (b) 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.42), (c) neutral solution (phosphate buffer solution, pH 6.68), (d) seawater (pH 7.91), and (e) water (tap water, pH 7.33).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The transparent statue used in the scanning operation. (b) The results obtained from the scanning operation of the transparent object. The change in light intensity is represented by grayscale levels.	 

 	Fig. 5  The images of Kalanchoe blossfeldiana captured by (a) a colour CCD camera, (b) a monochromatic CCD camera equipped with a UV band-pass filter, and (c) the proposed image scanning with the TiO2 nanowire array.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a, b) Top view and (c) cross-sectional SEM images of the TiO2 nanowire array grown on the FTO substrate.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the current–voltage characteristic and photo-response switching behaviour measurement.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the image scanning system with the transmissive configuration. (b) Shadow mask carved with the letter “S”.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the image scanning system with the reflective configuration.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00041g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
