Intrinsic and interfacial kinetics of perovskite solar cells under photo and bias-induced degradation and recovery   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02652H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02652H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7799-7805Intrinsic and interfacial kinetics of perovskite solar cells under photo and bias-induced degradation and recovery†

        
          
            Pankaj 
            Yadav
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Prochowicz
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Essa A. 
            Alharbi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shaik M. 
            Zakeeruddin
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      a
aLaboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, School of Basic Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: pankaj.yadav@epfl.ch
bInstitute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland
Received 
      14th June 2017
    , Accepted 10th July 2017First published on 10th July 2017AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a potential candidate for high efficiency low-cost photovoltaic technology. However, the intrinsic and interfacial responses of PSCs under photo and bias-induced degradation and recovery have not been clearly understood. Herein, the influence of illumination and bias on the intrinsic and interfacial characteristics of PSCs is examined by studying the role of trap states, perovskite dielectric relaxation phenomena, transport and recombination characteristics as well as ion movements. We found that under illumination and bias stress conditions, the photo-current at short circuit conditions was decreased in a reversible way and recovered to its initial value after keeping the device in the dark. On the basis of electrical measurements and analysis, we conclude that the full recovery of PSC performance was limited by an increase in the relative dielectric constant, series and shunt resistances and enhanced recombination pathways under stimuli conditions.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained increasing attention due to their easy fabrication and high power conversion efficiency up to 22.1%.1,2 Most of the reported PSCs are based on methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) due to its long electron/hole diffusion length, high absorption coefficient, and excellent defect tolerance.3–6 However, as the field has evolved, it was found that PSCs are subject to the impact of external environmental conditions.7,8 A rapid performance degradation was observed upon exposure of PSCs to oxygen,9 water,10,11 temperature12,13 and iodine vapour.14 The photovoltaic parameters of PSCs can also be affected by prolonged exposure to sunlight.15,16 Several studies ascribed the degradation under light irradiation to the decomposition of the perovskite layer.17 However, Misra et al. demonstrated that the degradation is initiated and enhanced by a combined effect of light and heat during concentrated sunlight exposure.18 Another study revealed that the constant light soaking of solar cell devices leads to photo-current degradation due to the formation of light-activated metastable deep-level trap states.19 The device degradation under sunlight was attributed to the fast ion transport of MA+ coupled with a lattice-expanding phase transition based on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies.20 On the other hand, Bae et al. studied the stability of solar cells in electric fields.21 The measurements conducted under dark conditions at different magnitudes of electric field revealed that a significant drop in performance is observed only at an applied voltage greater than VOC. From these investigations, it can be observed that the mechanism of applied illumination and bias can influence the PSC characteristics. However, the impact of these external stimuli on the device intrinsic and interfacial properties requires further investigations.
In this work, we report the photo-induced degradation and recovery of the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs under constant solar irradiation, applied bias and storing in the dark. In particular, the influence of illumination and bias on the PSCs characteristics is examined by studying the role of trap states, perovskite dielectric relaxation phenomena, transport and recombination characteristics as well as ion movements. We show that under illumination stress the photo-current at short circuit conditions is decreased; while storing the device in the dark causes the photo-current to recover to its initial value. However, both the open circuit voltage and fill factor were irreversibly reduced to a certain extent after prolonged irradiation. Mott–Schottky analysis depicts that the illumination stress caused a change in the interface energetics, which are semi-reversible in nature. Here, the term interface energetics is used to refer to positions of electronic bands and their alignment with the energy levels of adjacent layers. The accumulation of ions and the resultant change in reactivity of selective contacts is found to be a possible mechanism which restricts the recovery of photovoltaic parameters. We found that under the combined influence of illumination and bias stress, the degradation rate of interfaces in PSCs increases to a greater extent. Our results provide an in-depth understanding of the working mechanism of PSCs under illumination and bias stress.
Results and discussion
To study the influence of light irradiation and applied bias on the long term device performance and stability, we prepared state-of-the-art PSCs using the single cation perovskite composition MAPbI3 and the antisolvent deposition method (for details on the device fabrication and characterization procedures see the Experimental section). The cross-sectional SEM image of the as-fabricated MAPbI3 PSC with a 150 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 layer and a 200 nm thick capping perovskite layer is shown in Fig. 1a. Fig. 1b shows the current–density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best performing device measured under 1 Sun illumination Air Mass 1.5G and in the dark in the backward direction. The PSC exhibits a short circuit current (JSC) of 21.3 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.07 V, a fill factor (FF) of 78% and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼18%. The devices with a PCE of 17.5 ± 0.5% were used for different test conditions of illumination and bias stress to examine their impact on the degradation and recovery of photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC and FF).
 Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC; (b) J–V characteristics of MAPbI3 under 1 Sun (1000 Wm−2 AM 1.5 illumination) and in the dark at a scan speed of 0.01 V s−1 in the backward direction; (c and d) the normalized dark and illuminated J–V characteristics of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. 
Effects of constant illumination
To understand the effect of illumination on PSCs, we first measured the J–V characteristics under illumination (LED source) and dark conditions of the freshly prepared device. Next, the device was subjected to constant illumination stress for 3 h at zero bias and kept in the dark for 30 s before re-measuring the J–V characteristics. To test the recovery of photovoltaic parameters, the device was stored in the dark for a period of 16 h under an inert atmosphere. Fig. 1c and d show the dark and illuminated J–V characteristics of the fresh, illuminated for 3 h (aged) and stored in the dark for 16 h after irradiation (recovered) devices. We observed that the net diode current is fully recovered to its initial value after prolonged storage in the dark. In contrast, the knee voltage of the device is partially recovered, signifying that long hours of illumination stress have a significant impact on interface energetics. The effective average ideality factor (m) and the reverse saturation current (J0) of the device under different test conditions were calculated from the dark J–V characteristics. The values of m of 1.7, 2.1 and 1.9 and J0 of 1.4 × 10−8, 1.1 × 10−7 and 4.4 × 10−8 A cm−2 were obtained for the fresh, aged and recovered devices, respectively. The observed difference in the values of m and J0 between the fresh and recovered devices signifies that the applied test conditions have an influence on both the interfacial and bulk property of the devices.8 Similar to what was observed in the dark J–V measurements, under illumination the photo-current at short circuit conditions is recovered to its initial value after keeping the device in the dark. However, both FF and VOC were irreversibly reduced to a certain extent after prolonged irradiation. This implies that the long hours of illumination stress and subsequent storage of the device in the dark can only effectively recover the photo-current.19,22,23 In order to see the long term illumination influence on the crystal structure of perovskite, X-ray diffraction (XRD) on the freshly prepared perovskite absorber layer and aged samples were measured. We found that long term illumination has no detrimental effect on the absorber layer (Fig. S1, ESI†).
Illumination effect on trap states
The influence of illumination stress and storage in the dark on the intrinsic and interfacial kinetics of the PSC was also studied by using Mott–Schottky (MS) and impedance spectroscopy (IS). Fig. 2a illustrates the MS plots at 15 kHz in a bias range of 0.0 V to 1.1 V for each device. The built-in potential (Vbi) and space charge density were calculated by taking the intercept on the X axis and slope in a high forward bias range, respectively. As was observed for VOC, the value of Vbi was also reduced in the order of Vbi fresh > Vbi aged > Vbi recovered confirming that the illumination stress caused a change in the interface energetics, which are semi-reversible in nature.24 The space charge density increases from 9.3 × 1017 to 3.4 × 1018 cm−3 and recovers up to 2.8 × 1018 cm−3 while storing the PSC in the dark. The excess charge density can be viewed as a combined effect of the photo-doping and ion accumulation. We expect that the excess space charge density obtained after recovery is responsible for lower values of FF and VOC. Furthermore, the excess charges at the interfaces can also increase the interfacial recombination and limit the charge extraction property of selective contacts.19,25,26
 Fig. 2  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. Capacitance was measured at a 15 kHz oscillation frequency with 20 mV AC amplitude and (b) relative dielectric plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. 

Fig. 2b shows the relative dielectric constant of PSC measured at zero bias in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 200 mHz under different test conditions. The dielectric constant of PSC increases after illumination stress and remains almost the same with respect to recovery time in dark conditions. The increase in dielectric constant at low frequency can support the phenomena of ion accumulation and resultant change in the reactivity of selective contacts. The irreversible behavior of the relative dielectric constant under different test conditions can be postulated as follows: (i) the accumulation and interaction of cations and holes at the electron extraction layer can change the interface reactivity permanently, (ii) the chemical reactivity between selective contacts and transported ions may cause the immobilization of ions, and (iii) the irreversible interaction between iodide ions and the oxidized form of spiro-OMeTAD also causes an increase in device series resistance.27–29 It was previously demonstrated that the photo-induced structural changes alter the dielectric constant and polarizability in PSCs, which can be assisted by the rotational degree of freedom of MA cations.19
The degradation and recovery of PSCs were also investigated by measuring the current transient response at short circuit. As shown in Fig. 3, the current transient response of the fresh device is mainly dominated by fast and slow transient time constants as compared to the slow responses in aged and recovered devices. The slow time constants are generally attributed to the accumulation of charges and ions at the selective contacts.30,31 It was observed that the accumulated ions can relax in a time scale of minutes to hours. The current transient responses of PSCs also show the dominance of a slow time constant for aged and recovered devices. On the basis of the abovementioned results, it is clear that partial recovery of the space charge density after storing the PSC in the dark can lead to recovery of its photovoltaic parameters.20 However, the dominance of slow time response and increased dielectric constant can limit the full recovery of the photovoltaic performance.
 Fig. 3  Current transient plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. Normalized current was measured at short circuit conditions. 
Recent in situ transmission electron microscopy studies of PSCs have shown that the migrated and accumulated ions at the interface trigger the formation of voids that could alter the selective contacts and absorber layer interface charactersitics.32 Hence, a variation in interfacial property should be easily reflected by the change in junction resistance and capacitance. To identify these changes, impedance spectroscopy (IS) as a function of applied bias was carried out for each device. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Nyquist plots show two semicircles with difference in magnitude in the low and high frequency region, and are associated with different time constants. Focusing on the FF of the device after recovery, it was found that VOC and JSC can still increase but FF decreases with respect to the initial conditions. It is well known that FF is mainly associated with the series and shunt resistances (RS and RSH). The series resistance (RS), obtained from the X-axis intercept of real impedance, increases from 10.5 Ω before prolonged irradiation to 12.2 Ω after storage in the dark for 16 h indicating the change in conductivity of PSC layers or the interface energetics. In general, the IS response of solar cells in low forward bias is mainly dominated by shunt resistance (RSH). As shown in Fig. 4a, the illumination stress mainly affects the RSH that cannot be recovered even after keeping the cell in the dark for a long duration. These results suggest that the decrease of RSH and increase of RS during illumination stress restricts the full recovery of the J–V characteristic parameters as was observed for FF.
 Fig. 4  Nyquist spectra of the fresh, aged and recovered devices at (a) zero bias and (b) the open circuit voltage of the corresponding devices under illumination in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 200 mHz. 
It should be also noted that RSH and RS have irreversible recovery characteristics because RSH signifies the junction leakage property, which mainly depends on the fabrication procedure. The IS spectra of each device at VOC are shown in Fig. 4b. The dominant low frequency spectra observed in Fig. 4a are changed significantly and the net response is mainly dominated by the high frequency spectra. It is clear that prolonged illumination (applied bias is zero) of the PSC modifies the key photovoltaic parameters i.e. JSC, VOC, FF, RSH and RS to a greater extent. While storing PSCs in the dark, JSC recovers to its initial operating value, VOC partially recovers, and FF remains reduced. In the work done by Nie and co-workers on degradation and recovery in perovskite solar cells it has been shown that by keeping the solar cells in the dark, JSC and VOC both are recovered.19 However, in the present case we observed efficient recovery of JSC with an insignificant effect on VOC which may be due to the difference in test conditions. Moreover, we expect that along with the electronic charge trapping, trapping of ions also influences the device recovery. It should be noted here that the interfacial and bulk relative dielectric constant of PSCs are mainly affected by illumination stress and cannot be recovered by keeping PSCs in the dark. However, from the discussed transient and interfacial response, it is clear that the ion accumulation and their reactivity with selective contacts can also define the long term performance of PSCs.
Effect of illumination and bias stress
In principle, if the accumulation of ions and their reactivity with selective contacts defines the PSC performance and believing the fact that ion motion can be modulated by illumination and the applied bias, one can expect that under these stimuli the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs can mitigate at a faster rate. The influence of applied potential on the degradation and recovery dynamics of PSCs under illumination will be explored in this section.
To study the impact of applied bias on device performance, we first measured the dark and illuminated J–V characteristic parameters under illumination at zero bias. Then, the device was irradiated at knee voltage (0.85 V) for a period of time until the net photo-current reduces to 40% of its initial value. The degradation of the net current was observed within 30 minutes, in contrast to degradation of the irradiated device without the applied bias, which took a longer period of time (∼3 h). Moreover, when the stressed PSC was kept in the dark for 30 s and then re-illuminated, the JSC recovered to its initial value while VOC was unrecovered. We also found that the value of VOC remained unchanged after storing the device in the dark for the next 16 h. The J–V characteristics of fresh, illuminated for 30 min under applied bias (aged), and stored in the dark for 16 h after irradiation (recovered) devices are shown in Fig. 5a. These results signify that the applied bias increases the degradation rate of the PSCs and irreversibly limits the photovoltage recovery. To further confirm the role of applied bias in the degradation of PSCs, the device was exposed to a voltage of 1 V. As expected the PSC photovoltaic characteristic degraded at a faster rate than that of illumination stress and while keeping the device in the dark, only JSC recovered. In a recent study, Bae et al. observed that the permanent degradation of PSC can occur when a voltage greater than the knee voltage is applied; owing to migration of ions that infiltrate the space-charge region and reduce the total space-charge layer width.21
 Fig. 5  The response of fresh, bias stressed (aged) and stored in the dark for 16 h after irradiation (recovered) devices under, (a) normalized illuminated J–V characteristics at a scan speed of 0.01 V s−1 in the backward direction; (b) Mott–Schottky plot measured at 10 kHz oscillation frequency with 20 mV AC amplitude; (c) relative dielectric plot; (d) Nyquist spectra in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 200 mHz at zero bias. 
The MS spectra for each device measured at VOC are shown in Fig. 5b. From these plots we found that the space charge density increases from 8 × 1017 to 5 × 1018 cm−3 and recovers up to 2.7 × 1018 cm−3 while restoring in the dark. These results suggest that the space charge density of the PSC is partially recovered to a certain extent and Vbi is irreversibly reduced after measurements. The dielectric constants of PSCs under different test conditions shown in Fig. 5c clearly exhibit a change in dielectric constant in the probed frequency range. Similar to the conclusion drawn from illumination stress, the recovery of JSC in the PSC can be correlated with the recovered space charge density. The IS spectroscopy at zero bias for fresh, bias stressed (aged) and recovery conditions are shown in Fig. 5d. The IS spectra (low and high frequency arc) of the aged device irreversible decrease under bias stress. Therefore, we can say that under the influence of bias, a small period of time can augment the degradation rate of interfaces in PSCs by accumulating ions at the interface, and changing the reactivity between selective contacts and the absorber layer as supported by the various measurements. When the device is only exposed to illumination stress, the interfacial and bulk characteristics of the absorber layer significantly change as observed in Fig. 4, where the low frequency response is associated with interfacial kinetics and the high frequency response with the perovskite absorber layer. The observed degradation in JSC under illumination and bias stress can be attributed to the photo-accumulation at interfaces and light activated trap states. Previous studies have also shown that under illumination, along with charges, mobile ions are also accumulated at interfaces; while recovery in JSC is due to the recovery of trap states as can be correlated with the partially recovered carrier density.19 The accumulation of charges and mobile ions (low frequency dielectric constant) under illumination stress can cause depletion of the space-charge region and can lead to the partial or permanent degradation of PSC by altering the space-charge region properties. Moreover, bias stress greater than the knee voltage of the device can change the interfacial and intrinsic kinetics at a faster rate.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have shown that when PSCs are exposed to illumination and bias stress, the interfacial and bulk characteristics of the absorber layer changes significantly. The observed degradation in JSC of the devices under illumination and bias stress can be due to the photo-accumulation at interfaces and light activated trap states while the recovery in JSC is correlated with the recovery of trap states or partially recovered carrier density. We also observed that accumulation of charges and mobile ions under illumination stress can cause depletion of the space-charge region and can recover partially when kept in the dark. However, the exposition of PSCs to bias stress leads to their permanent degradation by altering the space-charge region properties.
Experimental section
Solar cell device fabrication
Devices were prepared on plasma-cleaned conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates. A compact titanium dioxide layer was deposited by spray pyrolysis of 9 mL ethanol solution containing 0.6 mL titanium diiso-propoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.4 mL acetylacetone at 450 °C in air. On top of this compact layer, a 150 nm-thick mesoporous titanium dioxide layer was prepared by spin-coating 30 nm sized nanoparticles (Dyesol 30NRD, Dyesol) diluted in ethanol (1:6 wt/wt) at 5000 rpm for 10 s. The films were then gradually heated to 500 °C and sintered at that temperature for 1.5 h under oxygen atmosphere. A perovskite stock reference solution in anhydrous DMSO was prepared from PbI2 (0.64 g) by mixing it with MAI (0.22 g) in a molar ratio of 1:1 by vigorous stirring at 60 °C. The perovskite solutions were spin coated in a two-step program at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 20 s respectively. During the second step, 100 μL of chlorobenzene was poured on the spinning substrate 10 s prior to the end of the program. The substrates were then annealed (at 100 °C unless stated otherwise) for 30 min in a dry box. A hole transporting material (HTM) solution was prepared by dissolving 74 mg spiro-MeOTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene and additionally mixing it with 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (stock solution Li-TFSI 520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile), 28.8 μL tert-butylpyridine and 29 μL of tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide (stock solution FK 209, 300 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile). Subsequently, the HTM was deposited on top of the perovskite layer by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, 80 nm of gold top electrode was thermally evaporated under high vacuum. The active area of the devices is approximately 0.16 cm2.
Device characterization
The J–V characteristics of the devices were measured under 100 mW cm−2 conditions using a 450 W Xenon lamp (Oriel), as a light source, equipped with a Schott K113 Tempax sunlight filter (Praezisions Glas & Optik GmbH) to match the emission spectra to the AM 1.5G standard in the region of 350–750 nm. The current–voltage characteristics of the devices were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cell while recording the generated photo-current using a Keithley (Model 2400) digital source meter. The J–V curves of all devices were measured by masking the active area with a metal mask of area 0.16 cm2. AC measurements were performed using a potentiostat Biologic SP300 equipped with a frequency response analyser.
Acknowledgements
P. Y. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Swiss Confederation under a Swiss Government Scholarship and D. P. from the co-funded Marie Sklodowska Curie fellowship, H2020 Grant agreement no. 707168. E. A. thanks King Abdulaziz city for science and technology, Saudi Arabia (KACST) for the fellowship.
Notes and references
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Li, C. Zheng, D. Gao and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38079 RSC .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323 CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655 CAS .
Z. Song, A. Abate, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, A. B. Phillips, U. Steiner, M. Graetzel and M. J. Heben, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600846 CrossRef .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
B. Roose, J.-P. C. Baena, K. C. Gödel, M. Graetzel, A. Hagfeldt, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, H. Vahlman, H. Nishino, K. Manabe and P. Lund, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, S. Kim, S.-W. Lee, K. J. Cho, S. Park, S. Lee, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Gratzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604 CAS .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258 CAS .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023 CAS .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. Jan Anton Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 27840 CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt, C. Aranda, L. Shooshtari, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 681 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sanchez and E. Mas-Marza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158(part 2), 189 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jeangros, M. Duchamp, J. Werner, M. Kruth, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, B. Niesen, C. Ballif and A. Hessler-Wyser, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02652hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC; (b) J–V characteristics of MAPbI3 under 1 Sun (1000 Wm−2 AM 1.5 illumination) and in the dark at a scan speed of 0.01 V s−1 in the backward direction; (c and d) the normalized dark and illuminated J–V characteristics of the fresh, aged and recovered devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. Capacitance was measured at a 15 kHz oscillation frequency with 20 mV AC amplitude and (b) relative dielectric plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current transient plot of the fresh, aged and recovered devices. Normalized current was measured at short circuit conditions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nyquist spectra of the fresh, aged and recovered devices at (a) zero bias and (b) the open circuit voltage of the corresponding devices under illumination in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 200 mHz.	 

 	Fig. 5  The response of fresh, bias stressed (aged) and stored in the dark for 16 h after irradiation (recovered) devices under, (a) normalized illuminated J–V characteristics at a scan speed of 0.01 V s−1 in the backward direction; (b) Mott–Schottky plot measured at 10 kHz oscillation frequency with 20 mV AC amplitude; (c) relative dielectric plot; (d) Nyquist spectra in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 200 mHz at zero bias.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02652h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
