Multiple exciton generation in nanocrystal  quantum dots – controversy, current status and future prospects  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP20225A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP20225A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12693-12704Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsMultiple exciton generation in nanocrystal quantum dots – controversy, current status and future prospects

        
          
            David J. 
            Binks
          
          
        
      *
      School of Physics and Astronomy & Photon Science Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. E-mail: david.binks@manchester.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 1612751001;   Tel: +44 1612754234
Received 
      26th January 2011
    , Accepted 27th April 2011First published on 20th May 2011AbstractMultiple exciton generation is a process that can occur in quantum dots by which the energy of an absorbed photon in excess of the bandgap can be used to create one or more additional excitons instead of being wasted as heat. This effect has received considerable interest because it has the potential to significantly enhance the performance of solar cells, nanocrystal lasers, high speed electronic devices and photocatalysts. However, measuring the efficiency of multiple exciton generation is experimentally challenging and the results of these measurements have been the subject of some controversy. This Perspective describes the techniques used to determine the quantum yield of multiexcitons in nanocrystals and also details the experimental artefacts that can confuse these measurements and have been the source of much of the recent debate. The greater understanding of these artefacts that has emerged recently and the experimental techniques developed to eliminate their effects on quantum yield measurements will also be described. The efficiency of multiple exciton generation currently obtainable from nanocrystals and its potential impact on solar cell performance is assessed in the light of this improved experimental understanding. Whilst it is found the quantum yields thus far reported are insufficient to result in more than a modest increase in solar cell efficiency, an analysis of the expected performance of a nanocrystal engineered to maximise multiple exciton generation indicates that a significant improvement in solar cell performance is possible. Moreover, a nanocrystal design is proposed for optimised efficiency of multiple exciton generation which would allow its potential benefit to solar power production to be realised.
David J. Binks
David Binks received his BSc in Physics from the University of Manchester in 1992, and after a period in industry, returned to Manchester and completed his PhD in 1998. He was appointed as lecturer in the School of Physics and Astronomy in Manchester in 2004 and became a Senior Lecturer in 2008. His interests are the photophysics of nanocrystal quantum dots and their application to solar power.
1. Introduction
The spectral breadth of sunlight is such that most of the photons absorbed by a conventional, semiconductor-based solar cell have energies (hν) that are significantly greater than the band gap (Eg). On absorption, the photon energy in excess of the bandgap, ΔE = hν − Eg, is transformed into the kinetic energy of the photogenerated electron-hole pair (ehp). Charge carriers produced in this way are thus initially ‘hot’, i.e. have an effective temperature much higher than that of the crystal lattice, but then rapidly cool to the band edge, resulting in the loss of ΔE as heat – see Fig. 1a. This rapid cooling process is responsible for most of the energy losses in conventional solar cells and limits their maximum theoretical efficiency to ∼30%.1 However, if a hot carrier has sufficient kinetic energy it may instead generate one or more additional ehp, as shown in Fig. 1b, which can usefully contribute to the photocurrent, thereby improving the maximum theoretical efficiency of the cell to 44%.2 This alternate process has been observed for decades in bulk materials,3–5 where it is known as impact ionisation, but its efficiency is too low at the visible and infra-red wavelengths that comprise the bulk of the solar spectrum for it to have a significant effect on cell efficiency.
 Fig. 1  (A) In a bulk semiconductor most solar photons absorbed have an energy in excess of the band gap and thus initially produce a ‘hot’ electron-hole pair. However, these hot carriers quickly cool and the consequent loss of energy to heat limits the theoretical efficiency of conventional solar cell. (B) In a NQD however, cooling is slowed by size and structure effects and the process of MEG becomes competitive. Here the excess photon energy associated with one carrier (typically the electron) is instead used to generate additional carriers which can contribute to the photocurrent and thereby improve the efficiency of a solar cell; in contrast the cooling hole produces waste heat as for bulk semiconductors. 
However, it was first suggested in 2001 that the analogous process in nanocrystal quantum dots (NQD), would be more efficient.6 NQD, which are also known as colloidal quantum dots or nanoparticles, are crystals whose nanometre-scale size is similar to or less than that of the Bohr radius of an exciton in the corresponding bulk material. The spatial extent of the ehp is thus determined by the dimensions of the NQD, some of the important consequences of which are outlined in this paragraph and described in detail elsewhere.7–9 Firstly, both the conduction and valance band separate into a set of discrete quantised states for electrons and holes respectively, the energy of which depends on the size of the NQD. Each electron state can be described by two quantum numbers: L, which determines the angular momentum of the envelope wavefunction, and n, which is analoguous to the principal quantum number of an atom; the notation for these states is usually written in the form, nX, (where X = S,P,D… for L = 0,1,2…). However, because of sub-band mixing, the hole states are better described by the quantum numbers n and F, where F determines the total angular momentum (i.e. the sum of the envelope wavefunction and Bloch function angular momenta); the notation for these states is nXF. The size dependence of the lowest energy electron and hole states allows the Eg of the NQD to be continuously tuned by growing smaller or larger crystals; this is a particularly important property because, as will be discussed later, the theoretical maxmium efficiency of a solar cell, whether it utilises MEG or not, depends on Eg. Secondly, the separation of these states, which also depends inversely on the effective mass of the carrier, can be 100s of meV for electrons, which is several times the phonon energy (∼30 meV) for typical NQD materials. Consequently, the rate of phonon-mediated cooling for electrons is reduced in NQD because it now requires the simultaneous involvement of several phonons—this effect has become known as the ‘phonon bottleneck’.10 In contrast the effective mass of holes is often significantly greater and consequently the energy level seperation is not sufficiently large to produce an appreciable reduction in phonon-mediated cooling. A third key effect of the confinement of the electron and hole by the nanometre size-scale of NQD is the enhancement of the Coulomb interaction between them, due to both increased wavefunction overlap and reduced dielectric screening. In particular, the efficiencies of Auger recombination and Auger relaxation are increased. In the first effect, a ehp transfers its energy to a third carrier. This process is much more efficient than radiative recombination in NQD and consequently multi-exciton and trion lifetimes are several orders of magnitude shorter than that for single excitons (for which no third carrier is available and so Auger recombination is not possible). In Auger relaxation, a hot electron may cool by transfering energy to the hole and thereby circumvent the phonon bottleneck. However, this process can be reduced or prevented by increasing the spatial separation of the hot electron and hole. This has been achieved in NQD both by introducing a fast hole trapping species to the surface and by using a core/shell structure in which the electron and hole localise in different regions.11 It was the prospect of a significantly slowed hot electron cooling rate which led to the original prediction6 that the the process in NQD analoguous to impact ionisation in bulk materials might be considerablly more efficient—see Fig. 1b. The term ‘multiple exciton generation’ (MEG) was coined to describe the process in NQD to emphasise the correlation of the ehp caused by their spatial confinement, although since then others have also labelled it ‘carrier multiplication’;12 currently the two terms are used synonymously in the literature.
The first experimental demonstration of MEG was reported in 2004 for PbSe NQD12 and over the next three years MEG was observed in a number of different laboratories using several different spectroscopic techniques for a range of different NQD types: PbS,13 PbTe,14 CdSe,15 InAs,16 and Si.17 Highlights among these early results were reports of upto 7 excitons produced by a single absorbed photon for PbSe NQD,18 and a threshold photon energy for InAs at the minimum required by conservation of energy,16i.e. 2Eg. Of these materials, it was the lead chalcogenide NQD that were of most interest for solar power applications because they can be fabricated with an Eg that is sufficiently small to enable MEG to be used to significantly enhance the exploitation of the solar spectrum, as will be discussed later in section 4. However, from 2007 a number of authors reported that they were unable to replicate the results obtained previously by themselves or others.19–22 Instead, either no MEG was observed or if it was then its efficiency was much less. There then followed a period of some controversy over this discrepancy in results for ostensibly similar NQD. There has also been considerable debate about how spectroscopic measurements should be interpretated with various authors disagreeing about whether measurements show that MEG in NQD is more or less efficient than impact ionisation in bulk materials.23–25 Whilst these debates were ongoing, the number of materials reported to exhibit efficient MEG increased to include CdTe,26 InP27 and CdSe/CdTe core-shell NQDs;28 MEG has also been observed in single-walled carbon nanotubes.29 A number of review articles discussing progress in this field also appeared in this period.7,9,30–32 However, there have been a number of very recent developments that have resolved some of the controversial issues and significantly advanced progress towards the use of MEG to enhance solar cell performance. In particular, it has been shown that electron transfer from a PbS NQD to a TiO2 substrate can occur in less than 50 fs, which is much less than the lifetime of biexcitons in NQD (typically 10–100 ps);33 similarly rapid charge extraction has also been demonstrated from CdSe NQD to molecular adsorbates.34,35 These results were important because they indicated that it would be possible to extract the additional charge carriers generated by MEG from the NQDs before they are lost to recombination. Finally, this expectation was confirmed shortly afterwards when MEG was demonstrated in a similar PbS NQD/TiO2 system by the direct measurement of an enhanced photocurrent rather than by spectroscopic means.36
This Perspective will first describe the experimental techniques used to measure MEG and the associated artefacts that can arise which lead to the original controversy and debate. The recent developments in the understanding of these artefacts and the effect they have on MEG efficiency measurements and their interpretation will also be detailed. Secondly, the efficiency of MEG in various NQD types will be reviewed in the light of this improved experimental understanding, and this will be related to the enhancement of solar cell performance that could be expected by using these NQD. Finally, the prospects for the improvement of MEG performance afforded by the scope for engineering the photophysical properties of NQD will discussed, and a NQD design for improved MEG efficiency will be proposed.
2. Measuring MEG
2.1 Experimental techniques
The aim of these measurements is determine the quantum yield (QY) for a NQD, i.e. the average number of excitons produced per absorbed photon, for a number of different excitation wavelengths. The signature of MEG is that the QY should exceed 100% above a threshold photon energy, hνth, which corresponds to the point at which the electron (typically) acquires an initial kinetic energy from the absorbed photon equal to Eg. However, the multi-exciton states created in NQD by MEG undergo rapid recombination by an Auger process and consequently have lifetimes in the 10 s to 100 s of picoseconds range. Therefore, the MEG-created excitons must be counted or extracted from the NQD before recombination can occur if QY is to be determined accurately. Most studies of MEG to date have relied on one or other ultrafast transient spectroscopic technique to determine the initial average population of excitons per NQD. Laser systems based on a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator with amplication and nonlinear frequency conversion are available which produce pulses that are ∼100 fs or less in duration and tunable over a wide wavelength range. These systems are ideal excitation sources because the ultrashort pulse duration enables the necessary time resolution to be straightfowardly achieved. The major experimental challenge in the spectroscopic determination of QY is rather achieving sufficient sensitivity. Multi-exciton states can be created by MEG or by sequential absorption of photons by the NQD within the lifetime of a single exciton (which, because Auger processes cannot occur for a single exciton, is much longer than for multiexcitons and is typically in the range 10 ns to 1 μs). To distinguish between these two sources of multi-exciton states, the excitation fluence must be sufficiently low to ensure that the probability of a NQD absorbing more than one photon during an excitation pulse is negligible. Consequently, the signal obtained from the sample is low (e.g. fractional changes in absorbance of the order of 10−3 are typical) and careful experimental design is neccessitated to ensure sufficient signal-to-noise.
The first spectroscopic technique used to measure MEG QY was ultrafast transient absorption (UTA).12 This is a pump–probe experiment in which the absorption of high energy pump photons creates initially hot ehp. A probe beam is then used to measure the average number of excitons per NQD as function of the time delay between the arrival of the pump and probe beams (which is varied by changing the optical path length difference for the two beams.) There are several variations of UTA which differ in the wavelength of the probe beam utilised. The commonest form uses a probe beam tuned to the lowest energy absorption maximum (LEAM), which corresponds to an interband transition from a state near to but not at the valance band maximum (VBM) to the conduction band minimum (CBM); the VBM to CBM transition is optically very weak and so cannot be readily used for absorption measurements. The absorption of a pump photon results in one (if no MEG occurs) or more (if MEG occurs) electrons filling the corresponding number of CBM states of the NQD, and thereby reduces the sample absorbance. In contrast, the hole created by the absorption of the pump photon relaxes to the VBM and so does not fill any states involved in the LEAM. The use of a lock-in amplifier synchronised to the excitation repetition rate ensures that only CBM electrons created by pump photons are detected. Thus interband-UTA monitors the population dynamics of photogenerated CBM electrons (and by inference that of the excitons) by measuring the pump-induced transient bleach at the LEAM. Intraband-UTA is a very similar technique37 that instead uses a probe tuned to the transition for an electron from the CBM to a higher state; here then the CBM electron dynamics are found from the transient pump-induced absorption increase at the probe wavelength. Lastly, THz-UTA is somewhat different in that it probes the pump-induced transient hole population (and, again, by inference that of the excitons) rather than that of the CBM electrons but is otherwise similar.23
Photoluminesence (PL) decay can be also be used to monitor exciton dynamics in NQD. Several forms of ultrafast transient photoluminescence (UTPL) spectroscopy have been used to measure MEG QY. The first involves the direct measurement of the PL decay using the time-correlated single photon counting technique and, as the name suggests, has the advantage of being very sensitive.38 However, the spectral sensitivity of the multi-channel plates (MCP) used restricts their use to samples emitting at wavelengths < 850 nm, which corresponds to band gaps too large to optimally exploit the solar spectrum. Direct detection of the PL by a photomultiplier tube (PMT) after quasi-continuous wave excitation has also been used, but this too is restricted by the spectral sensitivity range of the detector and neither does it reveal any detail about the multiexciton dynamics.28 Streak cameras have sufficient time-resolution and sensitivity and have been used to measure MEG for visible emitting NQD.19 However, their wavelength range also does not extended far enough into the infrared to accommodate NQD with the bandgaps best suited to solar conversion. In contrast, ultrafast PL upconversion (UPLU) spectroscopy combines sufficient time-resolution to monitor the multi-exciton lifetimes thus far reported and a spectral range suitable to monitor transient PL emitted in the near-infrared region which corresponds to the optimum band gap for harvesting solar photons.20,24 Here, the PL is not detected directly but mixed rather with an ultrafast laser pulse in a nonlinear crystal. Upconverted light at the sum of the optical frequencies of the PL and laser pulse is thus generated but only when both are co-incident in the crystal and at an intensity proportional to that of the PL. Varying the time delay of arrival at the crystal between the PL and laser pulse allows the PL decay to be monitored with a time resolution similar to the pulse duration (typically ∼100 fs or less). Furthermore, the wavelength of the laser pulse can be chosen to ensure that the frequency of the upconverted light falls with the spectral range of a sensitive PMT, which enables small signals to be detected.
The UPLU and UTA techniques just described are the experiments arguably best suited to the study of MEG in NQD. This is because they combine sub-picosecond time resolution, which allows multiexciton dynamics to be measured directly, with a spectral sensitivity which enables the study of NQD with Eg of ∼0.7–1.1 eV; as will be described in section 4, a band gap in this range is necessary if MEG is to be used to enhance solar cell efficiency. UPLU has the further advantage that it can employ very sensitive detectors, which is particular useful at the low excitation rates required to ensure a NQD has only negligible probability of absorbing more than photon per pulse.
2.2 Analysis
The analysis of transient data from UTA experiments relies on the large difference in recombination rate between single and multiexcitons in NQD. As noted above, the lifetime of single excitons, τX, is several orders of magnitude greater than that of bi-excitons, τXX, (or higher order multiexcitons) because Auger recombination cannot occur for a single exciton; it requires the presence of either more than one exciton or the formation of trion, i.e. a single exciton plus an unpaired electron or hole, because another charge is needed to accept the energy liberated by exciton recombination. For small fractional changes and negligible multiexcitonic binding energies, the initial maximum of the signal, occuring at time t0, is proportional to the number of excitons created by the pump pulse whether by absorption and cooling or absorption and MEG. At a time t1 after the initial maximum, where τXX ≪ t1 ≪ τX, all the multiexcitons formed by the pump pulse have decayed to single excitons but no significant number of single excitons have been lost. At this point the signal is proportional to the number of NQD intially excited by the pump pulse. The transient signal, as shown in Fig. 2, is thus characterised by a rapid decay from an initial peak down to a long-lived plateau. The ratio of the signal amplitudes at the intial peak and plateau, R, therefore corresponds to the average number excitons created per pump-excited NQD. At low pump fluences, however, the probability of an NQD absorbing more than one photon per pump pulse is negligible and so in this case R becomes equivalent to the average number of excitons created per absorbed pump photon i.e. the QY of MEG.
 Fig. 2  Typical signal obtained during a UTA experiment showing the fractional change in transmittance through the sample, ΔT/T, as a function of pump–probe delay time. R is the ratio between the initial amplitude of the signal, A, and its value, B, after biexciton decay but before the significant decay of any single excitons. 
The probability of a NQD absorbing N photons is determined by Poisson statistics and thus by the average number of photons absorbed per NQD, 〈N〉 = σJ, where σ is the absorption cross-section of the NQD at the pump wavelength and J is the fluence of the pump pulse (in units of photons per cm2 per second).8 The early reports based their claim of efficient MEG in NQD on the observation that the early peak in the absorption transient associated with biexcitons persisted even for values for 〈N〉 that corresponded to a negligible chance that any NQD had absorbed two or more photons. However, it was later recognised that it is sometimes difficult to measure σ accurately, as will be discussed in section 3. This led to the concern that an underestimate of σ and thus 〈N〉 might lead to a false conclusion that a bi-excitonic decay was the result of MEG when in fact it was just due to multiple photon absorptions.22 To overcome this uncertainty, an analysis technique was later developed17 that did not require prior knowledge of σ. For a particular pump wavelength, absorption transients are obtained and associated values of R calculated for a range of absorbed pump fluences. As shown in Fig. 3, these R values can then be plotted against fluence (or initial fractional transmittance change, ΔT(t = 0)/T, which, for small changes, is equivalent to σJ within a constant of proportionality) and the limiting value of R for vanishing fluence, i.e. QY, is found by fitting the data to the following expression: R(J) = QYσJ[1 − exp(−σJ)]−1(1)Note that as J → 0, R → QY and thus it is not necessary to know σ beforehand.
 Fig. 3  
R as a function of fractional transmittance change, ΔT/T, for InP NQD excited at 2.6 times Eg. The line is a fit to eqn (1). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. 
Repeating this procedure for a range of pump wavelengths allows the number of additional excitons per absorbed photon, i.e. QY-1, to be plotted against the pump photon energy normalised to the band gap i.e. hν/Eg, as shown in Fig. 4 for three different examples: InAs, PbSe and InP NQD. Such a plot is useful for the following reasons. Firstly, hνth for MEG depends on Eg, and hence NQD size, in the following way9: (2)where me* and mh* are the effective masses of the electron and hole, respectively. Thus, the observation of a common value of hνth/Eg for a range of NQD sizes supports the conclusion that efficient MEG is responsible for the greater than unity R values measured in the limit of low fluence. For both InAs16 and InP27 NQD me* ≪ mh* and thus hνth ∼ 2Eg while for PbSe16 NQD me* ∼ mh* and thus hνth ∼ 3Eg, which is consistent with the data shown in Fig. 4. In contrast, photo-charging of NQD which, as will be discussed in the next section, can also lead to greater than unity R values at low fluence and thus apparently a QY > 100% depends only on the absolute photon energy, hν, and so a plot of QY against hν/Eg would not yield a common theshold value for different NQD dimensions.
 Fig. 4  Addtional number of excitons created by MEG as function of hνth/Eg for (a) InP, (b) InAs and (c) PbSe NQD. Data from ref. 27, 16 and 39, respectively. (NREL and LANL indicate data from National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Los Alamos National Laboratory.) 
Secondly, the slope efficiency, η, i.e. the rate of increase of QY with hν/Eg, also appears to be broadly independent of NQD size, as can be seen from Fig. 4. Thus, the MEG efficiency of a NQD type can be characterised by two size-independent parameters, hνth/Eg and η, both of which are obtained from plots such as Fig. 4.
The analysis of ultrafast PL transients proceeds along the same lines except for the complication that PL intensity at the initial maximum depends on the rate of radiative recombination for both biexcitons, kXX, and single excitons, kX, whilst the intensity at the plateau depends only on kX. Calculation of QY in this cases thus requires that the ratio kXX/kX be known for the NQD. For many of the early reports utilising UTPL to investigate MEG, a value of kXX/kX was assumed based on theoretical considerations. However, the value used varied between authors, ranging between 2 and 5, and consequently was the subject of some debate.19,20,38 When the discrepancy between reported QY values for similar NQD emerged, the different values of this ratio used was one of the reasons suggested as an explanation.20 Later work measured kXX/kX directly but this involved measuring the PL intensity at high pump fluences which, unless the sample is effectively stirred, can lead to misleading results, as will be described in detail in the next section.19,20 However, very recent work24 on well-stirred samples has established that, for PbSe NQD at least, the radiative recombination is proportional to the product of the number of electrons, ne, and holes, nh, in the conduction and valence bands i.e. k ∝ nenh, and thus kXX/kX = 4.
3. Artefacts and controversy
When the disparity between reported QY values became apparent a number of different explanations were proposed, including: uncertainty in the value of σ,22 pump beam inhomogeneities,9 variation in surface chemistry,9 and sample photocharging by the pump beam.30 The resulting debate lead to improvements in experimental technique and data analysis which enabled the first two of these explanations to be eliminated. As mentioned above, underestimation of σ can lead to biexciton creation by sequential absorption being mis-identified as MEG. There are number of reasons why it can be difficult to determine σ accurately. Firstly, the mass fractions of NQD and passivating ligand within a particular sample, knowledge of which is necessary to calculate σ from measured absoprtion coefficients, might not be well known. Secondly, since σ increases strongly with decreasing wavelength above the band edge, its value for the pump beam can be as much as >40 times greater than for the probe beam40i.e. the transmittance for the pump beam may be e−40 less. In order to measure σ, it may thus be necessary to dilute the sample signficantly which, because the passivating ligand can be in dynamic equilibrium, may change the degree of surface passivation. Finally, while σ may also be determined from transient absorption experiments, these must take into account any spectral shift of the 1S absoprtion peak induced by multiexciton interaction energies.40 However, the development of the analysis described in section 2.2 allowed QY to be found without first determing σ thus removing this as possible source of discrepancy between results. Inhomogeneities in the pump beam can result in local ‘hotspots’ in which the the probability of a biexciton creation by sequential absorption is signficant even though average probability over the whole beam is low. However, this risk can be avoided either by careful control of the beam to ensure homogeneity or the use of beam homogenising optics.
The importance of surface chemistry has since been confirmed by a number of studies. In an investigation of MEG in PbSe NQD films,41 the QY was found to be affected by which of several reagents had been used to treat the surface. These changes were attributed to the action of the reagents changing the film from p-type to n-type. Two more recent studies have shown the importance of surface oxidation on MEG performance in both PbSe42 and PbS43 NQD. In both cases, exposure to the air results in the rapid transformation of a thick (∼0.5 nm) outer layer of the NQD into the corresponding oxide. The formation of this oxide layer does not seem to affect the MEG slope efficiency or normalised threshold, hν/Eg. Crucially, however, MEG performance relative to the solar spectrum is affected because the NQD has been transformed into one now comprising a core of Pb-chalcogenide, which is smaller in size than the original NQD, and an outer shell of oxide. The reduction in size of the Pb-chalcogenide phase and its envelopment by a shell of wider band gap material both increase Eg for the NQD and thus hνth (see eqn (2)). Clearly, the detail of the preparation methods used are important and could have contibuted to the differences in reported QY values, as could uncontrolled exposure to the air. However, both of these sources of disparity can be eliminated by careful sample preparation and handling, which can be done under an inert atmosphere if necessary.
The important role of photo-charging in confusing measurements of MEG QY and threshold has only very recently become understood. The difference of some UTA transients from the expected single exponential decay to a plateau shown in Fig. 2 had been noted several years ago.22 Concern over this was expressed by some authors because it indicated that processes other than biexciton recombination were contributing to the transient and thus cast some doubt on the validity of the analysis in these cases.22 The crucial part played by photocharging became evident following a 2008 study44 which, utilising both UTA and UTPL, showed that there was a factor of upto three difference between the values of QY found when the NQD sample was stirred and when it was static. This dramatic difference was attributed to the accumulation of long-lived photo-charged NQD within the pumped volume of the static sample; sufficient stirring was taken to refresh the material within the pumped volume and thus prevent a similar accumulation of photo-charged NQD. Photo-charging has the potential to confuse MEG measurements because when a charged NQD absorbs a photon it forms not a single exciton but a trion. (Note, that in this context ‘charging’ may refer to the trapping of a hole (or electron) on the NQD surface leaving an unpaired electron (hole) in the CBM (VBM)). Unlike a single exciton, a trion can decay rapidly by Auger recombination and therefore on a time-scale similar to that of a biexciton-this process is illustrated in Fig. 5. Trion decay thus produces features in UTA or UTPL transients that look similar to those caused by biexciton decay and are caused by the absorption of only a single pump photon per pulse and hence persist even in the limit of low pump fluence. Further work by the same group24 showed that by careful analysis the affect of photo-charging could be taken into account and the QY measured for static and stirred samples of the same NQD could be reconciled, lending strong support to the identification of the important role of photo-charging. Uncontrolled photo-charging of NQD therefore has the potential to disguise the true MEG QY and may explain the discrepancies between many of the early reports. Unlike biexcitons which decay into pump-produced excitons, trions decay into charged NQD which neither emit photoluminesence nor modulate the 1S absorption peak at the pump frequency. Hence, these charged NQD do not contribute to either a UTA or a UTPL signal and so the component of either transient corresponding to trion decay is a rapid monoexponetial decay to zero rather than to a plateau, as it is for biexciton decay. The effect of trion decay is thus to increase the value of R which usually leads to an overestimation of the QY. However, in some cases the particular analysis used may have conversely led to an underestimation of QY.19,20 As noted above, the analysis of UTPL transients requires that the value of kXX/kX be known for a particular NQD. One way to determine this experimentally is to measure the UTPL signal at saturation i.e. at large absorbed pump fluences, and use this to normalise the signal at low fluence. However, the degree of photo-charging is fluence dependent and thus the apparent exaggeration caused by trion decay will be most significant for a saturated signal. Division of the low fluence transients by an inflated saturation signal would hence lead to misleadingly low values of QY being reported.
 Fig. 5  Trion decay in a NQD. In a positive trion, the electron recombines with one of the holes by an Auger process, and the energy thus liberated is given to the remaining hole which quickly cools. Similarly, in a negative trion, the recombination energy is given to the remaining charge, this time an electron, which again rapidly loses the energy gained by cooling. 
Once the role of photocharging became clear and it was established that it could be reduced by stirring the sample, it became important to determine the factors governing the degree of photo-charging and establish the rate of sample stirring, or equivalently flowing, sufficient to completely suppress it and thus enable the accurate assessment of QY. A recent study39 investigated the dependence of R values calculated from transient absorption data on the pump fluence and photon energy, and the rate at which a solution of PbSe NQD was flowed through the pump volume. It found that there was no difference in the values found under static, Rstatic, and flowing, Rflow, conditions for low photon energies (hν < 2Eg) at any of the fluence levels investigated. For higher photon energies (hν < 2Eg), Rstatic exceeded Rflow and this difference was greatest for the highest pump fluences. The investigation of the influence of flow reported in the same study found that value of R found dropped rapidly from the static value as the flow was increased and then stabilised once a rate approximately equivalent to replacing the flow cell volume once per minute was achieved. Increasing the flow rate beyond this produced no further reduction in R. These results demonstrate that the effects of photo-charging on the measurements of MEG QY for PbSe NQD can be effectively ameliorated even by a modest rate of refreshing the excitation volume. Similarly, a recent study of MEG43 in PbS NQD showed that stirring at 500 rpm reduced the value of R obtained compared to Rstatic but no further reduction was obtained when rate of stirring was increased to 1000 rpm, indicating that photo-charging can been completely suppressed by stirring as well as flowing. However, not all of the NQD types thus far studied seem equally susceptible to photocharging. In particular, a study of MEG in InP NQD found no difference between R values for stirred and unstirred samples for any of the photon energies or fluence levels used in the investigation.27 Hence, in this case no flowing or stirring was required to obtain an accurate assessment of QY. The imperviousness of these NQD to photocharging is likely to be due the effective passivation of the InP surface by an inner and outer shell of ZnS and ZnO, respectively, which reduces the probability of charge trapping on the NQD surface and hence the chance of photo-charging. Finally, it should be noted that the effectiveness of stirring or flowing, when it is required by the nature of the NQD, depends on the experimental conditions. In particular, for laminar flow fluid velocities reduce to zero as the surface of the vessel is approached and thus the rate of replacement of NQD is much slower here than in the centre of the vessel. This can be problematic because the NQD absorption cross-section rises sharply with decreasing wavelength which can result in very short absorption depths for the high pump photon energies typically used in MEG studies. If the sample concentration is not kept low to compensate then these absorption depths can become similar in size to the thickness of the low fluid velocity region next to the cuvette or flow cell wall and the excitation volume will not be effectively refreshed.39
4. State of the art
4.1 Threshold and quantum yield
The potential for the experimental artefacts discussed in the previous section to affect the measurement of the threshold and QY of MEG has only been fully and widely appreciated in the last year or two. Consequently, the greatest confidence can only be attached to those recently reported results which have been obtained using the experimental techniques and data analysis methods described above which have been shown to eliminate confusing artefacts. Of particular importance is the need to establish whether the results have been affected by photo-charging by investigating whether the value of R obtained experimentally depends on the rate of sample stirring or flowing and, if it does, that a sufficient rate can be achieved to eliminate the effect of photo-charging. With these considerations in mind, the MEG threshold and QY values in which there is the greatest confidence are collated in Table 1 for a number of different NQD types.
Table 1 Experimentally measured MEG threshold and slope efficiency values for a range NQD types





NQD type


Threshold (hνth/Eg)

Slope eff. η (%)

Bulk E

g
 (eV)

Ref.






a Upper limit.
b Transition is from CdSe CBM to CdTe VBM.





PbSe
3
40
0.37

24,39



PbS
3
40
0.5

43



InP
2.1
30
1.27

27



InAs
2
35
0.36

16



CdSe/CdTe
2.7
<53a
0.91b

28





The threshold values determined for all the NQD types given in Table 1 are consistent with eqn (2) when the values for the electron and hole effectives masses obtained from bulk measurements are used. (An early report13 on PbSe NQD claimed that MEG was observed at a threshold lower than that predicted by eqn (2) but these experiments were performed before the importance of photo-charging and other artefacts was fully understood and similar observations have not been reported since.) As will be discussed shortly, the value of the threshold plays a key role in determining the potential enhancement of solar cell efficiency by MEG. The use of eqn (2) and bulk effective mass values to predict the MEG threshold of a NQD can therefore be a valuable part of assessing the potential of candidate materials.
The reported slope efficiency values given in Table 1 range between 30% and 53%, and are all signficantly lower than the values of >100% claimed previously,15,18 which were likely affected by the enhancement of R by uncontrolled photo-charging. The greater value of η observed for PbSe and PbS compared to InP and InAs may be a consequence of the rate of MEG being enhanced by the availability of a larger number of final exciton states in these NQD. Calculations indicate that for PbSe and PbS there are 4 equivalent band minima at the L points of the Brillouin zone45 which, with 2-fold spin degeneracy, leads to an 8-fold degeneracy of the lowest energy exciton state; this has been experimentally confirmed for PbSe NQD.46 In comparison, the lowest energy exciton states in most other NQD exhibit only 2-fold spin degeneracy.8 As will be argued in section 5, the enhanced slope efficiency measured for the CdSe/CdTe NQD can be attributed to the suppression of the cooling processes competitive with MEG.
4.2 Potential for enhancing solar cell efficiency
The ‘Detailed Balance’ model has been used to determine the theoretical maximum efficiency of conventional solar cells for many years,1 and a modified version of it has been been used more recently to calculate the potential for MEG to enhance solar cell performance.2,47–49 It represents the ideal case in which every photon with an energy greater than or equal to Eg is absorbed and produces excitons with a QY that depends on both hν and Eg. The photogenerated current density, jpg, is thus given by (3)where ϕ(hν) is the spectral photon flux density and e is the electronic charge. Further, the only loss of photogenerated charge is assumed to by radiative recombination and hence the total current density, j, is found by offsetting jpg by the recombination current density, jr, which is given by (4)where h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light, k is Boltzmann' constant, T is the temperature (set to 300 K here). V is the operating voltage of the cell and is assumed to be equal to a constant quasi-Fermi level seperation. V is determined in the model by finding the value which maximises the photovoltaic efficiency of the cell, ηPV=jV/I, where I is the total solar irradiance. MEG is incorporated into this model by assuming an appropiate functional form for QY. In the case of optimised MEG then QY is given by a series of unit steps occuring when hν equals an integer number of Egi.e. QY(hν,Eg) = ∑Mm=1θ(hν,mEg)(5)where θ(hν,mEg) is the Heaviside unit step function and M is the integer part of the maximum normalised photon energy, hνmax/Eg. Note that fixing m = 1 yields the QY in the absence of MEG. However, as remarked above, it has been found that for NQD the enhancement in QY due to MEG observed experimentally is better described by a linear rise after hνth has been reached: QY(hν,Eg) = θ(hν,Eg) + ηθ(hν,hνth)(hν − hνth)/Eg(6)Fig. 6 shows the maximum theoretical photovoltaic efficiency of solar cells as a function of Eg for five NQD: PbSe, PbS, InP, InAs and CdSe/CdTe types. In each case, the QY was calculated using eqn (6) and the experimentally determined values for hνth and η given in Table 1; the AM1.5G solar spectrum50 was used which has a total irradiance of 1 kWm−2. The efficiency was calculated for Eg ranging from the bulk value for each material up to 2.0 eV, which corresponds to a value of 2Eg equal to the maximum photon energy in the solar spectrum with significant intensity. Also included in Fig. 6 for comparison are the results for the cases of no MEG and maximum MEG efficiency i.e. where QY was calculated using eqn (5) for values of m equal to unity and the integer part of hνmax/Eg, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Solar cell efficiency calculated using the detailed balance model based on the MEG performance established to date for PbS, PbSe, InP, InAs and CdSe/CdTe NQD. For comparison, the efficiency expected for the cases of no MEG and ideal MEG are also shown. 

Fig. 6 shows that under unconcentrated sunlight the experimentally measured efficiency of MEG in PbSe, PbS and CdSe/CdTe does not have the potential to improve the performance of solar cells i.e. for each of these materials the maximum photovoltaic efficiency calculated was 33.7%, the same as for the case of no MEG. For InP and InAs, however, a small potential improvement of ∼0.5% in efficiency is calculated; the slope efficiencies of these two materials are the lowest of the values presented in Table 1 and so the better overall performance is due their threshold being at or close to the minimum allowed by eqn (2). (Note however that the bulk Eg of InP is similar to that required for optimum performance; the Eg of an InP NQD will be greater than this). In contrast to these results based on experimental data is the solar cell performance possible for ideal MEG, in which the threshold is minimised and all hot electrons undergo MEG. In this case, as has been reported previously,2 the maximum theoretical efficiency is 44.4%, a factor of 1.32 greater than for the no MEG case.
Similar trends in performance are obtained when photovoltaic efficiency under concentrated sunlight is calculated. Table 2 compares the performance under concentration factors of 10, 100 and 1000 for the case of no MEG, the currently best performing NQD (InAs) and the case of ideal MEG. Again MEG in InAs NQD brings a small increase in photovoltaic efficiency compared to a conventional cell, but this improvement could be much greater if MEG were optimised.
Table 2 Maximum theoretical efficiency under concentrated sunlight





Concentration factor


Photovoltaic efficiency (%)



No MEG


InAs NQD


Ideal MEG





10
36.0
36.9
45.1


100
38.5
39.4
54.5


1000
41.0
42.1
65.0




5. Engineering NQD for MEG
In the last section it was demonstrated that, while MEG has the potential to signficantly enhance photovoltaic efficiency, the QY of MEG thus far reported for NQD, allowing for the artefacts discussed in section 3, is sufficient only to produce a negligible improvement in solar cell performance. Section 4 also shows that it is the less than optimum slope efficiency of MEG that is reponsible for the full potential enhancement of photovoltiac efficiency not being realised; in contrast, optimum values of both Eg and hνth has already been demonstrated. However, even though MEG studies on NQD composed of a number of different semiconductor materials have been undertaken, as outlined in the introduction, and these studies often also explore the effect of NQD size on MEG, there has been very little investigation of how the structure of a NQD can influence MEG QY. Nevertheless, there is some initial evidence that NQD structure can have a strong influence on MEG QY. The values of hνth and η for InAs listed in Table 1 were for samples comprising an InAs core covered by a shell of CdSe. Without this shell, the MEG QY observed was approximately a factor of three less. The positions of the VBM and CBM of bulk CdSe relative to those of bulk InAs51 suggest that a shell of CdSe surrounding a InAs core acts to confine both the electron and hole within the core and consequently reduces the the overlap of their wavefunctions with trap states on the surface. The improved MEG QY observed when the InAs NQD included a CdSe shell may thus be due to reduced competition with surface trap state mediated cooling of hot electrons. A reduced interation with surface states is also consistent with the dramatic increase in photoluminesence lifetime, from 0.6 ns to 205 ns, observed for the InAs/CdSe core/shell NQD compared to the InAs core only NQD. A core/shell NQD that confines both electrons and holes to the core is known as a Type I structure whilst one which confines the electron to the core and the hole to the shell, or vice versa, is termed Type II—see Fig. 7 for an illustration of these two structures. (N.B. An intermediate case, known as a quasi-Type II structure, is possible in which one of the carriers is confined to a certain part of the NQD whilst the other is delocalised over the whole NQD.) A type II structure brings two distinct advantages. Firstly, the effective absorption edge now corresponds to a transition from the valance band of the hole-confining part of the structure to conduction band of the electron-confining part and will consequently be at a longer wavelength than for a NQD made entirely of either the core or shell material. Such a red-shifting effect is a method of reducing the value of Eg closer to the optimum value that might not otherwise be possible for a particular material system. Secondly, the reduced wavefunction overlap produced by confining the electron and hole to separate parts of the NQD decreases the rate of Auger relaxation, a hot electron cooling process that competes with MEG, as mentioned above. It was these considerations that led authors of ref. 28 to study MEG in CdTe/CdSe NQD, a Type II structure that confines the hole to the core and the electron to the shell. A shown in Table 1, they measured values of η as high 53%, the highest value reported since the consequences of the artefacts discussed in section 3 became clear. (N.B. The experimental techniques used in this study only yielded an upper limit to MEG efficiency and the true value may be somewhat lower). Nevertheless, the high MEG QY reported is consistent with the reduced competition with Auger relaxation expected in a Type II structure. In light of these promising observations, the possibilities for engineering the structure of NQD for enhanced MEG will be discussed in the rest of this section, with particular emphasis on increasing η.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of the structures of Type I and Type II NQD. In a Type I NQD, the VBM and CBM of the shell acts as potential barriers for the hole and electron, respectively, and both carriers are confined to the core region. In a Type II NQD, the electron is confined to the core and the hole to the shell (or vice versa) by the position of the shell VBM and CBM relative to those of the core. 
The QY of MEG depends on the competition between MEG and other hot carrier cooling processes, and can thus be increased both by enhancing MEG and by suppressing these competing processes. As will be discussed below, there have been some important advances in recent years which have shown that it is possible to reduce the rate of hot electron cooling in NQD by several orders of magnitude and so it is the application of these techniques that currently seems to be the most promising route to enhancing the QY of MEG. The phonon bottleneck produced by the discretization of the energy levels in the conduction band by quantum confinement was originally expected to result in much increased electron cooling times compared to bulk samples of the same material. However, this was not observed experimentally with typical cooling times of 1 ps reported, and so it was concluded that cooling processes other than phonon emission were playing an important role.52,53 Later work identified three main phenomena which all contributed to the rate of electron cooling: Auger relaxation, trapping by surface states, and coupling of the intraband transition to molecular vibrations of the surface ligands.11 Work on NQD structures designed to suppress each of the processes culminated in 2008 with the report of a NQD design in which an electron took >1 ns to relax between the 1P and 1S electron states, an increase in cooling time of three orders of magnitude.11 To achieve this dramatic decrease in electron cooling rate, three complementary design strategies were employed:
(i) a CdSe/ZnSe quasi-type II structure with a thick shell capped by hole-trapping ligands was used to reduce Auger relaxation,
(ii) a CdSe monolayer was added to the surface to prevent electron trapping, and
(iii) ligands with low absorbance in the region of the intraband transitions were used.
The increase in 1P to 1S cooling time by a factor of >1000 suggests that the cooling rate from the higher lying electron states from which MEG occurs will also be signficantly reduced, and thus much less competitive with MEG. To result in the moderate overall MEG QYs observed, the characteristic time for MEG must have been of the same order of magnitude as the electon cooling time in the NQD investigated i.e. ∼1 ps. Thus, an increase of the cooling time by only one order of magnitude would be sufficient to increase the QY of MEG to greater than 90%. Ref. 11 also studied NQD passivated by ligands which did absorb at energies corresponding to intraband transitions and found in that case the cooling time were 10–30 ps i.e. still long enough to ensure that MEG dominates. This is important because it means that the requirement to increase cooling times does not necessarily restrict which ligand can be used to passivate the NQD, the choice of which may also be important in determing the efficiency with which charge is extracted from the NQD so that it can contribute to the photocurrent and thereby the output of a solar cell.
With these considerations in mind, it is possible to propose a NQD design which would optimise the overall efficiency of MEG and allow the potential benefit of this process to solar cell efficiency to be realised. A thick-shelled type II structure in which the electron was confined to the core and the hole was confined to the shell region would both suppress Auger relaxation by reducing wavefunction overlap and also reduce the probability that the electron would interact with trapping states on the surface. (Note that increasing shell thickness has also been shown54 to reduce the rate of charge extraction from NQD and so this effect would have to be balanced against the benefits of reduced Auger relaxation.) The likelihood of the electron cooling via a trap state on the NQD surface could further be reduced by capping the shell with a monolayer of suitable material, such as CdSe in the case of the CdSe/ZnSe NQD described above. However, a CdSe/ZnSe NQD is not suitable for the enhancement of solar cell efficiency by MEG even with a hot electron cooling time much greater than 1 ps because its bandgap of Eg∼2.2 eV is too large for the optimal exploitation of the solar spectrum. As shown in Fig. 6, the efficiency of a MEG enhanced solar cell only exceeds what can be achieved in the absence of MEG for values of Eg between ∼0.7 and ∼1.3 eV. Hence, an alternative material system with Eg in this range is required, which must also have a hole effective mass much greater than that of the electron so that hνth is minimsed according to eqn (2). Additionally, since the ultimate aim is to improve solar cell efficiency to the point that solar power is economically competitive with other forms of electricity generation resulting in the widespread adoption of MEG enhanced cells, then material cost, abundance and toxicity should be also considered when selecting a suitable alternative.
Even though they have been the subject of the majority of MEG research, the use of NQD based on Pb and Cd in commercial products is currently severely restricted by legislation, such as the European Union's Restriction of Hazardous Substances (ROHS) Directive; other jurisdictions have similar legislation. Hence, to maximise the chance of this technology being adopted it is preferable that the material system chosen for the optimised NQD design avoids the use of Pb and Cd as well other restricted materials such as Hg. One potential system with a suitable Eg and me* ≪ mh*, and composed of materials not ROHS-restricted is a InP/GaAs core/shell structure. The relevant bulk material properties of InP and GaAs are given in Table 3 and show that this would be a type II structure that would confine the electron in the InP core and the hole in the GaAs shell. The difference in energy between the CBM of InP and the VBM of GaAs is 1.05 eV, which puts the value of Eg in the appropriate range even allowing for an increase due to quantum confinement. The hole effective masses in both InP and GaAs sufficiently exceed those of the electron so that hνth ∼ 2.1 is expected. A recent analysis estimated that semiconductor material extraction costs of InP and GaAs based solar cells to be 0.25 and 0.23 ¢/W, respectively, i.e. a small fraction of the total cost of an installed photovoltaic system.55 Furthermore, the known economic reserves of InP and GaAs have been calculated to be sufficient to generate more than 4000 TWh, i.e. the current annual consumption of the USA, and ∼100000 TWh, respectively, even without the benefit of MEG.55 Thus, InP/GaAs type II NQD meet the physical requirements for efficient MEG, and are made from substances not restricted for reasons of toxicity, cheap enough to extract to add negligble cost to a photovoltaic system and sufficiently abundant to allow solar cells based on them to make a signficant contribution to global energy production. Note, however, that the fabrication of InP/GaAs NQD has not been reported to date and so a suitable synthesis route needs to be developed before the expected enhancement in MEG QY can be confirmed experimentally.
Table 3 Selected properties of bulk InP and GaAs. CBM and VBM are relative to the vacuum and effectives masses are in units of electron mass51





Property


InP


GaAs





CBM (eV)
−4.51
−4.12


VBM (eV)
−5.85
−5.56



m

e
*
0.077
0.065



m
h*
0.6
0.5




Conclusions
Accurately measuring the efficiency of MEG has proved to be experimentally challenging and these difficulties have led to much of the controversy in this field over the last few years. However, an improved understanding of the experimental artefacts that can arise during the measurement of MEG QY has emerged recently, and this has led to the development of experimental and data analysis techniques that remove the effects of these artefacts. As a result it is now possible to make a much more confident assessment of the QY of the MEG process in the current generation of NQD and the consequent potential improvement in solar cell efficiency that might be expected. This assessment concludes that the MEG QYs thus far observed in NQD is insufficient to result in more than a very modest improvement in solar cell efficiency, in contrast to the significant enhancement that could potentially be realised if the MEG process were optimised. Crucially, however, recent developments in NQD design have shown that it is possible to effectively suppress the hot electron cooling processes that compete with MEG. This raises the prospect of NQD engineered for optimal MEG QY and consequently a significantly increased enhancement of solar cell efficiency.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge useful discussions with Prof Paul O’Brien (University of Manchester) which lead to the identification of InP/GaAs NQD as a candidate for enhanced MEG.
Notes and references
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
J. Shah, Solid-State Electron., 1978, 21, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
O. Christensen, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 689–695 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geist, J. L. Gardner and F. J. Wilkinson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1990, 42, 1262–1267 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 193–231 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635–673 CrossRef CAS .

Semiconductor and Metal Nanocrystals, ed. V. I. Klimov, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. C. Beard and R. J. Ellingson, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 377–399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Benisty, T. Sotomayor, C. M. and C. Weisbuch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 44, 10945 CrossRef .
A. Pandey and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Science, 2008, 322, 929–932 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. A. Petruska and V. I. Klimov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 253102 CrossRef .
R. D. Schaller, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3469–3476 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, K. P. Knutsen, P. R. Yu, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, W. K. Metzger, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2506–2512 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 424–429 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nair and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 081304 CrossRef .
G. Nair, S. M. Geyer, L. Y. Chang and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125325 CrossRef .
J. J. H. Pijpers, E. Hendry, M. T. W. Milder, R. Fanciulli, J. Savolainen, J. L. Herek, D. Vanmaekelbergh, S. Ruhman, D. Mocatta, D. Oron, A. Aharoni, U. Banin and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4783–4784 CAS .
M. Ben-Lulu, D. Mocatta, M. Bonn, U. Banin and S. Ruhman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, K. J. Tielrooij, A. Osherov, Y. Golan, C. Delerue, G. Allan and M. Bonn, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. McGuire, M. Sykora, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2049–2057 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, T. Udagawa and N. Tamai, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 830–831 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Stubbs, S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, B. F. Spencer, W. R. Flavell, P. Glarvey, O. Masala, N. L. Pickett and D. J. Binks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081303 CrossRef .
D. Gachet, A. Avidan, I. Pinkas and D. Oron, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, M. Khafizov, X. M. Tu, M. Zheng and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2381–2386 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3–11 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735–2741 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Matylitsky, L. Dworak, V. V. Breus, T. Basche and J. Wachtveitl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2424–2425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Zhu and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4858–4864 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ji, S. Park, S. T. Connor, T. Mokari, Y. Cui and K. J. Gaffney, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25332–25338 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Midgett, H. W. Hillhouse, B. K. Hughes, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17486–17500 CAS .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. Law, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836–845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sykora, A. Y. Koposov, J. A. McGuire, R. K. Schulze, O. Tretiak, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2021–2034 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, S. K. Stubbs, B. F. Spencer, E. A. Seddon, H.-T. Fung, S. Gardino, F. Sirotti, M. Silly, J. Akhtar, P. O'Brien, D. J. Binks and W. R. Flavell,  2011, submitted.
J. A. McGuire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810–1819 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kang and F. W. Wise, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1997, 14, 1632–1646 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. A. Petruska and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13765–13768 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123118 CrossRef .
Y. Takeda and T. Motohiro, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1399–1405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shpaisman, O. Niitsoo, I. Lubomirsky and D. Cahen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1541–1546 CrossRef CAS .

          http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/
        .

          F. J. Himpsel and T. C. Chiang, Electronic Structure of Solids, ed. A. Goldmann, Landolt-Börnstein Search PubMed .
E. Hendry, M. Koeberg, F. Wang, H. Zhang, D. de Mello, C. aacute, D. Vanmaekelbergh and M. Bonn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 057408 CrossRef CAS .
L.-W. Wang, M. Califano, A. Zunger and A. Franceschetti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 056404 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038–15045 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wadi, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072–2077 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

David J. Binks
	David Binks received his BSc in Physics from the University of Manchester in 1992, and after a period in industry, returned to Manchester and completed his PhD in 1998. He was appointed as lecturer in the School of Physics and Astronomy in Manchester in 2004 and became a Senior Lecturer in 2008. His interests are the photophysics of nanocrystal quantum dots and their application to solar power.

 	Fig. 1  (A) In a bulk semiconductor most solar photons absorbed have an energy in excess of the band gap and thus initially produce a ‘hot’ electron-hole pair. However, these hot carriers quickly cool and the consequent loss of energy to heat limits the theoretical efficiency of conventional solar cell. (B) In a NQD however, cooling is slowed by size and structure effects and the process of MEG becomes competitive. Here the excess photon energy associated with one carrier (typically the electron) is instead used to generate additional carriers which can contribute to the photocurrent and thereby improve the efficiency of a solar cell; in contrast the cooling hole produces waste heat as for bulk semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical signal obtained during a UTA experiment showing the fractional change in transmittance through the sample, ΔT/T, as a function of pump–probe delay time. R is the ratio between the initial amplitude of the signal, A, and its value, B, after biexciton decay but before the significant decay of any single excitons.	 
R(J) = QYσJ[1 − exp(−σJ)]−1	(1)

 	Fig. 3  
R as a function of fractional transmittance change, ΔT/T, for InP NQD excited at 2.6 times Eg. The line is a fit to eqn (1). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Addtional number of excitons created by MEG as function of hνth/Eg for (a) InP, (b) InAs and (c) PbSe NQD. Data from ref. 27, 16 and 39, respectively. (NREL and LANL indicate data from National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Los Alamos National Laboratory.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Trion decay in a NQD. In a positive trion, the electron recombines with one of the holes by an Auger process, and the energy thus liberated is given to the remaining hole which quickly cools. Similarly, in a negative trion, the recombination energy is given to the remaining charge, this time an electron, which again rapidly loses the energy gained by cooling.	 


PbSe	3	40	0.37	
24,39

PbS	3	40	0.5	
43

InP	2.1	30	1.27	
27

InAs	2	35	0.36	
16

CdSe/CdTe	2.7	<53a	0.91b	
28

	(3)
	(4)
QY(hν,Eg) = ∑Mm=1θ(hν,mEg)	(5)
QY(hν,Eg) = θ(hν,Eg) + ηθ(hν,hνth)(hν − hνth)/Eg	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Solar cell efficiency calculated using the detailed balance model based on the MEG performance established to date for PbS, PbSe, InP, InAs and CdSe/CdTe NQD. For comparison, the efficiency expected for the cases of no MEG and ideal MEG are also shown.	 


10	36.0	36.9	45.1
100	38.5	39.4	54.5
1000	41.0	42.1	65.0

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of the structures of Type I and Type II NQD. In a Type I NQD, the VBM and CBM of the shell acts as potential barriers for the hole and electron, respectively, and both carriers are confined to the core region. In a Type II NQD, the electron is confined to the core and the hole to the shell (or vice versa) by the position of the shell VBM and CBM relative to those of the core.	 

CBM (eV)	−4.51	−4.12
VBM (eV)	−5.85	−5.56

m

e
*	0.077	0.065

m
h*	0.6	0.5

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
