Destructive reverse bias pinning in perovskite/silicon tandem solar modules caused by perovskite hysteresis under dynamic shading   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE01246J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE01246J
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4067-4075Destructive reverse bias pinning in perovskite/silicon tandem solar modules caused by perovskite hysteresis under dynamic shading†

        
          
            Jiadong 
            Qian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marco 
            Ernst
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Walter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Md Arafat 
            Mahmud
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Hacke
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Klaus 
            Weber
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mowafak 
            Al-Jassim
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Andrew 
            Blakers
          
        
      a
aResearch School of Electrical, Energy and Materials Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2600, Australia. E-mail: marco.ernst@anu.edu.au
bNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver W Pkwy, Golden, CO 80401, USA
Received 
      17th December 2019
    , Accepted 1st June 2020First published on 9th June 2020AbstractWe demonstrate how perovskite hysteresis can result in permanent reductions in power output in perovskite/silicon tandem modules—including irreversible hotspot-induced damage—from only brief periods of shading. We show that reverse bias events in which a perovskite cell is biased above a threshold voltage—which in this work we find to be as low as −1.1 V—produces a temporary reduction in power output that is of sufficient magnitude to keep the cell pinned in reverse bias after the shading event ends. As a hysteretic phenomena, this crucial failure mode may be overlooked by static models of perovskite-based solar cells. Higher reverse bias voltages exacerbate the temporary reduction in short-circuit photocurrent, which is also sensitive to the level of illumination under reverse bias. Numerical device modelling demonstrates that this effect is consistent with our understanding of perovskite hysteresis as a consequence of mobile ion-electron coupling controlling rates of non-radiative recombination over time. Measurements of the dynamic response of single-junction perovskite cells are extrapolated to two-terminal and four-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem module modelling. We validate these models with measurements from an equivalent electronic circuit that represents a two-terminal perovskite–silicon tandem mini module. Two module-level solutions are discussed that address this issue, which includes increasing the number of bypass diodes and choosing better suited silicon bottom cells with higher shunter resistance in two-terminal tandem modules.
Introduction
Solar cells made of organic–inorganic perovskite (PSK) materials continue to improve with non-stabilized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction cells reaching 25.2%.1 With a bandgap greater than 1.5 eV, PSK cells are ideal top cell candidates in tandem structures combined with crystalline silicon (c-Si) bottom cells. Optimised PCEs over 31% are simulated for both two-terminal (2T) and four-terminal (4T) structures.2 On the laboratory scale, the PSK/Si tandem cell with 2T structure has achieved a PCE of 28% (ref. 3) whereas the record PCE for the 4T structure is 26.7%.4 Device stability and lifetime remains a critical challenge for both single-junction PSK and Si based PSK tandem devices.5 Some recent breakthroughs demonstrate devices with efficiencies between 10.1% and 22.7% maintaining more than 95% of initial PCE after more than 1000 h of operation under one-sun illumination.6–8
While both single-junction PSK and tandem cells are often tested at standard test condition (STC), photovoltaic (PV) modules in the field regularly experience non-ideal operating conditions. Thus, tests at realistic conditions are necessary for their reliability.9 Photovoltaic (PV) modules, consisting of either single-junction c-Si cells or PSK/Si tandem cells, can experience partial shading by clouds, plants, animals and adjacent modules in the field, resulting in reverse bias (RB) conditions leading to excessive heat dissipation in the shaded cells.10,11 This effect, typically called the ‘Hotspot Effect’ in commercial modules, is usually controlled using bypass diodes connected in parallel to cell strings in order to limit the maximum RB. Silverman et al. observed in an indoor partial shading test that hotspots in thin-film PV modules that are unprotected by bypass diodes can cause 4% to 14% permanent loss of total maximum power.12
Furthermore, PV modules in systems with central or module maximum power point tracking (MPPT) would respond differently to partial shading events. A central MPPT system typically has a maximum DC voltage between 1000 V and 1500 V and consists of strings with more than 20 PV modules.13 The operating point of modules within the system is selected based on the maximum power achieved by the whole system. Therefore, the operating current of one module is approximately independent with the partial shading condition. In contrast, a module-based MPPT system selects the operating point based on the I–V characteristic of each module and is therefore better able to respond to local shading. Both system types are considered in this work to provide a comprehensive understanding of the tandem device behaviour in large-scale PV systems.
In our previous hotspot simulation work for PSK/Si tandem modules using static modelling, we found that 2T tandem modules require more bypass diodes than conventional Si modules to prevent reverse breakdown at shaded Si bottom cells and the consequential excessive heat dissipation.11 Significant reverse bias at PSK cells can cause irreversible damage to cell performance.14 Meanwhile, hysteresis can also be induced by low reverse bias voltages. Temporary reduction of photocurrent potentially caused by ion motion are reported for PSK cells under RB.15,16 Dynamic studies considering possible changes to PSK cell properties are therefore required to better understand the impact of a short period of shading on PSK/Si tandem module reliability.
This work studies a potential risk overlooked by static modelling: that the PSK cells in PSK/Si tandem modules continue to experience detrimental reverse bias conditions and thus hotspots after short periods of shading. Experiments on single-junction PSK sample cells are conducted to test the immediate impact of RB on cell short-circuit current (Isc) with varied RB voltages and durations. Next, the PSK cell operating voltages with varied temporary Isc reductions are modelled for 2T and 4T tandem modules with proposed module designs presented in Fig. 1. More details about the number of cells and bypass diode configuration are provided in the Computational modelling section. The measured RB induced Isc reductions using single-junction PSK cells are extrapolated to module operation modelling. Furthermore, the effect of light intensity, which may vary for different partial shading areas in the field, is also tested under varied irradiance levels. Finally, we experimentally validate the simulated response in a two-terminal tandem module setup in two cases with different RB voltages and durations.
 Fig. 1  Module configurations of two-terminal (2T) and four-terminal (4T) tandem modules. 
Experimental setup
Single-junction perovskite cell experiment
The dynamic response of a single-junction PSK sample cell fabricated at the Australian National University17 to dynamic RB conditions are directly tested at reverse bias voltages between −0.5 and −3 V, for biasing periods of up to 100 s. The fabrication process of PSK sample cells is provided in ESI.† During this experiment, the samples are kept in nitrogen and exposed to a constant irradiance of 1000 W m−2 with temperature maintained at 25 °C. The initial current–voltage (I–V) curve of the sample cell is presented in supplementary Fig. S1 in ESI.†
The experiment is comprised of multiple sets that each quantifies the immediate Isc reduction caused by certain RB voltage that last for a certain amount of time. The sample cell is firstly stabilised at the short-circuit condition for 10 second and its stabilised short-circuit current is recorded as the reference short-circuit current, Isc(Vrev,t), where Vrev and t are the RB voltage and conditioning duration that would be applied to the sample cell afterwards. Vrev ranges from −0.5 V to −3 V while t is between 1 s and 100 s. Immediately after the RB, the new short-circuit current,  of the sample cell is measured. The temporary Isc reduction (ΔIsc) caused by an RB of Vrev for duration t is represented in eqn (1). (1)
In order to reverse the effect of RB conditions after each test and maintain the independence of the result of the next test, we conduct a recovery process following each  measurement. The recovery process is conducted at the same environmental conditions as before, with a forward bias of 1.2 V applied to the cell. The recovery process uses opposite electrical field to restore the ion migration and is considered completed when the cell current at 1.2 V reaches the original current at 1.2 V measured before the test.
Additionally, the effect of illumination is studied. The temporary ΔIsc caused by RB is measured for varied irradiance levels from 250 to 1000 W m−2. Unstressed PSK sample cells fabricated from the same batch in the previous experiments are used.
Experimental validation for two-terminal tandem
Experiments are then conducted to simulate the realistic shading scenario for a mini 2T tandem module in the field. The experiment setup illustrated in Fig. 2 simulates a 2T tandem cell at shading condition in a central Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) system. A PSK sample cell of an area of 0.4 cm × 0.4 cm is connected in series with a small Si cell. The illuminated area of the Si cell is adjusted to match the Isc of the PSK cell. This two-cell tandem device is then connected to a Source Measurement Unit (SMU), which can source time-dependent current or voltage output.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the realistic scenario test. A PSK cell and a Si cell with matching short-circuit current are connected in series to form a sub-module tandem device. The tandem device's current and voltage are determined by a SMU. A voltage meter is used to record the dynamic voltage changes of the PSK cell. 
The current and voltage outputs of the SMU are represented by two separated current and voltage sources in the figure. Time dependent outputs from the SMU and shading on both cells during the experiments are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Time dependent SMU outputs and shading at the PSK and Si cells




SMU function

T



0 s
10 s
10 s + t




Current source

I
mp

Off

I
mp



Voltage source
Off

V
rev

Off



Shading condition

Not shaded
Both cells shaded
Not shaded





I
mp is the initial maximum power current of the two-cell device measured. The reverse bias voltages at the tandem device Vrev and duration t are varied. For 0 s < T < 10 s, both the PSK and Si cells operate at the maximum power point. Then for 10 s < T < 10 s + t, the experiment simulates a shaded 2T tandem cell in a module. In practice, the worst-case Vrev at a shaded tandem device can be adjusted with different numbers of bypass diodes in a module. Afterwards, the applied shade is removed after T = 10 s + t, while the current source with same output previously applied replaces the voltage source. By recording the dynamic voltage response of the PSK cell, the ability of the PSK cell to recover from shade induced RB in a realistic condition is tested.
Results
Immediate impact of RB on PSK sample cells are tested with the  ratios and ΔIsc plotted in Fig. 3. Four coloured dashed lines are plotted in the figure to represent the highest permissible reduction in short-circuit current ΔIsc of the PSK cell to allow recovery to forward bias in 2T and 4T modules both for central and module MPPT. Detailed module modelling results are presented in later paragraphs. For each RB voltage, the ΔIsc increases as t increases. The convex shape of the  curves indicate ion accumulation at the transport layer interfaces approaching steady-state at each reverse-bias voltage, as described in more detail in the modelling section below. The PSK sample cell also experiences faster and larger Isc reduction after stabilisation following reverse bias conditions at higher Vrev. In comparison with the simulated maximum permissible ΔIsc in a module, the PSK cell shaded for more than 1 s can only recover to forward bias instantly after the shade is removed if the RB voltage is limited to −0.5 V.
 Fig. 3  Immediate Isc reduction induced by RB conditioning at different voltages (Vrev) and for different durations (t). The dashed lines show the simulated minimum Isc reductions that would cause permanent RB at the PSK cell for the four module and MPPT configurations. 
To verify the effectiveness of the recovery process, the ratio between the recovered sample Isc and the initial Isc0, , are plotted in Fig. 4 for total lapsed time of 4573 s. The complete recorded  after RB condition and recovery process are plotted in supplementary Fig. S2.† Throughout the experiment, the unrecoverable degradation of the cell Isc is within 2%.
 Fig. 4  Reference Isc measured throughout the experiment (4573 s in total) after recovery process and between each RB test. 
The temporary reduction in short circuit current of PSK cells after shading of a tandem module can cause pinning the PSK cell in reverse bias conditions even after the shadow is removed. A number of exemplary PSK cell I–V curves for different ΔIsc after RB with the new respective operating point in a 2T tandem module are illustrated in supplementary Fig. S3.† For ΔIsc values in the range between 0 and 100%, the resulted PSK voltages are simulated and presented in Fig. 5. In a 4T module the effect of PSK cell ΔIsc is equivalent to a local shade covering the cell. Indeed, in a 2T module, the PSK cell may even experience a higher RB voltage after the shade is removed as the Si bottom cell no longer limits the reverse leakage current. With central MPPT, the shaded PSK cell in a 2T or 4T tandem module will remain at reverse bias after the shade is removed if the RB induced ΔIsc is higher than 7% or 8%, respectively. The highest permissible ΔIsc rises to 10% and 25% for 2T and 4T modules if module MPPT is used. These four critical ΔIsc values are used as reference in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 5  PSK cell voltages with different temporary current reductions caused by partial shading. The lowest ΔIsc causing persistent reverse bias conditions of the PSK cell even after the shade is removed is marked with dashed lines for both central and module MPPT systems. 
Impact of light intensity on the temporary Isc reduction is then tested for Vrev between −0.5 V and −2.5 V and is plotted in Fig. 6. Higher illumination accelerates the Isc drops, which is likely related to faster ion motion. The curves for different irradiance converge in the diagram for Vrev = −2.5 V, indicating that higher irradiance may not affect the stabilised . This result implies that for PSK cells in a partially shaded module, the stabilised  impacted by certain Vrev would be independent from the illuminated area and intensity.
 Fig. 6  Impact of light intensity on the RB induced ΔIsc. 
Experimental validation results for a 2T tandem mini module are plotted in Fig. 7. Dynamic voltages of the PSK and Si individual cells and the tandem device are plotted in different colours. The green regions represent the scenario that the two cells' operating current is fixed at the maximum power current of the tandem device. The red regions represent when the voltage across the tandem device is fixed at values as indicated in the diagram. Two cases are illustrated: a safe case, in which no continuous damage occurs to the cell after the shade is removed, and a failed case where the PSK cell would be damaged by the persistent reverse bias and the consequential excessive heat after the shade is removed.
 Fig. 7  Voltages over time of the PSK cell, Si cell and the tandem device during the realistic test in a safe case and a failed case. 
The safe case shows the PSK cell recovers to forward bias after being reverse biased at an average of −0.65 V for 30 s. The voltage across the entire shaded tandem device is fixed at −2 V. A continuous voltage recovery towards the original state is also observed after the RB is no longer present.
In the failed case, the tandem device is maintained at −5 V for 10 s while the PSK cell experiences a Vrev of around −1.1 V. After the reverse voltage output is replaced with the fixed current output, the PSK cell only recovers to −0.55 V and remains at RB for more than 90 s until the end of the measurement. Although the Si cell instantly recovers to its original operating voltage (0.34 V), the entire tandem device operates at −0.21 V and remains at RB until the end of the experiment, dissipating instead of generating energy.
Discussion
Theoretical modelling of reverse-bias behaviour
To shed light on the mechanism(s) producing the temporary reduction in short-circuit current following reverse bias, we performed time-resolved numerical device simulations of a complete ionic-electronic PSK undergoing the reverse bias exposure protocol described above. This model accounts for electrostatic ion-electron coupling, as described previously,18,19 in which hysteretic phenomena are primarily the consequence of ion migration's influence on rates of non-radiative recombination in the perovskite layer. We find that the temporary reduction in reverse bias current is consistent with this framework, except for the magnitude of the illumination-dependence, as described below.
Hysteresis in PSKs is commonly observed in the current–voltage characteristics, in which a scan from open-to short-circuit voltage typical exhibits higher fill factor (and potentially short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage) than the returning scan from short-to open-circuit.20,21 Fill-factor loss under these conditions is a consequence of ion accumulation at voltages below Voc tending to enhance non-radiative recombination in the perovskite layer.19,22 Thus, non-destructive reverse bias will drive mobile ions in the perovskite into a state that significantly enhances non-radiative recombination, the magnitude of which increases with reverse bias voltage and dwell time at RB. We demonstrate this effect by comparing the time series data for the PSK taken from the SC-RB-SC cycle at −1 V for 100 s (ESI Fig. S4†). The simulation reflects the trend and magnitude of the empirical changes in short-circuit and reverse-bias current at each step of the cycle. Plotted alongside the extracted photocurrent is the total non-radiative recombination current, demonstrating how the recombination rate increases with time during the RB dwell, before slowly recovering once the cell returns to SC.
In Fig. 8, we plot the simulated  as a function of the reverse bias voltage and RB dwell time. By comparison to Fig. 3 above, we see a consistent trend with some disagreement in the magnitude of the current loss between successive voltages. This may be explained by a progressive degradation in the cell during the measurement protocol, or other changes known to occur in reverse-biased PSKs such a phase segregation or ingress of e.g. iodine ions into the transport layers.23
 Fig. 8  Simulated  ratio as a function of RB voltage and well time, using the protocol of the data in Fig. 3. 
We conclude this section by considering the light-dependence of  plotted in Fig. 6. Our model also predicts that under stronger illumination, ΔIsc increases more rapidly at any given RB voltage and dwell time (ESI Fig. S5†). However, it predicts that this effect will be much smaller in magnitude than is observed experimentally. It is possible that this can be ascribed to cell degradation, but the illumination level may be linked to ion concentration,24 ion mobility, or changes in the charge state of sub band-gap traps,25 which may increase ion flux with illumination. None of these factors are included in our model, and further investigation is beyond the scope of this study.
Realistic PSK cell voltages when partially shaded
For 2T and 4T tandem modules with cell properties provided in Table T1 (ESI†), the operating voltages of cells that may be reverse biased are modelled and presented in Fig. 9. The shading ratio, rshade, used to describe modelled partial shading conditions is the percentage reduction of Isc for the PSK and Si cells in a 2T module and for the PSK cells in a 4T module.
 Fig. 9  Simulated operating voltages of the reverse biased cells (shaded PSK and Si cells in a 2T module and shaded PSK cells in a 4T module) with varying shading ratio (rshade) from 0 to 100%. 
For both tandem configurations, using module MPPT would allow for a larger shade tolerance. In the 2T configuration, the bypass diode is activated when rshade exceeds 9% when central MPPT is used or exceeds 30% when module MPPT is used. The activated bypass diode limits the RB voltage at both the PSK and Si sub-cells in the tandem device. According to the simulated case, the RB at the PSK cell is limited to −1.7 V by the low leakage current of the Si bottom cell, which is assumed to have a shunt resistance (Rsh_Si) of 100 Ω. The PSK cell in a 4T module is not protected by the bypass diode and would reverse break down for rshade > 30%. The largest RB voltages at the PSK cell simulated are −7.0 V when using either central or module MPPT.
Both the simulated RB voltages are lower than the critical RB voltages of −0.5 V from the single-junction perovskite cell experiments. Thus, perovskite/silicon tandem modules using proposed modules designs based on current commercial PV modules are likely to experience prolonged hotspots at perovskite cells from short periods of shading.
Risk mitigation strategies
We now have shown the RB induced temporary Isc reduction could potentially lead to prolonged hotspot issues in both 2T and 4T PSK/Si tandem modules. The impact of this effect is determined by three major factors.
Firstly, PSK device properties that affect hysteresis will exacerbate the current-reduction effects of RB dwells. Our numerical device model demonstrated that the observed behaviour of  is consistent with the conventional notion of hysteresis as connected to mobile ions and non-radiative recombination. Thus, the magnitude of this response will be determined by factors such as free-ion concentration, ion mobility relative to the RB dwell time, the strength of non-radiative recombination, and the electronic properties of the transport layers, which influence ion accumulation.26 For example, it is widely reported that inverted PSK structures, such as those fabricated on Cu:NiOx HTL substrates27 demonstrate much smaller hysteresis and therefore are likely to exhibit less susceptible to RB-pinning, while PSK cells using standard structures (e.g. ETL substrates), which exhibit generally greater hysteresis, we predict to be more susceptible to RB-pinning.15
Furthermore, we expect PSKs with minimal non-radiative recombination (both in the bulk and at transport-layer interfaces) to demonstrate much smaller, even negligible ΔIsc after RB exposure. The risk of a high-quality PSK being pinned in reverse bias by a temporary shading event is consequently low. However strong electric fields under reverse bias are known to induce irreversible degradation in PSKs.23 This, among other long-term stability challenges, which include the relatively low mechanical strength of perovskite films28 suggests that recombination active defects are likely to increase in concentration for even the best perovskite devices under thermal stresses, shading events, and day/night cycles in real-world environments. Unless ion migration can be suppressed altogether, there will likely exist a point in a PSKs lifetime where the  ratio falls below the critical threshold that traps the cell in RB, destroying the device. We therefore suggest that reverse-bias recovery testing become a part of regular, ongoing characterisation in real-world PSK-based modules.
The second factor is the probability of tandem modules in the field to experience partial shading conditions and the time of module operation at RB. For conventional modules that comprise series-connected solar cells, the largest RB at a shaded cell occurs when it is the only shaded cell.11
Although there is no regional specific data for the occurrence and duration of partial shading condition available to our knowledge, the 2T and 4T tandem modules would have different responses to shades depending on the shape and size of the shading objects. 2T tandem modules are expected to have the same hotspot occurrence with c-Si solar modules. A circular shadow with an area larger than the simulated threshold rshade in Fig. 5 would cause a significant hotspot.
4T tandem modules and single-junction PSK modules that consist of long and thin cell strips may have the same hotspot occurrence with thin-film modules with similar cell sizes and orientations. Shades that are wide enough to cover more than one cells would result in multiple cells being reverse biased at lower voltages.11 PSK modules with cell strips align parallel with the ground may experience the highest hotspot risk due to snow and dirt accumulation as discussed by Bowring et al.14
The last factor is the RB voltage at the shaded PSK cell. This can further attribute to the PSK cell RB characteristics, number of cells in a string that connects to a bypass diode in parallel and the Rsh of the Si bottom cell for the 2T tandem configuration. PSK cells with ‘soft’ reverse breakdown characteristics would allow for higher leakage current at the same RB voltage. In both 2T and 4T modules, where the shaded PSK cell current is limited by either the leakage current of the Si bottom cell or the external circuit, PSK cells that have higher reverse leakage current would yield lower RB voltage. However, higher current at RB also causes higher heat dissipation, which may cause additional damage to the PSK cells and encapsulation materials.
One module level mitigation strategy is to increase the number of bypass diodes or reducing the number of cells in a cell string. This would effectively reduce the RB voltages at shaded PSK cells in both 2T and 4T modules.11 When the bypass diode is activated, the RB voltage at the shaded cell Vrev falls in a range as expressed in eqn (2). (2)s is the cell number of the shaded cell, nstring is the number of cells in a cell string, Vmp(i) and Voc(i) are the maximum power voltage and open circuit voltage of cell number i in the string. Thus, the lowest Vrev(s) that bypass diodes can limit to is the opposite of the sum of the maximum power voltage of the rest unshaded cells in the same string. However, the increase of bypass diodes per module would also increase the cost of modules and therefore requires further studies of such cost-risk trade-off.
In the case of 2T tandem modules the RB I–V characteristics of the Si bottom cell would also affect the PSK cell voltage when shaded. Si cells with higher Rsh would allow for lower reverse leakage current and therefore limit the RB voltage at the PSK top cells. The operating voltages of a shaded PSK cell in a 2T module is simulated for four Rsh values of the Si bottom cells. Systems using central and module MPPT are simulated and plotted in Fig. 10. The RB I–V characteristics of the PSK cell and Si cells are presented in ESI Fig. S6.† The 2T module is assumed to have 72 cells connected in series and 6 bypass diodes, each connected in parallel with every 12 tandem cells.
 Fig. 10  Simulated PSK cell voltages in a 72-cell 2T tandem module using both central and module MPPT. rshade from 0 to 100% is simulated for four Rsh values of the Si bottom cell. 
Consistent with the simulated results in Fig. 9, the MPPT system only affect the rshade threshold to trigger the hotspot effect. On the other hand, the Rsh_Si would only affect the maximum RB voltage but not the rshade threshold. According to the simulated results, using a Si bottom cell of an area of 15.6 cm × 15.6 cm that has a Rsh of 200 Ω would limit the RB voltage at the PSK top cell to −0.9 V. Whereas using a Si bottom cell with Rsh of 50 Ω would increase the maximum RB voltage at the PSK cell to −2.9 V. This suggests a preferential selection of high Rsh Si bottom cells in 2T tandem applications.
Conclusions
In this work we have demonstrated a potential risk of prolonged hotspot effects in PSK/Si tandem modules using both 2T and 4T configurations. The reverse bias that occurs at a dynamically shaded PSK cell is shown to cause temporary Isc reduction correlated with the duration and magnitude of reverse bias the cell experienced. When the Isc reduction exceeds 7% or 8% in either 2T or 4T modules using central MPPT, the PSK cell would remain reverse biased even after the shade is removed. We have also shown that with sufficient RB conditioning time, a partially shaded PSK cell is likely to have an Isc reduction independent of the cell shading ratio. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrated two scenarios in a 2T tandem module, with possible recovery of the PSK cell to forward bias conditions for sufficiently low reverse bias conditions and pinning of the PSK cell in reverse bias at reverse bias voltages exceeding this limit.
Finally, we discuss the potential factors that could mitigate the investigated prolonged hotspot effect. On device level, suppression of ion migration and thus hysteresis effects could effectively minimize the risk of reverse bias pinning. Further, we found that using Si bottom cells with higher Rsh can significantly reduce the maximum reverse bias voltage observed at the perovskite cell in 2T tandem module configuration.
One possible solution on module level is to increase the number of bypass diodes in both 4T and 2T modules which would also limit the maximum reverse bias voltage.
Computational modelling section
Module configuration
The proposed 2T tandem module comprises 72 monolithic tandem cells and a six-diode-design to prevent irreversible Avalanche breakdown at shading conditions.11 The dimensions of both the PSK and Si sub-cells are assumed to be 15.6 cm × 15.6 cm.
The top layer of the proposed 4T tandem module is consisted of 44 series-connected 2 cm × 199.5 cm PSK cells and uses only one bypass diode as in most commercial thin-film modules.12 The bottom layer comprises 72 silicon cells with the same cell dimension in the 2T module. The top and bottom layers in the 4T modules are assumed to connect to separate external circuits and therefore can operate at different I–V conditions.
Cell properties of PSK and Si cells in both 2T and 4T modules (Table S1 in ESI†) are based on a 25.1% efficient monolithic tandem cell.17
Two types of external circuits are considered implementing the MPPT on either module or module grid (central) levels. The module MPPT selects the maximum power point of each single module and responds to the shadow on a single module, while the central MPPT selects the maximum power point of a grid of PV modules and imposes approximately fixed operating current despite shading on an individual module.
Simulation method
These two modules are simulated using a MATLAB based model previously published.29 The I–V curve of both Si and PSK cells at forward bias is modelled with the one diode equivalent circuit in eqn (3). Explicit solution to the one-diode equation using Lambert-W function is presented in eqn (4). The I–V curves of both sub-cells under reverse bias are generated with the reverse breakdown model in eqn (5).30 (3) (4) (5)
In eqn (3) and (4), J is the cell current density, Jph is the photo-generated current density, J0 is the dark-saturation current, Vfwd is the forward bias at the cell, Rs is the series resistance, n is the ideality factor at the p–n junction, VT is the thermal voltage calculated as  where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the cell temperature and q is the electron charge, Rsh is the shunt resistance. In eqn (5), Vrev is the RB at the cell, a is the fraction of ohmic current involved in the breakdown, Vbr is the junction breakdown voltage and m is the avalanche breakdown exponent.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government.
Notes and references

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20190923.pdf, accessed 11/12,  2019 Search PubMed.
M. T. Hörantner and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1983–1993 RSC .

          Oxford PV, Oxford PV perovskite solar cell achieves 28% efficiency, https://www.oxfordpv.com/news/oxford-pv-perovskite-solar-cell-achieves-28-efficiency, accessed 11/12,  2019 Search PubMed.
C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, Y. Shen, M. Salvador, K. Forberich, N. Schrenker, G. D. Spyropoulos, T. Heumuller, B. Wilkinson, T. Kirchartz, E. Spiecker, P. J. Verlinden, X. Zhang, M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3583–3592 RSC .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. -K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani and K. Miyano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu, M. Xu, Y. Sheng, Z. Yan, J. Meng, C. Tong, D. Li, Z. Wan, Y. Ming, A. Mei, Y. Hu, Y. Rong and H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809129 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith and P. Hacke, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 459–465 CrossRef .
M. C. A. García, W. Herrmann, W. Böhmer and B. Proisy, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 293–307 CrossRef .
J. Qian, A. F. Thomson, Y. Wu, K. J. Weber and A. W. Blakers, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3025–3029 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Silverman, L. Mansfield, I. Repins and S. Kurtz, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 1333–1338 Search PubMed .

          R. Inzunza, R. Okuyama, T. Tanaka, and M. Kinoshita, in IEEE 2nd International Future Energy Electronics Conference (IFEEC),  2015, pp. 1–4 Search PubMed .
A. R. Bowring, L. Bertoluzzi, B. C. O'Regan and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702365 CrossRef .
A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arafat Mahmud, T. Duong, Y. Yin, H. T. Pham, D. Walter, J. Peng, Y. Wu, L. Li, H. Shen, N. Wu, N. Mozaffari, G. Andersson, K. R. Catchpole, K. J. Weber and T. P. White, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907962 CrossRef .
D. A. Jacobs, Y. Wu, H. Shen, C. Barugkin, F. J. Beck, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. R. Catchpole, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3094–3103 RSC .
D. Walter, A. Fell, Y. Wu, T. Duong, C. Barugkin, N. Wu, T. White and K. Weber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11270–11281 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. Tse-Wei Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Khaja Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Z. Razera, D. A. Jacobs, F. Fu, P. Fiala, M. Dussouillez, F. Sahli, T. C. J. Yang, L. Ding, A. Walter, A. F. Feil, H. I. Boudinov, S. Nicolay, C. Ballif and Q. Jeangros, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 242–250 RSC .
D. Barboni and R. A. de Souza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3266–3274 RSC .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Courtier, J. M. Cave, J. M. Foster, A. B. Walker and G. Richardson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 396–409 RSC .
J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Biomater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CAS .
N. Rolston, A. D. Printz, J. M. Tracy, H. C. Weerasinghe, D. Vak, L. Jia Haur, A. Priyadarshi, N. Mathews, D. J. Slotcavage, M. D. McGehee, R. E. Kalan, K. Zielinski, R. L. Grimm, H. Tsai, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite, S. Gholipour, M. Saliba, M. Grätzel and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702116 CrossRef .
J. Qian, A. Thomson, M. Ernst and A. Blakers, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 215, 1800429 CrossRef .
J. Bishop, Sol. Cells, 1988, 25, 73–89 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se01246jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Module configurations of two-terminal (2T) and four-terminal (4T) tandem modules.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the realistic scenario test. A PSK cell and a Si cell with matching short-circuit current are connected in series to form a sub-module tandem device. The tandem device's current and voltage are determined by a SMU. A voltage meter is used to record the dynamic voltage changes of the PSK cell.	 


Current source	
I
mp
	Off	
I
mp

Voltage source	Off	
V
rev
	Off

Shading condition
	Not shaded	Both cells shaded	Not shaded

 	Fig. 3  Immediate Isc reduction induced by RB conditioning at different voltages (Vrev) and for different durations (t). The dashed lines show the simulated minimum Isc reductions that would cause permanent RB at the PSK cell for the four module and MPPT configurations.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reference Isc measured throughout the experiment (4573 s in total) after recovery process and between each RB test.	 

 	Fig. 5  PSK cell voltages with different temporary current reductions caused by partial shading. The lowest ΔIsc causing persistent reverse bias conditions of the PSK cell even after the shade is removed is marked with dashed lines for both central and module MPPT systems.	 

 	Fig. 6  Impact of light intensity on the RB induced ΔIsc.	 

 	Fig. 7  Voltages over time of the PSK cell, Si cell and the tandem device during the realistic test in a safe case and a failed case.	 

 	Fig. 8  Simulated  ratio as a function of RB voltage and well time, using the protocol of the data in Fig. 3.	 

 	Fig. 9  Simulated operating voltages of the reverse biased cells (shaded PSK and Si cells in a 2T module and shaded PSK cells in a 4T module) with varying shading ratio (rshade) from 0 to 100%.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 10  Simulated PSK cell voltages in a 72-cell 2T tandem module using both central and module MPPT. rshade from 0 to 100% is simulated for four Rsh values of the Si bottom cell.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se01246j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
