Chitosan-based materials for supercapacitor applications: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02997E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02997E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17592-17642Chitosan-based materials for supercapacitor applications: a review

        
          
            Bijoy Krishna 
            Roy†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ishmam 
            Tahmid†
a and 

        
          
            Taslim Ur 
            Rashid
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. E-mail: turashid@ncsu.edu
bFiber and Polymer Science, North Carolina State University, Box 8301, 1020 Main Campus Drive, Raleigh, NC 27695-8301, USA
Received 
      10th April 2021
    , Accepted 19th July 2021First published on 20th July 2021AbstractIncreasing demand of energy with an exponential depletion of fossil fuel has persuaded the scientific community to search for renewable and sustainable sources of energy. Lack of efficient energy storage devices (ESD) is one of the great challenges that ultimately diminish the diverse applications of energy from these sources. Supercapacitor, an emerging ESD, has drawn the special interest of researchers due to its outstanding cycle life, high power density, and ultrafast charging ability without any risk of explosion and thermal runway. Currently, electrodes and electrolytes of supercapacitors are being made of non-renewable, toxic, and hazardous materials, which are also harmful to the environment. Biopolymers can be a suitable alternative for replacing these substances. Recently, chitosan, an abundantly available biopolymer, has been exploited to develop various electrolytes and electrodes, which have exhibited promising results. Moreover, low cost, biodegradability, and environmentally safe nature of these materials have drawn a lot of interest for further research and investigation, which has led to the publication of increased number of papers every year. This review has summarized and critically analyzed the recent developments of various chitosan-based electrodes and electrolyte materials for supercapacitor applications. Further, the performance of these supercapacitors is evaluated and compared with currently available highly efficient materials. Finally, the remaining challenges and possible future research directions are also outlined.Bijoy Krishna RoyBijoy Krishna Roy is a BSc student (4th year) in the Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Department at University of Dhaka. His research interests include the fabrication of materials for electrochemical devices (e.g., solar cell, battery, and supercapacitor) and biopolymer-based hydrogels.Ishmam TahmidIshmam Tahmid is currently pursuing BSc program in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Dhaka. His research interests include the fabrication of biomaterials for energy storage devices and fabrication of chitosan-based hydrogels for tissue engineering and drug delivery purposes.Taslim Ur RashidTaslim Ur Rashid is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. He received his BSc and MS from the same department. He is a PhD candidate in Fiber and Polymer Science program in the Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry and Science at North Carolina State University, USA. His broad research interest focuses on biopolymers, electrolytes, supercapacitors, dye sensitized solar cell, separation technology, designing polymer nanocomposites with improved properties for industrial waste management, and nanofiber fabrication by electrospinning.
1. Introduction
Energy is one of the three basic requirements with water and food that ensure our existence on Earth.1 Therefore, the uninterrupted supply of energy is always a major concern to human civilization. Since the currently exploited fossil fuels that are being employed as sources of energy are predicted to be exhausted by the end of 2200, the need of alternative sustainable sources to maintain a safe and clean environment has become one of the major challenges for the scientific community in the 21st century.2 Although efficient utilization of fossil fuels may prolong their applicability, transitioning our society from non-renewable fossil fuels to renewable and sustainable sources of energy is the best possible approach as fossil fuels will be completely worn out in the near future no matter how efficiently they are exploited. Besides, fossil fuel consumption is associated with numerous environmental problems and health risks.3 As a result, researchers have been assiduously pursuing different types of renewable energy sources, such as solar energy, hydro power, wind turbines, wave and tidal force, and biomass-derived fuels.2 Currently, some of these sources are being employed successfully for various purposes, ranging from industrial to household, and gaining more importance day by day. In order to utilize energy from these sources uninterruptedly and satisfying the energy demands in portable systems, energy storage devices (ESD) are one of the prime requirements for which batteries and supercapacitors can be utilized.4,5 At present, the battery technology is dominating the realm of ESD due to its ability of supplying high energy density.6 But it suffers from various problems, including intense maintenance and replacement issues, degradation due to aging, low cycle life, explosion, high cost of materials, and expensive manufacturing techniques.7–10 Moreover, the utilization of various toxic and hazardous chemicals in battery manufacturing have made battery waste management very challenging, resulting in serious environmental and health complications.11–13
Recently, supercapacitors, an emerging ESD, have drawn considerable attention of the scientific community due to its numerous unique properties including ultrafast charging time (few seconds), extraordinary power density and current capability, high charging–discharging cycle (>105 cycle), higher efficiency, and wider operating temperature range compared to other electrochemical devices.11,14,15 Although supercapacitors are still lagging behind batteries, their low energy density and high power density have enabled them to find various applications in hybrid electric vehicles, trains, cranes, memory backup, transportable systems, smart grids, and aircrafts, especially where the high power density is required.16,17 Another area of application of this device is in energy harvesting, such as wind turbines, where supercapacitors solve the problem of irregular power provided by wind.18,19
To compete with the battery technology and explore wider range of applications, increasing energy density has become crucial for supercapacitors. Various attempts have been harnessed to meet the required level of energy density. As the energy density of this device mainly depends on the capacitance of the electrodes and electrochemical potential window (ECPW) of the electrolytes, attention has been given to develop electrodes of higher capacitance and electrolytes of wider ECPW.20 Investigations for higher quality electrodes have focused mainly on various mixed metal oxides, conducting polymers, and carbon-based materials such as activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, carbon aerogels, and graphene.21–24 Although studies over these materials have exhibited very promising results, they are expensive, have scarcity problem, and require difficult and costly manufacturing procedures. Some of the metal oxides (e.g., RuO2 and CoO), which are used as electrodes, are toxic.25,26 Also, these are usually collected from non-renewable sources.16,27 Therefore, to obtain sustainable electrode materials of superior quality, utilization of various renewable sources is a better choice.
Similarly, various liquid electrolytes, such as aqueous, organic, and ionic liquids, are currently being used in supercapacitors, which suffer from numerous severe problems including leakage, corrosion, chemical degradation, flammability, and volatility.28–30 Moreover, supercapacitor devices fabricated using these electrolytes need expensive packing materials that increase the cost, size, and weight. Therefore, researchers are investigating various gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) and solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) as suitable replacement of liquid electrolytes.31–33 Numerous polymers have been employed for manufacturing these electrolytes including polyethylene oxide (PEO), polyacrylic acid (PAA), and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), which are mostly synthetic in nature and derived from various non-renewable sources.31–36 The utilization of biopolymers for replacing these synthetic polymers for imparting better performance is more desirable as they can fulfill the requirements of energy demand and ensure a safe and clean environment.37 Further, easy and cost-effective manufacturing procedures will make these materials more suitable for large-scale industrial production.
Chitosan, one of the most abundant biopolymers, has drawn considerable attention of researchers in the development of various electrode and electrolyte materials for applications in supercapacitors due to its numerous outstanding properties including unique structure, abundant availability, low cost of extraction, efficient interaction with many other polymers, biocompatibility, and biodegradability.38–42 The presence of both –NH2 and –OH groups in chitosan molecules enables the chemical modification of its structure, imparting various desired properties. Therefore, various chitosan-based electrodes for supercapacitors have been introduced, which can be classified into two fundamental categories based on their forms of application: (i) chitosan-based composite materials and (ii) chitosan as the carbon precursor. In the first one, chitosan is used to fabricate composite electrodes,16,43,44 whereas, in the latter one, chitosan is exploited as a renewable precursor for producing porous carbon, from which electrodes can be manufactured.45,46
Many chitosan-based electrodes exhibit high specific capacitance, electrical conductivity, as well as long cycle stability. Such as, a chitosan-based (chitosan/graphene/polyaniline) ternary nanocomposite electrode has demonstrated an unrivaled electrochemical performance with maximum specific capacitance of 1519 F g−1 and electrical conductivity of 2.9745 S cm−1,47 which is much better than any of the currently available electrode materials, including metal oxide-based composites (specific capacitance of 950 F g−1 and 650 F g−1 for MnO2 and RuO2-based composites, respectively),48 and carbon-based materials (specific capacitance of 170 F g−1, 390 F g−1, and 420–430 F g−1 for carbon nanotubes, N-doped carbon, and graphene composites, respectively).47,49–57 Furthermore, this ternary composite also exhibited long cycle life with extremely high capacitance retention (88% after 1000 cycles). However, the cycle stability and cycle life of that material is lower than carbon-based materials used for similar purposes.
Over the past few years, doping heteroatoms, such as N, P, B, and O in chitosan-derived porous carbon have been extensively explored to enhance the various properties of electrodes for supercapacitors. A recently developed double doped porous carbon nanosheet, produced from N-doped chitosan and nickel nitrate precursor, has exhibited extremely high specific capacitance and cycle stability (85.61% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles), which is the highest among the currently developed chitosan-derived porous carbon electrodes.57 These results are clear evidence of the promising future for the utilization of chitosan in electrode manufacturing for supercapacitors.
Apart from electrodes, many polymer electrolytes have also been developed from chitosan by utilizing various strategies, including the addition of salts, plasticizers, and nanofillers.58–60 These fabricated components have demonstrated higher mechanical and thermal stability, the ability to be operated at a wider temperature range, and enhanced conductive properties.61 As such, a system made up of chitosan/PEO/NH4SCN has exhibited fairly good conductivity with higher electrochemical stability of 2.43 V, which is much higher than that of aqueous electrolytes (∼1 V).62 Besides, several other chitosan-derived electrolytes have exhibited excellent conductivity of ∼10−2 S cm−1.63,64 The supercapacitors fabricated using these electrodes and electrolytes offer high specific capacitance, good power, and energy density.65,66 Therefore, to ensure the high performance of supercapacitors and to mitigate the electrochemical device waste produced globally to a minimum level, biopolymers can play the driving role and chitosan can be the most suitable one.
In recent years, numerous papers have been published on the development of chitosan-based electrolytes and electrodes for supercapacitors (as shown in Fig. 1). According to the best of the authors' knowledge, several reviews (or book chapters) on biopolymer-based supercapacitor, electrode, and electrolyte materials have been published, where chitosan together with some other biopolymers, such as cellulose, agar–agar, and polylactic acid, have been described briefly, which is insufficient for getting a complete insight into chitosan-based supercapacitors.37,67–72 Hence, a comprehensive review on chitosan-based materials for supercapacitor applications with critical analysis of the existing literature is crucial for a rigorous understanding of the state-of-the-art. The present review attempts to summarize the latest advancements in chitosan-based materials in supercapacitor applications with promising high performance. The article also focuses on providing a broad overview on the use of chitosan in electrodes and electrolytes along with a discussion of their applicability in supercapacitors. Special emphasis has been given to the key factors influencing the performance of chitosan-based materials for supercapacitors, and an analytical comparison of the performance of these materials with the currently used materials is presented. In the final part, the key challenges and current perspective of the evolution and research on chitosan-based materials for supercapacitors have been documented with the probable research directions to overcome the current challenges so as to simplify the efforts in this field.
 Fig. 1  Trend of article publication in relevant journals over the last decade. The values were obtained from a literature search using “chitosan-based materials for supercapacitor applications” (data source: Google Scholar). 
2. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, also known as ultracapacitors or electrical double layer capacitors (EDLC), have the ability to store approximately 10–100 times more energy per unit volume than ordinary capacitors, and exhibit superior charge transfer rates than batteries.73 Besides, this ESD demonstrates longer cycle life and low maintenance cost in comparison with electrochemical batteries and ordinary capacitors. However, the fundamental inconvenience of supercapacitors is their ability to store comparatively 3–30 times less charge than a battery.74 Other than that, gradual voltage loss is also another major problem. Fig. 2 is a Ragone plot displaying the comparison of the energy density and power density of supercapacitors, batteries, and capacitors. The energy densities of lithium ion and lithium primary batteries are higher than that of supercapacitors. Therefore, enhancing the energy density can make supercapacitors efficient ESD along with Li-ion or Li-primary batteries.
 Fig. 2  Ragone plot demonstrating power density vs. energy density of various ESD, such as capacitors, electrochemical capacitors (supercapacitors), and several types of batteries. The time parameters on the plot, calculated from the ratio of energy density to power density, indicates that batteries can perform for a longer period of time in comparison with supercapacitor and capacitors. On the other hand, capacitors and supercapacitors can provide higher power at a unit time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2008, Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature Materials. 
On the basis of the charge storage mechanisms, supercapacitors can be partitioned into 3 basic categories: (i) electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC), (ii) pseudocapacitors, and (iii) hybrid supercapacitors. Among them, EDLC has achieved higher popularity all over the world as the energy storage system is non-faradic in nature, and no redox (electronic transfer) reaction is involved.75 Energy is stored via charge separation in this device. In pseudocapacitors, capacitance emerges from speedy as well as reversible redox reaction at or near to the electrode; therefore, this type of supercapacitor has a resemblance with batteries and is known as a faradic capacitor.76 Electrostatic interaction is conducted to deposit power in the Helmholtz double layers on the interface between the surface of the electrodes and the electrolyte in the non-faradic capacitor (EDLC).77 On the other hand, the pseudocapacitance (faradic) occurs at the electrode surfaces where the electron transfer (redox reaction) takes place, which resembles the charging and discharging of batteries.78 As a result, faradic capacitors have more similarities with batteries than capacitors. The hybrid supercapacitor combines the characteristics of both EDLC and pseudocapacitors to achieve ameliorated performance, including high energy density and power supplying capability.78
Supercapacitors are mainly comprised of four primary parts: electrodes, electrolytes, separator, and current collector (as shown in Fig. 3a). Two electrodes are employed in a cell, which can either be similar or dissimilar, depending on whether those are symmetric or asymmetric in nature. These electrodes are segregated by an ion-permeable separator that is drenched in an electrolyte. An integrated figure showing the major components of the supercapacitors, and adsorption and desorption of ions during the charging and discharging stages are shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of a supercapacitor (EDLC) showing (a) different components (electrode, electrolyte, separator, and charge collector), and working principle during (b) the charging stage (ion adsorption) and (c) discharging stage (ion desorption). 
The capacitance mechanism of supercapacitors has a resemblance with the general capacitance mechanism of normal capacitors.79 In EDLC, energy is stored electrostatically as a result of the reversible adsorption of ions (Fig. 3b) of the electrolyte onto the electrode surface.77 The double layer capacitance is produced as a consequence of charge separation, occurring due to polarization at the electrode–electrolyte interface. Either an extra amount of charge or a shortage of charge accumulates there. During the charging operation (Fig. 3b), the electrons move toward the positive electrode from the negative electrode by means of an exterior load. Beneath the electrolyte, cations move in the direction of the negative electrode, while anions move in the direction of the positive electrode. In the discharging operation (Fig. 3c), the opposite phenomenon occurs. Hence, the net ion exchange between the electrodes and the electrolyte is zero. These phenomena explain why the concentration of the electrolyte remains unchanged. The stored energy in the device can be calculated using the formula E = 0.5CV2, where C stands for capacitance and V stands for cell voltage.80 From this equation, as the stored energy is directly proportional to the capacitance, the square of cell voltage, by enhancing the capacitance and operating voltage of the fabricated device, energy density, as well as the performance of the supercapacitor can be improved.
2.1. Materials currently used in supercapacitors
After development as a novel energy storage device, a lot of advancement has been carried out. Various electrode and electrolyte materials together with collectors and separators have been developed for achieving higher performance.

2.1.1. Electrode materials. 
Electrode materials are undeniably one of the most fundamental parts of the supercapacitor as the stored energy largely depends on the specific capacitance, which is determined by the electrochemically active surface area of the electrodes.81 Currently, various carbon-based materials, metal oxides, as well as conductive polymers are being used in general for this purpose.82 Supercapacitors with various transition metal oxide and hydroxide-based electrodes exhibit good specific capacitance with relatively lower resistance.83 Among these, nickel oxide (NiO), ruthenium dioxide (RuO2), manganese oxide (MnO2), and cobalt oxide (CoO) are employed, in general.84,85 RuO2 has some unique characteristics, such as extensive potential window, large redox reversibility, catalytic behavior, high stability, and field emitting properties.86 On the other hand, the most important feature of NiO is its environmental friendliness.87 Further, the production process using this metal oxide is simple and of lower cost compared to the rest. However, MnO2 has become very attractive to the researchers at present, considering its remarkable storage performance in liquid electrolytes.88
Various conductive polymers are also being used as electrode materials, which can provide the advantage of modifying the redox activity to enhance the capacitance by means of chemical modification.89 Some representative examples of conductive polymer electrodes are polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrol (PPy), and polythiophene (PTh)-based electrodes.90,91 Although these types of electrodes possess relatively high conductivity and capacitance in comparison with carbon-based materials, they also demonstrate higher resistance. On the other hand, carbon-based materials provide various unique properties including broad specific surface area, improved conductivity, and extreme level of stability.92,93 Therefore, these are the most extensively utilized for manufacturing electrodes.88 Among various carbon-based materials, activated carbon, carbon nanotube (CNTs), and graphene are noteworthy. Activated carbon is most widely utilized due to its excellent surface area and favorable electronic characteristics.94 Similarly, CNTs have also gained popularity as electrode materials by virtue of their unprecedented porous structure, comparatively good mechanical and thermal stability, and superb electrical characteristics.95–97 Recently, graphene has garnered a lot of attention as an electrode in supercapacitors as it is independent of the ordering of pores under solid conditions.98,99


2.1.2. Electrolyte materials. 
The electrolyte, consisting of the electrolytic salt dissolved in suitable solvent, allows ionic conductivity which enhances charge reparation on each electrode.17 Electrolyte materials used in supercapacitors can be divided into the following types based on their physical state: (i) liquid electrolyte, (ii) solid electrolyte, and (iii) quasi-solid electrolyte.20 Liquid electrolytes can further be subdivided into the following categories: aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes, and ionic liquid electrolytes. In the same way, solid state electrolytes are also classified as dry solid-state polymer electrolytes, gel polymer electrolytes, and inorganic electrolytes.17 Until 2014, approximately 85% of the total studies focused on aqueous electrolytes because of their high conductivity, low price, and facile synthesis procedures.17 Various types of aqueous electrolytes including acid solutions, alkali solutions, and neutral solutions are being utilized based on their suitability. Among various aqueous electrolytes, H2SO4, KOH, and Na2SO4 solutions are most extensively utilized. However, organic electrolytes are being used commercially in supercapacitors as a consequence of their broader cell voltage (2.5–2.8 V), which results in higher energy and power density.100 In most cases, acetonitrile (ACN) or propylene carbonate (PC) solvents are applied as the organic electrolyte.
Ionic liquids have garnered tremendous attention over the past few years owing to their various excellent characteristics, such as diversified physical and chemical properties, as a result of the wide combinations of anions and cations, superior stability, insignificant volatility, and non-combustibility.101–103 Currently employed ionic liquids are mainly imidazolium, pyrrolidinium, ammonium, sulfonium, phosphonium cations, and tetrafluoroborate, hexafluorophosphate, and dicyanamide anions.17 High electrochemical and thermal stability, safe use, and highly ionized environment along with high operating voltage (3 V) have made this type of electrolyte very promising. Moreover, these are mainly composed of cations and anions. Hence, the reduction in the specific capacitance due to the solvation effect can be avoided.


2.1.3. Separator materials. 
Separator materials, another crucial component of supercapacitors containing liquid electrolytes, is sandwiched between the positive and negative electrodes to avoid short circuit (the fundamental reason for self-discharge).104 Some indispensable operations of separators include the storage of electrolytes into its pores and letting ions travel from one electrode to another during charging and discharging processes. The proper selection of the separator material is essential as the ionic conductivity of the separator material influences the energy and power density of the fabricated devices.105 Over the past few decades, polyolefins and ceramic-filled polyolefins have been widely exploited as separators.106 In addition, different kinds of non-woven fibers, fabricated from cellulose, cotton, nylon, polyester, polyethylene, and poly-tetrafluoroethylene, have also been employed as separators.107 However, in case of solid and gel polymer electrolytes, if these electrolytes can provide proper strength to keep the electrodes separated, no separator is required.108


2.1.4 Current collector materials. 
Current collectors are employed for gathering electrons and boosting the electrode materials in supercapacitors. The properties including the conductivity, as well as contact resistance at the junction of the electrode and current collector have a direct impact on both the power density and capacitance of supercapacitors.109,110 Therefore, to fabricate supercapacitors with higher performance, the current collector must contain a high value of electrical conductivity, thermal stability, and mechanical strength. Currently, carbon fiber, nickel, copper, stainless steel, titanium, platinum, etc., are being used for this purpose.111

2.2. Major challenges with current electrode and electrolyte materials
There are some major drawbacks of the currently used electrode and electrolyte materials, which persuade researchers to fabricate materials of improved characteristics. While evaluating electrodes, the common disadvantages, exhibited by conductive polymers, are the sluggish cycle stability, high resistance, and mechanical deterioration due to swelling and shrinking during the intercalation and de-intercalation of ions.112 Similarly, in case of metal oxide-based electrodes, several metal oxides (e.g., RuO2) are costly and toxic in nature.76 Moreover, some exhibit dissolution problem (e.g., MnO2), poor cycle performance, and high resistivity (e.g., NiO).48 Apart from these, the various widely investigated carbon-based electrodes (e.g., CNT) demonstrate poor specific capacitance due to their low specific surface area (<500 m2 g−1).113 This causes low energy density compared to activated carbon. Further, some carbon-based electrodes have demonstrated elevated resistance due to the presence of small amount of active ingredients.114 Hence, researchers are trying hard to develop these electrode materials for getting superior performance.
Although solid-polymer electrolytes or quasi-solid electrolytes are garnering tremendous attention, they are not used commercially due to low ionic conductivity, which causes a reduction in the energy density.17 Moreover, polymer-based gel electrolytes possess some demerits such as comparatively poor mechanical strength, and a short operative temperature range in particular, when H2O is being used as the solvent. Currently, liquid electrolytes (aqueous and organic) are commonly being used as electrolytes for supercapacitors. Among various liquid electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes exhibit low voltage windows (∼1 V), which is the fundamental reason for the supercapacitor to demonstrate low energy density.115 On top of that, the operating temperature of these electrolytes must be restricted to the range of 0–100 °C.17 Similarly, the use of organic electrolytes contains several disadvantages including inferior specific conductance, high cost, and combustibility.116 Further, rigorous purification processes related with organic electrolytes make the utilization of these quite expensive. To overcome the various shortcomings associated with aqueous and organic electrolytes, researchers are leaning toward ionic electrolytes, which are mainly liquid organic salts having lower melting temperature (<100 °C).117 However, ionic liquids have some demerits, such as high viscosity, comparatively low ionic conductivity, and high cost. Moreover, the specific capacitance of ionic liquid-based electrolytes is low. In order to mitigate these problems associated with ionic liquids, researchers are mixing these with organic solvents to obtain the necessary properties from both.17Table 1 shows the merits and demerits of the electrode and electrolyte materials.
Table 1 Electrode and electrolyte materials currently in use, their merits, and demerits




Materials
Types
Merits
Demerits
Reference




Electrode
Metal oxides
• Contains higher cycle stability, electrical conductivity, and redox activity
• Some widely applied metal oxides (e.g., RuO2 and CoO) are costly and toxic

118



• Better energy density than carbon-based electrodes
• Not abundant in nature


• Higher rate capability




Conducting polymer
• Contains higher voltage window
• Lower stability

119 and 120


• Cheap and negligible environmental impact
• Faster instrumental deterioration occurs of the electrode


• Adjustable redox activity through chemical modification




Carbon-based materials
• Cheap as well as easier to process
• Exhibits lower capacitance

48



• Demonstrates great electronic conductivity and higher stability
• Elevated internal resistance


• Has a broad operating temperature




Electrolyte
Aqueous liquid
• Economical and conceivable in handling
• Possesses a narrow potential window

17



• Simple fabrication and assembly process
• Low operating temperature range (0–100 °C)


• Provides superior conductivity than organic electrolytes




Organic electrolyte
• Exhibits high operating potential window
• Displays high combustibility, volatility, and toxicity

116



• Improved energy and power densities
• Demonstrates low specific capacitance and conductivity


• Allows the use of cheaper materials for current collectors and packages
• Complex purification process


Ionic electrolytes
• Exhibits higher thermal, chemical, and electrochemical stability
• Costlier than other electrolytes

121 and 122


• Demonstrates negligible volatility
• Possesses greater viscosity


• Non-combustible
• Has low ionic conductivity




2.3. Scope of biopolymers for application in supercapacitors
In the previous sections, various electrode and electrolyte materials for supercapacitors have been discussed. Most of these are manufactured from various non-renewable sources, and lead to several environmental problems with some other complications, as mentioned in the previous sections. Therefore, various recent attempts have been undertaken to utilize several biopolymers such as cellulose, hemicellulose, chitosan, conducting biopolymers, starch, lignin, and gelatin as renewable and sustainable sources.37 As these biopolymers are abundant in nature, acquiring and processing these biopolymers is comparatively easier.123 Cellulose, being the most abundant biopolymer in nature, is worthy for formulating electrode and electrolyte materials, as this can sharply bind the inorganic and organic materials.124 On top of that, it demonstrates some excellent characteristics, such as renewability, non-poisonous, biocompatible, malleable, diaphanous, higher mechanical strength, biodegradable, and light weight.125 Other than cellulose, hemicellulose and derivatives of cellulose (e.g., hydroxyethyl cellulose) have also been investigated, as these biopolymers possess a branched structure unlike cellulose (unbranched). Apart from this, conducting biopolymers, such as polylactic acid (PLA) and polyhydroxy butyrate (P3HB), are also being used in supercapacitors. PLA is a biodegradable polymer fabricated from renewable sources via numerous methods including copolymerization, physical treatments using modifiers, and blending.126 On the other hand, polyhydroxy butyrate is comparatively lighter, easily transported, and less toxic. Although these types of conducting biopolymers have a higher specific capacitance, their cycle stability is poor, for which they are not used widely. Besides, lignin and gelatin have also been exploited for the investigation of their biodegradability and renewability.127 Apart from providing biodegradability, the use of these materials will ensure the lesser emission of greenhouse gases compared to synthetic polymers.128 Chitosan, another abundantly available biopolymer, has drawn considerable attention for fabricating electrode and electrolyte materials for supercapacitors due to their various superior qualities compared to other biopolymers, which has been described elaborately in the following sections.
3. Chitosan
Chitosan, a linear, semicrystalline, cationic polysaccharide produced by the partial deacetylation of chitin, is the second most abundant naturally occurring biopolymer available ubiquitously in nature.48 Generally, if degree of deacetylation (DD) of chitin is more than 70% after the deacetylation process, it is considered as chitosan. However, the DD of chitosan used for commercial purposes is in the range of 70–90%.114 The DD value plays a significant role in various properties of chitosan. Such as, chitosan, having higher DD, increases the solubility in aqueous acidic medium, and demonstrates superior biological as well as chemical properties.17 High quality chitosan, along with numerous outstanding properties due to its unique structure, has made chitosan suitable for developing myriad novel materials that satisfy various purposes in diverse fields.115 Consequently, the demand of chitosan has significantly increased in recent years, which has ultimately persuaded researchers to find major sources of chitin, their effective extraction methods, as well as efficient conversion techniques of chitin into chitosan. The major sources, extraction and conversion methods, and applications in various fields with structure and property relationships of chitosan are described below in brief.
3.1. Structure, source, extraction, properties, and applications
Chitin, from which chitosan is synthesized, is a copolymer formed by the β-(1,4) linkage of randomly oriented D-glucosamine and N-acetylglucosamine, a secondary amine monomer derived from glucose (Fig. 4). This cellulose-like biopolymer has made a significant portion of the total naturally occurring polymers on earth. The presence of chitin along with calcium carbonate and protein in the shell of the animals of two major phylums, Mollusca and Arthropoda, and in small amounts in animals of other phyla have made chitin the most abundant biopolymer in animal kingdom.17,117,118 However, among the major sources, shells of crabs, lobsters, krills, and shrimps are noteworthy.119 Besides, scale of fish is also a good source of chitin.120 Apart from animal sources, chitin is also found in the cell wall of fungi and yeast.48 Nevertheless, due to the collection in a large amount of crabs and shrimps for food processing industries, shells of these crustaceans have become the main sources for the industrial extraction of chitin.48 The major sources with available chitin percentage are enlisted in Table 2.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) chitin, (b) chitosan, (c) intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bonds inside and among the chitosan chain. 
Table 2 Chitin percentage in major sources




Sources
% of chitin
Basis of percentage
Reference




Fish scale
20.5
Dry fish scale

17



Lobster shell (Nephro)
69.8
Dry mass of organic cuticle

116



Shrimp shell (Crangon crangon)
17.8
Dry mass of exoskeletons

121



Antarctic krills
34–49
Dry weight of cuticle

122



Crub shell (Chinoecetes opilio)
26.6
Dry mass of exoskeletons

124



Filamentous fungi (Penicillium chrysogenum)
19.5–42
Dry mass of mycelium

125





Prior to obtaining the desired product chitosan, chitin is needed to be extracted from its sources by various chemical or biological methods or by combining both.40,129–131 In chemical extraction process, crustacean shells after drying and grinding are treated with some chemicals separately in several steps. In an orderly manner, the first step, deproteinization, is done by treating with a strong alkali solution, such as NaOH or KOH. Then, in the demineralization step, diluted acid solution (e.g., HCl) is used to remove the acid soluble mineral portion. After that, the remaining part is treated with a strong oxidizing agent (e.g., H2O2 and KMnO4) for decolorization. Finally, after washing and drying, purified chitin is obtained.82 Although this process is generally used for large scale extraction, the utilization of strong bases, acids, and oxidizing agents has made it very costly. Moreover, the generated chemical effluents and impurities in products (low purity) reduce the effectiveness drastically as well as endanger the environment.126 All these problems have been mitigated by developing biological processes where microorganisms or enzymes are used for deproteinization in the extraction of chitin.127 These biological processes are mainly based on purified enzymes, proteolytic microorganisms, or fungi.132 Incorporation of these methods has made chitin extraction environmentally safe and highly affordable. However, the low yield and long time requirement still hinder these strategies for industrial applications.128
After extraction, chitin needs to be partially deacetylated either by employing chemical or microbial/enzymatic methods. In chemical deacetylation, heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis are two commonly available approaches.133 In the former approach, 85–99% deacetylated insoluble chitosan residue is produced by reacting chitin with hot concentrated NaOH solution, whereas in the latter one, chitosan with uniformly distributed acetyl groups having an average DD of 48–55% is produced by dispersing chitin in concentrated NaOH solution, which is later dissolved in crushed ice at approximately 0 °C. With a view to exploit green synthetic methods for deacetylation, microbial and enzymatic processes are gaining much attention. Many studies have shown that various microorganisms (e.g., Mucor rouxii, Absidia coerulea, Rhizopus nigricans, and Colletotrichum lindemuthianum) and insects (e.g., Drosophila melanogaster and Mamestra configurata) excrete chitin deacetylase enzymes, which can be employed for this purpose.134 In a study, the deacetylation of chitin conducted by Rhizopus japonicas has provided chitosan with the highest DD of 79% and lowest molecular weight of 126 kDa.135 Although this result is not suitable for mass production, the incorporation of genetically modified superior quality strains of microorganisms with optimum fermentation condition can replace the chemical synthesis methods and makes this suitable for industrial application.
Aside from conventional methods, some other advanced methods have been developed by integrating modern technologies. Among these, γ-irradiation and microwave irradiation using low alkali concentration have shown a higher DD with a higher molecular weight within a shorter period of time than the conventional methods.136,137 Although the DD of the obtained chitosan by these methods is very high, it is far from 100%. In a recent study, a new compression method has been reported to produce fully deacetylated chitosan (DD 100%) with a high molecular weight using only 15% alkali solution, providing chitosan of superior quality.138 Increasing the DD provides a higher number of amino (–NH2) groups present in the polymeric structure, which has a significant impact on its chemical properties and biological activities, as mentioned earlier. In fact, the presence of –NH2 groups at the C-2 position along with the –OH groups in each of its monomeric unit has made this polymer completely unique compared to all other abundantly available biopolymers in nature. The protonation of H+ ion at –NH2 at pH < 6 makes it soluble and provides more positive charges, which is a pivotal factor for numerous activities and chemical modifications.40 These H atoms containing polar functional groups mainly contribute to the formation of interchain and intra chain hydrogen bonds, which makes the structure of chitosan rigid and forms films with high mechanical strength, as shown in Fig. 4c. The –NH2 groups present in chitosan exhibit chelating properties; thus, it can be used for water treatment to remove pollutants including metal ions, dye, and solids that are negatively charged.139–141 Again, chitosan exhibits numerous properties including mucoadhesive, analgesic, hemocompatible, biocompatible with antimicrobial, antitumor, and antioxidant activities that have made this biopolymer suitable for various medical applications.142–144 The ability of –NH2 and –OH functional groups present in chitosan to react with numerous compounds enable it to produce various chitosan derivatives via carboxylation, alkylation, acetylation, hydroxylation, and esterification.145 These derivatives of superior chemical, physicochemical, and biological properties can be employed for satisfying various purposes in agriculture, textile industry, tissue engineering, drug delivery, cosmetics, and in some other industries.145–151 Currently, chitosan has also found application in the energy industry for fabricating advanced energy storage devices including supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells.152 Various applications of chitosan with chitin extraction and deacetylation have been illustrated in Fig. 5.153–159
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the chitin sources, chitin extraction by deproteinization, and demineralization process, exploiting alkali and acid solution, respectively; chitosan manufacturing process by deacetylation using alkali solution, and applications of chitosan in various fields. 
3.2. Suitability of chitosan in supercapacitors
After the development of supercapacitors, researchers have extensively studied various materials to find their suitability in potential applications as electrodes and electrolytes with a view to increase the performance of this ESD fabricated using these materials. Besides, sustainable and renewable sources ensuring environmentally safe manufacturing processes and disposal, is another major area of concern.160 Therefore, as mentioned in Section 2.3, together with cellulose, starch, and polylactic acid, chitosan and its derivatives have also drawn remarkable attention due to their abundant availability in nature with non-toxicity, affordable production processes, biodegradability, biocompatibility, light weight, environmental friendliness, as well as high mechanical and electrical properties, obtained by transforming them into other materials.61,161–164 Among all these biopolymers, chitosan has been exploited intensively for manufacturing electrode and electrolyte materials because of its excellent mechanical strength and good ionic conductivity obtained after modification due to the ability to conduct ions with the help of lone pair electrons in –NH2, –OH, and C–O–C (glycosidic linkage) groups presented in its structure.165 Over years of studies and research, scientists have developed various chitosan-derived electrodes based on various carbon-containing materials including carbon nanodots, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and porous carbon.166–169 However, porous carbon has been regarded as a promising material due to its high porosity, large specific surface area with low cost of production along with electrochemical stability, high conductivity, and eco-friendliness.170 The use of chitosan as a renewable and sustainable source for synthesizing porous carbons with higher efficiency in environment-friendly and cost-effective ways has made utilization of this promising material more reliable. Numerous studies conducted by many researchers have synthesized porous carbons of various morphologies including porous activated carbons,171 hierarchical porous carbons,172 and heteroatom N,B-doped porous carbons.46,170 Flexible 3D scaffolds such as porous carbons173 utilize chitosan as the precursor. In many other studies, various composites for electrode application have been developed using chitosan with reduced graphene oxide and polyaniline,174 graphene oxide,175 and so on. Few of these materials have demonstrated outstanding properties including large surface area with high porosity and conductivity, increasing reactive sites, and better interaction with the electrolyte. While these electrodes are employed for fabricating supercapacitors, they exhibit increasing capacitance with an extraordinary cycle life, high current, and power density.
Apart from developing electrodes, chitosan has also been exploited for producing electrolytes of superior quality for supercapacitors, ensuring environmental benignity. In order to avoid the drawbacks of the various currently used liquid-based electrolytes, a number of solid-state electrolytes have been developed, which is based on various synthetic polymers, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), and poly(vinyl oxide).34,176–178 In many studies, composites have been developed by incorporating a number of inorganic fillers, such as TiO2, Al2O3, SiO2, and plasticizers in these synthetic polymers.179 These petrochemical-based conventional synthetic polymers often require complex chemical procedures for manufacturing and have negative environmental impacts, which should not be ignored.67 Hence, the replacement of these synthetic polymers with chitosan is a better solution to overcome these currently existing limitations. Besides, numerous electrolytes developed using chitosan have exhibited high conductivity, stability over a wider potential and temperature range, and have imparted good mechanical strength, which have made these materials more suitable for supercapacitor applications.180,181 However, the low ionic conductivity of pristine chitosan is one of the major challenges in manufacturing electrolytes using this biopolymer. This has been overcome by incorporating salts with a host polymer synthesized by blending chitosan with other natural and synthetic polymers in small amounts.62,182,183 Sometimes, plasticizers are also used for further enhancing the conductivity of electrolyte systems.184–186 Several studies have been conducted to develop chitosan-based polymer electrolytes. Among these, proton-conducting polymer electrolytes have become one of the major areas of research, where solid and gel electrolytes have been produced by incorporating a proton donor in the chitosan blend with other polymers. For example, NH4SCN incorporated chitosan–PEO blended system for a solid-state electrolyte.62 Here, H+ is mainly responsible for ionic transportation, which is provided by dissociation of NH4SCN. Also, chitosan is blended with PEO to increase the amorphous portion of the host polymer, as the amorphous portion is mainly responsible for the ionic conductivity. Many other similar types of solid-state electrolyte systems have been reported by incorporating many other proton donors, as well as blending chitosan with other polymers, such as NH4NO3 incorporated solid-state electrolyte system by blending poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) with plasticized chitosan,187 NH4Cl incorporated chitosan blended with starch solid-state electrolyte system,188 and NH4CNS incorporated chitosan blended with methyl cellulose (MC) system of the solid polymer electrolyte.189 Apart from employing proton as ionic conductor, several other cations including Li+, Ba2+, and Mg2+ are also incorporated in chitosan-based polymer matrix, such as LiCO2CH3-doped glycerol-blended chitosan solid polymer electrolyte, where Li+ is responsible for the ionic conductivity.190 Mg(CH3COO)2 incorporated plasticized chitosan is also an another approach, where Mg2+ acts as the charge carrier.165 Similarly, Ba(NO3)2 has also been doped in host polymer chitosan in an investigation.190
In addition to the development of electrode and electrolyte materials, chitosan has also been exploited to develop binding materials for electrodes that are environment friendly and cost effective.191 These plentiful approaches to utilize chitosan in various ways with optimistic results have revealed its wider potentiality in supercapacitor applications.
4. Application of chitosan-based materials for supercapacitors
As previously mentioned, chitosan has proved as a suitable material for fabricating environmentally benign electrodes and electrolytes for supercapacitors due to their remarkable benefits. Therefore, numerous chitosan-based electrodes and electrolytes have been developed, which are summarized in the following sections.
4.1. Chitosan-based materials as electrodes
Electrodes are regarded as one of the fundamental components of supercapacitors. The efficiency, electrochemical properties, and durability of supercapacitors largely depends on various factors of this component, such as porosity, hydrophilicity, structure, surface area, mechanical strength, chemical, and physical stability.192 Consequently, in order to receive a better performance from the supercapacitor, choosing proper electrode materials with superior characteristics is a primary requirement.193 While selecting proper electrodes, three parameters should be properly evaluated.88 The first one is specific capacitance. The second factor is sustainability at a high potential. And the last one is cycle life of electrode material. The specific capacitance and operating potential directly contribute to energy density, whereas the cycle life determines life expectancy of the supercapacitor. Over years of studies and research, numerous chitosan-based electrodes have been developed that demonstrate very promising properties including high specific capacitance, enhanced cycle life, and sustainability to high voltage. Chitosan has been exploited mainly in two ways, one is by the fabrication of composite materials with which poor mechanical characteristics problems of chitosan can be solved by the synergic effects among various incorporated materials.43,194 The second way is to manufacture carbon-based materials as carbon precursor with the aim of overcoming current drawbacks of various carbon-based electrodes.82,171,195 Modern advancements and significant features of these two main kinds of electrodes have been abbreviated below in the subsequent section.

4.1.1. Chitosan-based composites. 
Composite materials are developed by the integration of two or more components to create a hybrid material that is specialized to do definite works and demonstrates better properties than the individual components.196 Various chitosan-based composite materials developed for electrode application in supercapacitors are comprised mainly of either chitosan–polyaniline,47 chitosan–metal oxides,197 and chitosan–graphene43 as binary composites, or chitosan–graphene–polyaniline47 and chitosan–metal oxide–polyaniline as ternary composites.198 Composite electrodes containing conducting polymers are gathering more attention, as these can provide high pseudocapacitive characteristics. In addition, the nanostructure presented by these electrodes offers a high specific surface area. The shorter charge diffusion pathway further enhances the performance of energy storage. To date, various types of chitosan-based binary and ternary nanocomposites have been fabricated as electrode materials.
4.1.1.1. Chitosan–graphene–polyaniline-based composites. 
In recent decades, numerous studies have been conducted for developing various types of chitosan-based composites. Among these, chitosan–graphene oxide with multiwalled CNT composites (CS–GM) and chitosan–graphene modified-polyaniline composites (CS–GM-PANI) have exhibited very optimistic results.43 On comparing these two polymer composites with pure chitosan by the structural morphology, chitosan has demonstrated a flower-like structure, which is comparatively less porous (Fig. 6a). On the other hand, CS–GM has exhibited a rougher structure, whereas CS–GM-PANI has demonstrated an aggregated, porous, and even a highly rough structure that indicates higher ionic mobility and diffusion pathways (Fig. 6b and c). This rough structure, obtained due to the deposition of PANI, has generated an identical and uninterrupted network. As a result of highly porous structure, the CS–GM-PANI composite has demonstrated a higher specific capacitance of 609.2 F g−1 in comparison with other two electrodes fabricated using CS (282.6 F g−1) and CS–GM (307.7 F g−1). Fig. 6f has demonstrated specific capacitance vs. scan rate for these three electrodes in the potential window from −1.0 to +1.0 V using 0.5 M Na2SO4 as the electrolyte. It has been observed that if scan rate is enhanced, specific capacitance reduced drastically because of shortened faradic part of the total capacitance, which included PANI, –COOH/–OH, and N groups present in chitosan. Moreover, the ternary composites have exhibited better current density than the other two owing to the benefaction of two different charge storage mechanisms, faradic and electrostatic, for PANI and GM, respectively. The capacitance retention of CS, CS–GM, and CS–GM-PANI have been demonstrated in Fig. 6g, which has displayed quite a good result of almost 4% decay after 500 cycles at a large current density of 5 A g−1. Later, in another study, a series of binary and ternary composites were fabricated using chitosan–polyaniline (CP1–CP7) (binary) and chitosan–reduced graphene oxide–polyaniline (CG1P–CG5P) (ternary) by in situ polymerization.47 The main difference among various binary composites (CP1–CP7) and ternary composites (CG1P–CG5P) were the concentration variation of polyaniline and reduced graphene oxide (RGO), respectively. From CP1 to CP7, the concentration of aniline increased gradually, which showed a rise in specific conductance up to CP5. After that, the specific conductance decreased due to formation of agglomerates in chitosan matrix by extra aniline, which averted the transportation of ions toward conductive network.47 The highest conductivity (4.165 × 10−1 S cm−1) was obtained for CP5. Likewise, conductivity of the ternary composites increased with increasing concentration of RGO, and maximum conductivity of 2.9745 S cm−1 was obtained for CG3P. A further increase in concentration of RGO resulted in a decrease in the conductivity, as increasing RGO developed isolated aggregates, which have restricted transportation of ions through the conductive network.199,200 The utilization of RGO further enhances thermal stability of these composites up to 800 °C.201 While considering surface morphology, CP5 exhibited a small rod-like fibrous formation, and pulverized polyaniline was deposited on it (Fig. 6d). As a result, it exhibited better specific surface area and capacitance than CS. In the SEM image (Fig. 6e), CG3P displayed a porous and rough structure. The fiber shaped PANI and RGO created a conducting network, which formed π–π interaction among them. As a result, CG3P exhibited better specific capacitance (1519 F g−1 at scan rate of 5 mV s−1) (Fig. 6h) compared to individual binary composite CP5 and polyaniline (939 F g−1 and 495 F g−1, respectively). The demonstration of excellent electrochemical applications by CG3P was obtained due to high electrical conductivity and perfectly designed nanostructure of the fabricated composite. The amalgamation of graphene has further developed electric conductivity, whereas the addition of PANI has brought about noticeable enhancement in the pseudocapacitance. In addition to that, the availability of –NH2 and –OH groups in the chitosan structure has significantly minimized the ion permeable resistance at interface of electrode and electrolyte.198 The capacitance retention of CG3P has been measured to be 88% of the initial capacitance after 1000 cycles at scan rate of 50 mV s−1, which was superior to both CP5 (69%) and PANI (52%) (Fig. 6i). The better cycle stability of the ternary composite was due to the incorporation of reduced and elastic graphene, which produced a resilient network, mitigating structural deformation of PANI. Apart from these studies, few studies on chitosan–graphene-based composites has been carried out, which shows promising results.44,194
 Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) chitosan, (b) CS–GM, (c) CS–GM-PANI, (d) CP5, (e) CG3P. Graphical representation of specific capacitance vs. scan rate (f), specific capacitance vs. cycle number (g) of CS–GM-PANI, CS–GM, and CS composites. (a)–(c), (f), and (g) have been adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. Graphs of specific capacitance vs. scan rates (h) and specific capacitance vs. cycle life (i) of the CG3P, CP5, and PANI composites. (d), (e), (h), and (i) have been adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, Chemical Data Collections. 
4.1.1.2. Chitosan–metal oxide–graphene/polyaniline-based composites. 
Apart from chitosan-based composite electrodes, as mentioned before in the above section, chitosan–metal oxide composite materials are also investigated thoroughly as a result of their compatible characteristics, such as higher energy density, specific capacitance, and augmented cycle stability.202
In another attempt, a chitosan-based ternary composite has been fabricated (CS–ZnO/PANI) through in situ polymerization of aniline in presence of CS–ZnO, which was developed via simple chemical precipitation.198 According to morphological studies by HR-SEM (high resolution scanning electron microscopy), it demonstrated a plate-like structure, as the polymerization reaction was carried out under highly acidic conditions (1 M HCl). As a result, anilinium ions were adsorbed immediately on the surface of the dispersed CS–ZnO nanocomposite, and went through oxidative polymerization with (NH4)2S2O8. In course of polymerization, the reciprocal repulsion took place among the positive imine groups in the polymer chains, which enhanced free energy of the system effectively.203 Owing to the plate-like structure (Fig. 7a), this produced a superfluous efficient network for charge transportation, the composite electrode exhibited a larger conductivity of 9.6565 × 10−2 S.204 By applying the galvanostatic charging and discharging method, highest specific capacitance of 587.15 F g−1 was obtained at a current density of 150 mA cm−2.198 Approx. 25% increase in capacitance compared to the PANI–ZnO electrode resulted from the combining effect of mesoporous structure and extensive pore distribution, which allowed faster diffusion of electrolytes into the uniform mesopores because of the shortened solid-state transport length. After about 1000 cycles, at a current density of 0.175 A cm−2, which was in the voltage range of 0–0.8 V, capacitance retention of the electrode reduced to about 80% of the initial value (Fig. 7e). Later, in another investigation, a couple of hybrid nanocomposites, denoted by CS–GO–ZnO–PANI and CH–GO–ZnO–PANI, were produced by incorporating graphene oxide in the nanostructure.16 The incorporation of ZnO in the CH–GO–ZnO–PANI and CS–GO–ZnO–PANI hybrid composites has improved the bond formation among chitosan, GO, and PANI. The CH–GO–ZnO–PANI hybrid composite demonstrated a flower like grain structure, while the CS–GO–ZnO–PANI hybrid composite displayed a sheet-like grain structure. The GO nanosheets facilitated the growth of PANI in order to give a huge number of active nucleation sites for increasing the capacitance. CH–GO–ZnO–PANI and CS–PANI composites exhibited a higher area than the other two as a result of their better specific capacitance. The maximum specific capacitance of 542.63 F g−1 at current density of 0.1 A g−1, as well as the good cycle stability, were exhibited by the CH–GO–ZnO/PANI composite.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) CS0.12–ZnO2.5/PANI, (b) CS–PANI, and (c) CS–SnO2–PANI hybrid composites. Graphical representation of (d) the CV curves of binary (CS–PANI) and ternary (CS–SnO2–PANI) composite electrodes at a varying scan rate ranging from 10 mV s−1 to 200 mV s−1 using 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, (e) charge/discharge cycling performance of PANI–ZnO and CS0.12–ZnO2.5/PANI at a potential range from 0 V to 0.80 V vs. SCE at a charge density of 175 mA cm−2 (a), (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2013, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (b)–(d) are reproduced with permission from reference. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a different study, SnO2 was used to produce CS–SnO2–PANI ternary hybrid composite in a two-step process.205 In the first step, the chemical precipitation process was applied to produce the CS–SnO2 composite, whereas in the second step, in situ oxidative polymerization method was carried out by aniline monomer in acidic medium to form the CS–SnO2–PANI composite. Fig. 7b and c illustrates the structural morphology of CS–PANI and CS–SnO2–PANI, respectively. The CS–SnO2–PANI composite was more amorphous compared to the CS–PANI composite, which exhibited a twisted fibrous semi-crystalline structure. Doping of Sn4+ in numerous nitrogen sites present in the chitosan polymer chains made this ternary composite rougher, as CS–SnO2 was uniformly distributed throughout the PANI matrix. As a result, the BET surface area of CS–SnO2–PANI exhibited higher value of 147.14 m2 g−1 than the CS–PANI composite (surface area 29.90 m2 g−1). In Fig. 7d, cycle voltammograms of the CS–PANI and CS–SnO2–PANI composite electrodes at a varying scan rate ranging from 10 mV s−1 to 200 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte were exhibited for properly evaluating the electrochemical performances. The maximum specific capacitance, power density, and energy density displayed by this ternary composite are 179.20 F g−1, 32.25 kW kg−1, and 8.96 W h kg−1, respectively, which are higher than that of the binary composite (CS–PANI) electrode (84.34 F g−1, 15.18 kW kg−1, and 4.21 W h kg−1, respectively).
Apart from these studies, another investigation has been also performed over another ternary nanocomposite of zinc-doped Fe3O4–graphene oxide (GO) and chitosan.206 Iron oxide (magnetite) is a readily available, non-toxic, eco-friendly, cheap material, and displays satisfactory capacitance characteristics. Fe3O4 was doped with ZnO, which showed a favorable specific energy density of 650 A g−1. After doping, these were added to chitosan and GO composite for producing the final ternary nanocomposite. From cycle voltammetry, the measured specific capacitance was found to be 830 F g−1, which was higher than the individual components. Magnetite's (Fe3O4) theoretical capacitance of the individual pseudocapacitor was recorded to be 14 F g−1, and for EDLC, the capacitance of GO was recorded to be 550 F g−1.207,208 The higher value of capacitance was the evidence of existing synergistic effect of the individual constituents. Apart from these studies, few studies on chitosan–metal oxide-based composites were carried out.197,209 Various chitosan-based composite electrodes and their electrochemical properties are displayed in Table 3.
Table 3 Characteristics and key features of various chitosan-based polymer electrodes and performance obtained from fabricated supercapacitors




Electrode material
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Cycle stability with capacity retention (%)
Electrolyte used
Specific capacitance (F g−1) at current density (A g−1)
Power density (W kg−1)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Key features/remarks
Reference




N, O self-co-doped hierarchical porous carbon
1679
10000, 79.70%
Aq. KOH
287.94 (at 1)
399.92
28.74
• Large surface area with richer porosity

210



• Good energy and power density


• Satisfactory cycle stability


B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets
2362
100000, 100%
Na2SO4 and 6 M KOH
478 (at 0.5)
225.1
30.1
• Excellent cycle life

221



• Ultra-high surface area


• Good specific capacitance


• Comparatively high energy density


N-doped hierarchically porous carbon
3300
20000, 94%
6 M KOH
367 (at 0.1)
25
12.7
• Extremely high surface area

214



• Moderate capacitance


• Extremely high cycle stability


B, N co-doping porous carbon
1202.4
83%
H2SO4–PVA gel
393 (at 0.5)
400
19.1
• Large power density

212



• Sufficient specific surface area


Chitosan-derived hybrid porous carbon
927.17
10000, 90%
6 M KOH
331 (at 1)
900
34
• Excellent energy density as well as power density

169



• High cycle stability


• Large surface area


Carbon materials derived from chitosan/cellulose cryogel
1085.6
1000, 95.5%
6 M KOH
173.1 (at 1)
—
—
• High surface area

125



• Lower specific capacitance


• Lower cycle stability


N-doped graphene aerogels
692
5000, 96.2%
6 M KOH
244.4 (at 0.2)
—
—
• Normal specific capacitance

162



• Good cycle life


Chitosan-based carbon
1129.6
5000, 96.18%
KOH
316 (at 0.2)
—
—
• Good cycle stability

82



• Moderate specific capacitance


• High specific surface area


N/NiOx co-doped hierarchical porous carbon nanosheets
1847.4
10000, 85.61%
6 M KOH
614.6 (at 1)
240.9
20.3
• Very high specific capacitance

57



• Large specific surface area


• Excellent cycle stability


Chitosan-derived N-doped carbon
1223 ± 120
—
KOH and KHCO3
(406 ± 36) (at 0.5)
200
(23.6 ± 3.1)
• High specific capacitance

228



• Good energy density


• Large specific surface area


N-containing chitosan-based carbon
1000–1100
5000, 100%
1 M H2SO4
19.5 μF cm−2
—
—
• Excellent cycle capability

46



• Good specific capacitance


Boric acid-mediated B,N co-doped chitosan-derived porous carbons
710
4000, 99.4%
—
176 (at 3)
—
—
• Moderate capacitance

195



• Well cycle stability


Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) decorated pencil graphite electrodes (PGEs) with the assimilation of chitosan
—
1500, 92.8%
0.1 M HCl–KCl
367.16 mF cm−2 (at 1 mA cm−2)
—
—
• High specific areal capacitance

229



• Green synthesis technique


Hierarchically porous carbons derived from meta organic framework/chitosan composites
2375
10000, 79%
1.0 M H2SO4
199.9 (at 0.05)
—
—
• Non-toxic electrolyte used

219



• High specific surface area


Chitosan/reduced graphene oxide composite
—
10000, 92.57%
1 M H2SO4
274 (at 0.5)
50
8.4
• Excellent cycle stability

230



• Moderate specific capacitance


Chitosan and chitin-based hybrid composites
2630
—
0.2 M H2SO4
542.63 (at 0.1)
—
—
• Supreme specific surface area

16



• High specific capacitance


Chitosan–ZnO/polyaniline ternary nanocomposite electrode
116.25
1000, 80%
1.0 M H2SO4
541.03 (at 175 mA g−1)
—
—
• Large specific capacitance

198



• Lower surface area


• Moderate cycle stability


Zn-doped iron oxide/graphene oxide/chitosan nanocomposite electrode
—
—
1.0 M H2SO4
830
—
—
• Excellent specific capacitance

206



• Cost-effective, non-toxic


Chitosan–graphene–polyaniline ternary electrode (CG3P)
—
1000, 88%
1 M H2SO4
1519 (ref. 1)
—
—
• Ultra large specific capacitance

47



• Excellent thermal stability (up to 800 °C)


• Great cycle stability


Chitosan–polyaniline binary electrode (CP5)


1000, 69%
1 M H2SO4
939




• Great specific capacitance

47



• Superior thermal stability (up to 800 °C)


• Lower cycle stability


Chitosan/graphene oxide-MWCNT/polyaniline (CS/GM/PANI) ternary nanocomposite
—
500, 96%
0.5 M Na2SO4
609.2
—
—
• High specific capacitance at a higher scan rate

43



• Larger current density as a result of two charge storage mechanisms (faradic and electrostatic)


MnO2–chitosan hybrid nanocomposite
—
400, 3%
—
424
—
—
• High specific capacitance

197



• Comparatively poor stability


• Superior rate capability


Chitosan–SnO2–polyaniline ternary hybrid composite
—
—
1 M H2SO4
179.20 (at 0.1)
32250
8.96
• Excellent power density

205



• Low specific capacitance


Chitosan–polyaniline hybrid electrode
—
—
1 M H2SO4
84.34 (at 0.1)
15180
4.21
• Ultra-higher power density

205



Graphite oxide/cobalt hydroxide/chitosan ternary composite
—
2000, 80%
—
402
—
—
• High specific capacitance

209



• Low cost, mass production supercapacitors




• Fast diffusion of electrolyte ions into the nanostructured materials


Chitosan-based partially graphitic nanoflake-like carbon/Fe2O3 magnetic composites
—
2000, 83%
2 M KOH
299 (at 0.5)
1598
135
• Demonstrates strong singular crystalline property

231



• Moderate capacitance with superior recycling durability


• Green and reproducible


Graphene oxide–chitosan composite hydrogel derived porous carbon/graphene composites
—
2000, 96%
6 M KOH
320 (at 1)
700
13.95
• Good power density and specific capacitance at high current density

44



• Great power density


• High cycling stability


Chitosan-derived hierarchical porous carbon
3532
20000, 99%
6 M KOH
455
226.8
20.6
• Ultra-large surface area

213



• High energy and power density


• Excellent cycle stability


Chitosan-based hydrogel-derived hierarchical porous carbon
1743
81%
KOH and Na2SO4
165 (at 0.5)
192
7.54
• Excellent specific surface area

225



• High rate capability


• One step and cost-effective synthesis method


Heteroatom-doped hierarchical porous carbon aerogels
1475
—
1 M H2SO4
416 (at 1)
25
6.36
• High specific surface area

223



• Large specific capacitance


• Low equivalent series resistance






4.1.2. Chitosan-based materials as carbon precursors. 
Recently, researchers are getting attracted to chitosan as a renewable and sustainable source of porous carbon to fabricate electrodes with high specific capacitance.195 The fabrication of different types of electrodes by doping with different types of heteroatoms, such as N, B, S, and P, can enhance the wettability of carbon. Besides, these doped atoms also can boost induced pseudo-capacitive characteristics, which can lead to the increase of the specific capacitance, conductivity, and energy density.169 Consequently, the doping of different types of heteroatoms in porous activated carbon has garnered remarkable attention over the years. Activated carbon can be doped by two primary methods: (i) artificial doping, and (ii) self-doping.210 In the first method, activated carbon is treated using several types of reagents, including urea, thiourea, phosphoric acid, and boric acid, which form the corresponding functional groups on the surface of activated carbon.211 These treatments are perplexing, extravagant, and involve lengthy processes. In contrast, self-doping is a straight process, in which the carbon precursors serve as the source of the heteroatom elements. This provides more uniform incorporation of heteroatoms than artificial doping. As chitosan comprises a large amount of amino groups that can immediately allow the self-co-doped heteroatoms (e.g., N and O), this polymer can be exploited as the precursor for manufacturing self-co-doped carbon. Numerous attempts have been undertaken for fabricating chitosan-based activated carbon electrodes for supercapacitors.212
4.1.2.1. Hierarchical porous carbon from chitosan. 
In a study, a chitosan-derived porous carbon electrode has been fabricated by combining hydrothermal carbonization and chemical activation method.213 In this procedure, chitosan was dissolved in CH3COOH to generate a conducive medium and to gain accessibility of activators, KOH was added at the beginning. CH3COOH was functioned as an additive for hydrothermal carbonization. Then, an inflexible quasi-carbonized framework substrate was formed for generating a superior hierarchical porous structure. The electrode has demonstrated a three-dimensional honeycomb-like porous structure (Fig. 8a) with the highest attainable specific surface area of 3532 m2 g−1 and specific capacitance of 455 F g−1 (at current density 0.5 A g−1). This result is comparatively larger than the additive-free controlled sample and commercial activated carbon YP-50 (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, the electrode provided a long cycle stability of 99% capacitance retention of the initial value even after applying an extremely high current density of 20 A g−1 (Fig. 8d). Another method was developed later for fabricating hierarchically porous carbon doped with N using chitosan and betaine hydrochloride.214 Although the fabricated electrode material exhibited high power density compared to the aforementioned electrode, it failed to surpass the energy density and specific capacitance.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) hierarchical porous carbon from the chitosan sample, (b) chitosan derived HPC-0.50, (c) schematic representation of a comparison of specific capacitance among C-HPC, YP-50, and the control sample in a three-electrode system. Graphical representation of (d) change in the capacitance with respect to the cycle number at a current density of 20 A g−1, the inner curve shows the charging and discharging cycles in the maiden and last three cycles. Graphitic diagrams of CHPC-0.50, (e) the CV curves current density at the potential range of −1.2 V to −0.2 V, (f) charging–discharging curves showing the potential vs. time at varying current densities, (g) capacitance retention of the initial capacitance after 10000 cycles at a current density of 10 A g−1 (a), (c), and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b), (e), (f), and (g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature. 
Some other types of chitosan-derived porous carbon electrodes have also been developed by blending chitosan with gelatin and the additive solution of CH3COOH.169 Gelatin enhanced overall performance as it altered the structure of chitosan-derived carbon materials, and generated countless micropores and mesopores by assistance of KHCO3 activator. More notably, gelatin assembled the heteroatoms and facilitated pseudocapacitance into the electrodes, which enhanced the capacitive performance. This electrode exhibited a maximum energy density of 34 W h kg−1 with a power density of 900 W kg−1 and a massive lamellar structure with tangerine pith-like morphology, as shown in Fig. 8b. By enlarging the SEM image to a higher extent, countless linked nanopores were observed on account of the activation of KHCO3, which enhanced the specific surface area. Moreover, these significantly decreased the transportable route of electrolyte ions, resulting in upgradation in the rate capability performance.215,216 The explicit electrochemical performance of the electrode was described by the cycle voltammetry curve in Fig. 8e. The structure of the curves converted to reel as the scan rate was raised due to the pseudo-capacitance characteristic and the interior resistance. As a result, carrying out the charge–discharge process instantly became difficult.217 As shown in Fig. 8f, every galvanostatic charging–discharging curve exhibited symmetrical voltage performance at various current densities, assuring astonishing capacitive reversibility.218 The excellent cycle stability was also calculated via the charging discharging curve as the capacitance retention was shown to be almost 90% of the initial capacitance after 10000 cycles (Fig. 8g). The maximum specific capacitance exhibited was 331 F g−1.169
Some other latest works also exhibited quite prominent results by doping heteroatoms for creating porous carbon electrodes. Among them B,N co-doped porous carbon showed quite promising specific capacitance of 393 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 in a three electrode system.212 Besides, in another work, hierarchical porous carbon was fabricated from metal–organic framework and chitosan composites, which also provided prominent results.219
4.1.2.2. Co-doped porous carbon nanosheets derived from chitosan. 
A chitosan-derived double-doped (N and Ni) porous carbon nanosheet (NiOx-NCNS) electrode was fabricated via segmented carbonization method.57 In that method, N-doped chitosan nanofibers as well as Ni(NO3)3 were used as precursors for electrode fabrication. They generated a 2D fiber network, which facilitated the production of honeycomb layered structures (a rich pore structure that enhances ion transport and electrolyte infiltration).220 The 2D web sheet structure, built by loading chitosan nanofibers, delivered systematic ion and electron conveying paths, so that superfluous active sites took part in the redox reactions. As a consequence, the pseudo-capacitive property was enhanced, following larger specific capacitance, energy density, and cycle stability. In the fabrication process, the carbonization temperature used was 700 °C, 800 °C, and 900 °C to create three different sample electrodes designated by NiOx/NCNS-700, NiOx/NCNS-800, and NiOx/NCNS-900, respectively. Among the nanosheets, NiOx/NCNS-800 displayed the maximum capacitance of 614.6 F g−1 (Fig. 9a) at 1 A g−1 electric density along with 6 M KOH electrolyte, because they contained the highest specific surface area of 1847.4 m2 g−1 and immense mesopore volume, which facilitated ion transportation. Moreover, this electrode showed considerably high energy density of 20.3 W h kg−1 at power density of 240 W kg−1.57 The cycle stability of these electrodes was surprisingly good, as the capacitance retention was more than 85% of the primary capacitance after 10000 cycles. In Fig. 9b, the electrochemical performance at various current densities was measured.
 Fig. 9  Graphical representation of various types of chitosan-derived porous carbon nanosheet electrodes' electrochemical performance. (a) GCD curves showing the specific capacitance against varying current densities of NCNS, NiOx/NCNS-700, 800, 900 electrodes, (b) GCD curves at different current densities of NCNS, NiOx/NCNS-700, 800, 900 electrodes, (c) CV curves displaying electrochemical performance of the CS/His-B electrode with the Na2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 between varying voltage windows, (d) energy density against a power density of the CS/His-B solid state supercapacitor, (e) GCD curves of voltage vs. time of the CS/His-B electrode at varying current densities, (f) capacitance retention after 100000 cycles of CS/His-B fabricated symmetric supercapacitor with 6 M KOH electrolyte at a current density of 2.5 A g−1, (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2020, IOP Publishing Ltd (c)–(f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from this, B and N co-doped carbon nanosheet has been synthesized from chitosan and aspartic acid gel precursor in a direct carbonization activation process.221 Boric acid and amino acids were used as the primary source of B and N. During this process, three amino acids (histidine, aspartic acid, and serine) have been used, which are also known as basic, acidic, and neutral amino acids, respectively. These amino acids were employed as an additive agent for construction of a prominent structural morphology (thin nanosheets) as well as N donor. Boric acid was employed as activating agent, as it raised the activation efficiency to generate more pores.195 The fabricated three electrodes were entitled as CS/His-B, CS/Asp-B, and CS/Ser-B. The chitosan/amino acid gel was constructed by means of electrostatic attraction and formation of hydrogen bond among the charged chitosan and amino acids. Among the three electrodes, the CS/His-B electrode demonstrated a maximum specific capacitance of 478 F g−1 (at current density 0.5 A g−1) as well as a high specific surface area of 2362 m2 g−1. Prior to that, they displayed one of the best cycle stability (100% initial capacity after 100000 cycles) at current density of 2.5 A g−1 (Fig. 9f). The coulombic efficiency may be calculated from the galvanostatic charging and discharging experiment with the ratio of time of discharging to the time of charging.222 Furthermore, the CS/His-B electrode attained maximum energy density of 30.1 W h kg−1 and power density value of 225.1 W kg−1, when the supercapacitor was assembled symmetrically (Fig. 9d). For getting the optimum voltage range, various voltages were examined by cycle voltammetry (CV) method (Fig. 9c). Among the CV curves, a little variation was observed at different voltage windows, while at 2.0 V, the current rose speedily, resulting in the optimum potential window of 0–1.8 V. The CS/His-B electrode demonstrated flat and symmetric lines at the 1.8 V potential window with current density ranging from 0.5 to 30 A g−1 (Fig. 9e). Due to the higher energy density exhibited by porous carbon nanosheets in these aforementioned latest advancements, it is a very promising field of research for future.
4.1.2.3. Carbon derived from chitosan gels. 
At present, various types of chitosan-derived gel-based (e.g., aerogel, cryogel, and hydrogel) electrodes are gaining tremendous attention from researchers.44,162,223–225 Porous carbon aerogels is a type of low-density solid gel where the liquid section is substituted by gas without altering the structure. These are fabricated via freeze drying carbonization and activation process of chitosan.223 If the activation process is not carried out after carbonization, the chitosan-based electrodes exhibit a sheet-like structure with depleting volume (denoted by CNS). On the other hand, if the activation process is carried out using activators, such as H3PO4 and KOH, the fabricated electrodes exhibit a special three dimensional (3D)-honeycomb structure with better uniformity, and a 3D-mesh graphite-like structure, respectively (denoted by CNSP and CNSK). The special surface structure of CNSP is lighter and better than that of CNSK. Due to the intense KOH activation, when applied as electrode in supercapacitors, the KOH activated electrode (CNSK) exhibited a larger specific capacitance (416 F g−1) compared to the other two electrodes.223 In this study, three electrodes were fabricated at 800 °C carbonization temperature and labelled as CNS-800, CNSK-800, and CNSP-800. Investigation on these electrodes demonstrated high capacitance retention of CNSK-800 (93.72%) and CNSP-800 (95.51%) at current density of 10 A g−1 after 10000 cycles (Fig. 10a). The capacitance dropped about 14% after 10000 cycles for CNS-800, as the mesoporous structure was not developed properly in this electrode. The proportional outcomes among EDLC and the pseudocapacitance were demonstrated in Fig. 10b. While evaluating the electrochemical performance of the three electrodes using 1 M H2SO4 as electrolyte, the CV curves were rectangular in shape at varying scan rates, as illustrated in Fig. 10d, implying the behavior of EDLC and the efficient transference of electrolyte ions through the electrode.226 From the Nyquist plot in Fig. 10c, the resistance for CNSP-800 (0.86 Ω) is less than that of the other two electrodes (0.92 Ω and 0.88 Ω for CNS-800 and CNSK-800, respectively), which revealed the faster faradic reactions and speedy charge transfer kinetics of the fabricated aerogels.227 As a result of the higher pseudocapacitance of CNSP, better specific capacitance (168 F g−1) and energy density (6.36 W h kg−1) compared to the other electrodes, CNSK (126 F g−1, 4.69 W h kg−1) and CNS (98 F g−1, 3.35 W h kg−1), were obtained.
 Fig. 10  Electrochemical performance of chitosan-derived carbon aerogels, (a) specific capacitance retention of the three electrodes (CNS-800, CNSK-800, and CNSP-800) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte after 10000 cycles, (b) capacitance content of EDLC and pseudocapacitance, (c) typical Nyquist plot of the CNS-800, CNSK-800, and CNSP-800, (d) CV curves of current vs. potential of CNS-800 at different scan rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V. 
In another study, nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (NGA) of higher quality was fabricated by self-assembly method between chitosan and graphene oxide (GO).162 This electrode enhanced the specific capacitance compared to previous one, and better performance was observed at 900 °C carbonization temperature. The maximum capacitance of 244.4 F g−1 at current density of 0.2 A g−1 and a higher rate capability with better cycle life were achieved by this system.
Apart from this, in another study, the carbon electrode material was derived from chitosan/cellulose cryogel.224 This electrode was fabricated via incorporation of zeolite imidazole frameworks in the chitosan/cellulose carbon cryogel carbonized at 950 °C. This electrode demonstrated a moderate capacitance of 173.1 F g−1. Chitosan hydrogel, another gel-based material, was also used to fabricated the carbon electrodes. In another attempt, hierarchical porous carbon was fabricated from the chitosan hydrogel by the one-step preparation (microwave heating) method.225 The fabricated carbon electrode demonstrated a maximum specific surface area up to 1743 m2 g−1. On top of this, these kinds of electrodes exhibited excellent rate capability (up to 90%) and high capacitance (98% after 5000 cycles). Besides, a moderated maximum specific capacitance of 165 F g−1 was obtained. Apart from this study, a better type of 3D hierarchical porous carbon/graphene composite was fabricated from lyophilized graphene oxide–chitosan hydrogels via carbonization and chemical activation processes.44 This electrode displayed a higher specific capacitance of 320 F g−1 compared to the other type of gel electrodes.
From above discussion, it is evident that most of the chitosan-based electrode materials are used as composite materials or carbon precursor materials. As the capacitance of these chitosan-based electrodes is still not enough for utilizing in practical purposes, intensive studies should be carried out on co-doping different types of heteroatoms and fabricating new high composite materials for improving the characteristics.

4.2. Chitosan-based polymer electrolytes
Electrolyte, one of the major components of every electrochemical device including supercapacitor, is mainly an ion conducting medium interposed inside two electrodes, which confirms the effective interfacial interaction with electrodes that is indispensable for proper functioning of the fabricated electrochemical device.232 In order to obtain higher performance, utilizing electrolytes of superior quality is mandatory, which should have some important characteristics, such as a larger operating potential window with higher electrochemical stability, larger number of ionic species that ensure high ionic conductivity, low viscosity for easy ion transportation, and low toxicity with environmental benignity.32 However, while evaluating performance, two factors should be critically considered. One is electrochemical stability window which determines the operating potential range of that supercapacitor as decomposition voltage of that particular electrolyte ascertains the maximum potential provided by the device if electrodes can sustain that potential.145 Also, another factor is ionic conductivity, which mainly depends on the number of ions, charge, and their mobility. The rate capability and associated dynamic processes of devices are mainly determined by this factor. Previously, various liquid-based electrolytes have been employed, containing a lot of associated problems, which have been mentioned in Section 2.2. Therefore, various chitosan-based gel and solid polymer electrolytes are being developed by scientific communities worldwide, which is briefly summarized in the following section.

4.2.1. Solid polymer electrolytes. 
Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) are generally prepared by dispersing ions, generated by the dissociation of salts in the host polymer matrix.62,233 These ions create a coordination complex with polar functional groups of host polymer by coulombic attraction. When an external electric field is applied, existing bonds between cation and complexation sites break, and new bonds with another complexation sites are created. Thus, cation transition occurs in a certain direction by the hopping of cations. This model of ion transition has been illustrated in Fig. 11b and c.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of (a) solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) production by the solution casting technique, (b) ion transfer through the ion hopping model predominant in SPEs, (c) ion hopping model with the plasticizer in SPE, where the incorporation of the plasticizer provides a higher number of complexation sites and facilitates conduction. 
In recent decades, numerous studies have been conducted for developing various SPEs by exploiting chitosan. These SPEs are generally manufactured by the solution-casting method (Fig. 11a). In this process, first, chitosan is dissolved using 1% acetic acid solution,234,235 (2% in some cases).236 As the H atoms in the chitosan polymer are tightly bonded, hence, in the pure state, chitosan shows very poor conductivity. Dissolution in acetic acid causes the dispersion of H+ and CH3COO− ions in the host polymers, which contribute to the increase in the conductivity of the polymer host. Then, salts, plasticizers, or other polymers (for the blending purpose) according to the requirement of the electrolyte are added, mixed, and homogenized at a certain ratio to obtain a polymer blend, which exhibits minimum crystalline portion in its structure. As increasing the amorphous characteristics decreases the energy barrier for ionic transportation, the ionic conductivity is enhanced; therefore, the maximum amorphous nature of the polymer blend is very important.59 Prior to solidification, a certain percentage of the ion donor salt, which is being added, generates ions, which further improves the amount of charge carriers as well as the conductivity.235 Finally, the homogenized solution is poured to cast a film. After drying and keeping in a desiccator, the desired SPE is obtained.237 Various salts have been employed so far as the ion donor species. Among these, the proton donor salts and lithium salts have contributed to large portions. Apart from these two main groups, few studies have also been conducted on some other ion-containing salts including magnesium and silver.61,165,238
4.2.1.1. Proton-conducting solid polymer electrolytes. 
Proton-conducting polymer electrolytes have become one of the major areas of concern due to smaller size and higher conductivity of the proton, which facilitates conduction in electrolyte matrix.62 Further, numerous materials used in the manufacturing of proton-based polymer electrolytes are cheap and safe for use. Therefore, various proton conducting polymer/inorganic electrolytes have been developed based on perfluorosulphonic acid, sulfonated hydrocarbons, acid polymer blends, acidic hydrogels, heteropolyacids, or polymer composites.239 Among these, many electrolytes are being used in supercapacitors, where the migration of protons, responsible for ionic conduction, takes place by the following 3 mechanisms (i) Grotthuss mechanism, (ii) diffusion or vehicle mechanism, and (iii) direct transport via the polymer chain segmental motions.239 Proton conduction by the diffusion mechanism occurs generally in liquid electrolytes when the protons are associated with solvent molecules. On the other hand, proton conduction via the segmental motion of the polymer chains occur in polymer electrolytes above glass transition temperature of the host polymer, and when the polymer chains have the ability of free movement. As ion transfer mechanisms have significant impact on the conductivity of ions, a complete understanding is very crucial for designing efficient electrolyte systems.239
For manufacturing proton conducting SPEs, the proton can be provided in two ways.62 One way is to add inorganic acids that donate protons to the polymer host. Another way is the addition of proton-containing salts, mainly ammonium salts that produce protons by dissociation. Inorganic acids cause various problems, including chemical degradation and corrosion. Hence, the addition of ammonium-containing salts is a better option due to their compatibility with the system, high thermal stability, and easier dissociation due to low lattice energy compared to other salts.189 Therefore, various chitosan-based SPEs have been developed by incorporating various ammonium salts. These salts have been incorporated in a host polymer matrix obtained by blending chitosan with another polymer. Pure chitosan is unsuitable for direct use as a host material due to its poor conductivity (∼10−8 S cm−1). Hence, various other polymers are being added to impart higher conductivity, facilitating various required properties. PEO is one of the most extensively used polymers having good conductivity in ambient temperatures due to free electron pairs in the polyether groups present in its structure.240 These lone pair electrons make a coordination complex with cations. As previous studies have shown, chitosan and PEO blended at 3:2 ratio, which exhibited a maximum amorphous structure in its polymer blend.240 Also, the amorphous portion is mainly responsible for ionic conduction, which is well documented. Therefore, NH4NO3 was incorporated in the chitosan–PEO polymer blend, which exhibited a maximum conductivity of 1.02 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature.240 This result also demonstrated a significant increase in the polymer conductivity compared to that of pure chitosan. For further increasing the conductivity of the electrolyte system, ethylene carbonate (EC) as plasticizer was incorporated in various amounts.187 The incorporation of 70% EC exhibited a further increase in the conductivity of (2.06 ± 0.39) × 10−3 S cm−1, and electrochemical stability up to 1.75 V. EC, having a higher dielectric constant (89.6), weakened the electrostatic attraction between the cation and anion of the salts. Consequently, the dissociation of salt increased the resulting higher number of free ions available for conduction; thus, the conductivity of the polymer electrolytes was enhanced. Moreover, with the addition of EC, morphology of the polymer blend changed into the porous form. The higher porosity in the polymer matrix resulted in an enhancement of the conductivity. In another study, another proton donor salt, NH4SCN, was incorporated in the chitosan–PEO polymer host, which imparted a maximum conductivity of 2.11 × 10−4 S cm−1 with a higher breakdown down voltage of 2.43 V than that of the previously described system.62 NH4SCN (605 kJ mol−1) has a lower lattice energy than NH4NO3 (634 kJ mol−1), which facilitates the easier dissociation of salts and enhances the conductivity. Hence, the chitosan–PEO–NH4SCN system has a higher conductivity than that of the chitosan–PEO–NH4NO3 system. Adding a plasticizer could further increase the conductivity of the chitosan–PEO–NH4SCN electrolyte to a higher degree, which was not studied. PVA is another synthetic semi-crystalline polymer that exhibits numerous important properties, such as high mechanical strength, better flexibility, good film forming ability, high thermal and chemical stability, with low cost, non-toxicity, and biodegradability.241,242 These properties have made PVA suitable for blending purposes in the fabrication of polymer electrolytes. Therefore, in a study, a PVA–chitosan blended system plasticized with EC incorporating NH4NO3 as the ion donor was developed.58 This exhibited the highest conductivity of 1.63 × 10−3 S cm−1 at an ambient temperature with an electrochemical stability up to 1.7 V. These preliminary studies exhibited the suitability of chitosan for developing electrolytes for supercapacitors.
In these above-mentioned attempts, various synthetic polymers have been blended with chitosan. The replacement of these synthetic polymers with low cost, easily synthesized, biodegradable, and environment-friendly biopolymers without compromising the required properties can provide better sustainability. To obtain completely biopolymer-based proton conducting SPEs, various biopolymers including starch, dextran, and methyl cellulose have been investigated for blending purpose with chitosan. For example, starch has been blended with chitosan due to the compatibility and chemical interaction between the two polymers.243 Various polar functional groups including –OH present in starch form inter and intramolecular H-bonds with the H atom containing polar groups of chitosan, which leads to the formation of a mechanically stable film. Various ammonium halide salts as the proton donor were incorporated in the chitosan–starch blend. In a study, the incorporation of NH4Cl in the chitosan–starch blend polymer exhibited the highest conductivity of 6.47 × 10−7 S cm−1, whereas the incorporation of NH4Br and NH4I showed a conductivity of 9.72 × 10−5 S cm−1 and (3.04 ± 0.32)×10−4 S cm−1, respectively.244,245 This variation in the conductivity with different salts is mainly due to the change in the lattice energy. The low lattice energy of NH4I (634 kJ mol−1) compared to that of NH4Cl (698 kJ mol−1) and NH4Br (665.3 kJ mol−1) causes comparatively easier dissociation, and thus helps to increase the concentration of ionic species that eventually contribute to the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte system.234 However, the conductivity of these electrolyte systems was still low for practical applications. Hence, for further increasing the conductivity of these starch–chitosan–NH4+ systems, various plasticizers are blended with the host polymers. These small molecules increase the viscosity and make ion transfer easy; consequently, the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte systems increases. For example, glycerol, as a plasticizer, has been added with a host polymer manufactured by blending 80% starch with 20% chitosan incorporated with 25% NH4Cl.188 This chitosan–starch–NH4Cl–glycerol system exhibited a maximum conductivity of (5.11 ± 1.60) × 10−4 S cm−1. The linear sweep voltammetry study showed electrochemical stability up to 1.65 V. Again, the conductivity of the previously mentioned chitosan–starch–NH4Br electrolyte system increased similarly by incorporating ethylene carbonate as plasticizer.245 The incorporation of ethylene carbonate in the NH4Br-doped starch–chitosan polymer blend imparted a conductivity of (1.44 ± 0.51) × 10−3 S cm−1, which was much higher than that of the same system without the plasticizer. Ethylene carbonate, due to larger dielectric constant, increased ion dissociation. This ultimately contributed to the increase in the conductivity. In another study, the NH4SCN salt was incorporated in the starch–chitosan polymer blend of the same ratios previously used, which showed maximum amorphous portions.246 The highest conductivity of (1.30 ± 0.34) × 10−4 S cm−1 was obtained. This electrolyte exhibited a very low crystallinity of 6.98% and a low activation energy of 0.28 eV.
Apart from starch, dextran, another carbohydrate-based biopolymer that is produced by Leuconostoc mesenteroides bacteria in a sucrose rich medium, has also been utilized to blend with chitosan in order to develop host polymer matrix for SPE.189 The study showed that when 40 wt% dextran was blended with 60 wt% chitosan, maximum amorphous portions in the polymer blend were obtained.234 The incorporation of 30 wt% NH4Br in the chitosan–dextran blend provided a maximum conductivity 1.64 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature. The fabricated EDLC using activated carbon as the electrode demonstrated a specific capacitance of 132.5 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 scan rate with a decomposition voltage of 1.54 V. The same author, in another study, utilized NH4F, which exhibited a conductivity of 1 × 10−3 S cm−1 with an electrochemical stability of 1.7 V.189 However, as the electrochemical stability increased, the conductivity decreased, compared to that for NH4Br incorporation. This is due to the higher dissociation energy of NH4F (834 kJ mol−1), as this caused a lower number of free ions available for conduction. Another proton donor salt, NH4SCN, was incorporated in a different study, which demonstrated a conductivity of 1.29 × 10−4 S cm−1.60 For further enhancement, the system was doped with 6 wt% Al2O3 nano-fillers and the conductivity rose to 5.86 × 10−4 S cm−1.60 Although nano-fillers provided a slight increase, this is the evidence of the Al2O3 nano-fillers ability to enhance the conductivity. This rise is mainly due to the high charge density of Al3+ in the polymer matrix provided from the incorporated nano-fillers. These ions pull the electron density from O2− and SCN−, resulting in their immobilization; on the contrary, the transportation of H+ produced from NH4SCN increases. In addition to that, the FTIR study exhibited a further dissociation of the salts with the incorporation of 6 wt% Al2O3 nanofillers. Consequently, the conductivity of the polymer electrolytes was enhanced. In another attempt, a high performance SPE was developed by incorporating NH4PF6 in the chitosan–dextran polymer blend plasticized with glycerol.66 This system demonstrated a high energy and power density of 11.6 kW h kg−1 and 2741.2 kW kg−1, respectively, with specific capacitance of 102.9 F g−1 and conductivity of 3.04 × 10−4 S cm−1. The results obtained from this system are very promising and reached the value of commercialization according to the demand of the author. However, a lot of problems are associated with it. The NH4PF6 salt has a higher tendency of recrystallization. Therefore, with increasing cycle number, electrolyte depletion occurred due to the agglomeration of ions. This increased the equivalent series resistance, and consequently, resulted in a reduction in the energy and power density with reducing specific capacitance.
Another cellulose derivative biopolymer, methyl cellulose, was also blended with chitosan in some other studies. Although the NH4I incorporation plasticized chitosan–methyl cellulose blend did not impart higher performances,247 the incorporation of NH4SCN in the host polymer manufactured by blending 70 wt% chitosan with 30 wt% methyl cellulose exhibited the highest conductivity of 2.81 × 10−3 S cm−1 with an electrochemical stability up to 1.8 V.183,247 EDLC fabricated using activated carbon exhibited specific capacitance of 66.3 F g−1 with high power density of 1666.6 W kg−1 and maximum energy density of 8.81 W h kg−1. This system also suffered from increase in the ESR with a higher cycle life due to the depletion of the electrolytes, which resulted from the aggregation of salt ions with fast charging and discharging. Consequently, the power density, energy density, and specific capacitance decreased over time. NH4F was incorporated in another study, which also exhibited a slight increase in the energy density and conductivity.237 However, the fabricated device suffered from a similar reduction in the power density, energy density, and specific capacitance reduction due to a similar reason. From the study over the methyl cellulose-based system, it is evident that electrolytes based on this demonstrated a comparatively higher power and energy density, which was probably due to low degree of crystallinity of this polymer compared to that of the other polymers, which facilitated ion migration and diffusion with increased double layers of charges.
Another SPE system was synthesized by incorporating NH4NO3 in a glycerolized chitosan polymer matrix.65 The addition of glycerol in the chitosan host polymer imparted a significant reduction in crystallinity. Besides, lower dissociation energy (642 kJ mol−1) of the salt provided a good conductivity of the electrolyte (3.21 × 10−3 S cm−1) with a high decomposition voltage of 2.32 V. The fabricated EDLC using activated carbon exhibited an extremely high specific capacitance of 128 F g−1 with a very small reduction to 92% efficiency after 1000 cycles. This also exhibited high power and energy density of 2630 W kg−1 and 18 W h kg−1, respectively, which slightly dropped to 2050 W kg−1 and 16 W h kg−1 after 500 cycles. Recently, a novel strategy was introduced, wherein the Zn metal complex was incorporated in chitosan and plasticized with glycerol.180 Although the incorporation of NH4I imparted lower performance, utilizing NH4F in place of NH4I exhibited a significant rise in all parameters.248 The incorporation of the metal complex reduced the effect of H-bonding and interaction among the functional groups. Thus, the crystalline nature was significantly reduced. High electrochemical stability (2.25 V) with higher specific capacitance of 69.7–77.9 F g−1, maximum energy density of 8.5 W h kg−1, and power density of 1041.7 W kg−1 was obtained. However, quick charging and discharging with a higher cycle caused the depletion of ions by accumulation: thus, the equivalent series resistance increased and the power density decreased to 248.2 W kg−1 after 100 cycles.
In another recent study, purine groups were grafted with chitosan to form the polymer host.249,250 Adenine and adenosine monophosphate were utilized as the purine bases in this case. These N-containing aromatic molecules have several lone pair electrons in their structure, which work as the coordination site for proton conduction via the ion hopping model (Fig. 12a and b). Besides, the low pKa of these bases also facilitates proton dissociation and transfer. For the further improvement of the dimensional stability and mechanical strength, nano-cellulose was incorporated as a reinforcement in both adenine and adenosine monophosphate incorporated systems. The study of the ionic conductivity of these fabricated systems was carried out in the temperature ranging from 20 to 100 °C. Fig. 12c demonstrates the higher conductivity of adenine-grafted chitosan (A-CS) than that of other nanocellulose (NCC)-grafted systems and CS. In the same way, Fig. 12d shows the increasing conductivity of adenosine monophosphate-grafted chitosan (AMP-CS) with increasing temperature, which is comparable to that of Nafion-117. Surprisingly, these biopolymer-based systems have also exhibited higher thermal stability than Nafion-117. Although NCC incorporation has improved the mechanical and dimensional stability, this also mitigates proton conductivity due to a decrease in ion exchange equivalent and lower uptake of water (Fig. 12c and d). However, research has not been done yet for its supercapacitor application. According to authors, it has a great possibility of replacing the currently used non-biodegradable polymer electrolytes. Apart from these reports, a deep eutectic solvent (DES), which was manufactured by adding carboxylic acid and quaternary ammonium chloride, was investigated as the electrolyte in supercapacitors as a replacement of ionic liquids.251 In this study, choline chloride and lactic acid-based DES were incorporated in the chitosan polymer host. This system has imparted a conductivity of 2.5 × 10−3 S cm−1 with high flexibility and higher cycle stability.
 Fig. 12  Illustration of proton transport mechanisms of (a) adenine (A-CS) and (b) adenosine monophosphate (AMP-CS)-grafted chitosan membranes. AMP-functionalized chitosan membranes possess improved proton conductivity because of the presence of four conjugated nitrogen atoms in the purine structure, which act as a proton-transport vehicle by facilitating protons to hop from one purine ring to another. Change in the proton conductivity with temperature from 20 to 100 °C of (c) chitosan (CS), adenine-grafted chitosan (A-CS), and nanocellulose (NCC)-blended A-CS membrane (A-CS-NCC), (d) adenosine monophosphate-grafted chitosan (AMP-CS), nanocellulose-blended AMP-CS membrane (AMP-CS-NCC), and Nafion-117. A-CS-NCC-0.5, A-CS-NCC-1, and A-CS-NCC-2 represent the volume ratio of A-CS and NCC, which is, 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:2, respectively. Similarly, AMP-CS-NCC-1 and AMP-CS-NCC-2 represent the volume ratio of AMP-CS and NCC of 1:1 and 1:2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2.1.2. Li+ conducting solid polymer electrolytes. 
Apart from proton conducting electrolytes, Li+ ions have also been intensively investigated for incorporating in polymer electrolytes due to their various suitable properties including lightness compared to other metals and ability to supply higher energy content with higher electrochemical potential.252 On the other hand, proton conducting electrolytes are generally stable up to 1–2 V, while the Li+ conducting polymer provides electrochemical stability up to 4 V.188 All these benefits have led to the development of various Li+ conducting SPEs. These electrolytes are generally prepared by the solution casting technique, as previously mentioned.185,253 With a view to incorporate Li+ ion as the conducting species, various lithium salts were integrated in polymer the host manufactured using chitosan with various other polymers.
In another attempt, LiBF4 was incorporated in the host polymer manufactured by blending 75% chitosan with 25% methyl cellulose as LiBF4 (699 kJ mol−1) has a low lattice energy compared to other Li+-containing salts.252 Therefore, the system incorporated with this salt is supposed to exhibit enhanced conductivity.254 However, a conductivity of 3.74 × 10−6 S cm−1 at room temperature has been obtained, which is very low for practical applications. Studies have shown a little increase in the conductivity with the rise in temperature due to higher ion dissociation. Similarly, at a higher frequency, a rise in the conductivity is also noticed due to the release of ions accumulated at a lower frequency. In another attempt, LiOAc was incorporated in chitosan film, which was blended with oleic acid as plasticizer.255 The conductivity obtained by that system (∼10−5 S cm−1) is a little bit higher than that of the previous one. Oleic acid has an important effect on the host polymer while it is incorporated in chitosan. Chitosan, because of its hydrophilic nature, has a tendency to absorb H2O. But the chitosan–oleic acid blend reduces the water present in the polymer blend as blending causes the formation of hydrophobic aggregates. Thus, the opposite electromagnetic force formed because of the polarization of H2O is reduced. However, the conductivity is still very low.
As an effective attempt, an SPE system was developed by incorporating LiClO4 in the host polymer made of the chitosan–poly(ethylene glycol) blend.256,257 For smaller size and highly electropositive characteristics, LiClO4 is very compatible for doping in host polymer. Similarly, in another investigation, ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate both as the plasticizer were added in the chitosan–poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) blend.185 This electrolyte exhibited the highest conductivity of 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. The fabricated supercapacitor using activated carbon as electrodes gave a capacitance of 47 F g−1, which was fairly good for that time. The degradation study has demonstrated the easy degradation of these systems by hydrolysis, and then the microbial degradation of the hydrolyzed non-hazardous products, which is good for the environment. With a view to developing completely biopolymer-based host materials, chitosan has been blended with another biopolymer, dextran, where LiClO4 was doped as donor.258 This system exhibited a conductivity of 5.16 × 10−3 S cm−1 with a high electrochemical stability of approx. 2.3 V. While investigating, it was observed that with a higher cycle, both the energy density and power density gradually decreased. This is possibly due to the formation of aggregates of ions and the consumption of charge carrying materials during fast charging and discharging. But after the 10th cycle, the power density started rising up to the 80th cycle, from 571 W kg−1 to 685 W kg−1.
Recently, Asnawi et al. reported an LiCO2CH3-doped glycerolized chitosan-based electrolyte system, where the DC conductivity of 5.19 × 10−4 S cm−1 with an electrochemical stability of 1.8 V was obtained.253 Although these values were low compared to some of the previously discussed systems, it has offered high values of specific capacitance (132.8 F g−1) with a fairly high energy density (18.4 W h kg−1) and power density (2591 W kg−1). Although this system has demonstrated an increase in the specific capacitance and energy density with a higher cycle, a reduction in the power density was also noticed due to a rise in the equivalent series resistance (ESR).
4.2.1.3. Other ions conducting solid polymer electrolytes. 
Although, proton and lithium ions have been mainly investigated to a greater extent for developing superior quality electrolytes, studies on some other metal ions have also been conducted due to higher availability, low cost, safe, and environment friendly nature. As an effective attempt to incorporate Mg2+ ion in the chitosan-based host polymer matrix for supercapacitor applications, some salts containing Mg2+, such as MgCl2,61 Mg(CF3SO3)2,238 and Mg(CH3COO)2,165 have been studied so far to the best of our knowledge. These provide several advantages including a comparatively low cost and safe use compared to lithium salts having a high reduction potential and low equivalent weight. In an attempt to develop an Mg2+-based electrolyte, Mg(CF3SO3)2 has been incorporated in a CS-PVA host polymer plasticized with glycerol.238 This electrolyte system has exhibited a maximum conductivity of 1.016 × 10−5 S cm−1 with electrochemical stability up to 2.4 V and a specific capacitance of 32.69 F g−1 at a scan rate 10 mV s−1. In another attempt, an electrolyte of slightly higher conductivity of 1.08 × 10−4 S cm−1 was developed by incorporating Mg(CH3COO)2 in chitosan, doped with glycerol as plasticizer.165 Glycerol has a significant role for increasing conductivity of the electrolyte as –OH groups present in glycerol can provide an alternative route for ion transportation. Besides, the low ionic radius of CH3COO− than CF3SO3− enhances the mobility of the ions. Consequently, conductivity of the electrolyte increases. A higher electrochemical stability of 2.4 V with a specific capacitance of 39.72 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 scan rate were obtained. Apart from these studies, MgCl2 has been utilized to develop a glycerolized chitosan-based electrolyte system, which has exhibited electrochemical stability up to 1.8 V and a maximum conductivity of 1.03 × 10−3 S cm−1.61 The specific capacitance of 50 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with an energy density of 13.1 W h kg−1 and a power density of 550 W kg−1 were obtained by EDLC fabricated with activated carbon. Although, in this study, the electrochemical stability has been reduced, the conductivity and specific capacity have been increased significantly. However, specific capacitance has drastically lowered from 70.8 F g−1 to an avg. of 33.2 F g−1 above 40 cycles. On the other hand, the Mg(CH3COO)2-containing electrolyte has exhibited a stable specific capacitance from 79.0 to 80 F g−1 with an increasing cycle number. The larger ionic radius of Cl− (1.75 Å) than that of CH3COO− (1.62 Å) is responsible for these phenomena, as larger ions move slower and ultimately affect the specific capacitance.61 In these Mg2+-containing SPEs, the lattice energy has significant role in the conductivity as the low lattice energy causes higher dissociation of ions. However, it has been observed that despite having lower lattice energy of Mg(CF3SO3)2 (1967.51 kJ mol−1) than MgCl2 (2582.13 kJ mol−1) and Mg(CH3COO)2 (2627.64 kJ mol−1), EDLC fabricated using electrolyte incorporating Mg(CF3SO3)2 gives a lower capacitance.238 This may be due to the poor mobility of the anions with larger ionic radius.
Very limited number of studies have also been reported on Ag+-containing chitosan-based polymer electrolytes for supercapacitor applications as Ag+ ion suffers from higher tendency of reduction and causes the formation of Ag nanoparticles. An Ag+ ion conducting SPE has been developed by incorporating AgNO3 in glycerolized chitosan doped with Al2O3 nanofillers.259 The incorporation of the Al2O3 nanofillers enhance the amorphous domain and reduce the formation of Ag nanoparticles and aggregates, which is a major challenge for developing Ag+-based polymer electrolytes. However, the presence of free electrons in –OH and –NH2 functional groups pose the risk of further creating Ag nanoparticles.
From previous discussions over various chitosan-based SPEs, it has been found that proton conducting SPEs have gained considerable attention compared to other ions. Many systems have been developed using chitosan blending with many other synthetic materials and biopolymers. Among these, systems developed by blending methyl cellulose have shown very good results. Besides, some other systems have also been proved to be promising. However, these also suffer from several problems. Various incorporated salts exhibit the tendency of agglomeration with fast charging and discharging, which causes decrease in the specific capacitance along with power and energy density, over which further investigation should be conducted.


4.2.2. Gel polymer electrolytes. 
Gel refers to a semi-solid material where intermittent liquid phase remains dispersed in the uninterrupted solid phase.260 Gel polymer electrolytes integrate various advantages including the mechanical properties of solids (e.g., rigidity, mechanical strength, and flexibility), and the electrochemical properties of liquid electrolytes. Besides, these systems also offer adhesive properties with high ionic conductivity (∼10−3 S cm−1 at normal temperature).235 Hence, in order to develop electrolytes of higher quality, gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) have been manufactured by spreading the liquid solvent in the polymer host, which holds the liquid phase so that it cannot escape. The liquid phase solvates the salts added to increase the ions and plays the role of conducting medium. Like SPEs, GPEs are also developed by incorporating Li+ and protons in most of the cases.
4.2.2.1. Proton conducting gel polymer electrolytes. 
Generally, proton conducting GPEs are manufactured by incorporating a proton containing solution in host polymer. Chitosan is being exploited with or without blending other polymers and plasticizers as the host matrix for fabricating electrolytes. A novel type bi-crosslinked hydrogel polymer electrolyte membrane has been developed by crosslinking PVA with a chitosan derivative, such as carboxylated chitosan.261 Both covalent and non-covalent interactions among various functional groups of the polymer chain and other additional substrates are responsible for imparting this gel type structure. Further, various polar functional groups present in the polymer structure enhance the absorption capabilities of the electrolyte and facilitate ion diffusion. This interpenetrating macromolecular network has exhibited very high conductivity of 2.561 × 10−2 S cm−1 with high cycle life and capacity retention. In another study, a GPE has been developed by crosslinking the carboxyated chitosan polymer using HCl as the crosslinking agent.64 The presence of higher –COOH, –NH2, –OH, and –NHCO– groups increased electrolyte uptake and provided higher H-bond formation. Besides, due to the acidic condition at lower pH, –NH3+ groups were formed, which resulted in electrostatic attraction with –COO−. All these phenomena led to the formation of a crosslinked hydrogel. This fabricated electrolyte system has exhibited a very high conductivity of 8.69 × 10−2 S cm−1 with excellent electrochemical performance. Supercapacitors using this electrolyte exhibited good energy and power density. In these studies, very limited concern has been given to evaluate their performance in a wider range of temperature. As traditional hydrogel electrolytes contain a large amount of water, below the freezing point of water, these acutely suffer from lower conductivity, whereas at higher temperature, the reduction in the water content affected their performance severely.262 Therefore, fabricating a supercapacitor with the ability to operate at a wider temperature is still a big challenge. However, an electrolyte system has been developed recently by dissolving chitosan in chemically crosslinked polyacrylamide network, where aq. H3PO4 was used as the solvent for fabricating the hydrogel (Fig. 13a).263 The utilization of H3PO4 imparted high conductivity, while chitosan incorporation offered adhesiveness and extraordinary mechanical flexibility. Besides, H3PO4 and H2O both played the role of H+ acceptors and donors, and created multiple cycle H-bonds by interacting with one another. This prohibited the crystallization and formed a stable hydrogel over wider temperature ranging from −60 °C to 100 °C. The supercapacitor fabricated using this electrolyte exhibited an extremely high specific capacitance retention (97.5%) and coulombic efficiency (100%) with high cycle number (104 cycles), as shown in Fig. 13b. Further, studies have been carried out to investigate its performance under various stresses and bending angles. Fig. 13c–e demonstrates almost unchanging specific capacitance retention, coulombic efficiency, and charging–discharging cycle under increasing load, whereas a similar observation under increasing bending angle (0–180°) has been exhibited in Fig. 13f–h. This investigation pointed to the direction of easy, low cost, and rapid synthesis of chitosan-based highly flexible, conductive, and temperature-tolerant GPE.
 Fig. 13  (a) Graphical illustration of the chitosan–polyacrylamide (PAAm) hydrogel where crosslinking occurs due to the physical interaction among various polar molecules (e.g., H3PO4 and H2O) and groups present in whole electrolyte system. (b) Study on the specific capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency of the fabricated supercapacitors with 104 cycles of charge and discharge at a current density of 3.0 A g−1. The study of specific capacitance and capacitance retention (c), capacitance retention with higher cycles (d), charge–discharge curves (e) under various stresses. Study of specific capacitance and capacitance retention (f), capacitance retention with higher cycles (g), charge–discharge curve (h) under various bending angles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V. 
4.2.2.2. Li+ conducting gel polymer electrolytes. 
Lithium-ion conducting GPEs are mainly composed of lithium salts solvated in a solvent, which is dispersed in the host polymer matrix.260 In a study, chitosan has been utilized as host material, where LiClO4 has been incorporated as the ion donor.235 For further increase in conductivity, EC and PC both have been utilized as the plasticizer, which led to the development of biodegradable 0.2 mm thick GPE of good conductivity (5.5 × 10−3 S cm−1) with a high cycle life. In another study, sponge-like chitin scaffold collected from lanthella basta (Fig. 14a and b) after demineralization was incorporated in the chitosan film (CH/CS membrane) (Fig. 14c and d) by the solution casting technique, which significantly increased the mechanical and electrochemical properties of incorporated polymer matrix.236 After immersing the polymer matrix in 1 M LiOAc solution, electrolyte system was completed. Incorporation of a chitin sponge-like scaffold worked as a structural framework that significantly increased the mechanical characteristics by approx. 5 to 4 times (Fig. 14f) and facilitated the electrochemical characteristics (Fig. 14e) due to uptake of the electrolyte in tubular matrix structure. In addition, this scaffold offered controlled swelling of the polymer electrolyte while immersed in LiOAc solution and enabled better contact of electrolyte with electrodes. Ultimately, electrochemical performances of the electrolyte increased. Moreover, the chitosan–chitin scaffold membrane electrolyte imparted an extremely high cycle life. As study after 10000 cycles showed almost same capacitance (Fig. 14g). Recently, another new hydrogel-based electrolyte system, carboxylated chitosan-grafted polyacrylamide–Li2SO4 hydrogel (CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4), has been introduced.63 Incorporation of carboxylated chitosan demonstrated improved capacitive behavior (Fig. 15a), higher specific capacitance at various current densities (Fig. 15b), highly reversible charging–discharging behavior (Fig. 15c), and lower impedance (Fig. 15d) than the PAM–Li2SO4 electrolytes. Further, this hydrogel offered high tensile strength (2.25 MPa) compared to that of PAM–Li2SO4 electrolytes (0.37 MPa) (Fig. 15e). The electrolyte uptake (280%) as well as conductivity (1.74 × 10−2 S cm−1) rose significantly for the carboxylated grafted hydrogel-based system. The fabricated supercapacitor utilizing this electrolyte demonstrated high power and energy density of 50.3 W kg−1 and 8.3 W h kg−1, respectively.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) the skeletal fragment of lanthella basta marine demosponge, (b) isolated tube-like filigree chitinous scaffold, (c) fabricated membrane (CS/CH membrane) from chitosan and chitinous scaffold where the location of the chitinous network is clearly visible, (d) SEM image of the CS/CH membrane, (e) AC impedance curves of the CS and CS/CH membrane using 1 M LiOAc as the electrolyte in the EIS spectrum, shift in the curve for the CS/CH membrane toward a lower impedance value, Z indicates better electrochemical properties of the CS/CH membrane, (f) stress–strain curves of the CS and CS/CH membrane, (g) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the supercapacitor utilizing the CS/CH membrane electrolyte at the 1st and 10000th cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 15  Graphical representation of (a) the CV curves at 20 mV s−1 indicates good capacitive behavior of the fabricated supercapacitor using CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel as the electrolyte, (b) specific capacitances of the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel compared to the PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel at different current densities, (c) the GCD curves at 0.5 A g−1 show highly reversible charging–discharging behavior, (d) Nyquist plots exhibit that the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 electrolyte has lower impedance, (e) stress–strain curves of the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 and PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel electrolytes indicates much higher mechanical properties after grafting with carboxylated chitosan, (f) comparison of the ionic conductivity and liquid electrolyte uptake rate between the grafted CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel and the PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Electrolytes have a decisive role to play in overall supercapacitor performance. Hence, selection of suitable electrolyte is very important for imparting better performance to the fabricated device. For choosing an electrolyte of better quality, various important properties should present at the same time, including wider electrochemical potential window, good conductivity, high thermal as well as environmental resistance, and better interaction with the electrodes. All these required qualities cannot be met by a single material. Numerous studies have been conducted on the developing SPEs. In generally, these SPEs suffer from various drawbacks, such as poor conductivity and efficient interaction with the electrolyte materials. However, in this study, many SPEs (Table 4) have exhibited a highly promising future. On the other hand, despite a lower number of reports on GPEs compared to SPEs, some novel approaches with high performance have been introduced, where an improvement in the various qualities has been imparted. Therefore, we are optimistic that further investigations inspired by these findings will be able to introduce chitosan-based electrolytes for practical applications for both supercapacitors and other electrochemical devices.
Table 4 Characteristics and key features of various chitosan-based polymer electrolytes and performance obtained from fabricated supercapacitorsa




Materials for electrolytes
Physical state
Ionic conductivity (at room temp.) (S cm−1)
Electrochemical stability (V)
Electrode material
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Power density (W kg−1)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Key features/remarks
Reference





a PEO: poly(ethylene oxide); CS: chitosan; SC: supercapacitor; EC: ethylene carbonate; PC: propylene carbonate; PVA: poly(vinyl alcohol); PEG: poly(ethylene glycol); LiOAc: lithium acetate.





Chitosan, PEO, NH4NO3
Solid
1.02 × 10−4
—
—
—
—
—
• Demonstrates potential application of the CS–PEO blend in SC

240



• Homogeneous polymer blend


• Exhibits high conductivity and mechanical strength compared to pure polymer


Chitosan, PEO, NH4NO3, EC
Solid
(2.06 ± 0.39) × 10−3
1.75
Graphite, carbon black
0.133
—
—
• Reduction in viscosity of the host polymer due to plasticizer addition

187



• Increases the mobility of ions


• Conductivity increases


Chitosan, PEO NH4SCN
Solid
2.11 × 10−4
2.43
Activated carbon
3.80 (50 mV s−1)
—
—
• Higher electrochemical stability

62



• Chance of increasing conductivity by incorporating plasticizer


Chitosan, PVA, NH4NO3, EC
Solid
1.63 × 10−3
1.7
Activated carbon
27.1–16.7
—
—
• Good electrochemical stability

58



• Excellent conductivity


• Almost reversible charging and discharging


• Works as separator


Chitosan, starch, NH4Cl, glycerol
Solid
(5.11 ± 1.60)×10−4
1.65
Activated carbon
3.44




• Complete replacement of the synthetic polymer

188



• Biodegradable


Chitosan, starch, NH4Br, EC
Solid
(1.44 ± 0.51) × 10−3
—
—
—
—
—
• Biodegradable

245



• No use of the synthetic polymer


• High ion dissociation


• High conductivity


Chitosan, corn starch, NH4I,
Solid
(3.04 ± 0.32) × 10−4
—
—
—
—
—
• Use of easily available corn starch

244



• Lower dissociation energy of NH4I compared to NH4Br and NH4Cl


• Possibility of increasing conductivity by adding plasticizer


Chitosan, starch, NH4SCN
Solid
(1.30 ± 0.34) × 10−4
—
—
—
—
—
• Very low degree of crystallinity

246



• Higher percentage of free ions


• Low activation energy for ion transportation (0.28 eV)


Chitosan, dextran, NH4F
Solid
1 × 10−3
1.7
Activated carbon
12.4
428
1.4
• Almost constant energy density and capacitance up to 100 cycles

189



• Gradual reduction in power density with higher cycle


• Low energy density due to the higher dissociation energy of NH4F


Chitosan, dextran, NH4Br
Solid
1.64 × 10−3
1.54
Activated carbon
132




• Suitable for use in EDLC

234



• High specific capacitance


Chitosan, dextran NH4SCN, Al2O3 nanofiller
Solid
5.86 × 10−4
—
—
—


—
• Higher dissociation of the salt by nanofillers

60



• Increases conductivity by improving H+ transportation


Chitosan, dextran, NH4PF6, glycerol
Solid
3.04 × 10−4
1.5
Activated carbon
102.9
2741.2
11.6
• Very high energy and power density

66



• Obtained the result of commercialization


• Electrolyte depletion due to recrystallization of salts


• Gradual reduction in energy and power density with an increase in resistance


Chitosan, glycerol, NH4NO3
Solid
3.21 × 10−3
2.32
Activated carbon
128
2630(max.)
18(max.)
• Good conductivity with higher decomposition voltage

65



• Extremely high specific capacitance, power, and energy density with a longer cycle life


Chitosan, methyl cellulose, glycerol, NH4I
Solid
6.65 × 10−4
2.2
Activated carbon
9.97–9.70
578.55
1.1
• Extra ion transport site by adding glycerol

247



• More salt dissociation


• Low energy power density and specific capacitance than other methyl cellulose-based systems


Chitosan, methyl cellulose, NH4SCN
Solid
2.81 × 10−3
1.8
Activated carbon
66.3
1666.6
8.63
• High specific capacitance and energy density

183



• Good ionic conductivity


• Decrease in energy, power density, and specific capacitance due to electrolyte depletion


• Low cycle life


Chitosan, methyl cellulose, NH4F
Solid
2.96 × 10−3
2.3
Activated carbon
82.3 max. 64.1 avg.
1282
9.3
• High energy density than the previous one

237



• Good ionic conductivity


• Decrease in the energy power density and specific capacitance due to electrolyte depletion


• Low cycle life


Chitosan, glycerol, NH4I, Zn metal complex
Solid
1.17 × 10−4
1.37


36
480
4.1
• Increase in amorphous portion due to the Zn metal complex

248



• Reduction in the energy and power density


Chitosan, glycerol, NH4F, Zn metal complex
Solid
1.71 × 10−3
2.25
Activated carbon
69.7–77.9
1041.7–248.2
7.8–8.5
• High electrochemical stability

180



• High amorphous portion and high conductivity by incorporating the metal complex


• Gradual increase in the ESR, decrease in the power density with higher cycles


• Rise in energy density and specific capacitance with higher cycles


Chitosan, adenine
Solid
3.09 × 10−2
—
—
—
—
—
• Very high proton conductivity

145



• Increase in the dimensional stability and mechanical stability by incorporating nanocellulose


Chitosan, adenosine monophosphate
Solid
4.62 × 10−2
—
—
—
—
—
• Very high conductivity with complete biodegradability

145



• Provides a large number of hoping sites




• Very high proton conductivity




• Increase in the dimensional stability and mechanical stability by incorporating nanocellulose with a reduction in proton conduction




Chitosan, methyl cellulose, LiBF4
Solid
3.74 × 10−6
—
—
—
—
—
• Low lattice energy of LiBF4 compared to other Li+ containing salts

252



• Low conductivity at low frequency due to the accumulation of ions at the electrodes


• Risk of decomposition and HF formation


Chitosan, LiOAc, oleic acid
Solid
∼10−5










• Low opposite potential due to low H2O polarization

255



• Low conductivity


Chitosan, PEO LiClO4
Solid
7.34 × 10−4
2.24
Activated carbon


302–321
1.07–0.94
• Reduction of power and energy density with higher cycle

256



• Good electrochemical window


Chitosan, PEG, EC, PC, LiClO4
Solid
1 × 10−4


Activated carbon
47 (10 mV s−1)




• Good mechanical strength with moderate conductivity

185



• Biodegradable by hydrolysis, followed by microbial degradation


• Good capacitance


Chitosan, LiCO2CH3, glycerol
Solid
5.19 × 10−4
1.8
Activated carbon
132.8
2591
18.4
• Very high specific capacitance, power and energy density

253



• Low equivalent series resistance


• Increase in the specific capacitance, energy density, and efficiency with higher cycle


Mg(CF3SO3)2 CS–PVA, glycerol
Solid
1.016 × 10−5
2.4
Activated carbon
32.69 (10 mV s−1)
—
—
• Low conductivity

238



• High electrochemical stability


• Low mobility of anions due to the higher ionic radius


• Not favorable for EDLC fabrication despite having very low lattice energy of Mg(CF3SO3)2


Chitosan, Mg(CH3COO)2, glycerol
Solid
1.08 × 10−4
2.4
Activated carbon
39.72 (10 mV s−1)


8.8
• High electrochemical stability

165



• Excellent cyclability


• EDLC efficiency 97–99%


• Stable specific capacitance throughout the charge–discharge cycle


Chitosan, glycerol, MgCl2
Solid
1.03 × 10−3
1.8
Activated carbon
50 (10 mV s−1)
550
13.1
• Comparatively low electrochemical stability

61



• Higher conductivity, capacitance, energy, and power density


• Decreasing in the specific capacitance with cycle number


Chitosan, AgNO3, Al2O3 nanofiller, glycerol
Solid
3.7 × 10−4
2.1
Activated carbon
47.78 at 10 mV s−1
—
—
• Higher reduction tendency of silver ions

259



• Formation of Ag nanoparticles


• Depletion of electrolytes


Carboxylated chitosan non-covalent crosslinking by HCl
Gel
8.69 × 10−2


Activated carbon
45.9 (at 0.5 A g−1)
226.6
5.2
• High conductivity and flexibility with higher capacity of electrolyte absorption

64



• Demonstrates the potential of carboxylated chitosan


• Gradual reduction in capacitance with increasing current density


Carboxylated chitosan and PVA
Gel
2.561 × 10−2


Vinyl alcohol and carboxylated chitosan network
325 mF cm−1




• Flexible transparent membrane

261



• Extremely high conductivity


• Fabrication of both the electrode and the electrolyte


Chitosan, ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, LiClO4
Gel
5.5 × 10−3
—
Polypyrrole
120 (10 mV s−1)
—
—
• Combines mechanical strength of the polymer with the electrochemical properties of organic electrolytes

235



• Advantageous for electrode–electrolyte interface stability


• Fairly good specific capacitance


• Excellent biodegradability in the soil burial test


Chitosan, LiOAc solution
Gel
—
—
Activated carbon
88 75(10)
554
7.91
• Weak contact between the electrode and the electrolyte

236



• Low electrochemical as well as mechanical properties


Chitosan–chitin scaffold, LiOAc solution
Gel
—
—
Activated carbon
97 83(10)
563
8.89
• 4–5 times increased mechanical properties with better electrochemical properties than simple chitosan polymer

236



• Much stiffer and durable


• Extremely good cycle life


• Better contact between electrode and electrolyte


Chitosan-graft-polyacrylamide–Li2SO4
Gel
1.74 × 10−2
1.4
Activated carbon


350.3
8.7
• Very high mechanical electrochemical properties with extremely high conductivity

63



• High energy and power density





5. Factors influencing the efficiency of supercapacitors
In order to enhance the efficiency of supercapacitors, electrode, and electrolyte materials of higher performance is inevitable. From previous discussions, it is evident that a good number of chitosan-based electrodes and electrolytes for supercapacitor applications have been developed. Some of these studies are still in their preliminary stages, and need rigorous research and investigations. However, optimistic results obtained from these studies have made scientific communities believe that in future, there are a lot of possibilities of development. To obtain electrodes and electrolytes of higher quality, a profound understanding of the factors that influence the performance of these materials is undoubtedly crucial. Hence, important factors and their various impacts have been discussed in this section.
5.1. Factors for chitosan-based electrodes

5.1.1. Modification of the chitosan structure. 
Over the last few years, numerous attempts have been made to enhance various mechanical and electrochemical properties of electrodes by several modification techniques.82,194,197,210 The incorporation of nanomaterials is a common one, which leads to the development of various organic and inorganic hybrid electrodes of improved physical and mechanical characteristics with increased active specific surface area.16,206 Numerous electrodes have been developed with a diversified class of nanomaterials and a variety of nanostructures, such as zero, one, two, and three dimensional, in order to evaluate their performances. In particular, one dimensional nanostructure materials display greater specific surface area and effective electron transport toward one direction.264 Diverse structural nanomaterials (e.g., nano-aerogels, nanotubes, nanosheets, nanoplates, and nanospheres) exhibit a larger specific surface area. In addition, these can allow narrow transport path lengths for ions, which results in faster kinetics, better contact of the electrolyte ions, and generate electroactive sites. A compatible doping of transition metal oxides (e.g., RuO2, MnO2, IrO2, and NiOx) for fabricating nanostructured electrodes exhibits enhanced capacitive property by raising the pseudocapacitance.265–267 However, the incorporation of these nanomaterials should be prohibited due to their high toxicity and low availability. On the other hand, ZnO and Fe3O4 are predicted to be promising nanomaterials for electrode applications as the specific energy density significantly increased by incorporating this material.206,268 In addition, this has also demonstrated the non-toxic property, eco-friendliness, and higher electrochemical activity. Hence, ZnO and Fe3O4 have been utilized for fabricating various chitosan-based nanostructured electrodes.16,221
The modification of the functional groups present on the surface of the electrode is another technique, which generally leads to alternate various double layer characteristics including wettability, specific capacitance, conductivity, and self-discharge rate.269 Currently, a crucial challenge in chitosan-based electrode materials is the limited content of nitrogen.270 The aim of surface modification is to increase the surface chemical heterogeneity, which means the enhancement of the availability of various heteroatoms, such as N, O, and S. The modification can be performed by applying thermal and chemical treatment methods. The thermal treatment method allows the heat treatment of the electrode at high temperature up to 1000 °C, within hydrogen or inert atmosphere either by the conventional heating method or the microwave heating method.68 The purpose of thermal treatment is to selectively remove the acidic functionalities present on the surface, which creates instability.271 Chemical modification can be done by treating with numerous chemicals including HNO3, H2O2, and H2SO4.271–273 Various studies have demonstrated that chemical modification has no significant impact on the specific surface area. However, these treatments have exhibited a meaningful influence on the surface chemistry by increasing the functional groups on the surface of the electrode, resulting in higher specific capacitance.273,274


5.1.2. Physical properties. 
Various physical properties of the chitosan electrode, such as the optimum pore size of the electrode, pH, and concentration of chitosan have a direct impact on the performance of the electrode material.198,275,276 While considering the pore size (volume), nanostructured pores exhibit a significant role in acquiring superior capacitance as it raises the workable surface area.277 In the charge storage mechanism of the electrode, every pore does not participate in storing the charge on account of their size. Assuming this, the electrolytes ion volume is larger than the pore volume, resulting in no accumulation of the ions on the surface of the pores. Therefore, the smaller pores will be useless, which entail reduced specific capacitance. As a result, the optimum pore size should be larger than the size of the ions. In general, it is assumed that the pore size should be double the size of ions.278 In this case, this should approximately be 7 × 10−10 m in order to obtain high specific capacitance as the deviation from that value results in decreased specific capacitance.276 Apart from this, numerous attempts have been focused for fabricating chitosan-derived electrodes with a hierarchical pore structure.279 The real inspiration behind these operations is that this hierarchical pore structure possesses the benefit of multimodal pores with a synergistic effect during charge–discharge cycles, which rapidly improves the various supercapacitive properties.280
pH has a significant effect on the performance of the electrode materials as the morphologies are tunable by varying the pH of the reactant solution. In addition, the electrochemical performances (e.g., capacitive current, cycle stability, and specific capacitance) may vary considerably on altering the pH.275 The capacitive current ordinarily increases with the decreasing value of pH. There are not enough studies on the effect of pH on chitosan-based electrode materials. However, the effect of pH in graphene oxide,281 MnO2-based electrode demonstrated that the morphology, cycle life, as well as the specific capacitance can be enhanced by altering the pH.275,282 This resulted in an enhanced energy density.
The concentration of chitosan in the composite electrode also plays a crucial role in deciding the electrochemical performance of the supercapacitor.283 The optimum concentration can be determined by comparing similar kinds of electrodes with varying concentrations of chitosan. For instance, taking two similar types of CS–ZnO/PANI ternary composites with dissimilar amounts of chitosan of CS0.25–ZnO2.5/PANI (0.25 g) and CS0.12–ZnO2.5/PANI (0.125 g), their structure and electrochemical performances were evaluated.198 It was found that with the increasing concentration of chitosan in a composite, the electrical conductivity reduced significantly due to the change in the structure.204 Moreover, a better specific surface area was obtained for a lower concentration of chitosan, which possessed the ability to create an excessively efficient network for ion transport. This ultimately resulted in a better specific capacitance. Thus, it is crucial to determine the optimum concentration of chitosan in every chitosan-based composite electrode material.


5.1.3. Application of additives in the activation of the electrode. 
Activation is a method of conversion of carbonaceous compounds to activated carbon by the application of heat to achieve a porous structure.284 The activation process may be classified mainly into three types, including physical, chemical, and physiochemical processes. To date, various types of chemical activating agents have been exploited for the activation of chitosan-based materials, such as Na2CO3, K2CO3, ZnCl2, or KOH to fabricate activated carbon electrodes.285–287 Among them, KOH-activated chitosan-based electrodes have exhibited an elevated surface area on account of the fast release of N2. Various additives used for the activation processes play a significant role in facilitating the formation of a conducive environment with the aim of approachability of the activator materials.213 Moreover, additives boost the generation of a stiff semi-carbonized framework to achieve a highly porous structure. These additives should be compatible with the electrode for exhibiting better electrical properties. As the chitosan chain possesses charge, the structure can be controlled by introducing additives.279 Therefore, the structure, morphology, and the electrochemical performance can be toned after the carbonization reaction by applying proper additives in the activation process. Various materials including amino acids,221 acetic acid,213 and gelatin169 have been generally used for this purpose. Among these, amino acids have been extensively used for the fabrication and assembly of numerous nanomaterials, attributable to the characteristic zwitterionic character of the (–COOH) and (–NH2) groups.288–290 Chitosan can also be applied as an additive in some other electrodes fabricated using other materials, which have raised the pore volume and surface area, resulting in swift ion diffusion and transportation.219 For a better understanding of the function of chitosan additives, two distinctive types of electrodes were fabricated in a study, where pristine carbon (NPC) without chitosan and with the chitosan additive (NPC-2) were fabricated (Fig. 16a).219 NPC-2 has displayed a higher pore volume, surface area, and better specific capacitance compared to NCP. Further, it provided spontaneous transport channels for electrolyte ions, and developed rapid ion transfer by shortening the route of transportation. Moreover, the cycle stability and rate capability were also enhanced in the NPC-2 because of the relatively high degree of graphitization.
 Fig. 16  (a) Representative drawing demonstrating the impact of chitosan additive (yellow circle) in two identical electrodes NPC and NPC-2. The addition of additives results in a more porous structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2019, A Journal of Asian Chemical Editorial Society. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of chitosan-based hierarchical porous carbon with CH3COOH additive and control sample without the addition of additive. CH3COOH addition increases the specific surface area drastically. Adapted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (BDC: terephthalic acid; DMF: N,N-dimethylformamide; CS/CA-2: 2 ml citric acid solution of chitosan; RT: room temperature; MOF: metal organic framework; Ar: argon gas flow; HTC: high temperature carbonization). 
Gelatin, due to the presence of numerous functional groups, such as –OH, –NH2, and –COOH in the primary chains, can also function as an additive. This can immediately bring heteroatoms into the carbon skeleton, which enhances the electrochemical performance of chitosan-derived carbon electrode materials. In addition, the gelatin additive can modify the microstructure of the chitosan-derived electrodes and enhance the porosity as well as the active specific surface area. The CH3COOH additive also can help in fabricating an ultra-large surface area hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) from chitosan, as mentioned before in Section 4.1.213 The fabricated chitosan-derived HPC demonstrated fascinating capacitive characteristics including high energy and power densities, specific capacitance, and cycle stability in comparison with the control sample in which no additive was added. The additives help in creating a tremendously conductive environment for the accessibility of the activator. The fabricated electrode provided a maximum BET surface area, as demonstrated in Table 3. In Fig. 16b, the difference in the surface area and pore volume between these two are illustrated. There are not adequate number of studies about the impact of additives on various chitosan-derived electrodes. Thus, further investigations should be carried out on this aspect.


5.1.4. Controlling the carbonization and activation temperature. 
As the texture, porosity, and surface of electrodes can be modified by altering the temperature during the carbonization and activation processes, controlling the temperature can be regarded as an important factor.68 This results in varying the proportion of the micro, meso, and macroporous structure, which has a significant effect on the electrochemical performance of the electrode. In the activation process, the increase in temperature results in a depletion of the micropores in the electrodes.291 As the number of micropores are directly related to the specific surface area, a reduction in the micropores ultimately lessen the specific surface area. A former study showed a significant decrease in the specific surface area (from 2807 m2 g−1 to 2397 m2 g−1) while the temperature was increased from 750 °C to 850 °C during the activation process.171 Further, it has been observed that increasing the activation temperature above 700 °C results in the reduction of KOH (activator) into metallic potassium.292
Similarly, controlling the carbonization time and maintaining the optimum temperature in a single unit process is crucial for obtaining a more mesoporous structure with a low degree of graphitization, better N content, lesser resistance, and larger specific surface area with a more porous structure.228 Hence, a better specific capacitance can be obtained. For fabricating chitosan-derived hierarchical porous carbon nanosheets, three carbonization temperatures (700 °C, 800 °C, and 900 °C) were applied, which has been mentioned before in Section 4.1.2.2.57 At a temperature of 800 °C, better performance was gained. When the temperature was raised from 800 °C to 900 °C, a drastic increase in the charge transfer resistance, Faraday resistance, and equivalent series resistance occurred, resulting in lower conductivity and a substantial decrease in the specific capacitance.

5.2. Factors for chitosan-based electrolytes

5.2.1 Effect of chitosan structure, blending, grafting, and modification. 
While fabricating polymer-based electrolytes, the polymer structure has a significant role in the mechanical, electrochemical, as well as conductive properties of the obtained materials.2 In most of the polymer electrolytes, ionic conduction occurs generally by the exchange of ions among the complexation sites throughout the polymer host.237 The free electron pairs presented in the N and O atoms of the polar functional groups, such as –OH, –NH2, and –O– of the polymer structure work as the complexation sites. These polar functional groups also cause the formation of inter and intramolecular H-bonds, and the film forming ability, which imparts a higher mechanical strength to the film. As pristine chitosan contains a low number of these active functional groups with higher crystallinity, the conductivity is very low and not suitable for practical applications.293 Increasing the number of active ion conduction sites in the polymer matrix can improve the conductivity. Hence, several attempts have been undertaken to increase the conductivity, among which the blending of various polymers with chitosan is one of the major strategies that have been extensively used. Numerous polymers, such as PEO, PVA, PEG, starch, dextran, and methyl cellulose have been reported for blending purposes.187,189,240,244,245,252 These polymers cause the formation of a uniform blend by interacting with polar functional groups presented in their structure, with polar –O–, –NH2, and –OH groups remaining in the chitosan backbone and forming new H-bonds, breaking the existing ones. Apart from increasing the amorphous domain, the increasing number of ion conduction sites provided by the functional groups in the blending polymer also enhances the conductivity of the fabricated electrolyte. The increasing number of polar –OH and –NH2 groups also cause increased H-bond formation, which significantly increases the rigidity, mechanical strength, and thin film forming ability of the modified polymer matrix. Therefore, blending can simultaneously increase the conductivity and impart a combination of the desired properties, which cannot be obtained by utilizing a single polymer.
Recently, several other ways of modifications have also been reported, including crosslinking, use of derivatives, and modification of the polymer structure by incorporating nanofillers and metal complexes.60,63,64,180 As the crosslinking of polymers has demonstrated a higher ion conduction at an ambient temperature with an extremely lower degree of crystallinity, this has become an important strategy for fabricating the polymer electrolytes.294 Several systems have been developed by crosslinking chitosan with other suitable polymers or other materials, especially for preparing GPEs, where the network structure is important.64,261 The degree of crosslinking (DCL) has significant influence on the network structure as well as the conductivity of the electrolyte. The small value of DCL fails to produce an effective 3D structure. Again, the higher value of DCL causes a mitigation of the electrolyte solution uptake within a smaller gap inside the matrix. Consequently, the flow of ions and conductivity of the electrolyte system will decrease.
As previously mentioned, chitosan is the only biopolymer that has both –NH2 and –OH in its polymeric backbone; this provides a greater opportunity of forming various derivatives. Among these derivatives, only carboxylated chitosan has been reported in few investigations to fabricate chitosan-based electrolytes to the best of our knowledge.63,64 With many properties similar to chitosan including biodegradability, non-toxicity, antibacterial, film forming ability, and presence of higher number of –OH and –COOH, the uptake of the electrolyte solution is enhanced. Therefore, the hydrogel produced by crosslinking with carboxylated chitosan provides a very high conductivity with good energy and power density of the fabricated supercapacitor.
The incorporation of metal complexes and nanofillers can also enhance the conductivity by reducing the crystallinity of the polymer host. The addition of these materials resists the polymer chain to come back in regular arrangements and create new channels for ionic conduction.295,296 Moreover, a larger interfacial area of the nanofillers can improve the electrical as well as mechanical characteristics. However, very few studies have been reported on these modification techniques. Al2O3 nano-fillers and Zn metal complex have been reported to be utilized in chitosan-based electrolytes for supercapacitor applications.60,180 These studies have exhibited a rise in the amorphous characteristics, which ultimately increases the conductivity as well as the electrochemical stability of the fabricated electrolytes. Apart from these, the incorporation of heteroatoms, N-containing molecules (e.g., adenine and adenosine monophosphate), nanocellulose (NCC), and chitin sponge-like scaffold have also been reported for the modification of the polymer matrix to produce polymer electrolytes with higher electrochemical and mechanical properties.145,236
In summary, although numerous methods of modification of the polymer structure have been reported, the studies over the individual technique are still very less as this is an emerging field of investigation. Therefore, further investigations on other materials and combination of various modification techniques can help to find highly efficient chitosan-based electrolyte systems.


5.2.2. Physical properties. 
Several physical properties of the polymer blend, including the glass transition temperature, crystallinity, and viscosity have a very important role in the overall performance of the polymer electrolytes. Fabricating polymer electrolytes with low glass transition temperature is an effective way of increasing the conductivity of that system.297 Chitosan itself is a semi-crystalline polymer. Besides, other polymers used for blending have a few degrees of crystallinity. Higher crystallinity in the polymer structure provides less possible ways for ionic transfer and works as a barrier. Furthermore, in the crystalline domain, the polar functional groups are strongly bonded, forming an intact condition that hardly contributes to the ionic conduction of the polymer electrolytes.2 The migration of ions is more rapid through the amorphous domain than the crystalline part of the polymer electrolytes.249 Therefore, the reduction in the crystallinity is one of the most desired conditions. Various steps are followed for obtaining the polymer host of low crystallinity including salt incorporation, plasticizer addition, incorporation of various nanofillers, and incorporation of metal complexes.60,180,245,247,256 These steps provide a higher number of ions available for ionic conduction, make a void space among the polymer chains that lowers the glass transition temperature with crystallinity reduction, and create a channel for ion conduction in the host polymer. Above the glass transition temperature, the polymer chain segmental motion become possible that further facilitates ion transfer, which is parallel to ion hopping.239 Consequently, the conductivity of the polymer chain increases.
The viscosity of the polymer matrix also affects the conductivity. Polymer electrolytes with lower viscosity cause easy ion diffusion and transfer throughout the polymer host.2,298 Thus, ionic conduction increases. Besides, low viscosity also enables the ions to interact strongly with the system and offer higher electrochemical performance. Various plasticizers are generally incorporated for reducing the viscosity of the polymer electrolytes. Although low viscosity increases the ionic conductivity, this should be kept to a certain extent. Otherwise, the rigidity of the system falls and causes a transformation into the liquid form.2,298


5.2.3 Addition of salt. 
Higher ionic conductivity is one of the major requirements of high-performance electrolyte systems, where polymer electrolytes suffer profoundly. Salts can play a major role in increasing the ionic conductivity by generating ions in the polymer matrix.185,248 In Section 5.2.1, the blending of various polymers with chitosan have been discussed where the reduction of crystallinity in the polymer matrix was observed. The addition of salts further lowers the crystallinity to a higher extent. In Fig. 17a, for chitosan and dextran based system, it has been found that on increasing the chitosan percentage, the crystallinity is lowered gradually due to the modification of the polymer matrix structure, and at 60% composition, it reached at the minimum value.299 On the addition of salts, the crystallinity is further mitigated and lowest value is obtained at 40% composition of the salts in the system. Again, with a rise in the salt percentage in the polymer host, the number of ions are enhanced, which lead to the mitigation of the activation energy for ion transfer.299,300 Therefore, the minimum activation energy and highest conductivity for this system can be obtained at 40% salt composition (Fig. 17b). Similarly, for another chitosan and methyl cellulose-based system, a change in the conductivity with respect to the crystallinity of the polymer matrix has been depicted in Fig. 17c. At crystallinity near 15%, a sudden rise in the conductivity was noticed.301
 Fig. 17  Graphical illustration of the effect of the salt on the various properties of the fabricated electrolytes: (a) change in the degree of crystallinity with respect to chitosan and salt composition in the polymer blend, data collected from ref. 299, (b) change in the conductivity and activation energy with respect to the salt composition for the chitosan–dextran–NH4SCN electrolyte system where 60% chitosan with the dextran blend has been reported to exhibit minimum crystallinity. Further investigation gives minimum crystallinity with a maximum conductivity at 40% NH4SCN concentration, adapted with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (c) Change in the conductivity and degree of crystallinity with respect to the salt composition in the chitosan (CS)–methyl cellulose (MC)–NH4SCN electrolyte system, data collected from ref. 301. (d) Comparison of the conductivity between the electrolytes developed by incorporating H+- and Li+-containing salts. The smaller size of Li+ provides higher conductivity compared to H+-containing electrolytes while other components are similar, data adopted from ref. 62, 189, 256 and 258. 
The salt chosen for addition should have compatibility with the polymer host with a view of imparting higher chemical stability, mechanical strength, and improved conductive property.294 Further, these should contain some important properties including non-toxicity, non-hygroscopicity, and high thermal as well as electrochemical stability. As the conductivity of the electrolytes depends on the number of ions and their rate of migration, the salt incorporated in the polymer electrolytes can enhance the conductivity by increasing the number of ions with a higher rate of migration.253 In order to dissociate ions in higher numbers, lattice energy, the amount of energy required for the dissociation of salts to ions, plays an important role.188,234,237,240,245 As salts having lower lattice energy undergo easier dissociation, the number of ions increase. Therefore, studies often focus on salts with smaller lattice energy for incorporation into the polymer blend. Various ammonium containing salts have low lattice energy and allow the easier dissociation of the protons. Consequently, a lot of attention has been given to these salts. However, ammonium salts having very low lattice energy (600 kJ mol−1) cause problems due to higher tendency of ion association, which has been observed in the case of NH4BF4.302 Beside, salts having a bulky structure provide higher electrochemical stability, offering easier dissociation in solvents.294 Apart from ammonium salts, some other lithium-containing salts have also been investigated, as described in Section 4.2.1.2 and 4.2.2.2. These studies have revealed that lithium-containing salts provide a higher ionic conductivity compared to ammonium-containing salts for electrolytes, while other materials remain the same, as shown in Fig. 17d. In this figure, two different systems (chitosan–dextran and chitosan–PEO) have been incorporated with Li+- and H+-containing salts in different investigations for comparative discussion between these two ions.62,189,256,258 Although no recognizable variation is observed with addition of small amounts of salts, the incorporation of a higher quantity (40 wt%) significantly raises the conductivity of the lithium ion-containing systems compared to the ammonium ion. The smaller size of the lithium ion than that of the proton plays a significant role in this phenomenon.
During the incorporation of the salt, it is observed that while the percentage of the salt is gradually increasing, the structure of the polymer blend changes from homogeneous to porous (Fig. 18a–c) with the reduction in the crystallinity, which allows higher polymer chain segmental motion and a higher number of free ions available for ionic conduction.187,299 This also results in the reduction of the bulk resistance. All these phenomena lead to an increase in the ionic conductivity. After adding a certain percentage of salts, a further addition causes recrystallized salts to protrude on the surface (Fig. 18d). Therefore, the conductivity reduces as they block the channel for ionic conduction and consequently, the bulk resistance starts to increase.
 Fig. 18  Illustration of the FESEM micrograph of (a) 10 wt%, (b) 20 wt%, (c) 40 wt%, (d) > 40 wt% NH4SCN in the chitosan–dextran polymer blend. Incorporation of 10% NH4SCN in the chitosan–dextran polymer blend results in a homogeneous and smooth surface, which is an indication of the salt to be solvated in the host polymer blend. The amorphous domain increases with increasing salt percentage in (b) and the addition of 40% NH4SCN gives the lowest crystallinity, as demonstrated in figure (c); further addition causes salts to be recrystallized on the surface (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. 


5.2.4. Addition of plasticizers. 
Plasticization is one of the most widely utilized techniques for imparting superior electrical and electrochemical properties in various GPEs and SPEs. This process has been performed by incorporating small organic compounds, known as the plasticizer.303 There are many compounds that play the role of the plasticizer in various systems for satisfying various purposes. However, in manufacturing chitosan-based SPEs and GPEs, EC, PC, oleic acid, and glycerol are mostly studied (showed in Table 4). The addition of plasticizers can enhance the conductivity by increasing the number of ions available for conduction through the polymer host.61,187 Besides, this also causes the mitigation of the glass transition temperature of the polymer blend.304 The plasticizer having a higher dielectric constant weakens the electrostatic attraction between the cation and anion of the salts.305 Consequently, the dissociation of salt increases and results in a higher number of free ions available for conduction. Thus, the conductivity of the polymer electrolytes is enhanced.
The addition of plasticizers also causes the formation of a porous morphology of the polymer structure, as shown in Fig. 19a–d.188 With an increase in the glycerol content from 10% to 35%, the amorphous domain increases gradually. At a certain value of glycerol (35%), the maximum porous structure is formed (Fig. 19d), which works as an alternative path for ionic conduction. Thus, the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte increases. However, the addition of a higher amount of plasticizer than the optimum value causes the formation of agglomerates (Fig. 19e) and the conductivity decreases.
 Fig. 19  Illustration of the SEM images of (a) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 blend without the plasticizer (S5, starch–chitosan and NH4NO3 composition is 75 wt% and 25 wt%, respectively), (b) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 10% glycerol, (c) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 20% glycerol, (d) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 35% glycerol (P7), (e) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 40% glycerol. Dark regions in the images denote the amorphous part of electrolytes. In (b), the addition of 10% glycerol causes the formation of the amorphous region, which is increased in (c) due to the increase in the plasticizer amount to 20%. Besides, links in the polymer host create additional paths for ionic conduction. The addition of 35% glycerol in (d) gives maximum amorphous properties with enhanced number of links. Further, the addition of glycerol in (e) causes too much links among the plasticizer molecules, resulting in a salt to form the agglomerates. (f) Linear sweep voltammogram at 5 mV s−1 exhibits an increase in the electrochemical stability of the fabricated electrolyte with increasing glycerol content. (S5 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 0% glycerol, P3 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 15% glycerol, P5 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 25% glycerol, P7 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 35% glycerol). Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd. 
Plasticizers also cause a rise in the dielectric constant of the blend, which plays a significant role in salt dissociation and the formation of ions in the polymer host matrix. In addition, the dielectric constant has a significant effect on the electrochemical stability together with the number of ions present in the polymer host.235 As the study shows in Fig. 19f, with an increase in the glycerol percentage in the polymeric blend, the fabricated electrolyte exhibits a rise in the decomposition voltage.188 According to the author, this occurs due to the increase in the ions due to the addition of glycerol as the plasticizer.

6. Performance analysis of chitosan-based electrode and electrolyte materials
In order to have a clear insight of the current position of chitosan-based electrodes and electrolytes, the comparative performance analysis of these materials with the recently developed high performance one utilizing materials other than chitosan, is a suitable approach. As the high cycle life and specific surface area are two important parameters for high performance electrodes, similarly, conductivity and electrochemical stability are important parameters for electrolytes; the following comparisons among electrodes and electrolytes have been conducted based on these respective parameters.
In Fig. 20, various types of high-performance electrodes, including the currently introduced biopolymer (cellulose)-based, other material-based electrodes, and chitosan-based electrodes are compared depending on the specific capacitance and capacitance retention after certain cycles of charging and discharging. It has been observed that the chitosan–graphene–polyaniline (CS–RGO–PANI) ternary composite electrode exhibits the maximum specific capacitance of 1519 F g−1.47 However, this system suffers from poor cycle stability. Similarly, the N/NiOx co-doped hierarchical porous carbon and the currently used multi-walled CNT-MnO2 composite, the PANI/CNTA composite electrode, have also exhibited higher specific capacitance but lower cycle stability.48,57,306 On the other hand, chitosan-derived B/N co-doped carbon nanosheet electrode has demonstrated outstanding capacitance retention of about 100% after 100000 cycles, which is comparable to the non-biopolymer-based MnO2 coated with the CNT electrode.221,307 But the specific capacitance of both of these electrodes is inferior to the others, as mentioned above. Moreover, the toxicity of MnO2 coated with the CNT electrode is high. On the other hand, the cellulose-based electrode (cellulose/graphite/Ni/MnO2) can provide specific capacitance and cycle stability in between the value of the ternary composites (high specific capacitance) and carbon nanosheets (high cycle stability).308
 Fig. 20  Comparison of performance among various currently developed high performance electrodes and chitosan-based electrodes (cycle numbers performed for an electrode system have been given on top of each column). The maximum specific capacitance is exhibited by the chitosan–graphene–PANI composite electrode, whereas maximum capacitance retention is achieved by the B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets, and CNT-coated MnO2. Data collected from ref. 47, 48, 57, 221 and 306–308. 
Among all these electrodes, CS–RGO–PANI composites have exhibited the highest specific capacitance. Although the cycle stability is lower than that of the others, about 88% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles is definitely a good achievement. On the other hand, chitosan-derived B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets have offered an extremely high cycle life (∼100000 cycles) and extraordinary capacitance retention. In addition to this, this does not exhibit toxicity like the MnO2-coated with the CNT electrode. Therefore, it is evident that the utilization of chitosan can impart high-performance chitosan-based electrodes through further studies and investigations, on which considerable focus should be given.
In Fig. 21, a comparative study has been conducted among currently used high performance electrolyte systems and chitosan-based electrolytes. It has been observed that among various aqueous electrolytes (e.g., alkaline, acid, and neutral), system E, aqueous H2SO4, has been reported to exhibit the maximum conductivity (750 mS cm−1).309 However, this system drastically suffers from lower electrochemical stability and some other critical obstacles, which have been described previously. On the other hand, the ionic liquid, system D, has exhibited the highest electrochemical stability (4 V) for the [Et2MEIM]− [BF4]+-based electrolyte system.309 Despite the higher electrochemical stability, this suffers from very low ionic conductivity (8 mS cm−1). Moreover, the high cost due to expensive purification processes and the purity issue are still big challenges.310 However, the organic electrolyte (TEAB4/CAN), system F, can provide conductivity and electrochemical performance in between ionic liquid and aqueous electrolytes. The conductivity offered by this system is higher than that offered by the ionic liquid and lower than that offered by the aqueous electrolyte. In the same way, the electrochemical performance is lower than that of the ionic liquid but sufficiently higher than that of aqueous electrolytes.
 Fig. 21  Comparative study among chitosan-based electrolytes and other electrolytes including aqueous, organic, and ionic liquid. Chitosan-based electrolytes have exhibited good electrochemical stability, which lies in between that of ionic liquid and aqueous electrolyte. Although the ionic conductivity of these electrolytes is lower than that of the aqueous electrolyte, this is fairly high compared to organic and ionic liquid electrolytes. Data collected from ref. 63, 65, 240 and 309. 
The comparison among all these systems demonstrates that the recently introduced chitosan-based electrolytes (system A, B, and C) have electrochemical performance lower than D and F but it is significantly higher than that of the aqueous electrolyte, system E. Further, these chitosan-based systems have also exhibited conductivity better than that of the ionic liquid in some cases. However, this is a little bit lower than that of the organic electrolyte, system F. Similarly, the position of the chitosan-based electrolytes is somewhere in between the highest and lowest performance obtained by different systems in terms of the electrochemical stability. On the other hand, the conductivity of these chitosan-based systems is quite close to the conductivity of the other systems except aqueous H2SO4.
The obtained energy density and power density from the fabricated supercapacitor using the chitosan-based electrode and electrolyte materials are depicted in Fig. 22. From the graphical illustration, it is evident that chitosan-based electrolytes with conventional electrodes (activated carbon) exhibit higher power density and lower energy density. On the other hand, chitosan-based electrodes with conventional electrolytes demonstrate higher energy density and lower power density compared to the other one. As higher energy density is one of the most important requirements, supercapacitors fabricated using chitosan-based electrodes are in a better position than chitosan-based electrolytes. Although one study has reported power density and energy density of a supercapacitor fabricated using both chitosan-based electrode and electrolyte, the performance is very low.261 However, electrodes and electrolytes with properly selected materials are assumed to improve the performance of the fabricated supercapacitors.
 Fig. 22  Scatter plot demonstrating the energy and power density of the recently developed chitosan-based supercapacitors. Data obtained from ref. 261, Tables 3 and 4. Every symbol represents the individual supercapacitor system. 
7. Challenges and future research prospects
After emerging as a novel energy storage technology around 1970, supercapacitors have drawn paramount attention in the scientific community due to some outstanding properties including high power density, extraordinary cycle life, and ultrafast charging ability (few seconds), which has been mentioned previously.311 Considering its promising future, the US Department of Energy has undertaken a strategic development plan, where supercapacitors hold considerable attention with batteries for future energy storage technology.76 Also, a large number of recognized companies and organizations in many other countries are investing a lot of money and efforts to remove the bottlenecks of that technology, and make it suitable for various applications. Currently, the poor energy density is the major barrier associated with some other challenges. These challenges and the possible research directions to overcome them are discussed below.
• As previously mentioned, the low energy density is the major limitation of supercapacitors. In order to increase the energy density, we need electrodes of higher specific capacitance and electrolytes with a wider electrochemical window. Electrodes of higher capacitance can be obtained in the following ways.
(i) The specific capacitance of the electrode depends on the active surface area. The incorporation of nanomaterials for developing nanocomposites is a better choice owing to their ability to provide a high specific surface area. In addition, providing a reduced diffusion path lengths for the electrolyte ions and electrons is another effective property of the nanocomposites. On account of the shorter path lengths, the supreme value of charge and discharge capacities can be achieved with high current densities.192
(ii) Developing new chitosan-based quaternary composites by adding suitable materials may enhance the specific capacitance. In Section 4.1.1, the study on recent publications shows that the incorporation of novel materials to develop ternary composites provides higher specific capacitance and cycle stability than that of binary composites. Similarly, a recent investigation about the quaternary composite of the graphene/polyaniline–benzimidazole–grafted graphene/MnO2 has exhibited a higher performance (specific capacitance of 675 F g−1).312 As a result, the energy density increases as well.
Similarly, the electrochemical potential window of the electrolyte depends on the overall electrolyte combination including chitosan, concentration of other polymers, incorporated salts, and other materials (e.g., plasticizers, metal complex, and nanofillers). The variation in the composition of these materials can impart a potential window of a diverse range. Therefore, the optimization of various components may impart higher electrochemical stability. The effects of glycerol on the electrochemical stability has been previously demonstrated.188 But similar types of studies have not been conducted on other plasticizers as well as other incorporated materials. This type of study can help to understand the effect of various materials and to choose a suitable one for fabricating an electrolyte with higher electrochemical stability. Similarly, comparative studies of various modification techniques regarding their impact on the electrochemical stability can help researchers to screen and employ the suitable one according to their needs.
• Electrolytes of higher conductivity are very crucial to obtain high performance supercapacitors. Various strategies for increasing the conductivity have already been discussed, such as blending, plasticizer addition, salt incorporation, adding nitrogen containing bases, nanofillers, and metal complex. Considerable attention can also be given to the exploitation of various metal–organic frameworks due to their promising properties.313–315 Most of the reported electrolyte systems have been developed utilizing the various strategies mentioned above. However, many strategies have been recently introduced and very few investigations have been conducted. For example, carboxylated chitosan-based hydrogel electrolytes have exhibited extremely high conductivity.261 However, very limited number of studies on the chemical stability, chemical interaction with electrodes, and the overall electrochemical performances of these materials have made it difficult to gain a proper insight into these systems. Therefore, rigorous studies should be conducted together with a suitable form of chitosan-based electrode materials, which may improve many required properties of the fabricated supercapacitors and make them suitable for practical applications.
• Currently, the demand of flexible, thin supercapacitors has increased significantly. Besides, many electrolytes need to be mechanically stable and resist pressure to a certain extent without affecting their performance. For increasing the flexibility and high tensile strength, nanofiller incorporation and chemical crosslinking have exhibited promising results. However, the number of studies is insufficient to obtain a deep insight into these chitosan-based systems. Therefore, further investigation should be conducted on various nanofillers and crosslinking methods to impart higher quality.
For chitosan-based electrolytes, according to the best of our knowledge, only the Al2O3 nano-filler has been incorporated.259 Still, there are many other nano-fillers that need to be studied for chitosan-based systems, such as TiO2, ZrO2, and MgO.248 Focus should be given to these materials to investigate their performance.
• Interaction between the electrode and the electrolyte is one of the decisive factors of the overall performance of any electrochemical device. Individually, the electrode and electrolyte may exhibit very high performance. If these are not compatible together and fail to provide better interaction, the desired output cannot be obtained. In case of chitosan-based supercapacitors, various new electrode and electrolyte materials have been developed. But very few studies have been conducted to understand their interfacial interactions, involving the mechanism of charge storage and how the process functions. The studies on these together with the thermodynamics of the electrode–electrolyte interface may direct toward a way of developing new electrodes and electrolytes of desired characteristics, which will be able to impart higher performance of the fabricated supercapacitors.
• From the previous studies, it has been found that many systems have exhibited high energy density. But with the increasing number of charge–discharge cycles, the energy density reduced significantly due to a rise in the electrochemical series resistance. This results from electrolyte depletion due to the accumulation of ions and causes a reduction in the efficiency of the fabricated supercapacitors. Again, self-discharging is another important issue, for which the desired output cannot be obtained. But very less attention has been given to elaborately study these points. Further investigations should be conducted to obtain a deeper understanding over these phenomena, and a proper solution can ensure the high cycle life of the supercapacitor with higher performance.
• While comparing various electrolyte and electrode systems with respect to their efficiency, various investigations focus on various parameters. Further, in many reports, the information provided is very limited for proper evaluation and comparison. For instance, in some investigations on electrolytes, studies over the conductivity have been conducted with some other parameters, while many important factors, such as the electrochemical potential window, cycle stability, power, and energy density of the fabricated device have not been investigated. This hampers the proper evaluation and comparison among the various electrolytes. Similarly, in case of the electrode, some studies have emphasized on increasing the specific capacitance and cycle stability only, while many important parameters, such as the scan rate, current, energy, and power density, have not been conducted. As the research is escalating, the construction of proper and standard procedures for different performance analysis is required. The investigation of some common parameters that are crucial for performance analysis should not be ignored for the proper evaluation of its performance.
• Supercapacitors need to work in a wide temperature range at various regions and under various conditions. But most of the investigations over the performance of supercapacitors have been conducted at an ambient temperature. Although, in a limited number of studies, the effect of temperature on the conductivity and some other parameters have been reported, the overall performance of the fabricated devices in various conditions has not been investigated. Therefore, focus should also be given on investigating the performance of electrodes and electrolytes at various temperatures and conditions.
• In many attempts, separately chitosan-based electrodes and electrolytes have been investigated with conventional electrolytes and electrodes, respectively. To develop whole chitosan-based supercapacitors, chitosan-based electrodes should be assembled with chitosan-based electrolytes in a single device and their performance should be evaluated. The study on this aspect is very sparse. Therefore, researchers should focus on the study of integrated supercapacitors assembled by electrodes and electrolytes made up utilizing chitosan.
8. Concluding remarks
The future world is heading toward such technological advancements where a tremendous need of energy from sustainable sources will become mandatory. Besides, the increasing demand for wearable devices and electric automobiles has intensified the necessity of highly efficient energy storage devices. For satisfying these requirements, although highly efficient batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells have held significant attention of the researchers, supercapacitors have another important distinctive role to play due to their ultrafast charging time, high cycle life with non-faradic method of action, high power density, no risk of explosion, and few more that have been previously discussed. To develop green, biodegradable, environment friendly biopolymer-based supercapacitors, chitosan can play a significant role. On the other hand, the whole world is fighting to mitigate non-degradable wastes produced from ESDs and avoid the usage of toxic chemicals, utilization of chitosan-based electrodes, and various solid and gel polymer electrolytes without compromising the performance can reduce these waste globally and mitigate the spread of various toxic substances on Earth's surface.316,317 This will ensure the one step advancement of energy storage technology toward the exploitation of green and environment friendly materials. From the study on various investigations in this paper, we have seen an increase in various high performance electrode materials exhibiting extremely high cycle life with higher capacity retention. Similarly, various electrolytes, developed using chitosan, have also exhibited good electrochemical stability and conductivity with high cycle life. Further, extraordinary flexibility and ability to operate in a wider temperature range have also been obtained in several systems. The fabricated supercapacitors utilizing these materials can demonstrate very optimistic electrochemical performances. Although the obtained results are still not suitable for practical applications, these results are helpful for predicting the promising future research and investigation of the chitosan-based materials, the demonstration of which is a major goal of this paper. Overall, this paper has summarized the recently developed chitosan-based electrode and electrolyte materials, their current conditions in terms of the performance with their existence challenges and the possible future research directions for further improvements. Rigorous studies should be conducted in the following directions: (i) developing electrodes of high specific surface area, electrochemical, as well as mechanical stability, (ii) fabrication of electrolytes having higher conductivity and wider electrochemical potential window, (iii) increasing the interfacial interaction between the fabricated electrodes and electrolytes, (iv) deep investigation on the thermodynamics of the charging and discharging mechanism, (v) studying to learn the electrolyte depletion and self-discharge phenomena, and finding solutions to avoid this, (vi) the development of flexible supercapacitors that can function efficiently in a wider temperature range and atmospheric conditions.
The current progress in the development of chitosan-based supercapacitors is far more distinguishable than it was previously. Research and investigations in the right directions will be able to remove the currently existing limitations of fabricated supercapacitors, ensuring environmental safety and will enable the human civilization to take a giant leap in energy storage technology.
Author contributions
Bijoy Krishna Roy: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, software, visualization, writing (original draft, review, and editing); Ishmam Tahmid: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, software, visualization, writing (original draft, review, and editing); Taslim Ur Rashid: conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing (original draft, review, and editing), supervision, project administration.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in public, commercial, or non-profit sectors.
References
C. Zou, Q. Zhao, G. Zhang and B. Xiong, Nat. Gas Ind. B, 2016, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
M. M. Hasan, M. D. Islam and T. U. Rashid, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34(12), 15634–15671 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gielen, F. Boshell, D. Saygin, M. D. Bazilian, N. Wagner and R. Gorini, Energy Strategy Rev., 2019, 24, 38–50 CrossRef .

          G. Coppez, S. Chowdhury and S. Chowdhury, 45th International Universities Power Engineering Conference UPEC2010,  2010, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
R. Zhu, H. Duan, Z. Zhao and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9535–9572 RSC .
Y. Yang, S. Bremner, C. Menictas and M. Kay, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2018, 91, 109–125 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, P. Ping, X. Zhao, G. Chu, J. Sun and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 210–224 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, M. Ouyang, X. Liu, L. Lu, Y. Xia and X. He, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 246–267 CrossRef .
J. Ko, B. Min, D.-W. Kim, K. Ryu, K. Kim, Y. Lee and S. Chang, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
R. Trócoli, A. Battistel and F. L. Mantia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9888–9891 CrossRef .

          S. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Qi, Proceedings of ISES World Congress 2007, vol. I–V,  2008, pp. 2805–2809 Search PubMed .

          X. Zhao, J. Zhang and K. Y. Zhu, in Extracellular Sugar-Based Biopolymers Matrices,  2019, ch. 1, pp. 3–56,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-12919-4_1 .
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 173–202 CrossRef CAS .
L. o. Nègre, B. Daffos, V. Turq, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 490–495 CrossRef .
S. Anandhavelu, V. Dhanasekaran, V. Sethuraman and H. J. Park, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2017, 17, 1321–1328 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .

          J. Goodenough, H. Abruna and M. Buchanan, Basic Research Needs for Electrical Energy Storage. Report of the Basic Energy Sciences Workshop on Electrical Energy Storage, April 2-4, 2007, DOESC (USDOE Office of Science (SC)),  2007 Search PubMed .
L. Nègre, B. Daffos, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5037 CrossRef .
B. Pal, S. Yang, S. Ramesh, V. Thangadurai and R. Jose, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3807–3835 RSC .
V. Lokhande, A. Lokhande, C. Lokhande, J. H. Kim and T. Ji, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 682, 381–403 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak, K. Metenier, V. Bertagna and F. Beguin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2421–2423 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs and W. Y. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Gamboa and P. Sebastian, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 784–788 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Horie and K. Fujita, in Advances in molecular toxicology, Elsevier,  2011, vol. 5, pp. 145–178 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Zhang, L. H. Yin, T. Meng and Y. P. Pu, Biomed. Environ. Sci., 2011, 24, 661–669 CAS .
M. Karnan, A. K. Raj, K. Subramani, S. Santhoshkumar and M. Sathish, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3029–3041 RSC .
J. P. Trigueiro, R. S. Borges, R. L. Lavall, H. D. Calado and G. G. Silva, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 733–739 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fic, M. Meller, J. Menzel and E. Frackowiak, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 496–503 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, Z. Fahimi, O. Moradlou and M. R. Sovizi, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 118, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .

          J. K. Maranas, in Dynamics of Soft Matter, Springer,  2012, pp. 123–143 Search PubMed .

          Q. Wang, S. Chen and D. Zhang, in Carbon Nanotube Fibers and Yarns, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 243–270 Search PubMed .
C. Yan, M. Jin, X. Pan, L. Ma and X. Ma, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 9299–9308 RSC .
A. Lewandowski, M. Zajder, E. Frąckowiak and F. Beguin, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2777–2780 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao, F. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Liew, S. Ramesh and A. K. Arof, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2953–2963 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Okonkwo, E. Collins and E. Okonkwo, in Biopolymer composites in electronics, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 487–503 Search PubMed .
A. Muxika, A. Etxabide, J. Uranga, P. Guerrero and K. De La Caba, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 105, 1358–1368 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chung and C.-Y. Chen, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 2806–2814 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Islam, M. Shahruzzaman, S. Biswas, M. Nurus Sakib and T. U. Rashid, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 164–183 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Rahman, T. Rashid and A. Datta, Encyclopedia of Biomedical Polymers and Polymeric Biomaterials,  2015, vol. 11, pp. 1811–1825 Search PubMed .

          M. Rahman and T. Rashid, Crustac. Struct. Ecol. Life Cycle,  2013, pp. 37–70 Search PubMed .
M. G. Hosseini and E. Shahryari, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 496, 371–381 CrossRef .
G. Sun, B. Li, J. Ran, X. Shen and H. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 171, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Q. Ji, P.-Z. Guo and X.-S. Zhao, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2010, 26, 1254–1258 CAS .
A. Śliwak, N. Díez, E. Miniach and G. Gryglewicz, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 667–677 CrossRef .
A. Torvi, S. Naik and M. Kariduraganavar, Chem. Data Coll., 2018, 17, 459–471 Search PubMed .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, J. Cheng, B. Shao, K. Wang, L. Song and M. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1202–1207 CrossRef CAS .
D. Z. W. Tan, H. Cheng, S. T. Nguyen and H. M. Duong, Mater. Technol., 2014, 29, A107–A113 CrossRef CAS .
R. Warren, F. Sammoura, F. Tounsi, M. Sanghadasa and L. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15568–15575 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, D. W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L.-S. Tang, L. Bai, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, B.-H. Xie, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 250–273 RSC .
A. Borenstien, M. Noked, S. Okashy and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1282 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wickramaratne, J. Xu, M. Wang, L. Zhu, L. Dai and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2820–2828 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhuang, F. Zhang, D. Wu and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3081–3086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Liu, H. Bian, J. Wei, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 335713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kadir and A. Arof, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2011, 15, s217–s220 CrossRef .
G. Hirankumar and N. Mehta, Heliyon, 2018, 4, e00992 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aziz, S. R. Majid, R. Yahya and A. K. Arof, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 1345–1348 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hadi, S. B. Aziz, M. M. Nofal, S. A. Hussen, M. H. Hamsan, M. A. Brza, R. T. Abdulwahid, M. F. Z. Kadir and H. J. Woo, Membranes, 2020, 10(11), 363 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, R. T. Abdulwahid, M. H. Hamsan, M. A. Brza, R. M. Abdullah, M. F. Kadir and S. K. Muzakir, Molecules, 2019, 24, 3508 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, X. Ji, Y. Tan, Y. Liu and F. Ran, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Liu, L. Kong, L. Kang and F. Ran, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Brza, I. Brevik, M. Hamsan, R. T. Abdulwahid, S. Majid, M. Kadir, S. A. Hussen and R. M Abdullah, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B Aziz, M. A. Brza, I. Brevik, M. H. Hafiz, A. S. Asnawi, Y. M. Yusof, R. T. Abdulwahid and M. F. Kadir, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2103 CrossRef .
M. Rayung, M. M. Aung, S. C. Azhar, L. C. Abdullah, M. S. Suait, A. Ahmad and S. N. A. M. Jamil, Materials, 2020, 13, 838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Abioye and F. N. Ani, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 1282–1293 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, H. Li, Y. Huang and C. Zhi, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 139, 100520 CrossRef .
Z. Bi, Q. Kong, Y. Cao, G. Sun, F. Su, X. Wei, X. Li, A. Ahmad, L. Xie and C.-M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16028–16045 RSC .
S. Mehta, S. Jha and H. Liang, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2020, 134, 110345 CrossRef CAS .
T. Selvaraj, V. Perumal, S. F. Khor, L. S. Anthony, S. C. Gopinath and N. M. Mohamed, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 110839 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscience and technology: a collection of reviews from Nature journals,  2010, pp. 320–329 Search PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Libich, J. Máca, J. Vondrák, O. Čech and M. Sedlaříková, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 17, 224–227 CrossRef .

          L. Zhou, C. Li, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and T. van Ree, in Metal Oxides in Energy Technologies, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 169–203 Search PubMed .

          P. Barrade, S. Pittet and A. Rufer, PCIM Power Conversion Intelligent Motion, Nürnberg, Germany,  2000 Search PubMed .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guidi, T. M. Undeland and Y. Hori, IEEJ Trans. Ind. Appl., 2008, 128, 418–423 CrossRef .

          P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscience technology: a collection of reviews from Nature journals,  2010, pp. 320–329 Search PubMed .
D. Dmitriev, A. Nashchekin and V. Popkov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 501, 144216 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, X. Xiang, S. Peng, X. Jiang and L. Hou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 823, 563–572 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, T. Wang, X. Wu, Z. Su, J. Zhuang, S. Liu, R. Zhu, C. Chen and H. Pang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2330–2332 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jianming and C. Xiaomei, J. Semicond., 2015, 36, 083006 CrossRef .
R. S. Kate, S. A. Khalate and R. Deokate, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 734, 89–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao and W. Zheng, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 3, 23 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Sun, X. Li, D. Wang, P. Wang and D. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9988–9990 RSC .
Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani and S. Dash, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 10628–10643 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
J. H. Park and O. O. Park, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Suematsu and A. Manago, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 420 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-D. Huang, B. Zhang, S.-W. Oh, Q.-B. Zheng, X.-Y. Lin, N. Yousefi and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3591–3599 RSC .
H. Pan, J. Li and Y. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Syarif, Int. Trans. J. Eng. Manag. Appl. Sci. Technol., 2012, 3, 21 CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17615–17624 RSC .

          P. Tamilarasan, A. K. Mishra and S. Ramaprabhu, 2011 International Conference on Nanoscience, Technology and Societal Implications,  2011, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. R. Miller, R. Outlaw and B. Holloway, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10443–10449 CrossRef CAS .
P. Karthika, N. Rajalakshmi and K. S. Dhathathreyan, Soft Nanosci. Lett., 2012, 2, 23424 Search PubMed .
T. Kim, G. Jung, S. Yoo, K. S. Suh and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6899–6905 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burke and M. Miller, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 514–522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 9, 129–137 Search PubMed .

          J. H. Davis Jr, C. M. Gordon, C. Hilgers and P. Wasserscheid, Ionic Liquids in Synthesis,  2002, pp. 7–40 Search PubMed .
T. U. Rashid, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 114916 Search PubMed .
X.-Z. Sun, X. Zhang, B. Huang and Y.-W. Ma, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2014, 30, 485–491 CAS .

          K. D. Verma, P. Sinha, S. Banerjee, K. K. Kar and M. K. Ghorai, in Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor Materials I, Springer,  2020, pp. 315–326 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 649–662 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and K. K. Kar, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 42952 CrossRef .
M. Jiang, J. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Ge and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3473–3481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, A. Sun and R.-S. Liu, Electrochemical Technologies for Energy Storage and Conversion, volume set 2, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .

          B. K. Kim, S. Sy, A. Yu and J. Zhang, Handbook of Clean Energy Systems,  2015, pp. 1–25 Search PubMed .

          K. D. Verma, P. Sinha, S. Banerjee and K. K. Kar, in Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor Materials I, Springer,  2020, pp. 327–340 Search PubMed .
F. Shi, L. Li, X.-l. Wang, C.-d. Gu and J.-p. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani and S. J. Dash, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 10628–10643 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 480–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Yu, V. Chabot and J. Zhang, Electrochemical supercapacitors for energy storage and delivery: fundamentals and applications, Taylor & Francis,  2013 Search PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical supercapacitors: scientific fundamentals and technological applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .

          K. Ghandi, Green and sustainable chemistry,  2014, p. 2014 Search PubMed .

          D. P. Dubal, P. Gómez-Romero and G. Korotcenkov, Metal oxides in supercapacitors, Elsevier,  2017 Search PubMed .
V. Gupta and N. Miura, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1466–1469 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Z. Fan and J. Maier, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 937–940 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Huddleston, A. E. Visser, W. M. Reichert, H. D. Willauer, G. A. Broker and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2001, 3, 156–164 RSC .
Z. B. Zhou, H. Matsumoto and K. Tatsumi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 752–766 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, M. G. Edo and C. Alemán, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5930–5956 RSC .
E. Armelin, M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, C. Alemán and D. D. Díaz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8952–8968 RSC .
A. Kafy, A. Akther, L. Zhai, H. C. Kim and J. Kim, Synth. Met., 2017, 223, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jamshidian, E. A. Tehrany, M. Imran, M. Jacquot and S. Desobry, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2010, 9, 552–571 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mittal, K. Y. Rhee, S. J. Park and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2017, 114, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramesh, S. Khandelwal, K. Y. Rhee and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2018, 138, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
W. Arbia, L. Arbia, L. Adour and A. Amrane, Food Technol. Biotechnol., 2013, 51, 12–25 Search PubMed .
O. Ghorbel-Bellaaj, I. Younes, H. Maâlej, S. Hajji and M. Nasri, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2012, 51, 1196–1201 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Rahman, S. Kabir, T. U. Rashid, B. Nesa, R. Nasrin, P. Haque and M. A. Khan, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2013, 82, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Santos, N. S. Marques, P. C. Maia, M. A. B. d. Lima, L. d. O. Franco and G. M. d. Campos-Takaki, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 4290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Younes and M. Rinaudo, Mar. Drugs, 2015, 13, 1133–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. D. Park and R. A. Muzzarelli, Mar. Drugs, 2010, 8, 24–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Fang, Y. Deng, D. Wang and Y. Zhao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 101, 57–67 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. A. Sagheer, M. A. Al-Sughayer, S. Muslim and M. Z. Elsabee, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 77, 410–419 CrossRef .
T. U. Rashid, M. M. Rahman, S. Kabir, S. M. Shamsuddin and M. A. Khan, Polym. Int., 2012, 61, 1302–1308 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, K. Li, R. Xing, S. Liu, L. Hu and P. Li, Egypt. J. Aquat. Res., 2016, 42, 75–81 CrossRef .
A. J. Al-Manhel, A. R. S. Al-Hilphy and A. K. Niamah, J. Saudi Soc. Agric. Sci., 2018, 17, 186–190 Search PubMed .

          N. Ahmad, S. Sultana, M. Z. Khan and S. Sabir, in Modern age waste water problems, Springer,  2020, pp. 69–83 Search PubMed .
N. S. A. Mubarak, T. Chuan, H. Khor, A. H. Jawad, L. Wilson and S. Sabar, J. Polym. Environ., 2020, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, S. Yu, B. Sun, S. Gao, S. Guo and K. Zhao, Polymers, 2018, 10, 462 CrossRef .

          R. U. Thankachen, A. Nair, J. Raj, N. N. Areekal, P. M. Udayakumar, J. T. Haponiuk and S. Gopi, in Biopolymers and their Industrial Applications, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 81–103 Search PubMed .
C. Pacheco, F. Sousa and B. Sarmento, React. Funct. Polym., 2020, 146, 104430 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Meng, Q. Li, J. Liu, M. Zhou, Z. Jin and K. Zhao, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 487 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qu and Y. Luo, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 152, 437–448 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Qamar, M. Ashiq, M. Jahangeer, A. Riasat and M. Bilal, Case Studies in Chemical Environmental Engineering, 2020, 2, 100021 CrossRef .
P. Nezhad-Mokhtari, M. Akrami-Hasan-Kohal and M. Ghorbani, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 154, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nasrin, S. Biswas, T. U. Rashid, S. Afrin, R. A. Jahan, P. Haque and M. M. Rahman, Bioact. Mater., 2017, 2, 199–207 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Biswas, J. Fatema, T. Debnath and T. U. Rashid, ACS ES&T Water, 2021, 1(5), 1055–1085 Search PubMed .

          T. U. Rashid, M. S. Islam, S. Sharmeen, S. Biswas, A. Zaman, M. N. Khan, A. K. Mallik, P. Haque and M. M. Rahman, Handbook of Composites from Renewable Materials,  2017, pp. 471–517 Search PubMed .

          Z. Osman and A. K. Arof, Chitosan and phthaloylated chitosan in electrochemical devices, InTech,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. S. Islam, P. Haque, T. U. Rashid, M. N. Khan, A. K. Mallik, M. N. I. Khan, M. Khan and M. M. Rahman, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2017, 28, 55 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Al-Amin, S. C. Dey, T. U. Rashid, M. Ashaduzzaman and S. M. Shamsuddin, Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2016, 2, 14–21 Search PubMed .
S. C. Dey, M. Al-Amin, T. U. Rashid, M. Z. Sultan, M. Ashaduzzaman, M. Sarker and S. M. Shamsuddin, Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2016, 2, 52–62 Search PubMed .
T. U. Rashid, S. M. Shamsuddin, M. A. Khan and M. M. Rahman, Soft Mater., 2014, 12, 262–267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, T. U. Rashid, T. Debnath, P. Haque and M. M. Rahman, J. Compos. Sci., 2020, 4, 16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, T. U. Rashid, A. K. Mallik, M. Islam, M. N. Khan, P. Haque, M. Khan and M. M. Rahman, Int. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 2017, 6472131 Search PubMed .
A. Zaman, T. U. Rashid, M. A. Khan and M. M. Rahman, J. Bionanosci., 2015, 5, 31–38 CrossRef .

          Y. Goswami and S. Sharma, in Graphene Based Biopolymer Nanocomposites, Springer,  2021, pp. 233–250 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, P. Tammela, M. Strømme and L. Nyholm, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700130 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, X. Peng, X. Zhang, S. Jing, L. Zhong and R. Sun, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 170, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pang, B. Zou, Y. Zou, X. Han, L. Cao, W. Wang and Y. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 504, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Wang, P. Du, J. Liu, D. Liu and P. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 312–324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamsan, S. B. Aziz, M. Kadir, M. Brza and W. O. Karim, Polym. Test., 2020, 90, 106714 CrossRef CAS .
R. Teimuri-Mofrad, R. Hadi, H. Abbasi and R. F. B. Baj, J. Electron. Mater., 2019, 48, 4573–4581 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Liu, T.-C. Yu, Y.-W. Chen and C.-H. Hou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 3196–3205 CrossRef .
P. Hao, Z. Zhao, Y. Leng, J. Tian, Y. Sang, R. I. Boughton, C. Wong, H. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, Y. Zhang, B. Niu, F. Jiang, X. Yang and M. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 14456–14468 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Cheng, L. Dong, Y. Wang, J. Chen, C. Huang, D. Wei, Y. Feng, D. Jia and Y. Zhou, Carbon, 2017, 122, 592–603 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lota, I. Acznik, A. Sierczynska and G. Lota, Mater. Lett., 2016, 173, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
R.-w. Fu, Z.-h. Li, Y.-r. Liang, F. Li, F. Xu and D.-c. Wu, N. Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aswathy, A. K. Palai, A. Ramadoss, S. Mohanty and S. Nayak, Cellulose, 2020, 1–17 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Hsin, Y.-C. Cheng, M.-J. Wang, C.-C. Hsu, I.-C. Cheng and J.-Z. Chen, N. Carbon Mater., 2020, 5, 134–140 Search PubMed .
S. Selvam, B. Balamuralitharan, S. Jegatheeswaran, M.-Y. Kim, S. Karthick, J. A. Raj, P. Boomi, M. Sundrarajan, K. Prabakar and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1380–1386 RSC .
P. Yang and W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 274–290 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, N. Tong, N. He, Y. Liu, E. Shim, B. Pourdeyhimi and W. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7927–7934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tamilarasan and S. Ramaprabhu, Energy, 2013, 51, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kwon, T. Kim, B. M. Jung, S. B. Lee and U. H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35108–35117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Asnawi, S. B. Aziz, M. M. Nofal, Y. M. Yusof, I. Brevik, M. H. Hamsan, M. A. Brza, R. T. Abdulwahid and M. F. Kadir, Membranes, 2020, 10, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamagata, K. Soeda, S. Ikebe, S. Yamazaki and M. Ishikawa, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sudhakar and M. Selvakumar, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Hamsan, R. M. Abdullah and M. Kadir, Molecules, 2019, 24, 2503 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kadir, S. Majid and A. Arof, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1475–1482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sudhakar, M. Selvakumar and D. K. Bhat, Ionics, 2013, 19, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dannoun, S. B. Aziz, M. A. Brza, M. M. Nofal, A. S. Asnawi, Y. M. Yusof, S. Al-Zangana, M. H. Hamsan, M. F. Kadir and H. J. Woo, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2531 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shukur, R. Ithnin, H. Illias and M. Kadir, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 1834–1841 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shukur and M. Kadir, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 152–165 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Hamsan, W. O. Karim, M. Kadir, M. Brza and O. G. Abdullah, Biomolecules, 2019, 9, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Aziz, S. Al-Zangana, M. Brza, S. R. Saeed, R. T. Abdulwahid and M. Kadir, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 11580–11595 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Choudhury, P. W. Northrop, A. C. Crothers, S. Jain and V. R. Subramanian, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2012, 42, 935–943 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .

          A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Materials for sustainable energy: a collection of peer-reviewed research and review articles from Nature Publishing Group,  2011, pp. 148–159 Search PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Wang, B. Zhao, X. Gu, T. Li, L. Huang, Q. Wu, S. Yu and S. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 255, 117397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, G. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Fan, C. Yu, J. Yang, N. Xiao and J. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5120–5125 RSC .

          M. Halper and J. Ellenbogen, MITRE Nanosystems Group,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. Hassan, M. Suzuki and A. Abd El-Moneim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pandiselvi and S. Thambidurai, Ionics, 2014, 20, 551–561 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Yan, Y. J. Wang, L. Ren, G. Wu, S. G. Caridade, J. B. Fan, L. Y. Wang, P. H. Ji, J. M. Oliveira and J. T. Oliveira, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 95, 465–475 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang and M. Song, Nanomater. Energy, 2013, 2, 265–278 CrossRef .
A. Shalaby, V. Yaneva, A. Staneva, L. Aleksandrov, R. Iordanova and Y. Dimitriev, Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 120 Search PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang, X. Shen and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sapurina and J. Stejskal, Polym. Int., 2008, 57, 1295–1325 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katoch, M. Burkhart, T. Hwang and S. S. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 192, 262–268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karpuraranjith and S. Thambidurai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40567–40576 RSC .
R. B. Suneetha, P. Selvi and C. Vedhi, Vacuum, 2019, 164, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
T. Prasankumar, B. R. Wiston, C. Gautam, R. Ilangovan and S. P. Jose, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 757, 466–475 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ke and J. Wang, J. Materiomics, 2016, 2, 37–54 CrossRef .
J. Yin, H. U. Lee and J. Y. Park, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34801–34808 RSC .
X.-L. Zhang, C.-N. Feng, H.-P. Li and X.-C. Zheng, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 437–451 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, W.-T. Yao, Z.-Y. Yu and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3331–3338 RSC .
S. Qiu, Z. Chen, H. Zhuo, Y. Hu, Q. Liu, X. Peng and L. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15983–15994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Liang, H. Hu, S. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Dong, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24775–24781 RSC .
J. Cheng, Q. Xu, X. Wang, Z. Li, F. Wu, J. Shao and H. Xie, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1215–1224 RSC .
J. Deng, T. Xiong, F. Xu, M. Li, C. Han, Y. Gong, H. Wang and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4053–4060 RSC .
F. Kurosaki, H. Koyanaka, M. Tsujimoto and Y. Imamura, Carbon, 2008, 46, 850–857 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, Y. Chen, M. Yu, X. Shen, H. Lei, T. Xie, Y. Zhang and Y. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 332 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Y. Zhu, B. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Wu and J. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12088–12097 RSC .
S. Zhong, M. Kitta and Q. Xu, Chem. - Asian J., 2019, 14, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, C. Yu, J. Yang, Z. Ling, C. Hu, M. Zhang and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401761 CrossRef .
L. Yang, D. Wu, T. Wang and D. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18692–18704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laheäär, P. Przygocki, Q. Abbas and F. Béguin, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 21–25 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, J. Hu, S. Cao, S. Yu and L. Huang, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 155, 131–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Yang, H. Cao, Y. Chang, K. Tang, Z. Cao, J. Chang, Y. Cao, W. Wang and M. Gao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 175, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, X. Wang, T. Meng, P. Yang, Z. Zhu, H. Min, M. Chen, W. Chen and X. Zhou, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 146, 453–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, G. Cui and L. Chen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 136–164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, H. Lu, H. Li and X. Zhao, Carbon, 2018, 140, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, Z. Chen, H. Zhuo, Y. Hu, S. Jing, J. Liu and L. Zhong, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 207, 764–774 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salve, A. Mandal, K. Amreen, P. K. Pattnaik and S. Goel, Microchem. J., 2020, 157, 104973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, L. Wang, B. Zhao, X. Gu, T. Li, L. Huang, Q. Wu, S. Yu and S. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 117397 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, W. Wang, W. Wang and X. Guo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39625–39633 RSC .

          E. Bekaert, L. Buannic, U. Lassi, A. Llordés and J. Salminen, in Emerging Nanotechnologies in Rechargeable Energy Storage Systems, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 1–43 Search PubMed .
S. B. Aziz, T. J. Woo, M. Kadir and H. M. Ahmed, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2018, 3, 1–17 Search PubMed .
S. B. Aziz, M. Brza, H. Hamsan, M. Kadir and R. T. Abdulwahid, Polym. Bull., 2020, 1–19 CAS .
M. S. Kumar and D. K. Bhat, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2445–2454 CrossRef CAS .
I. Stepniak, M. Galinski, K. Nowacki, M. Wysokowski, P. Jakubowska, V. V. Bazhenov, T. Leisegang, H. Ehrlich and T. Jesionowski, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 4007–4013 RSC .
S. B Aziz, H. Hamsan, M. M Nofal, S. San, R. T. Abdulwahid, S. Raza Saeed, M. A. Brza, M. F. Kadir, S. J. Mohammed and S. Al-Zangana, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1526 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Aziz, M. A. Brza, E. Hamsan, J. M. Hadi, M. F. Kadir and R. T. Abdulwahid, Molecules, 2020, 25, 4503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao and K. Lian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33091–33113 RSC .
M. Kadir, Z. Aspanut, R. Yahya and A. K. Arof, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2011, 15, s164–s167 CrossRef .
M. Yar, A. Masood, R. Batool, L. Shahzadi, A. F. Khan, Z. Yousaf, M. Y. Rafique and A. Razaq, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 085055 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kadir, Z. Aspanut, S. R. Majid and A. K. Arof, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2011, 78, 1068–1074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. M. Kim, M. A. Hanna and D. Nag, Ind. Crops Prod., 2005, 21, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yusof, M. Shukur, H. Illias and M. Kadir, Phys. Scr., 2014, 89, 035701 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shukur, N. Majid, R. Ithnin and M. Kadir, Phys. Scr., 2013, 2013, 014051 CrossRef .
A. Mohamed, M. Shukur, M. Kadir and Y. Yusof, J. Polym. Res., 2020, 27, 149 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Hamsan, M. Brza, M. Kadir, S. Muzakir and R. T. Abdulwahid, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 9, 8355–8366 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hadi, S. B. Aziz, S. R Saeed, M. A. Brza, R. T. Abdulwahid, M. H. Hamsan, R. M Abdullah, M. F. Kadir and S. Muzakir, Membranes, 2020, 10, 363 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, Y. Ren, M. Wang, J. He, W. Huo and H. Tang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, Y. Chen, X.-F. Li, S. Zhang and Y. Situ, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2426–2433 RSC .
V. K. Vorobiov, M. A. Smirnov, N. V. Bobrova and M. P. Sokolova, Mater. Lett., 2021, 283, 128889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Salman, O. G. Abdullah, R. R. Hanna and S. B. Aziz, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 3185–3199 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Asnawi, S. B Aziz, M. M Nofal, M. H. Hamsan, M. A. Brza, Y. M. Yusof, R. T. Abdilwahid, S. K. Muzakir and M. F. Kadir, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1433 CrossRef CAS .
R. Whba, L. TianKhoon, M. Su'ait, M. Rahman and A. Ahmad, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 3351–3361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yahya and A. Arof, Eur. Polym. J., 2003, 39, 897–902 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Hamsan, M. Brza, M. Kadir, R. T. Abdulwahid, H. O. Ghareeb and H. Woo, Results Phys., 2019, 15, 102584 CrossRef .
Y. Sudhakar, M. Selvakumar and D. K. Bhat, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2014, 180, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. H. Hamsan, M. F. Kadir, W. O. Karim and R. M. Abdullah, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 3369 CrossRef CAS .
J. M Hadi, S. B Aziz, M. M Nofal, S. A. Hussein, M. H. Hafiz, M. A. Brza, R. T. Abdulwahid, M. F. Kadir and H. J. Woo, Membranes, 2020, 10, 151 CrossRef .
S. Alipoori, S. Mazinani, S. H. Aboutalebi and F. Sharif, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101072 CrossRef .
M. Yu, X. Ji and F. Ran, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 117346 Search PubMed .
L. Han, K. Liu, M. Wang, K. Wang, L. Fang, H. Chen, J. Zhou and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704195 CrossRef .
J. Xu, R. Jin, X. Ren and G. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 127446 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zeng, J. Li, X. Cui, A. M. Al-Enizi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16382–16392 RSC .
B. J. Lee, S. Sivakkumar, J. M. Ko, J. H. Kim, S. M. Jo and D. Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 546–552 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arabale, D. Wagh, M. Kulkarni, I. Mulla, S. Vernekar, K. Vijayamohanan and A. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, Y. Li and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Zhai, Y. Deng, D. Gu, Q. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Huang, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 579–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Figueiredo, M. Pereira, M. Freitas and J. Orfao, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1379–1389 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Liu, L.-B. Kong, P. Zhang, Y.-C. Luo and L. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Ismanto, S. Wang, F. E. Soetaredjo and S. Ismadji, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3534–3540 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elmouwahidi, Z. Zapata-Benabithe, F. Carrasco-Marín and C. Moreno-Castilla, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 111, 185–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Gan, Y. S. Lim, N. M. Huang and H. N. Lim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 479–486 CrossRef CAS .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. D. Verma, P. Sinha, S. Banerjee and K. K. Kar, in Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor Materials I, Springer,  2020, pp. 269–285 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
W. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang and S. Wei, Carbon, 2011, 49, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Lin, J. Yin, H. Lu, D. Liu and M. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2114–2122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, R. Rakhi, W. Chen and H. N. Alshareef, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Ren, R. Yu, J. Qi, D. Mao, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400011 CrossRef .
S. Anandhavelu and S. Thambidurai, Ionics, 2013, 19, 903–909 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lozano-Castello, J. Calo, D. Cazorla-Amorós and A. Linares-Solano, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2529–2536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Daud, A. S. Mohd Kassim, A. Mohd Aripin, H. Awang and M. Z. Mohd Hatta, Aust. J. Basic Appl. Sci., 2013, 7, 406–411 Search PubMed .
N. Abdullah and H. Gerhauser, Fuel, 2008, 87, 2606–2613 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abdullah, S. Yusup, M. M. Ahmad, A. Ramli and L. Ismail, Proc. World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2010, 72, 129–133 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Liu, Z. Chen, Q. Yang, C. Li, G. Lu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10438–10440 RSC .
L. Kang, P. Xu, D. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Du, X. Han, Q. Li and H.-L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10007–10012 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brif, G. Ankonina, C. Drathen and B. Pokroy, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 477–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, X.-b. Yan, R.-t. Wang, J.-w. Lang, Y.-j. Ou and Q.-j. Xue, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, G. Li, H. Yang, J. Tang and J. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 163, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, K. A. Creber, B. Peppley and V. T. Bui, Polymer, 2003, 44, 1057–1065 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ngai, S. Ramesh, K. Ramesh and J. C. Juan, Ionics, 2016, 22, 1259–1279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bhatt, R. Swaroop, A. Arya and A. Sharma, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2015, 5, 418–434 CAS .
S. M. M. Yasin, S. Ibrahim and M. R. Johan, Sci. World J., 2014, 2014, 547076 Search PubMed .
E. W. Stacy, C. P. Gainaru, M. Gobet, Z. Wojnarowska, V. Bocharova, S. G. Greenbaum and A. P. Sokolov, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 8637–8645 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cameron, M. Ingram and K. Sarmouk, Eur. Polym. J., 1990, 26, 1097–1101 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Z. Kadir and M. Hamsan, Ionics, 2018, 24, 2379–2398 CrossRef CAS .
N. Salleh, S. B. Aziz, Z. Aspanut and M. Kadir, Ionics, 2016, 22, 2157–2167 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, M. Hamsan, R. M. Abdullah and M. F. Z. Kadir, Molecules, 2019, 24, 2503 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Brza, S. B. Aziz, M. M. Nofal, S. R. Saeed, S. Al-Zangana, W. O. Karim, S. A. Hussen, R. T. Abdulwahid and M. F. Kadir, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pandey, N. Asthana, M. M. Dwivedi and S. Chaturvedi, J. Polym., 2013, 2013, 752596 Search PubMed .

          A. D. Godwin, in Applied plastics engineering handbook, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 533–553 Search PubMed .
A. Ahmad, M. Rahman, S. Low and H. Hamzah, Int. Sch. Res. Notices, 2011, 2011, 401280 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1056–1059 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. A. Hu, N. An, Y. Y. Yang, Z. M. Li and H. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22865–22872 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Feng, Q. Li, X.-F. Lu, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2985–2992 RSC .

          R. Ramachandran and F. Wang, in Supercapacitors-Theoretical Practical Solutions,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. Pan, M. Yao, J. Zhang, B. Li, C. Xing, X. Song, P. Su and H. Zhang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Majumdar, M. Mandal and S. K. Bhattacharya, Emergent Mater., 2020, 3, 347–367 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ensafi, N. Ahmadi, B. Rezaei, A. Abdolmaleki and M. Mahmoudian, Energy, 2018, 164, 707–721 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .
K.-B. Wang, Q. Xun and Q. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100025 CrossRef .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
R. Singh and H.-W. Rhee, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 390–408 CrossRef .
S. Herou, P. Schlee, A. B. Jorge and M. Titirici, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain., 2018, 9, 18–24 CrossRef .

Footnote† The authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Bijoy Krishna Roy	Bijoy Krishna Roy is a BSc student (4th year) in the Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Department at University of Dhaka. His research interests include the fabrication of materials for electrochemical devices (e.g., solar cell, battery, and supercapacitor) and biopolymer-based hydrogels.
Ishmam Tahmid	Ishmam Tahmid is currently pursuing BSc program in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Dhaka. His research interests include the fabrication of biomaterials for energy storage devices and fabrication of chitosan-based hydrogels for tissue engineering and drug delivery purposes.
Taslim Ur Rashid	Taslim Ur Rashid is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. He received his BSc and MS from the same department. He is a PhD candidate in Fiber and Polymer Science program in the Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry and Science at North Carolina State University, USA. His broad research interest focuses on biopolymers, electrolytes, supercapacitors, dye sensitized solar cell, separation technology, designing polymer nanocomposites with improved properties for industrial waste management, and nanofiber fabrication by electrospinning.

 	Fig. 1  Trend of article publication in relevant journals over the last decade. The values were obtained from a literature search using “chitosan-based materials for supercapacitor applications” (data source: Google Scholar).	 

 	Fig. 2  Ragone plot demonstrating power density vs. energy density of various ESD, such as capacitors, electrochemical capacitors (supercapacitors), and several types of batteries. The time parameters on the plot, calculated from the ratio of energy density to power density, indicates that batteries can perform for a longer period of time in comparison with supercapacitor and capacitors. On the other hand, capacitors and supercapacitors can provide higher power at a unit time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2008, Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature Materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of a supercapacitor (EDLC) showing (a) different components (electrode, electrolyte, separator, and charge collector), and working principle during (b) the charging stage (ion adsorption) and (c) discharging stage (ion desorption).	 

Electrode	Metal oxides	• Contains higher cycle stability, electrical conductivity, and redox activity	• Some widely applied metal oxides (e.g., RuO2 and CoO) are costly and toxic	
118

• Better energy density than carbon-based electrodes	• Not abundant in nature
• Higher rate capability	

Conducting polymer	• Contains higher voltage window	• Lower stability	
119 and 120
• Cheap and negligible environmental impact	• Faster instrumental deterioration occurs of the electrode
• Adjustable redox activity through chemical modification	

Carbon-based materials	• Cheap as well as easier to process	• Exhibits lower capacitance	
48

• Demonstrates great electronic conductivity and higher stability	• Elevated internal resistance
• Has a broad operating temperature	

Electrolyte	Aqueous liquid	• Economical and conceivable in handling	• Possesses a narrow potential window	
17

• Simple fabrication and assembly process	• Low operating temperature range (0–100 °C)
• Provides superior conductivity than organic electrolytes	

Organic electrolyte	• Exhibits high operating potential window	• Displays high combustibility, volatility, and toxicity	
116

• Improved energy and power densities	• Demonstrates low specific capacitance and conductivity
• Allows the use of cheaper materials for current collectors and packages	• Complex purification process
Ionic electrolytes	• Exhibits higher thermal, chemical, and electrochemical stability	• Costlier than other electrolytes	
121 and 122
• Demonstrates negligible volatility	• Possesses greater viscosity
• Non-combustible	• Has low ionic conductivity

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) chitin, (b) chitosan, (c) intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bonds inside and among the chitosan chain.	 

Fish scale	20.5	Dry fish scale	
17

Lobster shell (Nephro)	69.8	Dry mass of organic cuticle	
116

Shrimp shell (Crangon crangon)	17.8	Dry mass of exoskeletons	
121

Antarctic krills	34–49	Dry weight of cuticle	
122

Crub shell (Chinoecetes opilio)	26.6	Dry mass of exoskeletons	
124

Filamentous fungi (Penicillium chrysogenum)	19.5–42	Dry mass of mycelium	
125


 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the chitin sources, chitin extraction by deproteinization, and demineralization process, exploiting alkali and acid solution, respectively; chitosan manufacturing process by deacetylation using alkali solution, and applications of chitosan in various fields.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) chitosan, (b) CS–GM, (c) CS–GM-PANI, (d) CP5, (e) CG3P. Graphical representation of specific capacitance vs. scan rate (f), specific capacitance vs. cycle number (g) of CS–GM-PANI, CS–GM, and CS composites. (a)–(c), (f), and (g) have been adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. Graphs of specific capacitance vs. scan rates (h) and specific capacitance vs. cycle life (i) of the CG3P, CP5, and PANI composites. (d), (e), (h), and (i) have been adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, Chemical Data Collections.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) CS0.12–ZnO2.5/PANI, (b) CS–PANI, and (c) CS–SnO2–PANI hybrid composites. Graphical representation of (d) the CV curves of binary (CS–PANI) and ternary (CS–SnO2–PANI) composite electrodes at a varying scan rate ranging from 10 mV s−1 to 200 mV s−1 using 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, (e) charge/discharge cycling performance of PANI–ZnO and CS0.12–ZnO2.5/PANI at a potential range from 0 V to 0.80 V vs. SCE at a charge density of 175 mA cm−2 (a), (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2013, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (b)–(d) are reproduced with permission from reference. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

N, O self-co-doped hierarchical porous carbon	1679	10000, 79.70%	Aq. KOH	287.94 (at 1)	399.92	28.74	• Large surface area with richer porosity	
210

• Good energy and power density
• Satisfactory cycle stability
B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets	2362	100000, 100%	Na2SO4 and 6 M KOH	478 (at 0.5)	225.1	30.1	• Excellent cycle life	
221

• Ultra-high surface area
• Good specific capacitance
• Comparatively high energy density
N-doped hierarchically porous carbon	3300	20000, 94%	6 M KOH	367 (at 0.1)	25	12.7	• Extremely high surface area	
214

• Moderate capacitance
• Extremely high cycle stability
B, N co-doping porous carbon	1202.4	83%	H2SO4–PVA gel	393 (at 0.5)	400	19.1	• Large power density	
212

• Sufficient specific surface area
Chitosan-derived hybrid porous carbon	927.17	10000, 90%	6 M KOH	331 (at 1)	900	34	• Excellent energy density as well as power density	
169

• High cycle stability
• Large surface area
Carbon materials derived from chitosan/cellulose cryogel	1085.6	1000, 95.5%	6 M KOH	173.1 (at 1)	—	—	• High surface area	
125

• Lower specific capacitance
• Lower cycle stability
N-doped graphene aerogels	692	5000, 96.2%	6 M KOH	244.4 (at 0.2)	—	—	• Normal specific capacitance	
162

• Good cycle life
Chitosan-based carbon	1129.6	5000, 96.18%	KOH	316 (at 0.2)	—	—	• Good cycle stability	
82

• Moderate specific capacitance
• High specific surface area
N/NiOx co-doped hierarchical porous carbon nanosheets	1847.4	10000, 85.61%	6 M KOH	614.6 (at 1)	240.9	20.3	• Very high specific capacitance	
57

• Large specific surface area
• Excellent cycle stability
Chitosan-derived N-doped carbon	1223 ± 120	—	KOH and KHCO3	(406 ± 36) (at 0.5)	200	(23.6 ± 3.1)	• High specific capacitance	
228

• Good energy density
• Large specific surface area
N-containing chitosan-based carbon	1000–1100	5000, 100%	1 M H2SO4	19.5 μF cm−2	—	—	• Excellent cycle capability	
46

• Good specific capacitance
Boric acid-mediated B,N co-doped chitosan-derived porous carbons	710	4000, 99.4%	—	176 (at 3)	—	—	• Moderate capacitance	
195

• Well cycle stability
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) decorated pencil graphite electrodes (PGEs) with the assimilation of chitosan	—	1500, 92.8%	0.1 M HCl–KCl	367.16 mF cm−2 (at 1 mA cm−2)	—	—	• High specific areal capacitance	
229

• Green synthesis technique
Hierarchically porous carbons derived from meta organic framework/chitosan composites	2375	10000, 79%	1.0 M H2SO4	199.9 (at 0.05)	—	—	• Non-toxic electrolyte used	
219

• High specific surface area
Chitosan/reduced graphene oxide composite	—	10000, 92.57%	1 M H2SO4	274 (at 0.5)	50	8.4	• Excellent cycle stability	
230

• Moderate specific capacitance
Chitosan and chitin-based hybrid composites	2630	—	0.2 M H2SO4	542.63 (at 0.1)	—	—	• Supreme specific surface area	
16

• High specific capacitance
Chitosan–ZnO/polyaniline ternary nanocomposite electrode	116.25	1000, 80%	1.0 M H2SO4	541.03 (at 175 mA g−1)	—	—	• Large specific capacitance	
198

• Lower surface area
• Moderate cycle stability
Zn-doped iron oxide/graphene oxide/chitosan nanocomposite electrode	—	—	1.0 M H2SO4	830	—	—	• Excellent specific capacitance	
206

• Cost-effective, non-toxic
Chitosan–graphene–polyaniline ternary electrode (CG3P)	—	1000, 88%	1 M H2SO4	1519 (ref. 1)	—	—	• Ultra large specific capacitance	
47

• Excellent thermal stability (up to 800 °C)
• Great cycle stability
Chitosan–polyaniline binary electrode (CP5)	
	1000, 69%	1 M H2SO4	939	
	
	• Great specific capacitance	
47

• Superior thermal stability (up to 800 °C)
• Lower cycle stability
Chitosan/graphene oxide-MWCNT/polyaniline (CS/GM/PANI) ternary nanocomposite	—	500, 96%	0.5 M Na2SO4	609.2	—	—	• High specific capacitance at a higher scan rate	
43

• Larger current density as a result of two charge storage mechanisms (faradic and electrostatic)
MnO2–chitosan hybrid nanocomposite	—	400, 3%	—	424	—	—	• High specific capacitance	
197

• Comparatively poor stability
• Superior rate capability
Chitosan–SnO2–polyaniline ternary hybrid composite	—	—	1 M H2SO4	179.20 (at 0.1)	32250	8.96	• Excellent power density	
205

• Low specific capacitance
Chitosan–polyaniline hybrid electrode	—	—	1 M H2SO4	84.34 (at 0.1)	15180	4.21	• Ultra-higher power density	
205

Graphite oxide/cobalt hydroxide/chitosan ternary composite	—	2000, 80%	—	402	—	—	• High specific capacitance	
209

• Low cost, mass production supercapacitors	

• Fast diffusion of electrolyte ions into the nanostructured materials
Chitosan-based partially graphitic nanoflake-like carbon/Fe2O3 magnetic composites	—	2000, 83%	2 M KOH	299 (at 0.5)	1598	135	• Demonstrates strong singular crystalline property	
231

• Moderate capacitance with superior recycling durability
• Green and reproducible
Graphene oxide–chitosan composite hydrogel derived porous carbon/graphene composites	—	2000, 96%	6 M KOH	320 (at 1)	700	13.95	• Good power density and specific capacitance at high current density	
44

• Great power density
• High cycling stability
Chitosan-derived hierarchical porous carbon	3532	20000, 99%	6 M KOH	455	226.8	20.6	• Ultra-large surface area	
213

• High energy and power density
• Excellent cycle stability
Chitosan-based hydrogel-derived hierarchical porous carbon	1743	81%	KOH and Na2SO4	165 (at 0.5)	192	7.54	• Excellent specific surface area	
225

• High rate capability
• One step and cost-effective synthesis method
Heteroatom-doped hierarchical porous carbon aerogels	1475	—	1 M H2SO4	416 (at 1)	25	6.36	• High specific surface area	
223

• Large specific capacitance
• Low equivalent series resistance

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) hierarchical porous carbon from the chitosan sample, (b) chitosan derived HPC-0.50, (c) schematic representation of a comparison of specific capacitance among C-HPC, YP-50, and the control sample in a three-electrode system. Graphical representation of (d) change in the capacitance with respect to the cycle number at a current density of 20 A g−1, the inner curve shows the charging and discharging cycles in the maiden and last three cycles. Graphitic diagrams of CHPC-0.50, (e) the CV curves current density at the potential range of −1.2 V to −0.2 V, (f) charging–discharging curves showing the potential vs. time at varying current densities, (g) capacitance retention of the initial capacitance after 10000 cycles at a current density of 10 A g−1 (a), (c), and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b), (e), (f), and (g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Graphical representation of various types of chitosan-derived porous carbon nanosheet electrodes' electrochemical performance. (a) GCD curves showing the specific capacitance against varying current densities of NCNS, NiOx/NCNS-700, 800, 900 electrodes, (b) GCD curves at different current densities of NCNS, NiOx/NCNS-700, 800, 900 electrodes, (c) CV curves displaying electrochemical performance of the CS/His-B electrode with the Na2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 between varying voltage windows, (d) energy density against a power density of the CS/His-B solid state supercapacitor, (e) GCD curves of voltage vs. time of the CS/His-B electrode at varying current densities, (f) capacitance retention after 100000 cycles of CS/His-B fabricated symmetric supercapacitor with 6 M KOH electrolyte at a current density of 2.5 A g−1, (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2020, IOP Publishing Ltd (c)–(f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrochemical performance of chitosan-derived carbon aerogels, (a) specific capacitance retention of the three electrodes (CNS-800, CNSK-800, and CNSP-800) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte after 10000 cycles, (b) capacitance content of EDLC and pseudocapacitance, (c) typical Nyquist plot of the CNS-800, CNSK-800, and CNSP-800, (d) CV curves of current vs. potential of CNS-800 at different scan rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of (a) solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) production by the solution casting technique, (b) ion transfer through the ion hopping model predominant in SPEs, (c) ion hopping model with the plasticizer in SPE, where the incorporation of the plasticizer provides a higher number of complexation sites and facilitates conduction.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of proton transport mechanisms of (a) adenine (A-CS) and (b) adenosine monophosphate (AMP-CS)-grafted chitosan membranes. AMP-functionalized chitosan membranes possess improved proton conductivity because of the presence of four conjugated nitrogen atoms in the purine structure, which act as a proton-transport vehicle by facilitating protons to hop from one purine ring to another. Change in the proton conductivity with temperature from 20 to 100 °C of (c) chitosan (CS), adenine-grafted chitosan (A-CS), and nanocellulose (NCC)-blended A-CS membrane (A-CS-NCC), (d) adenosine monophosphate-grafted chitosan (AMP-CS), nanocellulose-blended AMP-CS membrane (AMP-CS-NCC), and Nafion-117. A-CS-NCC-0.5, A-CS-NCC-1, and A-CS-NCC-2 represent the volume ratio of A-CS and NCC, which is, 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:2, respectively. Similarly, AMP-CS-NCC-1 and AMP-CS-NCC-2 represent the volume ratio of AMP-CS and NCC of 1:1 and 1:2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Graphical illustration of the chitosan–polyacrylamide (PAAm) hydrogel where crosslinking occurs due to the physical interaction among various polar molecules (e.g., H3PO4 and H2O) and groups present in whole electrolyte system. (b) Study on the specific capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency of the fabricated supercapacitors with 104 cycles of charge and discharge at a current density of 3.0 A g−1. The study of specific capacitance and capacitance retention (c), capacitance retention with higher cycles (d), charge–discharge curves (e) under various stresses. Study of specific capacitance and capacitance retention (f), capacitance retention with higher cycles (g), charge–discharge curve (h) under various bending angles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) the skeletal fragment of lanthella basta marine demosponge, (b) isolated tube-like filigree chitinous scaffold, (c) fabricated membrane (CS/CH membrane) from chitosan and chitinous scaffold where the location of the chitinous network is clearly visible, (d) SEM image of the CS/CH membrane, (e) AC impedance curves of the CS and CS/CH membrane using 1 M LiOAc as the electrolyte in the EIS spectrum, shift in the curve for the CS/CH membrane toward a lower impedance value, Z indicates better electrochemical properties of the CS/CH membrane, (f) stress–strain curves of the CS and CS/CH membrane, (g) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the supercapacitor utilizing the CS/CH membrane electrolyte at the 1st and 10000th cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Graphical representation of (a) the CV curves at 20 mV s−1 indicates good capacitive behavior of the fabricated supercapacitor using CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel as the electrolyte, (b) specific capacitances of the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel compared to the PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel at different current densities, (c) the GCD curves at 0.5 A g−1 show highly reversible charging–discharging behavior, (d) Nyquist plots exhibit that the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 electrolyte has lower impedance, (e) stress–strain curves of the CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 and PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel electrolytes indicates much higher mechanical properties after grafting with carboxylated chitosan, (f) comparison of the ionic conductivity and liquid electrolyte uptake rate between the grafted CYCTS-g-PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel and the PAM–Li2SO4 hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 


Chitosan, PEO, NH4NO3	Solid	1.02 × 10−4	—	—	—	—	—	• Demonstrates potential application of the CS–PEO blend in SC	
240

• Homogeneous polymer blend
• Exhibits high conductivity and mechanical strength compared to pure polymer
Chitosan, PEO, NH4NO3, EC	Solid	(2.06 ± 0.39) × 10−3	1.75	Graphite, carbon black	0.133	—	—	• Reduction in viscosity of the host polymer due to plasticizer addition	
187

• Increases the mobility of ions
• Conductivity increases
Chitosan, PEO NH4SCN	Solid	2.11 × 10−4	2.43	Activated carbon	3.80 (50 mV s−1)	—	—	• Higher electrochemical stability	
62

• Chance of increasing conductivity by incorporating plasticizer
Chitosan, PVA, NH4NO3, EC	Solid	1.63 × 10−3	1.7	Activated carbon	27.1–16.7	—	—	• Good electrochemical stability	
58

• Excellent conductivity
• Almost reversible charging and discharging
• Works as separator
Chitosan, starch, NH4Cl, glycerol	Solid	(5.11 ± 1.60)×10−4	1.65	Activated carbon	3.44	
	
	• Complete replacement of the synthetic polymer	
188

• Biodegradable
Chitosan, starch, NH4Br, EC	Solid	(1.44 ± 0.51) × 10−3	—	—	—	—	—	• Biodegradable	
245

• No use of the synthetic polymer
• High ion dissociation
• High conductivity
Chitosan, corn starch, NH4I,	Solid	(3.04 ± 0.32) × 10−4	—	—	—	—	—	• Use of easily available corn starch	
244

• Lower dissociation energy of NH4I compared to NH4Br and NH4Cl
• Possibility of increasing conductivity by adding plasticizer
Chitosan, starch, NH4SCN	Solid	(1.30 ± 0.34) × 10−4	—	—	—	—	—	• Very low degree of crystallinity	
246

• Higher percentage of free ions
• Low activation energy for ion transportation (0.28 eV)
Chitosan, dextran, NH4F	Solid	1 × 10−3	1.7	Activated carbon	12.4	428	1.4	• Almost constant energy density and capacitance up to 100 cycles	
189

• Gradual reduction in power density with higher cycle
• Low energy density due to the higher dissociation energy of NH4F
Chitosan, dextran, NH4Br	Solid	1.64 × 10−3	1.54	Activated carbon	132	
	
	• Suitable for use in EDLC	
234

• High specific capacitance
Chitosan, dextran NH4SCN, Al2O3 nanofiller	Solid	5.86 × 10−4	—	—	—	
	—	• Higher dissociation of the salt by nanofillers	
60

• Increases conductivity by improving H+ transportation
Chitosan, dextran, NH4PF6, glycerol	Solid	3.04 × 10−4	1.5	Activated carbon	102.9	2741.2	11.6	• Very high energy and power density	
66

• Obtained the result of commercialization
• Electrolyte depletion due to recrystallization of salts
• Gradual reduction in energy and power density with an increase in resistance
Chitosan, glycerol, NH4NO3	Solid	3.21 × 10−3	2.32	Activated carbon	128	2630(max.)	18(max.)	• Good conductivity with higher decomposition voltage	
65

• Extremely high specific capacitance, power, and energy density with a longer cycle life
Chitosan, methyl cellulose, glycerol, NH4I	Solid	6.65 × 10−4	2.2	Activated carbon	9.97–9.70	578.55	1.1	• Extra ion transport site by adding glycerol	
247

• More salt dissociation
• Low energy power density and specific capacitance than other methyl cellulose-based systems
Chitosan, methyl cellulose, NH4SCN	Solid	2.81 × 10−3	1.8	Activated carbon	66.3	1666.6	8.63	• High specific capacitance and energy density	
183

• Good ionic conductivity
• Decrease in energy, power density, and specific capacitance due to electrolyte depletion
• Low cycle life
Chitosan, methyl cellulose, NH4F	Solid	2.96 × 10−3	2.3	Activated carbon	82.3 max. 64.1 avg.	1282	9.3	• High energy density than the previous one	
237

• Good ionic conductivity
• Decrease in the energy power density and specific capacitance due to electrolyte depletion
• Low cycle life
Chitosan, glycerol, NH4I, Zn metal complex	Solid	1.17 × 10−4	1.37	
	36	480	4.1	• Increase in amorphous portion due to the Zn metal complex	
248

• Reduction in the energy and power density
Chitosan, glycerol, NH4F, Zn metal complex	Solid	1.71 × 10−3	2.25	Activated carbon	69.7–77.9	1041.7–248.2	7.8–8.5	• High electrochemical stability	
180

• High amorphous portion and high conductivity by incorporating the metal complex
• Gradual increase in the ESR, decrease in the power density with higher cycles
• Rise in energy density and specific capacitance with higher cycles
Chitosan, adenine	Solid	3.09 × 10−2	—	—	—	—	—	• Very high proton conductivity	
145

• Increase in the dimensional stability and mechanical stability by incorporating nanocellulose
Chitosan, adenosine monophosphate	Solid	4.62 × 10−2	—	—	—	—	—	• Very high conductivity with complete biodegradability	
145

• Provides a large number of hoping sites	

• Very high proton conductivity	

• Increase in the dimensional stability and mechanical stability by incorporating nanocellulose with a reduction in proton conduction	

Chitosan, methyl cellulose, LiBF4	Solid	3.74 × 10−6	—	—	—	—	—	• Low lattice energy of LiBF4 compared to other Li+ containing salts	
252

• Low conductivity at low frequency due to the accumulation of ions at the electrodes
• Risk of decomposition and HF formation
Chitosan, LiOAc, oleic acid	Solid	∼10−5	
	
	
	
	
	• Low opposite potential due to low H2O polarization	
255

• Low conductivity
Chitosan, PEO LiClO4	Solid	7.34 × 10−4	2.24	Activated carbon	
	302–321	1.07–0.94	• Reduction of power and energy density with higher cycle	
256

• Good electrochemical window
Chitosan, PEG, EC, PC, LiClO4	Solid	1 × 10−4	
	Activated carbon	47 (10 mV s−1)	
	
	• Good mechanical strength with moderate conductivity	
185

• Biodegradable by hydrolysis, followed by microbial degradation
• Good capacitance
Chitosan, LiCO2CH3, glycerol	Solid	5.19 × 10−4	1.8	Activated carbon	132.8	2591	18.4	• Very high specific capacitance, power and energy density	
253

• Low equivalent series resistance
• Increase in the specific capacitance, energy density, and efficiency with higher cycle
Mg(CF3SO3)2 CS–PVA, glycerol	Solid	1.016 × 10−5	2.4	Activated carbon	32.69 (10 mV s−1)	—	—	• Low conductivity	
238

• High electrochemical stability
• Low mobility of anions due to the higher ionic radius
• Not favorable for EDLC fabrication despite having very low lattice energy of Mg(CF3SO3)2
Chitosan, Mg(CH3COO)2, glycerol	Solid	1.08 × 10−4	2.4	Activated carbon	39.72 (10 mV s−1)	
	8.8	• High electrochemical stability	
165

• Excellent cyclability
• EDLC efficiency 97–99%
• Stable specific capacitance throughout the charge–discharge cycle
Chitosan, glycerol, MgCl2	Solid	1.03 × 10−3	1.8	Activated carbon	50 (10 mV s−1)	550	13.1	• Comparatively low electrochemical stability	
61

• Higher conductivity, capacitance, energy, and power density
• Decreasing in the specific capacitance with cycle number
Chitosan, AgNO3, Al2O3 nanofiller, glycerol	Solid	3.7 × 10−4	2.1	Activated carbon	47.78 at 10 mV s−1	—	—	• Higher reduction tendency of silver ions	
259

• Formation of Ag nanoparticles
• Depletion of electrolytes
Carboxylated chitosan non-covalent crosslinking by HCl	Gel	8.69 × 10−2	
	Activated carbon	45.9 (at 0.5 A g−1)	226.6	5.2	• High conductivity and flexibility with higher capacity of electrolyte absorption	
64

• Demonstrates the potential of carboxylated chitosan
• Gradual reduction in capacitance with increasing current density
Carboxylated chitosan and PVA	Gel	2.561 × 10−2	
	Vinyl alcohol and carboxylated chitosan network	325 mF cm−1	
	
	• Flexible transparent membrane	
261

• Extremely high conductivity
• Fabrication of both the electrode and the electrolyte
Chitosan, ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, LiClO4	Gel	5.5 × 10−3	—	Polypyrrole	120 (10 mV s−1)	—	—	• Combines mechanical strength of the polymer with the electrochemical properties of organic electrolytes	
235

• Advantageous for electrode–electrolyte interface stability
• Fairly good specific capacitance
• Excellent biodegradability in the soil burial test
Chitosan, LiOAc solution	Gel	—	—	Activated carbon	88 75(10)	554	7.91	• Weak contact between the electrode and the electrolyte	
236

• Low electrochemical as well as mechanical properties
Chitosan–chitin scaffold, LiOAc solution	Gel	—	—	Activated carbon	97 83(10)	563	8.89	• 4–5 times increased mechanical properties with better electrochemical properties than simple chitosan polymer	
236

• Much stiffer and durable
• Extremely good cycle life
• Better contact between electrode and electrolyte
Chitosan-graft-polyacrylamide–Li2SO4	Gel	1.74 × 10−2	1.4	Activated carbon	
	350.3	8.7	• Very high mechanical electrochemical properties with extremely high conductivity	
63

• High energy and power density

 	Fig. 16  (a) Representative drawing demonstrating the impact of chitosan additive (yellow circle) in two identical electrodes NPC and NPC-2. The addition of additives results in a more porous structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2019, A Journal of Asian Chemical Editorial Society. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of chitosan-based hierarchical porous carbon with CH3COOH additive and control sample without the addition of additive. CH3COOH addition increases the specific surface area drastically. Adapted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (BDC: terephthalic acid; DMF: N,N-dimethylformamide; CS/CA-2: 2 ml citric acid solution of chitosan; RT: room temperature; MOF: metal organic framework; Ar: argon gas flow; HTC: high temperature carbonization).	 

 	Fig. 17  Graphical illustration of the effect of the salt on the various properties of the fabricated electrolytes: (a) change in the degree of crystallinity with respect to chitosan and salt composition in the polymer blend, data collected from ref. 299, (b) change in the conductivity and activation energy with respect to the salt composition for the chitosan–dextran–NH4SCN electrolyte system where 60% chitosan with the dextran blend has been reported to exhibit minimum crystallinity. Further investigation gives minimum crystallinity with a maximum conductivity at 40% NH4SCN concentration, adapted with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (c) Change in the conductivity and degree of crystallinity with respect to the salt composition in the chitosan (CS)–methyl cellulose (MC)–NH4SCN electrolyte system, data collected from ref. 301. (d) Comparison of the conductivity between the electrolytes developed by incorporating H+- and Li+-containing salts. The smaller size of Li+ provides higher conductivity compared to H+-containing electrolytes while other components are similar, data adopted from ref. 62, 189, 256 and 258.	 

 	Fig. 18  Illustration of the FESEM micrograph of (a) 10 wt%, (b) 20 wt%, (c) 40 wt%, (d) > 40 wt% NH4SCN in the chitosan–dextran polymer blend. Incorporation of 10% NH4SCN in the chitosan–dextran polymer blend results in a homogeneous and smooth surface, which is an indication of the salt to be solvated in the host polymer blend. The amorphous domain increases with increasing salt percentage in (b) and the addition of 40% NH4SCN gives the lowest crystallinity, as demonstrated in figure (c); further addition causes salts to be recrystallized on the surface (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  Illustration of the SEM images of (a) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 blend without the plasticizer (S5, starch–chitosan and NH4NO3 composition is 75 wt% and 25 wt%, respectively), (b) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 10% glycerol, (c) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 20% glycerol, (d) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 35% glycerol (P7), (e) chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 40% glycerol. Dark regions in the images denote the amorphous part of electrolytes. In (b), the addition of 10% glycerol causes the formation of the amorphous region, which is increased in (c) due to the increase in the plasticizer amount to 20%. Besides, links in the polymer host create additional paths for ionic conduction. The addition of 35% glycerol in (d) gives maximum amorphous properties with enhanced number of links. Further, the addition of glycerol in (e) causes too much links among the plasticizer molecules, resulting in a salt to form the agglomerates. (f) Linear sweep voltammogram at 5 mV s−1 exhibits an increase in the electrochemical stability of the fabricated electrolyte with increasing glycerol content. (S5 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 0% glycerol, P3 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 15% glycerol, P5 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 25% glycerol, P7 = chitosan–starch–NH4NO3 + 35% glycerol). Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 20  Comparison of performance among various currently developed high performance electrodes and chitosan-based electrodes (cycle numbers performed for an electrode system have been given on top of each column). The maximum specific capacitance is exhibited by the chitosan–graphene–PANI composite electrode, whereas maximum capacitance retention is achieved by the B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets, and CNT-coated MnO2. Data collected from ref. 47, 48, 57, 221 and 306–308.	 

 	Fig. 21  Comparative study among chitosan-based electrolytes and other electrolytes including aqueous, organic, and ionic liquid. Chitosan-based electrolytes have exhibited good electrochemical stability, which lies in between that of ionic liquid and aqueous electrolyte. Although the ionic conductivity of these electrolytes is lower than that of the aqueous electrolyte, this is fairly high compared to organic and ionic liquid electrolytes. Data collected from ref. 63, 65, 240 and 309.	 

 	Fig. 22  Scatter plot demonstrating the energy and power density of the recently developed chitosan-based supercapacitors. Data obtained from ref. 261, Tables 3 and 4. Every symbol represents the individual supercapacitor system.	 
Footnote
† The authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
