Single cells in nanoshells for the functionalization of living cells  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR08556G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR08556G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3112-3129Single cells in nanoshells for the functionalization of living cells

        
          
            Wei 
            Geng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Jiang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Cao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Xuan 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ali K. 
            Yetisen
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Yu 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Bao-Lian 
            Su
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, 122, Luoshi Road, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mail: xyyang@whut.edu.cn; baoliansu@whut.edu.cn
bLaboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry (CMI), University of Namur, 61, rue de Bruxelles, B-5000 Namur, Belgium. E-mail: bao-lian.su@unamur.be
cSchool of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
eSchool of Chemical Engineering, the University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
fInstitute of Translational Medicine, Mindelsohn Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TH, UK
Received 
      16th November 2017
    , Accepted 10th January 2018First published on 10th January 2018AbstractInspired by the characteristics of cells in live organisms, new types of hybrids have been designed comprising live cells and abiotic materials having a variety of structures and functionalities. The major goal of these studies is to uncover hybridization approaches that promote cell stabilization and enable the introduction of new functions into living cells. Single-cells in nanoshells have great potential in a large number of applications including bioelectronics, cell protection, cell therapy, and biocatalysis. In this review, we discuss the results of investigations that have focused on the synthesis, structuration, functionalization, and applications of these single-cells in nanoshells. We describe synthesis methods to control the structural and functional features of single-cells in nanoshells, and further develop their applications in sustainable energy, environmental remediation, green biocatalysis, and smart cell therapy. Perceived limitations of single-cells in nanoshells have been also identified.Wei GengWei Geng is currently a Ph.D. student at the Laboratory of Living Materials under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su and Prof. Dr Xiao-Yu Yang from Wuhan University of Technology, China. His current work includes the design and synthesis of nanocomposites, porous materials, biomaterials and catalysis.Li WangLi Wang is currently doing his postdoctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su. He received his Master of Engineering degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology in 2013 and his PhD degree from the University of Namur in 2017. His current work includes the design and synthesis of biohybrid materials for energy, environment, and biocatalysis.Xiao-Yu YangXiao-Yu Yang earned his Ph.D. degree from Jilin University (co-educated at the University of Namur, Belgium). After post-doctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Bao-Lian Su, he worked as a “Chargéde Recherches” at the F.N.R.S. (National Foundation of Scientific Research) since 2008. He is currently working at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Material Synthesis and Processing at Wuhan University of Technology as a Chutian Professor and he is also a visiting professor at Harvard University. His research is aimed at nanocatalysis, self-assembly technology and bio-nanotechnology.Bao-Lian SuBao-Lian Su is a member of the Royal Academy of Belgium (class of science). He is a Full Professor and Director of the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Namur, Belgium. He is currently an “Expert of the State” in the frame of the Chinese Central Government program of “Thousands Talents” and “Changjiang Professor” located at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His current research fields include synthesis, property study and molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, biomaterials, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.
1. Introduction
Cells as the most basic units in living systems are responsible for conducting the essential processes of life.1 The nature of cells is reflected in the selectivity, activity and self-regulation and reprogramability of biochemical processes.2 The capability to create non-natural functions in cells may have technological and scientific significance.3 This review focuses on single-cells in nanoshells, in which single-cells are coated by nanomaterials, in order to enhance the stability and activity of the cells and provide the cells with some abiotic functions often completely different from their original specializations.
Cell coating is a hybridization approach inspired by encapsulation protocols that cells use in nature to enhance their durability and function.4 Hybridization is a common phenomenon in living organisms that enables soft and fragile cells to adapt to constantly changing environments.5 This is exemplified by foraminifera within uniform hybrid shells,6 embryophytes with tunable hybrid pores,7 cells in cavities with interconnected nanochannels in bone,8 and the mineralized state of the influenza virus in the avian intestine.9
By taking advantage of self-assembly, nanomaterials can form a variety of nanostructures that can be coupled to cell surfaces to generate single-cells in nanoshells.10 Single-cells in nanoshells have features of both biological and abiotic systems.11–18 This tutorial review provides a comprehensive summary of single-cells in nanoshells comprised of single-cells and nanomaterials. The capability to develop single-cells in nanoshells that perform non-natural functions can have significance in energy production,19,20 environment remediation,21 biocatalysis,22 and biomedicine.23
Several earlier reviews of single-cells in nanoshells have focused on methods, hybridizing materials, and applications.16,24–26 In the present review, features associated with the advantages of single-cells in nanoshells are described. Factors affecting the synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells are discussed. Moreover, the surface nanostructures of the single-cells in nanoshells are presented, which are constructed by building blocks ranging from 0D to 1D to 2D and to 3D. Importantly, the photochemical, electrical conductivity, magnetism, heat resistance, and stimulus-responding properties of single-cells in nanoshells that govern their new functions are discussed. Finally, the applications of single-cells in nanoshells are emphasized in sustainable energy, clean environment, green catalysis, and smart therapy.
1.1. Brief history of nanocoated cells
The history of coated cells can date back to around the 6th millennium BC when a mixture of wild yeasts and natural materials were used and manipulated to food-producing applications in brewing in ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia and China, although it was a very rough technique in comparison with modern technology.27 For example, “Jiu-Qu” of China is a microbiota containing various bacteria and yeast cells entrapped in starchy beans and it is used even now, indicating the application values of cell–material mixtures along with the development of human society.28 This mixture can be employed to increase the fermentation rate in alcohol brewing. In the 1910s, immobilized enzymes were developed to have both biological activity and structural stability and this technique was also applied to the immobilization of whole cells.29 Cell encapsulation using porous materials was first described in the 1930s.30 This process not only results in the protection of cells present in harsh environments, but it also provides a mechanism to exchange mass, energy, and information between cells and their environments.31 Since 1930, the encapsulating materials, mainly including hydrogels and a sol–gel matrix, have been investigated in depth and developed for high biocompatibility, high stability, low toxicity, and relatively low cost.32,33 In the 2000s, nanotechnology-based single-cell encapsulation methods were developed to create shells surrounding cells individually. These advances led to the functionalization of single-cells at the nanoscale,34 and it provided promising platforms to investigate the basic molecular structures and processes on cell surfaces. Following these seminal studies, methods were developed to surround cells with hierarchically structured shells to introduce abiotic photochemical, electrochemical, magnetic, and thermal properties for the utilization and manipulation of the cells.3 Furthermore, advances in the understanding of single-cells in nanoshells derived by cell surface functionalization will be invaluable in controlling and utilizing living cells. The National Microbiome Initiative was launched in 2016 in addition to the International Microbiome Initiative and the Unified Microbiome Initiative in the United States.35 Even more, thousands of papers have been published in this research field with the number constantly increasing every year in fundamental research, for example, over 1000 papers per year in the last ten years. Meanwhile, many international programs and projects have made starts in practical applications.35
1.2 The advantageous features of single-cells in nanoshells
The most important feature of single-cells in nanoshells is their “living activity”, which means that the cells maintain living functions, while the nanomaterials provide their abiotic functions during forming, processing, manipulating and utilizing the hybrids. These features have stimulated the development of single-cells in nanoshells. The detailed advantageous features of single-cells in nanoshells are discussed as following.

1.2.1 Biocompatible synthesis. 
Considering the maintenance of living cell functions, a biocompatible condition is the primary requirement in the synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells because of the bio-structural fragility and environmental sensitivity of cells. These requirements have stimulated the development of methods to fabricate single-cells in nanoshells that employ green and bio-mimetic approaches. Almost all types of cells can be coated to form single-cells in nanoshells. Successful examples include microorganisms (Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, etc.),12 plant cells (Arabidopsis thaliana, Coronilla vaginalis, etc.),12 mammalian cells (HeLa cells, Jurkat cells, etc.)36 and so on. After the coating, the original living functions of the cells can be extended as the functions of the single-cells in nanoshells, thus contributing various applications.


1.2.2 Tunable surface nanostructures. 
Compared to the original living cells, single-cells in nanoshells are composed of cells and the coating nanomaterials. In nature, the cell surface shows a close relationship with the environmental adaption and communication capability of cells. The surface nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells address the stability, activity and functionality of the enclosed living cells. The surface nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells are tunable and can be adjusted by the synthesis approaches and the choice of building blocks of nanomaterials.37–40 This demonstrates potential regarding oriented cell surface manipulation and precise cell metabolism and behavior control, which may result in a high efficiency in whole-cell based applications.


1.2.3 Adjustable multiple functions. 
In nanocoated single-cells, hybridizing nanomaterials provide the living cells with new abiotic functions. A series of nontoxic materials such silica, titania, gold, carbon, mineral, iron oxide, polymer, and metal–organic frameworks has been used for single-cells in nanoshells design.41,42 The physicochemical properties of nanomaterials contribute to the endowed abiotic functions of nanocoated single-cells, which the living cells do not possess originally, including heat tolerance, UV irradiation resistance, electrical conductivity, magnetism, etc. In addition, some specific nanomaterials not only provide abiotic functions, but also take part in the metabolism of the cells to enhance the cells’ living functions. For example, cells hybridized with cadmium sulfide nanoparticles demonstrate an enhanced hydrogen production, and cells with polydopamine nanocoatings present high biocatalytic activity and stability in whole-cell based biocatalytic reduction.


1.2.4 Unique applications. 
Single-cells in nanoshells have demonstrated a large number of potential applications. The use of encapsulation supports for single-cells has found industrial applications in the context of whole-cell based biocatalysts.43 Single-cell encapsulation also limits the overgrowth of entrapped cells and, hence, it improves the utilization of cells in nanodevices.44 The secondary introduction of functional nanomaterials not only benefits cell protection and stability, but it also endows cells with new non-natural functions,45 thus providing an opportunity for manipulating cellular metabolism in a single cell.23 In addition, integrating living cells with extracellular microsystems can contribute to the amplification of subtle biological signals in biochips, biosensors, and biofuel cells.15,46

2 Controlled synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells
2.1 Method to single-cells in nanoshells
Single-cells in nanoshells are formed in the presence of living cells, which is the most obvious distinction in comparison with other kinds of hybrid materials. The basic interactions between the living cells and abiotic materials are the original driving forces to induce the formation of single-cells in nanoshells;47,48 these interactions can be systematically categorized into adsorption, covalent bonding and matrix entrapment (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Development of coated cells and the major approaches for the synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells. 

2.1.1 Adsorption. 
Adsorption is a facile and universal way to hybridize cells with nanomaterials to form single-cells in nanoshells. This hybridization depends on the weak interaction forces between cells and nanomaterials including hydrogen bonding and electrostatic forces. The weak interaction forces contribute to the self-assembly of building blocks of nanomaterials on the cell surface to form artificial layers coating around individual single-cells. Layer-by-Layer (LbL) is a typical approach for the single-cells in nanoshells design that refers to the assembly of multiple layers by alternating adsorption of different building blocks onto the surface of single-cells which are considered as colloidal particles.49 Therefore, adsorption avails the single-cells in nanoshells design on the basis of all kinds of functional single-cells. However, the ambiguous interaction sites of the cell surface in the adsorption demonstrate difficulty in precise cell stability and activity control.


2.1.2 Covalent bonding. 
Covalent binding is an effective single-cells in nanoshells design approach, which couples the specific chemical groups on the cell surface and the building blocks of the nanomaterials through ligand–receptor reactions. A successful example of covalent binding has been established using polydopamine binding with amine and/or thiol moieties of cell surface glycoproteins.50 Also calmodulin proteins on cell surfaces have been found suitable for preparing graphene/Au/Ca2+ shells.39 Compared with the adsorption method, the covalent bonding method presents a stronger combination between the cell surface and nanomaterials.51–53 The stability linkage of living cells and materials can prevent the leaching of the nanomaterials from the cell during the practical applications, thus prolonging the lifetime of nanocoated single-cells.50 In addition, the specific active sites for linking the nanomaterials and cell surface supply an opportunity to investigate the basic molecular mechanism on the cell surface. However, thousands of cells have thousands of different cell surface compositions, which makes it difficult to popularize one type of covalent bonding into a universal method for single-cells in nanoshells design.


2.1.3 Matrix entrapment. 
Matrix entrapment is a promising pathway for single-cells in nanoshells design, in that various types of polymeric or inorganic frameworks are directly formed around the single-cells through polymerization, mineralization, cross-linking or coordination, similar to the cell being entrapped in a cage. Polymers, minerals, hydrogels and metal–organic frameworks have been intensively studied as host matrices.54–57 The cell-encapsulating matrix is considered as the most stable material to be used for the single-cells in nanoshells design due to its in situ formation processes. More importantly, matrix entrapment can prevent the cellular damage caused by the interactions between the cell surface and nanomaterials. However, the formation of a matrix strongly depends on the surrounding microenvironment of single-cells associated with cell specification, thus leading to the complexity of this hybridization method design for cells of different types.

2.2 Effect factors in synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells
To design structured and functional single-cells in nanoshells without compromise on the original living activities, many issues need to be addressed in the cell–material hybridization which mainly includes the properties of cell surfaces and coating materials, and the synthesis conditions. Improved understanding of these impact factors has been an emerging need for designing single-cells in nanoshells to obtain high efficiency applications. The effects of cell surface and synthesis conditions on the properties of the generated hybrid-single cells are discussed next.

2.2.1 Effects of surface charges. 
Cell surface charges caused by membrane potentials and functional groups can be utilized advantageously to promote electrostatic interactions with charged nanomaterials during the fabrication process of single-cells in nanoshells. In the typical layer-by-layer (LbL) synthetic approach, positively and negatively charged material layers are alternately deposited on the cell surface creating a hierarchical structure.26 The single-cells in nanoshells construction can also take advantage of the interactions of the mutual attraction of the same types of charges on the material and cell surface with assistance of an intervening oppositely charged ions layer. For example, negatively charged cell surfaces are attracted electrostatically to negatively charged nanoaggregates through intervening cationic ions (M+) forming an electrical triple layer.58–60 These types of interactions have no obvious effect on the intrinsic characteristics of the charge of the cell surface. Consequently, cell surface damage caused by the presence of excess positive charges is minimized.61 Moreover, the charge density of the nanomaterials used in this approach, independent of whether a positive–negative, negative–negative or positive–positive platform is employed, should not be excessive.62 The reason for this is that the high charge density of the micro-environment surrounding cells could decrease cell activity or even cause the destruction of cells.63


2.2.2 Effects of surface functional groups. 
Functional groups play a large role in determining the properties of cell surfaces and distinguishing the functions of cells. For example, hydrophobic cell surfaces typically contain hydrophilic groups, which balance the osmotic pressure and help the exchange of nutrients with the exterior environment. In general, cell surfaces also contain a series of functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, amine, amide, ester and thiol groups, which can participate in the interactions with hybridizing nanomaterials, including weak interactions and covalent interactions,64 and play an important role in governing the nanostructure of single-cells in nanoshells. The strong covalent bonds in the association process leads to greater nanostructure stability of the nanocoated single-cells; nevertheless, it possibly limits conformational transitions of the cell membranes to negatively influence cell activity. In contrast, weak interactions rarely influence cell activity; however the nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells formed by the non-covalent bonding are more easily degraded.65–67


2.2.3 Effects of the surface fluidity of cells. 
The surface of living cells, a liquid state two-dimensional array composed of phospholipids, glycan, proteins, etc., has a special fluid structure owing to its dynamic and asymmetric properties. In the single-cells in nanoshells design, the fluidity of the cell surface can be used to control the interactions between cells and nanomaterials. For example, the fluidity of the cytomembrane enables the utilization of ion channels to be used advantageously for the fabrication of single-cells in nanoshells. Ca2+ has been reported to be utilized as a surface ion receptor to promote binding with gold nanoparticles and the eventual formation of the single-cells in nanoshells with graphene shells.39


2.2.4 Effects of the nanomaterials. 
Nanoparticles, nanotubes and nanosheets have been used as building blocks in the hierarchal assembly protocol for single-cells in nanoshells design with different complicated nanostructures.68–70 However, it has been pointed out that the structure of nanomaterials is a critical factor in the formation and activities of nanocoated single-cells. For example, 0D nanoparticles can penetrate into the cytoplasm of cells to disrupt the intracellular balance and further cause cell apoptosis and the deactivation of the nanocoated single-cells; 1D, 2D and 3D nanostructured materials can hardly fit with the fluid cell surface to form a perfect surrounding shell for the nanocoated single-cells due to their low flexibility and high crystallinity.


2.2.5 Effects of synthesis conditions. 
A careful control of conditions, including temperature, time, pH and solvent, is required for the design of single-cells in nanoshells with optimized activity, stability and functionality. Firstly, ambient temperature is the primary requirement for assembly processes because elevated temperatures could diminish or destroy the activities of cells and lessen the interactions between cells and materials, while low temperature (e.g., freeze-dry technique) reduces the reaction rates of polymerization and condensation of materials for hybridization.71 Secondly, biocompatibility exists only in a narrow pH range centered at 7, because large deviations of pH could lead to alterations in the charges of cell surfaces. For example, the cell surface is typically positively charged when the pH values are lower than the isoelectric point of cells.72 Notably, the abrupt change in pH is still harmful to cells. Thirdly, a proper reaction time is needed for the fabrication of single-cells in nanoshells with ideal components, morphology and nanostructure, because a long reaction time could lead to cell aggregation that will govern the morphology of single-cells in nanoshells, while a short reaction time can hardly contribute to the uniform formation of nanomaterials around individual cells. Finally, the solvent is one of the most important factors governing the synthesis of all materials. For the fabrication of single-cells in nanoshells, solvent biocompatibility is a key criterion. An aqueous solution is often chosen for the fabrication of almost all types of single-cells in nanoshells. The good dispersion of cells in water aids hybridization with nanomaterials. It is notable that culture media is often necessary so that the physiologic activities of cells be maintained.

3. Surface nanostructure of single-cells in nanoshells
In nanocoated single-cells, nanomaterials create an artificial surface on the living cells and their nanostructures can directly influence the mass and energy communication between the internal cellular unit and the external environment and affect cellular metabolism and activities.8,47 A range of surface nanostructures have been constructed by utilizing 0D, 1D and 2D pre-formed building blocks (Table 1). The connections between the surface nanostructures and the corresponding properties of single-cells in nanoshells will be discussed in detail below.
Table 1 Surface nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells categorized by the dimensions of building blocks




Dimension
Advantages
Materials
Ref.




0D
Efficient fabrication, packing porous surface structure with good mass exchange and wide choice of nanoparticles
Silica, gold, Fe3O4, LnPO4, MnO2, metal organic framework, polymer and calcium phosphate

34, 40, 54, 55, 57, 68 and 73–75



1D
High mechanical and elastic strength, good carriers for storage and release
Clay nanotube, carbon nanotube, gold nanorod and magnetic nanorod

38 and 76–78



2D
Well covering the cell, close connection for easy output of the biosignal from the cell
Graphene and graphene oxide

39 and 70



3D
Well-defined specific nanostructure, easy modification
Hydrogel

23





3.1. 0D building blocks
0D building blocks usually refer to organic monomers, inorganic precursors, ions and 0D nanoparticles. In comparison to other kinds of building blocks, using 0D building blocks facilitates controlling the properties and nanostructures in shell formation. Due to the low dimension of 0D building blocks, the surface nanostructure of the single-cells in nanoshells demonstrates a closer relationship with the formation processes of the hybridizing nanomaterials, which generally include chemical transformation and self-assembly.
Organic monomers, inorganic precursors, and ions are most-used 0D building blocks for the formation of single-cells in nanoshells during which some chemical transformations always happen. The surface nanostructure of the single-cells in nanoshells constructed by these 0D building blocks could be controlled by chemical transformations. For example, nanocoated single-cells with calcium phosphate shells have been reported to be formed by the crystallization of calcium ions and phosphate ions as 0D building blocks (Fig. 2a).40 The nanostructure of the calcium phosphates can be manipulated by adjusting the reaction conditions including the concentration of the ions, the cell density, the reaction time, etc. Calcium phosphate is suitable for biological applications owing to its biocompatibility and rigidity. Crystalline calcium phosphate, formed around individual yeast cells in a flake-like morphology, not only enhances the resistance of the cells to foreign aggressors, but also improves the living states of cells during low-temperature storage. Furthermore, silica,36,56,73,79–81 LnPO4,55 MnO2,75 metal organic framework54,82 and polymers57,83,84 have also been reported to be constructed on cell surfaces to form single-cells in nanoshells through some chemical transformation processes, which are biosilicification, biomineralization and coordination whose reaction conditions can be controlled in order to manipulate the surface nanostructure of single-cells in nanoshells.
 Fig. 2  Surface nanostructure of single-cells in nanoshells with different building blocks from 0D to 2D. (a) SEM image of S. cerevisiae with a calcium mineral coat. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of poly(L-lysine)-coated Au nanoparticles deposited on bacteria. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of a yeast cell coated with PAH/HNTs/PAH/PSS. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of a thin section of yeast cells coated with PAH/PSS/PAH/MWNTs/PAH/PSS. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of yeast cells with graphene sheets and TEM image of the cross section of the shell engineered cells. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of yeast cells with graphene oxide sheets and TEM image of the cross section of the shell engineered cells. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. The insets show detailed extracellular structures after coating. 
Nanoparticles can also serve as 0D building blocks that can be deposited on the cell surface to form shells around single-cells through self-assembly.85–88 The packing porous surface nanostructure of the single-cells in nanoshells can be adjusted to manipulate through the control on the nanoparticle self-assembly processes, contributing to the possibility of regulating the mass exchanges between the inner cytoplasm and the outer environment. Another advantage arises from the wide choice of nanoparticles that are available for functionalizing cells. For example, gold nanoparticles have been deposited on the surface of living Baccilus cereus bacterial cells to form a 0D monolayer of gold shells (Fig. 2b).37,68 The presence of gold nanoparticles on the cell surface does not negatively influence mass communication due to the packing porous nanostructure. Meanwhile, the gold nanoparticles deposited shells contribute to the conductivity of the living cell material, enabling them to be used in bioelectronic devices. Other kinds of 0D nanoparticles can also be applied to design single-cells in nanoshells with fascinating properties. For instance, magnetic nanoparticles were assembled on the surface of a bacterial biofilm, which is mainly composed of polysaccharides. This led to the formation of a shell which can offer magnetism to the nanocoated single-cells.74 Silica nanoparticles could also be deposited on the surfaces of polyelectrolyte-modified yeast cells to form uniform shells,89 which protect the living cells from high temperature culture conditions.90
3.2. 1D building blocks
Nanotubes/rods work as typical 1D building blocks to be applied for the single-cells in nanoshell construction through self-assembly processes.91 The surface of the single-cells in nanoshells demonstrates nanotube/rod assembly nanostructure. The defined orientation and flexibility of the nanotubes/rods lead to an excellent mechanical and elastic strength of the surface structures. Moreover, the nanotubes/rods have an ability of being employed as nutrient, enzyme and antibiotic carriers, leading to a storage and release capability of the nanotube assembled shells. For example, clay nanotubes can be assembled on the surface of polyelectrolyte-modified yeast cells to form an intact coating (Fig. 2c).76 Importantly, growth of the entrapped cells can be partly controlled by nutrients released from the nanotubes, so that the nanotube assembled shells lead to cell preservation and in vivo controlled drug release. Furthermore, various 1D nanomateials such as gold nanorods38 magnetic nanorods,77 carbon nanotubes (Fig. 2d),78 and clay nanotubes (Fig. 2c)76 have been applied to electronic devices and biosensors for toxicity detection. Notably, until now, the surface nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells constructed by using 1D building blocks present a short range order and long range disorder. Therefore, a great challenge remains to develop methods to control the formation of homogeneous 1D nanotube/rod assembled nanostructures on the surface of single-cells in nanoshells.
3.3. 2D building blocks
The building blocks can also be changed from low dimension 0D and 1D to 2D.92 2D building blocks have a unique planar structure which can fit perfectly on the cell surface. They can easily form an intact layer around the single-cells by self-assembly, similar to the surface nanostructures of single-cells in nanoshells formed by the biomineralization of calcium phosphate40 or the deposition of polyelectrolytes,61 which can provide the entrapped cells with good protection from harsh conditions. Moreover, the closed connection between 2D building blocks and cell surfaces leads to the possibility of outputting the chemical states of entrapped single-cells efficiently. The 2D building block-assembled nanostructure on the entrapped single-cells could facilitate applications of the nanocoated single-cells in electrochemical devices or even biofuel cells. Graphene, as a flexible 2D nanosheet material, can be utilized to coat yeast cells by self-assembly, leading to electromechanical coupling between the sheets and the cells (Fig. 2e).39,93 Formation of 2D graphene shells on the cell surfaces enables responses to cellular stimuli to be transformed into electrical signals. For example, cell volume changes accompanying exposure to alcohols lead to the formation of wrinkles in the hybrid surface, which reduces electrical conductivity and generates an electric signal. Due to its perfect fit to the cell surfaces, graphene can be assembled on cell surfaces to enhance the stability of entrapped cells to high osmotic stresses.39 Similar to graphene, graphene oxide assembles onto cell surfaces, but the resulting structures are fluid (Fig. 2f). The graphene oxide layer acts as an interface to connect organic polymers and inorganic nanoparticles which endow the hybrids with unique properties, such as fluorescence and magnetism.70
3.4. 3D building blocks
3D building blocks which possess their own 3D nanostructures show an ability to self-assemble on the cell surfaces to form single-cells in nanoshells with a hierarchical surface nanostructure. Different from other building blocks, 3D building blocks present several special advantages, such as well-defined pre-formed morphologies, easy pre-modification, and highly ordered structures. Therefore, single-cells in nanoshells formed by 3D building blocks could demonstrate a complex surface nanostructure which could endow the entrapped living cells with multiple and advanced nanofunctions. Hydrogel-nanocoated single-cells displayed the nanostructures constructed by 3-D network organic precursors, where single cells were individually encapsulated in tunable microgels, and showed advantages in therapeutics delivery.23 However, single-cells in nanoshells formed by 3D building blocks are rarely reported, because many pre-formed building blocks with 3D structures are difficult to coat and aggregate around the cell surface through weak interactions because of the decrease in surface defects and the reduction of surface energy after synthesis.
4. Function optimization of single-cells in nanoshells
In nanocoated single-cells, functional nanomaterials work in a compatible manner with living cells, so that the living states of the entrapped cells are maintained, and the cells are embodied with new functions. Nanomaterials with tunable physicochemical properties provide an indispensable platform to endow cells with new photochemicals, electrical conductivity, magnetism, heat resistance, and stimulus-responding and self-repairing functions (Table 2). Relying on the special functions of cells and abiotic materials, nanocoated single-cells not only obtain an increase in stability, but also can lead to an expansion of applications.
Table 2 Functions of single-cells in nanoshells brought by nanomaterials




Materials
Functions
Ref.




Polyelectrolyte pairs
Protection against UV radiation

94



Poly(dopamine)
Photoprotection against UV irradiation

95



CeO2 nanoparticles
Protection against UV radiation

96



Titanium oxides
Absorb UV light for efficient desulfurization

60



Lanthanide phosphate
Protection under long-term UV exposure

55



Gold nanoparticles
High conductivity at low coverage

38



Protection under UV radiation and high light radiation, and self-repairing

59



Carbon nanotube
Increase of charge transfer and sensitivity

69



Graphene
Formation of an electron conducting pathway on the surface of the cell

39



Iron nanoparticles
Exhibition of some magnetic behaviors

74



Silica
Alleviation of high light-induced photoinhibition

88



Conferring thermotolerance

90



Silica–titanium oxides
Enhancement of tolerance to thermal stress

97



Tannic acid/FeCl3
Protection of UV light irradiation, reversible collection and release by a magnetic force and pH-response providing a dynamic cell coating

66



PDMAEM-co-PPDEM/PMA-co-PMEM
Glutathione-responsive degradability

67



PMMA-co-NH2/PVPON
pH-responsive shell allowing cell growth by variation in pH

98



Spiropyran conjugated nanoparticles
Photoswitch by changing the excitation power density of laser

99



Silk proteins
Biodegradable silk nanoshells

100



Calcium bicarbonate
Dissolve the CaCO3 shell with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt

101





4.1. Photo-protection
Photochemical properties have a close relationship with cell growth states and performances. For example, all photosynthetic creatures including plants and microorganisms absorb solar energy in the visible light range and convert it into chemical compounds used in metabolism.
Thus, when designing nanomaterials for use in hybridization with photosynthetic cells to form single-cells in nanoshells, light transmittance is a primary requirement in order to have cellular activity. Silica has been widely applied in the design of single-cells in nanoshells owing to its biocompatibility.102,103 More importantly, silica has a large transmittance toward visible light.104 As a result, it is an ideal component for the construction of hybrids containing photosynthetic cells. A range of photosynthetic single-cells in nanoshells has been fabricated using silica and cyanobacteria,58,88,105 microalgae106–108 and plant cells.108,109 Interestingly, silica can help cells resist high intensity light which causes photoinhibition and cell deactivation. The silica shell can be constructed on single cyanobacteria by using the LbL approach to form nanocoated single-cells (Fig. 3A(a)).58,88 When cultured under high intensity light, the nanocoated single-cells retain their photosynthetic activity, while the native cells lose activity through photoinhibition (Fig. 3A(b)).
 Fig. 3  Function optimization of single-cells in nanoshells in photo-protection, electrical conductivity, magnetism and heat resistance. (A) TEM micrographs of (a) microtome-sliced cyanobacteria@SiO2 at different magnifications. (b) Photosynthetic production of O2 with NaHCO3 as the artificial electron source. The red line indicates native cyanobacteria, the blue line indicates cyanobacteria@SiO2. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) FESEM images show that (a) two SaC cells spanning the gap between Au electrodes show clear deposition of the GR–Ca–Au sheets on their surface. The sheets deposit in high density on the cell with gaps in between exposing the cell surface. (b) Current−voltage characteristics of the cell device. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (C) TEM images of (a) the yeast cells with TA-Fe3+ shell with different magnifications. (b) The reversible collection and release of magnetic yeast cells by the contact or removal of magnetic force. (c) The assembly of magnetic yeast cells in the pattern of “A” and pentagon with magnetic force. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) TEM micrographs of (a) Chlorella@SiO2–TiO2. (b) Viability (±standard error) of native Chlorella, Chlorella@SiO2–TiO2, and Chlorella@TiO2 before (0 h) and after 2 h thermal treatment at 45 °C. The viabilities after 2 h were analyzed statistically by one-way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni's multiple comparison test. There are significant differences (*p < 0.001). Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
In general, creatures on this planet live in an environment that is rich in both visible and UV light. Long term exposure to UV radiation contributes to damaging cells and even causes cancer formation and apoptosis. However, in practical industrial applications, harsh photo-conditions cannot be fully avoided. In order to widen the application of living cells, the design of single-cells in nanoshells that can enhance the stability of cells towards UV light is necessary. Recently, several successful approaches have emerged to hybridize UV resistant nanomaterials with living cells. For example, inorganic shells have been formed to protect zebrafish embryo cells from UV radiation.55 In addition, a large range of nanomaterials, including TiO2,60 gold nanoparticles,59 and several specific polyelectrolyte pairs have been applied to protect living cells from UV light.94
4.2. Electrical conductivity
Cells are considered to be promising units for sensing owing to their dynamic responses to environmental changes. In addition, cellular metabolism involves several redox reactions, which can be used in bio-electricity generation. However, organic components present in living cells display lower conductivity, which causes difficulty with the output of biosignals or bioelectricity generated in the cells.
An appropriate method to solve this problem would be to introduce conductive nanomaterials on the surfaces of living cells where they serve as a bridge between the entrapped cells and the external environment to facilitate signal transmission. Gold nanoparticles are typical materials that are deposited on cell surfaces for optimizing cellular conductivity,37,38,68 thus enabling the nanocoated single-cells to be used in active hybrid bioelectronics devices. Carbon is another ideal material for improving electron transfer between cells and media due to its excellent electronic properties. Moreover, carbon is an attractive electrode support because of its unique properties such as large surface area, high electrical conductivity and high chemical and thermal stability. Many living cells used in electrical applications are fabricated by using forms of carbon as coating materials, such as carbon fibres, aerogels, nanotubes, graphite and mesoporous carbon. With the rise of interest in graphene, it has been applied to form single-cells in nanoshells that have enhanced conductivity and resistance against stress.39 Eukaryotic yeast cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) have a cell wall and are relatively robust in comparison to mammalian cells. For conductivity optimization, these cells have been interfaced with chemically reduced graphene sheets (CRG) to form a shell (Fig. 3B(a)).39 The interfacing is driven by the negative zeta potential of the S. cerevisiae cells, which enabled binding of the cells with divalent cation (Ca2+, Mg2+) functionalized CRG sheets. The sheets partially cover the cell and form a conductive pathway (Fig. 3B(b)).
4.3. Magnetism
The facile control of cell movement is in great demand because it can be applied in cell harvesting, cell-based instruments and target therapy. Nanomaterials, which display magnetism when hybridized with living cells, are important to develop single-cells in nanoshells that can be controlled using a magnetic field.110–112 Super-paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are widely used in nanocoated single-cells to create magnetic surfaces.113,114 For example, iron oxide nanoparticles can be covalently coupled to metal-binding proteins, such as lactoferrin and ceruloplasmin, to form an extracellular shell.115 Bonding magnetic nanoparticles to cell surfaces, which have been treated to remove extracellular compounds that cause nonspecific binding, creates magnetic nanocoated single-cells that have been applied to the development of biosorbents,116 biocatalysts,117 and new cell isolation techniques. The magnetized cells were shown to effectively absorb heavy metal ions, including toxic mercury,116 from solutions, and they were easily separated using an external magnetic field. Magnetic nanocoated single-cells can also be constructed using a method involving the cooperation between magnetic nanoparticles and polymer modified cell surfaces. In this approach, a nanoshell is formed first by cross-linking tannic acid (TA) and iron ions on the cell surface (Fig. 3C(a)).66 Because TA binds magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) strongly via C–O–Fe bonds, magnetic modification of individual living cells is simply performed by mixing the magnetic nanoparticles with the shell-coated cells. The occurrence of successful binding of MNPs on the cell surface is verified by collecting and releasing the cells using a magnetic field (Fig. 3C(b)). The cells can also be assembled into arrays using a magnet, thus demonstrating the potential use of the method for separation, encapsulation and delivery of cells (Fig. 3C(c)). Furthermore, a similar type of modification can be carried out on cells using polyelectrolyte LbL77 or gold nanoparticle shells60 which bond to MNPs through electrostatic forces.
4.4. Heat resistance
One criterion for the wide use of living cells is heat resistance, because high temperature environments are normal in industrial settings. Inspired by extremophile bacteria, which can survive under extreme conditions, the possibility of hybridizing living cells in a protective matrix seems to be a feasible approach to incorporate heat resistance. Because of its heat stability, silica can be used to increase cellular stability at high temperatures. For instance, silica nanoparticle coated yeast cells have a moderately enhanced thermal tolerance compared with that of native cells.90 After 2 h exposure to 52 °C, the viability of the silica coated yeast cells is 68%, whereas that of native cells is about 43%. Another example of the use of heat resistant nanomaterials is found in silica–titania composite shells.97Chlorella cells were encapsulated individually within SiO2–TiO2 shells with (RKK)4D8 (R: arginine; K: lysine, D: aspartic acid) as a biomimetic catalyst for both titanium bis(ammonium lactato)dihydroxide (TiBALDH) and silicic acid (Fig. 3D(a)).97 After 2 h at 45 °C, nearly all of the native Chlorella cells died, whereas more than half of the SiO2–TiO2 encapsulated Chlorella cells survived at this temperature (Fig. 3D(b)).
4.5. Self-repairing
The durability of single-cells in nanoshells remains a major problem in the design of appropriate nanomaterials. Once the structures of encapsulated materials are disrupted, which is often caused by cell division, the stability of the material decreases and functions of the encapsulated cells and/or daughter cells are lost. A solution to this problem would be the introduction of self-repairing functional nanoshells which can self-assemble on the cell surface during cell division. Very recently, we discovered L-cysteine coated gold nanoparticles, which undergo structure forming deposition on cell surfaces through electrostatic forces. This unique system is the first example of a dynamic self-repairing nanomaterial (Fig. 4A.).59 Upon growth and division of the entrapped cells, the L-cysteine coated gold nanoparticles deposit on the surfaces of newly generated cells to form a supplemental shell that protects the cells. In addition, the newly assembled gold nanoparticle shells endow the cells with high resistance against UVC. The strategy should be applicable to prokaryote as well as higher eukaryote cells. Furthermore, other materials can be used to enhance cell activity and introduce new functions. This self-repairing interface technology would not only enhance cell stability during cell division, but it also can act as a platform to introduce secondary nanofunctional shells. Recently, a bio-interfacing protocol has been developed to enable the encapsulation of an individual cyanobacterium cell within a mesoporous bilayer nanoshell.58 We believe that the self-repairing interface strategy developed in this effort will increase the number of tools available for the introduction of greater levels of functionality in nanocoated single-cells and enable practical applications.
 Fig. 4  Smart functions of single-cells in nanoshells. (a) Process of self-repairing biohybrid nanoshells in yeast cell division (scale bar: 250 nm). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Confocal fluorescence micrographs of yeast@cross-linked multilayers (CLM)5/5 and yeast@CLM5/5 after exposure to GSH. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cross section confocal images of (PMAA-co-NH2)5 capsules in aqueous solution initially at pH 3.0, then at elevated pH 8.0, and finally switched back to pH 3.0. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
4.6. Stimulus-responsive materials
Stimulus-responsive materials have received increasing attention in the design and application of single-cells in nanoshells. In nature, spores possess programmed protein shells whose formation or degradation can be controlled by several environmental stimuli.118 Inspired by this natural phenomenon, stimulus-responsive shells have been designed which are particularly attractive candidates for drug delivery systems and cell-therapy platforms. Specifically, an artificial layer encasing therapeutic cells can be selectively degraded at target sites in response to a specific stimulus while proficiently protecting the cell in the absence of the stimulus. Based on this strategy, several kinds of programmed degradable materials have been applied to the living cells. An LbL extracellular shell, created using a thiol exchange reaction, has been generated on individual yeast cells through in situ cross-linking with poly-2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate-co-2-(pyridyldisulfide)ethyl methacrylate (PDMAEM-co-PPDEM) and poly(methacrylate-co-2-mercaptoethyl methacrylate) (PMA-co-PMEM) (Fig. 4B).67 Interestingly, the disulphide linked films were degraded in response to an external stimulus, such as glutathione (GSH), demonstrating that they were stimuli responsive hybrid materials. In addition, a pH responsive material has been constructed through cross-linking with the amine-bearing poly(methacrylic acid) (PMMA-co-NH2) and PVPON LbL on yeast cell surfaces (Fig. 4C).98 The viability of the cells is maintained, while cell behaviour can be mediated by the pH-responsive reversible swelling and shrinking of the shell, which happens over a narrow pH range and influences cell division.
5. Applications of single-cells in nanoshells
Single-cells in nanoshells, which are at the frontier of interdisciplinary cell and material studies, need to have an optimized design that enables limitations associated with the need for long-term operational stability, and simple recovery and reusability techniques to be overcome.119 It is known that cell hybridization can be employed to enhance the stability of living cells under special harsh conditions during storage and processing. In addition, abiotic nanomaterials are capable of directly interacting with the cells and, as a result, they can be utilized to influence cell surface chemistry and provide new functions to the cells. The incorporation of specifically designed nanomaterial morphologies can also lead to an increase in stability and to an expansion of applications of the nanocoated single-cells. Below, we describe four applied areas, including sustainable energy, environmental restoration, green chemistry and smart therapy, which can benefit from the development of new types of single-cells in nanoshells.
5.1. Sustainable energy
Single-cells in nanoshells are regarded as powerful tools in the area of clean energy production. The most frequent uses of nanocoated single-cells are for producing chemical (such as H2 energy) and electric energy (such as biofuel cells and biosensors).

5.1.1. Production of chemical energy. 
The biotechnology that uses cells as a bioproduction platform is regarded as a sustainable approach to produce chemical energy.120,121 Using a proper design, special cells can be generated to produce desired chemical products. Natural photosynthesis, as a typical bioprocess, is the most common pathway employed to obtain chemical energy in the form of carbon compounds and hydrogen.122
Owing to its superb conversion efficiency, environmental friendliness and high energy capacity, hydrogen is a future substitute for fossil fuels.123–126 Photosynthetic organisms split water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen via direct and indirect biophotolysis.84,127,128 Recently, the green alga Chlorella pyrenoidosa was encapsulated in silica shells to form single-cells in nanoshell aggregates, which contain an oxygen-free core and a H2 production capability (Fig. 5A(a)).129 The aggregates release H2 at a constant rate of about 1.75 times than that of the natural cells (ca. 0.20 μmol H2 h−1, (mg chlorophyll)−1). Because of their solid structures, the aggregates provide spatial functional differentiation of the cells in which cells near the shell produced O2 and those near the core produce H2 (Fig. 5A(b)). The excellent performance of the nanocoated single-cells indicates the importance of hybridization, not just expressed through their structures and morphologies, but also in their functions.
 Fig. 5  Single-cells in nanoshells for energy applications. (A) Aggregated cells viewed using an optical microscope and a SEM (a). The amount of H2 and the content of O2 in the headspace of sealed tubes under a light intensity of 100 μE m−2 s−1 at different time periods. Red lines: O2%. Blue lines: H2 amount. Open squares: native Chlorella. Filled circles: aggregated Chlorella (b). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) SEM image of a gold monolayer-coated yeast colony bridging Au electrodes (a); and application of a bias to the pads resulted in a nonlinear current response from the functionalized yeast bridge (b). Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (C) SEM image of GA/Pt incubation with S. oneidensis MR-1 (inset: magnified SEM image) (a); confocal laser scanning microscope image of bacteria on GA/Pt after 3 days of colonization (b); digital photo of MFCs to drive a timer (c), and single-cell biofuel cell performance constructed with different electrode materials working at room temperature (d). Reproduced with permission.140 


5.1.2. Electric energy production. 
To ensure the availability of environmentally compatible energy in the future, mankind needs to innovatively design green, sustainable, and efficient systems for the conversion of clean and cheap energy sources into electricity. Biofuel cells, which convert the chemical energy of biofuels into electrical energy, have substantial environmental advantages in this regard. Hybrid microbial cells, devised using this approach, have been employed to construct microbial bio-fuel cells.130,131
For this purpose, conductive nanoparticle coated cells have been assembled using a strategy that mimics the assembly of micro-components in microelectronic devices. The LbL deposition of electrically conducting materials on cells can be employed to encapsulate cells on various surfaces for the construction of bio-electrodes.132–136 For example, gold nanoparticles were deposited on the surfaces of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (SaC) cells by using calcium ions as the mediator. The functionalized cells were used to bridge two Au electrodes 15 μm apart (Fig. 5B(a)).137 Chains of several ellipsoid yeast cells served as a microelectrode extension. A nonlinear current voltage response was recorded from the Au interfaced microelectrode as a result of the tunneling of electrons across the nanoparticles (Fig. 5B(b)).
Several recent studies have been targeted at the development of single-cell-hybridization technologies and their application to the design of biofuel cells.138,139 For example, a 3D graphene aerogel (GA) was used as an anode along with platinum nanoparticles to encapsulate S. oneidensis MR-1 cells.140 The assembled system reaches a current density of 4.88 A m−2 and generates a maximum power density of 1460 mW m−2 in a sodium lactate medium (Fig. 5C).

5.2. Clean environment
The use of single-cells in nanoshells has proved to be highly efficient in environment treatment, especially in water purification processes. Serious environmental problems threaten ecological equilibrium and human health; these include heavy metal pollution resulting from the indiscriminate disposal of industrial and domestic wastes, and high nitrogen and phosphorus levels of water and organics, especially macromolecular toxic organic substances, caused by the production of highly polluted industrial wastewater. Taking heavy metal pollution for example, traditional technologies utilized to remove metal ions from water, such as precipitation, adsorption, ion exchange, reverse osmosis, evaporation, electrolysis and cementation, are costly and sometimes ineffective for diminishing the heavy metals to acceptable levels.141 Also secondary pollution, such as metal-bearing sludge, caused by alkaline precipitation, often occurs. Thus, using biomass has become an attractive alternative.142,143 The nanocoated single-cells developed to date are typically easily handled, require less complex separation systems, process a high biomass density and provide a greater opportunity for reuse and recovery.144
Sulfur from fossil fuels, which is decomposed in the petroleum making process, may cause corrosion of equipment and air and water pollution, and decrease the time of petroleum storage. Single-cells in nanoshells, in which a single cell is enclosed in hybrid shells, are beneficial for the diffusion of substrates into cells and inhibition of toxic mass development in the environment. Gordonia sp. WQ-01A, a desulfurizing bacterium, was entrapped by self-assembled Au@L-lysine biohybrids to enhance the stability of cells under harsh conditions.60 As a result, the hybrid shell surrounding the cell surface does not affect the metabolic and desulfurizing activities of cells. Furthermore, upon encapsulation in TiO2 nanoparticles, the cell desulfurizing capacity is improved because of the photocatalytic effect of the TiO2 layer (Fig. 6a and b). Multiple-functionalization is easily obtained by encapsulating cells with magnetic nanoparticles, which contribute to the separation of nanocoated single-cells (Fig. 6c and d).
 Fig. 6  Single-cells in nanoshells for biodesulfurization. (a) SEM image and EDX line profile for elemental Ti (inset) in cell@biohybrid shell@TiO2 shell; (b) degradation rate of cell@biohybrid shell@TiO2 shell, cell@biohybrid shell and native cells; (c) SEM image and EDX line profile for elements Fe (inset in a) in cell@biohybrid shell@Fe3O4–SiO2 shell; (d) magnetic behavior of hybrid cells. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.3. Green catalysis
Since they are biocompatible and environmentally friendly, single-cells in nanoshells have been widely applied as catalysts in green chemical reactions.145,146 Redox, hydrolysis and transesterification reactions are three typical whole cell biocatalysed processes. Single-cells in nanoshells can have optimized designs that address issues associated with the lack of long-term operational stability, difficult recovery and reusability.119 These hybrids can be designed to have high selectivity towards substrates and to accelerate reactions carried out under mild conditions including ambient temperature, atmospheric pressure and physiological pH.
Immobilization of microbes on supports, such as silica matrices or alginate beads, has been used to improve performance and stability in organic solvents. Inspired by Pickering interfacial catalysis,147 where colloid particles simultaneously stabilize an emulsion and catalyse reactions at the interface of two immiscible solvents, whole cells in extracellular protective shells have been employed as stabilized colloid particles to form Pickering emulsions for biocatalytic functions (Fig. 7A(a)).117Alcaligenes faecalis ATCC 8750 cells hydrolyse hydrophobic (R,S)-mandelonitrile to form hydrophilic R-(−)-mandelic acid. By using this strategy, the location of these cells at Pickering interfaces not only enables the area of liquid–catalyst–liquid interfacial to be large, but it also facilitates mass transfer between the two phases. Well-designed shells can also effectively protect the enclosed cell from long-term organic solvent stress (up to 30 cycles), while retaining high levels of stereoselectivity, catalytic activity, cell viability and proliferative ability (Fig. 7A(b) and (c)).117
 Fig. 7  Single-cells in nanoshells for biocatalysis. (A) SEM images of (a) the individually mineralized bacteria (B–MCaP). Inset: high-resolution SEM image. The bioconversion of mandelonitrile by bacteria was investigated under different conditions, using B–MCaPS(0.45) as the Pickering interfacial biocatalyst (black line) and through control experiments where bacteria were dispersed in the interior of SiO2-microparticle-stabilized Pickering emulsion droplets (red) and immobilized in alginate beads (blue) (b). Recycling bioconversion efficiency of B–MCaPS(0.45) as a Pickering interfacial biocatalyst (blue) and bare bacteria in a biphasic system as a control experiment (green) (c). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) TEM micrographs of (a) cell@PDA (inset image, scale bar represents 500 nm) and the surface. The interface between the cell wall and the PDA nanocoating is highlighted by a red dotted line. (S)-1-phenylethanol yield of the native cell and cell@PDA as a function of time. Error bars indicate standard deviations over three independent reactions (b). Recycling (S)-1-phenylethanol yield of the native cell and cell@PDA. Error bars indicate standard deviations over three independent reactions (c). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A big challenge for the biocatalysis of single-cells in nanoshells is the optimization of whole-cell catalytic activity enhancement through hybridization with nanomaterials. Recently, a kind of nanocoated single-cell in which the biocatalytic yeast cells are coated with polydopamine (PDA) nanoshells individually have been reported presenting high catalytic activity (5 times better productivity than the native cell) in asymmetric reduction (Fig. 7B).148 Abundant catechol groups in PDA, the redox-active functional ligands, could act as a redox shuttle for the transfer of two protons and two electrons, thus accelerating the rate of electron transfer in biocatalytic asymmetric reduction or from the cytoplasm to the extracellular environment for enhancing cell catalytic activity.
5.4 Smart therapies
Cell therapy, an emerging technology, has been used in clinical applications. Genetic engineering, in which peptides or genes are inserted into the target cell membrane or genome to improve therapeutic cell stability and functionality, is becoming a common approach for cell therapy. However, technical challenges and laborious experimental operations associated with this approach are not compatible with the requirements of efficient clinical applications. To solve this problem, integrating living cells with synthetic polymers and nanomaterials should provide a versatile methodology to enhance cell-based therapy.149

5.4.1. Drug delivery. 
The efficiencies of conventional oral ingestion and intravenous injection for therapeutic drug delivery to target disease sites are limited by clearance from blood. To overcome this problem, single-cells in nanoshells, comprised of therapeutic cells functionalized with nanocarriers to load drugs, have been developed.
The commonly used nanocarriers for cell therapy are dendrimers, gold nanoparticles, quantum dots, etc.78,150,151 In order to stabilize these drug-carriers on cell surfaces, the size and geometry of the exogenous nanomaterials, and linkage of cell surface and materials need to be considered. Rapid progress made in bionanotechnology has led to the emergence of more advanced cell–material hybrids for cell therapy and diagnosis.152 Irvine and co-workers synthesized a bilayer liposome-like nanoparticle which has a 100–300 nm core and phospholipid shell structure. These synthetic nanoparticles can be stably grafted on hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) surfaces without affecting intrinsic cell functions. These nanoparticle-conjuncted cells loaded with the glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) inhibitor TWS119 show sustained drug release for cancer therapy (Fig. 8A).153
 Fig. 8  Single-cells in nanoshells for cell therapy. (A) Schematic of maleimide-based conjugation to cell surface thiols (a). Confocal microscopy images of CD8+ effector T cells and lineage−Sca-1+c-Kit+ HSCs immediately after conjugation with fluorescent-labeled multilamellar lipid nanoparticles (b). In vivo imaging of HSCs carrying GSK-3β inhibitor-loaded nanoparticles (c). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2010, The Nature Publishing Group. (B) Representative images of encapsulated SC-β cells before implantation (a) or after retrieval 90 d after implantation (b). Masson's trichrome (c) and H&E (d) histological analysis of implants retrieved after 174 d. Human C-peptide levels in the blood of the STZ-treated C57BL/6 mice implanted with encapsulated SC-β cells (e). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2016, The Nature Publishing Group. 


5.4.2. Transplantation. 
Therapeutic cells can easily suffer from immune-suppression and rejection by the host in transplantation. Encapsulating cells within capsules provides an efficient approach to solve this problem in cell therapy.154 The common method to encapsulate cells is by entrapment within polymeric microcapsules. The advantage of the microcapsule lies in not only providing biocompatible cell microenvironments, but also in protecting cells from immune attack. Tang and co-workers used polydopamine to shield antigenic epitopes on red blood cells (RBCs). These “universal red blood cells” maintain their original morphology and show a high transfusion rate (up to around 60%).155 Recently, Anderson and co-workers encapsulated human stem cell-derived beta cells (SC-β cells) within alginate derivatives to protect cells from immune attack in vivo and during transplantation for type 1 diabetes therapy. The nanocoated single-cells show high viability and activity for glucose responsiveness after 174 days following implantation (Fig. 8B).156,157 In parallel with pursuing more functional materials, use of the cell–material technique can be expanded to different cell types, such as stem cell, monocytes and macrophages, making them as ideal candidates for cancer therapy, transplantation and tissue regeneration.158,159

6. Outlook
Single-cells in nanoshells, which have sustainable, clean and green advantages, are already on the market for biomass conversion. To further drive the development of single-cells in nanoshells in industrial applications, continuing progress is needed in the design and improvement of these systems. The following goals are essential to address in order to push forward practical application of single-cells in nanoshells.
(1) Developing new methods for the syntheses of single-cells in nanoshells to improve the viability and activity of cells. Although many methods have been employed to simulate organism structures for cell survival, it is still difficult to obtain accurate anatomical geometries found in natural organisms. The 4D bioprinting technology,160 controlled by computer programs and cell self-assembly techniques, should be useful in easily constructing desirable structures accurately.
(2) Developing novel hierarchical surface nanostructures to improve the activity and stability of cells. Appling 3D building blocks to construct single-cells in nanoshells with more complex surface nanostructure for the introduction of more advanced functions could be the future development, such as kinds of hierarchically porous nanomaterials.161–167 Besides, in conventional cell–nanomaterial hybridization, interactions between cells and nanomaterials always exist. These interactions influence cell activities. The use of the hollow structure approach that results in no cell−material interactions should provide good protection of cells while not influencing catalytic activity.
(3) Developing multiple functions to improve the efficiencies and enlarge applications of single-cells in nanoshells. Multiple function design is needed using approaches that integrate various cells and various materials. Such multifunctional single-cells in nanoshells have great potential for advanced complex applications.
(4) Developing new designs to promote applications of single-cells in nanoshells. Cell engineering has attracted much attention owing to the ability to introduce special functions into cells. Future studies should focus on the design of single-cell nanoreactors, constructed by using new encapsulation technologies, that can catalyse reactions in a ‘nano-catalyst’ way.
The field of single-cells in nanoshells cross-links biology, physics, chemistry, materials science and engineering. Many achievements have been made in the design of systems that have great viability and activity. The advent of new methods, nanostructures, morphologies and functions will make the hybrid cell technology increasingly applicable to energy, environmental, catalysis and therapeutic issues.
7. Conclusions
Single-cells in nanoshells have been designed to take advantage of the excellent features of combination between living cells and composite nanomaterials. In this combination, the cell–material interactions directly contribute to the formation of single-cells in nanoshells with different hybrid models, being complementary with a range of potential applications. Besides differences between hybrid models, the dimensional properties of the basic building block materials play a key role in determining the nanostructure of the material coating the cell surfaces in the nanocoated single-cells. Simple and hierarchically structured nanomaterials have been developed to enable mass transfer control between cells and the environment. Single-cells in nanoshells have been observed to meet the requirements of applications such as photo protection, electrical conductivity, heat resistance, magnetism, stimuli response and self-repairing. As a result, single-cells in nanoshells have been utilized in a wide number of varying applications including energy production, environmental remediation, green chemistry and smart cell therapy. In these applications, single-cells in nanoshells operate in a highly efficient, energy saving and environmentally friendly manner.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFC1103800), PCSIRT (IRT_15R52), NSFC (U1663225, U1662134, 51472190, 51611530672, 51503166, 21711530705), ISTCP (2015DFE52870), and HPNSF (2016CFA033). This study was also supported by the Open Project Program of State Key Laboratory of Petroleum Pollution Control (Grant No. PPC2016007) and the CNPC Research Institute of Safety and Environmental Technology. We thank Prof. Patrick S. Mariano at the University of New Mexico for editing and revising this article.
References
X. T. Zheng and C. M. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2061–2071 RSC .

          J. Miller, Evolving a self-repairing, self-regulating, French flag organism, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2004 Search PubMed .

          R. F. Fakhrullin, I. S. Choi and Y. Lvov, Cell surface engineering: fabrication of functional nanoshells, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2014 Search PubMed .
E. C. Carnes, D. M. Lopez, N. P. Donegan, A. Cheung, H. Gresham, G. S. Timmins and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2010, 6, 41–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hildebrand, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4855–4874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. P. Kennett and M. Srinivasan, Neogene planktonic foraminifera: a phylogenetic atlas, Hutchinson Ross, Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania,  1983 Search PubMed .
W. J. Lucas and J.-Y. Lee, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2004, 5, 712–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Stevens and J. H. George, Science, 2005, 310, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, G. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Song and R. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12908–12912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Drachuk, M. K. Gupta and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4437–4453 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, H. Xie and B. L. Su, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3843–3859 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, P. Dandoy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 211–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Léonard, P. Dandoy, E. Danloy, G. Leroux, C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke and B.-L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 860–885 RSC .
N. Nadine and L. Jacques, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 849–859 RSC .
R. F. Fakhrullin, A. I. Zamaleeva, R. T. Minullina, S. A. Konnova and V. N. Paunov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4189–4206 RSC .
H. P. Ji, S. H. Yang, J. Lee, E. H. Ko, D. Hong and I. S. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2001–2010 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Xu and R. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1862–1880 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Lodish, A. Berk, S. L. Zipursky, P. Matsudaira, D. Baltimore and J. Darnell, Molecular cell biology, W. H. Freeman, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
B. E. Logan and K. Rabaey, Science, 2012, 337, 686–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. McCarty, J. Bae and J. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7100–7106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Tonga, Y. Jeong, B. Duncan, T. Mizuhara, R. Mout, R. Das, S. T. Kim, Y.-C. Yeh, B. Yan, S. Hou and V. M. Rotello, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Mao, J.-W. Shin, S. Utech, H. Wang, O. Uzun, W. Li, M. Cooper, Y. Hu, L. Zhang and D. A. Weitz, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 236–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, D. Hong, J. Lee and I. S. Choi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 792–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Mckenney, A. Driks and P. Eichenberger, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2013, 11, 33–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Fakhrullin and Y. M. Lvov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4557–4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. P. Arnold, Origin and History of Beer and Brewing: From Prehistoric Times to the Beginning of Brewing Science and Technology: a Critical Essay, BeerBooks. com,  2005 Search PubMed .

          S. X. Jia, Qi Min Yao Shu Jin Shi, Zhonghua Book, Beijing,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Nelson and E. G. Griffin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1916, 38, 1109–1115 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bisceglie, J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol., 1934, 40, 122–140 Search PubMed .
G. Orive, R. M. Hernández, A. R. Gascón, R. Calafiore, T. M. Chang, P. De Vos, G. Hortelano, D. Hunkeler, I. Lacík and A. J. Shapiro, Nat. Med., 2003, 9, 104–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Science, 2017, 356, eaaf3627 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 106–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Diaspro, D. Silvano, S. Krol, O. Cavalleri and A. Gliozzi, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 5047–5050 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dubilier, M. McFall-Ngai and L. Zhao, Nature, 2015, 526, 631–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Choi, J. H. Park, M. H. Kim, D. Hong, H. Cho, S. H. Yang and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8056–8059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Berry, S. Rangaswamy and R. Saraf, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 939–942 CrossRef CAS .
V. Berry, A. Gole, S. Kundu, C. J. Murphy and R. F. Saraf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17600–17601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kempaiah, A. Chung and V. Maheshwari, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6025–6031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ben, L. Peng, J. Wenge, P. Haihua, X. Xurong and T. Ruikang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3560–3564 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, C. F. Meunier and B. L. Su, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1249–1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moreno-Garrido, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 3949–3964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan and J. M. Regan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5172–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, P. Chen, Y. Dong, X. Feng and B.-F. Liu, Biomed. Microdevices, 2013, 15, 553–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Oliveira, J. Hatami and J. F. Mano, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1753–1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yun and S. J. J. Kwok, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0008 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Mager, V. LaPointe and M. M. Stevens, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 582–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Nel, L. Mädler, D. Velegol, T. Xia, E. M. V. Hoek, P. Somasundaran, F. Klaessig, V. Castranova and M. Thompson, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 543–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Richardson, M. Björnmalm and F. Caruso, Science, 2015, 348, aaa2491 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Yang, S. M. Kang, K. B. Lee, T. D. Chung, H. Lee and I. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2795–2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, Y. Lee, A. R. Statz, J. Rho, T. G. Park and P. B. Messersmith, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1619–1623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. L. Bruening, D. E. Bergbreiter and R. M. Crooks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 2114–2116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, J. J. Richardson, J. Cui, F. Caruso, C. J. Doonan and P. Falcaro, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7910–7914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Pan, X. Xu and R. Tang, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e9963 Search PubMed .
D. Hong, H. Lee, E. H. Ko, J. Lee, H. Cho, M. Park, S. H. Yang and I. S. Choi, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 203–208 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, B. S. Lee, J. Choi, B. J. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. M. Kang, S. H. Yang and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15306–15309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, X. Y. Yang, Z. Deng, L. Wang, Z. Y. Hu, G. Tian, G. L. Ying, L. Shen, M. X. Zhang and B. L. Su, Small, 2015, 11, 2003–2010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, X.-Y. Yang, G.-L. Ying, L. Shen, J. Liu, W. Geng, L.-J. Dai, S.-Y. Liu, J. Cao, G. Tian, T.-L. Sun, S.-P. Li and B.-L. Su, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 486–491 RSC .
N. Jiang, G.-L. Ying, S.-Y. Liu, L. Shen, J. Hu, L.-J. Dai, X.-Y. Yang, G. Tian and B.-L. Su, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15407–15410 RSC .
J. T. Wilson, W. Cui, V. Kozlovskaya, E. Kharlampieva, D. Pan, Z. Qu, V. R. Krishnamurthy, J. Mets, V. Kumar, J. Wen, Y. Song, V. V. Tsukruk and E. L. Chaikof, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7054–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Mendelsohn, S. Y. Yang, J. A. Hiller, A. I. Hochbaum and M. F. Rubner, Biomacromolecules, 2003, 4, 96–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. T. W. Asri, M. Crismaru, S. Roest, Y. Chen, O. Ivashenko, P. Rudolf, J. C. Tiller, H. C. van der Mei, T. J. A. Loontjens and H. J. Busscher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arima and H. Iwata, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 3074–3082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, K. Kim, J. Lee, J. Y. Choi, D. Hong, S. H. Yang, F. Caruso, Y. Lee and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12420–12425 CAS .
W. Li, W. Bing, S. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3775–3784 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yang, J. Choi, L. Palanikumar, E. S. Choi, J. Lee, J. Kim, I. S. Choi and J.-H. Ryu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4698–4703 RSC .
V. Berry and R. F. Saraf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6668–6673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Zamaleeva, I. R. Sharipova, A. V. Porfireva, G. A. Evtugyn and R. F. Fakhrullin, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 2671–2679 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Yang, T. Lee, E. Seo, E. H. Ko, I. S. Choi and B. S. Kim, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 61–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bekatorou, A. Koutinas, A. Kaliafas and M. Kanellaki, Process Biochem., 2001, 36, 549–557 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Wilson, M. M. Wade, S. C. Holman and F. R. Champlin, J. Microbiol. Methods, 2001, 43, 153–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yang, K. B. Lee, B. Kong, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kim and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9160–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Martín, F. Carmona, R. Cuesta, D. Rondón, N. Gálvez and J. M. Domínguez-Vera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3489–3493 CrossRef .
W. Li, Z. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Guan, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13661–13665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Konnova, I. R. Sharipova, T. A. Demina, Y. N. Osin, D. R. Yarullina, O. N. Ilinskaya, Y. M. Lvov and R. F. Fakhrullin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4208–4210 RSC .
R. F. Fakhrullin, J. García-Alonso and V. N. Paunov, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 391–397 RSC .
X. Chen, U. C. Tam, J. L. Czlapinski, G. S. Lee, D. Rabuka, A. Zettl and C. R. Bertozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6292–6293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yang, E. H. Ko, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 6239–6242 CrossRef .
J. H. Park, I. S. Choi and S. H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5523–5525 RSC .
S.-H. Xue, H. Xie, H. Ping, Q.-C. Li, B.-L. Su and Z.-Y. Fu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71844–71848 RSC .
K. Liang, J. J. Richardson, C. J. Doonan, X. Mulet, Y. Ju, J. Cui, F. Caruso and P. Falcaro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 8630–8635 CrossRef .
J. Niu, D. J. Lunn, A. Pusuluri, J. I. Yoo, M. A. O'Malley, S. Mitragotri, H. T. Soh and C. J. Hawker, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 537–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Kapdan and F. Kargi, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 38, 569–582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kahraman, A. I. Zamaleeva, R. F. Fakhrullin and M. Culha, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Hayden, G. Zhao, K. Saha, R. L. Phillips, X. Li, O. R. Miranda, V. M. Rotello, M. A. El-Sayed, I. Schmidt-Krey and U. H. F. Bunz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6920–6923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, H. Xie, Q.-C. Li, E.-J. Sun and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 450, 388–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, Z. Yang, H. Zhai, G. Wang, X. Xu, W. Ma and R. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7525–7527 RSC .
S. S. Balkundi, N. G. Veerabadran, D. M. Eby, G. R. Johnson and Y. M. Lvov, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 14011–14016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Yan, X. Xu and R. Tang, ChemBioChem, 2010, 11, 2368–2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhu, R. Carboni, M. J. Quercio, B. Yan, O. R. Miranda, D. L. Anderton, K. F. Arcaro, V. M. Rotello and R. W. Vachet, Small, 2010, 6, 2261–2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wahid, E. Eroglu, X. Chen, S. M. Smith and C. L. Raston, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 650–655 RSC .
R. Kempaiah, S. Salgado, W. L. Chung and V. Maheshwari, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11480–11482 RSC .
D. M. Eby, S. Harbaugh, R. N. Tatum, K. E. Farrington, N. Kelley-Loughnane and G. R. Johnson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10521–10527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kim, T. Park, H. C. Moon, S.-Y. Park, D. Hong, E. H. Ko, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Hong, S. W. Han, Y.-G. Kim and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14443–14446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sicard, M. Perullini, C. Spedalieri, T. Coradin, R. Brayner, J. Livage, M. Jobbágy and S. A. Bilmes, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1374–1378 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Ko, Y. Yoon, J. H. Park, S. H. Yang, D. Hong, K.-B. Lee, H. K. Shon, T. G. Lee and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 12505–12508 CrossRef .
I. Drachuk, O. Shchepelina, M. Lisunova, S. Harbaugh, N. Kelley-Loughnane, M. Stone and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4266–4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Chen, L. Zhou, Z. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8199–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Drachuk, O. Shchepelina, S. Harbaugh, N. Kelley-Loughnane, M. Stone and V. V. Tsukruk, Small, 2013, 9, 3128–3137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Fakhrullin and R. T. Minullina, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6617–6621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Baca, A. Carlee, C. Eric, L. Deanna, F. Jeb, D. Darren, S. Seema, C. Zhu, L. Nanguo and F. Hongyou, Science, 2006, 313, 337–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Luckarift, J. C. Spain, R. R. Naik and M. O. Stone, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 211–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Ellerby and C. R. Nishida, Science, 1992, 255, 1113 CAS .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, C. F. Meunier, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Rooke, B. Vandoorne, A. Léonard, C. F. Meunier, P. Cambier, H. Sarmento, J.-P. Descy and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 356, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, H. Sarmento, C. F. Meunier, J. P. Descy and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 951–959 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, A. Léonard, P. Van Cutsem and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 929–936 RSC .
C. F. Meunier, J. C. Rooke, H. Kata, V. C. Pierre, C. Pierre, L. Alexandre and S. Bao-Lian, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6568–6575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, D. Hong, H. Cho, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Park, S. H. Lee, H. M. Kim, R. F. Fakhrullin and I. S. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, H. Lee, I. S. Choi and S. H. Yang, Solid State Sci., 2017, 71, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Konnova, Y. M. Lvov and R. F. Fakhrullin, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12552–12558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safarikova, Z. Maderova and I. Safarik, Food Res. Int., 2009, 42, 521–524 CrossRef CAS .
I. Safarik, L. F. T. Rego, M. Borovska, E. Mosiniewicz-Szablewska, F. Weyda and M. Safarikova, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2007, 40, 1551–1556 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gupta and A. S. Curtis, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 3029–3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yavuz, A. Denizli, H. Güngüneş, M. Safarikova and I. Safarik, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2006, 52, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Ji, C. Zhao, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4904–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Setlow, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 2003, 6, 550–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon and P. S. Van, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6223–6235 RSC .
S. C. Roberts, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 387–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hellwig, J. Drossard, R. M. Twyman and R. Fischer, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Zeng, K. H. Chu, D. Wu, H. Y. Yip, L. Ye and P. K. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700611 CrossRef .
L. Jing, Q. Yan, C. X. Guo, S. Lim, S. Hao and M. L. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 275–280 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Damien, J. Luo, H. D. Jang, J. Huang and Z. He, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kruse and B. Hankamer, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 238–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Srirangan, M. E. Pyne and C. P. Chou, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8589–8604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, X. Zhao, G. Zhu, C. Shao, Y. Li, W. Ma, X. Xu and R. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 12129–12133 CrossRef .
G. Ciudad, I. Reyes, L. Azócar, R. Briones, M. Jorquera, L. Y. Wick and R. Navia, New Biotechnol., 2011, 28, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Park and H. N. Chang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2000, 18, 303–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Minullina, Y. N. Osin, D. G. Ishmuchametova and R. F. Fakhrullin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7708–7713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. García-Alonso, R. F. Fakhrullin, V. N. Paunov, Z. Shen, J. D. Hardege, N. Pamme, S. J. Haswell and G. M. Greenway, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400, 1009–1013 CrossRef PubMed .
A. I. Zamaleeva, I. R. Sharipova, R. V. Shamagsumova, A. N. Ivanov, G. A. Evtugyn, D. G. Ishmuchametova and R. F. Fakhrullin, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3, 509–513 RSC .
J. García-Alonso, R. F. Fakhrullin and V. N. Paunov, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1816–1819 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Krol, M. Nolte, A. Diaspro, D. Mazza, R. Magrassi, A. Gliozzi and A. Fery, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 705–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vivek, D. E. Fomenko, S. Gaurav and R. F. Saraf, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 371–377 Search PubMed .
C. F. Meunier, X. Y. Yang, J. C. Rooke and B. L. Su, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 476–488 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Yang, G. Tian, N. Jiang and B.-L. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5540–5563 CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Yin, Z. Liu, E. Luan, Z. Feng, Z. Tang and S. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500372 Search PubMed .
J. Wang and C. Chen, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 195–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Chatterjee, I. Bhattacharjee and G. Chandra, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 175, 117–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Pérez Silva, A. Ábalos Rodríguez, J. M. Gómez Montes De Oca and D. Cantero Moreno, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 1533–1538 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Mata, M. L. Blázquez, A. Ballester, F. González and J. A. Muñoz, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 163, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schmid, J. S. Dordick, B. Hauer, A. Kiener, M. Wubbolts and B. Witholt, Nature, 2001, 409, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Tao and R. J. Kazlauskas, Biocatalysis for green chemistry and chemical process development, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Crossley, J. Faria, M. Shen and D. E. Resasco, Science, 2010, 327, 68–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Y. Hu, X. Y. Yang, B. B. Zhang, W. Geng, T. G. Van and B. L. Su, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6617 RSC .
M. T. Stephan and D. J. Irvine, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 309–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Beg, M. Rizwan, A. M. Sheikh, M. S. Hasnain, K. Anwer and K. Kohli, J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 2011, 63, 141–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, P. Wu, M. Rousseas, D. Okawa, Z. Gartner, A. Zettl and C. R. Bertozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 890–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. André, C. Passirani, B. Seijo, A. Sanchez and C. N. Montero-Menei, Biomaterials, 2016, 83, 347–362 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Stephan, J. J. Moon, S. H. Um, A. Bershteyn and D. J. Irvine, Nat. Med., 2010, 16, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dolgin, Nat. Med., 2014, 20, 9–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. Wang, B. Zhao, J. Chen, X. Zhang and R. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3463–3468 RSC .
A. J. Vegas, O. Veiseh, M. Gürtler, J. R. Millman, F. W. Pagliuca, A. R. Bader, J. C. Doloff, J. Li, M. Chen and K. Olejnik, Nat. Med., 2016, 22, 306–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Vegas, O. Veiseh, J. C. Doloff, M. Ma, H. H. Tam, K. Bratlie, J. Li, A. R. Bader, E. Langan and K. Olejnik, Nat. Biotechnol., 2016, 34, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Liu, L. Yildirimer, H. Zhao, R. Ding, H. Wang, W. Cui and D. Weitz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2809–2819 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and T. J. Webster, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 66–80 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirillova, R. Maxson, G. Stoychev, C. T. Gomillion and L. Ionov, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703443 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X.-Y. Yang, G. Tian, A. Vantomme, J. Yu, G. Van Tendeloo and B.-L. Su, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3251–3258 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Yang, S.-B. Zhang, Z.-M. Qiu, G. Tian, Y.-F. Feng and F.-S. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4696–4700 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Chen, X.-Y. Li, G. Tian, Y. Li, H.-Y. Tan, G. Van Tendeloo, G.-S. Zhu, S.-L. Qiu, X.-Y. Yang and B.-L. Su, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1452–1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yang, L.-H. Chen, Y. Li, J. C. Rooke, C. Sanchez and B.-L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 481–558 RSC .
X.-Y. Yang, A. Vantomme, F.-S. Xiao and B.-L. Su, Catal. Today, 2007, 128, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ying, X.-Y. Yang, G. Tian, C. Janiak and B.-L. Su, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13370–13382 RSC .
L.-H. Chen, S.-T. Xu, X.-Y. Li, G. Tian, Y. Li, J. C. Rooke, G.-S. Zhu, S.-L. Qiu, Y.-X. Wei, X.-Y. Yang, Z.-M. Liu and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Wei Geng	Wei Geng is currently a Ph.D. student at the Laboratory of Living Materials under the supervision of Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su and Prof. Dr Xiao-Yu Yang from Wuhan University of Technology, China. His current work includes the design and synthesis of nanocomposites, porous materials, biomaterials and catalysis.
Li Wang	Li Wang is currently doing his postdoctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Dr Bao-Lian Su. He received his Master of Engineering degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology in 2013 and his PhD degree from the University of Namur in 2017. His current work includes the design and synthesis of biohybrid materials for energy, environment, and biocatalysis.
Xiao-Yu Yang	Xiao-Yu Yang earned his Ph.D. degree from Jilin University (co-educated at the University of Namur, Belgium). After post-doctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Bao-Lian Su, he worked as a “Chargéde Recherches” at the F.N.R.S. (National Foundation of Scientific Research) since 2008. He is currently working at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Material Synthesis and Processing at Wuhan University of Technology as a Chutian Professor and he is also a visiting professor at Harvard University. His research is aimed at nanocatalysis, self-assembly technology and bio-nanotechnology.
Bao-Lian Su	Bao-Lian Su is a member of the Royal Academy of Belgium (class of science). He is a Full Professor and Director of the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Namur, Belgium. He is currently an “Expert of the State” in the frame of the Chinese Central Government program of “Thousands Talents” and “Changjiang Professor” located at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His current research fields include synthesis, property study and molecular engineering of organized, hierarchically porous and bio-inspired materials, biomaterials, nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, cell therapy and biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Development of coated cells and the major approaches for the synthesis of single-cells in nanoshells.	 

0D	Efficient fabrication, packing porous surface structure with good mass exchange and wide choice of nanoparticles	Silica, gold, Fe3O4, LnPO4, MnO2, metal organic framework, polymer and calcium phosphate	
34, 40, 54, 55, 57, 68 and 73–75

1D	High mechanical and elastic strength, good carriers for storage and release	Clay nanotube, carbon nanotube, gold nanorod and magnetic nanorod	
38 and 76–78

2D	Well covering the cell, close connection for easy output of the biosignal from the cell	Graphene and graphene oxide	
39 and 70

3D	Well-defined specific nanostructure, easy modification	Hydrogel	
23


 	Fig. 2  Surface nanostructure of single-cells in nanoshells with different building blocks from 0D to 2D. (a) SEM image of S. cerevisiae with a calcium mineral coat. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of poly(L-lysine)-coated Au nanoparticles deposited on bacteria. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of a yeast cell coated with PAH/HNTs/PAH/PSS. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of a thin section of yeast cells coated with PAH/PSS/PAH/MWNTs/PAH/PSS. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of yeast cells with graphene sheets and TEM image of the cross section of the shell engineered cells. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of yeast cells with graphene oxide sheets and TEM image of the cross section of the shell engineered cells. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. The insets show detailed extracellular structures after coating.	 

Polyelectrolyte pairs	Protection against UV radiation	
94

Poly(dopamine)	Photoprotection against UV irradiation	
95

CeO2 nanoparticles	Protection against UV radiation	
96

Titanium oxides	Absorb UV light for efficient desulfurization	
60

Lanthanide phosphate	Protection under long-term UV exposure	
55

Gold nanoparticles	High conductivity at low coverage	
38

Protection under UV radiation and high light radiation, and self-repairing	
59

Carbon nanotube	Increase of charge transfer and sensitivity	
69

Graphene	Formation of an electron conducting pathway on the surface of the cell	
39

Iron nanoparticles	Exhibition of some magnetic behaviors	
74

Silica	Alleviation of high light-induced photoinhibition	
88

Conferring thermotolerance	
90

Silica–titanium oxides	Enhancement of tolerance to thermal stress	
97

Tannic acid/FeCl3	Protection of UV light irradiation, reversible collection and release by a magnetic force and pH-response providing a dynamic cell coating	
66

PDMAEM-co-PPDEM/PMA-co-PMEM	Glutathione-responsive degradability	
67

PMMA-co-NH2/PVPON	pH-responsive shell allowing cell growth by variation in pH	
98

Spiropyran conjugated nanoparticles	Photoswitch by changing the excitation power density of laser	
99

Silk proteins	Biodegradable silk nanoshells	
100

Calcium bicarbonate	Dissolve the CaCO3 shell with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt	
101


 	Fig. 3  Function optimization of single-cells in nanoshells in photo-protection, electrical conductivity, magnetism and heat resistance. (A) TEM micrographs of (a) microtome-sliced cyanobacteria@SiO2 at different magnifications. (b) Photosynthetic production of O2 with NaHCO3 as the artificial electron source. The red line indicates native cyanobacteria, the blue line indicates cyanobacteria@SiO2. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) FESEM images show that (a) two SaC cells spanning the gap between Au electrodes show clear deposition of the GR–Ca–Au sheets on their surface. The sheets deposit in high density on the cell with gaps in between exposing the cell surface. (b) Current−voltage characteristics of the cell device. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (C) TEM images of (a) the yeast cells with TA-Fe3+ shell with different magnifications. (b) The reversible collection and release of magnetic yeast cells by the contact or removal of magnetic force. (c) The assembly of magnetic yeast cells in the pattern of “A” and pentagon with magnetic force. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) TEM micrographs of (a) Chlorella@SiO2–TiO2. (b) Viability (±standard error) of native Chlorella, Chlorella@SiO2–TiO2, and Chlorella@TiO2 before (0 h) and after 2 h thermal treatment at 45 °C. The viabilities after 2 h were analyzed statistically by one-way ANOVA, followed by the Bonferroni's multiple comparison test. There are significant differences (*p < 0.001). Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Smart functions of single-cells in nanoshells. (a) Process of self-repairing biohybrid nanoshells in yeast cell division (scale bar: 250 nm). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Confocal fluorescence micrographs of yeast@cross-linked multilayers (CLM)5/5 and yeast@CLM5/5 after exposure to GSH. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cross section confocal images of (PMAA-co-NH2)5 capsules in aqueous solution initially at pH 3.0, then at elevated pH 8.0, and finally switched back to pH 3.0. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Single-cells in nanoshells for energy applications. (A) Aggregated cells viewed using an optical microscope and a SEM (a). The amount of H2 and the content of O2 in the headspace of sealed tubes under a light intensity of 100 μE m−2 s−1 at different time periods. Red lines: O2%. Blue lines: H2 amount. Open squares: native Chlorella. Filled circles: aggregated Chlorella (b). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) SEM image of a gold monolayer-coated yeast colony bridging Au electrodes (a); and application of a bias to the pads resulted in a nonlinear current response from the functionalized yeast bridge (b). Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (C) SEM image of GA/Pt incubation with S. oneidensis MR-1 (inset: magnified SEM image) (a); confocal laser scanning microscope image of bacteria on GA/Pt after 3 days of colonization (b); digital photo of MFCs to drive a timer (c), and single-cell biofuel cell performance constructed with different electrode materials working at room temperature (d). Reproduced with permission.140	 

 	Fig. 6  Single-cells in nanoshells for biodesulfurization. (a) SEM image and EDX line profile for elemental Ti (inset) in cell@biohybrid shell@TiO2 shell; (b) degradation rate of cell@biohybrid shell@TiO2 shell, cell@biohybrid shell and native cells; (c) SEM image and EDX line profile for elements Fe (inset in a) in cell@biohybrid shell@Fe3O4–SiO2 shell; (d) magnetic behavior of hybrid cells. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Single-cells in nanoshells for biocatalysis. (A) SEM images of (a) the individually mineralized bacteria (B–MCaP). Inset: high-resolution SEM image. The bioconversion of mandelonitrile by bacteria was investigated under different conditions, using B–MCaPS(0.45) as the Pickering interfacial biocatalyst (black line) and through control experiments where bacteria were dispersed in the interior of SiO2-microparticle-stabilized Pickering emulsion droplets (red) and immobilized in alginate beads (blue) (b). Recycling bioconversion efficiency of B–MCaPS(0.45) as a Pickering interfacial biocatalyst (blue) and bare bacteria in a biphasic system as a control experiment (green) (c). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (B) TEM micrographs of (a) cell@PDA (inset image, scale bar represents 500 nm) and the surface. The interface between the cell wall and the PDA nanocoating is highlighted by a red dotted line. (S)-1-phenylethanol yield of the native cell and cell@PDA as a function of time. Error bars indicate standard deviations over three independent reactions (b). Recycling (S)-1-phenylethanol yield of the native cell and cell@PDA. Error bars indicate standard deviations over three independent reactions (c). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Single-cells in nanoshells for cell therapy. (A) Schematic of maleimide-based conjugation to cell surface thiols (a). Confocal microscopy images of CD8+ effector T cells and lineage−Sca-1+c-Kit+ HSCs immediately after conjugation with fluorescent-labeled multilamellar lipid nanoparticles (b). In vivo imaging of HSCs carrying GSK-3β inhibitor-loaded nanoparticles (c). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2010, The Nature Publishing Group. (B) Representative images of encapsulated SC-β cells before implantation (a) or after retrieval 90 d after implantation (b). Masson's trichrome (c) and H&E (d) histological analysis of implants retrieved after 174 d. Human C-peptide levels in the blood of the STZ-treated C57BL/6 mice implanted with encapsulated SC-β cells (e). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2016, The Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
