Photo-stimulated triboelectric generation   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR07020A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR07020A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18597-18603Photo-stimulated triboelectric generation†

        
          
            Byeong Uk 
            Ye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sang Yun 
            Lee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Minbok 
            Jung
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            So-Dam 
            Sohn
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyung-Joon 
            Shin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Myoung Hoon 
            Song
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyoung Jin 
            Choi
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jeong Min 
            Baik
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, KIST-UNIST-Ulsan Center for Convergent Materials, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Korea. E-mail: jbaik@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      20th September 2017
    , Accepted 9th November 2017First published on 9th November 2017AbstractA new photo-stimulated triboelectric generation occurring between a metal–oxide and polyimide during friction was demonstrated. The output currents of the triboelectric nanogenerator were significantly enhanced, under light illumination, up to approximately 5 times depending on the wavelength of the light, providing a new route for energy harvesting devices as well as self-powered selective photodetectors.
Triboelectric generation is a well-known phenomenon occurring when two objects touch each other, i.e. the objects become spontaneously and oppositely charged due to the charge transfer between them. The density of the transferred charges has been generally considered to depend on the intrinsic properties of the objects, summarized as the triboelectric series. The phenomenon has allowed the construction of various frictional electrostatic generators such as the Van de Graff generator, Holtz machine, and Lorentz generator, and it has also been fully utilized in many applications such as sensors, charge patterning, and laser printing.1–5 Recently, a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) coupled with the electrostatic induction effect has been proposed as a new energy generating device. Because of the simple device design, high energy conversion efficiency, and cost-effectiveness, many potential applications such as environmental monitoring, power sources for wearable/portable electronic devices, and self-powered sensors (i.e. pressure, motion, and acoustic sensors) have been successfully demonstrated.6–14 It is also expected to be one of the on-site electricity generation strategies potentially used to realize a net zero energy building by meeting the building's energy load.
For the successful commercialization of these potential applications, TENGs with higher conversion efficiency are required, which means that the amount of charges transferred to insulating materials under various realistic input conditions is still not enough. Although the triboelectric charging of insulating materials has been studied for a long time,15 thereby, the mechanism has been generally considered to be understood well and related to the work functions of the materials in the metal/polymer system, the rapid development of nanotechnologies and wide potential applications has significantly increased the need to enhance our understanding of the mechanism under various realistic conditions.16,17 It has also been reported that more than one of the various mechanisms such as material transfer, or exchange of electrons and ions, based on a combination of the physical, chemical, and electronic properties of the materials, could simultaneously contribute to the charge transfer.18,19
Here, we introduce a photo-stimulated triboelectric generation occurring on the metal–oxide/polyimide interface during instantaneous friction. When a photon is incident on an electron bound to an atom, the electron gains some energy and is excited above higher energy levels associated with the atom, known as the photoelectric effect.20,21 Electron excitation by photon absorption will alter the probability of the electron transfer in contact, thus, the output signals of TENGs. This concept can be considered for the self-powered detection of light or other electromagnetic radiation, and the enhancement of the output signals of TENGs. As photoactive materials, various TiO2 and ZnO nanostructures such as dendrites and nanoparticles were employed and there was an obvious change in the output signals by light illumination.22,23 A lead zirconate titanate film has been used to fabricate a UV light sensor operable without any power consumption.24,25 The increase of the output signals by light illumination was also observed in methylammonium lead triiodide-based TENG.26 The operating principle is understood by experimentally measuring the density of charges transferred to the photoactive films before and after the light illumination. However, despite the above theoretical explanation, the experimental evidence as to why the photons change charge density still remains scarce. There has also been no report on the enhancement of the output signals as large as what we report here, which is so meaningful in outdoor applications.
Here, as an effective light absorber, a poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) layer was used underneath an amorphous titanium oxide (TiOx) layer. A polyimide layer, followed by the deposition of aluminum (Al), was placed on the TiOx, by having the two physically separated. Under dark conditions, when the polyimide and TiOx are brought in contact and then released, negative charges are transferred from the polyimide to TiOx and the generated potential made the electrons flow through the external circuit connected between them. Interestingly, after visible light was illuminated, a higher output current, by about 5-fold, was generated in the opposite direction with respect to the current in the dark. This means that more charges transferred from the TiOx to the polyimide. The wavelength dependent measurement of the output current and the in situ Kelvin probe force microscope (KPFM) measurement of the TiOx layer with and without light illumination showed that the photogenerated electrons from the light absorber accumulated at the surface and the work function decreased by approximately 0.2 eV. Without the light absorber, there was no change in the output currents and surface potential with the light illumination. The photo-stimulation on the output signals was also revealed by the electrically stimulated TENGs composed of a TiOx layer on the SiO2/Si substrate with an Au metal as a back gate electrode. As the negative voltage to the gate increased, the electron concentration at the surface of the TiOx layer increased, enhancing the output signals at a higher negative gate voltage. Finally, other mechanisms such as material transfer were investigated by the surface chemistry of the TiOx layer before and after the contact, confirming that the photo-stimulation was due to the charge transfer.
A schematic diagram of the TENG's structure and the real photograph of the device are shown in Fig. 1a and b. The TENG consists of Al/polyimide/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass, by having the two layers (polyimide and TiOx) physically separated, as described in the Experimental section. Before the output power measurement, a solar device of Al/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass was fabricated (Fig. S1a†) and the current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics were evaluated under AM1.5G illumination from a calibrated solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2, plotted in Fig. S1b.† Without the TiOx layer (Fig. S1b†), the device showed a typical photovoltaic response, that is, the short-circuit current (Isc) was 8.98 mA cm−2, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) was 0.60 V, and the fill factor (FF) was 0.63, which are comparable to those reported in previous studies.27 The power conversion efficiency was calculated to be 3.39% by using ηe = IscVocFF/Pinc, where Pinc is the intensity of the incident light. Under the open-circuit conditions of steady state illumination, the generation of photo-induced current means that the photogenerated free carriers accumulate at the anode and cathode due to the potential difference between them, as shown in Fig. S1c.† As the TiOx layer of approximately 20 nm was deposited on the P3HT:PC61BM layer, the Isc and Voc increase to 9.72 mA cm−2 and 0.62 V, respectively; thus, η increases to 3.62, corresponding to an approximately 6.4% increase in the efficiency. It is well-known that the main requirements for the electron transport layer (ETL) are a good electron transport property and, when the light is collected through it, transparency to the solar radiation. This limits the choice to a few materials, among which are the well-known and widely used ZnO and TiOx. The amorphous TiOx ETL layer has been characterized by high electron mobility and high transparency in the visible range. It is possible to create a TiOx ETL layer at room temperature from a solution without any post-deposition annealing process.28 As the electrons mainly travel inside the PCBM phase and the holes mainly travel inside the P3HT phase towards the respective electrodes, the inverted configuration is the best one, being characterized by a self-assembled ETL (hole blocking) at the electron extraction electrode, thus increasing the charge extraction efficiency and reducing the bimolecular recombination at the electrodes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a triboelectric nanogenerator. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (b) A photograph of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (c), (d) Cross-sectional and top view (TiOx) SEM images. (e) Absorption spectra of TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO and TiOx/ITO layers. (f) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator with measuring time under dark conditions. (g) The expanded view of the output current. 
As mentioned above, the polyimide and TiOx layers were physically separated. The Al film (top electrode) was attached on a polyimide, which was connected through an insulating polymer with double-sided adhesive with a thickness of 0.03 mm, maintaining an air gap, as shown in Fig. 1a. TiOx was used as the bottom electrode. Fig. 1c shows the output voltage of the TENG under a compressive force of 30 N and a frequency of 10 Hz. Initially, the output voltage was found to be approximately 2 V. It then saturated to approximately 4 V and there was no more increase after 10 s. A continuous contact gradually accumulated the triboelectric charges on both surfaces, increasing the output current with a few cycles of contacting collisions. We used saturated signals from now on, which are compared with others for accurate experiments.
The current was carried out under a compressive force of 30 N and at an applied frequency of 10 Hz, plotted in Fig. 2a. The TENG has an active area of around 1 × 1 cm2. Under dark conditions, a saturated output current of approximately 4 μA was generated and its performance was stable. When the light was turned on, the output current quickly started to increase and saturated at approximately 15 μA within several seconds. The photoresponse of the output current is quite repeatable although the output current under dark conditions still increased a little as a function of measuring time. The increase in the output voltage and current by the light illumination can be clearly observed in Movies 1a and 1b.† We also measured the charge density on the surface of both layers, TiOx and polyimide, under dark and light conditions, using the electrometer system (Keithley 6514). As shown in Fig. 2b, the charge density was found to be 4 μC m−2 and 10 μC m−2, respectively. This shows that the enhancement of the output power may be ascribed to the increase in the transferred charge density.
 Fig. 2  Electrical outputs of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (a) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator under dark conditions and white light illumination. (b) Charge density measured under the same conditions. 
As one of main factors influencing charge density, Kelvin probe force microscope (KPFM) measurements were carried out, aimed at determining the TiOx layer work function variation before and after light exposure, as shown in Fig. 3. For the exact measurement, the topography (Fig. 3a) and surface potential (Fig. 3b) of the same region were obtained simultaneously by using an atomic force microscope (AFM)/KPFM. The topography image reveals very small nanoparticles with characteristic dimensions of approximately 20 nm. However, it displays quite a flat surface with an effective roughness of less than 10 nm. Under dark conditions, the potential maps show red over most of the region, although there is a part of the region showing green and blue. The work function under the dark conditions was determined to be on average Φdark = 5.12 eV. With light exposure on the same position as in the dark, it was changed to blue although the red colour is still visible in the map. This means that the mean work function shifted towards lower values, determined to be Φilluminated = 4.92 eV. This indicates that by the light illumination, the Fermi level shifted to a lower energy by approximately 0.2 eV.
 Fig. 3  Surface potential variation of the TiOx layer before and after light exposure. (a) Schematic illustration of KPFM measurement under dark conditions and light illumination. (b) Topography and surface potential maps of the TiOx layer on the P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate of the same region with light illumination. The arrows on the maps indicated that the images were recorded for the same surface region. 
According to the working principles of the photovoltaic structures, photogenerated electrons are excited to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and leave holes in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). The carriers are separated and moved in the opposite direction due to the internal electric field generated by the asymmetric potential of the electrodes at both ends or the built-in potential of the surface,17 as seen in Fig. S1c.† TiOx is well known to collect the photogenerated electrons effectively. Thus, the decrease in the work function may be due to the presence of photo-generated electrons at the TiOx layer resulting from the internal electric field. In order to further investigate the effects of the accumulation of photogenerated electrons at the TiOx layer on the output signals, a TENG was fabricated, in which the TiOx was coated on the SiO2/Si substrate with a back gate metal (Au), physically separated with the polyimide/Al layer by springs, as shown in Fig. 4a. The electrical output signals were measured with the gate voltage, compared with the electron concentration of the TiOx layer. For n-type semiconductors in the metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure, when negative voltage was applied, the electrons were pushed into the surface of the TiOx, while the holes were attracted to the TiOx/SiO2 interface. Band bending was upward from the bulk and induced a positive space charge region. The sum of the density of holes and positive space charges is equal to the electrons at the Si/SiO2 interface, which can be assumed to be equal to the concentration of electrons pushed away to the surface of the TiOx layer. The carrier concentration (n) in the TiOx thin film is defined as,  where mn,v, v, ℏ, Θ(x), En,i, ψn,i(x), and fFD are the electron effective mass, the valley index, Dirac's constant, the Heaviside step function, the energy of the electron's quasi-bound state, channel wave-function and the Fermi–Dirac distribution, respectively.29 Considering the relative permittivity (130) and band gap (3.2 eV) of TiO2 instead of TiOx, the carrier concentration with the gate voltage was calculated with MATLAB, and plotted in Fig. 4c. At zero gate voltage, the carrier concentration of the oxide was approximately 2.58 × 1017 cm−3. At a negative voltage of −15 V, it showed the highest electron concentration. As the gate voltage was varied to 15 V, the carrier concentration decreased, as expected, and the oxide was changed to p-type from approximately 5 V. Here, the thickness of the TiOx film was fixed to be approximately 20 nm. By considering the dielectric constant (3.2) and thickness (approximately 200 nm) of SiO2, at the low negative voltage, the width of the space charge region was calculated to be several nanometers. The region would essentially reach a maximum width, calculated to be less than 100 nm by  
 Fig. 4  Effect of electron accumulation on output performance in the TiOx layer. (a) Schematic picture and a photograph of the gated triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of the Al/polyimide and TiOx/SiO2/Si/Au, by having the two physically separated by springs. (b) Output voltage of the triboelectric nanogenerator measured with the gate voltage. (c) Simulated carrier concentration of the TiO2 layer on the SiO2/Si/Au substrate. (d) The output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator with carrier concentration and gate voltage. 
Thus, the thickness of the TiOx film is comparable to the width of the space charge region, meaning that the electron concentration at the surface of the TiOx film is larger than the calculated one due to the high electric field.

Fig. 4c shows the output voltages measured with the gate voltage. It can clearly be seen that as the gate voltage was varied from −15 V to 15 V, the output voltage also decreased. Movie 2† also clearly shows that the output voltage decreased with the gate voltage. The measured output currents with the carrier concentration and the gate voltage are also plotted in Fig. 4d. As the electron concentration decreased, the output current also decreased, indicating that more electrons were transferred to the polyimide at a higher negative gate voltage. As the electron concentration decreased to almost 0, the output current significantly decreased and there was no more significant decrease when the holes become majority carriers. Thus, this result clearly supports the idea that the enhancement mechanism inferred here is due to the accumulation of photogenerated electrons at the TiOx layer.
To support the above-proposed working mechanism, COMSOL simulations were performed for the charge density of TiOx with the gate voltage, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4d. The material parameters of the Au, Si, SiO2 and TiO2, taken from the COMSOL simulation software, were used for finite element analysis. The electrical conductivities of Au, Si, SiO2, and TiO2 are 4.4 × 107, 1.12 × 10−12, 2.83 × 10−45, and 1 × 10−9 S m−1, respectively. The relative permittivity values of the materials are 6.9, 11.7, 3.9, and 130, respectively. It can clearly be seen that as the electron concentration increased, the charge density increased, meaning that the electrons can act as carriers transferred to the polyimide.
According to previous work, the transferred charge density (σ) on the polyimide surface is defined as  where W − E0is the difference in the effective work functions between two materials, e, t, ε, ε0, z, and  are the charge of an electron, distance of space, relative permittivity of the polymer, vacuum permittivity of free space, depth of the polyimide film, and the averaged surface density of states, resepctively.30 Here, in the dark, the work function of the polyimide was found to be approximately 5.08 eV (Fig. S2†), which is comparable to that reported in the literature.31 Under dark conditions, the Fermi level of TiOx was represented by a characteristic energy level with an effective work function around 5.12 eV, which is a little higher than the surface energy state of the polyimide. This may imply that the charges will be transferred to the TiOx from the polyimide until the two energy levels are lined up. However, the charge density generated on both surfaces will not be enough for a large output power generation because of the very small difference in work function between the two materials. The binding energy of the charges trapped in the polyimide may be quite high, and it is difficult to escape the trapped sites, thereby resulting in low charge concentration. When the light is illuminated, the negative shift of the work function of −0.2 V will lead to the inversion of the charge transfer from TiOx to the polyimide and result in an enlarged potential difference between the two materials, which will in turn increase the probability of a charge transfer by tunneling upon contact. To support this assumption, we expanded the output signals measured under dark and lighted conditions, as plotted in Fig. 5. Under dark conditions, when the two materials were released after they were pressed, the electrons flowed from the TiOx to the top electrode. This indicates that the charges were transferred from the polyimide to TiOx. With light illumination, the direction of the electron flow through the external circuit was reversed and the output current was enhanced by approximately two times, as plotted in Fig. 5b. This clearly shows that more charges are transferred from the TiOx to the polyimide, in good agreement with the assumption.
 Fig. 5  Output currents of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of Al/polyimide/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO and the schematic illustration of working mechanisms. (a) Under dark conditions. (b) White light illumination. 
To gain further insight into the enhanced output performance of the TENG, the output signals with the wavelength of the incident light were measured, as plotted in Fig. 6a. Under dark conditions, an output current of approximately 4 μA was generated and the output current increased up to 20 μA after the white light was illuminated, in good agreement with the above results. Here, UV light (<400 nm) was filtered and exposed under the same conditions to see the effect of the visible light. An increase in the output current was also observed after exposing the sample to the light although there was a little decrease in the current. This means that visible light strongly contributes to the enhancement of the output performance. In general, UV light promotes the electrons in the valence band to the conduction band or the trap states; thereby, the oxide becomes more conductive.32 This may be quite effective in transferring more electrons to the polyimide film during physical contact. For further investigation, TiOx and TiO2 were directly deposited on the ITO/glass substrate and TENGs were fabricated. The white light was illuminated onto both oxides under the same conditions and the output voltage was measured, as plotted in Fig. S3.† It is clearly shown that there was no significant change in output voltages for both TENGs. This may show that the effect of UV light illumination on the output performance of the TENGs is negligible because the surface potential is not changed via visible light illumination because of the large band gap energy of the oxides. Actually, as shown in Fig. S4,† the potential maps of both oxides showed that their values were not significantly changed after exposing the samples to white light although there was a little decrease (<0.05 eV) in the surface potential.
 Fig. 6  Wavelength-dependent measurement of the electrical output. (a) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of Al/polyimide/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO with the wavelength of the incident light. (b) Current density of the solar cell consisting of Al/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO with the wavelength of the incident light. (c) The EQE with the wavelength of the incident light. 
We also measured the output performance of the device structures (Al/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass) as a function of the wavelength in Fig. 6b. When the UV-filtered light was illuminated, an Isc of 6.9 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.60 V were observed. When white light was illuminated, Isc increased to 9.8 mA cm−2, a 40% enhancement. This may explain the enhancement of the output current with the UV light observed in Fig. 6a as UV light can assist the transport of the photogenerated electrons to the TiOx.33–35 However, the enhancement was not so high due to the low EQE in the UV light region, as shown in Fig. 6c.36,37 Also, the electron–hole pairs generated in TiOx by UV light illumination are known to recombine very quickly (∼100 ps), while the recombination of the photogenerated electrons transported from the active layer with holes in TiOx is quite slow (>200 ps). As a result, it can be concluded that a large amount of photogenerated electrons can be transported to the polyimide layer during physical contact.38–40
Finally, to show that the enhancement of the output power is due to charge transfer, we performed a series of comparative experiments using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in Fig. S5.† After contact–separation for 10000 times, the core level spectra of O 1s, C 1s, and Ti 2p were obtained. There was no change in the binding energy of the O 1s and C 1s peaks, and no additional peak was observed. In Ti 2p spectra, no Ti element was observed after the contact–separation. Based on the results, we are convinced that there is no material transfer between TiOx and polyimide meaning that the power generation may originate from charge transfer.
Conclusions
Here, a photo-stimulated triboelectric generation occurring at the oxide/polyimide interface during instantaneous contact was successfully demonstrated. As an effective light absorber, P3HT:PC61BM was used underneath an TiOx layer, which made contact with a polyimide layer. Under dark conditions, the charges were transferred from the polyimide to the TiOx layer. However, under light illumination, more charges were transferred to the polyimide, generating an output current approximately 5 times higher in the opposite direction with respect to the current in the dark. The wavelength dependent measurement of the output current and the in situ Kelvin probe force microscope measurement of the TiOx layer with and without light illumination showed that the photogenerated electrons from the light absorber accumulated at the surface and the work function decreased by approximately 0.2 eV. Without the light absorber, there was no change in the output currents or surface potential due to light illumination. Upon white light irradiation, further enhancement of the output current was obtained due to the additional increase in the electron density at the surface of the TiOx layer by UV light.
Photo-stimulation on the output signals was also revealed in an electrically stimulated TENG, composed of TiOx/SiO2/Si with a back gate metal (Au). As the negative voltage to the gate increased, the electron concentration at the surface of the TiOx layer increased, enhancing the output. Finally, to investigate other mechanisms such as material transfer, XPS was employed to understand the surface chemistry before and after the contact, which confirmed that there was no material transfer between TiOx and polyimide, and the photo-stimulation was due to charge transfer. These results can contribute to the designs of energy harvesting devices with high performance as well as the development of self-powered selective wavelength photodetectors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Samsung Research Funding Center of Samsung Electronics under Project No. SRFC-TA1403-51. We are very thankful to Prof. Martin Moskovits and Prof. Zhong Lin Wang for their great contribution to this paper.
Notes and references
Z.-H. Lin, G. Zhu, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Yang, P. Bai, J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 5169–5173 CrossRef .
Z.-H. Lin, Y. Xie, Y. Yang, S. Wang, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4554–4560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, D. Zhao, M. Xue, H. Wang and T. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 5669–5672 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, L. Duan, M. Xue, W. Ni and T. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 6827–6831 CrossRef .
E. S. Polsen, A. G. Stevens and A. J. Hart, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3656–3662 CAS .
T. Zhou, C. Zhang, C. B. Han, F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14695–14701 CAS .
K. N. Kim, J. Chun, J. W. Kim, K. Y. Lee, J.-U. Park, S.-W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6394–6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, L. Wang, X. Chen and C. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, H. Zhang, B. Shi, X. Xue, Z. Liu, Y. Jin, Y. Ma, Y. Zou, X. Wang, Z. An, W. Tang, W. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Lang, Z. Xu, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6510–6518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zi, J. Wang, S. Wang, S. Li, Z. Wen, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dhakar, S. Gudla, X. Shan, Z. Wang, F. E. H. Tay, C.-H. Heng and C. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chun, B. U. Ye, J. W. Lee, D. Choi, C.-Y. Kang, S.-W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, S.-B. Jeon, J. Y. Kim, M.-L. Seol, S. O. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G.-T. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin, C. Liu, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6720–6728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. McCarty and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2188–2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mirkowska, M. Kratzer, C. Teichert and H. Flachberger, BHM Berg- und Hüttenmänn. Monatsh., 2016, 161, 359–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Akande and J. Lowell, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1987, 20, 565–578 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Williamsa, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 010701 CrossRef .
J. M. Lee, J. Lim, N. Lee, H. I. Park, K. E. Lee, T. Jeon, S. A. Nam, J. Kim, J. Shin and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1519–1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, B.-H. Kwon, H. I. Park, H. Kim, M. G. Kim, J. S. Park, E. S. Kim, S. Yoo, D. Y. Jeon and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2011–2017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin, G. Cheng, Y. Yang, Y. S. Zhou, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2810–2816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1436–1442 RSC .
S. Bai, Q. Xu, L. Gu, F. Ma, Y. Qina and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, H. Y. Li, Y. Wang, S. Y. Kuang, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, Z. Zhao, H. Li, y. Wang, S. Kuanh, G. Cao, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1039–10399 RSC .
J. Li, S. Kim, S. Edington, J. Nedy, S. Cho, K. Lee, A. J. Heeger, M. C. Gupta and J. T. Yates Jr., Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1123–1130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lattante, Electronics, 2014, 3, 132–164 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley,  2007, p. 3 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Yang, G. Zhu, S. Niu, Z.-H. Lin, Y. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1567–1572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Kim, Y. K. Jung, J. Chun, B. U. Ye, M. Gu, E. Seo, S. Kim, S.-W. Kim, B.-S. Kim and J. M. Baik, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 360–370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero, S. Chambon, L. Hirsch and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6234–6240 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuwabara, H. Sugiyama, T. Yamaguchi and K. Takahashi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 3766–3769 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2512 CAS .
Y. Li, J. K. Cooper, W. Liu, C. M. Sutter-Fella, M. Amani, J. W. Beeman, A. Javey, J. W. Ager, Y. Liu, F. M. Toma and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Bolink, E. Coronado, A. Forment-Aliaga, M. Lenes, A. L. Rosa, S. Filippone and N. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1382–1386 RSC .
M. Ikram, S. Ali, R. Murray, A. Hussain, Islah-u-din and S. I. Shah, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2015, 15, 48–54 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, Y. Li, L. Xiao, Q. Qiao, R. Dhakal, Z. Zhang, Q. Gong, D. Galipeau and X. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14590–14600 CAS .
M. Sachs, E. Pastor, A. Kafizas and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3742–3746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-W. Hwang, J. Y. Kim, S. Cho, J. Yuen, N. Coates, K. Lee, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, D. Moses and A. J. Heeg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7853–7857 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: I. Experimental section. II. The fabrication process of organic photovoltaic cells and the current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics with and without TiOx layer. III. The surface potential map of the polyimide layer under dark condition. IV. The output voltages of the triboelectric nanogenerators consisting of the Al/Kapton/TiOx/ITO/glass and Al/Kapton/TiO2/ITO/glass with the incident white light. V. The topography and surface potential maps of TiOx/ITO/glass and TiO2/ITO/glass with white light illumination. VI. The core level spectra of O 1s, C 1s, and Ti 2p of the TiOx layer before and after the physical contact. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07020aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a triboelectric nanogenerator. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (b) A photograph of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (c), (d) Cross-sectional and top view (TiOx) SEM images. (e) Absorption spectra of TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO and TiOx/ITO layers. (f) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator with measuring time under dark conditions. (g) The expanded view of the output current.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrical outputs of the triboelectric nanogenerator. (a) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator under dark conditions and white light illumination. (b) Charge density measured under the same conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface potential variation of the TiOx layer before and after light exposure. (a) Schematic illustration of KPFM measurement under dark conditions and light illumination. (b) Topography and surface potential maps of the TiOx layer on the P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate of the same region with light illumination. The arrows on the maps indicated that the images were recorded for the same surface region.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Effect of electron accumulation on output performance in the TiOx layer. (a) Schematic picture and a photograph of the gated triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of the Al/polyimide and TiOx/SiO2/Si/Au, by having the two physically separated by springs. (b) Output voltage of the triboelectric nanogenerator measured with the gate voltage. (c) Simulated carrier concentration of the TiO2 layer on the SiO2/Si/Au substrate. (d) The output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator with carrier concentration and gate voltage.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Output currents of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of Al/polyimide/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO and the schematic illustration of working mechanisms. (a) Under dark conditions. (b) White light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 6  Wavelength-dependent measurement of the electrical output. (a) Output current of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of Al/polyimide/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO with the wavelength of the incident light. (b) Current density of the solar cell consisting of Al/TiOx/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/ITO with the wavelength of the incident light. (c) The EQE with the wavelength of the incident light.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: I. Experimental section. II. The fabrication process of organic photovoltaic cells and the current-density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics with and without TiOx layer. III. The surface potential map of the polyimide layer under dark condition. IV. The output voltages of the triboelectric nanogenerators consisting of the Al/Kapton/TiOx/ITO/glass and Al/Kapton/TiO2/ITO/glass with the incident white light. V. The topography and surface potential maps of TiOx/ITO/glass and TiO2/ITO/glass with white light illumination. VI. The core level spectra of O 1s, C 1s, and Ti 2p of the TiOx layer before and after the physical contact. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07020a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
