Capture agents, conversion mechanisms, biotransformations and biomimetics: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5FD90082D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5FD90082D
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2015, 183, 463-487Capture agents, conversion mechanisms, biotransformations and biomimetics: general discussion

        
          
            Eryk 
            Remiezowicz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jeroen 
            Spooren
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Elizabeth 
            Bay
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Cowan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ian 
            Ingram
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pedro 
            Abrantes
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Manuel 
            Nunes da Ponte
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            North
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Albo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Styring
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Priestnall
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Katie 
            Lamb
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michele 
            Aresta
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Elsje Alessandra 
            Quadrelli
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard 
            Heyn
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            André 
            Bardow
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            William 
            Webb
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Renata 
            Silva
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Carlos 
            Alonso-Moreno
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Csaba 
            Janaky
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Geoffrey 
            Maitland
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seetharaman 
            Vaidyanathan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gonçalo 
            V. S. M. Carrera
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Reed
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Karolien 
            Vanbroekhoven
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cafer Tayyar 
            Yavuz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Deepak 
            Pant
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Nathan 
            Hollingsworth
          
        
      
First published on 23rd November 2015

Michael North presented some work related to the papers by Michael Priestnall, Christopher Hardacre and Cafer Tayyar Yavuz: I would like to share some recent work carried out jointly by my group and that of James Clark on the use of mesoporous carbons as CO2 capture agents. These materials are able to capture 65% more CO2 than activated carbon whilst retaining the rates of adsorption and desorption. The mesoporous materials also show much better selectivity for physisorption of CO2 over N2 than activated carbon (up to 20:1 compared to 5:1 for activated carbon) and also selectively adsorb CO2 over methane with about 2.8:1 selectivity.

Geoffrey Maitland asked: You showed some very interesting results concerning the adsorption of CO2 in the nanopores of a variety of carbonaceous materials, particularly the selectivity towards CO2 over N2, relevant to flue gas separation. Can you attribute the observed differences to variations in the hydrophobicity of potential adsorption sites or are there other factors at play in determining the loading and selectivity? Have you for instance considered the effects of confinement of the thermodynamics of adsorption in these systems?

Michael North responded: the hydrophobicity increases as the carbonisation temperature increases, but the CO2 adsorption goes through a maximum, so we do not believe that hydrophobicity is the explanation.

Peter Styring remarked: Michael North is talking about assisted physisorption. Really it is self-assembly. The polyamine on its own has little selectivity as we have shown in an Energy and Engineering Science paper with Aschenbrenner as the lead author.1 If you put it on a support (that has oxygenated groups in it) you get better activity. When you look at the support you are looking at self-assembly as well. That is why monoethanol amine is a better sorbent than amines in isolation: the hydroxyl motif aids the sorption process.
1 O. Aschenbrenner and P. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1106–1113.

Eryk Remiezowicz opened the discussion of the paper by Michael Priestnall: As I see, the necessary step is digestion with NaOH. NaOH is a great capture agent, how do you justify its further processing step? How do you balance your process with carbon capture by NaOH itself?

Michael Priestnall replied: NaOH is an excellent CO2 capture agent – agreed – but more CO2 is generated in its manufacture than in its carbonation to sodium carbonate, so it makes no life cycle sense to use NaOH to reduce net CO2 emissions. In this work we are using a minimum amount of NaOH as an agent to split magnesium silicate into magnesium hydroxide and sodium silicate and have calculated the CO2 captured on the basis of the carbonation of the magnesium hydroxide only. Industrially, sodium silicate solution is converted to silica powder and sodium carbonate by reaction with CO2; or the sodium silicate solution can be converted electrochemically into silica and sodium hydroxide. Energy is required to recover NaOH. The basis of CO2 balance in the paper does not include any benefit for capture of CO2 by NaOH or sodium silicate, nor does it include any CO2-cost for the recovery of NaOH, it simply assumes the NaOH is consumed. If we include the additional silica production part of the process and NaOH recovery, then the overall net reaction is:  Mg2SiO + 4CO2 + 2H2O = 2Mg(HCO3)2 + SiO2.
        (1)
      

Daniel Reed said: From a process point of view, how long does the process take from start to finish (feedstock to product)?

Michael Priestnall answered: The process has only been investigated in lab-scale experiments. We have used reaction times of 1–6 h and temperatures ~150–250 °C at ambient pressure. At 250 °C the conversion of olivine to brucite is mostly completed within 1 h. Higher temperatures and elevated pressure or smaller particle size would reduce reaction time further.
Wet carbonation of brucite (to scrub CO2 emissions) is a separate process. This is a continuous real-time process.

Daniel Reed asked: Do you envisage this to be a batch process for real world applications?

Michael Priestnall replied: The process could be operated as batch or continuous. Most industrial processes are cheaper when configured as continuous processes. For example the solid-state reaction could be achieved continuously by feeding a pelletised premix of olivine powder and NaOH through a rotary oven. The separate CO2 scrubbing process was tested experimentally with a single batch charge of brucite, but industrially this would certainly be a continuous process.

Daniel Reed enquired: Are you concerned about how much CO2 you can capture or are you just happy to be using some CO2 at all?

Michael Priestnall responded: For the scrubbing process to have commercial viability it is essential to have a very high utilisation (carbonation) of the brucite – uniquely we have shown close to 100% carbonation of the brucite at ambient temperature and pressure.
Again, to be industrially relevant, it is important to be able to remove >90% of the CO2 from an exhaust gas and also to be able to do this from a wide range of gas compositions. In the work reported we achieved close to 100% removal of CO2 from a 5%CO2/N2 gas mixture.

Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli noted: The kinetics of the process (and the connected necessity to grind and pre-condition the minerals) have been mentioned as a potential hurdle that can worsen the energy consumption and hence the feasibility of the inorganic silicate minerals route to large scale CO2 capture processes. In your study, how does the size of the particle come into play in the overall process proposed?

Michael Priestnall answered: We have not yet investigated the optimisation of particle size versus reaction times and temperatures and life cycle energy. Our work has used virgin quarried and comminuted olivine rock; however we could also have used already finely ground magnesium silicate wastes from nickel, platinum or asbestos mining. Such mineral wastes are available in mega-ton quantities in many sites around the world.

Geoffrey Maitland questioned: Did you include the significant particle grinding and mixing energies in the overall energy balance for your process? What effect does this have on your conclusions regarding the cradle-to-grave energy requirements and near carbon-neutrality of the CO2 storage process?

Michael Priestnall replied: In a separate (unpublished) life-cycle analysis for Alberta CCEMC, we estimated the full process and product life cycle from quarrying and comminution of virgin rock in China, on-site processing to silica powder and magnesium hydroxide, shipping 10 000 km and industrial wet-scrubbing to production of magnesium carbonate powder. Energy use in grinding and milling is a moderate factor, but by far the most significant contributors to the life cycle calculation are the amount of NaOH used and the extent to which the amorphous precipitated silica by-product can offset conventional production of APS. The result of that LCA calculation was a net 1 ton of CO2 reduced per ton of brucite converted to solid carbonate powder or a net 2 tons CO2 reduced per ton of brucite converted to dissolved magnesium bicarbonate.

Peter Styring asked: The process to get the carbonate from the CO2 is exothermic. The reactions you're looking at include the generation of heat. Is there any attempt to recover the heat back into the process and does that have any savings on the whole life cycle?

Michael Priestnall answered: In the wet-scrubbing process we describe that the carbonation of brucite takes place at ambient temperature ~10 °C. There is minimal prospect of recovering useful heat energy at this temperature. However, in other work we have demonstrated the feasibility of recovering a proportion of the ~100 kJ mol−1 carbonation energy directly as electricity by configuring the carbonation reaction as redox half-cell reactions in an alkaline electrolyte fuel cell.1
1 M. A. Priestnall, Patent Appl. WO2011073621, 2009.

Richard Heyn communicated: My impression is that the investigated process is carbon neutral or carbon negative when the CO2 is captured only as aqueous Mg(HCO3)2. Storage of CO2 in an aqueous solution does not strike me as particularly effective in the long-term. Could you expound on the eventual application or further processing or disposal of the aqueous Mg(HCO3)2 solutions, and the impact of those downstream steps on the overall carbon balance?

Michael Priestnall communicated in reply: Rau and others report the stability of ocean dissolved magnesium bicarbonate as being of the order of 1000 years.1,2 Large-scale storage of CO2 as ocean alkalinity (bicarbonate), via e.g. ocean liming or accelerated weathering is a relevant related area or research. The process we report has been considered for use on ships to scrub acid gas emissions directly into seawater without raising ocean pH. Dissolved magnesium bicarbonate will endothermically decompose into solid magnesium carbonate phases and dissolved CO2 as water temperature is increased or ambient pressure reduced or above saturation. Keener and others have devised cyclic process using brucite-bicarbonate-carbonate to separate pure CO2 from exhaust gases.3,4 Half as much CO2 is captured as solid carbonate compared to bicarbonate. However solid carbonate products can then offset life cycle CO2 from other production process routes.
1 Greg H. Rau, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 823–828.
2 Greg H. Rau et al., PNAS, 2013, 110, 10095–10100.
3 L. Cheng, T. Li, T. C. Keener, J. Y. Lee, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 17, 240–249.
4 H. K. Bharadwaja, J-Y. Lee, X. Li, Z. Liu, T. C. Keener, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 250–251, 292– 297.

Jeroen Spooren asked: Related to the life cycle is cost analysis in order to obtain an idea on the feasibility of the (overall) process – what are the prices of the produced products and what is the overall cost of the process?

Michael Priestnall responded: The values of products are hugely dependent upon volume, purity, morphology and market application. At moderate (<1 Mt CO2 per year) scales the process might be expected to be optimised to maximise product material value as advanced industrial minerals. At a larger scale of CO2 sequestration, where product volumes may be much larger than available markets for industrial minerals, the process may be optimised for minimum input and process costs, maximum CO2 capture and carbonated products configured for high-volume, low-price construction materials, agricultural and geo-materials or even zero-value storage/land-fill.
For process scales <1Mt CO2 per year:
• Process inputs are olivine or serpentine powder at a delivered price of ~18 euros per ton or production cost of ~1.5 per euros ton. The NaOH purchase price is ~230 euros per ton.
• The sodium silicate products are valued at ~260 euros per ton, which can, optionally, be further processed into precipitated silica valued at ~600 euros per ton and recovered sodium hydroxide valued at ~230 euros per ton. The magnesium hydroxide product (internal value of ~260 euros per ton) is used to capture CO2 (nominal sequestration value of ~35 euros per ton) to produce magnesium carbonate valued at 210 euros per ton.
• On the basis of input costs and output values, net profitability for the process has be estimated at ~800 euros per ton CO2 sequestered.

Jeroen Spooren queried: The sodium silicate which is produced contains impurities as well? How does the quality of this impure sodium silicate compare with the raw sodium silicate material that is nowadays used in the process industry? Does it comply with the industrial requirements for this material?

Michael Priestnall answered: The Norwegian olivine used in this work contains ~6% iron oxides. We have not compared the purity of the sodium silicate digestion by-product with commercial sodium silicate. However, amorphous silica powder with low-Fe has been precipitated from the processed sodium silicate and supplied to tyre manufacturers for comparison against commercial silica powder.

Katie Lamb communicated: I have a question about the magnesium silicate resources quoted in this paper. I was wondering if you have considered the availability of dunite in terms of a global scale? Is this a mineral that is abundant across the globe, and therefore could potentially be utilised on a global scale, or is this potentially a niche method that would only be beneficial in certain areas, in terms of economics and other factors?

Michael Priestnall communicated in reply: Olivine (dunite) and serpentine is available around the globe in gigaton quantities. Lackner and others have published resource maps for these minerals.1–3 Oman is reported to have 70 cubic-kilometres of accessible olivine deposits. We have used commercial olivine quarried in Norway and serpentine quarried in Austria; also serpentine from a 5 bn ton mine in China.
1 F. Goff, K. Lackner, Environ. Geosci., 1998, 5, 89–101.
2 K. Lackner et al., Energy, 1995, 20, 1153–1170.
3 A. Sanna et al., Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8049–8080.

Michael Priestnall concluded: To comment on small-scale, high-value versus large-scale, low-value CDU products in the context of our paper (c5fd00047e): one needs to configure a CDU process very specifically to the individual customer/market application and need – if we are applying our mineral carbonation process to a GWe-scale power station, we would configure it to operate as cheaply as possible assuming the carbonate product is most likely to go to landfill. If it is being applied to remediate chrysolite asbestos mining waste we would use CO2 from the air and maximise the yield of amorphous silica from silicate digestion.

Manuel Nunes da Ponte opened a general discussion of the paper by Christopher Hardacre†: I thought the process you describe in your paper is very interesting, but I was somewhat puzzled with the choice of materials for the cathode: silver, gold and platinum. I would have thought that maybe Cu or Ni would be the most obvious choices? And a second question: is it not surprising that the chemisorbed carbon dioxide is much more easily reduced (at a much lower potential) than the one that is only physisorbed in the ionic liquid?

Nathan Hollingsworth responded: Thank you for your questions. Ag, Au and Pt electrodes were chosen because they are inert within the ionic liquid/water/acetonitrile system. The authors agree that the use of Cu and Ni are a more obvious choice for CO2 reduction, however, within the electrolyte Cu was found to be unstable. Ni is a good suggestion and a material we should endeavour to test. Physisorbed CO2 is well reported to be difficult to reduce and we have postulated this reaction mechanism based on the interaction of the anion with the CO2 DFT studies are being undertaken to explore the mechanism of the low energy pathway the findings of which will hopefully provide an answer to this important question.

Csaba Janaky enquired: Could you tell us the approximate current density you achieve during the stationary reduction experiment?

Nathan Hollingsworth answered: The approximate current density used for the Au electrode was in the range of 1.8–4 mA cm−2.

Csaba Janaky continued: Could you comment on the stability of your system? Do you get back your ions unchanged after the CO2-reduction?

Nathan Hollingsworth replied: We have seen no evidence for any decomposition via1H-NMR of the ionic liquid after electrolysis. It is therefore suggested the ionic liquid is returned unchanged after electrolysis.

Geoffrey Maitland asked: Concerning the electrodes, is the physical form (rod vs foil), microstructure or the structure at the nanoscale important for their performance, apart from surface area effects?

Nathan Hollingsworth responded: Aside from surface area effects, the different physical electrode form will allow for differing sites and surfaces. Electrodes composed of nanoparticles are particularly interesting in that an electrode could be produced with an abundance of a particular active site or surface. To this end I believe the physical form and surface termination is a key variable to be altered when optimising a catalytic process.

Richard Heyn commented: Reduction of both chemically bound CO2 and physically bound CO2 is observed, with the chemically bound CO2 reduced at lower applied potentials. Do you have any thoughts or can you share any data about how this particular pathway can be improved upon?

Nathan Hollingsworth answered: I would attempt to improve this pathway by tailoring the anion. This would be to lower the reduction potential for the CO2 anion complex. One way to would be to use in silico methods to screen a wide range of anions with chemical binding sites and thus direct the experimental effort.

Peter Styring said: It might be tricky in your system, but there is a problem with units: some people use % mass or % mol capture etc. Here we have mg g−1. To try and get consistency, in terms of CO2 capture, what is the efficiency in your systems?

Nathan Hollingsworth answered: In terms of conversion efficiency the reported Faradaic efficiencies are a good guide. The highest reported is using a Ag electrode at −0.7 V giving an efficiency of 95%.1 With regards to capture efficiency, work needs to be done looking at capture efficiency when dissolved in MeCN.
1 N. Hollingsworth, S. F. R. Taylor, M. T. Galante, J. Jacquemin, C. Longo, K. B. Holt, N. H. de Leeuw and C. Hardacre, Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Formate at Low Overpotential using a Superbase Ionic Liquid., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14164–14168.

Peter Styring remarked: The highest efficiency that we have found is 0.7 g g−1 (70%) but to caveat that, MEA costs 14 000 euros per ton. If we were to scale ours it would be 20 000 000 euros per ton so you've really got to look at the economics. We have seen some cheaper reagents which make economic sense. Often you have to make a compromise. If you were to consider your capture agents, do you have a value for their cost?

Nathan Hollingsworth replied: Traditionally ionic liquids outperform MEA for CO2 capture (mole basis), however the high cost of ionic liquid based capture agents have been a barrier to market. The cost of the IL has been considered and we have purposely chosen a cheaper IL. The reagent used to make the ionic liquid reported is [P66614]Cl, which is an industrially produced fire retardant. Life cycle analysis of this process is currently being undertaken by Prof Adisa Azapagic’s group in Manchester, once completed we should have a much better idea of cost. Realistically the IL will cost more than the MEA therefore the stability and regeneration of the system (both of which can be improved by the use of an IL) is key to competing with conventional technology.

Peter Styring enquired: What is the lifetime of these materials? Looking at MEA, you're looking at anything from 28 days to 3 months before you need to completely replace them due to evaporative loss and degradation: so something that is more expensive may be better in the long run.

Nathan Hollingsworth responded: As an IL [P66614][124Triz] has a negligible vapour pressure. The decomposition temperature is also >250 °C. Recyclability studies of the pure IL system have shown no decrease in CO2 capture efficiency after 25 cycles.1 CO2 is removed from these systems at 80 °C compared to 120 °C for MEA and assuming the degradation is negligible the lifetime of this ionic liquid system should be longer than MEA. Given the higher CO2 uptake and the ability to convert the CO2in situ you are correct in saying a potentially more expensive initial out lay may make more economic sense in the long run.
1 Wang et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4918–4922.

Michael Priestnall commented: To comment further on capture efficiency, (c5fd00047e): the capture efficiency of Mg(OH)2 we have shown in our paper is approximately 160% – i.e. we capture 1.6 g of CO2 per 1 g of capture agent – looking at the costs, to ship a ton from Norway to UK is about 18 euros, and that material contains 50wt% Mg(OH)2 – you're not reusing it but the storage time is permanent, so overall this makes for a very good comparison against reuseable capture agents.

Peter Styring remarked: One thing you have to take into account is that whilst ionic liquids can be more efficient, you need to look at the process conditions as well. While they have vanishing vapour pressure at room temperature and pressure they enter the vapour phase above 100 °C and decompose above 200 °C. We have carried out molecular modelling studies looking at the binding energy/bond distortion as you bring the ionic liquid molecules together with CO2. The results allow us to predict which make good materials.

Michael North questioned: An issue for CO2 capture from power stations is water – the paper by Cafer Tayyar Yavuz (c5fd00099h) looked at pure CO2 and wet CO2. For your ionic liquid based system, what effect will water have on the CO2 capture? Will it form the bicarbonate instead of the ionic liquid CO2 adduct?

Nathan Hollingsworth answered: Thank you for your question. Water has been deliberately added to this system to provide a source of H+ and appears to still capture CO2. A recent study1 has reported the differences in CO2 capture with wet and dry CO2 streams. It should be noted that certain ionic liquids have increased CO2 capture properties when hydrated CO2 streams are employed. Good recyclability of [P66614][124Triz] for CO2 capture is also reported under wet conditions. With regards to the formation of bicarbonate, it is likely that with a large excess of water bicarbonate would form. This may compete with the physically absorbed CO2, however the main component of CO2 capture in [P66614][124Triz] is through chemical absorption and this should be unaffected.
1 S. F. R. Taylor et al., CO2 Capture in Wet and Dry Superbase Ionic Liquids, J. Solution Chem., 2015, 44, 511–527.

Manuel Nunes da Ponte commented: In favour of ionic liquids – the paper presented by Nathan Hollingsworth (c5fd00099h) looks at capture and conversion in situ, while the currently available amine-based capture technology requires a desorption step afterwards, in order to make the carbon dioxide available. A direct comparison of the two processes is therefore unfair to the ionic liquid-based one. Of course, we have to think how to separate the electroreduction products from the ionic liquid solvent, but the same would be required for any CDU process that utilises carbon dioxide captured by amines.

Jonathan Albo communicated: Among the broad diversity of ILs, those based on acetate anions typically present a higher degree of CO2 solubility (physical and chemical absorption) across a wide range of temperatures and applied pressures.1 Have you considered the application of these Ac-based ILs as a reaction media in your system?
1 J. Albo, T. Yoshioka, T. Tsuru, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 122, 440–448.

Nathan Hollingsworth communicated in reply: We have not considered using acetate based anions in this system. Firstly because CO2 reduction in acetate based ionic liquids is already reported,1,2 and secondly because the CO2 absorption properties are inferior to the super basic anion systems.
1 L. E. Barrosse-Antle and R. G. Compton, Reduction of carbon dioxide in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3744–3746.
2 J. D. Watkins and A. B. Bocarsly, Direct Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Formate in High-Gas-Capacity Ionic Liquids at Post-Transition-Metal Electrodes, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 284–290.

Jonathan Albo further communicated: ILs containing metals in their anion (also known as magnetic ionic liquids), have shown interesting properties as a reaction media for various catalytic reactions, as well as for electrochemical devices (i.e. flow battery systems, anti-glare rear, information displays, etc.).1 Would you expect an improved CO2 electroreduction performance by applying this new family of ILs?
1 E. Santos, J. Albo, A. Irabien, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40008–40018.

Nathan Hollingsworth communicated in reply: Including a catalytically active component into the ionic liquid (whether it be magnetic or non-magnetic) is in the future plan and should produce some very interesting results. We believe that to have the highest impact, the anion would have to directly interact with the CO2 and in these cases it should result in further improvements of the electroreduction performance.

Geoffrey Maitland addressed Michael Priestnall and Nathan Hollingsworth: You have added nitrogen because you were trying to simulate flue gas to some extent. What about the tolerance of your systems or otherwise to other impurities such as NOx, SOx, H2S etc.? The cost of a viable process will be very sensitive to the degree of purification of CO2 from a flue gas stream that is required, so tolerance of other components would be advantageous.

Michael Priestnall responded: Another reason to add N2 is so that the change in concentration of CO2 can easily be measured. We haven't investigated the effects of other impurities but magnesia is used commercially to scrub SOx, NOx and H2S. We anticipate that the system should be tolerant to and highly effective at scrubbing common acid gas impurities.

Nathan Hollingsworth continued: Indeed, tolerance of flue gas impurities is very important in the commercialisation of any capture conversion process. To this end, the effect of SOx species on the capture process is currently being studied; initial results suggest that these IL systems are tolerant to SOx. The effect of NOx and H2S at present has not been assessed, however we are looking into metal sulphide electrodes, where some H2S may be advantageous.

Ian Ingram continued the discussion of the paper by Michael Priestnall: Your method for CO2 capture using magnesium-based mineralisation seems to be very effective and obviously lends itself to application on a very large scale. However, on the RSC's sustainable periodic table,1 magnesium is colour-coded yellow, signifying that supplies might be running short in the next 200 years or so. How does this potential scarcity affect the large scale application of your process going forward? Are the magnesium silicates going to become prohibitively expensive in the future?
1 A. J. Hunt et al., Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1949–1950.

Michael Priestnall replied: Mg is the 8th most abundant element, comprising >2wt% of the Earth. Mg is mostly in the form of Mg-silicate rocks. There are no commercial processes for the production of Mg from magnesium silicate rocks and Mg-silicates are not included RSC's Mg resource base. The alkaline digestion process we describe enables the use of magnesium silicate as a commercial source of Mg metal for the first time. Serpentine and olivine are available in high purity and low cost from existing quarrying operations with accessible resources in the order of tens of billions of tons. The current global market for serpentine and olivine is very small.

Peter Styring said: Michael, you raised an interesting point about impurities and mentioned Carbon8 Systems. They take air pollution control residues and the toxic impurities are entrapped by accelerated carbonation using CO2 to produce building materials. These not only use CO2 but also reduce toxic landfill. In terms of public perceptions, these materials have gone through stringent building regulations to show they are fit for purpose in the building industry while having the environmental advantages discussed. Do you have any comment on this?

Michael Priestnall answered: A number of commercial mineral carbonation operations exist around the world. Currently, all of these are driven financially by either the value of the waste remediated (e.g. through avoiding landfill charges) or by the value of the end products (e.g. metals recovered, minerals or construction materials produced), rather than by the value of the CO2 sequestered. In cases where pure CO2 is utilised, this currently has to be paid for (at ~£100 per ton) as an input chemical and significant cost to the process. There is therefore an economic incentive to utilise and sequester the minimum amount of CO2. This disincentive to utilisation of CO2 probably exists in most CDU schemes including EOR. For it to become economically attractive to sequester CO2 there has to be a sufficiently high CO2 price.

Jeroen Spooren stated: Another example of CO2 utilisation in construction materials is in the Carbstone project/product (Belgium) where we store CO2 and produce high grade construction materials from otherwise landfilled steel slag materials. We store about 150 kg of CO2 in 1 ton of product and the required process energy emits an equivalent of 80 kg of CO2 per ton of product. This process will not capture large amounts of CO2 but can be a piece of the puzzle to contribute to a wider CDU spectrum. For more information see http://www.carbstoneinnovation.be/en/.

Alexander Cowan continued the discussion of the paper by Christopher Hardacre: Thank you for your presentation. It is a most interesting study. Could you comment on the oxidation side of your cell? Do you think the ionic liquid has a role to play in oxidation reactions as well or would you envisage that the cathode and anode reactions will be carried out in two different electrolytes?

Nathan Hollingsworth replied: In the presented manuscript (c5fd00099h) the same electrolyte was employed in both the cathode and anode compartments. With regard to the oxidation reactions taking place at the counter electrode, the authors believe that the [P66614][124Triz] is stable to oxidation under these conditions. This is due to no [P66614][124Triz] oxidation products being detected by 1H-NMR of the electrolyte after electrolysis. However, O2 is detected by GC after electrolysis; one plausible explanation is the O2 is a result of anodic processes involving H2O.

Alexander Cowan remarked: I was particularly interested in the potential role of the IL in mediating water oxidation. I understand that there is some really interesting work from the group of Doug MacFarlane1 where certain ionic liquid/catalyst combinations promote water oxidation. Could this be of interest for your system?
1 MacFarlane et. al., Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9496.

Nathan Hollingsworth responded: The paper by MacFarlane et al. is very interesting; he reports the oxidation of water to hydrogen peroxide, which is amine stabilised. The hydrogen peroxide can then form oxygen and water via a disproportionation reaction in the presence of MnO2 with current densities greatly increased by using the ionic butyl ammonium bisulphate. In our manuscript we have only been concerned with CO2 reduction products, however, you raise a very pertinent question with regard to counter electrode oxidation reactions and suggest a very interesting alternative use of the ionic liquid system. Linking MacFarlane’s study to this manuscript it is not possible to say if the oxygen we detect after electrolysis is from the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide or oxidation of water to O2. Further tests would need to be carried out to confirm this, such as performing a potassium permanganate or diphenylamine test which would detect and quantify any H2O2 formed. In the same paper MacFarlane reported, through DFT calculations, a greater affinity for hydrogen bonding of H2O2 with amine over water, providing twice as much stabilisation for 4 amines over 4 water molecules. It was further reported that the solvation of H2O2 by amine is critical and sufficient enough to lower E0. With the system presented, the ionic liquid [P66614][124Triz] is used without the addition of amine, as such a similar amine stabilised H2O2 complex would not be possible. However, it is plausible that the nitrogen groups on the [124Triz]− anion may provide hydrogen bonding sites and thus solvation to H2O2. As such, it is an area we should definitely look into and we thank you for this suggestion.

Geoffrey Maitland asked: You speculate on a mechanism that involves reduction of both chemically bound CO2via the [124Triz]− anion and of physically adsorbed CO2, the latter being capable of being blocked by IL binding to the electrode. By ‘easier CO2 access to the electrode' on page 6 (c5fd00099h), are you referring to enhanced transport to the electrode or to proximity for electron transfer? Have you investigated the use of physico-chemical techniques for probing CO2-IL-electrode interactions and investigating in more detail the underlying mechanisms resulting in the observed variations between electrode materials?

Nathan Hollingsworth replied: Here we are speculating a pseudo enhanced transport to the electrode through a reduced blocking effect from the IL that in turn may also lead to a closer proximity for the electron transfer. At present we have no evidence for this other than the difference in conversion, nor have we undertaken any further studies to yield mechanistic insight. Modelling is being carried out by the groups of Professor de Leeuw and Professor Catlow to model the reduction processes. More insight maybe gleaned by performing spectro electro chemistry, such as in situ IR studies which we will hopefully look into in the future.

William Webb communicated: I notice you talk about CO2 adopting a bent configuration during the course of the reaction, namely with the 1,2,4-triz. Does this bent configuration allow for utilisation of CO2 in other reactions. In much of the literature the formation of the bent conformation of CO2 is essential in allowing reactions to be undertaken, could your system therefore be employed for reactions such as the addition of CO2 to epoxides?

Nathan Hollingsworth communicated in reply: Thank you for your suggestion. Indeed this system is essentially a low potential way of generating the reactive [CO2]− anion. Without the presence of H2O the [CO2]− radical anion could be reacted with alcohols to make carbonates or added to epoxides.

Geoffrey Maitland enquired: How generic is this chemical binding of CO2 to ionic liquid anions other than [124Triz]−? What is the potential for optimization of the anion structure for reducing CO2 electrochemically and is there scope for tuning the composition of the resulting syngas?

Nathan Hollingsworth answered: The chemical binding is generic in that if an anion binding site is present it is possible the paper by Sheng Dai1 reports various anions that allow this chemical binding. The tuning of compositions of resulting products by tuning the anion is a study that should definitely be looked into. Within a recent reported paper2 we have shown that tuning the cation may also be a fruitful approach. For example, when the [N4444]+ cation is used in place of [P66614]+ with the [124Triz]− anion formaldehyde can be produced, which has not been seen previously.
1 C. Wang et al., Tuning the Basicity of Ionic Liquids for Equimolar CO2 Capture, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(21), 4918–4922.
2 N. Hollingsworth, S. F. R. Taylor, M. T. Galante, J. Jacquemin, C. Longo, K. B. Holt, N. H. de Leeuw and C. Hardacre, Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Formate at Low Overpotential using a Superbase Ionic Liquid, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14164–14168.

Peter Styring stated: The chloride ion performs best in the molecular modelling studies using ionic liquids as sorbents. However, when you put it into a process it is not so good, especially in a humid environment because of the corrosion. Klaus Lackner uses chloride but he uses a humidity swing which uses water. This could lead to corrosion. You might you need to screen out the chloride ions because of the practicalities.

Nathan Hollingsworth remarked: Our system does not employ chloride and so this should not be an issue here. In addition our system out performs chloride based ionic liquids for capture. Furthermore, a chloride anion would not have the CO2 binding site that is key to this study.

Renata Silva opened the discussion of the paper by Cafer Tayyar Yavuz‡ by communicating: Nowadays one of the main problems of valuability of the CDU is the high cost of the process. I think the idea of expanding the CDU concept is very important but this is not sufficient. What do you think remains to be done so that CDU can become real instead of just ideas to reduce problems caused by CO2 emissions?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in reply: In CDU efforts for CCS purposes, we tried to commercialize (and make a profit) graphene that is made directly from CO2. We made graphene as cheap as 10 per kg and yet we couldn't find a single buyer who may be eager to scale up. The point we learned the hard way is that no matter how exciting your research-led product development is, the industry may turn a blind eye, just like that. It seems like graphene is not worth anything, at least not yet. Please see our company page: www.GrapheneTechnologies.com for more information.

Carlos Alonso-Moreno communicated: What is the reason of choosing just 800 and 25000 molecular weight polyethylenimines for the amine impregnation process? Is it just because they are commercially available compounds?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in response: There are two reasons why we chose PEI 800 and PEI 25000 for this study. First, as you point out, is their commercial availability and second, this is a case study to show the potential of porous polymers for developing amine impregnated sorbents for carbon capture. Furthermore, we found that high molecular weight polymeric amines are more stable than low molecular weight amines (such as ethylenediamine and triethylenetetraamine) when considering repeated use of heat treatments for desorption, a leading cause for degradation of amines over long time.

Carlos Alonso-Moreno communicated: How have you achieved the calculation of the amount of PEI to impregnate the COP-19? Why was the solution of PEI and COP-19 only stirring for 24 h at room temperature? What is the maximum loading capacity of PEI for COP-13?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in reply: The amount of PEIs loaded on COP-19 was calculated from thermogravimetric analysis under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 1a and b in c5fd00099h). The calculated PEI-800 in COP-97A, COP-97B, and COP-97C is 24.1%, 36.4%, and 46.2% respectively while PEI-25000 in COP-98A, COP-98B, and COP-98C is 22.4%, 32.3%, and 44.8% respectively. PEI-800 shows a slightly higher loading efficiency over PEI-25000 because of the smaller steric size of the low molecular weight aliphatic amines.
We focused on which loading provides greater CO2 capture (at low partial pressure, i.e. 0.15 bar) rather than increasing PEI loading since a higher loading generally resulted in the blocking of the CO2-philic sites. COP-97B (PEI 800 loading of 36.4 %wt.) showed CO2 capture of 75 mg g−1 while COP-97C (PEI 800 loading of 46.2 %wt.) with a higher PEI loading actually demonstrated a decline in CO2 capture capacity (Table 2 in c5fd00099h). In the case of PEI 25000 loading, the best CO2 capture capacity was observed with COP-98A (PEI 25000 loading of 22.4 %wt.) which was 70.4 mg g−1.

Carlos Alonso-Moreno communicated: As a conclusion, you proposed amine impregnated COPs as a commercially viable CO2 sorbent. What can make COPs a commercially viable composition in comparison with other very cheap adsorbents such as silica, mesoporous silica or zeolites?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in response: Sorbents to be used for amine impregnation should have larger pores, such as a mesoporous structure; therefore, zeolites are not suitable as amine-impregnated sorbents. The most popular mesoporous materials, mesoporous silicas (SBA or MCM), are not cheap since they need surfactant templation. They are as expensive as metal–organic frameworks. Conventional silica gels lack porosity and most of the amine is anchored on the surface of it resulting in a low CO2 capture capacity. There have been many attempts made to synthesize hollow silica using polymeric surfactants that show exceptional CO2 uptakes, however, the cost of surfactant also restricts their potential. For sorbents based on amine impregnation, the crucial component is the support material since CO2 capture through amines is well documented.

Geoffrey Maitland communicated: How do you manipulate pore size and surface/connectivity of COPs, and how well can this be designed and controlled?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in reply: The COPs are covalently linked amorphous networks and form their pores during the synthesis. It is, therefore, very difficult to make it more porous, unless one installs sacrificial porogens to be cleaved later (something we are working on at the moment). Pore filling is easier and that is what we pursued here. The idea is to make larger pores (mesoporous or bigger) and then shrink them with amine impregnation to achieve micropores with an optimum strength basic surface. Macroporosity in the order of microns is not desired either since you want the amines to be trapped inside. In general, COPs can be tuned by varying starting materials and the non-associating chemicals. Temperature and pressure also helps greatly since the hot solvents push away the walls of the growing polymer.

Geoffrey Maitland communicated: You say that CO2-philicity is more important than surface area for optimised capture. Surely both are necessary for a successful system? If bicarbonate in water is much better than carbamate when dry, due to binding through one amine group rather than two, why is the loading difference not much closer to a factor of 2?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in response: We agree with you on the contribution of both CO2-philicity and surface area to the optimized capture. Of course, without surface area one cannot get high uptake, because of the unavailability of the contact surface, and the unspecific binding in a high surface area material won’t help achieve high CO2 capture since it will trap everything else as well. Our assessment is that the CO2-philicity is more important in the sense that the return will be bigger compared to just increasing surface area. Bicarbonate formation is clearly better than carbamate, and Nature prefers that way as well. In solid systems, where we cannot easily claim a solution behavior (locally maybe), both mechanisms will take place and we suggest that the more we can shift to bicarbonate the better. Since none of our systems are perfect, an ideal, twice capacity – unfortunately – will never be reality. But you are absolutely right that we should do everything we can to make it more capacity per mass of sorbent material.

Geoffrey Maitland communicated: COP-19 has a lower CO2 uptake but will have a lower cost – may not this material be the basis of a more viable CO2 capture process?

Cafer Tayyar Yavuz communicated in reply: This is a perfect question, of which the answer will eliminate much clutter in the sorbent design. There are recent reports emerging on the compromises between cost–capacity interplay. I strongly suggest (and we are attempting to answer this on our limited capacity as well) that a team of collaborators assess the leading solid sorbents to be checked on all the process parameters. I’d be happy to participate. In the case of COP-19, my fear is the well-known competition of CO2 with H2O in physisorptive solids. COP-19 is not purely physisorptive as it has basic nitrogens, but it is not extremely selective towards CO2 either. Suspicions don’t count, obviously, and we will be reporting in the near future the applicability of our structures. In fact, we discovered a similar structure with cheaper production costs and now in talks with a major Korean company for large-scale applications.

Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli opened a general discussion of the papers by Michele Aresta, Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera and Deepak Pant§ by commenting: Acidification of the oceans is a major issue. The potential solutions being talked about are indeed being explored: for example there are large projects around Offshore Membrane Enclosures for Growing Algae in the context of CO2 capture.
The stability of the strain has been mentioned often as a recurrent bottleneck in the industrialization of your type of approach. Do you have a comment in general and more pointedly related to your specific strains?

Karolien Vanbroekhoven answered: Specifically the work I was talking about actually did focus on bacteria, not on algae! That means, in my case, the energy comes as electricity or chemical energy directly to combine with CO2 to produce chemicals; the algae work is using direct sunlight as energy and I can imagine that increasing the strains robustness and stability is a big challenge, the same for all bioprocesses! Making a specific suggestions for algael strain selection is not my piece of cake.

Michele Aresta remarked: The use of biomass as an indirect way for CO2 utilization is one of the most investigated topics today. I wish to make two preliminary considerations:
1) Nature is not efficient nor selective, it does not need to be. It uses a perennial and abundant source of energy: the sun.
2) Plants produce chemicals for themselves not for us. What we want is not what they need.
There have been many attempts in the last forty years to change by genetically engineering the selectivity of the most abundant enzyme: RuBisCO, which is implied in the conversion of CO2, such as for making a C6 sugar from a C5. RuBisCO catalyzes the oxidation and carboxylation reactions and the selectivity is 50%. If one could be able to improve the carboxylation to 55% most probably the anthropogenic CO2 would be fixed by Nature. Unfortunately, the natural system produced in a million years cannot yet be easily modified in monocellular organisms. So far, no exploitable results have been obtained.
Biomass can be categorized into two main categories: terrestrial (i.e.: trees, which mainly produce lignocellulosic materials and oily-seed plants, which give oils), and aquatic (micro- and macro-algae which produce proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, fine chemicals, etc.). The microbial biomass, which can be found in soils and aquatic environments, is a separate case that is now under investigation.
So far, lignocellulosic materials have been gasified, destroying many complex structures for making a C1 molecule (CO) with a high entropy change (increase). CO was then converted into structured Cn molecules, with large entropy reduction. Such a conversion consumes energy, reducing the net use of carbon fixed in biomass. Today, there is a different approach: namely, the use of a cascade of technologies for recovering useful molecules first (that may have a direct use or may be used as monomers for polymers), with gasification of the residual inert portion. Cellulose is used for recovering monomers (C6 and C5) that are a source of new platform molecules or can be converted into ethanol biotechnologically. In the case of algae, their fractionation allows to separate proteins (for animal feeding), carbohydrates (only cellulose, without lignin, used for ethanol production or other applications), lipids and fine chemicals. Lipids can be used for making biodiesel (saturated long chains) or for making monomers for polymers. From a C18 monounsaturated long chain such as that contained in oleic acid (contained in olive oil and other seeds), one can produce by oxidative splitting of the double bond, two interesting molecules: a) azelaic acid, a C9 dicarboxylic acid used for making polymers, and b) a C9 monocarboxylic acid, pelargonic acid, that has herbicide properties. Mono- and di- poly-unsaturated fatty acids can be used, via epoxidation, for making new polyurethanes. The use of algae only for the production of biodiesel cannot be economically acceptable nor environmentally viable due to their growing, separation, drying and conversion costs. It must be noted that so far microalgae have been mainly used as feed (in fisheries or for livestock) or for producing fine chemicals. In such cases the product will have a price that will pay the producer for all costs faced: no consideration is made about CO2 emissions. If we wish to produce fuels from microalgae with the target of reducing the CO2 emission, then the boundary conditions are very strict: the entire process cannot emit more CO2 than is fixed. Therefore, all steps (growing, collection, drying and conversion) must be performed minimizing the CO2 emission. This means, for example, that it is impossible to add all N, P and micronutrients the microalgae need for growing as the commercial products bear on themselves a CO2 emission load and it has been found such to overcome the amount of fixed CO2. Therefore, process waters or municipal waters must be used as source of N, P and micronutrients: this poses the problem of contamination to which microalgae are very sensitive. The use of biomass is a very interesting option for CO2 reduction (leave Nature to convert CO2 and we convert biomass) but it requires a new approach that is mainly based on the exploitation of the concept of biorefinery applied to biomass. Additionally, a new catalysis must be developed as biomass is quite different form hydrocarbons used so far as raw materials. The future is very challenging under many different aspects as we shall move away from fossil carbon.

Seetharaman Vaidyanathan continued: I am in agreement with Michele Aresta's comment. I wish to add that in Nature, algae predominantly encounter low levels of CO2 (in relative terms) and have evolved to sequester this. However, they have inbuilt mechanisms to cope with excess excursion of nutrients that they are able to deal with to differing degrees. Simply taking the natural process and trying to implement it as a plausible CDU solution is bound to fail. The specific capability of algae to fix CO2 and convert to organic carbon of value (in a broad sense) has to be systematically examined, even in a scientific sense. Provision of N, P, nutrients and water is key and the uptake of CO2 along with these key nutrients for proper conversion to products of value needs further investigation for the perceived potential to materialise.

Peter Styring addressed Michele Aresta and Karolien Vanbroekhoven: Michele has a good point. Nature is very good at providing the energy it needs to survive: it produces a soup of chemicals. From a processing aspect, the energy costs of extracting the products is where it falls down. The mixture is too complex to identify and extract products, even using HPLC. Bearing in mind they produce chemicals for their own needs and not necessarily what we need. Are there any considerations on modifying the genomes rather than using the whole cells to obtain what we need?

Michele Aresta replied: Genetic engineering of monocellular organisms is an ongoing research: it may work with microalgae and less with superior plants (at the moment). It is noteworthy that genetically modified organisms and their derivatives may not find acceptance in all countries. With microlage one can use physical stress for pushing the production of lipids, if one wants to target high lipid production. Starvation in N (growing algae in a low amount of N) decreases the production of proteins and increases the production of carbohydrates and lipids, used as an energy reserve by the microorganism. This approach is giving interesting results in controlled conditions and, if it is applied to large ponds/PBR, can result in a way to address the enhanced production of large volumes of targeted products.

Karolien Vanbroekhoven continued: Indeed, that is exactly what we are considering! The final concentrations need to be high enough, but many fermentation based processes do run on a commercial scale, where titers or concentrations are in the range of 10–300 g l−1, depending on the chemical produced. The toolbox of genome engineering has increased tremendously and opens up a lot of new opportunities to play with Nature and get out what we want.

Pedro Abrantes added: I'd like to explain some figures about trees. A forest (average 2000 trees per hectare) absorbs about 1.8 tons of C per year; 6.5 tons of CO2. That means 3.6 kg CO2 per tree per year. With the agriculture under tunnels and micro-algae, we hope to consume 300–700 tons of CO2 per year with CO2 levels from 1200 to 1500 ppm.
The great difference between the micro-algae and trees – if you cut a tree that's it, no more CO2 consumed. You have to wait 10 years for a new tree. We need to work on micro-algae and agriculture. It needs to be a goal to keep humans on earth.

Michele Aresta responed: Terrestrial (fast growing trees, 2 years cut) and aquatic biomass have different and complementary roles, as they afford different raw materials. Trees will produce lignocellulosic materials, oily-seed plants will produce oil and cellulose, microalgae will give proteins, lipids and carbohydrates. Aquatic biomass is much more productive in terms of mass/surface used and may not require land, that often is a motif of argument about food–energy use. Moreover, aquatic biomass has not been exploited for energy so far, but only for food or fine chemicals. The exploitation for energy completely changes the boundary conditions for production: it is not a matter of how much the product will cost but how much CO2 is avoided. Aquatic biomass can be grown in marginally salty waters, with the correct offshore technology. In my group we are now applying to these micro-/macro-algae the biorefinery concept, that means their fractionation into proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and other chemicals for their complete use. This approach may bring about the correct assessment of the potential of aquatic biomass: not only biofuels, but also fine and bulky chemicals. Such an integrated approach may make economic the use of aquatic biomass on a large scale for the production of diesel (from saturated lipids) together with raw materials for polymers (monounsaturated fatty acids) or functional materials for polymers, proteins and so on. The use of microalgae for making biodiesel alone is not competitive with fossil fuels (and maybe will never be). A key point with aquatic biomass is not to supply all micronutrients, N and P microalgae need for their growth: if we have to supply all such chemicals the environmental benefit will be negative, as chemicals bring with them large emissions, and economic criteria will never be matched. Therefore, the use of process waters (we have used with success water from biogas digesters) or municipal water is essential, supposed that they do not bring contaminants that may kill the pond.
If we are successful in the exploitation of microalgae, then large volumes of C can be recycled at an industrial level.

Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli enquired: I was under the impression that the operation of a bioreactor for an algae producing plant is very expensive (open and closed sites). Even more so for plant operation, and the only viable business model is linked with waste remediation. Are there any other business models? Are you at liberty of discussing yours?

Pedro Abrantes answered: You are right, it's expensive. We're trying to build a new process and find solutions to reach our equilibrium target. There is a way. For the moment, I can't explain our position. We need to wait a few months for the first results. I hope that we'll be able to present a paper next year.

Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli opened the discussion of the paper by Michele Aresta: The direct photocarboxylation is a very interesting reaction. Can you comment on your choice of the photocalyst chosen (zinc sulphides, possibly modified by Ru)? Are you driven by band gap modification toward visible?

Michele Aresta replied: I can confirm that the choice of the semiconductors is not made only on the basis of their band gap but also considering their electrochemical potential. Two approaches can be used with the selected material that must be able to activate the C–H bond and produce CO2 anion radicals: either push the light absorption towards visible or enhance the ability of semiconductors to use the UV fraction of solar light. In the case of ZnS A and B we have used the second approach. In fact their activity is quite high around 375–390 nm, near UV on the boundary with the visible region. In this case we have improved their operational performance by decorating with Ru, which does not affect the light adsorption. In other cases, as with TiO2, we have decorated the photomaterial with an organic or inorganic motif that changes the band gap.

Richard Heyn asked: This is a very nice reaction. Is the reaction selective for carboxylation at the carbon atom of the allyl radical alpha to the oxygen atom? If so, what is the reason for the selectivity?

Michele Aresta replied: The selectivity and yield depend on the solvent: in chlorinated solvents we see two carboxylic acids, in methanol only the 2-CO2H. This can be explained in terms of solvent stabilization of reactive forms of the substrate. We are studying further the solvent effect, including solventless reactions.

Richard Heyn continued: Related to this, it seems that the 2-COOH-2,3-DHF (product B in Fig. 12) could arise from a 1,3 proton transfer after carboxylation at the allyl radical carbon atom alpha to the oxygen. The product distribution suggests that this transfer is more likely with the protic solvent MeOH, which is not too surprising. Do you have any data that might support this mechanism?

Michele Aresta responded: It is correct that the solvent plays a key role in the carboxylation, but also in the product distribution of isomers derived from the photoisomerization of the substrate in absence of CO2. The 1,3 proton shift in 5-membered rings is not easy and can be assisted by solvents. We are investigating further the reaction mechanism in order to collect useful information that may be applied to other systems under study. A reaction that we observe is the dimerization of the isomerized 2,3-DHF: this influences the yield of carboxylic species as it subtracts the substrate. This is the beginning of a story that I am sure will be quite long.

Michael North questioned: You have managed to add one acid group to the furan ring, but have you any thoughts about how to introduce a second so that you make monomers for polymer synthesis?

Michele Aresta answered: In my short presentation I have shown phtalic acid as an example of a chemical that would be interesting to make via carboxylation of benzene, more than by oxidation of another organic substrate with carbon loss. Obviously, mono- and di-carboxylic acids have different fields of application. You correctly point at the use of the latter as co-monomers for polymers. The former, if they are long chain acids, may have application as surfactants. The great advantage of photocarboxylation is that the free acid is produced, instead of salts, as it happens in chemical catalysis. At the moment, the introduction of a single –CO2H moiety is not an easy task, the introduction of two of them in specific positions is a problem of superior difficulty, if we want to target high selectivity and conversion. Using high energy radiation one can produce mixtures in which several species are found, including dicarboxylic derivatives, with serious separation difficulties. It is not impossible, but more difficult to perform selectively.

Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera said: In a different perspective from a photocatalyst based carboxylation reaction mechanism, photochemical reactions using the proper wavelength can eventually afford carboxylated products, as in excited states of olefins there's the option of singlet/triplet states, leading to biradical and zwiterionic intermediate, respectively, leading to a possible reaction with CO2. Have you tried these options? A suggestion to make this type of synthesis more sustainable could be the replacement of methanol or chloroform by ethanol. Have you considered this option?

Michele Aresta replied: We have expressly used solvents with different polarities as they can stabilize different states of the excited/isomerized substrate. As I have discussed, methanol and CHCl3 influence the reaction to a different extent, methanol being more selective towards the 2-carboxylic acid. This is in agreement with your comment. We have tried several other solvents (even water) or solventless reactions. There are three key issues for the solvents and these are:
i) the solubility of CO2 in the solvent (we have developed a photoreactor for working under pressure, which is under continuous improvement trying to find the best geometry that allows the full use of the light);
ii) the fact that CO2 can be converted into other species upon reaction with the solvent (in water, CO2 undergoes multiple equilibria affording species such as HCO3− and CO32−, the concentration of which depends on the pH);
iii) the reaction of the solvent with radiation (the solvents used were not reactive; ethanol gives some problems).

Pedro Abrantes enquired: You are talking about PV cells which deliver about 12% of solar energy. Do you follow the Israeli work about a PV converter that produced a 4m2 solar converter which reaches 25% solar energy? They are trying to reduce it to 1m2 and try to reach a 42% efficiency converter. Is this the solution for the next years to obtain a significant solution for our projects?

Michele Aresta responded: Converting solar energy into PV is a different approach. There are two ways to use solar energy: either direct photochemical conversions of CO2, about which I have been speaking, or prior conversion into electricity and use of the latter for producing hydrogen or CO2 electro-/photoelectro-catalytic conversion. The use of PV, that today can be produced with 20% efficiency and in perspective may reach 42%, is perfect for H2 production and its use in methanol and other oxygenates such as DME, methane or high HC synthesis from CO2.Today the limitation is the cost of PV-H2. Electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 has its own role. Photocatalysis has a different potential. These are ways of using solar energy for CO2 conversion: I believe that if we can exploit their potential, and integrate such applications of solar with biomass conversion, we shall be able to reach an interesting level of carbon recycling, mimicking photosynthetic processes.

Jonathan Albo communicated: A previous report showed that Bi2WO6 hollow microspheres possess high activity for CO2 conversion to methanol, without the aid of any co-catalyst, under visible light irradiation.1 In addition, the material seems to present a considerably high capacity for CO2 adsorption and charge separation. I wonder if its use could be interesting for the photocarboxylation of 2,3-dihydrofuran using CO2.
1 H. F. Cheng, B. B. Huang, Y. Y. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9729.

Michele Aresta communicated in reply: According to our experience catalysts which are able to reduce CO2 to other C1 or even Cn molecules are not so good for the formation of C–C bonds and fix CO2 onto organic substrates such as a carboxylic group. So Ru@ZnS is a catalyst of carboxylation while other p-type semiconductors based on Ni or Cu are poor as carboxylating agents and good for CO2 reduction to methanol or even methane. I'll try the catalyst you have mentioned and will let you know.

Elsje Alessandra Quadrelli addressed Michele Aresta, Karolien Vanbroekhoven and Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera :One criticism we hear often towards bio- and photo-based technologies revolves around the purported (limited) efficiency of the processes involved. Yet, if benchmarking against Nature, these artificial processes are often as efficient and selective (if not more so) than natural ones. What are the efficiencies and selectivities in your systems and do you consider them serious bottlenecks to the deployment of your technology?

Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera answered: In the specific instance of the work presented (c5fd00044k), initially limitations regarding selectivities were issues to consider, as mentioned in the paper, afterwards it was possible to optimize the systems and solve selectivity constraints even at the cost of losing optimal capacity to capture CO2. It was a matter of compromise. After optimization we consider that CO2 capture capacity is competitive with benchmark systems, there is even the possibility to explore other alternatives. Nature presents a specific time scale and complexity that is certainly different from the necessities of the society where we live, in this context task-specific systems similar to those presented at this conference are highly sought and optimization and additional research will give new perspectives.

Karolien Vanbroekhoven responded: Specifically towards photobiobased systems, indeed efficiencies like for algae are only 3%; however, for biocatalytic processes where other chemicals are provided as energy carriers (instead of light) the efficiencies are higher. A typical product yield of 80% has been reported for polyhydroxybutyric acid using H2 as the energy carrier. That's not too bad! Therefore, I think efficiencies and selectivities (typically known for biocatalytic systems to be higher) are not the biggest concern, it is the speed of the reaction.

Michele Aresta continued: There are not many examples of photocarboxylation in the literature: Those I have discussed are the first examples. We see that by mastering the photocatalytic system we can improve the yields and selectivities. We do not think we have reached the best performance, we are just at the start of research. The thermodynamics of the reaction poses a limit to the equilibrium concentration. We are now working to understand if we are already at the thermodynamic limit, and if not where it is and how to reach it.

André Bardow noted: The question has been asked whether we should benchmark biomimetic and photocatalytic processes against Nature and I want to comment on this question. In my view, we should not use Nature as a benchmark. Nature has a very different business model from ours and Nature is thus following very different (and multiple) objective functions. However, I agree that we should benchmark the proposed processes; I even regard such a benchmark as mandatory if we are aiming for a practical impact. I would suggest to benchmark against using the best photovoltaic (PV) cells available and further using the PV-generated electricity in the catalytic conversion. If the novel route has not even the theoretical potential to ever outperform an existing PV-based system, we cannot expect to make a practical impact and should regard and assess the work as fundamental research.

Geoffrey Maitland opened the discussion of the paper by Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera: You appear to have reached the situation where you can achieve less than optimal CO2 uptakes and are limited by the high viscosity, and hence poorer mixing, of systems at higher saccharide:superbase ratios. As the viscosity of the liquid phase decreases and more efficient mixers are used, mass transfer rates seem to increase and close to stoichiometric uptakes are observed. Would you please comment on the extent to which more effective mixing systems will be needed to give optimal conversions and whether mass transfer is likely to be a limiting factor for large-scale implementation of this approach?

Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera replied: At an initial stage we found that tetramethylguanidine, as superbasebase, in combination with mannose lead to high yields and low viscosity before reaction with CO2, nevertheless the resultant mixture is complex and not usefull for our purposes. In order to circumvent this problem we tested another base, DBU, in combination with carbohydrates. At the pressures tested, DBU alone doesn't react with CO2, and at that point we verified that it was a good candidate for a straightforward reaction. Of course we found that the combination DBU:saccharide can be problematic, leading to high viscosities and incomplete reactions with CO2. Nevertheless with an optimization effort in terms of ratios and more efficient stirring we could attain relatively satisfactory results. We think that we can improve our results by two valid paths: find a more effective base, that similarly to tetramethylguaninide, could lead to acceptable viscosities, and similarly to DBU lead to less complex mixtures. The other modification could be the type of mixing with CO2. An alternative that we are working on is bubbling CO2 directly to our mixtures instead of admission of this component from above. Considering the presented results and alternatives to improve, we consider this work valid for an eventual application at large scale.

Pedro Abrantes questioned: At this initial level of your work, how many years do you need to have a flagship technology?

Gonçalo V. S. M. Carrera answered: The work is at an initial stage of development, based on the same concept it can be optimized for improved performances in CO2 capture and reduction of energetic and material costs. Of course this system is relevant and can be a good platform to build a viable alternative to commercial systems for CO2 capture already in the market, however it is difficult to anticipate the time required to obtain a top technology as this depends on many factors.

Seetharaman Vaidyanathan opened a general discussion of the papers by Deepak Pant by communicating: Have you measured the residual bicarbonate in the media and monitored how it varies over time? This would give an idea of the rate of carbon uptake by the organism and help in attempting to improve this process.

Deepak Pant communicated in reply: We have measured the bicarbonate concentration in the media with time. We have also observed that the bicarbonate stripping is due to the continuous N2 supply. In order to quantify the bicarbonate stripping, we have operated blank reactors with and without bacterial inoculation in the MES reactors. The average bicarbonate rate was calculated by deducting the stripping rate of bicarbonates in the blank reactors from the apparent bicarbonate reduction rate. We have observed that the bicarbonate uptake rate of 203±42 mg HCO3− L−1 during the stable phase of operation. We completely agree that improving the bicarbonate uptake rate by the biocathode/bacteria will improve the process. Presently we are working on similar objectives.

Seetharaman Vaidyanathan communicated: How does your MES approach compare with other chemical and biochemical approaches for the reduction of CO2 to acetate?

Deepak Pant communicated in response: The MES research is at its infancy, the process itself being discovered only 5 years ago. A lot of development is needed towards improving the higher concentrations and production rates of the process. At present, the research is going in several directions from all corners of the world. Compared to autotrophic fixation of CO2, MES has showed about 10 times less acetate production rate (compared to Straub et al.1). In the case of a chemical approach, it is much lower. At the same time, compared to chemical processes, the MES approach requires very less energy input, where the MES is found as advantageous. Also by using the CO2 directly as a feedstock it does not get into the food vs fuel debate that the terrestrial plants or algae have to face.
1 Straub et al., J. Biotechnol., 2014, 178, 67–72.

Seetharaman Vaidyanathan communicated: What are the challenges you perceive in the large scale implementation of such MES systems?

Deepak Pant communicated in reply: This is a very important question where we are focused on our research. As microbial electrosynthesis (MES) is a combination of microbiological and electrochemical principles involving many disciplines, many challenges are associated:
1) Biocatalyst: the selection of a suitable biocatalyst for the electrochemical cathodic reduction reaction.
2) Electron transfer mechanism: in the case of microbial fuel cells (MFCs) the electron transfer mechanism was understood, and it works through direct and mediated electron transfer mechanisms (DET and MET). In the case of the biocathode, the electron transfer mechanism and the role of cell wall embedded cell organelles such as pili and cytochromes in reduction process still need to be explored. This is a crucial phenomenon to understand microbial electrosynthesis.
3) CO2 solubility rate: the CO2 solubility rate is very low. As this is the substrate for the process, higher solubility rates helps for the improved production rates. Presently we are focused on our state of the art technology of gas diffusion electrode (GDE) development which is expected to improve the availability of CO2 to the biocathode.
4) Selectivity of the product: physiological conditions and several other factors control product selectivity. A more selective product improves the conversion efficiency and purity. It also results in decreasing energy demand on down stream processing.
5) Effective and stable biofilm: a stable biofilm that can work under varied physiological and electrochemical conditions is important for the MES process. The biofilm growth rates and energy dissipation towards biofilm production and maintenance is also important.
6) Integrating the system with cheap/economic energy generating system such as wind and solar energy systems rather than grid, etc. is one of the sustainable options for microbial electrosynthesis. On the other hand, integration of MFC to utilize the energy generation from the biomass oxidation/wastewater treatment at the anode is also a possible way to decrease the energy demand for the MES process.
7) Apart from the above stated challenges there are several other challenges such as energy efficiency, carbon yield, bio-electro-kinetics, electrode materials that support biofilm formation, reactor engineering, etc., associated with the MES process.

Seetharaman Vaidyanathan communicated: Have you characterised the microbial consortia in your MES?

Deepak Pant communicated in reply: We have sent the samples of the biocathode to an external agency for microbial diversity analysis. Very recently we have received data for the analysis. The biofilm sample contains 6 different clones (Chelativorans spp, Erysipelothrix spp, Natronincola peptidivorans, Mesorhizobium sp., Delftia acidovorans and Clostridium felsenium) along with several other unidentified bacteria.
Footnotes† Christoper Hardacre’s paper was presented by Nathan Hollingsworth, University College London, United Kingdom.‡ The paper by Cafer Tayyar Yavuz was not presented at the meeting. Subsequently, any questions regarding this paper were submitted after the meeting.§ Deepak Pant’s paper was presented by Karolien Vanbroekhoven, VITO – Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Belgium.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Mg2SiO + 4CO2 + 2H2O = 2Mg(HCO3)2 + SiO2.	
        (1)
      
Footnotes
† Christoper Hardacre’s paper was presented by Nathan Hollingsworth, University College London, United Kingdom.
‡ The paper by Cafer Tayyar Yavuz was not presented at the meeting. Subsequently, any questions regarding this paper were submitted after the meeting.
§ Deepak Pant’s paper was presented by Karolien Vanbroekhoven, VITO – Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Belgium.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
