Electrode dependence in halide perovskite memories: resistive switching behaviours   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2QM00614F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2QM00614F
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 3125-3142Electrode dependence in halide perovskite memories: resistive switching behaviours†

        
          
            Gregory Soon How 
            Thien
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohd Arif Mohd 
            Sarjidan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Noor Azrina 
            Talik
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Boon Tong 
            Goh
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Boon Kar 
            Yap
          
        
      cde, 
      
        
          
            Zhicai 
            He
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Kah-Yoong 
            Chan
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Advanced Devices and Systems, Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia University, 63100, Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia. E-mail: kychan@mmu.edu.my
bLow Dimensional Materials Research Centre, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
cElectronic and Communications Department, College of Engineering, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, 43000, Kajang, Selangor, Malaysia
dInstitute of Sustainable Energy, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, 43000, Kajang, Selangor, Malaysia
eInternational School of Advanced Materials, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Tianhe District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China
fInstitute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Rd, Tianhe District, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China
Received 
      27th June 2022
    , Accepted 12th September 2022First published on 14th September 2022AbstractHalide perovskites (HPs) are widely employed in a variety of applications including optoelectronics, lasers, light-emitting diodes, and photovoltaics. As HPs are superb semiconductors with remarkable electronic and light absorption characteristics, global research into these materials is flourishing in various industries. Thus, memory devices have lately seen a growth in the usage of HPs as a next-generation candidate for high-performance memories. Nonetheless, understanding the impact of design structure on HP memories, such as electrode dependence in producing different resistive switching (RS) properties, is critical in optimizing the design process. This review describes the top electrode (TE) dependence of various materials in creating diverse RS memory behaviour. The disparities in all recently reported RS characteristics based on different TE materials are addressed and explored. Current electrode modification advances and techniques in HP RS devices are also discussed. Through this, the relevance and importance of electrode dependence in the design architecture of HP memories toward RS mechanisms are highlighted in this review work.
1. Introduction
In this new area of modern electronics and digital technology, the role of system memory and memory storage has tremendously increased. To support such growth, new structures and materials are researched and explored to obtain high-performance memory devices. The first memory concept was realised by Gustav Tauschek in 1932 with the invention of drum memory, which is made up of a huge tube-shaped container with a covering of ferromagnetic elements.1,2 As system memory develops over time, it ultimately transforms into other types of memory such as delay line memory,3 magnetic drums and core memory,4 twister memory,5 bubble memory,6,7 and today's frequently applied dynamic random access memory (RAM).8 Nevertheless, the development of memory storage is necessary to store the data retrieved from the system memory. They are commonly classified as volatile memory and non-volatile memory (NVM). The distinction between the two memories is their capacity to store data with or without a power supply, with NVM being able to do so whereas volatile memory cannot. Resultantly, as the desire for greater digitization grows, the development of memory storage has accelerated dramatically in recent years.
Previously, punched cards were the first storage device utilised, which gradually evolved into punched cards and tapes, magnetic tapes, and magnetic disks.2,9,10 Subsequently, with today's digital technology, the tremendously popular flash drive can be found everywhere as it possesses higher writing speeds while being inexpensive to fabricate. The operating principle of flash drives is based on the “NOT AND” Boolean operator and logic gate (NAND) flash memory, which is now dominating the market due to its low cost of production, high density, and NVM behaviour.11 It functions in such a way that data may be wiped and rebuilt electrically within the flash memory structure. Nonetheless, as the electronics industry advances, there is a greater necessity for even better density storage, lower power consumption, and quicker memory storage. Consequently, resistive switching (RS) devices are developed to replace existing saturated memory storage technology. Fig. 1 depicts the progression of memory storage throughout time to today's storage technologies.
 Fig. 1  Timeline of memory storage evolution. Flash memory is currently the most widely used type of memory storage while future research indicates the inclusion of RS memory in new technologies. 
RS technology is a preferred next-generation option in today's memory storage research. Although they were studied in the 1960 s using binary oxides, it was the invention of silicon-based circuits that prompted in-depth RS memory research.12–14 This results in the development of resistive random-access memory (ReRAM) that drives researchers to investigate ReRAM devices as an option to attain this aim.15 RS memory, unlike flash memory, does not require an electrical source to store information because data is stored through the interchange of resistance states. The transition from a high resistance state (HRS) to a low resistance state (LRS) is denoted by the “SET” process, whereas the reverse is indicated by the “RESET” process.
The devices are typically constructed with a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) or metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure. Subsequently, an applied voltage is delivered across the dielectric material. The applied voltage would allow electrical conductivity to be manipulated by forming filamentary conduction across the top and bottom electrodes. In general, there are two types of ReRAM conduction mechanisms namely electrode limited mechanisms and bulk limited mechanisms.16 Furthermore, they are also categorised as memristors, which has been a matter of contention until today as to whether ReRAM may be the same as memristors. Additionally, the insulator layer is frequently constructed of a variety of materials, including metal oxides and more recently, perovskites.16
Generally, perovskites are nanomaterials with the stoichiometric formula ABX3, where A and B are cations and X is an anion. They are often classified into two primary groups, which are halide perovskites (HPs) and oxide perovskites. The primary distinction is that oxide perovskites have oxygen anions (ABO3) whereas HPs include halogen anions (ABX3, X = Cl, I, Br). Both forms of perovskites have been researched in RS memory, and the results have been encouraging. Nonetheless, HPs have been massively popular and identified as the next generation candidate to pioneer in the field of photovoltaics. Kojima et al. introduced MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 onto photovoltaic modules in the 2000 s.17 This piqued the interest of renewable energy experts as the research of perovskite solar cells is now a growing market with better-operating efficiencies. Also, because HPs are good semiconductors with high light absorption, they are widely used in research in optoelectronics. The discovery has prompted researchers to investigate the possible application of HPs in other sectors such as RS memory technology. HPs are typically produced by solution processing techniques and are composed of earth-abundant elements. Therefore, HPs utilised in RS memory would be explored in-depth in this study.
Throughout the vast number of HPs in RS memories, numerous differences were discovered in the literature on HP memories with diverse top electrode (TE) materials. Several discrepancies in multiple reported works were found in which similar electrode materials were used (e.g. metals) but produced different RS behaviour such as bipolar switching, unipolar switching, and write-once-read-many (WORM). To the best of our knowledge, this electro dependence aspect was not fully elaborated in any other work in manufacturing various types of RS features. This review examines the overall overview of HPs in RS devices, including their numerous working mechanisms. The association between TE types and RS characteristics is then carefully investigated. Finally, the advantages and disadvantages of constructing HP RS devices with optimised TEs are discussed.
2. Overview of HPs in RS memories
In 2002, the first perovskite-based RS device was created utilizing oxide perovskites (Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3).18 Nevertheless, not much attention was given to perovskites as a ground-breaking material to be mass adopted in the market. HPs were not studied in RS memories until the exponential use of HPs in solar harvesting technologies. At that time, the renewable solar energy industry was found to be oversaturated with silicon-based photovoltaics and nearly reaching its maximum efficiency potential. It was then the use of HPs in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) was discovered to perform better because they offer significant advantages such as simple processing techniques, lower production costs, high-performance efficiencies, and the ability to be made onto flexible substrates. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) were measurably excellent and comparable to solar harvesting systems that existed way before PSCs. With this ground-breaking discovery, HPs were riled up, and research into new uses, specifically RS memory, was launched. Thus, the RS capabilities of perovskite-based compounds have been extensively studied. Chemical stability, high durability, quick writing speed, and high electron interaction correlation are some of the benefits of employing perovskites in RS devices.
One critical work by Landi et al. provides an indication of bipolar RS characteristics in PSCs.19 Through the construction of an Ag/SPIRO-MeoTAD/CH3NH3PBI3/TiO2/FTO device (Fig. 2a), this work reveals the photoresponse properties in which they have attained a PCE value of 2.2% under solar light irradiation.19 The evidence of bipolar RS features was detected using a current density–voltage (J–V) plot (Fig. 2b). When the same device was subjected to an operational voltage window ranging from −1 V to 1 V, the device exhibits a low working voltage of less than 1 V (Fig. 2c) while retaining more than 200 endurance cycles. According to the authors, the movement of defect ions inside the absorber layer produces the RS feature through the SET/RESET process. The migration of iodide vacancies at grain boundaries builds up the conduction filament pathway across the electrodes causing the RS behaviour. As a result, this work demonstrates that HPs have the potential to be used as high-performance memory devices in RS memories.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram showing the design structure of Ag/SPIRO-MeoTAD/CH3NH3PBI3/TiO2/FTO device. J–V plot of the Ag/SPIRO-MeoTAD/CH3NH3PBI3/TiO2/FTO device indicating the presence of (b) photoresponsivity characteristics for photovoltaics and (c) bipolar RS properties for memory device applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. 
Typically, HP RS memories have been designed using the conventional MIM architecture. The traditional sandwich form was employed by most RS memories discovered in existing research. This approach provides a straightforward way for fabricating RS devices in which the HP layer is sandwiched between two electrodes and a bias voltage is applied across the device. Other design architecture also includes the use of panel structure and crossbar array structure. As the number of studies incorporating HPs in RS memories grows, multiple memory behaviour can be observed in roughly equivalent design structures. The bipolar switching features are the most prominent RS type found in memory research development. Other RS features noticed in these devices include unipolar switching, multilevel storage, and WORM memory behaviour.
3. Operating principles of HP RS memories
3.1 General operation of RS devices
It is known that the characteristics of charge trapping and defect migration of HPs are sometimes negatively viewed in photovoltaics and optoelectronics devices.20,21 Nonetheless, an excellent RS device can be designed by properly exploiting and tailoring these constraints. Generally, the RS device exhibits two main operations namely SET (ON) and RESET (OFF) process. The initial state of the RS device (OFF) switches to an ON state when a forward voltage is applied. When this positive voltage exceeds a threshold voltage, it drives the carriers to jump from LRS to HRS. This transition is also called SET operation. In contrast to the SET condition, the RESET state can be recovered with the application of a reverse threshold voltage. Therefore, the transition occurs from HRS to LRS state.
The presence of ions and defects that forms a transport path or filament producing current–voltage (I–V) hysteresis allows these ReRAM devices to function effectively. The dramatic change in the device resistance properties creates an excellent fundamental basis for outstanding RS memory properties. To date, various RS characteristics of HP materials have been identified which depend on the electrode used, device integration/stack, and type of halides used. Unlike the photovoltaic and optoelectronics conductivity principles, which are primarily based on the alignment of material work functions,22 the conductivity in halides-based memory devices is primarily based on the vacancies, interstitial, and anti-sites of the halides-electrode alignment at the interface.23 The switching mechanism is also influenced by the type of electrode used. For example, an inert TE may aid in providing a transport path, resulting in intrinsic defects-dominated RS characteristics. On the other hand, reactive electrode materials may form another phase for switching interaction when compared with inert electrodes.
The other part of the RS device design structure is the bottom electrodes. The bottom electrodes usually act as insulating substrates or conductive substrates, which are deposited with inert materials. In oxide-based RS, it is explained that the ohmic contact from the bottom electrodes is essential to provide a sufficient field. The sufficient field was then utilised to create the RS phenomena.24 Nonetheless, they were contradicting reports on the effect of the bottom electrodes. For example, in non-HP RS devices, Terai et al. reveals that the role of the bottom electrode does not affect the electrical performance (I–V) of the Ta2O2/TiO2 stack RS device.25 Walczyk et al. investigated the role of Ti adlayers in between electrodes of the TiN/HfO2/TiN stack. The Ti top adlayers were observed to have a significant I–V characteristic improvement whilst Ti bottom adlayers reported no substantial impact at all. This implies that other than the formation of ohmic contact, the electrodes chosen in the design structure must allow the formation of a non-stoichiometric state at the electrode/RS layer interface.26 Additionally, it is also crucial to have a compatible work function between the top and bottom electrodes as this may influence the operational voltage of RS devices.27
In the case of HP-based RS, inert materials such as Au, Pt, Ti, TaN, TiN, ITO, PET, and FTO are among the common bottom electrodes used when designing RS devices (refer Table S1 in ESI†). Nevertheless, the effect of bottom electrodes in HP-based RS has rarely been reported. This might be also due to the perovskite incompatibility that limits the choices of bottom electrodes. Moreover, it is reported that the spin coating process of perovskite precursor compounds could severely etch the bottom metal electrodes.28 Thus, the selection of suitable flat surface substrates in electrode choice is a crucial step to optimise the RS device.
Recently, it is reported that the role of the electrode may contribute less to the formation of conductive filament owing to the thicker electrode films.29 The interaction of these parameters is still being researched and explored. The following section reviews and discusses various mechanisms of RS found in HP memories.
3.2 RS device-type mechanisms

3.2.1 Bipolar RS. 
Bipolar RS is the most common and the most reported switching type found in HP memories (refer Table S1 in ESI†). The bipolar RS of the ReRAM device can only be turned on when subjected to forward bias and turned off when subjected to reverse bias.

Fig. 3a depicts a typical hysteresis loop of I–V for bipolar RS under direct I–V sweep. By sweeping 0 V to a positive voltage of about 1 V, an abrupt increase in current was observed. The abrupt increase in current triggers the HRS to LRS process (from 1 to 2). The OFF state can only be obtained when the film is swept back to 0 V. Moreover, the device remains in the LRS state (process 3). Subsequently, when a negative bias is applied, the resistance of the device is abruptly increased until a certain negative voltage is around −1.5 V, which causes the switch back to HRS (process 4).
 Fig. 3  Diagram showing (a) symmetric and (b) asymmetric bipolar switching. (c) Interface deviation at the interface layer due to barrier height changes caused by asymmetric bipolar switching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. 
This characteristic is typically found in devices with high conductivity (ohmic), allowing for easy carrier transport.30–33 Halide vacancies, ions, and defects are well known to form readily in inorganic hybrid perovskite during the solution-based deposition process.23 These vacancies/defects can control the interface conductivity via trap-controlled space-charge-limited conduction (SCLC) or trap-to-trap hopping.23 For example, in hybrid organic–inorganic CH3NH3PBI3 perovskite, electron hopping in the perovskite layer is reported to occur between the mobile iodine vacancy (Vi) defects. The defect creates a continuous conductive chain, which causes the HRS to LRS transition, or SET process. When a reverse bias is applied, the conduction path is ruptured, and this is known as the RESET process. Another example involves the use of inorganic HPs, such as Cs4PbBr6.34,35 The use of Cs4PbBr6 was demonstrated by Chen et al., which reveals bromide vacancies (Br−) can be easily formed and that the device's RS behaviour is primarily attributed to the creation and vacancies of Br ions.34
To date, two types of bipolar switching have been reported; symmetric and asymmetric bipolar switching.23,36–40Fig. 3a depicts symmetric bipolar switching, which is common in halide-based ReRAM devices with an almost symmetric pattern visible from the I–V curve. Through this, good perovskite-electrode conductivity is expected in symmetric devices due to the smooth transition from HRS to LRS and vice versa. Lee et al. demonstrated the existence of asymmetric bipolar switching by inserting TiO2 between halides and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO).23 The presence of TiO2 interferes with the trap-to-trap electron injection mechanism. When a reverse bias is applied to the CH3NH3PBI3–TiO2 interface, electric and ionic charges accumulate, increasing the Schottky barrier. While the Vi defect is said to be responsible for creating the conducting path in symmetric switching, the main role in asymmetric switching is held by negatively charged iodine interstitial  and positively charged oxygen vacancies (Vo). As shown in Fig. 3b,  caused a space change at the interface and increases the barrier height as seen in Fig. 3c. This work demonstrates the significance of designing the halides interface to control the device's characteristics.


3.2.2 Unipolar RS. 
While bipolar RS characteristics are easier to achieve in HP memories, unipolar switching behaviour is highly desirable for their ease of enabling read–write processes via the same operational direction.38 The reported works for unipolar RS in HP memories is uncommon and rarely reported. Unipolar switching employs the same biased direction to turn the process ON and OFF.

Fig. 4 depicts a typical I–V behaviour of a unipolar RS device. Unlike bipolar RS, the ON and OFF process in unipolar RS occurs within a similar direction voltage. This process can only occur at either positive or negative voltage. It does not depend on the voltage's polarity. The initial OFF state (process 1) manifests at a very low current. The device is switched ON (SET) when the threshold voltage has achieved a high voltage. Typically, the threshold voltage is normally higher than bipolar RS. If the voltage applied was exceeding this threshold voltage, the device will be switched OFF (process 2). The same ON–OFF process occurs when a reverse voltage was applied. A pristine RS can be directly switched to LRS (red lines in Fig. 4), by applying a high voltage bias. Hence, this process is irreversible. Note that, the process is normally limited by current compliance to avoid device damage.41
 Fig. 4  Diagram depicting a typical unipolar I–V behaviour found in RS devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. 
For unipolar RS, according to Kang et al., rather than being influenced by an external electric field, the formation and rupturing of conducting paths composed of anion vacancies, are explained by a dominant role of a thermal driving force generated by Joule heating.36,42 A similar mechanism can be proposed by considering iodine ion vacancies instead of oxygen vacancies. The formation and dissolution of the conducting paths can be explained in terms of two competing forces that drive the diffusion of halide ion vacancies; one via a thermal gradient (Soret force) and one via a vacancy concentration gradient (Fick force), both of which are induced by Joule heating.43,44
Kang et al. also claimed to be the first group to report on a detailed unipolar or non-polar RS behaviour adapting organic metal HP in their RS device.26 The main difference lies in the symmetrical structure using Au metal electrodes with CH3NH3PBI3 material instead of different counter electrode materials as in reported for bipolar switching devices.23,34,39,40,45–51 Similarly, by adapting the symmetrical structure of indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)/MAPbBr3/ITO, Yu et al. were able to obtain unipolar RS behaviour.38 Thee findings are consistent with Kang et al. results as they explained their unipolar RS was also due to the role of a thermal driving force generated by Joule heating.


3.2.3 Multilevel RS. 
Although bipolar switching is prevalent in RS devices, another type of ReRAM device is based on multilevel RS. A cell with multilevel data storage can store more than two data levels. This is desirable to effectively increase storage density. Few studies have shown that multilevel RS behaviour can be extended from bipolar RS. Lv et al. demonstrated that Au/MAPIC/ITO structure can be extended from a non-RS device to RS induced device with a multilevel resistance state by adding potassium chloride (KCl) in the perovskite-based film.52 The origin of multilevel behaviour in their devices was attributed to an improvement of MAPIC film quality that enables the device to undergo cycling endurance of more than 140 cycles and data retention of over 1000 s.
Tri-state RS was also observed by applying different SET voltages.52 Previous works demonstrated that multilevel RS can be achieved by modulating current compliance during the SET process52–54 or by modulating RESET voltages during the RESET process.55Fig. 5 illustrates a typical I–V curve for multilevel RS measured at different compliance currents.56 It is noted that the ON/OFF ratios are large and abrupt for this type of RS. When compliance current at positive bias is lowered, a reversible RS without disrupting SET voltage can be seen. With the decrease in compliance current, the energy incurred for the RESET process also decreases simultaneously. This phenomenon can be attributed to the numbers of Vi that form the filamentary conduction on compliance current.55
 Fig. 5  
I–V plot displaying multilevel characteristics at different compliance levels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. 


3.2.4 Write-once-read-many (WORM). 
Another important non-volatile RS characteristic recently researched in HP devices for their irreversible process is known as the WORM effect.57–64 Similar to other types of RS devices, the principle of halide-based RS is primarily related to charge or defect trapping, filamentary conduction, ion migration, ohmic, and trap-filled SCLC conduction. For example, Li et al. fabricated a uniform CH3NH3PbBr3 film with an excellent WORM behaviour and they attributed the RS behaviour to the formation of ohmic, SCLC conduction that lead to the formation of conductive filament.60 Additionally, Chen et al. also attributed their CsPbBr3 WORM behaviour to the same conduction mechanism.61 Unlike the bipolar RS curve, there is no symmetric I–V curve observed for the WORM device. Fig. 6a depicts WORM RS switching characteristics. This type of RS has a distinct characteristic whereby it switches ON once and cannot be switched OFF. An abrupt increase in current conduction is defined as the “writing” or SET process. Further increasing the voltage, the current remains at LRS for a few sweeps even after removing the power. This steady current at LRS indicates a strong non-volatile WORM memory device behaviour. Once the device has been written to the “2” state, neither positive (sweep 2) nor negative (sweep 3/4), sweeping could recover the WORM device to the initial state of “0”.60
 Fig. 6  (a) WORM RS I–V switching characteristics. (b) The I–V double logarithmic plots for WORM RS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. 
WORM conduction mechanism can be further understood from the I–V double logarithmic plots as shown in Fig. 6b. During the ‘writing’ or SET process in the low voltage range, the line can be fitted to get a slope of 1 which is an ohmic region. The ohmic behaviour suggests the occurrence of charge injection between the halides and electrode. Once the voltage is further increased from the slope, the fit was found to be more than 2 which is known as the SCLC region.
During this process, the charge slowly fills in the traps formed by halides, which then reduces the band gap. When the bias is further increased, the traps formed are almost filled with carriers. The almost filled traps allow the injected electron to move freely via trap to trap hopping mechanism which causes a filamentary pathway to be formed.

4. Electrode dependence in HP memories
4.1 Electrodes in HP RS devices
Recently, it was discovered that the choice of TE plays a role in influencing the memory device's RS outcome alongside several parameters. Several investigations on HP memory devices have been conducted to understand the role of TE on RS behaviour and its impact on their performance.65–67 The TEs are typically made from metals or metal oxides that are physically formed on top of the active memory layer. They are typically designed with a thickness of 100 to 150 nm using various deposition methods such as thermal evaporation, e-beam, or sputtering processes. In general, the TE is separated into two groups: active metals and inert metals. Depending on their oxidation rate and Gibbs energy, active metals such as Ag, Al, Cu, and Ni can chemically react with the perovskite layer. The metal atoms of the TE are ionised at the active electrode (AE), resulting in the development and rupture of the conducting filament (CF). The electrochemical metallization mechanism (ECM) or filamentary type of switching is the name given to this mechanism.68 Because the RS is linked to the CF, the resistance value is independent of the active area device's size.
In contrast, inert metals such as Au, Pt, W, and carbon do not chemically react with the perovskite layer and serve primarily as a charged carrier injection medium at the metal/perovskite interface. The valence change mechanism (VCM) of interface-type switching refers to the change in electronic conductivity caused by an enhanced halogen negative anion (e.g., iodine51 or bromine69) with the usage of an inert electrode. As VCM occurs throughout the interface between TE and perovskite, the resistance value is heavily dependent on the geometrical size of the active area (i.e. the size of TE). Fig. 7 shows the work function and electrical conductivity of common metals used as TE in memory devices.70,71 Pt exhibit the highest work function, followed by Ni and Au, whereas Ag demonstrates the greatest conductivity followed by Cu and Au. The work function of the metal is critical to consider when choosing an electrode material. When the TE meets the perovskite layer, a Schottky barrier or ohmic contact forms at the interface as their Fermi levels realign.72 The high and low work functions of TE, respectively, will lower the potential barrier at the interface and allow for greater charge carrier injection into p-type and n-type HPs. A study by Long et al. revealed that only Au and graphite TE will form an ohmic, whereas the other metals such as Ag, and Cu metal produced Schottky junctions with the p-type HP CsSnBr3.73
 Fig. 7  Work function and conductivity of selected TE elements for memory devices. Data was taken from ref. 70 and 71. 
Nonetheless, HP-based memories might exhibit both ECM and VCM characteristics. Particularly when active metals were used as the TE.74 The features of HPs are relatively important in determining memory device qualities. A minor change in halide composition can result in variable switching behaviour and performance.75,76 In addition, common bottom electrodes, such as Au, Pt, Ti, TaN, TiN, ITO, PET, and FTO were utilised in HP RS devices. The following section goes into detail about the TE properties and their influence on the RS properties and performance of HP-based memory devices.

4.1.1 Gold (Au) electrodes. 
Au possesses a high conductivity value of 49 × 106 S m−1 and corrosion resistance properties. Therefore, Au is commonly utilised as an electrode in electronics. Au electrodes with a high work function of 5.2 eV, are critical for high charge carrier injection between the electrode and the active layer of the devices. The inert metal possesses a low oxygen affinity that prevents it from chemically reacting with the device's active layer, making it an excellent inert TE for HP-based RS devices. Among the methods used in obtaining Au electrodes, thermal evaporation or RF sputtering are predominantly used to easily deposit Au on HPs.49,51
When Au is employed as the TE, reports on the well-established MAPbI3-based halide memory usually exhibits bipolar RS characteristic.23,39,47,77 The RS characteristics typically display an ON/OFF switching ratio of more than 103 and a retention time of at least 104 s. By spin-coating the MAPbI3 solution over an ITO-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate, a flexible memory device can be created.49 Since solvent engineering can form a homogenous perovskite layer, the ON current can remain constant even when the sample is subjected to tensile or compressive bending states as illustrated in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Flexible hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite RS memory systems with mechanical flexibility (a) I–V properties in the absence and presence of bending stress (a bending radius of 1.5 cm). The inset pictures depict device tensile and compressive bending states. Bending stability of perovskite ReRAM with repeated bending cycles (b). One bending cycle is depicted in the inset photos. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. 
Notably, the reliability of the Au/MAPbI3/ITO device can be improved by more than 4000 times endurance cycles even at a low operating voltage of around 0.25 V. Thus, the reliability can be achieved by employing thin polyethyleneimine (PEI) interfacial layers to prevent direct contact of the perovskite layer with the top and bottom electrodes.78 On the other hand, the SET voltage was significantly reduced when the Br− was introduced in the MAPbI3 structure. The low ionic migration barrier of Br− (0.23 eV) as compared to I− (0.29 to 0.30 eV) facilitates charge carrier injection at Au/perovskite interface and transportation in the device.47 An outstanding ON/OFF ratio of 109 is possibly achieved by doping with chlorine atom (Cl−) to form a solution-processed MAPbClxI3−x hybrid perovskite. Besides, a unipolar RS could also be produced from the MAPbI3 perovskite by utilising Au as both the top and bottom electrodes. Such devices were reported with a relatively high ON/OFF ratio between 107 to 108.36,37 Moreover, a multilevel RS memory has been introduced through the fabrication of Au/KCl-MAPbI3−xClx/ITO/glass device, where MAPbI3−xClx perovskite was modified with potassium chloride (KCl) as an additive.52
Bipolar switching was also demonstrated in other lead-free HPs such as Rb3Bi2I9,40 Cs2BiAgBr6,30 Cs3Sb2Br9,69 Cs3Sb2I9,46 Cs4PbBr6,34 and CsSnI3.67 One example includes the use of Au/Rb3Bi2I9/Pt device operated at a very low SET voltage. The device depicts a high ON/OFF ratio of over 107, retention performance up to 1000 s, and endurance of more than 400 cycles.40 Moreover, it was discovered that replacing the Na+ cation with Bi3+ cation sites, could create forming-free devices. The first nanoflake-shape monocrystalline lead-free Cs3Sb2Br9 perovskite in planar-structured devices was introduced by Mao et al.69 This device had overcome the issue of high leakage current and operating current due to the high amount of grain boundaries and pin-holes in lead-free HP-based RS devices.79 This Au/perovskite/Au planar device produces a non-volatile bipolar switching characteristic at a low electric field of 2.2 × 105 Vm−1. The switching mechanism was governed by the migration of highly mobile Br vacancies with low activation energy.
Other RS devices include the formation of an ultrafast switching speed device of about 20 ns that was achieved in the Au/Cs3Sb2I9/ITO vertical memory device.46 The device was developed using a combined method of first-principles-based high-throughput screening and experimental verification. After evaluating a total of 696 compositions in four different crystal structures, and considering the descriptor parameter including stability, vacancy formation, and migration, the dimer-Cs3Sb2I9 was selected to have the highest switching speed as compared to other Cs3Sb2I9. The device produces a relatively slow switching speed of 100 ns. Additionally, the device also shows stable 5000 s retention properties of LRS and HRS at a read voltage of 0.1 V.
Using a low-temperature facile chemical deposition method, a transient memory electronic device has been fabricated with the Au/Cs4PbBr6/PEDOT:PSS/ITO structure.34 The device performed bipolar RS with great endurance and retention data of 104 s. The perovskite was water-soluble and exhibited great transient properties when dissolved in deionised water. The perovskite colour turns from yellow to white and simultaneously vanishes its optical and electrical properties. The transient material is potentially utilised for short-term data storage and in vivo implants in the human or animal body, especially when dissolvable metals such as Mg, Zn, or Mo were selected as electrodes.80
The CsSnI3-based perovskite with a structure of Au/PMMA/CsSnI3/Pt produces a bipolar RS, in which the switching mechanism is governed by the interface-type VCM.67 When the Au electrode, PMMA, and CsSnI3 were in contact, the Schottky barrier was created to form a depletion region between Au TE and p-type perovskite (Fig. 9). Sn vacancies are accumulated at the Au/perovskite interface when the positive bias was applied to the Au. The accumulation caused the depletion width to reduce and allow electrons to be injected through the narrow Schottky barrier by a tunnelling process. Hence, this caused the resistance state to change from HRs to LRS. The opposite mechanism occurs when the negative bias was applied to the Au. The depleting width is expended and reduces the injection of electrons from the Au into the perovskite layer, which induces the HRS process.
 Fig. 9  (a) Mechanism of the Au/PMMA/CsSnI3/Pt device. (b) Variation in depletion width in a p-type perovskite layer due to Sn vacancy accumulation in an electric field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. 
A study on the effect of device area for Au-based TE RS devices was also performed. A study was executed to evaluate the correlation between the TE size area and the RS behaviour for Au-based TE devices.45 The device displays the reduction of HRS values when the size of the device increases from 280 to 1000 μm. Thus, the area-dependent resistance indicates that the device behaves under the Schottky barrier or interface-type RS. Nevertheless, the area-independent characteristic was observed for LRS values that remained at about 100 Ω. Hence, the characteristics verify that the RS device behaviour is highly localised, which is consistent with the filament-based RS mechanism. In general, the inert TE could only present Schottky type RS as there is no ionic interaction between TE and the active layer. Nonetheless, the filamentary RS could also be possible, which highly depends on the characteristics of the active layer of the memory device. In this case, the iodine ions from PbI MAPbI3 moved from the original lattice to accumulate at the Au electrode and the remaining iodine vacancies gradually created a CF to bridge the top and bottom electrodes. Although the RS remains at a bipolar state, further studies on larger variations of active areas can be carried out with specific device structures to observe any change in RS behaviour types.


4.1.2 Silver (Ag) electrodes. 
Ag, like Au, has a high conductivity of 66.7 × 106 S m−1 and a lower work function of 4.32 eV. In electronic devices, Ag can take the shape of a thin solid layer or a network of porous nanowires. The advantage of using Ag nanowire electrodes is that the electronic device may be bent without compromising electrical performance, making it suitable for wearable applications. The high porosity of Ag nanowires is also critical for generating adequate Schottky contact in vertical-type organic transistors. Moreover, thermal evaporation methods are typically used in halide memory devices to deposit Ag in contact with the perovskite layer.
Generally, the device structure plays an important role in operating current and ON/OFF ratio values. Bipolar RS is commonly observed when the Ag is fabricated as the TE. Depending on the combination of the HP and device structure, the RS was usually contributed by Ag and halogen ion filament formation and rupture. A very high ON/OFF ratio of 109 was demonstrated in the Ag/(PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si memory devices, which is three orders of magnitude higher than that of the 3-D CsPbI3-based device. The observation was due to the huge decrease in the HRS current as shown in Fig. 10.81 After forming a Schottky contact, the band bending induced by tuning the bandgap of the perovskite controls the barrier height and affects the HRS current of the device. Moreover, the 2D perovskite-based device also can sustain its electrical properties for up to 2 weeks, which is more reliable than the 3-D CsPbI3-based device that degraded after 5 days.
 Fig. 10  Comparison of linear replotted I–V curves for the HRS and schematic diagram of the Schottky barrier heights for CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13. (a) Comparison of linear replotted I–V curves for the HRS of CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13 devices. (b) Schematic diagram of the Schottky barrier heights for CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. 
The common MAPbI3 perovskite also produces bipolar RS when in contact with the Ag electrode. Several reports observe the RS parameters with an ON/OFF ratio of 106, endurance up to 104 cycles, and retention of 104 s.82,83 After being treated with a small amount of hydroiodic acid solution into the MAPbI3, the grain size becomes smaller which improves the morphological properties. Subsequently, the electrical properties of the Ag/MAPbI3/Pt memory devices with an operating speed of 640 μs were observed without an electroforming mechanism.82
Extremely low program current memory has been demonstrated by self-assembling single-crystalline CsPbBr3 on co-planar Ag electrodes.74 The device exhibits bipolar RS with an operating current of approximately 10 nA, which induces a relatively low power of 10−8 W, a large ON/OFF ratio of about 103, and long data retention above 103 s. Nevertheless, when the CsPbBr3 was vacuum-deposited based on the vertical structure of Ag/CsPbBr3/MoO3/Ag, the operating current becomes higher. The increase in the current was due to the shorter electrical distance between two electrodes, which reduces the internal resistance of the perovskite layer but resulted in a weaker ON/OFF ratio of 102.84 Nonetheless, the vacuum deposited CsPbBr3 exhibits outstanding ambient stability without degradation for over 30 days in an ambient environment.
Perovskite nanorods (PNRs) based on RbPI3 with Cl halide mixing present significant bipolar switching characteristics as compared to the PNRs without Cl in the device structure of Ag/PMMA/PNRs/ITO.75 The existence of Cl substitution had introduced the defect/trap states, which improved the RS behaviour as well as its reliability and flexibility. The conduction mechanism of the device is governed by SCLC associated with the charge trapping and de-trapping by the PNRs in the PMMA matrix. At 4 wt% of PNRs in the PMMA mixture, the memory device displays its best performance with an ON/OFF ratio above 103 and data retention of 104 s. The high stability was still observed even after 14 days of storage and under flat, tensile, and compressive bending conditions.


4.1.3 Aluminium (Al) electrodes. 
Al is a popular choice in choosing electrodes, especially for optoelectronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and solar cells due to its high reflectivity of light. The Al metals exhibit high conductivity of 40.8 × 106 S m−1,71 with a relatively low work function of 4.32 eV.70 Al electrodes usually act as the cathode to inject electrons while being considered among the cheapest metal for electronics. Nevertheless, because of its low Gibbs free energy, Al is rapidly oxidised, therefore encapsulation is usually required to extend the dependability of the devices. Similar to Au and Ag TEs, the MAPbI3-based perovskite was also reported to exhibit the bipolar RS electrical property when Ag was employed as the TE.57,78 A unique design of Al-based RS devices was demonstrated by forming a fibrous cross-point, mainly for future flexible wearable electronics.85 The lightweight Al fibre was coated with MAPbI3 using a simple dip-coating technique before the bare metallic Al fibre was physically crossed at different bending angles to form a flexible Al@MAPbI3/Al memory device. The device performs well with great stability and a high ON/OFF ratio of 106. Interestingly, it was discovered that one can manipulate the RS mechanism from bipolar RS to WORM when MAPbI3 was mixed with polyvinylcarbazole (PVK), which was mainly due to the conformation ordering of the PVK side-chain/backbone under applied voltage bias.62 This reveals the effect of the interfacial layer in controlling the HP RS device characteristics.
It was found that many memory devices use Al and ITO as the top and bottom electrodes, respectively. For example, the lead-free layered Cs3Sb2I9 perovskite demonstrates repeatable bipolar RS with a high ON/OFF ratio of about 104 and superb retention over 104 s.86 Similar performance was demonstrated for the CsPbCl3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) embedded in the matrix of PMMA.87 The PQDs are distributed evenly in the PMMA polymer dielectric matrix. Moreover, they induce trapping sites between the PQD/PMMA interface that attribute to the switching mechanism of the Al/PQDs:PMMA/ITO memory device. During the SET condition, some of the electrons that were transported in the PQDs:PMMA layer were captured in the trapping sites. They were not released from the sites due to the related deep energy level in the RESET condition, which results in the switch from the LRS to the HRS.
On the other hand, CsPbBr3 nanocube perovskite exhibits a multilayer RS in the Al/perovskite/ITO device architecture, which results in a large ON/OFF ratio (103), long retention duration (103 s), and good endurance stability (>103 cycles).88 Memory devices, which are made on a PET substrate, retain their electrical properties despite bending at 20 mm radii. Furthermore, exposure to 405 nm UV light affected the switching capabilities due to the creation of electron–hole pairs, which are appropriate for light-sensitive memory systems. Fig. 11 depicts the RS properties of CsPbBr3 nanocube flexible memory devices subjected to mechanical bending and UV light irradiation.
 Fig. 11  
I–V characteristics of the CsPbBr3 nanocube-based device under (a) different bending states and (b) dark and illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. 


4.1.4 Other rare electrodes. 
Some elements are seldom utilised as the TE in HP memory systems. Pt is classified as an inert electrode with high conductivity of 10.2 × 106 S m−1 and the highest work function of the metal choices. Unfortunately, the price of this metal is prohibitively expensive, making it unsuitable for large productions. Pt has been described as the TE for Cs2AgBiBr6 memory devices,89 CsPbBr3,90 CsSnBr3,91 and MAPbI1xBixBr3.92 Among these, the Pt/CsSnBr3/Pt exhibits an exceptional big ON/OFF ratio of more than 105 with ultralow SET and RESET voltages of roughly 0.2 V and 0.15 V, respectively.59
Other rare reported metals such as InGA,78 Pt,89–93 Cu,94 Ni,95 W,96 and NiO97 have been implemented as the TE in HP RS devices. One remarkable study has been reported for a lead-free eco-friendly methyl-ammonium bismuth iodide (MA3Bi2I9) perovskite. The perovskite was sandwiched between Cu and ITO electrodes, which produces a 104 ON/OFF ratio, vigorous endurance of 1730 cycles, excellent data retention above 105 s, and an ultra-fast switching speed of 10 ns.94 Nonetheless, more research is needed to explore the suitability of these uncommonly used elements as TEs in HP RS devices.

4.2 Normalising electrode dependency in HP RS devices
The TE dependency of the RS behaviour and performance of the memory devices can be explained by discussing the normalised halide perovskite memory device concerning the bottom electrodes (ITO or FTO) (i.e. TE/halide perovskite/ITO @ FTO), as illustrated in Fig. 12. For MAPbI3, the TE typically presents bipolar RS behaviour when Au, Ag, or Al were used as TEs. Nevertheless, the RS mechanisms between them are slightly different. The difference is affected by the inert and active TE selections. For Au-based TEs, the RS is mainly induced by the migration of iodide vacancies and the formation of conducting filament under the electric field.49 It is proposed that the Al- and Ag-based TE memory devices are operated under filament- and interface-type RS mechanisms, respectively.66 On the contrary, another study proposes that the formation of Al metal filaments was not completed to connect the bottom and top electrodes. The incompletion was due to Al losing to compete with iodide vacancies in forming the main filament pathways.57 In fact, the high conductivity of Au may also lead to metal filament formation in similar devices.
 Fig. 12  Normalised halide perovskite memory devices. 
In CsPbBr3-based RS devices, the Au TE produces either a multilevel or WORM RS mechanism with a high ON/OFF ratio ranging between 104 to 107.61,98,99 Hence, the formation of defects during the fabrication processes of the CsPbBr3 QDs causes the thermionic emission mechanism, ohmic conduction, and trap-filled SCLC mechanisms to contribute in inducing the WORM effect.61 Besides, the unipolar RS device mechanism was verified by conductive atomic force microscope (C-AFM), which originates from the formation and rupture of the conducting channel of the Br vacancies.98 Nevertheless, when the active metal Al is used as TE, the CsPbBr3-based devices operate under bipolar RS with a slightly lower ON/OFF ratio of 102.100 The bipolar RS behaviour was explained through ohmic and SCLC mechanisms. Additionally, the formation of the conducting filament was related to the diffusion of Al atoms into CsPbBr3 and the migration and drift of Br ions.
Another comparison involves the MA3Bi2I9-based RS devices. The devices can behave in multilevel or bipolar RS characteristics when the Au53 or Cu94 are employed as the TE, respectively. In the Au/MA3Bi2I9/ITO device, the filament formation/rupture of iodide vacancies have resulted in multilevel RS with a reasonable ON/OFF ratio (10) and high retention of 104 s.53 On the other hand, for the Cu/MA3Bi2I9/ITO device, the filament formation/rupture by the Cu atom has significantly improved the ON/OFF ratio and retention time up to 104 and 105 s, respectively.94
In the case of bottom electrodes, the material selection was observed to influence the RS behaviour and performance of the halide perovskite-based memory devices. An interesting study by Zhu et al. on the Ag/CsPbBr3/Pt reveals that the role of Ag and Pt electrodes can be alternately switched to either bottom or top electrodes. The switching was carried out by changing the polarity of the electrical bias.101 When Ag acts as the TE, the RS mechanism is represented by the metal Ag filament formation/rupture. In contrast, when the Pt becomes the TE, the RS mechanism is denoted by the filament formation/rupture of Br ions. Regardless of the material choice in the bottom electrodes, both conditions exhibit multilevel RS mechanisms. Moreover, the common bipolar RS mechanism in MAPbI3 can be transformed into a unipolar RS mechanism by replacing the ITO bottom electrode with Au.102 Not only the type of RS mechanism was observed to change, but the performance of the device also improved significantly with the largest ON/OFF ratio of 108. Nonetheless, the cause of the RS mechanism remains the same, which is related to the filament formation/rupture of the iodide ions. Thus, it can be concluded through the observation of the literature, that the impact of bottom electrodes is still very minimal as the focus has always been prioritised on the TE effect on memory devices. More studies on the role of bottom electrodes should be emphasised in future in-depth analyses.
5. Challenges of electrode dependence in developing RS behaviours
In terms of efficiency and simplicity, the use of HPs in the development of memory devices has shown to be promising. As a result, there are a few review papers summarising the use of HP in RS devices.68,103,104 Nonetheless, based on the reports obtained for this research (refer Table S1 in ESI†), it was observed that a change in electrode materials has a substantial influence on the kind of RS characteristics in the devices. Throughout this method, several variations in the literature on HP memory with distinct electrode materials were discovered. Several differences were discovered in several studies where the same electrode materials (e.g. metals) were employed but produced distinct RS behaviours. This element of electro-dependence was not thoroughly developed in any review studies. With the rising number of articles in the burgeoning field of HP memories, it is vital to focus more on simply examining the electrode dependency to provide a clearer picture of optimising these memory devices.
The difficulty arises when equivalent electrodes respond differently to RS operations. It is difficult to nail down a specific cause, but rather a combination of various aspects within the RS design framework. As noted in the earlier section, the interaction between the TE and the preceding active layer causes most of the fluctuation. Some key features in the electrodes that causes the varying RS behaviours are the choice of electrodes, the thickness of electrodes, work functions, interfacial layers, preceding HP composition, or the Schottky barrier size. Fig. 13a illustrates all recent HP RS memories published works on the use of various TEs, as well as various RS memories generated.
 Fig. 13  (a) Graph displaying the number of reported HP-based RS devices until the year 2022 which corresponds to the different types of RS characteristics and TEs. Graphs displaying reported works involving halides perovskites in RS devices and their various TEs which corresponds to (b) ON/OFF ratio, (c) endurance, and (d) retention properties. 
Much of the reported works display bipolar switching, while the other half reported a combination of multilevel, WORM, and unipolar switching. The usage of Ag and Au electrodes is significantly more advantageous in all RS behaviour due to the inertness or resistive performance produced. Nonetheless, it is still costly to produce Ag or Au electrodes. Al remains a secondary alternative due to its low production cost. Nevertheless, its lack of performance presents problems for high-performance RS devices. Other uncommon electrodes used only in bipolar and multilayer RS devices are InGa,78 Pt,89–93 Cu,94 Ni,95 W,96 and NiO.97 Less is known about their full applicability and potential efficacy in memory devices. Researchers should be aware of the most essential TE choice that affects interchangeable resistance states and the WORM effect. Since the WORM process is irreversible and the filament channels cannot be ruptured, the electrodes utilised must be precise in their participation in the conduction pathways. It should be emphasised that each HP RS device design structure is unique, and the possibilities are based on a variety of characteristics, including electrode dependence. Hence, more data is needed for HP RS devices for comparison. Only a few documented papers have touched briefly on the influence of electrode materials, with no additional in-depth examination. Unlike other common RS devices, the research on electrode influence on other RS devices, such as metal oxides (ZrO2,105 TiO2,106 ZnO,107 AlOx108) and nitrides (AlN,109 WN,110 SiN111) has been fully examined. As a result, specialised electrode studies for HP RS devices should be initiated to better understand the role of electrode materials in memory behaviours.
In terms of resistive performance of HP RS devices, Fig. 13b reveals the ON/OFF ratio of all reported works. The highest ON/OFF ratio was reported using Ag TE in bipolar switching of nearly ∼109 using Ag/(PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si device structure.81 Endurance properties were shown in Fig. 13c in which using Ag in bipolar RS shows high endurance of 106 cycles through Ag/CsSnCl3/ITO structure.112 Surprisingly, for retention characteristics (Fig. 13d), using Au in bipolar RS shows excellent stability of nearly 105 s using Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si and Au/Cs0.06FA0.78MA0.16Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3/ITO device structure. The inertness of Au metals in comparison to other TEs may be an effective contribution to the high retention of Au TEs. Nonetheless, there is a noticeable contrast in the resistive performance of most of the reported works. For instance, the low retention (2000 s) and low endurance (200 cycles) of the high ON/OFF ratio of Ag TE in bipolar switching (∼109) continue to be a challenge.81 As a result, it should be understood that there is no single parameter that can be used to evaluate the performance of HP RS memories.
To create an outstanding RS device, optimised ON/OFF ratio, endurance, and retention parameters must be attained. Additionally, it can be challenging to comprehend the full potential of the corresponding HP RS device because some of the reported works lack important parameter values for ON/OFF ratio, endurance, or retention. Only with the full reported data values, the performance of the RS of the HP memories can only be strongly related to the different kinds of TEs. Furthermore, the several absences of the utilisation of other TEs for related RS types such as unipolar (Al, rare), and WORM (Ag, rare) RS switching were not reported. This may create new opportunities for RS technology research and RS development provided the RS type can be achieved using the selected TEs mentioned.
6. Electrode selection strategies for HP RS devices
In most cases, the MIM or MIS framework is usually employed in RS memories. The parameters of the HP active layer design may be adjusted to provide a variety of RS behaviour. It is important to predict the RS behaviour produced through understanding the memory features which occur through VCM or ECM processes. The VCM process is often a nanoscale redox reaction caused by the mobility of mobile donor-type defects such as halide vacancies for HPs.113,114 On the other hand, the electrochemical dissolution and deposition of an active electrode metal generates the conductive filament route.115,116 It is becoming obvious, as recent breakthroughs in current HP RS studies reveal that the choice of TE influences RS behaviour.
Many elements must be considered to produce an optimum RS memory design structure. Because they are multiple varieties of RS memory behaviour, it is critical to understand how each of these RS functions in connection to the device's design structure. Thus, to obtain a high-performance RS memory, a few issues must be addressed and comprehended while selecting the appropriate electrodes for RS devices as shown in Fig. 14. Among the questions that can be answered when producing memory devices are:
 Fig. 14  Schematic flow of electrode selection for HP RS devices optimization. 
1. Can the TE element's inertness endure instability or deterioration? Some electrodes interact with the perovskite layer (e.g. active electrodes), generating undesirable compounds that impair the resistive properties. Long-term stability has always been a key issue in perovskite-based applications. Efficient and cheaper electrodes like Ag have been shown to react with methylammonium perovskite to produce silver iodide, and AgI compounds via ion migration between both layers through the hole transport layer.117–119 This may speed up the degradation process of the RS device while the formation of AgI acts as an insulator layer. Most solutions to this problem have been discovered in perovskite solar cell applications such as control of methylammonium cation amounts,120 insertions of monolayer graphene barrier,121 addition of ZnO layer,122 and mixing of Ag–graphene composites,123 The solutions indicate that new research should be focused in improving the stability of RS electrodes, specifically Ag as it is a cheaper alternative to Au while maintaining RS qualities. For the time being, Au electrodes remain a preferred option as seen in many RS memories due to their inertness characteristics that do not corrode easily.
2. Will the cost of the chosen electrodes significantly raise the cost of production? The debate is whether inexpensive elements like Cu or Al are a better long-term investment than more costly ones like Au or Ag. If HP RS memories are to reach the commercial market, the cost vs. benefit of the chosen electrodes must be understood. Although Au or Ag remains the preferable option, the industry's cheap manufacturing costs are the goal of future electronics.124 Alternatively, low-cost methods for producing Au or Ag electrodes may be suggested which may be incorporated in HP RS memories. One reported work by Santos et al. includes the fabrication of Au planar-disc electrodes on polyimide tape using Au leaf sheets for wearable electronics.125 This study found that when the electrode was subjected to extreme mechanical deformation, there was no loss of electrical contact or substantial fluctuation in the electrode response. Furthermore, because the research on HP RS memory is still relatively new, other electrode elements have not been investigated. Some widely studied elements as electrodes as well as non-metal nanomaterials in perovskite solar cells show promising results which may provide fresh insights into the creation of cheaper electrodes. Thus, HP RS memories should explore these alternatives such as carbonaceous electrodes (graphene, carbon), which have been recently established in HP photovoltaics as they offer cheaper solutions in reducing electrode costs.126–128
3. When employing the selected design structure, how does the choice of electrode material affect RS characteristics? Although several criteria influence RS characteristics, the components that comprise the electrodes may play a part in having a diverse operating voltage window, ON/OFF ratio, endurance, and retention. This could be attributed to the different work functions of electrodes such as Al (4.28 eV), Ag (4.32 eV), Cu (4.70 eV), and Au (5.2 eV).129–131 Some electrodes may necessitate a greater bias voltage, which raises power consumption. This may influence the lifetime of the HP layer when constructing the filamentary conduction pathways. Alternatively, selecting an electrode with a low operating voltage range while maintaining a high ON/OFF ratio that corresponds to the assembly of RS devices would be perfect for optimizing the resistive output. In addition, interfacial layers within the perovskite–TE interface may play a role in varying the RS characteristics.
4. If the design of the memory devices is based on flexible electronics, how good would the electrodes withstand bending stress cycles? Flexible RS devices typically used flexible substrates with pre-patterned ITO on their surfaces. They are often constructed of polymers such as polyimide and PET. With the emergence of wearable electronics, flexible electronics or optoelectronics have lately gained popularity. Some key parameters that can be studied in HP RS devices include bending cycles, bending strain, and bending fatigue lifetime. This can be seen in the use of Ag flexible electrodes without compromising electrical performance.
5. Along with the points discussed above, other parameters of the role of the electrode that may be considered in the HP RS design framework, include electrode area and thickness, choice of the bottom electrode, thermal stability, the addition of interfacial layers, perovskite–TE interactions, and the choice of electrode deposition processes.
Eventually, choosing the appropriate electrodes may aid in the optimization of HP-based RS memories in terms of efficiency, cost, stability, and device technology advancement. As the subject of RS integrating HP is still relatively new, there is much more to debate and study before passing judgement on the favourable prognosis of these devices. Well-established memory technologies such as using metal oxides and nitrides may overshadow HP's work. To compete with them in the future, HP RS devices will need to reach equivalent resistive qualities to fully show their full potential.
7. Conclusion and future outlooks
In conclusion, as memory characteristics respond to a wide range of factors, using diverse materials as TEs in HP RS memories proves to be a challenge. Although the methodologies shown above cannot cover all the essential features, the relevance of electrode dependency on the different RS created in HP memory is demonstrated. From the known reported works, most of the devices exhibit bipolar RS switching. Other RS properties, such as unipolar, WORM, and multilayer switching, should be further investigated as they may pose potential benefits in the future development of RS technology. As the effect of electrode choices and parameters was proven to have a role in the development of diverse RS behaviours, the question lies in the relevance effect of these TEs. There is no one-size-fits-all answer for the schematic framework of HP's RS design structure. Rather, their implications must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Further research would be required to optimise the choices of TEs, such as whether the popular but expensive electrodes or the cheap but less efficient electrodes are preferable choices. In-depth investigations of the electrodes, such as their interfacial layers or interface interactions may give additional information to optimize the RS output. Consequently, the described works only reflect a subset of electrode materials, leaving others unexplored. Alternatives materials should be studied as some of these mentioned elements are not sustainable in the long run. Additionally, the role of bottom electrodes in HP-based RS devices should be studied to complement the use of TE. Thus, these intriguing investigations on electrode dependence will assist in the commercialization of HP RS devices in the future.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through equal contributions of all authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The study was funded by Multimedia University Postdoctoral Research Fellow Grant (MMUI/220123). This work was also supported by SATU Joint Research Scheme (ST002-2021) and Universiti Malaya Impact-Oriented Interdisciplinary Research Grant Programme (IIRG007B-19FNW), and Universiti Tenaga Nasional (UNITEN) BOLD Grant (J5150050002/20021170).
Notes and references
H. Zhang and G. Zhang, Review of research on storage development, Scalable Comput., 2021, 22, 365–385 Search PubMed .
D. Klein, The history of semiconductor memory: from magnetic tape to NAND flash memory, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Mag., 2016, 8, 16–22 Search PubMed .
I. L. Auerbach, J. P. Eckert, R. F. Shaw and C. B. Sheppard, Mercury delay line memory using a pulse rate of several megacycles, Proc. IRE, 1949, 37, 855–861 Search PubMed .
B. North and O. Nash, Magnetic core memory reborn, Access, 2011, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D. Ellerbruch, A new memory device-the twister, IRE Trans. Compon. Parts, 1959, 6, 42–44 CrossRef .
J. E. Juliussen, Bubble memory as small mass storage, Microelectron. Reliab., 1977, 16, 427–430 CrossRef .
P. Bonyhard, J. Geusic, A. Bobeck, Y.-S. Chen, P. Michaelis and J. Smith, Magnetic bubble memory chip design, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1973, 9, 433–436 CrossRef .
T.-C. Chang, K.-C. Chang, T.-M. Tsai, T.-J. Chu and S. M. Sze, Resistance random access memory, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 254–264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaur, A journey of digital storage from punch cards to cloud, IOSR J. Eng., 2014, 4, 36–41 CrossRef .
K. Goda and M. Kitsuregawa, The history of storage systems, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1433–1440 Search PubMed .
C. Monzio Compagnoni, A. Goda, A. S. Spinelli, P. Feeley, A. L. Lacaita and A. Visconti, Reviewing the evolution of the NAND flash technology, Proc. IEEE, 2017, 105, 1609–1633 Search PubMed .
T. Shi, R. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. Sun, J. An and Q. Liu, A review of resistive switching devices: performance improvement, characterization, and applications, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000109 CrossRef .
R. Waser, R. Dittmann, G. Staikov and K. Szot, Redox-based resistive switching memories - nanoionic mechanisms, prospects, and challenges, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2632–2663 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wu, G. W. Burr, C. S. Hwang, K. L. Wang, Q. Xia and J. J. Yang, Resistive switching materials for information processing, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 173–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akinaga and H. Shima, Reram technology; challenges and prospects, IEICE Electron. Express, 2012, 9, 795–807 CrossRef .
H. Akinaga and H. Shima, Resistive random access memory (ReRAM) based on metal oxides, Proc. IEEE, 2010, 98, 2237–2251 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, D. J. Loy, P. A. Dananjaya, F. Tan, C. Ng and W. Lew, Oxide-based RRAM materials for neuromorphic computing, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 8720–8746 CrossRef CAS .
G. Landi, V. Subbiah, K. S. Reddy, A. Sorrentino, A. Sambandam, P. C. Ramamurthy and H. C. Neitzert, Evidence of bipolar resistive switching memory in perovskite solar cell, IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., 2018, 6, 454–463 CAS .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Trapped charge-driven degradation of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, S. Yang, B. Cao, X. Tao and Z. Chen, Single crystal perovskite solar cells: development and perspectives, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905021 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bu, B. He, Y. Ding, X. Li, X. Sun, J. Duan, Y. Zhao, H. Chen and Q. Tang, Enhanced energy level alignment and hole extraction of carbon electrode for air-stable hole-transporting material-free CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 205, 110267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. Wolfe, J. Torres, M. Yun and J.-K. Lee, Asymmetric bipolar resistive switching of halide perovskite film in contact with TiO2 layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 27209–27216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Khan, N. Ilyas, M. Z. M. Shamim, M. I. Khan, M. Sohail, N. Rahman, A. A. Khan, S. N. Khan and A. Khan, Oxide-based resistive switching-based devices: fabrication, influence parameters and applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 15755–15788 RSC .

          M. Terai, Y. Sakotsubo, Y. Saito, S. Kotsuji and H. Hada, in 2009 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE,  2009, pp. 1–4 Search PubMed .
C. Walczyk, C. Wenger, D. Walczyk, M. Lukosius, I. Costina, M. Fraschke, J. Dabrowski, A. Fox, D. Wolansky, S. Thiess, E. Miranda, B. Tillack and T. Schroeder, On the role of Ti adlayers for resistive switching in HfO2-based metal-insulator-metal structures: Top versus bottom electrode integration, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2011, 29, 01AD02 Search PubMed .
S. Jabeen, M. Ismail, A. M. Rana and E. Ahmed, Impact of work function on the resistive switching characteristics of M/ZnO/CeO2/Pt devices, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 056401 CrossRef .
C. Ma, S. Clark, Z. Liu, L. Liang, Y. Firdaus, R. Tao, A. Han, X. Liu, L.-J. Li, T. D. Anthopoulos, M. C. Hersam and T. Wu, Solution-processed mixed-dimensional hybrid perovskite/carbon nanotube electronics, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3969–3979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, M. Tai, C. Song, Z. Wang and J. Yin, Competition between metallic and vacancy defect conductive filaments in a CH3NH3PbI3-based memory device, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6431–6436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, N. Ali, G. Bi and H. Wu, Investigation of resistive switching in lead-free bismuth–silver halide double perovskite, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2022, 37, 065011 CrossRef .
E. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. Choi and L. Wang, Bifunctional resistive switching behavior in an organolead halide perovskite based Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO structure, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7824–7830 RSC .
Y. Park and J. S. Lee, Bifunctional silver-doped ZnO for reliable and stable organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite memory, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1021–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, F. Li, C. P. Veeramalai and T. Guo, A facile synthesis of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite quantum dots and their application in flexible nonvolatile memory, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 083102 CrossRef .
R. Chen, J. Xu, M. Lao, Z. Liang, Y. Chen, C. Zhong, L. Huang, A. Hao and M. Ismail, Transient resistive switching for nonvolatile memory based on water-Soluble Cs4PbBr6 perovskite films, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. G. Kim, Q. Van Le, J. S. Han, H. Kim, M.-J. Choi, S. A. Lee, T. L. Kim, S. B. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Dual-phase all-inorganic cesium halide perovskites for conducting-bridge memory-based artificial synapses, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Yoo and T. Lee, High-performance solution-processed organo-metal halide perovskite unipolar resistive memory devices in a cross-bar array structure, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804841 CrossRef .
H. Ahn, K. Kang, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, J. Kim, J. Lee, K. Baek, J. Shin, H. Lim, Y. Kim, J. S. Lee and T. Lee, Resistive switching by percolative conducting filaments in organometal perovskite unipolar memory devices analyzed using current noise spectra, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2107727 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, T. Shen, C. Zhu, Q. Zeng, A. Yu, S. Liu, R. Yi, Z. Weng, Y. Zhan, X. Hou and J. Qin, Memory Devices via unipolar resistive switching in symmetric organic–inorganic perovskite nanoscale heterolayers, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 11889–11896 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hwang and J.-S. Lee, A strategy to design high-density nanoscale devices utilizing vapor deposition of metal halide perovskite materials, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701048 CrossRef .
C. Cuhadar, S. G. Kim, J. M. Yang, J. Y. Seo, D. Lee and N. G. Park, All-inorganic bismuth halide perovskite-like materials A3Bi2I9 and A3Bi1.8Na0.2I8.6 (A = Rb and Cs) for low-voltage switching resistive memory, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29741–29749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Prakash, D. Jana and S. Maikap, TaOx-based resistive switching memories: prospective and challenges, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 418 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Memristive devices for computing, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Strukov, F. Alibart and R. Stanley Williams, Thermophoresis/diffusion as a plausible mechanism for unipolar resistive switching in metal–oxide–metal memristors, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 107, 509–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. Lee and T. W. Noh, Resistive switching phenomena: A review of statistical physics approaches, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 031303 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Tang, C. Wang, H. Fan, Z. Zhao, H. Wu, M. Xu, R. Shen, Y. Yang and J. Bian, Triple-cation perovskite resistive switching memory with enhanced endurance and retention, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3695–3703 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, S. H. Kim, D. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Designing zero-dimensional dimer-type all-inorganic perovskites for ultra-fast switching memory, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang, C. Gu, D. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Effect of halide-mixing on the switching behaviors of organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite memory, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43794 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yan, B. Chen, H. Hu, S. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and D. Zou, First fiber-shaped non-volatile memory device based on hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600160 CrossRef .
C. Gu and J.-S. Lee, Flexible hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite memory, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, S. H. Kim, Y. Park, D. Lee and J. S. Lee, Metal-halide perovskite design for next-generation memories: First-Principles screening and experimental verification, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
E. Yoo, S. V. N. Pammi, K. Y. Kim, T.-V. Dang, J.-H. Eom, Y. J. Choi and S.-G. Yoon, Strategic extended air stability of organolead halide perovskite nonvolatile memory devices, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 811, 151999 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lv, K. Ling, T. Zhong, F. Liu, X. Liang, C. Zhu, J. Liu and W. Kong, Multilevel resistive switching memory based on a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film with potassium chloride additives, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang and J.-S. Lee, Lead-free, air-stable hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite resistive switching memory with ultrafast switching and multilevel data storage, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8578–8584 RSC .
J.-M. Yang, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, C. Cuhadar, D.-Y. Son, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, 1D hexagonal HC(NH2)2PbI3 for multilevel resistive switching nonvolatile memory, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800190 CrossRef .
S. Ge, Y. Wang, Z. Xiang and Y. Cui, Reset voltage-dependent multilevel resistive switching behavior in CsPb1–xBixI3 Perovskite-Based Memory Device, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24620–24626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D.-H. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. Do Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N.-G. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Organolead halide perovskites for low operating voltage multilevel resistive switching, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562–6567 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. S. How, N. A. Talik, B. K. Yap, H. Nakajima, S. Tunmee and B. T. Goh, Multiple resistive switching behaviours of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film with different metal electrodes, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 473, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Yu, C. Park, D. Y. Park, S. C. Lim, G. Namkoong and M. S. Jeong, Probing Pathways of conductive filaments of FAMAPbI3 with controlled FA composition using conductive atomic force microscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 25067–25074 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jeong, C. Park, H. Jeon, K.-N. Lee, J. Lee, S. C. Lim, G. Namkoong and M. S. Jeong, Quasi-2D halide perovskite memory device formed by acid–base binary ligand solution composed of oleylamine and oleic acid, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 40891–40900 CrossRef .
B. Li, H. Yin, F. Xia, B. Sun, S. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Robust and transient write-once-read-many-times memory device based on hybrid perovskite film with novel room temperature molten salt solvent, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000109 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Che, L. Jin, Y. Li, Q. Li, T. Li, H. Dai and J. Yao, Write once read many times resistance switching memory based on all-inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3 quantum dot, Opt. Mater., 2019, 90, 123–126 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Chen, Y. Cao and S. Sun, High-efficiency bulk heterojunction memory devices fabricated using organometallic halide perovskite:poly(N-vinylcarbazole) blend active layers, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 484–488 RSC .
E. Ercan, J.-Y. Chen, P.-C. Tsai, J.-Y. Lam, S. C.-W. Huang, C.-C. Chueh and W.-C. Chen, A redox-based resistive switching memory device consisting of
organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite/polymer composite thin film, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700344 CrossRef .
X.-F. Cheng, X. Hou, J. Zhou, B.-J. Gao, J.-H. He, H. Li, Q.-F. Xu, N.-J. Li, D.-Y. Chen and J.-M. Lu, Pseudohalide-induced 2D (CH3NH3)2PbI2(SCN)2 perovskite for ternary resistive memory with high performance, Small, 2018, 14, 1703667 CrossRef .
K. Yan, M. Peng, X. Yu, X. Cai, S. Chen, H. Hu, B. Chen, X. Gao, B. Dong and D. Zou, High-performance perovskite memristor based on methyl ammonium lead halides, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1375–1381 RSC .
X. Wu, H. Yu and J. Cao, Unraveling the origin of resistive switching behavior in organolead halide perovskite based memory devices, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 085202 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Han, Q. Van Le, J. Choi, H. Kim, S. G. Kim, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, T. L. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Lead-free all-inorganic cesium tin iodide perovskite for filamentary and interface-type resistive switching toward environment-friendly and temperature-tolerant nonvolatile memories, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8155–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. S. Han, S. G. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Halide perovskites for resistive random-access memories, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5226–5234 RSC .
J.-Y. Mao, Z. Zheng, Z.-Y. Xiong, P. Huang, G.-L. Ding, R. Wang, Z.-P. Wang, J.-Q. Yang, Y. Zhou, T. Zhai and S.-T. Han, Lead-free monocrystalline perovskite resistive switching device for temporal information processing, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104616 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Drummond, work functions of the transition metals and metal silicides, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 3597 Search PubMed .
F. C. Walsh, electrode reactions in metal finishing, Trans. IMF, 1991, 69, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bagdzevicius, K. Maas, M. Boudard and M. Burriel, Interface-type resistive switching in perovskite materials, J. Electroceram., 2017, 39, 157–184 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, B. Li and Q. Mi, Selection of contact materials to p -type halide perovskite by electronegativity matching, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 065224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Jin, Z. Yang, J. Cai, J. Yue, J. Impundu, H. Liu, H. Wei, Z. Peng, Y. J. Li and L. Sun, Extremely low program current memory based on self-assembled all-inorganic perovskite single crystals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31776–31782 CrossRef CAS .
U. Das, A. Dehingia, B. Paul, P. K. Sarkar and A. Roy, Improvement of the Resistive Switching characteristics upon halide mixing in an all-inorganic RbPbI3 perovskite polymer composite based flexible device, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 13610–13618 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ge, X. Guan, Y. Wang, C. Lin, Y. Cui, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Yang and T. Wu, Low-dimensional lead-free inorganic perovskites for resistive switching with ultralow bias, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002110 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, T. H. Lee, J.-M. Yang, J. W. Yang, Y. J. Lee, M.-J. Choi, S. A. Lee, J. M. Suh, K. J. Kwak, J. H. Baek, I. H. Im, D. E. Lee, J. Y. Kim, J. Kim, J. S. Han, S. Y. Kim, D. Lee, N.-G. Park and H. W. Jang, Vertically aligned two-dimensional halide perovskites for reliably operable artificial synapses, Mater. Today, 2022, 52, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Yu and J. Cao, Unraveling the origin of resistive switching behavior in organolead halide perovskite based memory devices, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 085202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Grain boundary dominated ion migration in polycrystalline organic–inorganic halide perovskite films, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
L. Yin, H. Cheng, S. Mao, R. Haasch, Y. Liu, X. Xie, S.-W. Hwang, H. Jain, S.-K. Kang, Y. Su, R. Li, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Dissolvable metals for transient electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 645–658 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, M. J. Choi, J. M. Suh, J. S. Han, S. G. Kim, Q. Van Le, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Quasi-2D halide perovskites for resistive switching devices with ON/OFF ratios above 109, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 0–10 Search PubMed .
J. Choi, Q. Van Le, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, J. S. Han, K. C. Kwon, P. R. Cha, Y. Kwon, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Enhanced endurance organolead halide perovskite resistive switching memories operable under an extremely low bending radius, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30764–30771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shaban, M. Joodaki, S. Mehregan and I. W. Rangelow, Probe-induced resistive switching memory based on organic-inorganic lead halide perovskite materials, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zou, L. He and L. Y. Lin, Vacuum-deposited inorganic perovskite memory arrays with long-term ambient stability, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1–6 Search PubMed .
P. Shu, X. Cao, Y. Du, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, S. Xu, Y. Liu and S. Cao, Resistive switching performance of fibrous crosspoint memories based on an organic–inorganic halide perovskite, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12865–12875 RSC .
S. Paramanik, A. Maiti, S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, Large resistive switching and artificial synaptic behaviors in layered Cs3Sb2I9 Lead-free perovskite memory devices, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 210037 Search PubMed .
H. An, W. K. Kim, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, Highly-stable memristive devices based on poly(methylmethacrylate): CsPbCl3 perovskite quantum dot hybrid nanocomposites, Org. Electron., 2018, 56, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
T. Paul, P. K. Sarkar, S. Maiti and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Multilevel programming and light-assisted resistive switching in a halide-tunable all-inorganic perovskite cube for flexible memory devices, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3667–3677 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lv, T. Zhong, Y. Qin, H. Qin, W. Wang, F. Liu and W. Kong, Resistive switching characteristics improved by visible-light irradiation in a Cs2AgBiBr6-based memory device, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Wu and Y. Hu, Reproducible switching effect of an all-inorganic halide perovskite CsPbBr3 for memory applications, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 7020–7025 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Zhu, X. Zeng, H. Wei, P. Cheng, H. Lu, Y. Liu and R. Xiong, Fabrication of flexible resistive
switching devices based on lead-free all-inorganic CsSnBr3 perovskite using a one-step chemical vapor deposition method, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Ruan, Y. Hu, F. Xu and S. Zhang, Resistive switching behavior of organic-metallic halide perovskites CH3NH3Pb1-BiBr3, Org. Electron., 2019, 70, 252–257 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhong, Y. Qin, F. Lv, H. Qin and X. Tian, Light-activated multilevel resistive switching storage in Pt/Cs2AgBiBr6/ITO/Glass Devices, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2021, 16, 178 CrossRef CAS .
S. Poddar, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhang and Z. Fan, Optically tunable ultra-fast resistive switching in lead-free methyl-ammonium bismuth iodide perovskite films, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6184–6191 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Huang, F. Cao, D. Yu, X. Li and H. Zeng, Capping CsPbBr3 with ZnO to improve performance and stability of perovskite memristors, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1584–1594 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cai, G. Ma, Y. He, C. Liu and H. Wang, A remarkable performance of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite memory based on passivated method, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, H.-S. Kim, D. Y. Park, M. S. Jeong and J. Kim, Compliance-free multileveled resistive switching in a transparent 2D perovskite for neuromorphic computing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12768–12772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, M. Cao, Y. Che, L. Jin, Y. Li, Q. Li, T. Li, H. Dai, J. Yang and J. Yao, Light assisted multilevel resistive switching memory devices based on all-inorganic perovskite quantum dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 181103 CrossRef .
W. Ruan, Y. Hu, T. Qiu, F. Bai, S. Zhang and F. Xu, Morphological regulation of all-inorganic perovskites for multilevel resistive switching, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 127, 258–264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Q. Lin, Z. Zang, M. Wang, P. Wangyang, X. Tang, M. Zhou and W. Hu, Flexible all-inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3 nonvolatile memory device, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6171–6176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, P. Cheng, J. Shi, H. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Xiong, H. Ma and H. Ma, Bromine vacancy redistribution and metallic-ion-migration-induced air-stable resistive switching behavior in all-inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3 film-based memory device, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900754 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Yoo and T. Lee, High-performance solution-processed organo-metal halide perovskite unipolar resistive memory devices in a cross-bar array structure, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804841 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Di, J. Du, Z. Lin, S. Liu, J. Ouyang and J. Chang, Recent advances in resistive random access memory based on lead halide perovskite, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 293–315 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, J. Hu, S. Tang, K. Yan, B. Gao, H. Chen and D. Zou, Recent advances in halide perovskite memristors: materials, structures, mechanisms, and applications, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 1900914 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Wu, C.-Y. Wu, T.-C. Lee, F.-L. Yang, C. Hu and T.-Y. Tseng, Effect of top electrode material on resistive switching properties of ZrO2 film memory devices, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2007, 28, 366–368 CAS .
W.-G. Kim and S.-W. Rhee, Effect of the top electrode material on the resistive switching of TiO2 thin film, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Peng, G. P. Li, J. Y. Ye, Z. P. Wei, Z. Zhang, D. D. Wang, G. Z. Xing and T. Wu, Electrode dependence of resistive switching in Mn-doped ZnO: Filamentary versus interfacial mechanisms, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 192113 CrossRef .
Y. Qi, Z. Shen, C. Zhao and C. Z. Zhao, Effect of electrode area on resistive switching behavior in translucent solution-processed AlOx based memory device, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 822, 153603 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, S. Gao, G. Tang, H. Fu, G. Wang, C. Song, F. Zeng and F. Pan, Effect of electrode materials on AlN-based bipolar and complementary resistive switching, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1793–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prakash, B. P. Singh Rathore and D. Kaur, Effect of top electrode material on resistive switching properties of WN based thin films for non volatile memory application, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 726, 693–697 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Hong, H.-D. Kim, H.-M. An and T. G. Kim, Effect of work function difference between top and bottom electrodes on the resistive switching properties of SiN films, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 1181–1183 CAS .
A. Siddik, P. K. Haldar, T. Paul, U. Das, A. Barman, A. Roy and P. K. Sarkar, Nonvolatile resistive switching and synaptic characteristics of lead-free all-inorganic perovskite-based flexible memristive devices for neuromorphic systems, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 8864–8874 RSC .
A. Kindsmüller, C. Schmitz, C. Wiemann, K. Skaja, D. J. Wouters, R. Waser, C. M. Schneider and R. Dittmann, Valence change detection in memristive oxide based heterostructure cells by hard X-ray photoelectron emission spectroscopy, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 046106 CrossRef .
E. Lim and R. Ismail, Conduction mechanism of valence change resistive switching memory: A survey, Electronics, 2015, 4, 586–613 CrossRef CAS .
I. Valov, R. Waser, J. R. Jameson and M. N. Kozicki, Electrochemical metallization memories—fundamentals, applications, prospects, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 254003 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Q. Wang, S. Wang, L. Chen, Z. Yin, S. Mei, Y. Zhong, Y. Yao, N. Li, J. Wang and W. Song, Understanding degradation mechanisms of perovskite solar cells due to electrochemical metallization effect, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Silver iodide formation in methyl ammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with silver top electrodes, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
J. S. Yun, W. J. Choi, S. H. Kim, E. Cho, S. J. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park and D. S. Ham, Inhibition of iodide ion migration in flexible perovskite solar cells using oxide–metal–oxide transparent electrode, Surf. Interfaces, 2021, 27, 101546 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Chen, H. Zheng, D. Liu, T. Zhang, F. Wang, P. Gu, J. Wu, Z. D. Chen, P. Zhang and S. Li, Corrosive behavior of silver electrode in inverted perovskite solar cells based on Cu:NiOx, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9, 1081–1085 Search PubMed .
O. R. Yamilova, A. V. Danilov, M. Mangrulkar, Y. S. Fedotov, S. Y. Luchkin, S. D. Babenko, S. I. Bredikhin, S. M. Aldoshin, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, Reduction of methylammonium cations as a major electrochemical degradation pathway in MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunham, D. Bal, Y. Jo, Y. Wang and C. Dimitrakopoulos, Monolayer CVD graphene barrier enhances the stability of planar p–i–n organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Reduced open-circuit voltage loss for highly efficient low-bandgap perovskite solar cells via suppression of silver diffusion, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17324–17333 RSC .
T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang and Y.-B. Hahn, Stability enhancement in perovskite solar cells with perovskite/silver–graphene composites in the active layer, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 235–241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, Y. Cai, X. Li, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, All that glitters is not gold: Recent progress of alternative counter electrodes for perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 211–238 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. F. Santos, W. A. Ameku, I. G. R. Gutz and T. R. L. C. Paixão, Gold leaf: From gilding to the fabrication of disposable, wearable and low-cost electrodes, Talanta, 2018, 179, 507–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, G. DeLuca, A. N. Simonov, N. W. Duffy, E. Reichmanis, U. Bach, P. Docampo, T. Bein, E. C. Garnett, A. S. R. Chesman and A. N. Jumabekov, Perovskite solar cells with a hybrid electrode structure, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 125037 CrossRef .
B. Nath, P. C. Ramamurthy, G. Hegde and D. Roy Mahapatra, Role of electrodes on perovskite solar cells performance: A review, ISSS J. Micro Smart Syst., 2022, 11, 61 CrossRef .
D. Bogachuk, B. Yang, J. Suo, D. Martineau, A. Verma, S. Narbey, M. Anaya, K. Frohna, T. Doherty, D. Müller, J. P. Herterich, S. Zouhair, A. Hagfeldt, S. D. Stranks, U. Würfel, A. Hinsch and L. Wagner, Perovskite solar cells with carbon-based electrodes – quantification of losses and strategies to overcome them, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103128 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ofuonye, J. Lee, M. Yan, C. Sun, J.-M. Zuo and I. Adesida, Electrical and microstructural properties of thermally annealed Ni/Au and Ni/Pt/Au Schottky contacts on AlGaN/GaN heterostructures, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2014, 29, 095005 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stössel, J. Staudigel, F. Steuber, J. Simmerer and A. Winnacker, Impact of the cathode metal work function on the performance of vacuum-deposited organic light emitting-devices, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 68, 387–390 CrossRef .
H. Y. Peng, L. Pu, J. C. Wu, D. Cha, J. H. Hong, W. N. Lin, Y. Y. Li, J. F. Ding, A. David, K. Li and T. Wu, Effects of electrode material and configuration on the characteristics of planar resistive switching devices, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 052106 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2qm00614fThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Timeline of memory storage evolution. Flash memory is currently the most widely used type of memory storage while future research indicates the inclusion of RS memory in new technologies.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram showing the design structure of Ag/SPIRO-MeoTAD/CH3NH3PBI3/TiO2/FTO device. J–V plot of the Ag/SPIRO-MeoTAD/CH3NH3PBI3/TiO2/FTO device indicating the presence of (b) photoresponsivity characteristics for photovoltaics and (c) bipolar RS properties for memory device applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19.	 

 	Fig. 3  Diagram showing (a) symmetric and (b) asymmetric bipolar switching. (c) Interface deviation at the interface layer due to barrier height changes caused by asymmetric bipolar switching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram depicting a typical unipolar I–V behaviour found in RS devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 5  
I–V plot displaying multilevel characteristics at different compliance levels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) WORM RS I–V switching characteristics. (b) The I–V double logarithmic plots for WORM RS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 7  Work function and conductivity of selected TE elements for memory devices. Data was taken from ref. 70 and 71.	 

 	Fig. 8  Flexible hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite RS memory systems with mechanical flexibility (a) I–V properties in the absence and presence of bending stress (a bending radius of 1.5 cm). The inset pictures depict device tensile and compressive bending states. Bending stability of perovskite ReRAM with repeated bending cycles (b). One bending cycle is depicted in the inset photos. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Mechanism of the Au/PMMA/CsSnI3/Pt device. (b) Variation in depletion width in a p-type perovskite layer due to Sn vacancy accumulation in an electric field. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison of linear replotted I–V curves for the HRS and schematic diagram of the Schottky barrier heights for CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13. (a) Comparison of linear replotted I–V curves for the HRS of CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13 devices. (b) Schematic diagram of the Schottky barrier heights for CsPbI3 and (PEA)2Cs3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81.	 

 	Fig. 11  
I–V characteristics of the CsPbBr3 nanocube-based device under (a) different bending states and (b) dark and illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 12  Normalised halide perovskite memory devices.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Graph displaying the number of reported HP-based RS devices until the year 2022 which corresponds to the different types of RS characteristics and TEs. Graphs displaying reported works involving halides perovskites in RS devices and their various TEs which corresponds to (b) ON/OFF ratio, (c) endurance, and (d) retention properties.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic flow of electrode selection for HP RS devices optimization.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2qm00614f

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
