Solution-based synthetic strategies for one-dimensional metal-containing nanostructures  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC01735C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC01735C
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8093-8130Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSolution-based synthetic strategies for one-dimensional metal-containing nanostructures

        
          
            Amanda L. 
            Tiano
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Koenigsmann
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander C. 
            Santulli
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Stanislaus S. 
            Wong
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. E-mail: sswong@notes.cc.sunysb.edu, sswong@bnl.gov;  Fax: +1 631 344 3178;   Tel: +1 631 632 1703
bCondensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA
Received 
      4th June 2010
    , Accepted 13th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      17th September 2010
    AbstractOne-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, such as nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods, and nanoribbons, have attracted significant attention stemming from the plethora of interesting size-dependent and, more importantly, structure-related properties resulting from confinement effects. In particular, the novel properties of 1D nanostructures of metals and metal oxides (binary and ternary) render them as prime candidates for a wide range of applications including the fabrication of nanoscale devices associated with solar cells, energy storage, fuel cells, molecular computing and information storage, medical imaging, diagnosis and detection, drug delivery, sensors and catalysis. Thus, it has been simultaneously necessary and critical to create synthetic protocols for the production of these materials which not only are reliable and reproducible, but also can generate compositionally pure, monodisperse, highly crystalline products of a desired 1D morphology. Solution-based methodologies have demonstrated significant advantages over other approaches, as they are facile, simple, flexible, ‘green’ by nature, and can be applied to a wide range of nanomaterials with diverse chemical compositions. Moreover, these methods can often be scaled so as to produce large quantities of products which are advantageous from an applications' standpoint. Herein, we present synthetic advances associated with solution-based approaches. Specifically solvothermal/hydrothermal, molten salt, electrospinning, template-directed, solution/one-pot, and sol–gel methodologies are discussed with the primary goal of achieving the reproducible synthesis of 1D motifs of metals, binary metal oxides, and ternary metal oxide systems.
Amanda L. Tiano
Amanda L. Tiano earned her BS in Chemistry in 2007 from the State University of New York at Binghamton. During her undergraduate career, she participated in an REU at University of Tennessee, Knoxville/ORNL under Robert J. Harrison and subsequently in the SULI program at Brookhaven National Laboratory under the direction of Professor Stanislaus S. Wong. She is currently pursuing her PhD with Professor Wong at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Her research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanostructures as well as investigating and understanding the properties of various types of nanomaterials using computational approaches.
Christopher Koenigsmann
Christopher Koenigsmann earned his BS in Chemistry in 2008 from Fairfield University in Fairfield, CT. As an undergraduate, he completed the secondary education program and is a certified secondary chemistry educator in the state of Connecticut. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD in Chemistry under the mentorship of Professor Stanislaus S. Wong at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. His research interests include the synthesis and electrochemical characterization of metallic nanostructures for use in electrocatalysis and fuel cells.
Alexander C. Santulli
Alexander C. Santulli earned his BS in Chemistry in 2006 from Manhattan College. He is currently studying for his PhD in the Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, under the guidance of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests include the synthesis of various metal oxide nanostructures and their applications towards solar energy.
Stanislaus S. Wong
Stanislaus S. Wong earned a BSc (First Class Honours) from McGill University, and a PhD from Harvard University with Professor Charles M. Lieber. After completing a postdoctoral fellowship at Columbia University with Professor Louis E. Brus, he is currently a Professor of Chemistry at SUNY Stony Brook with a joint appointment at Brookhaven National Laboratory. He and his group have wide-ranging interests, including carbon nanotube chemistry as well as the green synthesis of nanostructures. Over the years, Professor Wong has received the ACS Buck-Whitney award, a National Science Foundation CAREER award, as well as an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Faculty Fellowship.
1. Introduction
1.1 Idea of one-dimensionality
Nanomaterials, which are defined as structures possessing at least one dimension less than 100 nm, have become an intense focus area of research, because they have the potential of exhibiting extremely attractive size-dependent properties as compared with their bulk equivalents. Coupled with their small size, which is of relevance to technology's increased demand for continuing miniaturization, nanomaterials have engendered an ongoing and ever expanding interest in probing and manipulating their unique structure–property correlations.1 In particular, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures represent an extremely important class of nanomaterials, as demonstrated by the rapidly expanding literature concerning their synthesis and characterization. Fundamentally, the interest in these 1D nanomaterials stems from their intrinsic anisotropic nature, resulting from nanoscale confinement in two dimensions.2,3 As such, 1D nanostructures manifest themselves as a variety of diverse morphologies and structural motifs, including nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes, core–shell structures, nanoribbons/nanobelts, striped (AB-type) heterostructures, and hierarchical assemblies.4
A specific, concerted focus on synthesizing and understanding 1D nanostructures can be attributed to particular advantages that these materials possess over other classes of nanostructures.5 Indeed, 1D nanomaterials tend to retain decent mechanical strength, enviable structural flexibility, high surface-to-volume ratios, and large reactive surface areas,6 but the most substantive feature characteristic of these anisotropic structures is an intriguing quantum confinement effect,6 alluded to earlier that renders 1D nanostructures as the smallest dimensional vehicles capable of efficient transport of electrons and optical excitations.2 As such, they represent ideal candidates for the study of the nuanced effects of quantum confinement on the transport, mechanical, and electrical properties of nanoscale systems with respect to the bulk. Consequently, 1D nanomaterials are anticipated to and, in many cases, have already been successfully demonstrated to possess a wide range of potential technological applications. In effect, they are key building blocks for the fabrication of various nanoscale devices including electronic, optoelectronic, electrochemical, and electromechanical devices as well as for molecular computing applications.3,7,8
1.2 1D synthesis strategies
Not surprisingly, a good deal of effort has been expended towards the directed synthesis of various classes of 1D materials.9,10 Indeed, the primary goal of rational synthesis arises from the need to achieve a high-yield, low-cost production of homogeneous, monodisperse, and uniform nanostructures which exhibit precise control over size, shape, morphology, crystallinity, and chemical composition. Moreover, conducting this task with either environmentally friendly methodologies or without generating harsh, potentially toxic by-products is particularly desirable.11 Top-down approaches, such as physical lithographic techniques including, but not limited to, photolithography, deep Ultra-Violet lithography, and laser-based micromachining, are inherently promising for the fabrication of ultrapure, monodisperse products.12 However, these methods tend to be rather expensive, technically challenging, tedious, time-consuming, and relatively low-throughput in nature. Moreover, they are not ideal for practical, cost-effective, and ubiquitous uses in commercial applications such as solar energy, energy storage, and fuel cell applications but may find applications in highly specialized areas. We note that lithographic manipulation13,14 has also been used as a precursor step for chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques, but in spite of the high growth rates possible, appropriate conditions for effective CVD growth can be complex and often necessitate high temperatures in addition to the use of toxic and corrosive gases as precursor materials. Pure nanoscale products can also be derived from epitaxial methods,15,16 but this protocol requires highly specialized equipment, uncommon gas sources, as well as a powerful vacuum system. As such, epitaxial growth methods are generally even more expensive as compared with lithography, thereby rendering them equally impractical for wide-scale applications of nanomaterials.
By comparison, wet chemical or solution-based methodologies17 of synthesis therefore possess intrinsic advantages of flexibility, generalizability, and relative simplicity. This intrinsic flexibility stems from the potential use of a wide range of available chemicals with which to vary the nature of solvents, precursors, oxidizing/reducing agents, stabilizing agents, and surfactants. Additionally, a solution-based synthesis can allow for a combinatorial approach towards altering experimental parameters such as concentration, reaction time, temperature, pH, stirring rate, and atmosphere. With wet chemical methods, the myriad of available experimental possibilities and combinations is effectively endless. Moreover, these protocols are generally kinetically and/or thermodynamically feasible in terms of fabricating product. In addition, they are often economical, high-yield, and large-scale in ultimately creating nanostructures with reasonable control over size, shape, and crystal structure, which, especially from an applications point-of-view, are attractive attributes.
Previously, a review of 1D nanostructures by Xia et al.10 has emphasized key classes of approaches proven for their reliable synthesis of these types of nanomaterials. Specifically, these synthetic methods can be broken down into six basic categories or strategies, including (1) an inherent emphasis favoring the inherent anisotropic crystallographic structure of a specific solid, (2) confinement by a liquid droplet as in a vapor–liquid–solid process, (3) directional growth through the use of the spatially confining pores of a template, (4) kinetic control provided by the presence of a directing, capping agent, (5) self-assembly and aggregation of precursor 0D nanostructures, and finally (6) size reduction of a larger 1D microstructure.10 While these philosophical means for achieving 1D growth govern many of the tremendous advances in 1D synthesis to date, we would like to approach this issue of 1D nanostructure formation from a different perspective. Specifically, we would like to describe recent progress in 1D nanostructure synthesis through the prism of successful and proven protocols used by a number of groups throughout the world, including sol–gel, template and modified-template directed (using both hard and soft templates) methodologies, electrospinning, electrochemical deposition, molten salt, hydrothermal, as well as one-pot and complementary wet chemical methods.5,9
In the early stages of the emerging field of nanotechnology, much of the pioneering research was focused on carbon-based nanomaterial motifs, including fullerenes and carbon nanotubes. In recent years, there has been a gradual widening of focus and effort so as to encompass the study of a number of interesting inorganic-based, non-carbonaceous nanomaterials, which ultimately may have far greater potential in terms of actively fulfilling the needs for future technological requirements.
1.3 Materials focus
In this regard, our group composed a review article focused on the synthesis of ternary metal oxide nanostructures in 2005.18 Since this article, our group has continued to demonstrate the successful synthesis of pure, crystalline, and monodisperse zero-dimensional formulations of various ternary metal oxides, such as BiFeO319 and BaZrO320 nanoparticles. In more recent years, we have expended more effort on creating 1D nanostructures of ternary metal oxide systems such as Bi2Ti2O7 nanotubes,21 MnWO4 nanowires and nanowire arrays (Fig. 1),22 as well as pure and Mn-doped alkaline-earth metal tungstate AWO4 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba) nanorods.23,24 Whereas ternary metal oxides remain a vital source for nanomaterials-based applications, the research emphasis in the field as a whole has also expanded so as to encompass 1D formulations of a number of other classes of materials ranging from elemental metals25 to binary metal oxides.9
 Fig. 1  SEM images of (A) isolated MnWO4 nanowires, (B) MnWO4 arrays (top view), (C) MnWO4 arrays (side view). (D) Representative EDS pattern of as-prepared MnWO4 nanowires and nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc. 
The increased focus on these types of materials is not surprising, since a number of them exhibit interesting and desirable properties such as high thermal stability, favorable mechanical strength, as well as excellent electrical conductivity. For instance, as examples, whereas LiMn2O4 nanowires26 are stable up to 800 °C for 12 h, ZnO nanowires have demonstrated metal-like behavior with a low resistivity of 0.019 Ω cm at room temperature.27 In many cases, these materials can also be either semiconducting and/or magnetic in nature. Moreover, the optical (such as photoluminescence (PL)), catalytic, and gas sensing properties6 of these structures have also generated a significant degree of interest, because of their implications for the development of exciting, unforeseen applications. Hence, there is a vigorous, parallel track of research aimed at optimizing and tailoring the potentially unique properties of as-synthesized nanostructures using strategies such as but certainly not limited to (i) doping, (ii) size and aspect ratio modification, and (iii) surface chemical functionalization, in order to generate better-quality, higher-performing, and even multi-functional nanostructures.
In terms of currently achievable applications thus far with these classes of materials, a number of representative examples stand out. In 2008, Grimes and co-workers assembled dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) by growing single-crystalline nanowire arrays of TiO2 on conductive glass reporting energy conversion efficiencies of 5.02%.28 Yan et al. synthesized Pt and PtPd alloy nanotubes via a galvanic exchange reaction in solution as potential model electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction of fuel cells.29 The as-synthesized nanotubes displayed a 3.8 times higher specific activity, when compared with a state-of-the-art commercial nanoparticle electrocatalyst. Zhou et al. were able to synthesize LiMn2O4 nanowires using a combination of both hydrothermal and molten salt methods, and subsequently found that these materials demonstrated reversible stability and large capacities of 100 mA h g−1, maintained after 100 charge–discharge cycles at 5 A g−1 when used as lithium ion batteries.26 These examples highlight the fact that 1D nanostructures can be gainfully employed in a wide range of applications, such as in solar cells, energy storage media, fuel cells, medical diagnosis and detection applications, drug delivery applications, ion channel mimicking, photochemical and photophysical devices, as well as catalysts and sensors.4–6,10,31,32
In the current review article, for a particular class of materials, we will highlight their intrinsic importance, discuss various effective methods as well as new wet-chemical-inspired directions employed in the recent literature for their synthesis, and briefly mention their possible applications and broader impacts. In so doing, we will delve into a number of 1D systems ranging from metals (Section 3), to binary metal oxides (Section 4), and finally, ternary metal oxides (Section 5). Lastly, a summary and outlook of 1D nanostructured research will be provided in Section 6. We begin though in Section 2 with a discussion of commonly accepted solution-based 1D synthetic techniques, along with their potential advantages and disadvantages.
2. A concise guide to solution-phase synthesis methods for 1D nanomaterials
The objective of a 1D nanomaterial synthesis technique is to produce not only the right composition and crystallographic phase but also the desired morphology of a material. Thus, in order to deduce an appropriate method selection for a given material, it is important to understand the various strategies available for synthesis, especially their advantages and disadvantages with respect to one another. Moreover, many of these experimental techniques can be used either in combination or in sequence in order to synthesize the desired nanomaterial. Herein we briefly discuss the following basic wet-chemical methods commonly used towards the synthesis of 1D nanomaterials. These include sol–gel, template-based (encompassing both hard and soft templates), electrochemically-derived (including deposition and electrospinning), molten salt, hydrothermal, and other solution-based reaction schemes.
2.1 Molten salt
The molten salt technique has become an extremely popular methodology, because of its ease of synthesizing oxide nanomaterials in a wide range of compositions and morphologies. In short, the precursor materials, salt(s), as well as optional surfactant are mixed together uniformly using a mortar and pestle, transferred to a quartz crucible, and heated to a level at or above the melting point of the chosen salt system (Fig. 2E). At this temperature, the salt melts into a stable liquid and acts as the solution medium for the reaction to occur between individual precursor molecules. It is well known that parameters such as anion size, concentration, viscosity of the melt, and solubility of the precursors play a significant role in governing the reaction rate and growth. Therefore, changing the nature of the salt(s), subsequent reaction temperature, annealing/cooling rates, and/or varying molar precursor ratios can have dramatic results on the resultant product composition, size, crystallinity and morphology.33–35 Moreover, in addition to its simplicity, the molten salt technique has the additional advantage of being readily scalable in order to produce large quantities of monodisperse, crystalline nanomaterials.11 However, one obstacle with the molten salt synthesis resides in the difficulty in reproducibly creating very small (e.g. <10 nm) nanoparticles. Moreover, although it is certainly achievable, it can be challenging at times to control product morphology and shape, even with the use of surfactants.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of various experimental methods for the synthesis of 1D nanostructures such as electrospinning (A), directed growth within the spatial confines of template pores (B), wet/solution-based methods (C), solvothermal/hydrothermal (D), and molten-salt synthesis (E). 
The use of surfactants, also known as capping agents, in the synthesis of 1D nanomaterials, has proven to be extremely advantageous, particularly for the shape control of materials that do not have an intrinsic anisotropic crystal structure. Surfactants either preferentially adsorb onto or cap certain crystallographic faces, thereby altering the free energies of a particular facet. As is well known from the Wülff theorem, the surface energies of crystal facets thermodynamically dictate their shape.36 Therefore, the adsorption of surfactants changes the growth rates of crystal facets and ultimately can result in morphological control. Hence, for a particular system, 1D growth can often be achieved by choosing an appropriate surfactant. Indeed, preferential growth directions are driven by a reduction of either Gibbs free energy or chemical potential. Whereas a few select capping agents are well known to adsorb onto certain facets of a particular material, the effects of and mechanisms associated with the adsorption of the vast majority of surfactants are poorly understood,37 thereby resulting in the necessity of a trial-and-error exploration of surfactants for the 1D synthesis of a desired system. However, surfactants are generally versatile and can be employed in a variety of synthetic techniques including molten salt, hydrothermal/solvothermal, and wet chemical/one-pot syntheses.
2.2. Solvothermal, solution-based, and sol–gel methods
The solvothermal technique involves heating of solvents in a sealed vessel (Fig. 2D) which thereby increases the autogenous pressure present to levels above ambient conditions and concomitantly results in the solvent's temperature controllably increasing well beyond its boiling point.38 As such, inorganic precursors have significantly increased solubility and reactivity at these elevated temperatures and pressures, thereby resulting in quasi-optimal reaction conditions for the synthesis of very high-quality nanomaterials.5,11,39 Heating can be accomplished either using an oven or a microwave with the latter resulting in a shorter processing time. The solvothermal technique typically encompasses all types of solvents (including organic ones), whereas the hydrothermal method is simple in that water is exclusively used as the solvent. Analogous to the molten salt process, a variety of parameters, such as temperature, pH, precursor ratios, reaction time, solvent, and the presence of additives, such as surfactants, can be varied in order to achieve optimal reaction conditions for the 1D synthesis of a particular material. Moreover, in addition to being reasonably simple and facile, the technique is typically low cost, the reaction yields are high, the resulting products are pure and crystalline, and ultimately, this procedure normally does not require additional annealing steps. Furthermore, the technique can be applied to most solvents and inorganic precursors, thereby allowing for the synthesis of many types of materials including metals, metal oxides, and non-carbonaceous oxides, thereby making the solvothermal technique an extremely versatile one for the reliable synthesis of 1D nanomaterials.
Solution and one-pot methods (Fig. 2C) are amongst the simplest methods for the growth of 1D nanomaterials, particularly metallic nanostructures. These techniques are attractive in that they allow for synthesis to be achieved at lower temperatures as compared with vapor-phase-growth methodologies.5 Similar to the solvothermal method, solution-based growth can allow for ease of varying experimental reaction parameters such as solvent, precursor, concentration, temperature, and time. Unlike some of the other techniques though, the oxygen content of the atmosphere can be easily controlled upon the addition of a Schlenk line40 in order to prevent any undesired reactions from occurring. 1D growth itself is often controlled by the purposeful introduction of reducing/oxidizing agents to the reaction solution.39 For instance, the use of reducing agents and catalysts in solution can result in electroless deposition of 1D nanomaterials of which ordered arrays can also be synthesized upon the addition of a substrate.41 For those materials without an intrinsic anisotropic crystallographic structure, surfactants can also be used to engender 1D growth, as previously mentioned. Furthermore, in addition to shape control, these methods, in general, are easily scalable to the production of large quantities. Moreover, they tend to result in the formation of highly crystalline materials, unless crystal ripening has not occurred, perhaps due to inadequate reaction times.
The sol–gel method is another fundamental procedure aimed toward the synthesis of 1D nanostructures. The process involves the transition from a stable colloidal solution of the precursor material, known as the sol, into a condensed, inorganic solid phase, known as the gel, through chemical reactions, such as hydrolysis.42 By tailoring experimental parameters such as concentration and aging time, adequate control over product size and morphology can be achieved. Whereas both the choice of precursor and type of solution, i.e. aqueous or organic,43 can have an effect on the outcome of the reaction, it has been shown that precise determination of pH is essentially most significant in terms of obtaining the greatest control over the size and morphology of as-synthesized nanomaterials.39 Overall, the sol–gel method is sufficiently flexible and tailorable in order to synthesize various types of materials, thereby rendering it as a versatile synthetic method for creating molecularly homogeneous materials.44 Moreover, sol–gel reactions are typically run at low temperatures and are particularly effective when considering the formation of doped materials. However, because of the nature of the sol as a colloidal dispersion, the as-prepared 1D products are usually polycrystalline in nature. Nonetheless, as a stand-alone method, the sol–gel process can be scaled to large quantities, by analogy with most other solution-based protocols.
2.3 Template-associated and electro-based techniques
1D nanostructures can also be achieved via a conventional template-assisted growth in which the template serves as a spatially confining scaffold around or within which the desired 1D nanostructure can be generated (Fig. 2B).45,46 In order to achieve the desired synthesis, parameters such as the pore size, uniformity, thickness of the template, and chemical composition need to be considered prior to selection of the system to be synthesized.5 It is highly important to consider the actual chemical composition of the template itself because of the need to selectively remove it, subsequent to the synthesis without destroying the as-prepared materials. Moreover, the template materials must be compatible with the overall processing conditions and the depositing precursor materials or solution must be capable of wetting internal pore walls to some extent.
Template-directed growth has attracted considerable attention. In fact, a number of template types have been studied for the synthesis of 1D nanostructures ranging from ‘hard’ templates such as anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) and track-etched polycarbonate as well as zeolites to ‘soft’ templates such as DNA, polymer materials, micelles, gels, porous structures like surfactants, and even biological scaffolds like viruses.11 In addition, 1D nanostructures can also be synthesized by templating either against solid surfaces or even other existing nanostructures in order to achieve the desired growth.10 Specifically, the chosen template pore channels can be filled either by immersion in a melt or solution, vacuum suction, or pressure injection. Often though, it can be difficult to ensure complete filling of the template pores.47 Moreover, hard template methods are limited in terms of the quantity of product generated; the use of soft templates by contrast can be scaled to bulk-like quantities.48
Nevertheless, this method is extremely attractive for its low cost, reproducibility, applicability to many chemical compositions, and ease of achieving 1D growth. However, template methods do often require additional annealing steps, typically resulting in polycrystalline products. Recently, our group developed a modified template-directed technique in which the template was placed between the two half-cells of a U-tube, resulting in directed crystal growth within the template pore channels by means of a direct chemical reaction.11 This simple and versatile method allows for the reproducible synthesis of single-crystalline 1D nanostructures under ambient conditions and, furthermore, the parallel creation of ordered arrays, which have been advantageous in terms of applicability to the creation of functional devices.23,24,49–51
Conventional template methods can also be combined with electrochemical, electroless deposition, immersion, and sol–gel techniques. For instance with sol–gel, combined with templates, the synthesis is inherently restricted by the size of the template pores used, thereby resulting in a significantly lower product yield. Either electrodeposition or electroplating of materials into the pores of a nanoporous template has been shown to achieve synthesis of 1D nanoscale systems of various morphologies, such as nanowires, nanorods, and nanotubes, as well as 3D arrays of nanostructures.12 Additionally, electrodeposition can be used to synthesize AB-type heterostructures and multi-segmented nanostructures.52
The electrodeposition process involves (i) an oriented diffusion of charged growth species through a solution when an applied external field is applied followed by (ii) reduction of the charged species at the growth or deposition surface which also simultaneously serves as an electrode. In short, growth within the pores can be achieved by reducing cations at the cathode where the template is attached, upon application of an electric field between the cathode and anode,5 while the source of the material to be deposited can exist either as ions in solution or at the anode itself. For materials which inherently undergo anisotropic crystal growth, the technique can be utilized without a template in order to allow for nanostructure growth in solution.
It is clear that several factors must be considered for electrodeposition to work, including the ability of the material to be reduced/oxidized as well as the conductivity characteristics of the originating template, growing nanostructure,52 and electrolyte. As a potential limitation to the process, ionic migration is an important parameter in determining mass transport within the system.5 Moreover, another drawback to electrodeposition is that it is often necessary to modify the template with a metal backing, which requires the additional non-trivial use of physical vapor deposition methods. Nonetheless, electrodeposition has been shown to synthesize a wide variety of 1D nanomaterials including metals, metal oxides, semiconductors, and even polymer-based nanomaterials. Finally, electroless deposition involves a chemical deposition process and use of a chemical agent in order to plate a material from the surrounding phase onto the template surface. This is uniquely advantageous because it does not require expensive equipment such as a potentiostat.
Lastly, electrospinning is another viable solution-based process for the synthesis of 1D nanomaterials, in particular, nanofibers with very high surface area-to-volume ratios. These nanofibers can be synthesized in various morphological incarnations. Specifically, solid, porous, hollow, core–shell (coaxial), AB-type, and even 3D scaffolds have been successfully formed using this technique.53–55 Similar in theory to the electrospray process, the setup for the electrospinning technique is decidedly more simplistic, requiring only a syringe with a metal needle, a conductive (grounded) collector, and a high-voltage power supply.56 There are many more elaborate setups which have been developed for precise morphological control and these have been previously and ably reviewed.57 In the simplest terms, a solution or melt of the desired material is placed in a syringe. Application of a sufficiently strong electric field to the needle (electrode) results in a cone-like deformation of the solution droplets, from which a jet protrudes towards the collector (counter electrode). During the ejection from the needle to the collection plate, solid nanofibers of the material can be formed on the collection plate (Fig. 2A) by either solidification of the melt or evaporation of the reaction solvent.55
However, controlling the actual morphology and diameter of the fibers can be a difficult task as there are numerous experimental parameters to contend with, including solvent, conductivity, concentration, viscosity, polarity, surface tension, feeding rate of the precursor solution, voltage, field strength, and distance between the electrodes.55,56 Moreover, humidity and temperature can have a large impact on the results of electrospinning.55 Inherently, as-prepared fibers often require an additional thermal annealing step in order to achieve sufficiently crystalline materials. Nonetheless, in spite of these drawbacks, electrospinning has been found to be a versatile process, capable of synthesizing nanoscale fibers from a wide range of materials including polymers, inorganics, ceramics, heterostructures, and composites.
2.4 Perspective
As discussed here, there are many solution-based methods of synthesis for 1D nanomaterials. The consistent theme is that developing environmentally sustainable, universal syntheses are paramount to truly discovering novel structure–property correlations that can be exploited for further applications. Hence, there has been an obsession with generating high-yield, facile processes. The actual choice of a suitable methodology necessarily balances concerns over the advantages and disadvantages of each process with legitimate considerations over ease of use as well as the size, purity, and morphology of the eventual desired product. The key point is that when compared with either vapor phase deposition or lithographic methods, wet chemical techniques possess the greatest potential for producing large quantities of highly-crystalline 1D nanomaterials, which is extremely advantageous from an applications point-of-view.
3. Elemental metals and associated alloys
3.1 Importance and applications
Nanostructured 1D metals display a wide range of unique optical properties that arise from their inherent structural anisotropy. Although there are several reviews58–61 that have discussed the electronic and optical properties of metallic nanowires in great detail, we will focus on those properties which are most relevant to device applications.
One of the most well known optical properties of nanostructured metals, especially those of gold and silver, is the characteristic surface plasmon resonance (SPR) that arises from the collective resonance of delocalized electrons present in the conduction band of the metal upon photoexcitation.62 In the case of nanostructured metals with 1D morphologies, the inherent structural anisotropy results in a splitting of the isotropic SPR associated with nanoparticles into distinctive longitudinal and transverse SPR bands.61,63–67 Because of the structural nature of these bands, the absorption maxima are highly dependent upon geometric factors such as aspect ratio68,69 and diameter.70,71 In fact, the SPR band can be reliably tuned as a function of aspect ratio from absorption in the visible onwards to the near-IR region.72,73 For example, gold nanorods prepared by seed mediated growth with aspect ratios of 2.7 to 3.9 display longitudinal plasmon resonance bands ranging from 670 nm to 796 nm.74 This intrinsic degree of control over the optical characteristics of 1D metal nanostructures has made these structures attractive for use in optical storage devices. For example, Gu and co-workers have recently exploited laser photoillumination so as to selectively excite the size-dependent SPRs of gold nanorods, present in films in order to create working “five-dimensional” optical recording media.75 The large differences in the SPR bands of rods with various sizes coupled with the high melting point of the nanosized gold have allowed for excellent selectivity without unwanted photobleaching. The five orthogonal storage channels in this material were achieved by utilizing three different wavelengths of light and two different polarizations to address specific nanorods within a single pixel. Other applications of this unique property of anisotropic nanowires include use in biological imaging,76,77 sensing,77–79 and opto-electronics.30
The unique SPR characteristics of 1D metal nanostructures, particularly nanowires, have also been found to act as an antenna for single molecule detection by surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). Specifically, Raman signal enhancements of 1014 to 1015 have been previously observed with single Rhodamine 6G molecules adsorbed onto gold nanorods.80 The huge increases in the SERS signal of adsorbed species have been attributed to the coupling of the SPR resonance states with electronic states of the adsorbate.81 There has been increasing interest in the development of SERS-based sensors that utilize metallic nanowires and nanorods because of their unique propensity to enhance the SERS signal. For example, Yang et al. have employed a versatile, reproducible self-assembly technique in order to prepare monolayer films of aligned silver nanowires for use as a SERS sensor in the detection of volatile explosive components.82 As-prepared substrates displayed an enhancement factor of 2 × 109 for the detection of the SERS standard, Rhodamine 6G, and 2 × 105 for the explosive simulant, 2,4-dinitrotoluene. Presumably, SERS sensors of this kind can be produced for the detection of a variety of small organic SERS active molecules.
In addition, metallic nanostructures, particularly those comprised of noble metals, display excellent optical reflectivity properties much like their bulk counterparts.83 Keating and co-workers have exploited these properties by synthesizing “multi-segmented nanowires” or wires comprised of axially oriented noble metal segments, which can be prepared by sequential electrodeposition processes into the pores of anodic alumina (AAO) templates.83,84 These so-called “nano-barcodes” make use of the differing reflectivity of the various noble-metal segments in order to give unique optical patterns. Optical reflectance microscopy of the various metal segments has revealed that the reflectivities of the metals are dependent not only upon the metal itself but also on the wavelength of the impinging light. For example, gold and silver segments display an almost 2.5 fold difference in reflectivity under irradiation with 430 nm incident light, whereas at 600 nm, the segments are effectively indistinguishable by optical reflectance. Interestingly, all of the metals, that have been incorporated into the bar codes (Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Co, Ni, and Cu) thus far, yield reflectivities that are well within one standard deviation of their bulk counterparts, despite the fact that the nanowires possess one dimension that is commensurate with the wavelength of impinging light.
Multisegmented nano-barcodes possess great potential for biological applications, such as biomolecule separations, assays, and tagging, as a result of the incredible optical properties observed by Keating and co-workers. In a recent report, segmented gold–nickel–gold nanowires prepared by electrodeposition were used as efficient protein separation devices.85 The gold segments were functionalized with nitrostreptavidin-modified thiols for the selective binding of biotinylated proteins. In a complementary fashion, the nickel segments were capable of selective, spontaneous adsorption of histidine-tagged proteins. Upon introducing the functionalized nanowire into a mixture of proteins, the target proteins were covalently attached and could be selectively released chemically after magnetic separation of the wires from the mixture. More importantly, the wire's segments could be easily distinguished by means of optical reflectance microscopy, SEM, and fluorescence microscopy. Thus, multi-segmented wires have the potential to couple uniquely advantageous optical properties with a wide scope of highly-selective and flexible biorecognition chemistries.
In addition to a diverse range of optical properties, 1D metal nanomaterials also display highly advantageous electrical and magnetic properties. For example, metal nanowires and nanorods are widely known to possess improved electron transport characteristics due to the path directing effects of their structural anisotropy.29,86 More importantly, the resistivity of metal nanowires can be tuned as a function of the wire's dimensions. In one example,87 gold nanowires prepared by electrodeposition had a resistivity of 2.9 × 10−6 Ω cm, which compares favorably with bulk gold, when the diameter of the wire was greater than 350 nm. An analogous nanowire, with a diameter of 70 nm, displayed a more than two-fold higher resistivity of 4.5 × 10−6 Ω cm. In addition to their transport properties, metal nanowires have previously displayed a propensity to delay the transition from a conductive to a superconductive material at low temperatures, that is commonly observed in bulk metals.88–90 Previous work by Chan and co-workers91–93 has demonstrated that zinc nanowire arrays with diameters below 40 nm grown directly within the channels of a membrane template remain conductive even at temperatures as low as 0.47 K. On the other hand, the conductive-to-superconductive transition can be observed in wires with a diameter of more than 70 nm analogous to their bulk counterparts. This ability to tailor the transport characteristics of 1D metal nanostructures solely by rationally modifying their dimensions has made them very attractive for a number of nanoscale applications in electronic devices94,95 and microprocessing.96 In particular, the advantageous transport properties of metallic nanowires have been used by Mayer et al. in the study of the conductivity of π-conjugated oligomer-type molecules.97
From a structural perspective, 1D metal nanostructures possess high aspect ratios and their surfaces are often characterized by long, smooth crystal planes and relatively few defect sites.58,98,99 Previous work has shown that metallic nanorods and nanowires preferentially display low energy crystalline facets, which are highly active toward surface catalysis.100,101 These structural characteristics have rendered 1D nanostructures, particularly those comprised of noble metals such as platinum, palladium, and ruthenium, highly desirable for use as electrocatalysts in fuel cells. Not surprisingly, it has been widely demonstrated throughout the literature that one-dimensional nanowires,102–105 nanodendrites,106 nanocubes,107 and nanotubes50,108,109 display higher intrinsic electrocatalytic activity as compared with nanoparticles of analogous composition. Recently, our group has also highlighted the outstanding performance of 1D nanoscale noble metals as effective cathodic oxygen reduction catalysts.110a Specifically, we generated highly crystalline platinum nanotubes and nanotube arrays that displayed an electrochemical surface area activity (ECSA) of 0.30 mA cm−2, which was more than double that of commercial carbon supported nanoparticles (Fig. 3). In a recent report, we have observed dramatic enhancements in ORR with processed ultrathin Pt nanowires and it is believed that these enhancements arise from the anisotropy of these nanostructures, which is thought to preferentially display certain low energy facets that are highly active towards ORR.110b In addition, we also generated analogous silver and gold nanowires, which evinced promising cathodic results in alkaline media. We note that the synthesis of these metallic nanostructures involved an ambient, surfactantless, template-based technique that will be discussed in more detail in later sections.
 Fig. 3  Representative electron micrographs of as-prepared platinum nanotube arrays (A) and of an individual platinum nanotube (B). A representative powder X-ray diffraction pattern (C) of as-prepared wires after isolation. The polarization curve of as-prepared nanowires is compared with that of commercial carbon-supported 8 nm platinum nanoparticles in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte at 20 °C and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The ECSA (inset) of the nanotubes (black) by comparison with commercial nanoparticles (grey) calculated at 0.9 V (D). 
Indeed, the incredible diversity of 1D transition metal nanostructures and their correspondingly highly advantageous properties have sparked great interest in the development of facile synthetic techniques aimed at their reliable preparation. In the following sections, we will review a wide range of solution-based methods with an emphasis on techniques that are reasonably rapid and inexpensive, and that can occur under industrially relevant and environmentally benign ambient conditions.
3.2 Template based methods

3.2.1 Hard templates. 
As alluded to in Section 2.3, hard templates are characterized by their geometrically rigid pore space, in which nanometal growth is confined.45,60,111 A diverse range of metallic nanostructures has thus far been employed as hard templates. Salient examples include the pores of track-etched polycarbonate (PC) membranes,110a,112–115 the pores of anodized alumina (AAO) membranes,116–124 the channels of mesoporous silica,125,126 and even the central channel of carbon nanotubes.127,128 Moreover, hard templates offer an excellent platform for the reliable formation of nanowires and nanorods with controlled dimensions without the need for additional surfactants, capping agents or stabilizers, which is especially relevant for metals. Although hard templates afford a high degree of control over the resulting morphology, the restriction of the reaction to the limited interior space of the pores can result in low overall yields. In addition, the metals that are prepared by template-directed methods are often polycrystalline as a result of the ambient conditions and strong reducing potentials that are required for their preparation.
One of the most popular solution-based methods for achieving template direct growth has been through the use of electrodeposition of a metal within the pores of either a polycarbonate or an anodic alumina membrane. Template-directed electrodeposition is advantageous because it is a quick and reliable method to generate nanostructured metals. This method has produced a wide range of 1D transition metal nanowires, particularly pertaining to noble metals.109,114,118,122
Not surprisingly, the synthetic parameters used in template-directed electrodeposition play a large role in determining the resulting morphology and dimensions of as-prepared metal nanostructures. In one report, the morphology of 1D platinum and ruthenium arrays deposited into 200 nm AAO templates could be reliably tuned by systematically varying the potential and precursor concentration.129 Growth of nanotubular structures was observed under conditions of high overpotentials, low precursor concentrations and dilute electrolytes, which apparently fostered high rates of nucleation at the expense of crystal growth and subsequent pore filling. Specifically, the diameter and wall thickness of as-prepared platinum arrays could be systematically varied within the confines of 200 nm pore channels from 140 nm to 235 nm and from 95 nm to 35 nm, respectively, as the overpotential was systematically increased from −0.37 V to −0.45 V.
Another important element involved with the control of morphology and dimensions of metal nanostructures in template-based electrodeposition is the composition of the electrolyte. The electrolyte necessarily plays a critical role because it determines the inherent conductivity, ionic mobility, and kinetics associated with the electrodeposition process. For example, the wall thickness of Ni, Co and Fe nanotubes with an outer diameter of 200 nm was found to be dependent upon the pH of the supporting electrolyte.130 In particular, the wall thickness could be reliably controlled from 10 nm to 70 nm as the pH of the electrolyte was systematically varied from 1.5 to 5.5. This degree of control has been attributed to the suppression of hydrogen bubble formation at the interface between the growing tube and the electrolyte, due to a lower availability of protons at higher pH values. This suppression of hydrogen bubbles is thought to increase the availability of precursor ions at the inner walls of the growing tube, thereby allowing for transverse crystal growth and subsequent wall thickening.
Moreover, a wide range of alloyed nanowires with reliable chemical compositions can be generated by means of template-assisted electrodeposition. Relevant nanowire examples include binary alloys, such as AuAg,116,119 FeCo,131 PtRu,104,108 NiCu,112 and PtCo132,133 as well as ternary alloys, such as FeCoPb.123 Fundamentally, the composition of alloyed wires can be controlled by varying the stoichiometric composition of precursor ions in the electrolyte in combination with the potential utilized during electrodeposition. In one report, electrodeposition was used to prepare a series of Co1−xPtx alloyed nanowires with diameters of 14 nm and compositions that ranged from ‘x’ = 0.09 to 0.86.134 Such a broad range of compositions was achieved simply by varying the mass ratio of the precursor ions in the salt solution from a mass ratio of 1∶1 to a mass ratio of 1∶80. Interestingly, varying the ratio of precursor ions in solution typically did not result in a linear variation in the resulting nanowire composition; the observed non-linearity was attributed to differing rates of bulk diffusion of the precursors through the electrolyte as well as dissimilar reduction kinetics at the given deposition potential. Thus, the composition of nanowires was found to be highly dependent upon reaction conditions and associated electrochemical settings.
One of the more recent endeavors in electrodeposition therefore has been to control the crystallinity of the resulting nanostructures by careful modification of the electrodeposition parameters. In several recent publications,122,135,136 single-crystalline and twinned nanowires and nanotubes have been generated in pores with diameters of less than 100 nm. In general, single crystallinity has been achieved by using low reduction over-potentials in combination with small pore sizes. Small pore sizes intrinsically minimize the cross-sectional surface area of the interface between the growing nanowire and the electrolyte, thereby lowering the rate of surface nuclei formation. Coupling this with low overpotentials allows for the growth of crystalline segments as opposed to the formation of multiple nuclei, thereby resulting in higher degrees of single crystallinity. For example, single crystalline 50 nm palladium nanowires have been prepared in AAO templates with pore sizes of 35 nm.122 In another report, single crystalline nanowires of Au, Ag, and Cu with diameters of 40 nm were prepared in polycarbonate templates with average pore diameters of 10 nm.136 In this latter study, the importance of careful control of the deposition environment was highlighted as single crystalline growth could only be achieved at elevated temperatures and in the presence of a polymer surfactant in the electrolyte. It is thought that the polymeric surfactant may contribute to improved wetting of the template pores, whereas the increased temperature is thought to promote enhanced diffusion of the atoms to nucleation sites on the surfaces of the growing wires. Much of the recent work on the growth of single crystalline nanowires has been previously reviewed.60
Recently, the template-based electrodeposition method has been expanded to the generation of multi-segmented and heterojunction nanowires. Specifically, axial segmentation can be achieved by deposition of the first metallic segment followed subsequently by a second segment that can be deposited merely by changing the precursor solution.46 The length of each segment can be reliably controlled through the deposition time and deposition current. In one recent report, segmented “step-like” porous gold nanowires were prepared by generating segmented AuAg alloyed nanowires; a subsequent dealloying step was used to etch the silver leaving behind only porous gold segments of varying diameter.116 Alloyed segments were then prepared by sequentially electroplating alloyed segments from solutions with stoichiometric Au∶Ag ratios of 10∶0 to 7∶3. In this study, alloyed nanowires were created with compositions that varied continuously over the entire length of the nanowire by carefully controlling the rate of silver precursor introduction into the electrolyte (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Nanocone (C–H) and nanobone (I, J) wires prepared by gradually changing the compositions of the plating solution. Nanocone nanowires were grown by adding 5.0 mL of silver plating solution to 5.0 mL of an already present gold plating solution at varying flow rates. (C, E, G) TEM and (D, F, H) SEM images obtained using silver flow rates of 0.37, 1.0, and 2.0 mL min−1, respectively. Insets (A) and (B) show the constant volume flow cell setup used to create the porous nanobone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, segmentation has also been achieved in a one-pot synthesis by potential-controlled sequential electrodeposition of two or more precursors with different reduction potentials that are able to co-exist within the same plating solution. This technique has given rise to axial alloyed segments of controlled composition that can span over a wide regime defined by the degree of reduction overpotential, which is used. For example, AuAg nano-barcodes have been prepared by the simultaneous reduction of gold and silver precursor ions at various overpotentials.119 The composition of these segments possessed ‘a nearly sigmoidal dependence’ with respect to the deposition potential and the corresponding alloy composition was found to vary from 92% to 53% Ag, as the overpotential was correspondingly increased from −0.50 V to −1.20 V. Not surprisingly, optical reflectance measurements of the resulting segmented nanowires showed that the reflectance behavior of these individual sections precisely mirrored their chemical composition, as expected. Furthermore, this one-pot technique has been successfully employed to generate gold–silver striped nanowires,119 gold–cobalt striped nanowires115 and striped nano-barcodes.137 In addition, a variety of segmented PtRu systems have been generated by Zhou and co-workers,138 including Pt–Ru,139 Pt–Ni,140 and Pt–RuNi141 nanowires, which have promising applications as fuel cell electrocatalysts for methanol and ethanol oxidation.
One of the most recent developments in template-directed electrodeposition has been the preparation of heterojunction nanowires by coupling sequential electrodeposition steps with chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in order to generate well-defined interfaces between metals and non-metals. Examples have included junctions between metal segments and bismuth nanowires,120 as well as between carbon nanotubes and semiconductor materials.142 For example, in the recent work of Meng et al.,121 AAO membranes with so-called “Y-shaped” pores were used to generate heterojunction nanostructures that have well defined interfaces between metal segments as well as between segments of carbon and silicon nanotubes. In this case, the electrodeposited metal serves as a seed catalyst for the subsequent growth of semiconducting material that is deposited by CVD into the pores.
In addition, heterojunctions have also been created between metals and metal oxides within a single 1D heterostructure. Specifically, in the work of Vasiliev et al.,143 segmented metal nanowires with diameters of 220 nm were prepared in a single nanowire by sequential electrodeposition of Au–Sn–Au and Au–Ni–Au nanowires within an AAO template. Subsequently, the nanowires were released from the template and a two-step heat treatment was then utilized to oxidize the central segment, thus resulting in the formation of Au–SnO2–Au and Au–NiO–Au heterojunction wires. Overall, these techniques highlight the versatility of template assisted electrodeposition because a wide range of metals, metal alloys, and segmented structures can be decorated with semiconducting, organic, and metal oxide segments so as to yield a vast range of multifunctional nanomaterials with potential applications in catalysis, sensing and photonics.121
Although electrochemical deposition within a template is fast, reliable, elegant, and offers control of composition, this method undeniably also requires the use of specialized electrochemical equipment and/or physical deposition techniques. Hence, the state-of-the-art manifestation of template-based synthesis of anisotropic metals has involved the use of so-called electroless techniques, which do not necessarily require any electrochemical apparatus whatsoever. For example, in recent work within our group, we have employed a simple, surfactantless, ambient, and completely solution-based technique to generate crystalline metallic nanowires within a PC membrane without the need for any electrochemical instrumentation.110a Specifically, arrays of platinum nanotubes and gold and silver nanowires were made by the controlled reduction of a precursor solution by sodium borohydride within the confines of the membrane pore. The reaction was conducted in a double diffusion ‘U-tube’ device, which consisted of two precursor half-cells, mutually separated by a commercial PC membrane and loaded with solutions of the metal precursor and reducing agent, respectively. As-synthesized pristine polycrystalline nanowires had ∼200 nm diameters and lengths on the micron scale, consistent with the template pore channel dimensions. Other electroless techniques have also been developed recently, which rely on pore surface functionalization113 as well as galvanic displacement reactions.144 In all of these cases, these as-reported techniques afford the same reliability and speed of electrochemical protocols without the possible disadvantages associated with either electrochemical or physical deposition steps.
In addition to membranous templates, the interior pore structures of mesoporous silica and carbon nanotubes have also been utilized for the production of 1D metal nanostructures. By comparison with membrane templates, these template materials have so-called “ultrathin” pore spaces in which nanowires and nanorods can be grown with diameters of less than 10 nm. The pore channels of mesoporous silicas such as SBA-15 and MCM-41 can be controllably tuned from 30 nm to as low as 2 nm145 and similarly carbon nanotubes can maintain internal pore diameters of less than 1 nm.128,146 In one report, mesoporous SBA-15 was impregnated with a gold precursor and subsequently, glow discharge plasma was utilized to prepare gold nanowires and nanorods with ultrathin diameters of 8 nm.125 Similarly, ultrathin metallic nanowires with diameters of less than 0.5 nm have been prepared within a single-walled carbon nanotube by means of vapor deposition.127 Ultrathin diameter metal nanowires are of particularly high interest because of their unique electronic, optical, structural, and catalytic properties.99 Hence, these templates offer a very promising means by which to generate these types of nanostructures.


3.2.2 Soft templates. 
By contrast with the rigid pore spaces associated with hard templates, soft templates are characterized by their geometrically flexible pore spaces. Typical examples of soft templates that have been used to prepare anisotropic metal nanostructures include synthetic structures such as surfactant micelles147–152 and liquid crystals.153,154 By analogy with hard templates, these templates limit nucleation and crystal growth within a finite 1D pore space. However, the resulting nanostructures can possess dimensions that are substantially different from those of the confining space because of their inherent structural flexibility. More importantly, soft template materials often interact with and stabilize the surfaces of the growing metal, thereby resulting in metal–surfactant and metal–biomolecule composites. Synthetic soft templates such as micelles and liquid crystals rely upon the self-assembly of surfactant molecules into ordered porous structures within a solvent system. Once prepared, the pores are infiltrated with a metallic precursor and the subsequent reduction process results in confined growth within the pore channels. This technique has yielded a wide range of 1D metal nanostructures including but not limited to Pt,147 Pd,147,151 Au,148,149 Ni,150 and Ag.152
Recently, soft templates have become popular in the preparation of ultrathin noble-metal nanowires147,153 because of the ultrathin pore-sizes that can be achieved with micelles of cetyl-trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) in mixed aqueous organic solutions. For example, ultrathin platinum and palladium nanowire networks have been prepared by saturating the pores of wormlike CTAB micelles present in a water–chloroform two-phase mixture with the corresponding solubilized metal precursor. The addition of sodium borohydride resulted in the generation of nanowire networks with individual nanowire diameters measuring approximately 2 nm. This report highlighted the importance of solution conditions, particularly the quantity of CTAB present in the mixed phase system, since the formation of porous micelles is highly dependent upon the solvent system. The platinum and palladium nanowire networks were prepared with a CTAB concentration of 40 mM, which is thought to form a bicontinuous phase structure with worm-like pores in the water–chloroform system. Lowering the concentration of CTAB to 2 mM resulted in networks with shorter aspect ratios and higher degrees of aggregation. In the absence of CTAB, only aggregated nanoparticles are observed. Based on these data, it is believed that at lower concentrations of CTAB, the bicontinuous network of this two-phase system is converted into spherical micelles, encapsulating the water content within a continuous oil phase. Thus, the surfactant concentration is critical in determining the structure of micelles within multi-phase systems and the morphology of the resulting nanostructures.
Recently, the aforementioned technique has been extended to the production of ultrathin binary alloy nanowire networks of PtPd, PtAu, PtFe, and PtRu with reliable composition control; this was achieved by swelling the pores with relevant stoichiometric amounts of precursor mixtures.155 Presumably, soft templates can be utilized in the future in order to generate additional binary and ternary systems.


3.2.3 Biologically inspired templates. 
By contrast with synthetic soft templates, biologically inspired templates use naturally porous and 1D scaffolds in order to generate nanostructured metals such as biologically-inspired materials, such as viruses,156 and biomolecules, including DNA157,158 and proteins.159 In addition, bio-templates allow for the anisotropic nucleation and growth of metal structures at the nanoscale. Moreover, after growth is complete, the resulting nanostructure is decorated with a biological scaffold that can be additionally functionalized. Most commonly, the bio-template serves simply as a 1D scaffold and requires the presence of a strong reducing agent, such as sodium borohydride, in order to achieve crystal growth. Hence, the size and dimensions of the biological scaffold play a large role in determining the morphology and dimensions of the resulting metallic nanostructure. In one instance, anisotropic silver nanostructures were prepared by adsorbing Ag ions onto a nanoporous DNA network, supported onto a mica surface. Subsequent introduction of sodium borohydride resulted in the formation of Ag nanowires and nanorods.158 In this report, the aspect ratio of the resulting silver nanostructures could be reliably tuned as a function of the DNA concentration, which was found to determine the pore size of the immobilized DNA on the surface. Specifically, a DNA network prepared with pore sizes of 19 nm yielded nanorods with lengths of 117 nm and diameters of 9 nm. By simply changing the pore size to an estimated 12 nm, the subsequent reduction process yielded nanowires with average diameters of 4.38 nm and lengths in excess of 500 nm.
It has also been recently demonstrated that bio-templates can be utilized as scaffolds for the production of binary alloys. For example, in the work of Yamashita and co-workers,156 the central channel of the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) was utilized as a reaction chamber for the production of ultrathin CoPt and FePt alloyed nanowires with diameters of 4 nm by using a biomineralization reaction in the presence of sodium borohydride. Interestingly, the as-prepared nanowires remain within the central channel of the virus yielding a composite structure that has potential for further chemical functionalization (Fig. 5). The composition of the wires could be tuned by simply modifying the ratio of precursors within the reaction mixture. Moreover, molar concentration ratios of 1∶2, 1∶1, and 3∶1 for Co∶Pt were utilized to generate alloyed nanowires with compositions of CoPt9, Co1.7Pt8.3, and Co4.5Pt5.5, respectively. This study also highlights the specificity of the biomineralization process, because wires were only produced when both Co and Pt precursor ions were present in the solution.
 Fig. 5  TEM micrograph of TMV–nanowire composites after biomineralization of Co–Pt alloy in the hollow central channel of the TMV (stained by aurothioglucose). Scale bar is 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
The multifunctional nature of biological templates has been more fully realized, as the functional groups of the biological scaffold itself have been used as an in situ reducing agent without the need for the introduction of strong external reducing agents. Examples of this multifunctional use of a biological template have included the preparation of gold nanowires157 with diameters of 10 to 15 nm from a DNA template. In this report, microwave irradiation was necessary in order to achieve the spontaneous reduction of the gold precursor by the DNA itself. Similarly, noble metal nanowires,159 such as Au, Ag, Pd, and Pt, could be grown onto protein filaments by the reduction of an associated metal precursor in their presence. The reaction temperature is highlighted in this particular report, because the reduction kinetics of the amino acids with the metal ions along the protein filaments was sluggish at room temperature. At elevated temperatures (e.g. 80 °C), the reduction of the metal precursor could be achieved spontaneously by the coupled oxidation of amino acids present, thereby giving rise to faceted particles strung along the length of the filament. By contrast, the presence of added sodium borohydride was required in order to initiate crystal growth along the protein filaments at room temperature; interestingly, this seeding technique yielded a more uniform coating of interconnected metallic nanoparticles along the filament.

3.3 Hydrothermal technique
The hydrothermal process allows for the large-scale production of metallic nanowires in a relatively short period of time. Although the hydrothermal method has been widely used to prepare copper nanowires,160–162 the technique has recently been expanded to include other metals such as tellurium,163 palladium,164 cobalt,165 silver,166 and zinc.167 Despite the fact that this is not an ambient technique, a hydrothermal reaction generally facilitates the production of relatively high yields of metallic nanostructures, as compared with template-based protocols since crystal growth is not spatially confined within geometrically defined pore channels. In addition, the hydrothermal technique is particularly advantageous, because the resulting nanostructures usually possess improved crystallinity as compared with those generated by template-based methods for instance.
The hydrothermal process is also uniquely tailored to the production of nanoscale metals because the reducing power of many common surfactants and mild reducing agents are greatly enhanced under high-pressure and high-temperature conditions. Thus, powerful reducing agents such as sodium borohydride can be suitably replaced with either a common surfactant or a simple directing agent in certain hydrothermal preparations. For example, copper nanowires with high aspect ratios in excess of 105 have been synthesized hydrothermally in the presence of octadecylamine (ODA), which simultaneously acts both as a directing agent as well as a reducing agent.161 The minimally soluble ODA is thought to complex with copper ions in solution at room temperature thereby resulting in its solubilization. Previous literature168 has demonstrated that the solubilized ODA forms a lamellar phase within the aqueous solvent under hydrothermal conditions. Thus, it is believed that the reduction of the copper occurs within the confines of the micelle interlayers, hence leading to the directed growth of copper nanowires. In the same report, reaction temperature was identified as a critical factor in determining the resulting crystallinity and size of the as-produced nanowires. Specifically, the crystallinity of the resulting face-centered cubic nanowires could be reliably tailored from highly polycrystalline to single-crystalline (Fig. 6) as the temperature of the hydrothermal process was systematically increased from 120 °C to 180 °C, causing an increased diffusion of atomic copper clusters and thereby allowing for growth of existing nuclei. Moreover, the reaction temperature also affected the resulting morphology, with the production of monodisperse nanowires with diameters of 50–100 nm closer to 120 °C and shorter, polydisperse wire-like structures with diameters between 50 and 1000 nm nearer to 180 °C.
 Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM images of copper nanowires obtained at (A, B) 180 °C; (C, D) 120 °C. Insets in A and C are the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2005 IOP. 
Another key aspect of the hydrothermal technique in the generation of metal nanowires is the inherent balance between the enhanced reducing power of a select reducing agent and the high oxidizing nature of the surrounding aqueous medium. For example, in the work of Jianqiang et al.,167 it has been observed that metallic zinc nanowires with a diameter of 65 nm can be hydrothermally prepared from the reduction of zinc acetate with ethanol, only if silver nitrate is available within the reaction mixture. Upon excluding silver nitrate, the reaction yields strictly zinc oxide nanowires with a diameter of 9 nm. Although the precise role of the silver nitrate is unknown, it is thought that the presence of silver nitrate hinders the formation of zinc–oxygen bonds. This synthesis nonetheless highlights the unique conditions associated with the formation of metallic nanostructures within the generally oxidizing environment associated with aqueous hydrothermal conditions.
3.4 Colloidal processes

3.4.1 High-temperature polyol reduction. 
Polyol reduction is a reliable, facile method for the generation of large quantities of anisotropic metallic nanoparticles under quasi-near ambient conditions. A wide range of 1D metallic nanostructures have already been prepared utilizing polyol reduction methods including Pt,169,170 Ag,170 Pd,171 and other metals.58 In fact, polyol-associated processes offer a great degree of control over the morphology, surface structure, and crystallinity without the need for harsh reducing agents because the kinetics of these reactions can often be controlled through synthetic parameters such as temperature, the presence of surfactants, additives, and oxygen content. Moreover, the process has been generalized to the synthesis of a wide range of alloyed nanostructures including CoNi nano-dumbbells, nano-needles, and nanowires, for example.172,173 Nonetheless, despite the high degree of kinetic control intrinsic to this methodology, as-prepared nanostructures are often decorated with residual surfactant. This issue has sparked significant interest in the development of so-called surfactantless polyol techniques in order to generate pristine nanostructures.
Much like the hydrothermal technique, polyol reduction methods are often conducted at elevated temperatures, typically in excess of 100 °C, in order to increase the reducing power of a liquid polyol, such as ethylene glycol, which often simultaneously serves as both the solvent and the reducing agent. This process is uniquely advantageous as compared with hydrothermal techniques, because the high boiling points of the polyols allow for sufficiently rapid reduction kinetics of metal precursors without the need for high-pressure vessels. Recently, Xia and co-workers have utilized the polyol process in order to prepare anisotropic and unusual structures of platinum in the presence of polyvinylpyrolidone (PVP), utilizing various synthetic parameters in order to control the kinetics of the reduction process and achieve a desired morphology.170 In one interesting example, the kinetic control of a polyol process has been utilized in order to decorate platinum nanoparticle aggregates with ultrathin platinum nanowires with a diameter of 5 nm.174 The kinetics of the ethylene glycol reduction in this reaction were controlled by the addition of a trace quantity of iron ions to the reaction mixture. The iron ions are thought to catalyze the oxidation of the as-formed platinum nuclei to Pt(II) species in the presence of dissolved oxygen within the reaction system. Thus, the overall rate of reduction is suppressed, preventing rapid isotropic growth. This procedure resulted in the initial formation of micron-sized aggregates of nanoparticles within the first 4 h, which acted as seeds for the subsequent nucleation and anisotropic growth of platinum nanowires atop the surfaces of the aggregates after 8 h of reaction. Without iron ion addition, crystalline growth was rapid and strictly isotropic, giving rise to only 5 nm nanoparticles within 3 h of the initial reaction. The reaction scheme is summarized in Fig. 7. Thus, anisotropic growth was primarily achieved when the rate of reduction was sufficiently slowed so as to prevent rapid nucleation and isotropic growth.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration detailing all of the major steps and changes involved in the formation of single-crystal Pt nanowires through an iron-mediated polyol process. The final product resembles sea urchins. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
In a subsequent report,169 analogous sea urchin structures were prepared in a two-step process wherein aggregated nanoparticle spheres were initially prepared by the reduction of a platinum precursor with ethylene glycol in the presence of a sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) surfactant. These as-prepared micro-spheres were subsequently isolated and then used as seeds for the later growth of platinum nanowires on their surfaces. A significant increase in the density of nanowire networks on the surfaces of the seeds as well as an associated increase in nanowire length to 500 nm were simultaneously achieved upon increasing the platinum precursor concentration from 1 mM to 10 mM. This level of control over both the length and density of wires at higher precursor concentrations could be attributed to the correspondingly high concentrations of Pt(II) species present for extended periods of time, as mediated by the presence of trace Fe3+ ions in the reaction medium. As in the aforementioned one-pot synthesis, the iron ions catalyze the oxidation of the platinum nuclei to ionic platinum species, while simultaneously slowing down the rate of reduction as well as maintaining a relatively high concentration of precursor throughout the duration of the reaction.
Concomitant with a good understanding of the degree of control over the kinetics of polyol reduction reactions, there has been a complementary interest in developing surfactantless polyol techniques that can give rise to metallic nanostructures with uncapped surfaces. In the recent work of Chen and co-workers,174 ultrathin palladium nanowires with a diameter of 8 nm were prepared by a polyol reduction at 120 °C with ethylene glycol in the presence of a DMSO co-solvent without the need for surfactant. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to track the evolution of this surfactantless polyol process from precursor to nanowire. Initially, isotropic palladium nanoparticles are formed within the first five minutes of the reaction and subsequently, these self-assemble into a string-of-pearls configuration. Ultimately, the strings lengthen and ripen so as to form a final 2D network, comprised of polycrystalline palladium nanowires. The anisotropic assembly process in this work was attributed to the presence of the DMSO co-solvent, which was believed to self-assemble into a porous soft-template under the direction of hydrogen bonding. In fact, the diameter of the resultant nanowires could be increased from 8 nm to 30 nm, as the percentage of DMSO was correspondingly increased from 60% to 90% of the solvent system. Thus, anisotropic growth and dimensional control could be achieved directly without the addition of surfactants in this system, and presumably this technique can also be extended to the generalized preparation of other noble metal nanowires. Moreover, the resulting nanowires maintained pristine crystalline surfaces with only minimal organic residue after washing.


3.4.2 Ambient colloidal techniques. 
Ambient colloidal techniques are highly desirable for the synthesis of anisotropic metal nanostructures because these processes can maintain high yields at room temperature and pressure. By contrast with polyol processes, ambient techniques are performed at room temperature and necessarily require the use of strong reducing agents such as either sodium borohydride or hydrazine in order to achieve sufficiently high reduction kinetics for the formation of metallic nanostructures. In most cases, surfactants and other directing agents are present within the reaction mixture in order to direct the anisotropic growth of the metal nanostructure because of the rapid reduction kinetics that result from the addition of such strong reducing agents. Surfactant-based methods have led to the production of a wide range of 1D metal nanostructures including Pt,175–177 Pd,176,178 and Au.179,180 Recently, a number of methods have been developed that can control reduction kinetics and the degree of self-assembly within ambient processes so as to yield anisotropic growth without the need for additional surfactants.
In one recent report, rectangular palladium 1D nanofilaments have been prepared by the ascorbic acid reduction of a palladium precursor in the presence of CTAB and sodium citrate.178 The co-existence of the CTAB and citrate ions were crucial to the formation of the anisotropic filaments and upon excluding either of these directing agents, the reaction yielded strictly isotropic nanoparticles. Furthermore, the aspect ratios of the resulting nanofilaments could be tuned as a function of the concentration of citrate ions present within the reaction system. As the concentration of sodium citrate is increased from 0.2 mM to 0.8 mM, the measured aspect ratio of the nanofilaments can increase from 2.5 to 3.94, while the width nominally increased by 1 nm. It is believed that the citrate ion mediates the interaction of the CTAB with the low energy (100) facet of palladium, thereby resulting in anisotropic growth. In another report, the propensity for anisotropic growth decreased as the concentration of the capping agent was increased. In this case, the amount of dodecylamine (DDA) was increased with respect to the precursor concentration.177 In this reaction sequence, a borohydride salt was utilized to reduce a soluble platinum precursor in the presence of a surfactant and the DDA capping agent, thereby yielding ultrathin 2 nm platinum nanowire networks. Halving the concentration of DDA improved reaction selectivity in favor of nanowire production. Nanowire formation in this case is thought to be a result of the 1D self-assembly of quasi-spherical nanoparticle seeds and thus, lowering the extent of surface passivation of the initial seeds is believed to facilitate the self-assembly process. Hence, ambient reduction techniques are highly sensitive to the concentration of the surfactants and capping agents present in the reaction mixture, which have a corresponding effect on the resulting growth mechanism of anisotropic structures.
The use of ambient techniques also highlights the importance of both atmospheric and dissolved oxygen on the growth and formation of metallic nanostructures. For instance, oxygen present within a reaction mixture can preferentially oxidize reducing agents, thereby impacting the longevity of a reducing agent within the reaction mixture. In the aforementioned report,177 selectivity for nanowire production was also enhanced when the reaction was performed under an inert atmosphere as a result of the increased lifetime of the reducing agent in solution. In addition, dissolved oxygen is widely known to etch growing metallic nanostructures at defect sites along the surface of the wire. This etching effect can play a significant role in determining the evolving morphology of a growing metallic nanostructure particularly if the defect sites are arranged along the length of an emerging anisotropic structure. For example, in the recent work of Hücker et al.,176 the dissolved oxygen content was found to be a crucial element in determining the morphology of as-prepared ultrathin platinum and palladium nanowire networks with individual nanowires possessing diameters of 2 nm. In this synthesis, nanowires are grown in a two-phase system wherein a phase-transfer catalyst is used to introduce sodium borohydride into the organic phase so as to reduce the precursor solubilized by the octadecylamine surfactant. Initially, the precursor is reduced into rod-like nanostructures and subsequently wire formation is observed if the reaction is conducted in an oxygen-free environment. In the case that the reaction mixture is exposed to atmospheric oxygen, the reaction yields strictly elongated nanoparticles, which can be attributed to the etching effect of the dissolved oxygen, thereby preventing the elongated nanoparticles from coalescing to form long, discrete, solid nanowires.
As previously mentioned, there has been significant interest in developing ambient techniques that do not require the presence of additional surfactants in the solvent system. One of the major methodologies for achieving this goal is to either suitably stabilize or destabilize the platinum nuclei that are formed after the initial rapid reduction of the solubilized precursor ions. In the recent work of Miyake and co-workers,175 platinum nanowire networks with ultrathin 2 nm diameters were prepared within a weakly polar three-component dimethylformamide (DMF), toluene, and water solvent system by the reduction of a dissolved platinum precursor with excess sodium borohydride. In the proposed formation mechanism, the platinum nuclei are formed rapidly upon addition of the borohydride and the nuclei are believed to be initially stabilized by the poorly soluble borohydride anion, thereby preventing rapid isotropic aggregation. As the borohydride anion is oxidized by residual dissolved oxygen, the DMF is thought to adsorb onto the exposed facets, thereby resulting in selective anisotropic growth of the nanowires. Interestingly, the morphology of the resulting platinum nanostructures is highly dependent upon the polarity of the solvent system. As the toluene content is increased from 0 mL to 12.5 mL within the solvent system, the reaction favors the production of increasing fractions of nanowires at the expense of nanoparticles as a result of a decrease in the overall solubility of the excess borohydride anion.
In a separate report, nanowire networks of gold, platinum, and palladium were prepared by the reduction of an aliquot of an aqueous solution of precursor dissolved into an ethanol solvent system.180 The reduction of this mixture by sodium borohydride gave rise to metallic networks of interconnected metal nanoparticles with a diameter of 5 nm. The critical synthetic parameter in this technique is the use of a solvent with a relatively low dielectric constant, which is thought to destabilize the citrate-capped nuclei by decreasing the overall charge on the nanoparticles. It is believed that this contributes to the self-assembly process of nanoparticles via aggregation into nanowire networks. Without an ethanol solvent system, the growth is strictly isotropic and only gold nanoparticles are produced. In fact, the ratio of the resulting nanowires with respect to nanoparticles could be reliably tailored as a function of the water content in the solvent system with increasing fractions of nanowires observed as the ethanol content was systematically increased. Thus, the directing effects of the surfactants can be suitably replaced by either the specific stabilization or destabilization of metallic nuclei, after the primary reduction step has taken place.

4. Binary metal oxides
4.1 Introduction
Binary metal oxides maintain the general formula of MxOy, where M is a metal, typically a transition metal, and O is oxygen. They have been of keen interest in the past several years due to their interesting properties, which are often enhanced at the nanoscale as compared with the bulk. Specifically, these metal oxides possess a wide variety of attributes, which encompass magnetic,181–185 and electronic properties186–190 as well as physical attributes,191−194 which render binary metal oxides suitable for a wide variety of applications in areas ranging from sensors, alternative energy sources, capacitors, memory devices, and catalysts.195
Since obtaining one-dimensional morphologies of metal oxides renders them ideal for incorporation into nanoscale devices, a great deal of focus in recent metal oxide research has been directed towards the synthesis of these structural motifs. In particular, in this review, we will focus on solution-based methods that do not require the use of either any extremely specialized instrumentation or other exotic experimental conditions. These methods include, but are not limited to, hydrothermal (solvothermal), molten salt, sol–gel, template-assisted, as well as electrospinning methods. Herein, we discuss the applications of these methodologies towards the rational synthesis of various metal oxides.
4.2 Hydrothermal methods
As mentioned, hydrothermal synthesis is a versatile method that has been successfully applied to a number of systems, including metal oxides and more specifically, binary metal oxides. In fact, the range of materials that can be reliably prepared via hydrothermal methods is numerous and includes oxides of titanium,28,192,196–198 vanadium,189,199–207 cadmium,208,209 zinc,210–212 iron,213–215 manganese,216,217 molybdenum,218,219 and cobalt.220 These methods take advantage of and optimize the many parameters associated with the hydrothermal method in order to allow for the production of highly crystalline and chemically pure one-dimensional nanomaterials.
Our group has previously utilized a hydrothermal method to produce titanate nanostructures that can become further converted into analogous titania materials (Fig. 8).196,221 In order to achieve this goal, titanium dioxide is dissolved in a solution of concentrated sodium hydroxide. Through a hydrothermal treatment, the titania precursor is converted into sodium hydrogen titanate. The morphology of the product was found to be tunable through the modulation of the reaction temperature. For example, at lower temperatures, nanotubes were formed, whereas at higher temperatures, nanowires predominated. These nanostructures were then neutralized with hydrochloric acid in order to produce hydrogen titanate analogues via ion-exchange. A second subsequent hydrothermal treatment in water converted as-prepared titanates into anatase titania nanostructures. If titanate nanotubes had been used as the precursor for the second hydrothermal step, pure single-crystalline anatase TiO2 nanoparticles with no rutile impurities, measuring approximately 12 nm in size, were obtained. Conversely, if titanate nanowires were used as precursors for the second hydrothermal treatment, analogous titania nanowires could be generated. Two distinctive types of nanowires have been formed from this reaction, namely wires with diameters of ≤200 nm and those with sizes ranging from 200–400 nm. Smaller nanowires exhibit a smoother surface and appear to be single-crystalline. However, larger nanowires were noted to be significantly roughened on the surface and were clearly composed of smaller nanocrystals. In both cases, as-obtained nanowires consisted of highly-crystalline, pure anatase TiO2. The photocatalytic ability of these nanomaterials has been investigated by analyzing the degradation pattern of Procion red dye molecules in the presence of these nanostructures. It has been found, for example, that as-prepared nanowires possessed the highest degradation rate as compared with both nanoparticles (commercial and as-prepared structures) and bulk. This observation has been attributed to an increased surface area, a higher crystallinity and sample purity, as well as a general enhancement of the optical properties of nanomaterials.
 Fig. 8  Representation of the size- and shape-dependence of the morphological transformation of hydrogen titanate nanostructures into their anatase analogues. Step 1 represents the preparation of hydrogen titanate nanostructures, neutralized from sodium hydrogen titanate nanostructures that, in turn, had been initially hydrothermally synthesized from commercial anatase TiO2 powder. Step 2 represents the hydrothermal size and shape-dependent transformation process of orthorhombic protonic lepidocrocite titanate (HxTi2−x/4□x/4O4 (x ≈ 0.7, □: vacancy)) nanostructures into anatase titania nanostructures at 170 °C for 24 h. 
By analogy, the Grimes group28 has demonstrated that the hydrothermal methodology can be used to synthesize TiO2 nanowires directly on transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-coated glass. They accomplished this feat by submerging the TCO substrate directly into a mixture of polar HCl and non-polar toluene, containing titanium precursors. Such a mixture of non-polar and polar solvents allowed for a controlled reaction such that the titanium precursor could be drawn onto the surface of the TCO substrate and hydrolyzed by water in solution so as to yield single crystalline, highly-ordered rutile nanowires. Observed morphological control arose from the selective surface adsorption of anions in solution, specifically Cl−. Widths of as-obtained nanowires ranged from 30–55 nm in size, while the lengths spanned from 2–5 microns. In general, wire dimensionality could be controlled by the length of the hydrothermal reaction time. Moreover, this paper further highlighted the application of these nanowire arrays to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC). Specifically, it was shown that use of these nanowires directly grown on a TCO substrate could enable a maximum recordable efficiency of 4.34% in as-prepared DSSCs, an observation attributable to the likely presence of fast electron conduction, high surface area, and decreased recombination rates in these nanowires. Overall, by careful manipulation of synthetic parameters, the rational synthesis of discrete nanowires directly attached onto a substrate effectively eliminated an additional post-treatment step.
In another set of experiments,197,198 another group also incorporated one-dimensional TiO2 in the production of DSSCs. These papers are noteworthy for their development of a unique precursor, the subsequent conversion of that nanoscale intermediate in order to produce a unique morphology, and finally the application of that material for practical purposes. Specifically, Park et al. initially hydrothermally synthesized nanowires using titanium isopropoxide precursors in a HCl solution of varying concentration,198 thereby producing smooth nanowires. By varying the reaction time, it was found that the product morphology could be tailored to the formation of either particles or wires. For example, while the size of nanoparticles measured at 5 nm at low reaction times remained fairly constant with increasing reaction time, rising to only ∼7 nm in size, the corresponding aspect ratio of the sample lengthened with reaction time, thereby rendering the sample more and more wire-like in overall morphology. Control over sample crystallinity (e.g. anatase vs. rutile) was gained by varying HCl concentration. For instance, low acid concentrations favored anatase TiO2 formation, presumably due to the decreased solubility of the precursor in acidic solution.
In a subsequent experiment, these nanowires were then used by the same group as the template for further growth in a solution containing the titanium precursor, titanium(IV) isopropoxide.197 This reaction proceeded via heating of a solution containing the nanowires and the titanium precursor at 95 °C for several hours. The sample produced via this reaction was rutile in nature due to the crystallographic nature of the precursors, and possessed several small “branches” protruding from the nanowire “backbone.” As-prepared nanobranched TiO2 maintained a surface area, porosity, and roughness factor, corresponding to 108.5 m2 g−1, 47.2%, and 240.6 μm−1, respectively, whereas analogous nanowire precursors showed significantly lower values of 33.6 m2 g−1, 15%, and 120 μm−1 for those identical parameters. When the nanobranched TiO2 was applied to a DSSC, the advantages of this unique morphology became evident. Specifically, an increase of nearly 2% was reported in the efficiency of cells constructed using nanobranched TiO2 as compared with cells fabricated using nanowires, an observation mainly attributed to enhanced dye adsorption due to the increased surface area of nanobranched TiO2.
Our group has recently shown further evidence that nanostructure intermediates hydrothermally produced can be subsequently treated to yield novel materials with properties different from those of the starting material. For example, in a recent synthesis, we have used VO2 nanowires as a starting material for the synthesis of V2O3 nanowires.203 This is a three-step procedure, the first of which utilizes hydrothermal conditions in order to synthesize precursor nanowires of hydrated VO2.222 As-prepared nanowires are single crystalline in nature, smooth in texture, and exhibit widths of 74 ± 21 nm and lengths of up to several microns. These nanowires are subsequently dehydrated through heating in an inert atmosphere for 24 h. The resulting dehydrated product maintains its morphology, showing only a slight decrease in the width of the product, 68 ± 12 nm, with lengths of up to several microns. Furthermore, the single crystalline nature of the product is maintained throughout this dehydration process, thereby yielding pure, single-crystalline VO2 (M) nanowires. The most exciting aspect of this work is that this synthesis can be taken a step further in order to produce a novel product. For example, we found that by subsequent heating in a reducing atmosphere, pure, single-crystalline V2O3 nanowires could be prepared using either as-prepared hydrated VO2 or dehydrated VO2 product. We further showed that the properties of the nanowires are comparable to those of the bulk. Specifically, nanowires exhibited a metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) at approximately 160 K. At this transition temperature, the material underwent transformation from a paramagnetic metal to that of an antiferromagnetic insulator. We showed not only that the transition temperature is maintained at the nanoscale but also that the magnitude of the transition is preserved as well. Furthermore, when we fabricated a device based on a single nanowire, we noted an increase of resistivity of ∼103 when the device was cooled from 300 to 80 K. This drastic increase in resistivity is comparable to bulk behavior.203
Other groups have also shown similar success in the synthesis of vanadium oxides using the hydrothermal method. Specifically, Corr et al. used a previously reported hydrothermal method201,223 in order to produce nanoscrolls of vanadium oxide. In their synthetic method, V2O5 in water was mixed with a solution of dodecylamine in ethanol. After aging the solution for several days, the mixture was sealed in an autoclave and heated to 180 °C for 48 h. The optimal reaction time of 48 h was deduced after a careful correlation of the precise effect of varying possible reaction times with the quality of the resulting products. The crystal structure of V2O5 is such that when hydrothermally treated, in the presence of an amine, sheets of V2O5 roll up to form a scroll-like material. These V2O5 nanoscrolls possessed an average width of 110 nm with lengths typically ranging from 2 to 5 μm. The interlayer spacing of the nanoscrolls was measured to be 2 nm, due to intercalation of amine molecules into the scroll structure. The resulting product was then used in a series of experiments to examine the effects of additional experimental parameters upon morphology and crystallographic structure.
What was found was that by maintaining a reducing atmosphere, while varying the annealing temperature and time, the crystallographic structure of the resulting product could be deterministically controlled. For example, at a temperature of 400 °C, even with heating durations of as long as 6 h, the product could be reduced to the monoclinic distortion of rutile VO2. By contrast, at 500 °C, the product was converted to V2O3 when the annealing times were ≥3 h. Finally at 600 °C, pure V2O3 could be isolated with annealing times of up to 6 h. The morphology of the materials is largely maintained, yielding only a small amount of granulation within the material as the annealing time and temperature are increased. When the MIT for the materials was probed, data were found to be very similar to that of bulk, albeit with a somewhat less abrupt degree of resistivity change. This observation has been attributed to the presence of a nonstoichiometric amount of oxygen in the material. Nonetheless, overall, these results show that by altering post-treatment parameters, one can readily fine tune the properties of a material in order to render them more desirable.
In a 2008 paper, Zhou et al. were able to successfully synthesize nanowires of V2O5 measuring millimetres in length.224 Specifically, by dissolving vanadium oxysulfate hydrate and potassium permanganate in water, and adjusting the pH to 1–2 with nitric acid, a precursor solution was obtained. After hydrothermal treatment at 160 °C for 24 h, single-crystalline orthorhombic V2O5 nanowires with widths of 60–80 nm were noted. To explain why such long nanostructures could be formed in the absence of a surfactant, it was noted that variations in the oxidizing agent present likely had an enormous impact on both the crystallinity and the morphology of the product. For instance, when an oxidizing agent with a relatively low oxidation potential, e.g. KClO3, was used, it was likely unable to prevent a significant amount of water molecules from being incorporated into the lattice of the product. This would adversely affect the crystallinity of the product and effectively convert it into V2O5 hydrate. However, when an oxidizing agent with a higher oxidation potential, namely K2S2O8, was utilized, a similar phenomenon occurred, which was explained using a different reason, e.g. the idea of slow kinetics. That is, while it may be a relatively strong oxidizing agent, K2S2O8 itself reacts much more slowly as compared with KMnO4, thereby allowing for water molecules to be inserted into the product lattice. Upon addition of a catalyst, such as Ag+ in the form of silver nitrate, to mitigate this issue, the net result was successful formation of pure V2O5 nanowires with lengths in the millimetre range. Hence, it was evident that the composition of the solution components is crucial in determining the overall makeup of the final products. Not surprisingly, V2O5 is not the only material that can be made into ultralong nanowires using the hydrothermal method.
By analogy with titanium dioxide, one-dimensional zinc oxide nanomaterials have attracted substantial interest due to possible solar cell applications.225 Moreover, ZnO nanostructures are of importance, arising from their piezoelectric properties rendering them as key materials in the development of piezoelectronics and nanoscale generators.226 A recent report by Li et al.210 involved the production of ZnO nanowires measuring tens of microns in length. In order to accomplish this feat, a piece of cleaned zinc foil was submerged into a solution of sodium oxalate in a Teflon-lined autoclave. Upon heating the sealed autoclave to 140 °C for 24 h and subsequently cooling to room temperature, the resulting product consisted of hexagonal-phase ZnO nanowires with widths between 150 and 500 nm and lengths on the millimetre scale. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were used to prove that the nanowires were indeed single-crystalline in nature. Sensor devices constructed using these nanowires exhibit excellent sensitivity to ammonia and triethylamine gas, an observation attributed to the high surface area and excellent crystallinity of this product.
Other groups have also hydrothermally synthesized ZnO nanowires. For instance, Huang et al. have reported on the synthesis of ZnO nanowires using zinc film as the starting material.212 Specifically, a piece of zinc metal was placed into a solution of sodium hydroxide in an autoclave and heated to 80 °C for times ranging from 12–24 h. The isolated product consisted of würtzite zinc oxide with widths ranging from 10 to 80 nm and lengths attaining up to 10 microns over reaction times of up to 24 h. It was also noted that by decreasing the concentration of sodium hydroxide, the size as well as the size distribution of the nanowires was more polydisperse, presumably due to a lessened degree of control over the formation of zinc oxide precursor in the hydrothermal solution.212
Tungsten oxide nanowires227 have been produced using a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method in which sodium tungstate is dissolved in water prior to the addition of 3 M HCl, yielding a precursor solution of H2WO4 to which 0.5 M ammonium sulfate is subsequently added. Finally, this solution is added to a digestion bomb, sealed, and subjected to microwave irradiation of 300 W at 150 °C for 20 min, in order to enhance the hydrothermal reaction. By comparison with traditional hydrothermal methods, the microwave-assisted growth process yielded generally improved crystallinity. Specifically, whereas the conventional hydrothermal method created crystalline hexagonal tungstate nanowires or rods with widths between 10 and 15 nm and lengths ranging from 200 to 300 nm, with the microwave-assisted method, the resulting product primarily consisted of single-crystalline nanowires with widths less than 10 nm and lengths of up to 5 microns.
In order to investigate the formation mechanism of these nanowires, the reaction time and temperature were systematically varied. The results showed that temperature does not have a very large effect on the resulting morphology; indeed, 1D products were obtained at all temperatures. However, at higher temperatures, structures with lower aspect ratios were predominant. Furthermore, an increase in reaction time resulted in larger wire lengths, though the trend in wire length increase as a function of reaction time was non-linear. Moreover, the reaction time associated with the microwave process, e.g. 20 min, was significantly lower than that required for standard hydrothermal syntheses, e.g. 12 h. It was also found that in the absence of an ammonia salt, hexagonal phase tungsten oxide could not be formed. A case was certainly made that microwave-assisted hydrothermal growth can be advantageous over conventional hydrothermal routes not only by (i) improving product crystallinity but also by (ii) reducing the reaction time needed to obtain the desired product.
The hydrothermal method is a very versatile method that allows for the consistent production of high-quality products in relatively high yields. Moreover, through directed and thorough manipulation of the various parameters associated with the hydrothermal method, a wide variety of materials can be synthesized as a one-dimensional motif. Furthermore, the properties of these nanowires often show demonstrable enhancement over their bulk counterparts. However, there are a number of other synthetic methods, such as the molten salt technique, that one can utilize in order to obtain equally pure and relevant products.
4.3 Molten salt methods
Unlike the hydrothermal method, the molten salt method requires relatively high temperatures but, however, does not require the use of an autoclave. While this method is not as popular for the synthesis of binary metal oxides, it has still found applicability in synthesizing nanowires of manganese,228,229 cobalt,230 niobium,231 tin,232,233 and zinc oxide.234
Jiao and co-workers228 recently reported the synthesis of both α- and β-MnO2 through a molten salt protocol. Specifically, they found that by using dehydrated manganese sulfate as the precursor and various salts, such as potassium, sodium, and lithium nitrate, the crystallinity of the product can be controlled. In a typical reaction, potassium nitrate is heated with stirring to 380 °C in order to form a molten liquid. To this molten liquid, the manganese sulfate precursor is added and held at this temperature for 3 h. The resulting product consisted of single crystalline nanowires of α-MnO2 (Fig. 9) with widths between 15 and 30 nm and lengths of up to several microns. It was found that two of the most important variables governing this process are temperature and the nature of the salt. For instance, the potassium ion played a crucial role in supporting the crystal framework, thereby allowing for the formation of the proper crystal structure. Furthermore, using temperatures above 400 °C yielded Mn2O3 as opposed to MnO2, whereas temperatures below 360 °C did not result in any product whatsoever.
 Fig. 9  XRD pattern (a), TEM (b), SEM (c), and HR-TEM (d) images of as-prepared α-MnO2 nanowires. The inset in (c) is the magnified SEM image of the end of a single nanowire. The insets in (d) are the corresponding TEM image and FFT pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
A simple substitution of the salt was noted to have a major effect on the nature of the product obtained. Hence, if, instead of potassium nitrate, a mixture of sodium and lithium nitrate was used, the as-obtained product consisted of β-MnO2 as opposed to α-MnO2. This change in crystallinity could be attributed to the larger size of the sodium and lithium ions, as opposed to the potassium ion, which allows the former set of ions to accommodate to the larger crystal framework of β-MnO2. Hence, the product obtained using the salt mixture consisted of single-crystalline β-MnO2 nanowires with widths of 20 to 40 nm and lengths ranging from 500 to 2000 nm. When heated above 400 °C, both MnO2 species could be converted to Mn2O3. However, unlike the α-phase, the β-phase could be formed at temperatures as low as 250 °C. Furthermore, a detailed analysis into the formation mechanism of the nanowires was conducted via a time-controlled experiment. The data suggested that the product was created through the formation and subsequent rolling up of amorphous MnO2 sheets. These nanowires also demonstrated enhanced capabilities for the photocatalytic degradation of various organic-based dyes.
In another recent report by another group, the use of the molten salt technique was reported in the synthesis of nanowires of CoO.230 In their report, the bulk CoCO3 precursor was mixed together with NaCl and a surfactant called NP-9 (nonylphenyl ether), and placed into a porcelain boat. This mixture was then heated in a furnace to 850 °C for 2 h, before being cooled back to room temperature. The resulting product consisted of pure, single crystalline CoO nanowires with widths and lengths of 50–80 nm and >5 μm, respectively. Further studies highlighted the fact that the cooling rate yielded little if any influence over the morphology of the product. However, the presence of salt and surfactant was found to be crucial to the formation of primarily nanowire motifs. In the absence of either or both, only nanoparticles were obtained as the final product. It was finally concluded that the formation mechanism for the nanowires likely involved Ostwald ripening, wherein smaller particles were preferentially dissolved and subsequently deposited onto larger particles.
Niobium oxide nanowires have also been synthesized utilizing the molten salt technique.231 In this example, a multi-step process was used. Specifically, in the first step, Nb2O5 was mixed with KCl, ground together in the presence of ethanol, and once dried, heated in a furnace to 800 °C for 3 h. The resulting product of this molten salt reaction consisted of KNb3O8 nanowires, which were in turn used for the subsequent production of other 1D niobium oxide materials. Briefly, as-prepared KNb3O8 nanowires were subsequently mixed with 2 M nitric acid and stirred for 48 hours, thereby effectively exchanging the potassium ion for a protonic species (H3O+) and creating H3ONb3O8. Upon heating in air at 550 °C for 1 h, single-crystalline Nb2O5 nanowires, possessing widths of several hundred nanometres and lengths up to several micrometres, were ultimately obtained and did not show any impurities arising from prior treatments. An explanation was offered as to the transformation of the initial precursors to niobium oxide nanowires. Specifically, the initial KNb3O8 maintained a layer-like structure, consisting of sheets of NbO6 octahedra separated by potassium ions. When mixed with HNO3, the potassium was replaced by H3O+ in the interstitial spaces between NbO6 octahedra sheets. Upon heating, the H3O+ was removed from the structure, bringing the sheets of octahedra closer together and thereby allowing for bonding to occur between them, a process which ultimately led to Nb2O5 formation. Moreover, the authors were able to demonstrate that as-synthesized niobium oxide nanowires exhibited a relatively large piezoelectric constant of 140 pC N−1, an observation attributed to the high intrinsic anisotropy of the nanomaterial.
Tin oxide nanowires232 either with or without crystal twins have been generated using a molten salt procedure as well. To make nanowires without a twinned structure, tin chloride, NaCO3, NaCl, and a mixture of surfactants (1∶1 mixture of NP5 and NP9) were ground in a mortar and pestle. Following this grinding procedure, the mixture was placed into a porcelain boat and subsequently heated to 780 °C for 2 hours. The resulting product from this reaction consisted of single crystalline tin oxide with widths of 30–50 nm and lengths of up to several microns. However, if either tin or tin oxide were used as the precursor, the resulting product consisted of twinned nanowires, which could be attributed to the formation of Sn4+ from either Sn or Sn2+. The presence of surfactant was critical in preventing sintering and aggregation of the precursor particles, thereby allowing for the subsequent synthesis of tin oxide nanowires.
Zinc oxide nanowires have also been produced through a molten salt technique.234 In the synthesis, zinc acetate was used as the precursor for the formation of zinc oxide nanowires. When the precursor was mixed with lithium chloride and then heated to 615 °C for 30 min, single crystalline würtzite ZnO nanowires with dimensions of 30–70 nm wide and lengths of microns were produced. However, the surfaces of these nanowires were considerably roughened as compared with ZnO nanowires fabricated using other means, and moreover, the growth direction of the nanowires was along the [102] plane, rather than the more commonly reported [001] direction. This latter observation was attributed to surface stabilization by the ions present in the molten salt. This assertion was confirmed when the experiment was conducted in the absence of LiCl. Specifically, the resulting product consisted of only ZnO nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 10–100 nm. The work also highlighted the relative insignificance of the identity of the starting material upon the final product morphology. For instance, if, in lieu of zinc acetate, zinc acetate hydrate were thermally decomposed in the absence of a salt, the product obtained consisted of single crystalline ZnO nanowires with widths of 60–150 nm and lengths of up to 2 microns. In addition, when zinc sulfate were mixed with lithium chloride and reacted, the as-obtained product also consisted of 1D materials of ZnO.
Overall, molten salt was noted to be a very versatile, facile, and flexible methodology. Its attractiveness resides in its relatively high tolerances in terms of reaction conditions that can be used. Nonetheless, as previously mentioned, variations in the identities of salts, surfactants, heating temperatures, and reaction times used could systematically affect the nature of the morphology obtained. In all cases, nonetheless, single-crystalline products were primarily obtained. Through controlled modifications of either surfactants or salts, the growth direction could be altered so as to form nanowires aligned in different orientations other than those found to be the most thermodynamically stable.
4.4 Sol–gel methods
Sol–gel synthesis is a well-known method that can be utilized to form a multitude of different materials. Several of these materials include oxides of chromium,235 cobalt,236 copper,237 iron,238,239 indium,240 neodymium,241 nickel,242–245 lead,246 manganese,247,248 titanium,249–252 tin,253 tungsten,254–257 tantalum,258,259 and zinc.245,260–262 Although the sol–gel technique is capable of producing many materials on the nanoscale, as a technique, it is often insufficient in and of itself to create one-dimensional structures. As such, sol–gel is often used in combination with other methodologies, including the use of templates as well as other structure-directing agents. We discuss several of these methods in two separate, subsequent sections. In the first, the use of templates to spatially confine the material in conjunction with sol–gel protocols is emphasized in order to achieve a 1D motif. In the second, the use of electrospinning in combination with sol–gel will be emphasized as a route towards fabricating 1D nanostructures.

4.4.1 Sol–gel with template-assisted methods. 
Employing the use of templates is an excellent way to achieve a desired structure. The sol–gel process shows exceptional advantages in combination with templates, due to the ability of the sol to intimately interact with the template structure itself. Templates used can consist of either hard templates (such as AAO), other nanostructures, or soft templates (such as polymers or surfactants).
As examples, chromium oxide nanowires have been synthesized through the use of an AAO template.235 This goal was achieved by filling the pores of the template with a chromium oxide sol; the sol itself is prepared by dissolving chromium nitrate in water followed by a subsequent addition of hydrazine. A commercial AAO template is then immersed into the sol for 4–5 h under a slightly pressurized atmosphere, e.g. 1.3 atm of pressure. Following this pressure treatment, the template was dried and any surface contaminants were removed, via polishing with alumina powder. After a subsequent 5 h annealing step at 600 °C in argon, the template itself was removed by immersion in a 6 N solution of sodium hydroxide. The resulting product consisted primarily of single crystalline nanowires with 100–300 nm widths and lengths of up to 10 μm. Optically, these nanowires exhibited photoluminescent properties, resulting in a slight blue shift in the emission spectrum that was attributed to the presence of defects of the material, caused by the annealing process used to generate the nanostructures. Use of hard templates can also be utilized to make other materials including neodymium oxide nanowires.
Neodymium oxide nanowires241 have been synthesized by wetting AAO template pores using a gravity impregnation method with a sol produced by dissolving acidic neodymium nitrate in water followed by neutralization with ammonia. Specifically, the template was fixed at the bottom of a glass tube filled with the sol. The apparatus was then heated to 80 °C, where, over a period of 12 h, gravity caused the sol to seep into and immerse the pores of the template. Finally, the template was subjected to an annealing process by heating the product up to 900 °C for 2 h. After template removal through immersion in sodium hydroxide, the product obtained was found to consist of nanowires with widths of around 50 nm and varying lengths. These nanowires appeared to be polycrystalline in nature and to consist of only neodymium and oxygen.
Tungsten oxide nanotubes have also been synthesized using an AAO template.255 In order to prepare the relevant sol, tungsten hexachloride and ethanol were initially mixed together with shaking, in a glove box for 2 h, after which 2,4-pentanedione was added to the now light blue solution, causing an immediate change to a green hue. Upon addition of water to this solution followed by aging of the resulting sol overnight, the alumina templates were themselves immersed in the sol for 30 min. After a process of successively dipping, drying, and annealing at 550 °C for 6 h for five cycles, thereby resulting in a pale yellow sample, analysis of these nanotubes suggested that these nanostructures maintained widths comparable to those of template pore dimensions, with lengths attaining up to 10 microns. Later work deduced that hollow, continuous, and high-surface-area aligned arrays of these nanotubes were capable of transmitting gaseous molecules and facilitating the transfer of electrons, rendering them useful for sensing both NO2 and methanol in the parts per thousand (μmol mol−1) range.
Zinc oxide nanotubes have also been created through the use of a sol–gel template technique.260 For their synthesis, zinc nitrate was dissolved in water, followed by the addition of urea. To this sol, an alumina template was added and submerged for a given period of time. It was found that the morphology of the resulting product could be varied between nanotube and nanowire motifs, by modulating the time the template remained in solution. Specifically, upon heating to 80 °C, nanotubes could be generated after short reaction periods (e.g. 24 h), whereas nanowires could be produced after longer incubation times (e.g. 48 h). The template was then annealed in a furnace at 650 °C for 10 h in order to sinter the product. Following sintering, surface impurities were removed via a sanding procedure. The template was then removed in 1 M NaOH solution in order to dissolve the alumina and permit for isolation of the nanostructures. Analysis of these as-generated nanomaterials revealed that they were polycrystalline in nature with widths of around 70 nm and lengths of up to several microns.
A possible formation mechanism was proposed in which the solution of zinc precursors completely penetrates the template. When this solution was then heated to 80 °C, the urea becomes hydrolyzed and the pH of the solution rises. This causes the zinc precursor to form a Zn[(OH)x](H2O)y sol, both in the template as well as in the bulk solution. Since these sol particles exhibit a negative charge and the template walls maintain an overall positive charge,263 the subsequent attraction between opposing charges likely leads to the preferential formation of nanotubes under fast kinetic conditions. This system is worthy of note in that one can control the type of nanostructure created, simply by adjusting for the reaction time.
Another recent report focused on the efficient and versatile production of 12 lanthanum rare earth metal oxides (Y, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, and Yb), using a sol–gel template method.264 These nanomaterials have attracted a great deal of attention, attributed to their well known luminescent properties in addition to other interesting electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties. To complement this work, in another report,265 the same group also utilized this method for the production of thorium oxide nanotubes, doped with europium. Specifically, in order to achieve all of these desired products, the appropriate metal oxide was initially dissolved in nitric acid and water, followed by heating at 100 °C to form a white sol. After introduction of the sol into the pores of the template for 2 h under vacuum, the template was annealed at 500 °C for 2 h followed by dissolution in sodium hydroxide, thereby releasing the nanotubes. A subsequent analysis of the nanotubes, via electron microscopy as well as XRD, suggested that these nanostructures consisted of the expected metal oxides and maintained widths of ∼80 nm as well as lengths of several hundred nanometres. Furthermore, these nanotubes were comprised of an assembly of smaller, discrete 5–10 nm nanoparticles, which originated from the preferential wetting of the template walls. Moreover, it was noted that some materials tended to form a bamboo-like structure, as opposed to traditional, completely hollow nanotubes, due to a combination of factors such as sol viscosity and gaseous release, during subsequent annealing steps.
Much of the literature utilizing the template-mediated sol–gel method involves infiltration of the pores of the template with a sol using either pressure or vacuum. However, this is not always the case. A perfect example of this assertion is a recent work from Bu and co workers.246 In this paper, a spin-coating process was used in order to introduce a lead oxide sol into the pores of the template. There was a notable difference discerned between the use of alumina templates (with the aluminium backing still attached) versus alumina membranes (with the aluminium backing removed). That is, when a template was employed, only nanorods were obtained, whereas when a membrane was utilized, longer nanowires were synthesized; the difference in morphology could be attributed to the trapping of air bubbles in the pores of the template. These nanowires were subsequently crystallized through an annealing step at 650 °C. The resulting product consisted of nanowires with widths between 30 and 60 nm and lengths of up to several microns. Furthermore, these nanowires were single-crystalline in nature and orthorhombic in structure. It was also found that varying the amount of precursor solution applied to the template allowed for control of the morphology of nanotubes versus nanowires. A possible, proposed mechanism for the filling of the pores of the template equated the use of the spin coating process with the creation of a vortex pressure that could pull the sol within the pores of the membrane, a process fundamentally dependent upon the amount of precursor added to the surface of the membrane, prior to spinning. Evidently, this novel way of infiltrating the pores of a template with a sol could allow for the production of 1D nanostructures that may otherwise not have been conventionally produced within the template pore channels.
The use of an alumina template has been required for the fabrication of 1D nanostructures of materials, discussed so far herein. Nevertheless, other types of templates can and have been used. For example, ZnO nanowire arrays have been successfully used as a template for the formation of TiO2 nanotubes.250 Specifically, an ordered array of ZnO nanowires was initially created by first depositing a dense layer of ZnO seeds, formed by heating a solution of zinc acetate and monoethanolamine (MEA) in 2-methoxyethanol at 550 °C, onto a glass substrate, followed by heating to 90 °C for 6 h to allow for 1D array growth. To coat ZnO nanowires with TiO2, a sol was prepared by mixing tetrabutylorthotitanate, diethanolamine, water, and ethanol and applied to the ZnO nanowires by a dip-coating procedure, followed by drying at 100 °C for 10 min. After crystallization of the TiO2 sol via a sintering process at 550 °C for 1 hour, the ZnO nanowire array backbone was dissolved by treating the glass substrate with a dilute HCl solution, leaving TiO2 nanostructures.
It was found that the morphology of the resulting TiO2 was directly influenced by the number of dip coating/drying steps associated with the application of the TiO2 sol. For instance, when only one dip coating/drying step was used, short, broken nanotubes of TiO2 were primarily obtained. By contrast, as the number of application steps increased to an optimal 3 cycles, a far more uniform coating of TiO2 was created on the ZnO nanowires, resulting in an oriented nanotube array, upon dissolution of the ZnO nanowires, composed of 4–5 nm anatase TiO2 nanoparticles. Interestingly, as the number of application steps increased to 5, the nanotubes formed bundles due to the presence of excess TiO2 sol, while after 7 application steps involving TiO2, the nanotube morphology was lost altogether, resulting in a porous TiO2 network. This methodology was suggested as a viable means of purposefully using a morphological directing agent in order to achieve desired 1D structural motifs.
In terms of potential soft templates reported, organic and biomolecular-inspired structures for instance have been reported as reasonable morphology-directing agents.254,257 One such example is deferoxamine mesylate (DFOM). In the presence of a solution containing tungsten chloride in benzyl alcohol, heated to 100 °C for 48 h, with DFOM, formation of “worm-like hybrids” as opposed to nanoplates of inorganic and organic materials could be observed. Moreover, when the solution temperature were to be increased to 175 °C, single-crystalline fibers of tungsten oxide could be isolated, consisting of several nanowires bunched together and ranging in length from 200 to 600 nm and in width from 10 to 20 nm. From the SAED data, it was concluded that the structure of the nanowires was consistent with W18O49, aligned along the [010] direction. Infrared spectroscopy confirmed the formation of an inorganic–organic hybrid through the presence of various distinctive peaks attributed to organic linkers that could be broken down through a process such as dissolution in formamide. Such a process could not only potentially exfoliate the larger bundles into smaller, individual nanowires but also destroy the nanowires themselves. Nonetheless, it was clearly shown that a soft, biomolecular template can be used to successfully tune the controlled formation of an inorganic material.


4.4.2 Sol–gel with electrospinning methods. 
The use of sol–gel and electrospinning processing also results in a powerful combination that can be used to create 1D nanostructures. Previously, electrospinning has been utilized to fabricate oxides of cobalt,236 iron,238,239 indium,240 manganese,247,248 nickel,243,244 titanium,251,252 tungsten,256 zinc,245,261,262,266 and zirconium.251
For instance, electrospinning has been advanced as a means of fabricating nanowires of cobalt oxide.236 First, aqueous solutions of cobalt acetate tetrahydrate and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) were mixed in a desired ratio, and loaded into a capillary tube to which a copper pin was inserted and connected to a high-voltage source; a polyethylene-covered iron drum was used as the counter electrode for this process. Nanowires were formed upon the application of 20 kV to the system. The as-obtained mat was then dried under vacuum at 80 °C for a total of 24 h, and calcined at varying temperatures from 500–800 °C for 2 h. An alternative post-processing treatment was also utilized, involving water gas produced via hydrothermal conditions. When as-synthesized nanowires were subjected to calcination in air, the resulting product consisted of Co3O4. However, the actual size distribution of the nanowires was greatly affected by the annealing temperature utilized. For example, with increasing temperatures from 500 to 700 °C, the average width tended to decrease from 440 to 221 nm. Conversely, when the wires were heated to 800 °C, the as-obtained nanowires became considerably more polydisperse, resulting in a larger average size of 450 nm. Overall, these results suggested that calcination at 700 °C is optimal for the production of smooth nanowires with a relatively narrow size distribution. If a hydrothermal treatment, in the presence of water gas, was substituted for the calcination step, the crystallographic nature of the product changed. Specifically, the product obtained from this post-processing step consisted of smooth CoO nanowires with average widths of 421 nm. Nevertheless, regardless of processing conditions, the products were single-crystalline in nature and did not exhibit any form of impurities.
An optical study of the nanowires revealed that the nanowires contained two band gaps and that these energies varied slightly with a change in the annealing temperature. This variation could be attributed to the difference in nanowire structure, annealed at different temperatures. In essence, the electrospinning process allowed for the creation of well-defined nanowires which, after a subsequent post-processing method, could be converted to either Co3O4 or CoO. In both cases, the product obtained was single-crystalline in nature and maintained its original morphology even upon reaction. Utilizing the same methodology, the synthesis of manganese oxide (MnO/Mn3O4) nanowires exhibiting a dual band gap has been separately reported.248
Nanowires composed of constituent Fe2O3 nanoparticles have also been produced using electrospinning,238 by mixing a solution of iron oxide nanoparticles with PVP and placing this solution into a steel-tipped syringe. Upon application of 15 kV to the system, nanowires with widths of approximately 500 nm were obtained after electrospinning. It was also noted that upon the application of an external magnetic field, the nanowires could be generally oriented, aligned, and ordered. Moreover, upon heating the nanowires to temperatures of 550 °C for 4 hours, the morphology was destroyed, whereas exposure to an oxygen plasma was less destructive to the intrinsic 1D morphology.
A PVP solution consisting of indium nitrate dissolved in a solution of dimethyl formamide (DMF) and ethanol was used in the preparation of In2O3 nanowires.240 The presence of DMF was critical in ensuring the solubility of the indium precursor in the presence of PVP. This solution was subsequently placed into a syringe with an attached needle; an external voltage source was then connected to the needle and to an aluminium foil counter electrode. Upon application of 15 kV to the system, nanowires with widths between 160 and 200 nm were obtained, following the electrospinning process. Following a drying treatment in vacuum, the nanowires were finally heated to a range of temperatures from 500–800 °C in order to generate In2O3 nanowires. This final calcination step resulted in a transformation of the nanowire morphology from a smooth to a roughened texture. Concomitant with this roughening and crystallization process, the widths of the nanowires were reduced from 160–200 nm to approximately 60 nm. A subsequent exploration of the gas sensing properties of these nanowires revealed that the nanowires evinced sensitivity to a variety of different gases such as ethanol, ammonia, hydrogen, methane, ethyne and NOx; interestingly, analysis revealed that a sintering temperature of 700 °C resulted in the highest gaseous sensitivity detected. This sensing sweet spot likely arose from the combination of sufficient nanowire crystallinity coupled with suppression of crystal grain growth. Hence, the studies revealed that whereas an increased sintering temperature may increase the crystallinity of the resulting product, it may simultaneously incur a detrimental influence on other interesting properties of the material.
TiO2 nanowire synthesis has also been reported through electrospinning.252 In a typical reaction, titanium propoxide was mixed into a solution of DMF and poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) upon the addition of acetic acid as a catalyst. The subsequent electrospinning procedure was performed at 15 kV, thereby creating nanowires with widths of 200–500 nm. For sensing applications, these nanowires were then pressed into mats using pre-heated Teflon plates onto a sensor-friendly substrate and subsequently heated to 450 °C for 30 min to crystallize the structure into anatase TiO2. The special hot pressing step was necessary (i) to cause the nanowire film to adhere to the substrate, allowing for good contact and ease of handling, and (ii) to vastly improve the amount of surface area available, permitting for greater sensitivity and high gas mobility, all of which were useful in generating a functional gas sensor device capable of detecting NO2 below 1 part per billion (ppb) in concentration.
The synthesis and subsequent treatment of electrospun TiO2 and ZrO2 nanowires have also been reported for use as a catalyst by Xia and co-workers.251 In order to synthesize the titania and zirconia nanowires, the respective precursors of these materials were dissolved in a solution of PVP, acetic acid and ethanol. Specifically, for the fabrication of TiO2, titanium tetraisopropoxide was utilized, whereas for ZrO2, zirconium acetylacetonate was used. The solutions were subsequently loaded into a steel-tipped syringe and electrospun with a voltage of 10 kV. The resulting product was allowed to stand overnight to achieve complete hydrolysis of the precursors, and crystallized by heating at varying temperatures in order to obtain desired products. For example, if TiO2 nanowires were heated at 510 °C and 800 °C, a preponderance of pure anatase and rutile TiO2 nanowires measuring 150 nm and 125 nm in diameter could be, respectively, isolated. For ZrO2, a simple calcination at 550 °C would result in the formation of 150 nm diameter tetragonal-phase ZrO2 nanowires. Upon additional treatment with polyol to subsequently deposit noble metal nanoparticles (Pt, Pd, and Rh) onto the surface of metal oxide nanowires, it was also possible to create single-crystalline, small-diameter (e.g. 7 nm) metal nanowires growing from the metal oxide nanowire (Fig. 10). Upon incorporation of these materials into a constant flow reactor, the anatase TiO2/Pd composite evinced the ability to catalyze a Suzuki coupling reaction and could be reactivated merely through a simple treatment with nitric acid.
 Fig. 10  TEM images showing deposition of Pt nanoparticles (NP) at different time points (3, 7, and 19 h) and nanowires (NW) on various metal oxide fibres. All fibres were decorated in the same manner. Each row presents different metal oxides, with each column for samples at different points in terms of reaction time and deposition of nanowires. All the scale bars are 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, the electrospinning apparatus was modified slightly in order to produce hollow nanostructures of metal oxides, specifically nickel oxide.243 To achieve this goal, the needle of the apparatus was modified in order to contain two concentric needles, thereby allowing for the electrospinning of two separate materials in a core–shell type of configuration. In the outer needle, a solution of nickel precursor was chosen, while in the inner needle, machine oil was used. In order to prepare the nickel precursor, nickel acetate was dissolved in water, forming a green solution. Following dissolution, citric acid was added to the nickel solution and the mixture was aged for several days at 60 °C. Upon electrospinning at varying voltages, nanowires with widths ranging from 500 nm to 3.5 μm were isolated. Upon subsequent annealing at 500 °C for 6 hours, the NiO precursor was crystallized, whereas the inner core was simultaneously removed and sacrificed. The final product after calcination consisted of cubic NiO nanotubes composed of constituent nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 10 to 20 nm.
Another post-processing technique developed for electrospinning has allowed for the formation of “nanofiber yarns” fabricated from electrospun nanowires of either ZnO or NiO.245 In a typical synthesis, the appropriate metal acetate was dissolved into a solution of PVP and this solution was then loaded into a syringe fitted with a 1 mm needle. Using a specially designed apparatus, the nanowires could be simultaneously electrospun and wound into a discrete yarn. Indeed, the resulting nanowires maintained a width of 63.2 nm for ZnO and 98.6 nm for NiO. A time-dependent study revealed that the thickness of the yarn increased from 5 to 25 microns as a function of the duration of electrospinning. After annealing, the nanofibers crystallized into either hexagonal-phase ZnO or cubic-phase NiO. Electrical characterization of these yarns showed that these micron-sized fibers behaved in a similar fashion to thin films of the same material. Furthermore, individual yarns of ZnO and NiO could be further intertwined in order to create a composite metal oxide yarn. These data showed that it was possible to construct hierarchical structures of several nanomaterials with relative ease, and that one could combine these products into a single functional architecture, while still merging, retaining, and preserving favorable properties of each constituent component at the nanoscale.

4.5 Additional solution-based methods
In recent years, the use of solution-based methods for the synthesis of 1D binary metal oxides has been utilized for a number of systems. While not as popular as previous methods, these have been used to create nanowires of iron, copper, zinc, tin, indium, lead, and titanium185,257,267,268 in the solution phase without the aid of external structure-directing agents.
Yang and co-workers reported the use of a simple solution phase synthesis of ZnO nanowire arrays.267 This was accomplished by first depositing a layer of ZnO nanocrystals onto a substrate through the decomposition of ZnO seeds, originating from the heating to 350 °C for 20 min of an acetate precursor. These seeds were oriented such that the (0001) surface of the seeds was parallel to the substrate surface. Nanowire growth on the deposited seeds was conducted by submerging the substrate into a solution of zinc precursor at 90 °C, thereby yielding nanowires with widths of 15 to 60 nm, lengths of 250 to 400 nm, and an interwire spacing of 5 to 45 nm, all of which could be reliably tuned by varying growth time and seed density. As-synthesized nanowires were single-crystalline in nature with their long axis oriented nearly normal to the substrate surface. Electrical characterization of the resulting films revealed that the seeds and the resulting nanowires formed ohmic contacts with the ITO substrates. This seeding method could also be combined with other techniques, such as gas phase synthesis, for the growth of well-aligned ZnO nanowires with ohmic contact to the supporting substrate, which would find promise in applications such as solar energy harvesting.
Our group has utilized an ambient aqueous solution-based protocol in order to produce nanowires of iron, zinc, and copper oxide.185 We accomplished this goal by first dissolving a solution of the appropriate metal precursor such as zinc chloride, copper nitrate, and iron sulfate in water for the subsequent production of ZnO, CuO, and Fe2O3, respectively. Specifically, these metal precursors were added to one half of a U-tube cell with either sodium or ammonium hydroxide in the other half. These two solutions were then separated by a polycarbonate or alumina membrane, wherein the pores of these membranes served as the spatially confined reaction vessels for the two solutions. The template pores localized the reaction in such a way that allowed for the creation of 1D nanomaterials and the dimensions of the as-generated nanostructures were inherently dependent upon the widths and lengths of the originating pore channels. For the specific cases of ZnO and CuO, nanowires were isolated, whereas for iron, nanotubes were the predominant motif. This difference in morphology observed could be attributed to variations in the strength of the chemical bonding interactions of precursor molecules with respect to the pore surfaces of the template membranes used. Ordered nanowire arrays could be subsequently ‘glued’ onto any viable substrate, regardless of either its deformability or its thermal, chemical, electrical, or mechanical properties (Fig. 11). Further analysis of these nanowires highlighted their enhanced catalytic performance. For instance, ZnO nanowires were perceptibly more effective at photodegrading methyl orange as compared with ZnO nanoparticles and bulk ZnO. By analogy, iron oxide and copper oxide nanowires were equally efficient at degrading 4-chlorophenol and hydrogen peroxide, respectively, as compared with their nanoparticulate and bulk counterparts.
 Fig. 11  SEM images of CuO nanowire arrays immobilized onto (A and B) a plastic tip as well as onto (C and D) a curved glass rod. (E and F) Analogous SEM images of ZnO nanowire arrays immobilized onto a curved glass rod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
5. Ternary metal oxides
5.1 Introduction
Complex ternary transition metal oxides, e.g. AxByOz wherein A and B are metals, are an extremely relevant class of materials that have attracted attention as many of these materials exhibit highly interesting physical properties. Ternary metal oxides can also be classified into other smaller subdivisions or families of materials of a particular formula such as ABO3 and ABO4 types. First, ABO3 ternary metal oxides are referred to as ferroelectric perovskite-type oxides which exhibit morphology dependent properties.269 Second, the subset of ternary metal oxides with the ABO4 formula are usually composed of two different metals, A and B, with oxidation states of +2 and +6, respectively, and often include unique properties such as photoluminescence, photosensitization, and scintillation.18 As a whole, the class of ternary metal oxides possesses a phenomenally diverse range of technologically significant functionalities and properties including ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity, multiferroicity, high dielectric constants, magnetoresistance, superconductivity, piezoelectricity, and pyroelectricity,270–278 as well as excellent thermal, mechanical, optical properties, and often catalytic abilities.4
Moreover, these oxides often contain a combination of several key functionalities and furthermore, additional property attributes can also be subsequently incorporated and dialed into these materials by rational chemical means, such as doping,23,279,280 resulting in not only novel but also uniquely multifunctional nanomaterials, which are advantageous from an applications point-of-view. Specifically, this class of materials has been considered for a variety of applications including sensors,281 catalysis,282–284 energy storage,32 field-effect transistors (FETs),285 memory devices such as ferroelectric random access memory (FeRAM) and dynamic random access memory (DRAM), spintronics,274,286,287 and as building blocks for the assembly of nanoscale electronic devices.269 In terms of reproducibly achieving desired pure and highly crystalline 1D nanostructures necessary for these types of devices, prior literature has demonstrated that of the available solution-based methodologies, the hydrothermal technique and molten salt method, by far, have been the most appropriate and successful synthetic protocols for generating ternary metal oxides. In addition, a number of groups have attained varying levels of success with other techniques including but not limited to electrospinning, sol–gel, and solution/one-pot synthesis for binary metal oxide systems in particular, thereby broadening the potential of these other protocols for the practical synthesis of ternary metal oxide systems.
5.2 Hydrothermal methods
As one of the most versatile and flexible synthesis methods, the hydrothermal technique has been successfully applied for a wide range of ternary systems, including (but not limited to) chromates,285 manganates,288 molybdates,289–291 tungstates,292,293 vanadates,284,294–298 niobates,282,283,299–302 and titanates.303–305 As such, the literature shows a significant emphasis on optimization of the experimental parameters needed in order to achieve reliable 1D growth and also to develop generalized synthesis protocols which are capable of producing a wide range of ternary metal oxides. For instance, Lou et al. have previously demonstrated the synthesis of NiMoO4·nH2O and CoMoO4·nH2O nanorods290 with diameters ranging from 50–100 nm and 100–200 nm, respectively, and lengths of up to 10 μm. Reaction conditions were further optimized for nanorod growth, with a specific emphasis on the roles of reaction temperature, reaction time, organic additives, and post-annealing temperature. It was concluded that the addition of ethanol, like other organic additives, can affect the morphology of the product. In this case, inclusion of ethanol in the hydrothermal reaction resulted in the production of smaller and shorter nanorods, presumably arising from a change in the polarity of the reaction mixture. Moreover, dehydration of the as-synthesized product can be achieved via calcination, after which the nanorod morphology is maintained. Furthermore, Lou and co-workers confirmed the facile capability to grow nanorod arrays by inclusion of titanium foil into the autoclave prior to heating. Though the charge/discharge processes in these materials are not yet well understood, electrochemical analysis of the pure nickel and cobalt molybdates reveal that they are excellent candidates for reversible lithium storage, as demonstrated by the high reversible capacity of 100 mA h g−1 after 70 cycles reported for as-synthesized NiMoO4 nanorods.
Molybdates belong to an important family of ternary materials, including chromates and tungstates, which, in addition to the energy storage application demonstrated above, exhibit excellent photoluminescent, magnetic, catalytic, sensing, and electronic properties.23,279,285,306 As such, developing methods to easily synthesize 1D nanostructures of ternary molybdates, tungstates, and chromates have come under focus with the goal of real-world applications. For the chromate family, MxCr2O4 (where Mx=1 = Pb, Ba, Sr, Ni, Zn, Cu, Ca, Sr and Mx=2 = Ag) for example, a generalized hydrothermal method for their 1D synthesis has been presented by Li et al.285 The reaction conditions are deceptively simple: aqueous solutions of the metal precursors are mixed together and adjusted to neutral pH, to which the desired surfactant, typically PVP, is added and heated in a Teflon-lined autoclave at 140 °C for 20 h. Under these conditions, the reaction is robust, successfully generating single-crystalline nanorods and nanobelts of these oxide materials. For as-obtained nanostructures, assessed diameters for the family of chromates ranged between 30 nm to 80 nm, while lengths were noted to be more consistent between 1 and 2 micrometres, except for the peculiar case of CuCrO4 nanobelts with a maximum length of 20 μm. Overall, this generalized synthesis approach has proven to be extremely advantageous, allowing for a subsequent robust exploration of the dielectric, electrochemical, and optical properties (along with accompanying trends) of this family of materials. For example, as-synthesized PbCrO4 nanorods exhibited a maximum dielectric constant of 800 and could accumulate a high quantity of charge, rendering this material as an attractive candidate for dielectric materials in capacitors and gate components for FETs.
In an analogous manner, in 2009, Wu et al. reported a facile hydrothermal method for the large-scale synthesis of uniform, pure, single-crystalline Ag2MO4 (where M = Cr, Mo, and W) nanowires without the use of either surfactants or templating agents.306 More importantly, the effects of pH value and reaction time were investigated upon the resultant morphology, emphasizing that these two experimental parameters were most significant. For Ag2MoO4, for instance, a pH > 7 resulted in loss of the anisotropic shape, whereas shorter reaction times led to the prevalence of nanowire bundles. Optimal conditions for producing Ag2MoO4 nanowires were found to involve processing at 150 °C for 12 h in a medium with a pH of 2, whereas for Ag2CrO4 and Ag2WO4 nanowires, heating at 180 °C for 20 h in a medium at a pH of 7 yielded the best results. All as-synthesized nanowires were nearly homogeneous in size, measuring up to several micrometres in length with average diameters of 80 nm, when M = Mo and W, and 115 nm, when M = Cr. Furthermore, photoconduction devices fabricated with these as-synthesized nanowires showed reproducible and rapid photoswitching responses, revealing the practical potential for these types of materials as components of photo-sensing devices.
As another relevant example of a material with potential real-life applicability, Chen and Ye achieved the hydrothermal 1D synthesis of two photocatalysts, namely Sr2Nb2O7 and SrNb2O6, by simply altering the nature of the strontium precursor and molar ratio of Sr to Nb.282 Specifically, mixing Nb2O5 with Sr(OH)2 in a 10∶1 ratio yielded Sr2Nb2O7 nanoribbons, whereas the use of Sr(CH3COO)2 in a 1∶1 ratio generated SrNb2O6 nanorods (Fig. 12); both structural motifs were compositionally pure and single-crystalline. Though the diameter distributions for Sr2Nb2O7 nanoribbons and SrNb2O6 nanorods were relatively wide, ranging from 30 to 300 nm and 50 to 150 nm, respectively, both nanowire systems possessed very high aspect ratios with lengths attaining tens of micrometres. By means of comparison, solid state reactions were conducted between the precursor materials themselves. Though the desired chemical compositions were achieved, the morphology of these particular, as-synthesized structures mainly consisted of polydisperse nanoparticles, thereby emphasizing the key importance of aqueous hydrothermal conditions for fostering primarily one-dimensional growth. Moreover, Brünauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface analysis method revealed large surface areas for Sr2Nb2O7 nanoribbons and SrNb2O6 nanorods, i.e. 38 and 9 m2 g−1, respectively, which were noticeably larger than photocatalytic niobate materials prepared using a conventional solid-state method. These high surface areas have proven to be especially crucial for maximizing the photocatalytic water-splitting abilities of these materials, which have demonstrated relatively high efficiencies of as much as 32% for Sr2Nb2O7 nanoribbons and 19% for SrNb2O6 nanorods, respectively. It was further proposed that this method can be extended to the reliable synthesis of other niobium-containing systems, which are highly touted for their promise as effective catalytic nanomaterials.283,307–309
 Fig. 12  SEM and TEM images of as-synthesized SrNb2O6 nanorods from the Sr(AC)2 system. (a, b) SEM images, (c, d) TEM images and SAED pattern (inset) of a single nanorod, (e) HRTEM image, and (f) EDS spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2009 The American Chemical Society. 
Many reports have established that, while less desirable, the presence of an additional species, such as a surfactant, additive, salt, or other organic compound, is often necessary to ensure 1D growth of a particular material. For instance, a simple synthesis of BaMo2O7 nanowire bundles was accomplished by mixing BaCl2, MoO3, and NaF powders in distilled water at 140 °C for 48 h.289 As-synthesized nanowires measured 30 nm in diameter and tens of microns in length. The importance of not only pH but also F− anions was emphasized in directing the growth of the nanowires. Moreover, this methodology could be extended to the production of other molybdate systems (Cd, Pb, and Ag) as well as to tungstate, chromate, and even metallic phosphate compounds. In another example, Zhu and co-workers demonstrated that the synthesis of pure Ag2V4O11 nanobelts could only be achieved with the use of either 1,6-hexanediamine or dodecylamine, suggesting that the amine groups played a crucial role in product formation.297 Even with the addition of an additive, as-synthesized nanobelts in this case were much larger and polydisperse in size, with diameters ranging between 70 and 200 nm.
Similarly, in 2008, a hydrothermal method was developed for the synthesis of 20 nm diameter CoWO4 nanorods, in the presence of SDS surfactant.292 Experiments revealed that without SDS in the reaction mixture, the isolated product consisted of only CoWO4 nanoparticles. By contrast with SDS present, a nanorod morphology was achieved. Furthermore, with increasing amounts of SDS (up to 2 grams) in the reaction mixture, the aspect ratio was simultaneously increased with the longest nanowires measuring 100 to 200 nm. Similarly, Zhao et al. focused on the synthesis of 1D LaVO4 nanostructures using a co-surfactant microemulsion-mediated hydrothermal method which included SDS as a surfactant.295 The incorporation of microemulsions into hydrothermal techniques has previously proven to be useful for the synthesis of 1D ternary metal oxide systems.310 Hence, consistent with these previous studies, this particular report revealed that of the experimental parameters analyzed, surfactant concentration was crucial in controlling the morphology and aspect ratios of the final product. In particular for SDS at and above a critical point of 0.3 M, TEM analysis showed the presence of aggregated nanowires and nanorods measuring 50 nm in diameter with aspect ratios below 10. At slightly lower SDS concentrations, i.e. 0.25 M, pure LaVO4 nanowires were fabricated with diameters of 20 nm and aspect ratios exceeding 100. Moreover, it was concluded that the choice of an appropriate co-surfactant, in this case n-hexanol, for the microemulsion process is also vital to achieving a more uniform size dispersion. Interestingly, the addition of very high concentrations of a n-hexanol co-surfactant demonstrated the possibility of even further control over morphology, resulting in the formation of LaVO4 short nanotubes with diameters between 100 and 200 nm. All of these examples clearly confirm the importance of surfactants and additives in guiding nanostructure synthesis under hydrothermal conditions. However, it is not evident that smaller-diameter structures can necessarily be achieved upon addition of capping agents, but undoubtedly the concentration of the surfactant plays a significant role in determining aspect ratios in the resulting anisotropic growth process.
A recent 2010 study by Hu et al.299 not only used two types of organic additives, namely polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polyacrylic acid (PAA), to create a predominantly 1D motif but also simultaneously exhibited the ability to easily control chemical composition by doping tantalum into the parent KNbO3 system of interest in order to achieve 1D KTa0.25Nb0.75O3 nanostructures. The synthesis was accomplished by mixing Ta2O5 and Nb2O5 precursors in a 1∶3 molar ratio into a KOH solution to which organic additives were included, filled to 80% volume with distilled water, sealed, and heated at 200 °C for 24 h. Using HRTEM to characterize isolated nanomaterials, it was reported that when only PVA was added, the product consisted primarily of KTa0.25Nb0.75O3 (KTN) nanorods, approximately 100 nm in diameter with a [001] growth orientation. However, when both PVA and PAA were added, the synthetic procedure led to larger-diameter (approximately 300 nm) KTN nanorods but with an observed [110] growth orientation. Hence, by carefully exploiting the different functional groups of PVA and PAA and their respective adsorptive behaviors, Hu et al. were able to demonstrate facile control over the resultant growth direction of as-synthesized nanorods. Subsequent analysis examined the photocatalytic and thermal properties of nanorods prepared with different crystallographic growth orientations. Specifically, [110]-oriented KTN nanorods maintained better thermal conductivity, whereas [001]-oriented KTN nanorods possessed an approximately 28% increase in photocatalytic performance by comparison with the [110]-oriented KTN nanorods. Though it is clear that the idea proposed herein still needs additional work and interpretation, this preliminary study is invaluable, as it definitively suggests that, as opposed to merely varying either morphology or composition, tailoring the growth direction of 1D nanostructures can also be successfully used to reasonably manipulate the desired properties of a particular nanomaterial.
5.3 Molten-salt synthesis (MSS)
In spite of the molten salt method's effectiveness for 1D binary metal oxide systems and 3D ternary metal oxides, the reliable synthesis of 1D ternary metal oxide systems has been limited to titanates311–315 and niobates316,317 as well as to a few manganate systems.26,318–320 Specifically, exhaustive efforts have been expended towards the facile nanoscale synthesis of MTiO3 (M = Ba, Sr, Pb) perovskite, due to their potential in electronic devices as ferroelectric materials. Fabricating ternary niobate systems, such as ANbO3 and ANb2O6, where A is either an alkaline or alkaline earth metal, have recently gained interest, due to their superb nonlinear optical and dielectric properties, which are attractive for nanoscale devices. Additionally, manganese oxide compounds are attractive because of their high power density and possible applicability as a cathode material for lithium ion batteries. Exploiting the simplicity of the molten salt method, the theme of extant literature has been focused on carefully investigating and correlating the nuanced effects of individual experimental parameters with the resulting product morphology and composition in order to gain reliable insights into 1D nanostructure synthesis using this method.
For instance, in two analogous works by Hsieh et al.312 and Xing et al.,315 each conducted an investigation towards morphological control of ternary titanate nanomaterials, namely BaTiO3 and PbTiO3, respectively. In both studies, the nanomaterials are synthesized within a NaCl–KCl flux. However, the nature of the titanium dioxide precursor had a dramatic effect on whether spheres or rods were formed; for example, Xing et al.315 used K2Ti4O9 nanorods themselves as their source of titanium. From experiments with various combinations of precursors, it is clear that the actual shape of the titanium oxide precursor can decisively dictate the morphology of the resulting product, as the TiO2 can act as an in situ template for directing growth. Since it is well known that titanium dioxide is insoluble in molten alkali chlorides,321 the specific choice of barium and lead precursors often governs the mechanism by which the TiO2 reagent behaves in the reaction medium. In the case of Hsieh et al.,312 they found that in the presence of TiO2 nanorods at 700 °C, the BaCO3 dissolves faster than BaO, readily coats the surfaces of the TiO2, and thereby preserves the initial titania morphology, resulting in the production of single-crystalline BaTiO3 nanorods. By contrast, as BaO is less soluble in the molten flux, unprotected TiO2 nanorods often decomposed into smaller particulates and upon reaction, led to the formation of BaTiO3 nanocubes as opposed to nanorods.
Similarly, Xing et al. proposed that the high solubility of PbO in molten NaCl–KCl at 900 °C results in the surface coating and protection of the titanium precursor, thereby preserving its initial 1D morphology.315 Thus, the use of PbO as a lead source results in the formation of PbTiO3 nanorods with diameters ranging from 100 nm to 1 μm and lengths of up to several microns. On the other hand, using K2Ti4O9 nanorods at the same reaction temperature produces cubic PbTiO3 nanoparticles, as the potassium titanate precursor likely fragments into individual TiO2 cubes during the reaction. Both studies reinforce the notion not only that the actual morphology of the precursors is highly significant but also that the dissolution rates of each precursor are particularly influential in controlling 1D growth, which are observations consistent with previous reports.34,35
The importance of precursor morphology has been similarly underlined in the synthesis of ternary alkali and alkali earth niobates as well as of a lithium manganate system. For example, in 2007, Zhen and Wang and co-workers reported on the synthesis of orthorhombic NaNbO3 and CaNb2O6 nanorods, measuring several hundred nanometres in diameters and up to several microns in length.317,322 They demonstrated that by using K2Nb8O21 nanowires316 as a precursor and self-sacrificing template for 1D growth,10 desired products could be achieved via an ion-exchange of the larger potassium ions for the smaller sodium (or calcium) ions by using NaCl (or CaCl) as the molten flux. To further stress the importance of a 1D precursor, Nb2O5 powder was used as the niobium precursor with NaCl under identical conditions; in that case, however, only NaNbO3 nanoparticles were synthesized to any significant degree.
A subsequent study by Xing et al. in 2009 was associated with the successful production of ANbO3 (A = Na, K, (Na/K)) nanorods from Nb2O5 nanorods.231 Analogous to the work presented by Xu et al., the ternary niobate nanorods synthesized by Xing's laboratory were computed to be several hundred nanometres in diameter and several microns in length. In order to obtain the Nb2O5 nanorod precursor, KNb3O8 nanowires, synthesized via MSS, were initially treated with nitric acid in order to convert to H3ONb3O8 nanorods followed by subsequent calcination at 550 °C. Then, depending on the desired product, Nb2O5 nanorods were subjected to reaction with either Na2CO3, K2CO3, or a mixture of the two in a molten flux at 850 °C for 10 min. Similarly, the salt used as the reaction medium was chosen to be either NaCl, KCl, or a mixture of NaCl–KCl, a decision governed by the desired chemical composition of the ultimate product. In all cases, wherein the Nb2O5 nanorod was used as the precursor, the morphology of the as-synthesized material also corresponded to 1D nanorods. However, when either KNb3O8 nanowires or H3ONb3O8 nanorods were utilized, only nanoparticles of the desired materials were produced. Therefore, based on these experimental findings, it was concluded that the selection of a Nb2O5 nanorod precursor is crucial for two main reasons. First, in the molten flux reaction, both KNb3O8 and H3ONb3O8 reacted with the carbonate precursors, thereby forming Nb2O5 and in the process, either the wire or rod morphology was not preserved, an assertion consistent with observations in the literature on similar systems.315 Second, KNb3O8 and H3ONb3O8 possess layered structures which can be easily disrupted by the transport of alkali ions, which can thereby destroy the initial shape of the precursors. By contrast, Nb2O5 maintains a more compact and stable crystal structure, that can easily accommodate these ions without necessarily compromising its morphology231 and as such, can act as a suitable self-sacrificing template.10
Our group has recently modified this multi-step molten salt procedure for generating potassium and sodium niobate nanorods in terms of a large-scale synthesis of pure, single-crystalline lithium niobate (LiNbO3) nanowires.323 Thus, the Nb2O5 precursor nanorods can be reacted with Li2CO3 in a 1∶1 ratio within a KCl molten flux at 780 °C for 10 minutes. XRD analysis of the product confirmed that the product was composed of rhombohedral LiNbO3 with very minor impurity peaks. Electron microscopy analysis of as-synthesized LiNbO3 nanowires showed the products measured 385 ± 106 nm in width, whereas lengths were found to measure up to several microns. Moreover, as a molten salt procedure, we were able to demonstrate that the method could be easily scaled up to gram quantities of this material, which is imperative to not only properly investigate their nanoscale properties, but also actively probe their potential as viable components of electronic and optical devices.
In a related paper, a surfactant-free molten salt method was developed by Deng et al. as a means for procuring pure, single-crystalline MTiO3 (M = Ba, Sr, and Pb) nanostrips, all grown in the [001] direction.311 In this methodology, the corresponding metal oxalates and TiO2 were utilized as precursors in a NaCl–KCl flux. First, it is important to note that this reaction was conducted at 950 °C for 5 h, a higher reaction temperature than that reported by both Hsieh et al.312 and Xing et al.315 Moreover, Yang and co-workers clearly emphasize that this precise set of reaction temperature and time conditions are absolutely crucial and necessary for isolating a pure monodisperse 1D product, which is consistent with other works on ternary titanate systems.314 Second, even more noteworthy was their successful synthesis of 1D MTiO3 products using a TiO2 precursor consisting primarily of commercial Degussa particles as opposed to 1D nanostructures. While the use of a 1D TiO2 precursor was not specifically investigated, Yang et al. suggested the importance of the size of TiO2 particles in accounting for their data. That is, when the commercial precursor, measuring ∼30 nm in particle diameter, was used, as-synthesized nanostrips were noted to span from 50 to 200 nm in width, 20 to 50 nm in thickness, and up to tens of microns in length. By means of comparison, under identical experimental conditions, utilizing TiO2 particles measuring ∼600 nm in diameter brought forth much larger nanostrips with an average width between 100 to 1000 nm and an average thickness of 50 to 400 nm. Thus, it was concluded that, in order to control product size, the initial size of the titanium oxide precursor needed to be taken into account. Hence, use of a smaller initial precursor particle size will very likely bring about smaller product dimensions.
Probing the synthesis of ternary manganate compounds reiterates and re-emphasizes the importance of the morphology of precursor materials. In 2009, Zhou and co-workers reported on the production of LiMn2O4 nanowires.26 In this method, Na0.44MnO2 nanowires, synthesized from an established hydrothermal method, measuring 30 nm in average diameter and hundreds of micrometres in length, were used as the precursor material. These Na0.44MnO2 nanowires were heated to 450 °C for 1 h in the presence of a LiNO3/LiCl (88%∶12%) salt mixture after which the XRD patterns evinced a mixture of two phases, namely Li0.44MnO2 and Li2MnO3. Despite the impurity of the product composition, SEM revealed that the initial morphology was still maintained after ion-exchange via a molten salt reaction. After washing the mixture so as to remove excess salt, the final products were sintered at 800 °C for 1 h in order to transform the intermediate to the desired LiMn2O4 composition, as confirmed by subsequent analysis. Moreover, the products consisted of pure, single-crystalline LiMn2O4 high-aspect ratio nanowires with diameters ranging between 50 and 100 nm. These as-synthesized nanowires were found to be extremely robust, exhibiting excellent thermal and chemical stability after heating at 800 °C for 12 h. Even after 100 charge–discharge cycles at 5 A g−1, there was no noticeable damage to the nanowire structure or visible deformation of the faceted surfaces, a highly promising result for their prospective usage as a battery cathode. In fact, in spite of the relatively larger diameter of the final product, it is evident that the anisotropic shape was conserved throughout the reaction, stemming from the preservation of the precursor morphology, acting as a template for 1D growth of the eventual LiMn2O4 nanowire product.
All of these synthetic approaches towards titanates, niobates and manganates (a) use molten chlorides as the reactive flux medium, (b) are chemically consistent with one another, and (c) clearly emphasize the undeniable role of the size and shape of the precursors as well as their inherent solubility in the molten flux for achieving predictive 1D growth of the desired materials. However, when hydroxide mixtures are substituted for the molten salt medium in a process referred to as the composite-hydroxide mediated (CHM) method,324 these parameters are not necessarily the most vital factors that have a bearing on whether or not 1D anisotropic growth occurs. In a manner exactly identical to that of the molten salt reaction, the CHM method exploits the eutectic points of a mixture of hydroxides. For example, stand-alone melting points for NaOH and KOH are 323 °C and 404 °C, respectively, whereas a 51.5∶48.5 mixture of these two salts will melt at 165 °C. Thus, at significantly lower reaction temperatures than conventional molten chlorides, chemical reactions can occur in a one-step process and often, but not always, the resultant morphology is anisotropic. As such, the CHM method has proven to be extremely versatile for a variety of materials including hydroxides, chalcogenides, binary metal oxides, fluorides, and metals.324 Even more significant has been the ability of various groups to synthesize a diverse range of 1D ternary metal oxide systems, such as BaMnO3, CoFe2O4, and Pb2V2O7,320 under these conditions. Furthermore, the method easily allows for partial substitution of either metal ion, as verified with the synthesis of BaTixMn1−xO3 nanorods (Fig. 13E–H).325
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of perovskite nanostructures. (A–D) BaMnO3 and (E–H) BaTi1−xMnxO3 nanobelts synthesized by the composite-hydroxide-mediated approach. (A) XRD pattern of the BaMnO3 nanobelts. (B) TEM image and EDS spectrum (inset) showing the presence of Ba, Mn, and O. The Si signal originated from the TEM gird. (C) A single-crystal nanobelt and (D) its HRTEM image as well as the corresponding electron diffraction pattern (inset) showing the [001] growth direction. (E) XRD pattern of BaTixMn1−xO3 nanopowder. (F) TEM image of the nanostructure. (G) A single-crystal nanostructure and (H) its HRTEM image as well as its electron diffraction pattern (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
Overall, the CHM method is quite simple, requiring merely the mixing together of simple precursors, typically a metallic salt (usually chloride or nitrate) and a simple oxide of the other metal. For example, in the case of BaMnO3 nanorods, BaCl2 and MnO2 are mixed together with a NaOH/KOH composite and heated to 170–200 °C for 24–120 h. At higher temperatures, namely 200 °C for 24 h, isolated products measured 30 nm in diameter with surprisingly short lengths of up to only 100 nm. Lengthening of the reaction time to 24 h results in increased lengths of 200 to 400 nm, suggesting that sufficient time was necessary in order to allow for adequate growth to occur. Interestingly, lowering the reaction temperature to 170 °C appeared to enlarge both quantified widths and lengths to ranges of 50 to 100 nm and 600 to 1000 nm, respectively (Fig. 13A–D).325 Addition of water to the system in minute quantities under identical reaction conditions yielded a predominant nanoparticle product morphology. Based on these findings, it was concluded that the acidity of the hydroxide melts is a critical component in determining anisotropic growth; with increased acidity of the flux, i.e. addition of water, isotropic growth is more likely to occur. It was proposed that this change in the type of growth occurring was a result of changes in pressure within the vessel as a result of evaporating water. Since hydroxides have little water content, the hydroxide eutectic melts are undoubtedly more basic in nature than those with added water. Therefore, preferential anisotropic growth appears to be a consequence of using the CHM method.324 Moreover, as a molten salt technique, the CHM method allows for simple preparation of nanomaterials without surfactants and this inherently large scalability is useful in probing possible applications of as-synthesized 1D nanostructures. For instance, the gas sensitivity of as-prepared BaMnO3 nanorods has been investigated and their excellent ultrasensitive response to and detection of O2 at low concentrations (ppb) over a wide range of temperatures are likely enhanced by the presence of the smooth, faceted surfaces of the nanorods.281
5.4 Electrospinning and sol–gel methods
To date, the use of electrospinning and sol–gel methods has been surprisingly limited in the synthesis of 1D ternary metal oxides. Recently, the two techniques have been combined, as sol–gel techniques have been used to prepare a precursor solution for subsequent electrospinning. As-spun fibers are often a composite with the polymer used during the electrospinning process.54 Thus, post-annealing of the fibers is frequently necessary. As a result, it is difficult to maintain smooth external surfaces and moreover, isolated products are typically poly-crystalline. Several types of nanofibers have been synthesized using this method, with a heavy emphasis on ferrites, such as simple ferrites, e.g. MFe2O4 (M = Co, Zn, Mn, Mg, and Cu)326–331 and complex formulations such as Co1−xZnxFe2O4,332 with a few studies focused on other materials.279,280,333
In the synthesis of simple spinel ferrites for example, the work of Meng and co-workers has demonstrated that an exceptionally simple process based on a sol–gel method can produce one-dimensional CoFe2O4 nanostructures330 by analogy with other studies.326 Specifically iron nitrate and cobalt acetate are dissolved in a mixture of ethanol and water under magnetic stirring after which PVP is added. Once the solution becomes transparent, after 12 h of stirring, the solution is drawn into a syringe and spun into fibers at a voltage of 30 kV. As expected, as-synthesized smooth nanofibers (500 nm in diameter) are amorphous. Thus, subsequent calcination in air at temperatures from 500 to 900 °C is necessary in order to remove PVP and crystallize the product. At all calcination temperatures, the XRD patterns could be ascribed to CoFe2O4 with no impurity peaks. However, the morphology of the nanofibers changes drastically as a function of calcination temperature. For example, at the lower range of temperatures, namely 500 °C and 600 °C, nanofibers tend to have a smooth surface and measure 300 nm in width. With increasing temperature, the nanofibers shrink slightly in width to a range of 200 to 250 nm at 700 °C. Finally at 900 °C, the nanofibers become visibly surface roughened with uniform individual particles held together in a chain-like motif and are found to be only 100–150 nm in diameter. Regardless of annealing temperature, the nanofibers are poly-crystalline in nature. Further investigation of their magnetic properties revealed significant shape and size dependence. In all cases, the magnetic data suggest cubic magnetic anisotropy330 resulting from randomly oriented particles within the cobalt ferrite nanofibers, which is of consequence for possible applications associated with magnetic and electronic devices.
Electrospinning has also been ably utilized to produce luminescent 1D nanomaterials, namely CaWO4280 and CaMoO4.279 In both cases, the same group demonstrated the versatility of the electrospinning process by facile incorporation of lanthanides in controllable amounts into the nanofibers so as to actively control the luminescent properties. For CaWO4, for instance, doping with Tb3+ in x mol% (with ‘x’ = 0 to 10) was easily accomplished by incorporating desired molar amounts of Tb3+ with respect to calcium. Precursor materials for calcium, tungsten, and terbium were mixed together in water in dilute concentrations, followed by additional mixing with an ethanol/citric acid solution as a chelating agent to which PVP was subsequently added. The sol was then transferred to a syringe to conduct electrospinning. To obtain nanowires, a lower ratio of metal ions to water was used, namely 1∶20 (referred to in Fig. 14 as S1–x) or 1∶12.5 (S2–x) whereas to form nanotubes, a slightly higher ratio of 1∶10 (S3–x) was employed. Post-annealing of the nanofibers from 500 to 700 °C was usually necessary to obtain samples with reasonably good crystallinity. Slight shifts in XRD peak locations were noted for doped calcium tungstate samples, presumably due to incorporation of the smaller Tb3+ ions within the existing tetragonal lattice. For CaWO4∶Tb3+ nanowires, noted diameters ranged from 50 to 100 nm for samples prepared with a 1∶20 ratio of metal ions to water (Fig. 14b), whereas the 1∶12.5 molar ratio sample gave rise to larger structures, measuring 100 to 150 nm (Fig. 14d). On the other hand, CaWO4∶Tb3+ nanotubes measured between 100 and 200 nm in diameter with wall thicknesses of 30 to 50 nm. Thus, all data show a systematic decrease from as-prepared amorphous fibers, measuring 500 to 600 nm in width (Fig. 14a and c), an observation consistent with the loss of PVP and any residual solvents. HRTEM analysis has determined the fibers to consist of individual, highly crystalline CaWO4 particles. As well, photoluminescence (PL) and cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements of both pure and Tb3+ doped CaWO4 nanostructures exhibited blue (416 nm) and green (545 nm) emission, respectively, demonstrating the tenability of emission colors of as-synthesized materials, generated simply by controlling the level of the dopant concentration.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of the as-formed precursor for CaWO4: 5 mol% Tb3+ nanowires and those annealed at 700 °C. (a) Precursor for S1–5, (b) nanowires S1–5, (c) precursor for S2–5 and (d) nanowires S2–5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A parallel synthesis of crystalline 1D CaMoO4 using a molybdate precursor and annealing at a higher temperature of 800 °C yielded similar results. Additionally, several other lanthanide elements were easily incorporated into the system via doping, namely Eu3+, Tb3+, and Dy3+. As with CaWO4, small shifts in peak location were observed with XRD analysis, demonstrating incorporation of differently sized lanthanide ions into the lattice structure. Microscopy data disclosed that the nanofibers, ranging from 80 to 150 nm in diameter, were composed of adjoining highly-crystalline CaMoO4 nanoparticles. PL and CL measurements were also conducted on both pure and as-doped CaMoO4 nanofibers. For instance, pure CaMoO4 nanofibers exhibited a characteristic blue-green emission band of 500 nm. By varying the different lanthanide dopants, the ability to change the emission characteristics of the nanofibers, even at low mole percents of dopant, was also demonstrated. Thus for Tb3+, Dy3+, and Eu3+ doping, the emission can be rationally shifted to green (543 nm), yellow (576 nm), and orange-red (615 nm) colors, respectively. Moreover, the intensities of the luminescence can be adjusted by changing the mole percent of metal dopant ions, as can be observed by changes in chromaticity with very small amounts of dopant levels. Therefore, multicolor emission tuning of CaMoO4 can provide an increased range of possible applications, such as lighting displays, light emitting diodes, and lasers, which can be made even more attractive due to the facile methodology used to prepare these 1D nanostructures.
Apart from electrospinning, sol–gel synthesis can also be combined with other experimental protocols such as template-directed synthesis, in which a sol is employed as the precursor solution. There are several examples in the literature utilizing this technique for the synthesis of 1D nanostructures, such as barium zirconate nanotubes,334 bismuth vanadate nanotubes,335 ZnFe2O4 nanotube arrays,336 and a variety of mixed-valence metal oxide nanostructures.337–341 Of particular interest is the synthesis of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 nanowires, which can be generated using either polycarbonate or polyimide membranes containing 100 nm pore channels.338 The experimental procedure entailed heating a stoichiometric aqueous solution of La, Sr, and Mn nitrates, in the presence of ethylene glycol, to 150 °C while stirring. Then the interior spaces of the membranes were filled via capillary force and subsequently annealed for 5 h at 800 °C in a controlled oxygen atmosphere. Analysis of the products revealed that the free-standing La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (LSMO) nanowires were highly monodisperse, measuring 90 ± 10 nm in diameter and several micrometres in length, with both dimensions in excellent agreement with the known membrane pore size. HRTEM and SAED unexpectedly highlighted both a novel monoclinic crystal structure as well as the single-crystalline nature of the LMSO nanowires, the latter of which can be exceedingly difficult to achieve with both sol–gel and template-directed growth techniques. Mestres and co-workers attributed the attainment of these structural attributes to the use of polymer templates to grow the nanowires.338 Specifically, they argued that crystallization of the material into the high aspect ratio spaces of the membrane pores allowed for development of a new crystal structure. Moreover, the single-crystalline nature of these nanowires has been ascribed not only to the nature of the precursor solution but also to freedom from mechanical confinement when the crystallization process was occurring, since at high calcination temperatures, the polymer membranes are essentially removed via combustion. Thus, this polymer membrane-directed synthesis is not only appropriate for a variety of materials but also capable of generating single-crystalline nanostructures, which is key for exploring the intrinsic properties of a 1D nanoscale material by comparison with the bulk. Moreover, the LMSO nanowires exhibited ferromagnetic ordering at room temperature, which could potentially be applied to the development of nanoscale magnetic memory devices such as FeRAM. Overall, this example illustrates the possibility of creating new crystal structures for familiar materials, thereby illustrating the realistic capability for acquiring both new or modified physical properties and applications at the nanoscale.
5.5 Additional solution/wet methods
Examples of solution or wet methods are slowly becoming more prevalent among the literature for complex metal oxides, often demonstrating the possibility to accomplish synthesis at either relatively low temperature342,343 or even room temperature conditions.23,24,60,344 In the work of Zhen et al., the use of ambient, room-temperature reactions has proven to be vital towards the synthesis of lead and strontium chromates.60,344 The experimental procedure reported can be considered to be generalized, as it applies to both the lead and strontium systems, which can be produced simply by appropriate changes of the precursor. In a typical reaction, an aqueous mixture of either Pb(NO3)2 or SrCl2 is added dropwise to an aqueous solution of Na2CrO4 (in a 1∶1 molar ratio), assisted by magnetic stirring so as to produce a homogeneous yellow solution. The yellow-hued mixture is then allowed to sit without any disturbance for 5 days, resulting in either PbCrO4 nanorods or SrCrO4 nanowires, which both tend to form bundles. SrCrO4 nanowires are highly polydisperse in terms of diameter, measuring from 50 to 230 nm with lengths of up to several microns.60 On the other hand, PbCrO4 nanorods, measuring on an average between 80–100 nm in diameter and several microns in length, are significantly more monodisperse in nature as compared with their strontium counterparts. In spite of the room temperature synthesis, both chromate systems are single-crystalline in nature without any observable defects or dislocations within the structures.
In the case of the PbCrO4, Zhen and co-workers further investigated the effect of changing concentrations and precursor molar ratios with respect to the resulting product morphologies.344 At a 1∶1 molar ratio and at low precursor solution concentrations of 0.03 M, only nanoparticles were observed via SEM, whereas higher solution concentrations of 0.5 M led to a mixture of nanorods and nanoparticles. Thus, it was determined that there is a critical concentration value of precursors set at 0.2 M at which an optimal anisotropic growth will occur for the PbCrO4 system above which, nucleation occurs rapidly, thereby reducing the likelihood of nanorod production. At this optimum concentration of precursors in aqueous solution, the molar concentration of [Pb2+]∶[CrO42+] can be varied from 2∶1, 1∶1, and 1∶2. When the amount of lead ions is doubled, only nanoparticles are observed. Conversely, when the amount of chromate ions is doubled, short nanorods with an average length of 0.5 μm are produced, demonstrating that the 1∶1 molar ratio of metal ion reagents is most appropriate for making higher aspect-ratio nanorods. Thus, the presence of an excess of either metal ion component will easily exhaust the other ion source, which therefore acts as the limiting reagent in the reaction. Delving further, the product was examined at various stages of mixing and it was observed that over the course of adding in Pb(NO3)2 solution, the morphology evolved from nanoparticles at 1 mL introduced, to shorter rods at 15 mL inserted, and finally onto longer rods at 25 mL quantities put in. From these observations, it was concluded that the initial PbCrO4 nanoparticles likely acted as seeds for homogeneous nucleation and subsequent anisotropic growth towards nanorods.
Recently, our group has demonstrated that a modified template-directed technique can be applied to a solution-phase method at room temperature. Specifically, a typical synthesis involves mounting of a polycarbonate membrane with a known pore size, between two halves of a U-shaped glass tube. Then, each half cell is filled with a solution of metal ion precursors, dependent on the desired nanostructure, and then allowed to incubate for growth to occur within the template pores. Since our previous review in 2005,18 we have demonstrated successful application of this technique for both pure solid solutions of tungstates as well as for Mn-doped alkaline-earth metal tungstates, AWO4 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba).23,24 In both cases, the source of WO42− ions is an aqueous solution of Na2WO4 with ionic sources for Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+ ions derived from aqueous solutions of CaCl2, SrCl2 and Ba(NO3)2, respectively. In order to create nanorods from solid solutions of Sr1−xCaxWO4 and Ba1−xSrxWO4, the precursors are mixed controllably by molar ratios, determined by the desired value of ‘x’ in the final product.24 Subsequent analysis with SEM and TEM revealed that discrete, uniform, homogeneous, and crystalline nanostructures were synthesized and, moreover, possessed smooth surfaces. Diameters for Sr1−xCaxWO4 nanorods measured 50 ± 5 nm, while Ba1−xSrxWO4 nanorods were found to be between 90 to 112 nm from SEM analysis, consistent with the 50 nm and 100 nm pore sizes of the template pore channels from whence they were, respectively, derived. As-obtained lengths measured up to a few microns. Even more significantly, HRTEM and SAED analysis both suggested that the nanorods are single-crystalline in nature, which is often rare to obtain with conventional template techniques.45,46 PL measurements of as-synthesized solid-solution nanorods illustrated optical behavior comparable with their bulk counterparts and most importantly, these data offered the possibility of facile tuning of luminescence properties simply by controllably modifying the chemical composition. As such, Sr1−xCaxWO4 and Ba1−xSrxWO4 nanorods are excellent candidates for exploring the fundamental basis of optical properties with respect to the bulk with the possibility of the incorporation of these nanostructures into nanoscale optoelectronic devices.
The production of Mn-doped alkaline-earth metal tungstates is almost identical to that of pure tungstates, as described above, with the only modification being the inclusion of up to 10 mol % of Mn by way of MnCl2 in the half cell containing the alkaline-earth precursor solution.23 Analogous to the solid-solution nanorods, electron microscopy has shown that in all cases, as-obtained highly-crystalline nanorods possessed diameters corresponding to the known pore sizes of the templates used with lengths measuring up to several microns. Specifically when using templates possessing 200 nm, 100 nm, and 50 nm pore diameters, respectively, the diameters of the corresponding as-prepared Mn-doped CaWO4 nanorods, Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorods (Fig. 15), and Mn-doped BaWO4 nanorods were 183 to 209 nm, 88 to 112 nm, and 47 to 52 nm, respectively. Further analysis of our as-synthesized Mn-doped nanorods revealed that they possessed appreciably higher PL intensities by contrast with their pure counterparts. Moreover, magnetic characterization showed that the nanorods exhibited antiferromagnetic behavior originating from the presence of Mn within the AWO4 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) matrix. Hence, we have validated the notion that this simplistic modified-template method can enable synthesis of 1D multifunctional nanostructures, thereby further emphasizing the ability to rationally modify nanomaterials with essentially arbitrary chemical moiety and hence, associated functionality.
 Fig. 15  (A, C) Typical SEM and TEM images of as-prepared Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorods, prepared using polycarbonate membranes with 100 nm pore diameters. (B) EDS spectrum of as-prepared Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorods. (D) HRTEM image of a representative portion of an individual Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorod shown in panel C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
6. Summary and outlook
As we have demonstrated here, since our last review in 2005, significant strides have been made within the research community to develop versatile and robust synthetic protocols which can be applied to a wide range of systems. It is evident that the efforts within the field have proved beneficial. To date, virtually every scientifically interesting and commercially significant material associated with families of metals, binary metal oxides and ternary metal oxides has been successfully synthesized as a 1D nanostructure. The emphasis on employing solution-based techniques to synthesize these materials has been crucial for several reasons. First, these methods are often simplistic (and hence, cost-effective) and thereby allow for facile, reproducible, and reliable production of these materials. Secondly, the majority of these protocols are environmentally friendlier as compared with conventional solid-state methods of their fabrication and hence socially relevant, in that, by nature, they result in a high-yield production of high-quality nanostructures under reasonably mild reaction conditions. Lastly, these synthetic approaches are key to generating desired nanostructures on a large-scale basis. The result of this broad community of effort is the increased availability of 1D nanostructures of a nearly endless range of materials for a wide range of applicability in practical devices ranging from electronic and optical instrumentation, sensors, catalysts, and even diagnostic equipment.
Furthermore, the extensive research conducted worldwide has established a significant baseline of knowledge about solution-based techniques with respect to their potential advantages and limitations for any given material or family of related materials. Hence, a thorough understanding of each methodology and protocol provides for a database for future researchers to make well-informed decisions about which technique(s) to employ in order to obtain a given synthetic objective. Similarly, as we have discussed, much research has thoroughly investigated the correlation of a range of experimental parameters such as reaction time and temperature with their resulting tangible effects upon product structure, crystallinity, and morphology. Thus, this information can be reliably exploited in order to rationally employ these previously developed experimental protocols towards the predictive synthesis of 1D nanostructures of a desired composition with controllable size and shape.
Such an approach has had broad implications for the transformation of fundamental research into a deeper appreciation of how the structures of these nanoscale materials can be tailored so as to yield desirable properties including favorable optoelectronic, piezoelectric, mechanical, and thermoelectric attributes. Though, in many cases, there is still much work to be done in terms of fully understanding the underlying growth mechanisms, defect propagation, and surface chemical characteristics associated with their generation, the prospects for incorporating 1D nanostructures into real-world applications have only improved and significantly advanced over the last few years. As such, we are ever closer to the time when such nanostructures will inevitably and fundamentally impact our daily lives in a profound and hopefully beneficial way for humankind in a global context.
References
C. M. Lieber, MRS Bull., 2003, 28, 486–491 CAS .
C. M. Lieber, Solid State Commun., 1998, 107, 607–616 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolmakov and M. Moskovits, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Weber, R. Singhal, S. Zekri and A. Kumar, Int. Mater. Rev., 2008, 53, 235–255 Search PubMed .
S. Kuchibhatla, A. S. Karakoti, D. Bera and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 699–913 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chopra, V. G. Gavalas, B. J. Hinds and L. G. Bachas, Anal. Lett., 2007, 40, 2067–2096 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, F. L. Deepak, G. Gundiah and A. Govindaraj, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2003, 31, 5–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, T. J. Park, F. Zhang, H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, Small, 2007, 3, 1122–1139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hernández-Vélez, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 495, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
S. Donthu, Z. Pan, B. Myers, G. Shekhawat, N. Wu and V. Dravid, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1710–1715 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsui and Y. Ochiai, Nanotechnology, 1996, 7, 247–258 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Cai and R. Q. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 60, 1–51 CrossRef .
N. Wang, Y. Cai and R. Q. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 60, 1–51 CrossRef .
X. Wang and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7522–7534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Mao, T. J. Park and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5721–5735 RSC .
T. J. Park, G. C. Papaefthymiou, A. J. Viescas, A. R. Moodenbaugh and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 766–772 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5238–5249 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhou, T. J. Park and S. S. Wong, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14816–14824 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Y. Sfeir, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5500–5512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sharma and T. Imae, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 19–40 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hosono, T. Kudo, I. Honma, H. Matsuda and H. S. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1045–1051 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Chiu, Y. H. Lin and J. J. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 015203 CrossRef .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, M. Waje, W. Li and Y. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4060–4063 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, J. Tao, Y. Lu, K. Lin, J. Yan, P. Wang and H. Ming, Optics Communications, 2009, 282, 439–442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1748–1755 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chen, J.-B. Li, Q.-M. Wei and H.-Z. Zhai, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 224, 244–250 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Yoon, Y. S. Cho and D. H. Kang, J. Mater. Sci., 1998, 33, 2977–2984 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Yoon, Y. S. Cho and D. H. Kang, J. Mater. Sci., 1998, 33, 2977–2984 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wulff, Z. Kristallogr. Mineral., 1901, 34, 449–530 Search PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rajamathi and R. Seshadri, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 337–345 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893–3946 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schlenk, Methoden Org. Chem. (Houben-Weyl), 1924, 4, 790–978 Search PubMed .
T. Qiu and P. K. Chu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 61, 59–77 CrossRef .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neiderberger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Mackenzie and E. P. Bescher, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 810–818 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961–1966 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1739–1746 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Bhushan, Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology, Springer, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .
T. R. Kline, M. L. Tian, J. G. Wang, A. Sen, M. W. H. Chan and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7555–7565 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 99–112 .
H. Zhou, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5460–5466 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhou, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hurst, E. K. Payne, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2672–2692 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bognitzki, W. Czado, T. Frese, A. Schaper, M. Hellwig, M. Steinhart, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Adv. Mater, 2001, 13, 70–72 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Lu, C. Wang and Y. Wei, Small, 2009, 5, 2349–2370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5670–5703 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R89–R106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, G. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kline, M. Tian, J. Wang, A. Sen, M. W. H. Chan and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7555–7565 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. Gole and C. J. Orendorff, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 349–355 CAS .
A. M. Schwartzberg and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10323–10337 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Neretina and M. A. El-Sayed, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4880–4910 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 107, 668–677 .
I. O. Sosa, C. Noguez and R. G. Barrera, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6269–6275 CrossRef CAS .
K. Imura, T. Nagahara and H. Okamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12730–12731 CAS .
T. Suzuki, H. Miyata, T. Noma and K. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1831–1836 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044324 CrossRef .
B. Yan, Y. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9159–9159 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Cepak and C. R. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9985–9990 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2003, 104, 293–346 .
W. Ni, X. Kou, Z. Yang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 677–686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
C. Novo, D. Gomez, J. Perez-Juste, Z. Y. Zhang, H. Petrova, M. Reismann, P. Mulvaney and G. V. Hartland, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3540–3546 RSC .
P. Zijlstra, J. W. M. Chon and M. Gu, Nature, 2009, 459, 410–413 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, Q. Wei, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 21–32 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Lee and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19220–19225 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, M. A. Brook and Y. Li, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 2363–2371 CrossRef .
E. T. Castellana, R. C. Gamez, M. E. Gómez and D. H. Russell, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6066–6070 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2957–2976 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nicewarner-Pena, R. G. Freeman, B. D. Reiss, L. He, D. J. Pena, I. D. Walton, R. Cromer, C. D. Keating and M. J. Natan, Science, 2001, 294, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nicewarner-Pena, A. J. Carado, K. E. Shale and C. D. Keating, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7360–7367 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. Oh, S. Park, J. E. Millstone, S. W. Lee, K.-B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11825–11829 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, D. Strmcnik, B. B. Blizanac, V. Stamenkovic, M. Arenz and N. M. Markovic, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3181–3188 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Smith, C. D. Nordquist, T. N. Jackson, T. S. Mayer, B. R. Martin, J. Mbindyo and T. E. Mallouk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1399–1401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, J. Wang, J. S. Kurtz, Y. Liu, M. H. W. Chan, T. S. Mayer and T. E. Mallouk, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 71, 104521 CrossRef .
N. Giordano, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1990, 41, 6350 CrossRef CAS .
N. Giordano, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 43, 160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, N. Kumar, S. Xu, J. Wang, J. S. Kurtz and M. H. W. Chan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 076802 CrossRef .
N. Giordano, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1990, 41, 6350–6365 CrossRef CAS .
N. Giordano, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 43, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Melosh, A. Boukai, F. Diana, B. Gerardot, A. Badolato, P. M. Petroff and J. R. Heath, Science, 2003, 300, 112–115 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Kushmerick, D. L. Allara, T. E. Mallouk and T. S. Mayer, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 396–402 CAS .
U. Ramsperger, T. Uchihashi and H. Nejoh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 85–87 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Cai, H. Skulason, J. G. Kushmerick, S. K. Pollack, J. Naciri, R. Shashidhar, D. L. Allara, T. E. Mallouk and T. S. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2827–2832 CrossRef CAS .
M. Subhramannia and V. K. Pillai, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5858–5870 RSC .
L. Cademartiri and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1013–1020 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3900–3904 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hoefelmeyer, K. Niesz, G. A. Somorjai and T. D. Tilley, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 435–438 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, C. Yang, M. Sun, F. Yang, Y. Ma, Z. Zhang and X. Yang, Talanta, 2009, 78, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Choi, J. H. Kim, J. Y. Jung, E. Y. Yoon and W. B. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5804–5811 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Zhao, C.-L. Xu, D.-J. Guo, H. Li and H.-L. Li, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 492–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, H. Xu, S. Tang, J. Guo, H. Li, L. Cao, B. Zhou, Q. Xin and G. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2006, 27, 932–936 Search PubMed .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, T. Onodera, T. Koda and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3588–3591 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garbarino, A. Ponrouch, S. Pronovost and D. Guay, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1449–1452 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Dong, D. Li, T. Williams, H. Wang and P. A. Webley, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 190–193 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Zhou, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5460–5466 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Koenigsmann, W.-P. Zhou, R. R. Adzic, E. Sutter and S. S. Wong, Nano Letters, 2010, 10, 2806–2811 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
I. Kazeminezhad and W. Schwarzacher, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, K24–K26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wirtz and C. R. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 455–458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Tian, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 108, 841–845 .
S. Valizadeh, L. Hultman, J. M. George and P. Leisner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 766–772 CrossRef CAS .
R. Laocharoensuk, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Burdick, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Anderson, M. R. Buck, I. T. Sines, K. D. Oyler and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14042–14043 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kazeminezhad, A. C. Barnes, J. D. Holbrey, K. R. Seddon and W. Schwarzacher, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 86, 373–375 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bulbarello, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. G. Crevillen, J. Burdick, S. Mannino, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Small, 2008, 4, 597–600 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Yang, G. W. Meng, S. Y. Zhang, Y. F. Hao, X. H. An, Q. Wei, M. Ye and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1733–1735 RSC .
G. Meng, F. Han, X. Zhao, B. Chen, D. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Xu, M. Kong, X. Zhu, Y. J. Jung, Y. Yang, Z. Chu, M. Ye, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7166–7170 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kartopu, S. Habouti and M. Es-Souni, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 107, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Wang, S. L. Tang, Y. G. Shi, X. L. Fei, B. Nie and Y. W. Du, J. Appl. Phys, 2008, 103, 07D507 CrossRef .
B. M. I. van der Zande, M. R. Böhmer, L. G. J. Fokkink and C. Schönenberger, Langmuir, 1999, 16, 451–458 .
Z.-j. Wang, Y. Xie and C.-j. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19818–19824 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Piquemal, G. Viau, P. Beaunier, F. Bozon-Verduraz and F. Fiévet, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kitaura, R. Nakanishi, T. Saito, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga and H. Shinohara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8298–8302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Govindaraj, B. C. Satishkumar, M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Mater., 1999, 12, 202–205 .
A. Ponrouch, S. Garbarino, S. Pronovost, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and D. Guay, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, K59–K65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fukunaka, M. Motoyama, Y. Konishi and R. Ishii, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, C62–C64 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Qin, Y. Peng, L. Cao and H.-L. Li, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 374, 661–666 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, E. Pippel, R. Scholz and U. Gösele, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4352–4358 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. F. Hsin, P. Y. Chen, R.-S. Liu, S.-F. Hu, C.-Y. Huang, J.-F. Lee and L.-Y. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15794–15801 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Li, G. A. Jones and T. H. Shen, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 08Q502–08Q503 CrossRef .
J.-G. Wang, M.-L. Tian, N. Kumar and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1247–1253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, J. Wang, J. Kurtz, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 919–923 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Keating and M. J. Natan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Jim Y. Lee and W. J. Zhou, Small, 2006, 2, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. Y. Lee and W. J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1459–1464 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. Y. Lee and W. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17959–17963 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. Y. Lee and W. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2133–A2138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1413–1414 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Tresback, A. L. Vasiliev and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 2613–2617 CrossRef CAS .
R. Inguanta, S. Piazza and C. Sunseri, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1385–1388 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun and X. Bao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7478–7488 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ruoff and D. C. Lorents, Carbon, 1995, 33, 925–930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. M. Garcia, R. M. Dorin, H. Wang, Y. Qiu, E. N. Coker, W. A. Steen, J. E. Miller and J. A. Shelnutt, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3650–3655 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, C. Shen, S. Sun and H. J. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15196–15200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Wang and N. Ming, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3295–3303 CrossRef CAS .
D.-P. Wang, D.-B. Sun, H.-Y. Yu, Z.-G. Qiu and H.-M. Meng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ksar, G. Surendran, L. Ramos, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, E. Prouzet, P. Beaunier, A. Hagège, F. Audonnet and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1612–1617 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Chen, G. Zhu and Z. Lin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 243, 362–364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Azulai, T. Belenkova, H. Gilon, Z. Barkay and G. Markovich, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4246–4249 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kijima, T. Yoshimura, M. Uota, T. Ikeda, D. Fujikawa, S. Mouri and S. Uoyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, F. Hong, L. Wang, S. Guo, X. Song, B. Ding and Z. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 203–207 .
R. Tsukamoto, M. Muraoka, M. Seki, H. Tabata and I. Yamashita, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2389–2391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and H. Liang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9668–9674 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Song, L. Wang, L. Sun and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8738–8743 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Slocik, S. N. Kim, T. A. Whitehead, D. S. Clark and R. R. Naik, Small, 2009, 5, 2038–2042 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, X. Sun, H. Ye, T. You, X. Song and S. Sun, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 120, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2005, 6, 761–765 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Liang, Z. Hu, S. Li, S. Peng and Y. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12658–12661 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Liang, S. Liu, J.-Y. Gong, S.-B. Wang, L. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1850–1854 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4602–4603 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Q. Xie, Y. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Fu and W. Yu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 2454–2459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Hu, C. Peng, H. Liu and Y. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 298, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jianqiang, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 032004 CrossRef .
S. Biz and M. L. Occelli, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1998, 40, 329–407 CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Xiong, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Small, 2006, 2, 1340–1343 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, B. J. Wiley and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4120–4129 CrossRef .
F. Caihong, 
            et al.
          , Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 305601 CrossRef .
D. Ung, Y. Soumare, N. Chakroune, G. Viau, M. J. Vaulay, V. Richard and F. Fiévet, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2084–2094 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ung, G. Viau, C. Ricolleau, F. Warmont, P. Gredin and F. Fiévet, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, T. Herricks, M. Geissler and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10854–10855 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, M. Yamada and M. Miyake, Chem. Commun., 2007, 245–247 RSC .
X. Teng, W.-Q. Han, W. Ku and M. Hücker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2055–2058 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fenske, H. Borchert, J. Kehres, R. Kröger, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9011–9016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Zhu, E. Sutter, Y. Ji, M. H. Rafailovich and J. C. Sokolov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2065–2070 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navaladian, C. M. Janet, B. Viswanathan, T. K. Varadarajan and R. P. Viswanath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14150–14156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Lee and D. I. C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17158–17162 CrossRef CAS .
R. Podila, W. Queen, A. Nath, J. T. Arantes, A. L. Schoenhalz, A. Fazzio, G. M. Dalpian, J. He, S. J. Hwu, M. J. Skove and A. M. Rao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1383–1386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Shi, S. Zhang, K. Jiang, S. Yang, Z. Li and E. Takayama-Muromachi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10398–10401 CrossRef CAS .
T.-J. Park and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5289–5295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pitzschel, J. M. M. Moreno, J. Escrig, O. Albrecht, K. Nielsch and J. Bachmann, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3463–3468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 944–958 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choe, G. Jo, J. Maeng, W.-K. Hong, M. Jo, G. Wang, W. Park, B. H. Lee, H. Hwang and T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 034504–034504 CrossRef .
V. D. Patake and C. D. Lokhande, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2820–2824 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Y. Chou and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4527–4532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hormoz and S. Ramanathan, Solid-State Electron., 2010, 54, 654–659 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, E. A. Gibson, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1759–1762 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Zhang, H. Dai and H. He, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4421–4434 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kwon, K. M. Kim, J. H. Jang, J. M. Jeon, M. H. Lee, G. H. Kim, X.-S. Li, G.-S. Park, B. Lee, S. Han, M. Kim and C. S. Hwang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, R. Senter, K. Brezesinski, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 967–977 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lepoutre, B. Julian-Lopez, C. Sanchez, H. Amenitsch, M. Linden and D. Grosso, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 537–542 RSC .
G. Shen, P. C. Chen, K. Ryu and C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 828–839 RSC .
Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8217–8226 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Oh, J.-K. Lee, H.-S. Kim, S.-B. Han and K.-W. Park, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 1114–1118 .
J.-K. Oh, J.-K. Lee, S. J. Kim and K.-W. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 270–274 Search PubMed .
W. Avansi Jr, C. Ribeiro, E. R. Leite and V. R. Mastelaro, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3626–3631 CrossRef .
H. Aghabozorg, R. Mousavi and S. Asckari, J. Nanopart. Res., 2007, 9, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Corr, M. Grossman, J. D. Furman, B. C. Melot, A. K. Cheetham, K. R. Heier and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6396–6404 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao and C. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 1384–1392 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Santulli, W. Xu, J. B. Parise, L. Wu, M. C. Aronson, F. Zhang, C.-Y. Nam, C. T. Black, A. L. Tiano and S. S. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3718–3726 RSC .
F. Sediri and N. Gharbi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1821–1829 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sipos, M. Duchamp, A. Magrez, L. Forro, N. Barisic, A. Kis, J. W. Seo, F. Bieri, F. Krumeich, R. Nesper and G. R. Patzke, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 074317–074315 CrossRef .
L. I. Vera-Robles and A. Campero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19930–19933 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiong, A. E. Aliev, B. Gnade and K. J. Balkus, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 293–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, H. Zhong, W. Zheng, R. Li and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9064–9068 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, M. Li and J. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 245611 CrossRef .
L. Li, H. Yang, H. Zhao, J. Yu, J. Ma, L. An and X. Wang, Appl. Phys. A: Solid Surf., 2010, 98, 635–641 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Das, J.-H. Choi, J. P. Kar, T. I. Lee and J.-M. Myoung, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 472–476 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Huang, J. Liu and H. Ai, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 2507–2511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, H. Yang, R. Rao and A. Zhang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 4774–4779 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Jia, L. D. Sun, Z. G. Yan, L. P. You, F. Luo, X. D. Han, Y. C. Pang, Z. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4328–4333 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, Y. Yao and G. Tang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 89, 529–532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, L. Fei and H. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1785–1788 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, S. Sun, W. Fan, H. Yu, C. Fan, G. Cao, Z. Yin and X. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16439–16443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8126–8127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Phuruangrat, D. J. Ham, S. Thongtem and J. S. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1740–1743 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie and W. Shen, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 50–60 RSC .
Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8217–8226 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gui, R. Fan, W. Mo, X. Chen, L. Yang, S. Zhang, Y. Hu, Z. Wang and W. Fan, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5053–5056 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Sun and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 4524–4530 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. Yuan and L. Li, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 2506–2509 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Zhou and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087–4108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, R. Yang, J. Zhou, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Hu and S. Xu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R DOI:10.1016/j.mser.2010.06.015 .
A. Phuruangrat, D. J. Ham, S. J. Hong, S. Thongtem and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1683–1690 RSC .
N. Sui, Y. Duan, X. Jiao and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8560–8565 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ran and L. Gao, Chem. Lett., 2007, 688–689 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and G. Zhang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 4275–4280 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Deng, J. Chen, X. Sun, R. Yu, G. Liu and X. Xing, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1207–1213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Yang, Z. Dai, H. Chen, X. Yang and D. Hou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 112, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Chu and M. Gong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 183–187 CrossRef .
Z.-Y. Jiang, T. Xu, Z.-X. Xie, Z.-W. Lin, X. Zhou, X. Xu, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 23269–23273 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, X. Qiu, Y. Liang, M. Zhao and Q. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 241112–241113 CrossRef .
N. A. M. Barakat, M. S. Khil, F. A. Sheikh and H. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12225–12233 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-k. Su, C.-m. Shen, H.-t. Yang, H.-l. Li and H.-j. Gao, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2007, 17, 783–786 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Tang, J. He and Q. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, Z. Li, H. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Wang and C. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, X. Lu, W. Wang, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang and C. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 61–65 CrossRef .
X. Qu, J. Dai, J. Tian, X. Huang, Z. Liu, Z. Shen and P. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 469, 332–335 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, J. Sha, X. Ma and D. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 1967–1970 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and S. Zhan, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2009, 30, 246–249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, J. Yu, X. Zhou, C. Tan and J. Yin, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 173–177 Search PubMed .
A. F. Lotus, E. T. Bender, E. A. Evans, R. D. Ramsier, D. H. Reneker and G. G. Chase, J.
Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 024910–024916 CrossRef .
Y. C. Choi, J. Kim and S. D. Bu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 133, 245–249 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. M. Barakat, S. J. Park, M. S. Khil and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 162, 205–208 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barakat, K.-D. Woo, S. Ansari, J.-A. Ko, M. Kanjwal and H. Kim, Appl. Phys. A: Solid Surf., 2009, 95, 769–776 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, A. J. Patil, K. Liu, S. Petrov, S. Mann, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1805–1808 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, W. Yu, X. Gao and X. Li, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 44, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
E. Formo, M. S. Yavuz, E. P. Lee, L. Lane and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3878–3882 RSC .
I.-D. Kim, A. Rothschild, B. H. Lee, D. Y. Kim, S. M. Jo and H. L. Tuller, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2009–2013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Aponte, N. Leon, I. Ramos, R. Furlan, N. Pinto, S. Evoy and J. J. Santiago-Avilés, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2059–2063 CrossRef CAS .
J. Polleux, N. Pinna, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15595–15601 CrossRef CAS .
R. Artzi-Gerlitz, K. D. Benkstein, D. L. Lahr, J. L. Hertz, C. B. Montgomery, J. E. Bonevich, S. Semancik and M. J. Tarlov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 136, 257–264 CrossRef .
G. Wang, Y. Ji, X. Huang, X. Yang, P.-I. Gouma and M. Dudley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23777–23782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Polleux, N. Pinna, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15595–15601 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, Q. Lin, S. Baber and M. Naalla, J. Nanomater, 2010, 2010, 750960/1-6 Search PubMed .
N. Dharmaraj, H. C. Park, C. H. Kim, P. Viswanathamurthi and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 612–619 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Wu, T. Xie, X. Y. Yuan, Y. Li, L. Yang, Y. H. Xiao and L. D. Zhang, Solid State Commun., 2005, 134, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sangkhaprom, P. Supaphol and V. Pavarajarn, Ceram. Int., 2010, 36, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and W. Pan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 699–701 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Diggle, T. C. Downie and C. W. Goulding, Chem. Rev., 1969, 69, 365–405 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kuang, Z.-W. Lin, W. Lian, Z.-Y. Jiang, Z.-X. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 1236–1242 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-W. Lin, Q. Kuang, W. Lian, Z.-Y. Jiang, Z.-X. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Phys.
Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23007–23011 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Zheng and C. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 3817–3819 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, Y. Xie, Z. Li, R. Zhang, J. Yang and C. Wu, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 588–590 RSC .
X. Zhu, Z. Liu and N. Ming, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4015–4030 RSC .
C. H. Ahn, K. M. Rabe and J. M. Triscone, Science, 2004, 303, 488–491 CrossRef CAS .
N. Izyumskaya, Y. Alivov and H. Morkoc, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2009, 34, 89–179 Search PubMed .
D. I. Khomskii, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2006, 306, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
W. Prellier, M. P. Singh and P. Murugavel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, R803–R832 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramesh and N. A. Spaldin, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Wang, J. M. Liu and Z. F. Ren, Adv. Phys., 2009, 58, 321–448 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ederer and N. A. Spaldin, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 849–851 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6694–6709 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Naumov, L. Bellaiche and H. Fu, Nature, 2004, 432, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Hou, R. T. Chai, M. L. Zhang, C. M. Zhang, P. Chong, Z. H. Xu, G. G. Li and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12340–12348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, J. Yang, H. Z. Lian, P. P. Yang, R. T. Chai, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2737–2746 RSC .
N. Wang, C. G. Hu, C. H. Xia, B. Feng, Z. W. Zhang, Y. Xi and Y. F. Xiong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163111 CrossRef .
D. Chen and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2327–2333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. P. Ding, Y. P. Yuan, X. Xiong, R. P. Li, H. B. Huang, Z. S. Li, T. Yu, Z. G. Zou and S. G. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18846–18848 CAS .
F. Wang, M. Shao, L. Cheng, J. Hua and X. Wei, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1687–1691 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Liang, C. Peng, X. Wang, X. Zheng, R. J. Wang, X. P. P. Qiu, C. W. Nan and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9405–9415 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bea, M. Gajek, M. Bibes and A. Barthelemy, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 434221/1-11 .
J. F. Scott, Science, 2007, 315, 954–959 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Xiao, L. Wang, D. S. Wang, X. M. He, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 923–930 Search PubMed .
P. Gao, Y. Xie, L. Ye, Y. Chen and Z. Li, Chem. Lett., 2006, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 746–754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, J. Peng, Z. Xin, B. Xue, B. Dong, F. Shen and L. Li, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 2109–2112 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Song, E. Yang, R. Ma, H. F. Chen and Y. Zhao, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 10, 709–713 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Wang, X.-D. Ma, X.-F. Qian, J. Yin and Z.-K. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4588–4596 CrossRef CAS .
A. Michailovski, M. Worle, D. Sheptyakov and G. R. Patzke, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 5–18 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Fan, X. Y. Song, S. X. Sun and X. Zhao, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 284–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, M. Shao, H. Ban, H. Wang and H. Gao, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 775–777 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Mao, X. C. Wu, H. C. Pan, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2892–2896 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Liu, Y. G. Wang, L. Li, K. X. Wang, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7885–7891 RSC .
Y. M. Hu, H. S. Gu, D. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. L. W. Chan and Y. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 609–613 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grange, J. W. Choi, C. L. Hsieh, Y. Pu, A. Magrez, R. Smajda, L. Forro and D. Psaltis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 143105/1-3 .
A. Magrez, E. Vasco, J. W. Seo, C. Dieker, N. Setter and L. Forró, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 110, 58–61 .
G. Z. Wang, Y. D. Yu, T. Grande and M. A. Einarsrud, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 1465–1469 CrossRef CAS .
N. Z. Bao, L. M. Shen, A. Gupta, A. Tatarenko, G. Srinivasan and K. Yanagisawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 253109/1-3 .
U. A. Joshi, S. H. Yoon, S. G. Baik and J. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12249–12256 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, G. Xu, L. L. Yang, Z. H. Ren, X. Wei, W. J. Weng, P. Y. Du, G. Shen and G. R. Han, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 481, L27–L30 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, Q. Shao, M. W. Shao, X. W. Wei and Z. C. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1764–1768 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, T. Kako, Z. S. Li, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6157–6162 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Shi, X. K. Li, D. F. Wang, Y. P. Yuan, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Catal. Lett., 2009, 132, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhang, C. Liu, G. S. Pang, S. H. Jiao, S. Y. Zhu, D. Wang, D. X. Liang and S. H. Feng, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 1275–1282 CrossRef CAS .
X. He and M. Cao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3139–3143 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, Y. C. Qiu and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 976–982 RSC .
K.-C. Huang, T.-C. Huang and W.-F. Hsieh, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 9180–9184 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Rørvik, T. Lyngdal, R. Sæterli, A. T. J. van Helvoort, R. Holmestad, T. Grande and M.-A. Einarsrud, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3173–3181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, S. Tang, R. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Nie, L. Zhai, X. Zhang and Y. Du, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1481–1483 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, X. Xing, R. Yu, X. Sun and G. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7423–7427 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Xu, L. Zhen, L. Yang, K. He, W.-Z. Shao and L.-C. Qin, Ceram. Int., 2008, 34, 435–437 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Xu, L. Zhen, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15444–15445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yu, S. L. Tang, L. Zhai, Y. Deng, Y. G. Shi, X. K. Zhang and Y. W. Du, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 093909/1-4 .
J. Y. Yu, S. L. Tang, X. K. Zhang, L. Zhai, Y. G. Shi, Y. Deng and Y. W. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1535–1540 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Anikin, I. I. Naumova and G. V. Rumyantseva, Sov. Phys. Crystallogr. (Engl. Transl.), 1965, 10, 172–177 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Xu, L. Zhen, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15444–15445 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Santulli, H. Zhou, S. Berweger, M. B. Raschke, E. Sutter and S. S. Wong, CrystEngComm, 2010 10.1039/c005318j .
C. G. Hu, Y. Xi, H. Liu and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 858–868 RSC .
C. G. Hu, H. Liu, C. S. Lao, L. Y. Zhang, D. Davidovic and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14050–14054 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ju, J. H. Park, H. R. Jung, S. J. Cho and W. J. Lee, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 147, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ju, J. H. Park, H. R. Jung, S. J. Cho and W. J. Lee, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 1704–1709 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maensiri, M. Sangmanee and A. Wiengmoon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 221–228 Search PubMed .
W. Ponhan and S. Maensiri, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, X. J. Liu, M. F. Lv, P. Chai, Y. Liu, X. F. Zhou and J. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15171–15175 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Zhan, C. R. Gong, D. R. Chen and X. L. Jiao, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2006, 27, 931–933 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Shen, J. Xiang, F. Z. Song and M. Q. Liu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2010, 99, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuh, L. Perez, W. M. Sigmund and J. C. Nino, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh and S. B. Krupanidhi, Curr. Nanosci., 2009, 5, 339–343 Search PubMed .
S. Singh, N. Kumari, K. B. R. Varma and S. B. Krupanidhi, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 6549–6553 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Hou, X. Quan and G. Chen, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 2684–2690 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Atalay, V. Yagmur, S. Atalay, H. Kaya, S. Tari and D. Avsar, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2010, 12, 392–396 Search PubMed .
A. Carretero-Genevrier, N. Mestres, T. Puig, A. Hassini, J. Oro, A. Pomar, F. Sandiumenge, X. Obradors and E. Ferain, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3672–3677 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, C. G. Jin, J. Zhang, X. L. Lu, T. Qian and X. G. Li, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2743–2747 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carretero-Genevrier, J. Gazquez, T. Puig, N. Mestres, F. Sandiumenge, X. Obradors and E. Ferain, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 892–897 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J. B. Wang, X. L. Zhong, B. Li and Y. C. Zhou, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 4495–4498 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Jiang, K. Kiyofumi, Y. F. Wang and K. Koumoto, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2713–2715 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saito and A. Kudo, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2017–2019 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Wang, C. Y. Xu, L. Zhen and W. Z. Shao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 299, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Amanda L. Tiano
	Amanda L. Tiano earned her BS in Chemistry in 2007 from the State University of New York at Binghamton. During her undergraduate career, she participated in an REU at University of Tennessee, Knoxville/ORNL under Robert J. Harrison and subsequently in the SULI program at Brookhaven National Laboratory under the direction of Professor Stanislaus S. Wong. She is currently pursuing her PhD with Professor Wong at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Her research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanostructures as well as investigating and understanding the properties of various types of nanomaterials using computational approaches.

Christopher Koenigsmann
	Christopher Koenigsmann earned his BS in Chemistry in 2008 from Fairfield University in Fairfield, CT. As an undergraduate, he completed the secondary education program and is a certified secondary chemistry educator in the state of Connecticut. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD in Chemistry under the mentorship of Professor Stanislaus S. Wong at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. His research interests include the synthesis and electrochemical characterization of metallic nanostructures for use in electrocatalysis and fuel cells.

Alexander C. Santulli
	Alexander C. Santulli earned his BS in Chemistry in 2006 from Manhattan College. He is currently studying for his PhD in the Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, under the guidance of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests include the synthesis of various metal oxide nanostructures and their applications towards solar energy.

Stanislaus S. Wong
	Stanislaus S. Wong earned a BSc (First Class Honours) from McGill University, and a PhD from Harvard University with Professor Charles M. Lieber. After completing a postdoctoral fellowship at Columbia University with Professor Louis E. Brus, he is currently a Professor of Chemistry at SUNY Stony Brook with a joint appointment at Brookhaven National Laboratory. He and his group have wide-ranging interests, including carbon nanotube chemistry as well as the green synthesis of nanostructures. Over the years, Professor Wong has received the ACS Buck-Whitney award, a National Science Foundation CAREER award, as well as an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Faculty Fellowship.

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of (A) isolated MnWO4 nanowires, (B) MnWO4 arrays (top view), (C) MnWO4 arrays (side view). (D) Representative EDS pattern of as-prepared MnWO4 nanowires and nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of various experimental methods for the synthesis of 1D nanostructures such as electrospinning (A), directed growth within the spatial confines of template pores (B), wet/solution-based methods (C), solvothermal/hydrothermal (D), and molten-salt synthesis (E).	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative electron micrographs of as-prepared platinum nanotube arrays (A) and of an individual platinum nanotube (B). A representative powder X-ray diffraction pattern (C) of as-prepared wires after isolation. The polarization curve of as-prepared nanowires is compared with that of commercial carbon-supported 8 nm platinum nanoparticles in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte at 20 °C and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The ECSA (inset) of the nanotubes (black) by comparison with commercial nanoparticles (grey) calculated at 0.9 V (D).	 

 	Fig. 4  Nanocone (C–H) and nanobone (I, J) wires prepared by gradually changing the compositions of the plating solution. Nanocone nanowires were grown by adding 5.0 mL of silver plating solution to 5.0 mL of an already present gold plating solution at varying flow rates. (C, E, G) TEM and (D, F, H) SEM images obtained using silver flow rates of 0.37, 1.0, and 2.0 mL min−1, respectively. Insets (A) and (B) show the constant volume flow cell setup used to create the porous nanobone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM micrograph of TMV–nanowire composites after biomineralization of Co–Pt alloy in the hollow central channel of the TMV (stained by aurothioglucose). Scale bar is 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM images of copper nanowires obtained at (A, B) 180 °C; (C, D) 120 °C. Insets in A and C are the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2005 IOP.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration detailing all of the major steps and changes involved in the formation of single-crystal Pt nanowires through an iron-mediated polyol process. The final product resembles sea urchins. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Representation of the size- and shape-dependence of the morphological transformation of hydrogen titanate nanostructures into their anatase analogues. Step 1 represents the preparation of hydrogen titanate nanostructures, neutralized from sodium hydrogen titanate nanostructures that, in turn, had been initially hydrothermally synthesized from commercial anatase TiO2 powder. Step 2 represents the hydrothermal size and shape-dependent transformation process of orthorhombic protonic lepidocrocite titanate (HxTi2−x/4□x/4O4 (x ≈ 0.7, □: vacancy)) nanostructures into anatase titania nanostructures at 170 °C for 24 h.	 

 	Fig. 9  XRD pattern (a), TEM (b), SEM (c), and HR-TEM (d) images of as-prepared α-MnO2 nanowires. The inset in (c) is the magnified SEM image of the end of a single nanowire. The insets in (d) are the corresponding TEM image and FFT pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images showing deposition of Pt nanoparticles (NP) at different time points (3, 7, and 19 h) and nanowires (NW) on various metal oxide fibres. All fibres were decorated in the same manner. Each row presents different metal oxides, with each column for samples at different points in terms of reaction time and deposition of nanowires. All the scale bars are 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of CuO nanowire arrays immobilized onto (A and B) a plastic tip as well as onto (C and D) a curved glass rod. (E and F) Analogous SEM images of ZnO nanowire arrays immobilized onto a curved glass rod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM and TEM images of as-synthesized SrNb2O6 nanorods from the Sr(AC)2 system. (a, b) SEM images, (c, d) TEM images and SAED pattern (inset) of a single nanorod, (e) HRTEM image, and (f) EDS spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2009 The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of perovskite nanostructures. (A–D) BaMnO3 and (E–H) BaTi1−xMnxO3 nanobelts synthesized by the composite-hydroxide-mediated approach. (A) XRD pattern of the BaMnO3 nanobelts. (B) TEM image and EDS spectrum (inset) showing the presence of Ba, Mn, and O. The Si signal originated from the TEM gird. (C) A single-crystal nanobelt and (D) its HRTEM image as well as the corresponding electron diffraction pattern (inset) showing the [001] growth direction. (E) XRD pattern of BaTixMn1−xO3 nanopowder. (F) TEM image of the nanostructure. (G) A single-crystal nanostructure and (H) its HRTEM image as well as its electron diffraction pattern (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of the as-formed precursor for CaWO4: 5 mol% Tb3+ nanowires and those annealed at 700 °C. (a) Precursor for S1–5, (b) nanowires S1–5, (c) precursor for S2–5 and (d) nanowires S2–5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A, C) Typical SEM and TEM images of as-prepared Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorods, prepared using polycarbonate membranes with 100 nm pore diameters. (B) EDS spectrum of as-prepared Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorods. (D) HRTEM image of a representative portion of an individual Mn-doped SrWO4 nanorod shown in panel C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
