Organic semiconductor crystals  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00490G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00490G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 422-500Organic semiconductor crystals

        
          
            Chengliang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Huanli 
            Dong
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lang 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Wenping 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *d
aSchool of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: clwang@hust.edu.cn
bWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
cBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
dCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Department of Chemistry, School of Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: huwp@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      2nd July 2017
    First published on 29th November 2017AbstractOrganic semiconductors have attracted a lot of attention since the discovery of highly doped conductive polymers, due to the potential application in field-effect transistors (OFETs), light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic cells (OPVs). Single crystals of organic semiconductors are particularly intriguing because they are free of grain boundaries and have long-range periodic order as well as minimal traps and defects. Hence, organic semiconductor crystals provide a powerful tool for revealing the intrinsic properties, examining the structure–property relationships, demonstrating the important factors for high performance devices and uncovering fundamental physics in organic semiconductors. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the molecular packing, morphology and charge transport features of organic semiconductor crystals, the control of crystallization for achieving high quality crystals and the device physics in the three main applications. We hope that this comprehensive summary can give a clear picture of the state-of-art status and guide future work in this area.
Chengliang Wang
Chengliang Wang is a Professor in Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University in 2005 and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2010. He then worked in the Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Muenster and Technical University of Ilmenau. He was selected in the National 1000-Talents Program for Young Scholars and joined HUST in 2016. His research topics include the design and synthesis of novel conjugated materials, crystals, nanostructures and their applications in organic optoelectronics and flexible batteries.
Huanli Dong
Huanli Dong is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. She received her MS degree (2006) from Fujian Institute of Material Structure, CAS, and her PhD (2009) from the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. She was awarded the Outstanding Young Scientist of NSFC in 2012 and the Prize for Young Chemists of Chinese Chemical Society in 2014. Her research interests include molecular materials, crystals and devices of organic/polymeric semiconductors. Currently, she has more than 140 refereed publications with over 4500 citations.
Lang Jiang
Lang Jiang is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BS degree in Applied Physics from the School of Physics and Microelectronics Science, Hunan University in 2004 and his PhD degree from ICCAS in 2011. Then he became an Assistant Professor in ICCAS. In 2013, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Henning Sirringhaus in Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge. In 2016, he moved back to ICCAS, as part of the Hundred Talents Program. His current research focuses on molecular electronics including crystalline organic semiconductors and device engineering and their circuit applications.
Wenping Hu
Wenping Hu is a Professor at Tianjin University. He received his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. Then he joined Osaka University and Stuttgart University as a research fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences and Alexander von Humboldt, respectively. In 2003 he returned to the Institute of Chemistry from Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (Japan), and was then promoted to full professor in the institute. He was awarded the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2007 and was appointed as Cheung Kong Professor of Ministry of Education of China in 2014. He was elected as an assistant president of Tianjin University in 2013 and vice president of the university in 2016. His research interests include organic semiconducting materials, single crystals and devices. He has published more than 470 refereed publications with over 15000 citations (H index = 62) and has edited 4 books for Wiley-VCH, etc. He was an associate editor of Polymer Chemistry (RSC) from 2013 to 2016, and an editorial member of several journals including Advanced Energy Materials, Advanced Electronic Materials, Nano Research, Science China Materials, etc.
1 Introduction
Semiconductors are adopted in such a wide range of applications, such as in displays, computers, telephones, etc., that they have become virtually indispensable for daily life. A semiconductor is a material which has electrical conductivity between that of conductors and insulators. Although there is no precise definition of semiconductors, generally a material possessing a conductivity of about 10−8–103 S cm−1 is regarded as a semiconductor. The conductivity differences of the materials originate from their different energy band structures. In a conductor, usually the valence band (the highest occupied energy band) is partially filled. That is, there is an overlap between the valence band and the conduction band (the lowest unoccupied energy band). Where semiconductors (low energy gaps, usually <4.0 eV) and insulators (high energy gaps, usually >4.0 eV) are concerned, there is an energy gap (band gap) between the valence band and the conduction band. Under certain conditions, semiconductors can be conductive, e.g. as a result of the excitation of charges from the valence band into the conduction band. However, insulators are not conductive, due to their large band gaps (charge carriers are localized). The adjustable conductivity of semiconductors by doping or other techniques makes them promising for different kinds of applications, and therefore they have attracted particular attention since the 1940s. For example, it has been demonstrated that an external electric field can work effectively to tune both injection and accumulation of charges in semiconductors, which can yield high conductivity, and devices based on this mechanism are denoted as field-effect transistors (FETs). The importance of this research is demonstrated by a wide range of FET applications and by the fact that 6 scientists have shared the Nobel Prize in Physics on two occasions: in 1956 for applications in transistors and in 2000 for semiconductor heterostructures and integrated circuit.
The discovery of “organic semiconductors” dates back to the 1940s.1 Researchers then found that with halogens most polycyclic aromatic compounds can form semiconducting charge-transfer complex salts (e.g. perylene–bromine complex2 showed a conductivity of 0.1–1 S cm−1). Of particular note was the discovery of tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) complexes3,4 in the early 1970s with a metallic conductivity as high as 104–105 S cm−1. In 1977, Heeger, MacDiarmid, Shirakawa et al. reported high conductivity in doped polyacetylene.5 This led them to win the 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for “The discovery and development of conductive polymers”. These findings indicated that organic compounds are capable of transporting current and appropriate molecular design and doping can tune the conductivity, which makes organic semiconductors fascinating for potential applications. In contrast to inorganic semiconductors which have continuous energy bands, organic semiconductors possess discrete “energy levels”, consisting of molecular orbitals. Charge transport depends on the ability of the charge carriers to pass from one molecule to another. This is closely related to π-bonding orbitals and quantum mechanical wave-function overlap, namely, the energy levels of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the energy band gap between the HOMO and LUMO energy levels. The possibility of tuning the conductivity of organic semiconductors using molecular design has attracted intensive interest and inspired many intriguing properties such as low-temperature processability, flexibility and diverse colours as well as cost-effective applications.6 As the three main applications of organic semiconductors, the research on organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic cells (OPVs) is therefore of great importance.
Single crystals of organic semiconductors are free of grain boundaries and have long-range periodic order as well as minimal traps and defects. Hence, crystals are particularly beneficial for revealing the intrinsic properties of organic semiconductors, providing a powerful tool for examining structure–property relationships, demonstrating the important factors for high performance devices and studying fundamental physics in organic semiconductors. This in turn further guides molecular design and syntheses. The first reported organic semiconductor crystals (naphthalene and anthracene crystals) date back to the 1940–1950s.7,8 After half a century's research, organic semiconductor crystals have become a tool with widespread use such as for determining the packing and intrinsic properties of semiconductor materials or today's advanced materials used in organic electronics and energy harvesting. By using the term “organic semiconductor crystal” to search the Web of Science, more than 43000 publications are found and more than 90% of these articles have been published since 2000. This suggests that organic semiconductor crystals are now one of the ‘hottest’ research areas.8–20 Therefore, a timely review in this field is not only of scientific importance but is also technologically imperative. A general overview highlighting the most important progress in this rapidly expanding field will ensure that the readers are not submerged by the flood of references. This “organic semiconductor crystals” review will comprehensively cover the introduction and history (Section 1), the structural, physicochemical and charge transport properties, the theoretical studies and the experimental investigation of semiconducting properties (Section 2), as well as the crystal growth methods (Section 3). Finally, we will focus on the device physics in optoelectronics using organic semiconductor crystals as prototypes, discuss the factors which influence the device performance, investigate the structure–property relationships for achieving high performance devices and examine the charge generation, injection, transport and combination mechanisms (Section 4). It is hoped that as a result of this comprehensive analysis, explicit information about the current research situation will guide further efforts in developing future applications of organic semiconductors in optoelectronics.
2 Physicochemical features of organic semiconductor crystals
2.1 Molecular packing features

2.1.1 Molecular structure and packing. 
Organic semiconductors usually contain conjugated systems, such as π-systems,6 with overlapping π-orbitals bridging the adjacent single bonds. This allows delocalization of the π-electrons across all the aligned π-orbitals of the molecule. As the most common π-conjugated systems in organic semiconductors, the CC bond is formed by two carbon atoms with sp2-hybridization where the sp2-orbitals form a triangle within a plane and the pz-orbitals are perpendicular to the plane. The orbital overlap of one sp2-orbital with that of another carbon atom can form a σ-bond. Because there is a very large energy difference (large energy gap) between its occupied bonding orbitals and unoccupied anti-bonding orbitals, the σ-bond will result in insulating properties and has no contribution to the semiconducting properties. However, the pz-orbitals can form π-bonds with smaller energy gaps, which is the reason that semiconductors usually possess π-conjugated systems. For larger planar molecules, the π-bonds become delocalized and form a π-system. The energy gap between the occupied and empty states in the π-systems becomes even smaller and they can exhibit semiconducting properties with efficient charge transport. For long chain compounds, the π-bonds become delocalized along the chain and form a one-dimensional electronic system. From this point of view, long-range order is a prerequisite for achieving large delocalized π-systems for efficient charge transport through interacting molecular π-orbitals.
From the physical description of the polaron theory (the most popular theory for charge transport, details can be found in Section 2.4), the system Hamiltonian can be regarded as a sum of three terms,21–23H = He + HL + Hint, where He, HL and Hint are the electronic component, the lattice component and the electron–lattice interaction respectively. It is clear that for small molecule semiconductors, long range intramolecular delocalization is not likely. Therefore, the charge transport will be largely determined by the packing of the molecules, i.e. the chemical structure, the molecular arrangement and the intermolecular interactions. These parameters will determine the electron state as localization in the molecule (small polaron: the electronic bandwidth 2J is much smaller than the maximum binding energy of the polaron A2/2Mω02) or delocalization over many molecules (large polaron: 2J ≫ A2/2Mω02). Herein, J is the electronic overlap integral describing the motion of the electron through the lattice, while A, M and ω0 are a constant, the relative mass and harmonic vibration frequency respectively.
The understanding of the molecular packing features is beneficial for both the design and synthesis of organic semiconductors and understanding the structure–property relationship and the limits of charge transport. An organic crystal can be considered as being made up of identical molecules stacked regularly and closely and held together by intermolecular interactions24 such as hydrogen bonds, charge transfer or van der Waals forces. It is indisputable that the properties of crystals are closely related to their molecular packing as well as to the properties of the parent molecules. For example, it has long been established that organic crystals are highly compressible, have a very low resistance to shear deformations and expand rapidly on heating. So-called negative thermal expansion behaviour has also been observed, which illustrates just how counterintuitive the physics of molecular crystals can be.25,26 It is worth noting that the mechanical and thermal properties of organic single crystals lie beyond the focus of the present review, although they also highly depend on the molecular arrangements of organic semiconductor crystals.
In inorganic semiconductor crystals, the whole crystal acts like a “single molecule”.27 The charge carriers (hole or electron) are delocalized in the crystals. In organic crystals, on the other hand, the situation is more complicated as mentioned above. The carriers can be localized or delocalized, which is dependent on the packing parameters. The following factors will influence the molecular packing and ultimately the charge transport: (i) the electronic structure of molecules, (ii) the relative positions of the molecules in the crystals and (iii) the morphology variations generated from the static or dynamic deviations of optimal single-crystal structures.28 In order to guarantee efficient charge transport and hence the high performance of organic semiconductor crystals, in addition to the nature of the molecule itself, optimally the molecular packing motifs should have strong and long range intermolecular interactions (C–H⋯π, π–π, etc.). The key point behind this philosophy is that the molecular packing features are to a large extent determined by the intermolecular interactions. Especially for a certain molecule, the lattice component and the electron–lattice interaction Hamiltonian are highly dependent on the packing features. The typical packing motifs in organic semiconductor crystals are summarized in the following. There are a few exceptions which are not elaborated here. One is the sandwich herringbone packing (e.g. perylene29 and 9,10-bis(thiophen-2-ylethynyl)anthracene (BTEA)30), which is not suitable for creating long range efficient charge transport. Another is some specific packing motifs, such as the two-dimensional π–π stacking motif (e.g., 1,2,5,6,7,8,11,12-octachloroperylene-3,4:9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide (Cl8-PTCDI)31 and organoplatinum(II) complexes32). Concerning the relevant typical molecular packing motifs they can be divided into four types, which are shown in a simplified manner in Fig. 2A–D6,33,34 with their representative molecules in Fig. 2E–H: (A) herringbone packing motif without π–π overlap (face-to-face) between adjacent molecules (e.g., Fig. 1E, pentacene35,36); (B) herringbone packing motif with π–π overlap between adjacent molecules (e.g., Fig. 1F, rubrene37,38); (C) lamellar packing motif, one dimensional (1D) π–π stacking (e.g., Fig. 1G, C8-PTCDI39,40); (D) lamellar packing motif, two dimensional (2D) π–π stacking (e.g., Fig. 1H, N,N′-1H,1H-perfluorobutyldicyanoperylene-carboxydi-imide (PDIF-CN2)41,42).
 Fig. 1  Typical molecular packing motifs in organic semiconductor crystals: (A–D) schematic diagrams and (E–H) the representative molecular arrangements. (E) Pentacene, Ref Code PENCEN from CSD; (F) rubrene, Ref Code QQQCIG04 from CSD; (G) C8-PTCDI, Ref Code GILFUD from CSD; (H) PDIF-CN2, Ref Code FEHROA from CSD. All the hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Of these four kinds of packing mode, the π–π stacking is believed to be the most efficient one for transporting charge carriers. This is because the large π–π overlap (a more delocalized state) can stabilize the +1 or −1 charged state and produce a more efficient route for transporting charge carriers from one molecule to its neighbour molecule. In a more delocalized state, the splitting of the HOMO/LUMO will result in a higher electron bandwidth (2J).43 In this case, large polaron or band-like transport (i.e. 2J ≫ A2/2Mω02) can be formed, which is promising for charge transport as mentioned in the physical description of the polaron theory (for more details see Section 2.4). Not surprisingly, much research effort has gone into obtaining π–π stacking in the solid state. The most facile and efficient way is by using chemical modification. This topic has been discussed previously in several reports.6,34 In addition to the semiconductor itself, there are also many other external conditions which can be exploited in order to improve the molecular arrangements, such as by controlling the growth methods44,45 (see Section 3).


2.1.2 Structural anisotropy. 
From the packing motifs, it can be seen that normally the molecular arrangements are different along different orientations. As a result, structural anisotropy is unavoidable. Consequently this is one of the most important properties of single crystals and utilizing this property is crucial for achieving high performance devices and revealing the charge transport mechanisms.46 Such structural anisotropy leads to anisotropic properties from optical absorption,47 thermal expansion,25 exciton diffusion48 to charge transport.9 Our focus now will be on the anisotropy of organic crystals and the effects on charge transport. In contrast to inorganic semiconductors, in which the charge carriers travel “as highly delocalized plane waves in wide bands”,27 the charge carriers in organic semiconductors have to move from one molecule to the neighbouring molecule when passing through the conductive channel. Therefore, the charge transport properties of the crystal are highly dependent on the molecule itself as well as the surrounding molecules, i.e. on the molecular packing features. In the semiclassical electron-transfer theory, the electron-transfer rate is highly dependent on the transfer integral (also called electronic coupling) and reorganization energy (see Section 2.4).28,43,49,50 The transfer integral is defined as the splitting of the frontier molecular orbital between adjacent molecules (the HOMO or LUMO energy levels). This affects the charge carrier transport from one molecule to its neighbour molecule. The reorganization energy describes the energy loss when a charge carrier passes through a molecule.50
It is suggested that increasing the transfer integral and lowering the reorganization energy are helpful in increasing the mobility (see Section 4.1.1.2).43,49,50 Additionally, decreasing the intermolecular distance can increase the splitting of the HOMO and LUMO exponentially. This higher splitting of the energy orbital means higher transfer integral and hence suggests higher mobility. On the other hand, the splitting of the HOMO and LUMO does not increase with the lateral increase of π–π overlap but rather exhibits oscillations in the values. Although the transfer integral does not absolutely increase with the increase of π–π overlap, normally the transfer integral along the direction with π–π overlap is much larger than the other orientation without π–π overlap.52 Also the mobility along this direction is much higher than those along other directions. An example of the mobility-anisotropy of rubrene along the a, b and c axes is presented in Fig. 2. The mobility-anisotropy ratio μb/μa can be as high as 3.537 and μb/μc can be as high as 3.0.51 Similarly, more examples of two-51,53–56 or three-dimensional57–59 anisotropy can also be commonly found (see Section 4.1.3).
 Fig. 2  Mobility-anisotropy of rubrene along the a, b and c axes. (A) Left: Schematic diagram of devices based on rubrene crystals. The electrodes were fabricated on the (100) face. A mobility of 5.3 cm2 (V s)−1 was found along the [010] direction and 1.8 cm2 (V s)−1 along the [001] direction; right: rubrene crystallographic structure along the two directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society. (B) Polar plot of the mobility in the (001) face, in which the angle was measured between the [010] direction and the conducting channel, indicating that the maximum mobility is along the [010] direction with minimum mobility along the [100] direction and (C) four-probe conductivity as a function of gate voltage along the [010] and [100] directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


2.1.3 Polymorphism. 
Polymorphism and phase transition in organic crystals are typical features of organic crystals.60,61 The polymorphism of organic crystals can be ascribed to the weak interactions between neighbouring molecules and the non-rigid structural properties of the molecules. Hence, the realization of crystals with preferred crystal structure through growth control is prerequisite for achieving high performance devices. The control of crystallization will be discussed in Section 3. Theoretically, when the molecules aggregate to form a crystal, there should be a state with global minimum energy, which is the state for thermodynamically stable crystal configurations (Fig. 3A). However, due to the non-rigid structural properties of the molecules and the weak interactions between neighbour molecules, the bonds in the molecules may stretch, twist or rotate and the molecules may move slightly in the crystals. All of these will result in the formation of a metastable state with relative minimum energy (kinetically stable state) during the crystallization process; in other words a different crystal phase can form. For example, ten crystal phases of CuPc have been reported. These include the lamellar packing motif (α phase) and the slipped π–π stacking motifs (β, γ and ε phases) with different herringbone angles (Fig. 3B).62–65 Normally, the kinetically stable state dominates in the fast process, whereas the thermodynamically stable state occurs in the equilibrium process.66 Therefore, fast crystallization is most likely to provide kinetically favoured crystals. For example, the rotation of the carbon–carbon bond in the BPEA molecule can lead to planar and non-planar states. More volatile solvents facilitate the formation of non-planar BPEA molecules in the crystals.67 The energy difference between these different states may be very small, which increases the possibility of phase transition and leads to more polymorphism. In this case, the molecular arrangements in different crystal structures may differ only slightly in the d-spacing distances or dihedral angles without distorting their packing motif.35 Therefore, different molecular arrangements can be achieved by slight changes of temperature, solvent, concentration or pressure during the crystallization process or even after formation of the crystals.68,69 For example, Jurchescu and co-workers70 reported the crystal structure of rubrene single crystals grown under different temperatures in the 100–300 K range. With increasing temperature, the rubrene molecules packed in the same orthorhombic symmetry and Cmca space group, but with a slight increase in cell volume (from 2730 to 2789 Å3) and a small molecular displacement along the long axis of the molecules in the crystals (from 6.15 to 6.18 Å). On the other hand, as mentioned above, negative thermal expansion behaviour has also been observed. All of these factors have an important impact on the charge transport properties, and this will be discussed in the next section.
 Fig. 3  (A) Thermodynamic and kinetic outcomes of crystallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright © 2002 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Packing diagrams of four CuPc polymorphs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2004 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2 Crystal growth features

2.2.1 Crystal engineering. 
The external crystal features and their relationship to internal chemical and crystal structure have long been of great interest to scientists. The systematic use of chemical structure and the intermolecular interactions to design and predict organic semiconductor crystals is of great significance, known as crystal engineering.71,72 The earlier73,74 polyhedral crystal shapes were built according to the stacking of unit cells (Hauy, 1792) with minimal total free energy (Gibbs, 1875):  where γi and Ai are the surface energy and the area of the ith face respectively. Later, it was extended by Wullf's (1901) theorem which suggested that the equilibrium form of the crystals would consist of such faces: having the distances from the growth origin which are proportional to the surface energies of the faces.75 Then the morphology simulation was proposed by Bravais (1866), Friedel (1907), Donnay and Harker (1937), quoted as Bravais–Friedel–Donnay–Harker (BFDH) law, which makes use of the framework of the crystal lattice but doesn’t count the atom or bond type and the partial charge.76 Further studies of the energetic effect on morphology were going into the evaluation of the interaction energies between non-bonded atoms or molecules. Then the lattice energy is the sum of the intermolecular interactions between a central molecule and each surrounding molecule within the crystal lattice. The quantification of the interaction energy was drawn by using the assumption that the surface energy is directly related to the chemical bond energies and the uninterrupted chains of strong intermolecular interactions. They defined that the formation of the crystals is determined by two energies: one is the layer energy in the slice (or face) and the other is the attachment energy which is the energy to attach the slice on the growing crystal surface. The growing rate of the face is proportional to the attachment energy. The attachment energy (AE) model assumes that the surface is a perfect lattice face and there is no surface rearrangement and relaxation, which is not likely real.77 In a real state, there is one interface between the solid and the fluid (liquid, gas or even solid), which exhibits an order–disorder phase transition under a critical condition (e.g. temperature or concentration). This surface roughening was introduced by Burton and Jackson et al., and was developed via the Monte Carlo model to the Ising model. For the temperature-dependent system, the critical temperature can be calculated by using the critical value of the average dimensionless bond energy. Simply speaking, in the Ising model, by identifying the strong bonds in the crystal structure, calculating the relative bond strengths, derivation and conversion of the connected nets (given by the molecules as the nodes and the intermolecular interactions as the links between nodes), the critical temperature and the theoretical morphology can be calculated and computed. Thus the morphology provided by the Ising model can be regarded as stable crystal morphology, which is close to the growth conditions for kinetic roughening. For vapour sublimation methods, the external factors are normally negligible, and hence are usually best comparable with the calculated crystal habits. On the other hand, for solution-grown crystals, the interactions between the solute and the solvent at the crystal/solution interfaces may influence the shape of the crystals.73,78 In the surface roughening model, the interaction between the solvent and the specific crystal faces reduces the interfacial tension and leads to a rough surface. The rough surface can promote the growth of this affected surface, which becomes morphologically less important. In contrast, the inhibition model was also proposed to predict the effect of the solvent on the crystal growth. According to the inhibition model, the adsorption of the solvent molecules upon the growing surfaces, forming an interfacial layer, inhibits the growth of the specific faces, because the growth of the solute molecules on the surfaces needs a desolvation process. The resultant affected surface will be morphologically important. In order to reduce the kinetic influence during the crystallization process on the morphology of the crystal, low supersaturations can be adopted. Similarly, the impurities can also change the growth rates and the crystal habit, with inhibition or enhanced nucleation effects at concentrations as low as 10−9 M. These will be further discussed in Section 3.


2.2.2 Morphology–structure relationship. 
For organic semiconductor crystals, there are several crystal growth features, which should be taken into consideration:24 (1) the crystal structures are usually of low symmetry (e.g. triclinic, monoclinic or orthorhombic) and the adjacent molecules are packed through non-bonded interactions; (2) the low crystalline symmetry will result in anisotropy of the physicochemical properties, e.g. the electric conductivity; (3) the intermolecular interactions are very weak, and hence lead to polymorphism and phase transitions (see Section 2.1.3). The aforementioned comparisons between different morphology simulation models74 have shown that for these organic semiconductor crystals, which are isotropic but without significant dipole effects, both the BFDH and attachment energy (AE) model can provide a good fitting to the observed morphologies. There is no obvious difference between the two models. Meanwhile, the BFDH model can be used to identify important morphologies through refinement by using energy calculations. The BFDH rule76 is widely adopted as a means for predicting the morphology of organic semiconductor crystals. Indeed it is found to work well in predicting the morphology of crystals, an example of which is the equilibrium crystal shape (ECS).30,75,79–81 For example, the shape of dibenzo[d,d′]thieno [3,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (DBTDT) crystals grown by using the physical vapour transport (PVT) technique conforms well with the theoretically predicted morphology with respect to the aspects of not only shapes but also the exact dihedral angles between the relevant faces. These are shown in Fig. 4A and B.54 Similarly, hexathiapentacene (HTP) crystals have been found to be prone to growing along the [010] direction,82 which agrees with the theoretically predicted elongation orientation, i.e. the direction with the strongest intermolecular interactions (Fig. 4C and D).
 Fig. 4  (A) A typical DBTDT crystal with shape and dihedral angles coincident with (B) its theoretically predicted morphology. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) A typical HTP crystal showing a preferred orientation in the [010] direction which agrees well with the (D) theoretically predicted elongation orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society. 
According to the aforementioned rules, if the interaction in one direction (such as the π–π interactions or hydrogen bonds83) in a crystal is stronger than those in other directions, then the crystals tend to grow along this direction, forming morphologies consisting of one dimensional (1D) rods, needles or wires or two dimensional (2D) ribbons or disks. There are many examples of crystals existing as one or two dimensional morphologies:84 rubrene,38 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA),30 9,10-bis(naphthalen-2-ylethynyl)anthracene (BNEA),30 1,2-di(anthracen-9-yl)ethyne (H-Ant),85 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA),86 6H-pyrrolo-[3,2-b:4,5-b′] bis[1,4]benzothiazine (PBBTZ),80syn-bis(benzothieno)thiophene (syn-BBTT),52 dithiophene-tetra thiafulvalene (DT-TTF),87 triisopropylsilylethynyl pentacene (TIPS-PEN),88 copper phthalocyanine (CuPc),62,89 copper hexadecafluorophthalocyanine (F16CuPc),90,91 6,13-bis((triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl)-5,7,12,14-tetraazapentacene (TIPS-TAP),92 perylo[1,12-b,c,d] thiophene (PET),93 perylo[1,12-b,c,d]selenophene (PESE),94 hexathiapentacene (HTP),82 perylenetetracarboxylicdiimide (PTCDI),79,95 poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT),96 thioacetate ended poly(para-phenylene ethynylene) (TA-PPE),97 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin (H2TPyP)98 and others. Almost all of these semiconductors possess π–π stacking in their molecular arrangements (see packing features in Section 2.1).
On the other hand, if there is no orientation with dominant intermolecular interactions which means the interactions are comparable with each other along at least two orientations (C–H⋯π, or van der Waals force between alkyl groups), then it is likely that crystals present with 2D (ribbons or disks) or three dimensional (3D) (plates or particles) morphologies. For example, the interactions along the [100] (edge-to-edge) and the [110] (edge-to-face) directions in the a–b plane of dinaphtho[2,3-b:2′,3′-f]-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene crystals possess similar effective intermolecular contacts. This can be ascribed to the S⋯S interaction which enhances the edge-to-edge interaction and results in a balanced 2D electronic structure and 2D morphology.99 Likewise, there are extensive examples of this kind of materials.84 Of special note are those that possess a herringbone packing motif without π–π stacking and sandwich herringbone packing (see packing features in Section 2.1). Examples are pentacene,36,100–102 tetracene,9 anthracene,103 di(phenylvinyl) anthracene (DPV-ant),55anti-bis(benzothieno)thiophene (anti-BBTT, DBTDT),52,54 BTEA,30 C60104 and so forth. Therefore, by adjusting the intermolecular interactions through cautious tuning of the chemical structure, it is possible to obtain different self-assembled morphologies. For example, two cis–trans isomers52 of BBTT formed 1D and 2D self-assembled structures, respectively. This could be ascribed to the different packing modes in their single crystals, namely with or without π–π stacking.16 Similarly, by tuning the substitutes of anthracene, morphologies ranging from 1D to 3D micro/nanostructures were obtained from BPEA, BNEA to BTEA.30 Similar results can also be found in anthracene derivatives by adjusting the intermolecular hydrogen bonds.103 Hence, it can be expected that ultra-large 2D crystals can be obtained if the intermolecular interaction of one direction (e.g. van der Waals force between alkyl groups) is much weaker than those of the other orientations. This will also be discussed in Section 3.6. This probably is the reason why organic semiconductor molecules tend to form in a layer-by-layer growth manner (see below for details). This can also explain why 1,4-bis((5′-hexyl-2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)ethynyl)benzene (HTEB) (a linear molecule with two long alkyl groups at both ends) presents as 2D large millimetre-sized crystal films.105 This interpretation can be proved by X-ray diffraction (XRD) results and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns. The layer thickness of the crystals is close to the long axis of the molecules, which strongly suggests that the crystals have a tendency to grow in the plane perpendicular to the long axis of the molecules. Along the long axis of the molecules, there are only weak van der Waals forces between the alkyl groups. These results also indicate that the interaction along the long axis of the molecules is much weaker than that in the other directions (C–H⋯π interactions). As mentioned above, many external conditions, such as growth methods, temperature, solvent and concentration, can also affect the crystal growth. All these can lead to different morphologies. These will be further discussed in Section 3.


2.2.3 Structural identification. 
It is important to verify the crystal structure and identify the growth direction of organic crystals as a means for revealing the intrinsic reasons for preference of specific morphologies and anisotropy of charge transport. In-depth knowledge of this is vital for further guiding the applications of organic semiconductors. XRD (including single crystal X-ray diffraction for bulk single crystals, wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) for thin film single crystals), synchrotron radiation and neutron diffraction techniques have made a valuable contribution to examining the molecular packing in crystals.106,107 Especially, GIXD provides a powerful way to identify the in-plane and out-of-plane orientations of even micro/nano crystals that are common for micro-devices based on organic semiconductors.108–110
Another potential method is to use atomic force microscopy (AFM), which has high resolution on the nanometer scale and can give a precise image of the crystal, especially the height profile. By measuring the height of the crystal steps, combining the length or width of the molecule, information about the crystal morphology and growth directions can be successfully obtained. One example is that these data can confirm either “face on” or “edge on” growth mode on the substrate, such as for graphene which possesses a “face-on” mode on the substrate. An estimated layer thickness of 0.4–0.7 nm111,112 was found by using AFM images. Fig. 5 shows an example of how to estimate the “edge on” mode adopted in the PDIF-CN2 crystals. Based on the experimental results that the height differences of the different layers are 1.9 × 1 nm, 1.9 × 3 nm, 1.9 × 5 nm respectively and the c-axis length of the primitive cell is 1.9 nm, it is reasonable to conclude that the crystals grow in a manner such that the c-axis is perpendicular to the substrate.113 Similar results can also be found for rubrene,114–116 HTEB,105 and dioctylbenzothienobenzothiophene (C8-BTBT)117 crystals among others. It should be noted that caution is needed when adopting this method and the height of the step or crystal should be as close as possible to the length of the molecule. The possible tilt of the molecule or unavoidable crystal defects will obscure the estimation or even give a wrong interpretation. Such an AFM technique can also be used to reveal the morphology of screw dislocations118 and the electronic disorder can be manifested as potential variations by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy.110
 Fig. 5  (A and B) AFM images of PDIF-CN2 crystal films, and (C) cross-sectional profile along the line in (B). (D) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of PDIF-CN2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is another very useful technique for obtaining information about the growth and morphology of crystals. Different from AFM images, SEM images hardly give height information regarding the micro/nanostructures. However, SEM techniques can provide shape images as in AFM images. The growth direction can be inferred from the crystal shape and crystal structure according to two rules: (1) the crystals must have regular shapes, whose surface consists of lattice planes; (2) the dihedral angle between two specific lattice planes is fixed. Therefore, by using BFDH methods to simulate crystal shapes and the angles, every crystal surface can be identified in terms of precise Miller indices. Examples can be found in Fig. 4A and B.54 Of course, the obtained crystal morphology may be different from the simulated crystal shape because, as mentioned earlier, the crystal growth can be affected by many external factors such as temperature, solvent and solution concentration. Therefore, it should be noted that sometimes it is difficult to determine the orientation by using this method.
Another efficient way to verify a crystal's orientation is by using a combination of its transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns together with crystal parameters. There are two methods to index the SAED pattern with the Miller indices: (1) first calculating the spacing distance (d-spacing) by measuring the lattice distance in the reciprocal lattice points (SAED pattern), which can be calibrated by the SAED pattern of polycrystalline Au films (the diameter of diffraction rings is constant), and then comparing the Miller indices in the table of reflection parameters; (2) first simulating the probable crystal growth direction and then indexing the other directions by utilizing the distance and angle relationship between this supposed direction and the other directions. If all the angles and distances are coincident with the crystal structure, then the whole SAED pattern can be indexed. Fig. 4C shows an example of how this method is used to explore the growth direction of the crystals. A more complex example is shown in Fig. 6, in which CuPc, F16CuPc and CuPc/F16CuPc heterojunction crystals are studied.119 In fact, if it is possible to obtain high resolution TEM (HRTEM) images, then the growth direction could be identified by the HRTEM image directly120–123 due to its crystallographic structure image at an atomic scale. It follows that if atomic scale HRTEM images could be obtained, then by using the d-spacing distances, that would give very clear crystal growth directions. Sometimes, the sensitivity of organic crystals to the high energy electron beam makes HRTEM, TEM and SAED techniques full of challenges for the identification of crystal growth features.124
 Fig. 6  The growth direction of (A) CuPc, (B) F16CuPc and (C) CuPc/F16CuPc heterojunction crystals obtained by a combination of TEM images and the corresponding SAED patterns. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 

2.3 Non-ideal features
In the previous sections, although we have not mentioned the issue of defects in the crystals, it has to be acknowledged that they are actually unavoidable.20,125 It is pertinent therefore that we present a short summary of the defects here. In reality, crystals without the presence of any defects do not exist. The traps (e.g. oxidized molecules) can act as point defects,126 affecting the charge transport properties. Crystals with minimized impurities and defects are, therefore, ideal for revealing the intrinsic properties of organic semiconductors, investigating the important factors for high performance devices and demonstrating the fundamental physics. However, defects are not only of significance for examining the fundamental physics but are also useful for achieving specific applications.127 For example, the intentionally induced disorder of the crystals by using fluoro self-assembly monolayers (SAMs),128 ferroelectric material129 or by photooxidation130,131 opens new opportunities for exploring the electronic states in the crystals and various applications (e.g. increasing the conductivity or memory application). Moreover, some features, such as regular shapes, smooth surfaces, terraces and steps, are useful for determining the molecular packing and arrangements in the crystals (e.g.Fig. 5). In addition, the defect density will change the mobility dependence on temperature, providing a powerful tool for studying the charge transport mechanism in organic semiconductor crystals (see Section 2.4).125,132 Simply speaking, it was ever generally recognized that the charge transport mechanism in organic crystals can be understood through small-polaron theory: at low temperature, the charge carrier transport occurs by band-like transport and the mobility decreases with increasing temperature, while at high temperature, the charge carrier transport occurs by small-polaron hopping from one localized site to another site and the mobility increases with increasing temperature. However, the purification of the materials can change this temperature-dependence relationship, which suggests that the thermally activated mobility is due to the defects rather than the small-polaron hopping. This will be discussed in the next section. Grain boundaries, which are a kind of defects, make it a bit of a challenge for crystalline films to be recognized as single crystals. Studies133,134 suggest that the highest density of defects exists at the grain boundaries of the crystalline films, which definitely will limit the charge transport135,136 (Fig. 7A). Similarly, polymers, which do not have accurate molecular weight (length), make the growth of polymeric crystals full of challenges. In some reports, long-ranged, ordered polymeric aggregations are regarded as crystals.96 Finally, thermal lattice fluctuation is not negligible, which will affect the transfer integrals due to their sensitivity to the relative positions of adjacent molecules. In summary, non-ideal features widely exist in organic crystals.
 Fig. 7  (A) Representative trap density of states (DOS) data in small molecule organic semiconductors. The trap densities of single crystal (SC) FETs (red lines) are much lower than those of thin film transistors (TFTs, black lines), indicating that the structural defects such as grain boundaries tend to dominate in thin films. The trap densities of bulk single crystals (blue lines) are lower than those of SC-FETs. This suggests that the trap densities are much more likely to be on the surface or interface. Importantly, the highly hydrophobic CytopTM gate dielectric can significantly reduce the trap density. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2010 The American Physical Society. (B) Distribution of band and localized states for polycrystalline pentacene. Acceptor-like states are formed around 0.29 eV above the VBM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. VB: valence band, CB: conduction band. 
The traps in the crystals mainly originate from the presence of chemical impurities, structural imperfections and thermal fluctuations.132,133 Chemical impurities normally originate from the reactants, by-products, degradation or external species (e.g. moisture, oxygen gas, etc.) which exist during the process of crystal growth, device fabrication or characterization (Fig. 7A). The presence of impurities can manifest itself in various ways.133,137–141 For example, oxygen in pentacene crystals can exist as an oxygen intermolecular bridge, in which the oxygen atom is covalently bonded to carbon atoms on the center rings of two adjacent pentacene molecules. The active trap is located above the valence band maximum (VBM) around 0.3–0.4 eV (Fig. 7B).137,139 Water molecules stay in the intact molecular form between the molecular layers of pentacene.137 It should be noted that whether a chemical impurity acts as trap or not depends on the accessible energy levels. In other words, electronic levels of the trap should lie within the band gap of the semiconductor. Otherwise, the chemical impurities cannot act as trapping centers. Instead they only introduce local deformation of the semiconductor lattice and form scattering centers.132,133 Besides the aforementioned active trap in pentacene that is located above the VBM around 0.3–0.4 eV, an example is also reported in phthalocyanine crystals,142 in which traps with a density of 1019 cm−3 located 0.38 eV below the conduction band (CB) have been observed.
There is no doubt that the trap density is highly dependent on the growth techniques employed. For example, melting and vapour techniques can provide single crystals with higher quality than those from solution-processing techniques because of the absence of external species. Moreover, vapour-grown crystals possess a lower density of defects than those resulting from the melting techniques. The reason is that higher temperature is adopted in the melting methods. In this situation the impurities may form eutectic mixtures with the semiconductors,143 and degradation may occur.144,145 Besides, the slow self-assembly processes can facilitate the formation of an ordered structure and lead to a lower defect density. For example, it has been found that rapid growth of crystals will lead to a large density of screw dislocations,118 which can be revealed by using morphological characterization (AFM). These issues will be further discussed in Section 3. In addition, in order to reduce the defect density, the optimization of device fabrication and characterization146,147 should also be taken into consideration. Issues such as the utilization of polymeric (e.g. cytop133) or air/vacuum dielectric layers (Fig. 7A), or the modification of the dielectric layer by using SAMs,148 will be mentioned in Section 4.1. Typical SAMs include octyltrichlorosilane (OTS), decyltriethoxysilane (DTS), octadecyltrichlorosilane (ODTS), octadecyltrimethoxysilane (OTMS), β-phenylethyltrimethoxylsilane (β-PTS), hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), heptadecafluorodecyltriethoxysilane (FDTS), etc. It is believed that the low dielectric constant and high water contact angle of the dielectric layer can facilitate the formation of low trap density, due to the low dipolar disorder and the water repellent nature. Podzorov and co-workers149 reported a trap healing method for reducing the surface traps by using surface functionalization. An inert non-conjugated polymer, perfluoropolyether (PFPE), was deposited at the surface of organic crystals, which can reduce the traps of pristine and photo-oxidized crystals, resulting in low trap densities and high mobilities. The exposure of crystals to light or air may lead to a sharp change in conductivity. The deposition of fluorinated SAMs on semiconducting crystals can chemically dope the semiconductor via a charge-transfer doping process, showing a surface potential shift150 as high as 540 meV and a 104-fold increase in the surface conductivity.128 Similar phenomena can also be observed under the conditions of humidity, ethanol, acetone, ammonia or other gas vapours. This suggests potential applications of defects for light detection or gas sensing, and these will be demonstrated in Section 4.1.4.
Annealing is another method for reducing the density of defects. This includes thermal and solvent vapour annealing, which can remove the chemical impurities, reconstruct the molecular arrangement and decrease the structural imperfections. Solvent vapour annealing has even been adopted as a method for growing single crystals, and this will be discussed in Section 3.3.4. However, it should be noted that appropriate utilization of impurities can lead to high performance. For example, it is difficult to eliminate 6,13-pentacenequinone (PQ), which is the reactant for producing pentacene and can be reintroduced by oxidation of pentacene. However, by utilizing PQ as a dielectric layer, the PQ molecules around the interface between the semiconducting and insulating layer will provide an intimate contact between them, rather than acting as impurities. This in turn leads to a high mobility for pentacene devices.36
The trap density can be probed by methods such as the space charge limited current (SCLC) method,132,140,151,152 photoluminescence measurements and field-effect transistor measurements (see Section 4.1). For example, the SCLC method153 is based on the analysis of the current density (J) versus the applied voltage (V) characteristics. At low voltages, the J–V curves are linear, i.e. showing ohmic behaviour. However, at high bias voltages, the J–V curves become space-charge-limited due to the injection of the charge carriers. If the contact between the electrode and the crystal is ohmic and the current is transport-limited, the SCLC J is given by the Mott–Gurney equation:  where ε, μ and d are the permittivity, mobility and thickness of the crystal, and θ is a factor that refers to the trap density. This factor represents the number of free carriers to the total number of carriers. After purification (by vapour sublimation), the trap density of pentacene132 can be reduced down to 1011 traps per cm3. Otherwise, the trap density can vary exponentially133 to 1021 traps per cm3 even in single crystals without any grain boundaries, due to the presence of chemical impurities, structural imperfections or thermal fluctuations.141 Normally, the trap density on the surface of the crystals is much higher than that in the bulk crystals, and the traps increase significantly at the grain boundaries and the interfaces between the crystals and the dielectric layers (or electrodes) (Fig. 7A). These observations reflect the importance of device physics in achieving high performance devices.148 The details will be presented in Section 4.
2.4 Charge transport features
Crystals provide a useful tool for revealing the charge transport mechanism due to their highly ordered structures and minimal defects. The charge transport situation in organic semiconductors is quite different from that in their inorganic counterparts. They are much more complex due to the weak and non-covalent bonds between neighbouring molecules. There are a lot of proposed theories which evaluate the charge carrier transport mechanisms in organic semiconductors, including the band-like transport, small polaron hopping, multiple trapping and release (MTR) models, and their revisions. Because there are a lot of literature reports addressing this topic,19,34,49,125,153–157 we will confine ourselves to briefly and concisely summarizing the recent progress in charge transport mechanisms, their features and working conditions.

2.4.1 Band transport and classic small-polaron hopping. 
In the earlier studies, it is generally well accepted that the charge transport mechanism in organic semiconductors mostly obeys the Holstein small-polaron theory.21,22,125,157–159 The basic features of this model may be written as  which contains three terms: the electronic component He, the lattice component HL and the electron–lattice interaction Hint. The wave function (an(x1,…,xN)) is a function of the lattice-vibration coordinates (x1,…,xN) and a discrete electronic coordinate. The sum over m describes the lattice Hamiltonian, which consists of the vibratory kinetic and potential energies of the molecules in the absence of the electron. The term −Axn represents the electron–lattice interaction, being a linear function of the vibration coordinate of the occupied site. Finally, the term proportional to the electronic overlap integral J gives the motion of the electron through the lattice. It should be noted that the total Hamiltonian cannot be studied exactly and hence only a qualitative expression is given here. According to this theory, (1) at low temperature, charge transport is similar to that which occurs in inorganic semiconductor crystals. In other words, the charge carriers are delocalized in the wide bands “as highly delocalized plane waves in wide bands”.27 The Hamiltonian in this case can be described as the electronic Hamiltonian with a part of nuclear Hamiltonian. The effective intermolecular coupling (or transfer integral) τ′ can be described as  with Nω = [exp(hω/kBT) − 1]−1, ω the frequency of the nuclear motion and g a parameter of quantification of the electron–phonon coupling term. Where the charge transport in ultrapure organic semiconductor crystals is concerned, the carrier in the bands (narrow bands) is like a particle with an effective mass (large polaron, delocalized),160m* = h2/(2|τ|L2), which is inversely proportional to the transfer integral (L is the distance between collision sites of the carrier). In this case, the propagation of this particle with an effective mass will be limited by the vibrations of the crystal lattice (phonons) or impurities that scatter the carriers. Then the mobility in this limit can be written asμ = etS/m*where tS is the average time between collisions and e is the electron charge. Because the vibration and the scattering become severe with increasing temperature (τ′ decreases and m* increases correspondingly), the mobility reduces with the increase in temperature (Fig. 8A), which is regarded as the signature property of band transport.125 (2) With the increase in temperature, the vibration of the crystal lattice and the scattering become even more vigorous so that the band narrowing becomes more pronounced. The result is that the polaronic band vanishes (τ′ → 0) and the effective mass becomes infinite. Then the carrier is no longer delocalized and the propagation of the polaron (small polaron, localized in one molecule) resembles more a hopping from one site to another site. Because this hopping transport is assisted by phonons, the mobility should be thermally activated which increases with increasing temperature. In other words, Arrhenius-like temperature dependence is observed. In the semiclassical electron-transfer theory, the electron-transfer rate43,161kET can be described to a good approximation as  where T is the absolute temperature, λ and τ are the reorganization energy and transfer integral (also called electronic coupling), and h and kB are the Plank and Boltzmann constants. This is the well-known Marcus equation.
 Fig. 8  (A) Electron and hole mobilities in ultrapure naphthalene as a function of temperature examined using TOF measurements; they exhibit a negative correlation with temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 1985 The American Physical Society. (B) Temperature dependence of carrier mobility for different insulators based on field-effect transistor measurements, which shows a transition from negative to positive correlation with temperature, with increasing dielectric constant. The mobility increases with decreasing dielectric constant, indicating that the charge carrier transports as a polaron. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 


2.4.2 New insights. 
Recent theoretical and experimental results suggest that small-polaron hopping does not in fact exist, especially in high performance devices.161 The reason is that the small polaron can only be formed when the electronic coupling between neighbouring molecules (transfer integrals) is much smaller than the polaron binding energy (Holstein coupling): 2J ≪ A2/2Mω02. However, the transfer integrals are always found to be comparable to or even larger than the electron–phonon coupling (Peierls coupling).28 Moreover, the excited levels of the high frequency intramolecular vibrations, which are the main contribution to the polaron binding energy, are thermally inaccessible even at room temperature. Another proof is that the purification of the materials can change this temperature-dependence relationship from thermally activated mobility (signature of traditional small-polaron hopping) to the signature temperature-dependence of band-like transport. This suggests that the charge carriers are not localized in one molecule and the thermally activated mobility is due to the defects rather than the small-polaron hopping. All these research studies indicate that temperature-independence mobility or activated transport mobility is more likely due to the structural disorder and chemical defects,143 rather than to small-polaron hopping.26,125,162–164
When a charge carrier passes through a crystal lattice, the polarization of the charge carrier will lead to deformation of the surrounding molecules. The charge carrier together with the deformation of the surrounding molecules is called a polaron. The existence of a polaron can be confirmed by the dependence of the mobility on the dielectric constant. Theoretically, the mobility should increase with increasing dielectric constant (ε) because a high ε can result in a high induced electric field at the same voltage.165 However, the experimental results are inconsistent with this theory. On the other hand, the polaron can be used to solve this controversy. Because of its efficient mass, the propagation of the polaron is more hindered by a large dielectric constant, and this in turn leads to negative coefficient dependence of the mobility on the dielectric constant (examples can be found in Fig. 8B, from Vacuum to Ta2O5, the dielectric constant decreases successively, with mobility increasing on the contrary).166
If the charge carriers are delocalized (i.e. a large polaron is formed), the polaron will move as is the propagation of the carrier in the band. The band-like transport was widely accepted in earlier studies as the intrinsic transport mode of organic semiconductor crystals. This was based on the time-of-flight (TOF) results obtained by probing the charge transport in ultrapure organic semiconductor crystals at low carrier densities. The TOF method introduced by Leblanc and Kepler167,168 can investigate the drift mobility of the charge carriers by applying a pulse light to the crystals and by analysing the photoconductivity evolution of the crystals. It should be pointed out that the drift mobility is dependent on the drift distance (the thickness of the crystal), the applied potential and the drift time.168 From the TOF measurements, the carrier mobilities exhibited anisotropy along different directions and they increased with the decrease in temperature at temperature around RT (μ ∝ Tn, with n < 0, e.g. n = −2.9 for naphthalene in the temperature range of 150–300 K, Fig. 8A).169 This suggests that the charge carriers are transporting in a band-like transport mode.151,170–175 This feature can also be observed using SCLC measurements132,151,176 and ultrafast optical pump-terahertz probe techniques.170,177 Using single crystals as the semiconductor layer in transistors, in which grain boundaries are eliminated and defects and traps are minimized, it has also been possible to observe intrinsic charge transport. The mobility anisotropy feature178 has been studied widely and has already been mentioned in the molecular packing features (see Section 2.1.2). The temperature-dependence mobility manifests itself widely,179,180 even in polycrystalline thin films.181 For example, by using rubrene single crystals as the semiconductor and air as the dielectric layers, Podzorov and co-workers182 reported that the charge transport in highly pure rubrene single crystals is intrinsic transport, i.e. polaronic band-like transport at high temperature (150–300 K). The Hall effect (see Section 4.1.1.4) is another feature of band-like transport, which can reveal the intrinsic mobility, even if the charge transport is affected by the trapping. The reason is that the trapping charges cannot contribute to the Hall voltage due to its zero momentum (no Lorentz force). The Hall effect observed in rubrene also exhibited an increase in mobility with the decrease in temperature, suggesting that the intrinsic charge transport is in fact band-like transport.20,183–186
A thermally activated mobility correlation is also observed in single crystal devices. In the earlier research,187,188 this was regarded as a feature of small-polaron hopping and small-polaron hopping was considered as the carrier transport mechanism in devices with low mobility.27 However, as mentioned above, in recent years it has been acceptable that small polarons are unlikely to exist in organic semiconductor crystals, especially for the intrinsic charge transport in high performance devices. Podzorov et al. pointed out that thermally activated transport in pure crystals under low temperature or in doped rubrene crystals is probably due to the multiple trapping and release (MTR) of carriers. According to the MTR model, crystal defects, such as impurities, structural disorder or surface states, induce the formation of localized electronic states (traps). Two kinds of traps are suggested: these include the deep trap (>few kT from the HOMO or LUMO energy level) and the shallow trap (<few kT). When the gate voltage is lower than the threshold voltage (VT), the charge carriers will be localized in the deep traps and this shifts the Fermi level to the HOMO (or LUMO) energy level. Hence, deep traps only affect the threshold voltage while not determining the mobility. When the gate voltage is higher than VT, the deep traps are filled and then charge carriers become localized in the shallow traps. In this situation, the trapping and release of the traps dominate the charge transport process. Because temperature can strongly affect the rate of trapping and release, mobility is also highly dependent on temperature. At high temperature, the period during which a polaron is trapped (τtr) in the shallow trap is much smaller than when it moves between neighbouring traps (τdiff). Therefore, the effective mobility is close to the intrinsic trap-free mobility (μ0):  The charge carriers therefore transport the same as that seen in intrinsic band-like transport with threshold-less operation, anisotropic intrinsic mobility and band-like temperature-dependence mobility. However, at low temperature, τtr is much larger than τdiff, so the mobility can be described by the following equation:  The proof of the MTR mode can be found by observing a decrease in mobility with cooling (the Arrhenius dependence μ(T) = μ0exp(−T0/T)) and the vanishing of the anisotropy.182 Similar work has also been reported for tetracene with non-monotonous temperature dependence.151,189 On the other hand, from TOF results obtained using DPA crystals, Pflaum and co-workers173 insisted that the temperature independence of the mobility behaviour of DPA at low temperature (<100 K) is due to the intrinsic band-like transport, in which the charge carriers are still delocalized and the mobility saturation at low temperature originates from the finite band-width. The Hall-effect is also observed in some crystalline thin films,190 with thermally activated mobility.191,192 However, scientists found that the charge carriers are delocalized in the single crystals or the crystal domain of the thin films (also see below). They concluded that the charge transport in the domains is qualitatively the same as that found in the single crystals, i.e. band-like transport. On the other hand, the decrease in mobility with cooling is due to the dynamic disorder, fluctuations, or the grain boundaries, rather than small-polaron hopping. By analysing the onset temperature (T*) where the temperature correlation changed from negative to positive (Fig. 9), Morpurgo and co-workers193 claimed that the transport in single crystals is band-like transport, which exhibit an increase in mobility upon lowering the temperature. A further reduction in temperature results in a decrease of mobility, which is due to the extrinsic disorders. From Fig. 9A–C, the material with a longer chain length always shows smaller T* and the onset temperature increases from vacuum, cytop to PMMA dielectric layers. These results fit well with a phenomenological mobility-edge model that describes band-like transport. T* is smaller when the band-tail width (Et) is smaller, i.e. the strength of disorder is smaller (Fig. 9D). The calculations also show that the disorder is largely due to the potential fluctuations generated by permanent, randomly oriented electrical dipoles or charged species adsorbed on the crystal surface.
 Fig. 9  Temperature dependent mobility of PDIF-CN2 (full squares) and its derivatives with two more CF2 units (open circles) with (A) vacuum, (B) cytop and (C) PMMA gate dielectrics. (D) Plot of T* versus Et extracted from panels A–C. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Usually, it is generally recognized that the charge carriers are delocalized in band-like transport (extended-state band conduction). However, some research has suggested that crystals with localized charge carriers can possess band-like transport. The localization or delocalization state of charge carriers can be investigated by using electron spin resonance (ESR) and optical charge modulation spectroscopy (CMS). ESR spectroscopy128,194,195 is a technique by which the electronic states of unpaired electrons can be analysed. It can be used to investigate the spin density distribution of paramagnetic carriers and probe the molecular orientation by observing the anisotropic and different linewidth of the ESR signal due to hyperfine coupling of the π electrons. A study of pentacene crystalline thin films suggests that at room temperature the charge carriers are localized within about 10 molecules.194 Optical charge modulation spectroscopy (CMS) is an electro-optical method for the in situ characterization of gate-induced charge carriers. According to the CMS data for single crystalline TIPS-PEN thin films (the grain size is much larger than the channel dimension), it has been suggested that the localized charge carriers can also undergo band-like transport and that their transport is limited by thermal lattice fluctuations.181 An attempt to underscore this contradiction is proposed by extending the polaron band theory to non-local electron–phonon coupling.125,157,163,196–201 The non-local electron–phonon coupling also leads to narrowing of the polaronic band and a negative temperature coefficient on the mobility. However, this does not change the qualitative description of the polaronic band model. With increasing temperature, the dynamic disorder becomes dominant and the electronic states become localized by disorder. By assuming that the electronic dynamics are much faster than the lattice vibrational frequencies which are responsible for the intermolecular coupling, Fratini and Ciuchi202 observed the coexistence of coherent band-like states and incoherent localized dynamic disorder states. This crossover region is extremely promising because it solves the contradiction between the localized states and temperature-dependence mobility.
As mentioned above, the band narrowing was regarded as a prominent feature of the Holstein small polaron model. With increasing temperature, the band becomes narrower and the transport switches from band-like transport to hopping mode. The band narrowing with increasing temperature can be observed by using angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements.203–206 ARPES provides a powerful tool for obtaining the bandwidth and the effective mass (m*). In addition, the mean free path of the carriers can be obtained by measuring the energy of the photoemitted electrons as a function of their angular distribution. The mean free path of the carriers (l) is defined as  where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature and τ is the transfer integral. The energy dispersion of rubrene single crystals observed by ARPES showed that the mean free path of holes in rubrene crystals is a few times longer than the crystal lattice constant. This indicates that the holes are delocalized over several molecules and act almost as free carriers. Recent calculations unexpectedly demonstrate that the bandwidth narrowing is unlikely to be caused by electron–phonon coupling and the aforementioned non-local electron–phonon coupling probably results in thermal broadening of the bandwidth.200,207 Li et al. believed that the bandwidth narrowing originates from the thermal expansion of the crystal lattice.26 Remarkably, the transfer integrals, which closely follow the temperature dependence of the energy bands, also decrease along the a axis with increasing temperature, although the crystal shows a negative thermal expansion along this direction. This suggests that the transfer integral is highly dependent on the relevant molecular orbital overlap rather than simply on the spatial overlap between adjacent molecules.
In summary, the study of charge transport in organic semiconductors has progressed rapidly, not only based on theories but also on experimental data. Recently, it has become acceptable that (1) the charge transport mechanism at low temperature is similar to conventional theories, i.e. the charge carriers are delocalized in the polaronic band; (2) with increasing temperature, the charge carriers become localized by the thermal disorder, rather than localized as small polarons. However, the analyses and final interpretation of the charge transport mechanism are often obscured by many factors.166,180,208 These include the impurities, defects, the contacts, the phase transitions under different temperatures among others and all of these make the intrinsic charge transport picture controversial and unsatisfactory. Fortunately, mobility dependence on temperature, mobility anisotropy, ESR, ARPES, CMS spectroscopy, the Hall effect, the electrical characteristics of single crystal transistors and theoretical simulations all provide powerful tools for revealing the intrinsic properties and structure–property relationships.

2.5 Electronic states in organic semiconductor crystals
In Section 2.4, we mainly focused on the charge transport of the charge carriers in the molecular crystals. There are two kinds of charge carriers: electrons and holes. As mentioned above, the polarization of the charge carrier will lead to deformation of the surrounding molecules. The charge carrier together with this deformation is called a polaron. In organic field-effect transistors, the charge carriers are injected from the source electrode (i.e. the grounded electrode) into the interface between the semiconductor and the insulator and then propagate to the drain electrode, in the form of polarons. One kind of charge carriers is enough to form a conductive channel. The co-existence of both kinds of charge carriers in one conducting channel is called ambipolar transport. The polaron may be localized or trapped in the defects, leading to lower mobility. A further discussion of charge transport in organic field-effect transistors can be found in Sections 2.4 and 4.1.
Similarly, the charge carriers are also injected from the electrode and then move toward the other electrode in organic light-emitting diodes. In order to achieve light emission, both kinds of charge carriers are necessary for efficient light emission in the channel. Holes are injected from the anode and electrons are generated from the cathode. When they propagate toward the opposite electrodes and meet each other in the channel, they can combine to form excitons. The decay of excitons results in light irradiation. Because the diffusion distance of the excitons is usually very short (see below), the emission often occurs at the place where the excitons are formed. The absence of one kind of charge carriers due to the use of an inappropriate electrode or unipolar semiconducting material will lead to light emission near the electrode. The low mobility of one or both of the charge carriers will also reduce the emission or lead to emission near the electrodes. The trapping of charge carriers will diminish or even extinguish the emission. This will be further discussed in Section 4.2.
The term “exciton” is usually regarded as the excited state in organic materials.209–211 Besides the aforementioned association of the charge carriers, excitons can also be generated by direct photoexcitation. When the electron in the valence band (or HOMO orbit) absorbs one photon, it is photo excited into the conduction band (or LUMO orbit), leaving a hole in the valence band. If there is no interaction between the electron and the hole, i.e. their wave functions are eigenstates of the individual Hamiltonians, then the electron and the hole are free charge carriers. In contrast, the Coulombic interaction between the electron and the hole binds them into an exciton. When the electron jumps into the LUMO orbit after absorption of a photon, the spin property of the electron may remain the same or convert oppositely to its original spin, leading to singlet or triplet states respectively. After its generation, the exciton may diffuse, or evolve ranging from dissociation into electron–hole pairs, fusion of two excitons into one exciton, fission into two excitons, trapping or localization to annihilation or emission. In order to achieve highly photoconductive and efficient organic photovoltaic or solar cells, there is no doubt that the enhanced absorption of the photons, the long-range diffusion and efficient dissociation of the excitons, and the fast transport of the electron and hole free charge carriers to reduce the recombination of the electron–hole pairs are of significant importance.
After creation of the excitons, the exciton has to move to an interface where it can be ionized into an electron–hole pair. In the earlier studies, the diffusion length was considered to be very short (10–20 nm), which confined the efficient diffusion and dissociation of the excitons. In order to facilitate the diffusion of the excitons for efficient dissociation into free charge carriers, two possible approaches can be utilized: (i) decrease the distance between the absorption site and the dissociation interface. The fact212 that a surface coating of rubrene single crystals by using an inert and trap-free dielectric layer significantly decreases the photocurrent (the relative dark current is removed for comparison) indicates that the exciton dissociation is a surface phenomenon rather than a bulk effect (also see Section 4.1.4.2). Such a remarkable change probably can be ascribed to the quantum efficiency of exciton dissociation at the surface or the reduced mobility of the dissociated carriers due to the formation of polarons (see Section 2.4). On the other hand, suitable functionalization of the surface by using exciton splitters can reinforce the dissociation. Therefore, blending of n-type and p-type semiconductors is an efficient way to reduce this distance, leading to enhanced dissociation of excitons into free charge carriers, although the blending always decreases the charge transport and therefore may result in recombination of the charge carriers. (ii) Increase the diffusion length of the excitons. A high degree of order and the delocalized states make it possible to achieve a large diffusion length in the order of microns or more. Podzorov et al.48,212–214 have found that the diffusion of triplet excitons in the single crystals can be over microscopic distances (micron magnitude). By using localized photoexcitation and spatially resolved detection of excitonic luminescence, the exciton diffusion can be visually observed. Moreover, the triplet exciton is strongly anisotropic with long-range diffusion along the orientation of π–π stacking (Fig. 10A).48 The quenching of photoluminescence with the increase of photoconductivity by surface functionalization of exciton splitters suggests that the long-lived triplet excitons are generated by fission of singlets and the enhancement of photoconductivity is due to these triplet excitons. The generated singlet excitons214–216 have a short lifetime of nanosecond magnitude; however, the singlet excitons can fissure into triplet excitons with a lifetime of microsecond level. More details about the fission of singlets can be found in previously reported reviews.217 Time-resolved photoluminescence decay is widely used to study the fission, fusion and quenching of excitons. Fig. 10B shows one example of photogenerated singlet decay and the recombined singlet decay. The photogenerated singlets have a short lifetime of picosecond level. However, a singlet exciton can fissure into two triplet excitons and the two triplet excitons can recombine into a singlet exciton. Because the triplet excitons have a much longer lifetime of microsecond level, the subsequent radiative relaxation of the recombined singlets shows delayed fluorescence. From this point of view, reasonable utilization of transition of short-lived singlets to long-lived triplets is useful to increase the diffusion distance. Besides, ambipolar molecular crystals (single component or co-crystals) are one of the most efficient media for organic photovoltaic cells, because they possess the maximum blending level at the molecular scale, are highly ordered and are free of grain boundaries. The molecular scale blending makes it possible to reach the dissociation interface as soon as the excitons are generated, while the highly ordered structure and absence of grain boundaries facilitate the propagation of the charge carriers to the electrodes. These will be further discussed in Sections 4.1.4.2 and 4.3.
 Fig. 10  (A) Anisotropy in exciton diffusion, showing preferential diffusion along the π–π stacking (b axis) in rubrene single crystals, obtained by using localized photoexcitation and spatially resolved detection of excitonic luminescence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright © 2011 American Physical Society. (B) Typical time-resolved photoluminescence decay based on a tetracene single crystal, showing the regimes of prompt (inset) and delayed fluorescence that correspond to the radiative singlet decay and triplet decay respectively. The triplet is generated from fission of singlets and the recombination of two triplets forms a radiative singlet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The fusion and the fission of the excitons are also very important to organic solar cells. The fusion of two excitons can produce a high-energy exciton, which is of particular interest in the energy harvesting system for converting two low-energy photons into a high-energy photon. This high-energy photon then can be absorbed by the wide bandgap material. Especially, the fusion of two long-lived low-energy triplets into a singlet with a shorter lifetime is meaningful for enhancing the utilization of low-energy photons to realize energy harvesting. On the other hand, the fission of singlets is of significant importance because the high-energy exciton can be split into two low-energy excitons which are close to the band edge. Then the high-energy photon can generate two excitons rather than one exciton with the loss of excess energy. Similarly, the fission of the shorter-lived singlet into two longer-lived triplets is of particular significance because they can diffuse over a longer distance. The utilization209,219–222 of high-energy and low-energy photons in the wide solar spectrum through fission and fusion of the excitons respectively can break the upper Shockley and Queisser limit223 of ∼31% in single junction solar cells and increase the overall efficiency of solar cells by as much as 44%.
3 Techniques for controlling the crystallization of organic semiconductors
The crystallization of organic semiconductors is a prerequisite for investigating the various properties and the structures of semiconductors. Simultaneously, crystals with minimized impurities and defects are necessary not only to reveal the intrinsic properties of organic semiconductors, but also to investigate the important factors for high performance devices and demonstrate the fundamental physics. Besides, the growth methods and conditions are also essential to the morphologies and the molecular arrangements, as mentioned in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. The summarization of growth control of organic semiconductor crystals will be helpful in revealing the crystal growth mechanism, understanding the intrinsic reason of crystallization, guiding the future crystal growth and producing crystals with desired size, shape and molecular arrangement for various purposes such as organic optoelectronics and semiconductor industry. An in-depth study of the crystallization of organic semiconductor crystals will benefit further understanding of organic thin film and crystal growth mechanisms and promote their applications in organic electronics.
3.1 Melting techniques
A common method for growing organic semiconductor crystals in earlier research is zone refining.8,224,225 It involves moving a heater or freezer very slowly (several or tens of microns per minute) in order to melt and crystallize the materials. It is also known as the zone melting or zone freezing technique226 (Fig. 11A). In a typical zone refining process, multiple heater zones are aligned with minimized length (e.g. 1 cm).172,227 Normally, the system is maintained in an inert gas atmosphere, which protects the semiconductors from the air and reduces evaporation of the semiconductors. Depending on the difference in the solubility of the impurities in the liquid melt and the solid crystal, the impurities will move to the melting and crystallization interface. Finally, they accumulate at both ends of the system after repeated movement of the heater from one side to the other.228 Highly pure crystals are obtained in the middle of the system (Fig. 11B). Due to the absence of external chemicals, the zone melting technique is regarded as one of the most useful methods for achieving ultra-pure single crystals. In the early research on organic semiconductor crystals, zone refining was often used as a technique for purifying semiconductors.173,227,229 Because of its ability to yield large crystals, it is also utilized for photocurrent studies, especially for TOF measurements, and the fabrication of organic lasers. Until the 1990s, the highest mobility based on organic semiconductors was achieved by using zone melting methods.230
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of a typical zone melting apparatus, which contains one molten zone (heater). Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. (B) Zone-refined anthracene. The impurities moved to both ends of the ampoule, as shown in the dark and light parts at both ends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright © 2010 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Bridgman and Stockbarger methods are two typical zone-melting techniques.8,143,171–173,231,232 They differ with respect to the moving objects, i.e. the heater (or freezer) and the crucible respectively. Normally, the ampoule is sealed in the Bridgman process and the whole ingot is melted. The crystals grow either spontaneously or on a small seed crystal at the cooler end of the ampoule. Due to the sealed nature of the apparatus, pre-purification of the source materials is usually needed.15 Another method for growing crystals is utilizing a seed crystal and subsequently pulling it out of the melt or by keeping it stationary. This is called the Czochralski method.231 This particular method cannot prevent the vapour from escaping from the system, and hence it can only be used for low-vapour-pressure materials.8 The liquids should be cooled down as slow as possible in order to balance the crystallization and the structural reconfiguration. Hence, the temperature gradient of the different zones and the moving speed of the heater should be as minimal as possible.233 The challenge for crystal growth using melting techniques is the stability of the organic semiconductors at high temperature. In addition, impurities often affect the melting and crystallization by forming eutectic mixtures with the semiconductors.143 It is also worth pointing out that these techniques require a large amount of raw materials as well as relatively expensive and complex apparatus.227 Sometimes, pre-deposited organic films are used as the source materials to grow crystals. The films are sandwiched between two slides (e.g. glass) and the slides act as a template for confining the molten liquids.234–236 Organic semiconductor melts such as anthracene237–239 can be used as solvents for growing crystals of other organic semiconductors with high melting points. The melting solvents can also be other similar aromatic materials.240 With decreasing temperature, the solute becomes supersaturated and hence will nucleate and form crystals. By using this method, the semiconductor crystals can be grown at a much lower temperature. For example, in the case of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), the crystals can be obtained at 235–260 °C using anthracene as solvent. Without the presence of the solvent, CuPc will not even start to melt at temperature higher than 450 °C and will decompose around 540 °C.238,239 Hence this method is very appropriate for semiconductors which decompose around their melting and sublimation points and have low solubility in most common solvents. Additionally, not much raw materials are required and the solvents can be removed by using organic solvents after crystal growth.
3.2 Vapour techniques
Generally, materials have three states: solid, liquid and gaseous. Due to the localized nature of the molecules in the solid state, it is difficult to form long-range ordered structures through structural reconfiguration or reordering (phase transition).69 It is possible, however, to grow crystals from their liquid and gaseous states. The molecules have high energy to move around and hence form ordered structures through structural reconfiguration involving melting or vapour techniques. As shown in a typical phase diagram (Fig. 12A), it can be seen that a material will change from solid to gaseous state at low temperature (lower than the melting point) with the reduction in the system pressure. As a result, the vapour technique provides a facile way for growing high quality crystals at low temperature.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic diagram of a typical three phase diagram; (B) centimeter-sized crystal of tetracene obtained by using the vapour-Bridgman growth method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2005 American Institute of Physics. 

3.2.1 The vapour-Bridgman technique. 
The Bridgman technique is a variation of the zone-melting method used to grow organic semiconductor crystals. In the zone-melting method, the materials are usually melted in the first step. In contrast to the aforementioned Bridgman method which forms crystals from molten liquids, the vapour-Bridgman technique uses the vapour of the materials to grow single crystals. Due to the more active state of the molecules in vapour (gas) than in the molten liquid, the vapour-Bridgman technique is more favourable for the recombination of molecules for crystal growth. Therefore, in early research most organic semiconductor crystals were obtained using the vapour-Bridgman technique.8,143,231,232
Pflaum et al.228,241 improved the vapour-Bridgman technique which could be used to grow crystals with low stability around the melting point, by keeping the heater zone below the melting point. In other words, the materials are not melted in the apparatus and the molecules are not evaporated but rather sublimed into their gaseous states. Using this method, large crystals useful for TOF measurements can be achieved (Fig. 12B).144,242 Similar methods243,244 have also been reported where the heater or the source is not moved. Due to the simultaneous sublimation of the target material and impurities, one problem with crystal growth by these methods is that their purity is not as good as that obtained from melting methods.144,228,243 Therefore, it was necessary to develop novel methods for the growth of crystals with high purity, which culminated in the physical vapour transport (PVT) method, wherein inert carrier gases are introduced into the system to separate the impurity from the target materials.


3.2.2 Physical vapour transport techniques. 
In a typical phase diagram, it can be seen that the direct solid–gas exchange has a lower temperature than the liquid–gas exchange, providing a lower system pressure. Therefore, if the system pressure is decreased,245,246 it is possible to change the solid source into the gaseous state directly under a low temperature. This temperature relates to the sublimation point and is normally lower than the melting point and the decomposition point. This is very meaningful for the sublimation and subsequent crystallization of organic semiconductors which are usually not stable at high temperature. In addition, the molecules in gaseous state have higher energies to recombine into crystals and this in turn facilitates the formation of high quality crystals. Due to the difference in vapour pressure (or different sublimation points), materials will crystallize in different temperature zones.132,228,247 It is worth noting that based on this property, doping of a semiconductor can also be achieved by using the mixture with dopants (similar sublimation points and crystal lattices are necessary) in a suitable ratio as the starting materials.248,249 In order to achieve high quality single crystals, usually an inert carrier gas250 such as Ar, N2, He, H2 is introduced into the system to transport the semiconductor molecules from the high temperature zone to the low temperature zone. This can facilitate the separation of impurities and hence is beneficial for producing high quality crystals. The PVT method was pioneered for organic crystal growth245,251 by Kloc et al. in the 1990s, and has become one of the most popular methods for preparing organic semiconductor crystals.9,10
As shown in Fig. 13, a typical PVT (called the vaporization–condensation–recrystallization (VCR) process in some reports91,98) apparatus consists of a tube furnace with 2 or 3 temperature zones and a quartz tube with open ends. The starting materials are placed and evaporated in the high temperature zone,84,245,246 and then transported by the carrier gas to the low temperature zone for crystallization. As shown in the example in Fig. 13, heavy and light impurities crystallize either in front of or behind the pentacene crystallization zone as well as forming co-crystals with pentacene. The temperature of the high temperature zone controls the sublimation rate and plays an important role in the crystal growth. When the temperature is a little higher than the sublimation point, the crystal will grow slowly (e.g. 10−7 cm s−1)252 which is helpful in forming large and high quality crystals. Changing this temperature can result in different crystal morphologies or molecular arrangements.253,254 For example, by using temperatures of 350 °C and 325 °C for sublimation, 1D wires and 2D disks of pentacene can be obtained, respectively.253 This indicates that when the temperature is as close as possible to the sublimation point, it is favourable for equilibrium crystal morphology. The temperature and position of the low temperature zone, the gas flow and the temperature gradient are all essential for the crystal growth. For example, different morphologies16 of anti-BBTT (DBTDT) were obtained at different growth temperatures. This strongly suggests that the growth temperature can significantly affect the morphology. The probable mechanism is that a higher temperature facilitates the movement of the molecules. In this situation, the molecules prefer growing along the orientation with stronger intermolecular interactions, which will result in crystals with an equilibrium crystal shape. Similar results have been reported for rubrene crystals.37,38,252,255 Different growth temperatures can even lead to different molecular arrangements. For example, α and β CuPc can be obtained with growth temperature lower than 192 °C and higher than 214 °C respectively.63 It is found that a steady gas flow with low velocity (usually 100–300 sccm (sccm = standard cubic centimetre per minute)) and a steady and low temperature gradient (usually 2–5 °C cm−1) facilitate the growth of large crystals. Because of the subsequent change in the sublimation point, the sublimation speed is also influenced by the system pressure by balancing the gas flow and pumping. For example, it has been reported251 that when the pressure is higher than 10 Torr and the temperature is fixed at 285 °C, the sublimation is inhibited for α-6T. Finally, it is plausible that crystal growth is independent of the nature of gas.251 However, argon (Ar)98,256 and hydrogen (H2)252,257 are preferred as carrier gases compared to nitrogen (N2) due to the content of the oxygen impurities found in nitrogen. Technologically, it is more difficult to remove oxygen from nitrogen which may form oxygenated by-products.258 The oxygenated by-products were observable when the content of oxygen exceeded 2 ppm and it was suggested that the oxygen concentration should therefore be less than 0.2 ppm. In addition, both the quantity and purity of the starting materials can affect subsequent crystal growth. Large amounts of starting materials lead to a higher evaporation rate and hence quicker crystallization. Clearly, high purity starting materials will facilitate the growth of high quality crystals.252 Finally, it should be mentioned that crystal growth free from light irradiation151 is necessary in order to prevent photoinduced reactions with O2.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of a typical PVT process. The dark blue crystals are identified as pentacene and the red and yellow crystals as impurities. Adapted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. 
In summary, compared with melting methods, the PVT method provides an efficient way for producing organic crystals at low temperature and therefore is more suitable for organic semiconductors with low thermal stability. Moreover, the PVT method is advantageous for the crystal growth of materials with poor solubility such as pentacene,258 rubrene37,182 and CuPc.62 Because of the absence of external chemicals and the efficient separation from impurities, PVT presents a very superb way for producing crystals with high quality (see Section 4.1.3). This method can even be used to grow crystals of monomers or precursors, which can be later treated using UV irradiation or other methods to form polymer crystals.259 However, it should be noted that if the organic semiconductors are sensitive to heat, then PVT is not a suitable crystal growth method.


3.2.3 Vapour sublimation. 
Normally, vapour sublimation is used for the deposition of thin films with a view to creating continuous and uniform thin films. Crystalline films with large crystal domains can be achieved by careful selection of the substrate with low nucleation density, high substrate temperature, and slow sublimation rate. Therefore, one possible method for growing single crystals by vapour sublimation is by using a crystal substrate or crystal seed260 to grow semiconducting crystals, e.g. epitaxial growth (e.g., KCl crystal for p-sexiphenyl (6P)261,262 or 2,5-bis(4-biphenyl)bithiophene BP2T263,264) and liquid crystal (LC) growth.265Fig. 14A and B shows an example where the growth of tetracene was induced by using a LC solvent. Crystals as large as tens of micrometers can be observed. It is recognized that the mechanism for the alignment is the LC distortion rather than the epitaxial interaction or anisotropic diffusion.265 Another method266,267 is to use a low vapour pressure solvent to assist the deposition. Ionic liquids (IL) are suitable candidates for this kind of solvents because they possess low vapour pressure and can be used under high temperature and high vacuum conditions. The liquid solvent is favourable for overcoming the nonequilibrium nature of the crystal growth in the vacuum sublimation. High temperature of the substrate is helpful for reaching a thermodynamic equilibrium. A schematic diagram of this method and the resulting pentacene crystals are presented in Fig. 14C and D. After crystal growth, the LC and the IL can be removed by normal organic solvents.265–267
 Fig. 14  (A and B) Vapor sublimation of tetracene crystals induced by an oriented LC solvent. The scale bar in the upper part of (B) is 100 μm and that in the bottom part is 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society. (C and D) Vacuum deposition of pentacene crystals assisted by the droplet of an ionic liquid solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright © 2012 American Institute of Physics. 

3.3 Solution-processing techniques
Organic semiconducting molecules can move freely in solutions, and this makes it possible to assemble them in high order when they are separated from the solvent molecules. Moreover, organic semiconductors usually possess poor thermal stability. Hence, for some materials,96,268 it is impossible to utilize PVT methods or melting methods due to their degradation or decomposition. However, it is possible to grow their crystals by using solution-processing methods.269–272 There are various solution-processing techniques14 which can be exploited for the growth of organic semiconductor crystals, including recrystallization, dip-coating, drop-casting, solvent-exchange, vapour-diffusion methods, etc. The basis of solution-processing techniques is the reorganization of the semiconducting molecules when they are separated from the solvents. Therefore, in order to crystallize molecules out of solutions, the first step is to make the solution saturated or supersaturated. There are three methods for achieving this purpose:82,273–279 (1) slow evaporation of solvents; (2) changing the temperature slowly to adjust the solubility of the organic semiconductor (normally, decreasing the temperature will result in lower solubility); (3) slow introduction of poor solvents into the solutions. Hence, the growth and the quality of the crystals are highly dependent on factors such as the growth method, solvent, solubility, concentration, temperature, atmosphere, pressure as well as the nature of organic semiconductors. For example, by reducing the evaporation rate, nanowire crystals of poly(para-phenylene ethynylene)s (TA-PPEs, TA stands for the thioacetate end groups)97 were obtained through the solvent-vapour diffusion method. Due to the slow evaporation, well-defined, nanowire crystals of TA-PPE were formed. From the structural analysis, it was shown that the π–π stacking direction in TA-PPE nanowires was predominantly perpendicular to the long axis of the nanowires, instead of being parallel to the long axis of the nanowires as was traditionally believed.96 In other words, the charge transport in these nanowires is intramolecular transport. Similar molecular arrangements can also be found in other literature reports.280,281

3.3.1 Dip-coating techniques. 
Dip-coating methods are usually adopted in order to obtain thin films.282 In a typical dip-coating process (Fig. 15A), the substrate is first immersed in the solution gradually with a view to preventing vibrations and bubble formation. Then the substrate is pulled out of the solution slowly, accompanied by precipitation and crystallization which occur at the withdrawing area. Therefore, the pulling speed is important and a suitable speed facilitates the formation of homogeneous and thin crystals.283,284 If the pulling speed is too fast, it may lead to discontinuous islands.284 In contrast, if it is too slow, the uniformity of the crystals will be compromised.285 Normally, in order to achieve stable and slow movement, some special equipment (e.g. Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) apparatus286) is needed.283,287 In addition, the solvent, the concentration, the temperature, the viscosity of the solution and the crystallinity of the materials all play critical roles in the crystallization process.287–290 For example, fast evaporation of solvent (low boiling point, high temperature, etc.) may result in crystal clusters along the contact line.290
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the dip-coating process for crystal growth; (B) typical AFM images of TIPS-PEN crystals obtained through the dip-coating technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Due to the slow evaporation, the obtained crystals are able to possess high quality with ordered molecular arrangement. Another advantage of dip-coating techniques is that they can yield crystals with the same orientation. Normally, they grow along the pulling direction (Fig. 15A and B). One problem that is encountered, however, is that the solution of small molecular weight semiconductors usually has low viscosity. This leads to a low wetting of the substrate, especially for hydrophobic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) modified substrates. Therefore, dip-coating methods are usually adopted for the deposition of polymeric semiconductors285 and are rarely adopted for growing organic semiconductor crystals. There are two possible ways which can solve this problem, but each exhibits its own disadvantages: (1) increasing the viscosity of the solutions, which usually results in the formation of thin films or polycrystals; (2) choosing substrates with better wettability,283,291 which may lead to thin films and a poor interface between the crystal and the substrate. Another shortcoming is that the dip-coating method often results in the formation of dendritic microstripes rather than a regular morphology.283,292 In addition, the use of non-volatile solvents leads to prolonged entrained films.293 In other words, the external withdrawing force facilitates the evaporation of the solvent which results in lower quality products than those obtained using self-assembly methods.


3.3.2 Drop-casting techniques. 
Drop-casting methods are one of the most efficient approaches for growing organic crystals. It is generally recognized that crystals obtained using this method will be of high quality. The reason is that this method is free from external forces, such as the withdrawing force used in the dip-coating method. Such external force accelerates the separation of the semiconductor from the solvent. Therefore, the drop-casting method is usually regarded as one of the self-assembly crystal-growing methods. Thus, the growth of the crystals (morphology and molecular arrangement) is first determined by the material itself, i.e., its chemical structure and intermolecular interactions. For example, under the same growth conditions (solvent, concentration, temperature and atmosphere), a range of morphologies from 1D to 3D micro/nanostructures were realized from BPEA, BNEA to BTEA.30 The morphology has a close relationship with the intermolecular interactions, i.e., the long range π–π interactions weaken their dominant role in going from BPEA to BNEA and completely vanish in the BTEA crystals. Such morphology–structure relationship has been discussed in Section 2.2.2.
Undoubtedly, the growth of crystals using this method is also highly dependent on factors such as the solvent, concentration, temperature, atmosphere and substrate surface. Theoretically, the self-assembly process depends mainly on three important intermolecular interactions between (1) solvent molecules; (2) semiconductor molecules; and (3) semiconductor and solvent molecules.294 The interaction between the solvent molecules determines the solvent evaporation, which is also impacted by the temperature, the atmosphere pressure and whether the system is an open or a quasi-closed system. The interaction between the semiconductor molecules governs the crystallinity of the semiconductors. Finally, the interaction between the semiconductor and solvent molecules determines the solubility of the semiconductor295 and hence affects the self-assembly process and plays a role in tuning the molecular arrangements. For example, BPEA can assemble into crystals with different phases depending on the selection of chlorobenzene or dichloromethane solvent to control the evaporation velocity.67 Another interesting example296 is that the residual solvent can also etch the crystals into nanotubes by dissolving the centre of the nanowires, leading to hollowed structures.
Due to the slow self-assembly process, the drop-casting method can be used to produce polymeric crystals96 and co-crystals. For example, co-crystals can be formed by dissolving two semiconductors in a solution with a defined ratio. The co-crystals, especially the electron-donor–electron-acceptor (D–A) co-crystals, are extremely intriguing for charge transfer complex applications. They can be used as organic conductors or ambipolar semiconductor crystals for application in inverters, integrated circuits, OLEDs or OPVs. For example, using simple drop-casting methods, meso-diphenyl tetrathia[22]annulene (DPTTA) can be used as a donor to form co-crystals with not only planar TCNQ297 and TCNQ derivative298 but also nonplanar fullerenes (C60 or C70)299 as the acceptor.
The solvent can be either a single solvent or mixed solvents. There are a few factors that need to be considered. Firstly, solvents used in drop-casting methods should possess suitable boiling points and volatility.30,67,94,300–304 Usually, solvents with a high boiling point facilitate a slow self-assembly process, which is helpful in forming ordered molecular arrangements. Secondly, the semiconductor should have suitable solubility in the solvent. High solubility may prevent the precipitation until only a small amount of solution is left, leading to polycrystals. On the other hand, it is unlikely to obtain crystals or large crystals from solvents with low solubility. For some semiconductors, it is difficult to find a single solvent with ideal solubility, boiling point and volatility. Therefore, mixed-solvents can be adopted.305 One efficient way is to use a mixed-solvent system consisting of one solvent which has higher volatility and solubility for the semiconductor (e.g. toluene) and the other solvent which has lower volatility and solubility for the semiconductor (e.g. ethanol).92 Similar results306 can also be obtained by using toluene and IPA as mixed solvents and the authors found that an abrupt transition in morphology from crystalline films to large single crystals can be achieved when the volume ratio of the two solvents is close to the azeotropic point.
For some semiconductors, even mixed-solvents are incapable of producing high quality crystals. Then complementary methods such as solvent exchange (Section 3.3.3)88 or vapour diffusion (Section 3.3.4)92 may be useful for growing single crystals. They provide slow dilution of the semiconductor. Another problem in drop-casting methods is that well-aligned crystals are unlikely to be obtained over a large area. This might be solved by using inducing methods or printing techniques (Section 3.5). For example, one possible method307–309 for aligning organic crystals through drop-casting methods is to use a tilted substrate. It should be noted that the tilt angle and the surface energy must be appropriate in order to make sure that the lower drop line can spread down the substrate and the upper line can be pinned such that the crystals grow from the upper drop line to form crystal arrays.


3.3.3 Solvent-exchange techniques. 
Solvent-exchange techniques, which are also called phase transfer methods310–313 or liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation (LLIP) methods,122,314–316 are one of the frequently used methods for growing single crystals, through the slow permeation of two different solvents. A typical schematic diagram of a solvent-exchange method is shown in Fig. 16A. Such a solvent-exchange method normally requires the following: (1) the semiconductor should have different solubility in the two solvents; (2) the two solvents should be miscible with each other; (3) the densities of the two solvents should be different so that a distinct interface can be formed and the top layer should be lighter to avoid fast mixing. The most frequently used solvents are tetrahydrofuran, toluene, chlorobenzene, dichloromethane and chloroform. Typical poor solvents include hexane, petroleum ether, diethyl ether, methanol, ethanol and even water.79,317–320 Coincidently, these typical poor solvents are usually lighter than the good solvents although there are some exceptions such as the water–tetrahydrofuran system318 in which the lighter solution was placed upon the heavier poor solvent, or the water–methanol system321 and the chloroform–hexane system56 in which the heavier poor solvent or solution was put on the lighter ones. In order to form large high quality crystals, the injection of the poor solvent (to form the top layer) onto the solution of the semiconductor in the good solvent (to form the bottom layer) should be very cautiously done to prevent vibration.317 With slow permeation (or diffusion) of the poor solvent into the solution, the semiconductor molecules will precipitate to form crystals. For example, crystals of porphyrin derivatives319 were grown through such a solvent-exchange method by using hexane and toluene as the poor and good solvents respectively. Another example is PTCDI crystals which were obtained by using chloroform and methanol as the good and poor solvents respectively.79 C60 nanowires320 were also reported by using solvent-exchange methods. Iso-propyl alcohol (IPA) and m-xylene322 (or toluene314) were used as the poor and good solvents, respectively. Interestingly, when reduced graphene oxide (RGO) was dispersed in the IPA solvent,320 RGO wrapped C60 nanowires (shell–core structure) were obtained. In addition to judicious selection of the two solvents, the concentration of the semiconductor in the good solvent and the volume ratio of the good solvent and poor solvent also play important roles in the crystal growth. For example, by utilizing IPA and benzene (or m-xylene) as the poor and good solvents respectively, 1D nanowhiskers of C60 were successfully obtained. The replacement of good solvent (benzene) by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) resulted in 2D hexagonal sheets. However, if the mixture of CCl4 and benzene was adopted as the good solvent system, then porous structures were achieved (volume ratio higher than 70:30).122,314,323–325 This slow penetration of the poor solvents into the semiconductor solutions often results in large crystals. This solvent-exchange method can also be used to grow supramolecular nanostructures, e.g., D–A complexes, such as C60 and ferrocene (Fc)315 or C60 and 5,10,15,20-tetrakis (4-methoxyphenyl) porphyrinato cobalt(II) (CoTMPP)316 co-crystals. In a process similar to the one mentioned above, the two semiconductors were dissolved in the toluene solution and then the poor solvent isopropyl alcohol (IPA) was added onto the surface of the solution to form a precipitation interface.
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of a typical solvent-exchange method (A) by injecting the poor solvent (or solution) onto the solution (or poor solvent) to form a distinct mixture interface. The mixtures are normally kept in a quasi-closed container on a stationary surface to retard evaporation and mixing; (B) by injecting the solution (or poor solvent) into the poor solvents (or solution), the crystals can be precipitated directly. 
In order to grow crystals directly onto a substrate or to form small crystals (or thin crystals) for device fabrication, the injection of the solution into a large amount of the poor solvent is sometimes utilized, as shown in Fig. 16B. In this case, the solution is diluted by the poor solvent quickly so that crystals precipitate directly.32,57,88,313,326–331 For example, TIPS-PEN microtubes332 were obtained by injecting the solution of TIPS-PEN in toluene into a large amount of acetonitrile and accompanied by sufficient aging. The aging process caused self-etching of the crystals by the residual toluene. A similar example296 is the case of a poor solvent in the solutions restraining the dissolution of the semiconductor in the residual good solvent and thereby inhibiting the formation of hollowed structures as well as reducing the evaporation speed. Another example is that of BPEA. It forms nanotubes333 when solvent-exchange methods are used by injecting the BPEA solution in ethanol (poor solubility) into boiling water (insoluble). On the other hand, by using a drop-casting method, BPEA nanorods30 and nanoribbons67 are formed through slow or fast evaporation respectively. Such a solvent-exchange method334 was also reported by using spray of the solutions onto the anti-solvent. Through optimization of the spray-printing conditions, crystals were obtained for a range of different organic semiconductors. Surfactants can be used to facilitate the nucleation and self-assembly process. This proved to be necessary in order to overcome insoluble issues in the poor solvents (e.g. perylene in water).86,335–337 Similar results338 are also reported for zinc meso-tetra (4-pyridyl) porphyrin (ZnTPyP). Here, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was used as a surfactant to self-assemble ZnTPyP hollow structures by injecting its N,N-dimethyl-formamide solution into water (poor solvent). The injection of the solution into another solvent which contained seed crystals may produce heterojunctions. For instance, fac-tris(2-phenylpyridine) iridium–silver (Ir(ppy)3–Ag) heterojunctions were obtained by injecting the dichloromethane solution of Ir(ppy)3 into the Ag nanowire suspension (in ethanol).339 The reverse process in which the poor solvent was injected into the solutions was also reported.92,95,340–343 C60 single crystal nanorods344 can be obtained by this method using toluene and IPA as the good and poor solvents, and assisted by CTAB as the surfactant. This direct injection of one solution into another can also be used to crystallize co-crystals. An example is where the two components, i.e., the donor (coronene tetracarboxylate tetrapotassium salt) and the acceptor (dodecyl-functionalized methyl viologen derivative), were mixed in an aqueous solution containing 10% v/v methanol and methanol respectively.345,346 Of course, it should be recognised that this direct mixing of the solution with a poor solvent may result in crystals of low quality or a phase with low thermodynamic stability. This probably can be attributed to the fast mixing and precipitation. For example, by using solvent-exchange methods, kinetically favoured arrangements of rubrene347 are obtained through the injection of the rubrene chloroform solution into methanol or the injection of methanol onto the rubrene dichloromethane solution.


3.3.4 Solvent-vapour diffusion methods. 
From the above discussions, it is evident that high quality and large crystals can be achieved by lowering the mixing speed of the solution and poor solvent. With this target in view, solvent-vapour diffusion (SVD) methods are expected to further reduce the mixing speed. This method is particularly suitable for materials which are highly soluble in some solvents but are almost insoluble in the other solvents. For example, TIPS-TAP is highly soluble in normal solvents such as toluene or chloroform, but has low solubility in acetonitrile.92 With the slow diffusion of the poor solvent vapour into the solution, high quality crystals can be achieved. Similar results can also be found for the crystal growth of tetrachlorinated diperylene bisimide (C12-4CldiPBI) by using toluene and methanol as the good and poor solvents respectively348 and the growth of tetracene-doped anthracene crystals by putting the solution of the two materials (in the mixture of dichloromethane and methanol) in methanol vapour.349 The crystal growth89 of insoluble CuPc and F16CuPc was also reported by using saturated sulphuric acid and water as good solvent and anti-solvent vapour respectively. Hu et al. reported a vapour diffusion method where the good solvent is exploited for providing the vapour atmosphere. They ascribed this successful result to the additional solvent leading to slow evaporation of the solvent and thereby facilitating the self-assembly of the polymer molecules.97 In another example, cyclohexane was used as the solvent and THF was utilized for providing the vapour. Both of them are good solvents and the crystal growth is attributed to the polar/nonpolar co-solvent condition.350–352 Because of the slow evaporation, this method can also be used for the crystal growth of spiro-molecules353 and polymeric semiconductors.280,354 In order to increase the solubility of the semiconductor in the good solvent or accelerate the evaporation of the solvent, it is sometimes necessary to use high temperature.355 For some materials, a mixed solvent system might yield better results. Examples of either solution (e.g. toluene and acetonitrile mixture with a volume ratio of 10:4)92 or solvent vapour systems (e.g. chloroform and methanol mixture with a volume ratio of 3:7)356 have been described.
Similar to the vapour-diffusion method, where the additional solvent vapour diffuses into the solution to induce crystallization of the organic molecules, the solvent-vapour annealing (SVA) method also utilizes solvent-vapour diffusion technology. The difference is that in SVA, typically solid samples are used (e.g. thin films311,357–360), unlike in the SVD process, where the crystal growth is accomplished in solution. Hence, a good solvent should be exploited for providing the vapour in the SVA process, whereas in the SVD process either good or poor solvent can be used. For example, using SVA, tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium (Alq3) crystals were obtained by annealing the amorphous film of Alq3 in chloroform atmosphere.361 Further studies362 showed that a polymer substrate could assist the SVA process when the solvent is also a good solvent for the substrate. This can be attributed to the reconstruction of the polymer substrate. The thickness of the polymer is also very important for the crystal growth. A range of organic semiconductor films have been shown to self-assemble into crystals on polymer substrates after a SVA process. The SVA method can also be utilized in phase separation to produce C8-BTBT crystals from polymers.208,363 The devices based on this kind of crystals provided a good interface between the semiconductor crystals and the polymeric insulators, and exhibited a mobility as high as 9.1 cm2 (V s)−1. Similar results were also reported for polymer crystals364 and D–A co-crystals365 formed by annealing a ternary spin-coated film composed of the donor, the acceptor and an insulating polymer.

3.4 Chemical reaction methods
The particular chemical deposition method for growing organic semiconductor crystals mentioned here is defined as ‘crystal growth occurring concurrently with the chemical synthesis of the materials’. On the other hand, the methods for growth of crystals discussed in previous sections are accomplished after the synthesis of the materials. The chemical deposition of organometallic complex crystals can be achieved using a variety of techniques including vapour methods (chemical vapour deposition (CVD))366–369 or solution-processing techniques.4,370,371 For example, Cu-TCNQ (or Ag-TCNQ) crystals can be obtained by the chemical reaction of copper (or silver, as films or foils) with TCNQ in either vapour or solution.366–371
Yao et al. reported a colloidal chemical reaction method for growing organic semiconductor crystals. This method can be applied to PTCDI,372,373 perylene,374 rubrene,375 and aquozinc tetraphenylporphyrin376 among others. For example, n-type semiconductors (e.g. PTCDI and its derivatives) contain electro-withdrawing groups and can stabilize anions. As the first step, soluble precursors of PTCDI (radical anions or dianions377) were prepared by utilizing the reaction of PTCDI with a reducing agent. Then the precursors were oxidized by oxygen to form PTCDI. Along with the oxidation, the generated PTCDI molecules self-assembled into crystals from the solutions due to their insolubility.372,373 On the other hand, p-type semiconductors, such as rubrene, consist of electron-rich systems, which can stabilize radical cations. Therefore, rubrene was oxidized into rubrene radical cations by iodine in the first step. This was followed by the reduction of the radical cations using silver, which has a lower oxidation potential than the rubrene radical cations.375 Due to the lower solubility of rubrene than the radical cations and the absorption of the cations on the silver, the nucleation and the growth of the rubrene crystals occurred when rubrene became saturated.375
Usually, the chemical reaction methods used are solution-processing techniques and in order to realize simultaneous crystal growth concomitant with the generation of semiconductor molecules, the solubility of the semiconductor should be lower than that of the precursors. It is generally accepted that the quality and the growth of the crystals are highly dependent on the oxidation (or reduction) potential and the concentration of the semiconductor anions (or cations) and neutral molecules. However, it should be pointed out that in practice chemical reaction methods are not very extensively applied for the growth of organic semiconductor crystals. There are two probable reasons: (1) the anions or cations of most organic semiconductors are not stable enough to last the oxidation and reduction process; (2) too fast growth of the crystals hinders the formation of ordered molecular arrangements.
3.5 Patterning of organic semiconductor crystals
The patterning of crystals is an intriguing subject which makes it possible to investigate the fundamental physics of complex electronic devices. It also makes it possible to demonstrate the potential applications of organic semiconductor crystals in optoelectronics. However, of all the aforementioned methods, only dip-coating283,286 actually provides the possibility of achieving this target. Where other methods are concerned, they rarely produce crystals in ordered arrays. Three possible methods are expected to produce organic semiconductor crystal arrays: (1) top-down mode: patterning the crystals after their growth; (2) bottom-up mode: growing the crystals on the treated substrates with patterned seed crystals or other patterned inducers (e.g. SAM patterns) to form crystal arrays; (3) printing techniques.

3.5.1 Patterning of crystals after their growth. 
The patterning of organic semiconductor crystals is important for the fabrication of organic circuits such as inverters consisting of n-type and p-type crystals378,379 or only p-type crystals.55 For example, crystal arrays with moderate orientation can be produced using methods where the substrates are treated (rubbed) with pre-grown organic crystals (Fig. 17)38 or by drop-casting a suspension of the crystals in poor solvents onto the tilted substrate82 (the utilization of substrates pre-treated with hydrophobic and hydrophilic agents for selective patterning of the crystal suspension will be discussed in Section 3.5.2.2). The friction rubbing method needs crystals vertically grown on the substrates. It is found that crystals prepared by PVT techniques on a bare silicon substrate (untreated by hydrophobic SAMs) may meet the necessary requirements.
 Fig. 17  (A) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of organic crystal arrays by rubbing the substrate with a pre-deposited crystal sample and its (B) ideal result and (C) actual result. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright © 2010 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One efficient way to creating crystal arrays is to pattern the films consisting of plenty of crystals. The crystal network acts as a polycrystalline film. The crystals can be obtained using a range of techniques such as PVT methods, recrystallization, solvent-exchange methods and vapor-diffusion methods. The crystals are firstly dispersed in poor solvents and then thin films can be obtained by spin-coating or drop-casting.79,82 Bao and co-workers adopted a filtration-and-transfer (FAT) alignment method for patterning crystals which form crystalline film arrays.95 In short, they adopted a patterned polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mask with hollows as the filter so that the crystals could only pass through the holes in order to be deposited onto the porous AAO supporter. The PDMS mask and supporter were then removed to form the crystal arrays, which reflected the duplication of the hollow patterns of the PDMS (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of a filtration-and-transfer (FAT) alignment method for patterning crystal film arrays, MW: microwires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright © 2009 The National Academy of Sciences. 


3.5.2 Inducing techniques for the patterning of organic crystals. 
3.5.2.1 Crystal patterning using seed crystal patterns. 
One efficient method for inducing the crystal growth is to utilize the seed crystals. The seed crystals have been widely used for the growth of large crystals,380e.g. the aforementioned Czochralski method. This “bottom-up” method is free from pollution and damage to the crystals, both of which are usually associated with the handpicking process (crystals are handpicked out of the pre-grown crystals) of organic crystals. Moreover, as an “epitaxial” growth technique, it facilitates the generation of high quality organic crystals. In addition, it has the advantage of providing crystal patterns in situ on a chosen substrate at a specific location. This proves to be very helpful for forming crystal patterns in intimate contact with the selected substrates. For example, by dip-coating the substrate in a suspension of seed crystals and then epitaxially growing the seed crystals in the PVD system, it was possible to obtain patterns of CuPc crystals.381 The crystals grew epitaxially along the long axis of the seed crystals, i.e., the π–π stacking direction of the crystals. Therefore, it was possible to create crystal patterns such as parallel and crossed nanoribbon arrays by controlling the orientation of the seed crystals.
One important advantage of this method is its applicability for the growth of organic single crystalline heterojunctions. For example, F16CuPc crystals can grow epitaxially on CuPc crystals using PVD methods119 (Fig. 19). One necessary condition, however, is that this epitaxial growth requires that the two materials possess similar lattice parameters in order to decrease the lattice mismatch which might result in structural defects. Fortunately, the CuPc crystals grew along the [010] direction, which has a lattice parameter of 4.790 Å in this direction, and the F16CuPc molecules were stacked along the [100] direction, which has a lattice parameter of 4.796 Å in this direction. The mismatch between the lattice parameters of CuPc and F16CuPc is only about 0.13%. Hence, the single crystal of F16CuPc was successfully obtained on the CuPc crystals as shown in Fig. 19. Similar results382 were reported for the epitaxial growth of CuPc onto n-type 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)-porphyrin (H2TPyP) hollow structures. The interesting point of this result is that the two semiconductors were deposited in one step. The n-type semiconductor was first nucleated on the substrate and formed a hollow structure, and then the hollow structure provided the high surface energy areas for selective deposition of CuPc. The CuPc was partially wrapped by H2TPyP near the junctions, which formed core–shell structures and benefited the collection of excited carriers.
 Fig. 19  (A) Epitaxial growth of F16CuPc crystals onto CuPc crystals by PVT methods; (B) schematic top view of the (001) planes of CuPc and F16CuPc crystals, which pack along the [100] and [010] directions respectively (π–π stacking orientation). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The SVA technique provides another method for patterning organic crystals by using seed crystals, where organic semiconductor thin films are used as the seeds. In simple terms, patterns of organic thin films are first prepared by selective deposition of organic semiconductors on substrates, and then the SVA process is carried out in order to generate patterned single crystals from the pre-deposited thin film patterns.383 The selection deposition can be obtained either by vapour sublimation through a shadow mask384 or by deposition on a pre-patterned substrate383 (see Section 3.5.2.2). The problem is that by using this method it is difficult to achieve patterned crystals with highly oriented arrays, especially over large areas. This is due to the uncontrollable pattern of seed crystals (epitaxial growth methods) and low orientation selectivity during the annealing process.
3.5.2.2 Crystal patterning using substrate pre-treatment with SAM patterns. 
Compared to the approach of using seed crystals for crystal growth, the modification of substrates with pre-treated patterns is easier and more powerful. Different techniques can be used to pattern the substrate for the subsequent crystal growth, such as micro-contact printing,101,385 shadow masking technique (e.g. Au patterns as a mask to form hydrophilic patterns on the substrate during the surface modification of substrate by SAMs386), plasma387 or vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) light388–390 etching (only some areas are etched to give SAM patterns) and different kinds of lithography techniques.363,390Fig. 20 shows an example of achieving crystal patterns using ODTS patterns. The SAM patterns on the substrates obtained by micro-contact printing101 were accomplished before crystal growth. Although this method could not guarantee that the crystals grown at all the lattice points of the SAM layer had the same orientation, it is still one of the most useful and efficient methods for producing high quality crystal patterns. Every desired site has crystals over a large area, compared with the previously discussed methods such as dip-coating techniques, patterning of crystals after crystal growth and seed crystal-inducing techniques.
 Fig. 20  Patterning of crystals on SAM patterns which were obtained by micro-contact printing techniques. The crystals were located on the rough SAM patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright © 2006 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
One method utilizing SAM patterns to obtain crystal arrays is using the rough edge of the SAM patterns as the crystal nucleation sites. For example, micro-contact printing usually provides rough SAM surfaces (e.g., r.m.s roughness: ∼150 Å), which results in a much higher possibility of nucleation than smooth surfaces (e.g., untreated area or vapour-deposited smooth ODTS monolayer surface with r.m.s roughness lower than 5 Å).101 When the substrate is kept at high temperature using vapour growth methods, the valley in the roughness area confines the movement of the vapour molecules. This in turn enhances the selectivity of the nucleation in this area. Selective growth is found, irrespective of whether the other surface of the substrate is untreated or treated with smooth monolayers. This suggests that the selectivity is due to the surface roughness of the patterns rather than the hydrophobic or hydrophilic properties.391 As shown in Fig. 20, pentacene, rubrene and C60 crystals were grown using PVT methods onto the patterned substrate at the precise locations of the SAM patterns. A similar mechanism is found by using Au patterns to grow crystal patterns through the PVT method.392 The crystals nucleated at the edge or at the top surface of the Au patterns and then grew two dimensionally on the smooth SiO2 surface. The problem is that the low quality of the rough patterns usually results in the formation of polycrystals.
The second method utilizing SAM arrays to pattern crystals is utilizing the interaction or the crystal lattice matching between the SAM patterns and the relevant organic semiconductor. For example, the crystallization of anthracene on a diphenylbenzene-modified substrate exhibited a higher nucleation density and more uniform facet angles of crystals than other SAMs (e.g. phenyl, or SAMs with terminal groups of –CH3 or –NH2, etc.) or unmodified substrates. Especially, the nucleation density was also higher than the other phenyl-terminated SAMs, suggesting the important role of the interaction and crystal lattice matching in the selective growth of crystals.385
The third approach using SAM arrays to pattern organic crystals is to utilize the surface energy to tune the wettability of the solutions, leading to nucleation at the desired sites. In other words, a lyophobic surface suppresses the wetting of the solution and prevents the preservation of the solution in this area. On the other hand, lyophilic surfaces facilitate the confinement of the solution.286,386,393 SAM-modified substrates are typically lyophobic to water (hydrophobic) and most organic solvents. Therefore, the substrate modification by SAM patterns is one of the most efficient ways for achieving lyophobic–lyophilic patterns. It should be noted that substrates with untreated patterns (irrespective of whether the crystals are growing onto the SAM areas or unmodified regions) are usually detrimental to the growth of high-quality crystals as well as the charge transport of the semiconductors. One way for producing patterned substrates is to treat the whole surface with a hydrophobic agent and then pattern lyophilic arrays on this substrate. The patterns and the rest of the areas of the substrate are both SAM modified. For example, the surface of the substrate can be first modified by HMDS and then patterned with a lyophilic SAM such as phenethyltrichlorosilane (PhTS) on the selected areas after removing HMDS in these regions.389 Similar results can also be found using other SAMs, as long as they possess phenyl terminal groups which are needed to form lyophilic patterns (e.g. phenyltrichlorosilane (PTS)).390 The solution-processing techniques for growing crystals such as the dip-coating method and drop-casting385 (theoretically, solvent-exchange and vapour-diffusion methods could also be used) can be adopted for growing crystal arrays by using SAM patterns. Of these, the dip-coating method is preferred due to its strength in providing crystals with an ordered orientation along the pulling direction. In order to localize the solution more efficiently to the lyophilic areas and to save the consumption of the organic semiconductors, Bao386et al. developed a method by injecting the semiconductor solution into the water and placing the patterned substrate with the lyophilic patterns (the background is the lyophobic areas) into the mixture. The stirring proved to be helpful in localizing the solution onto the lyophilic patterns and hindering the localization onto lyophobic areas. After removal of the mixture, droplets of the semiconductor solution were left onto the lyophilic patterns, which formed crystals after solvent evaporation. This is shown in Fig. 21. Another useful method for patterning organic semiconductor crystals is to utilize patterns with different surface energies to selectively deposit the suspension of the pre-deposited crystals. For example, CuPc crystals were patterned by drop-casting the suspension of CuPc crystals in water onto a substrate with patterned hydrophobic and hydrophilic patterns or through rinsing the crystals on the patterned substrate with hydrophobic or hydrophilic solvents.394
 Fig. 21  Patterning of crystals by utilizing the areas with different surface energies. Au pads: lyophilic area, and substrate: lyophobic area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 386. Copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
A comparison of these methods reveals that the surface energy approach is much more popular due to its high efficiency (compared to the utilization of interaction and lattice match) and its ability to achieve high quality crystals (compared to the utilization of roughness). Similarly, polymers or other materials can also be used to act as templates (patterns) to provide the lyophobic–lyophilic patterns. For example, a fluoropolymer, Cytop-TM (lyophobic surface), is patterned onto a SiO2 substrate to form lyophobic–lyophilic patterns363 through a photolithography process. Photoresist is patterned to partially cover the substrate where Cytop-TM could not be deposited. Then, after removing photoresist patterns, the semiconductor C8-BTBT in a suitable polymer is deposited onto the wetting regions (without Cytop-TM patterns). This results in crystal arrays with the assistance of the SVA process. Based on patterns of large rectangular lyophilic regions (small rectangular lyophilic regions connected to the large rectangular region were patterned on its side) on the lyophobic substrate, Goto et al. obtained single crystal arrays through solution-processing techniques. These substrates successfully confined the solution in the lyophilic regions.395 According to the experimental results and computer simulations, they concluded that crystal nucleation occurred at the small rectangular lyophilic region due to the absence of surrounding solutions which in turn made the solution more saturated in this area. Then the crystal growth continued in the large rectangular lyophilic region. The anisotropic growth rates resulted in selective orientation. Zhang et al. reported another lithography-assisted method396 for patterning single crystals. BPEA solutions were directly spin-coated onto the substrate (modified by PTS after lithography) with ditch-like photoresist patterns. Such a self-assembly process produced a well-aligned single crystal nanowire array at the wafer-scale. The nanowire array possesses high quality, yielding a mobility of up to 3.2 cm2 (V s)−1, which is even much higher than that of the individual crystal obtained by a drop-casting method.30
3.5.2.3 Crystal patterning using substrate pre-treatment with other patterns. 
Theoretically, the most efficient way to guarantee the crystal growth at every induction site is by using chemical reaction methods. The much stronger covalent bonds between the acceptor (patterned inducers) and donor (precursors of the semiconductors) can provide a much higher possibility of crystal growth compared to any other methods. This method is particularly suitable for the growth of metal complex semiconductors, in which the metals can be facilely patterned onto the substrates through diverse means, such as shadow mask method or lithography techniques. For example, Cu-TCNQ or Ag-TCNQ patterns were successfully synthesized after chemical reaction of TCNQ with copper or silver arrays which had been first patterned onto the substrate.368,369,397
Takeya et al. developed a facile method which they named the edge-cast solution crystallization method185,398 for patterning crystals. This was achieved by sustaining the semiconductor solutions around the patterned pillars117,399 as shown in Fig. 22A. The pillars, which can be made from any insoluble material such as plastic, silicon wafer,117,120,400 or capillary tube,401 were found to be sufficiently efficient in sustaining the solutions around the pillars. Crystals formed around the pillars after evaporation of the solvents. The crystals grew in the direction from the edge of the droplet to the liquid-sustaining structure as shown in Fig. 22A. Similar results were also reported by Pyo109,401–403 and Bao120,404et al., who used a capillary tube or a small piece of silicon wafer as the pinners (or pillars). This is known as droplet-pinned crystallization. As shown in Fig. 23, the solution is sustained around the pins which creates crystal arrays as a consequence of solvent evaporation.120 By utilizing this method a mixture of two semiconductors (C8-BTBT and C60) was also developed which was capable of forming heterojunctions, in which the two semiconductors were separated according to the different crystallization rates. C60 crystallizes easily and grows faster and as a result the second semiconductor grew on it to form the p–n heterojunctions.405 There are some differences in the two approaches. In Takeya's method large crystalline films were obtained around every pillar, whereas in Pyo and Bao's method crystal arrays were observed around every pin. This might be due to the different size of the pillars, the use of different semiconductors (C8-BTBT for Takeya's method and C8-BTBT, C60, TCNQ, TIPS-PEN, PTCDI-C8, etc. for Pyo and Bao's method), different substrates or different growth conditions (e.g. solvent, concentration, etc.).109,117,120,401–406 Interestingly, in these methods, crystals grow along the direction of the solvent receding direction.109,117,120,401–404 In order to efficiently grow crystal patterns, two requirements need to be fulfilled:120 (1) the pillars or pinners should be lyophilic to make sure that the solution is sustained around them; (2) the solution should be saturated or close to saturation, so that the crystals can crystallize around the pillars or pinners to form crystal arrays. Otherwise, precipitation occurs only when a little solution is left, which leads to polycrystals on the pillars or pinners.
 Fig. 22  (A) Patterning of crystals by using pillar arrays to sustain the solutions around the pillars (edge casting); (B) patterning of crystals by using inclining plate arrays (or stamps with inclined surfaces at intended positions) to hold the solutions beneath the plate (gap casting). The arrows represent the direction of the crystal growth. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. 
 Fig. 23  Patterning of crystals by utilizing pillars or pinners to sustain the solutions around the pillars or pinners. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Similar results are found by using patterned inclining plates to hold the solutions beneath the plate. This is known as the gap casting method and is illustrated in Fig. 22B.113,407 One end of the inclining plate is open to make sure that the evaporation of the solvents occurs from this end. This ensures that the crystals grow along the direction from this opened side to the closed edge, the same as the solvent receding direction. A thin wire can be adopted as support to provide the slight inclining angle.113 One important difference to the induction by pillars or pinners is that the inclining plates should be little lyophobic or at least more lyophobic than the substrate. Then the solutions will be more wettable on the substrate in order to form the crystal arrays. Using either a p-type semiconductor, C10-DNTT,407 or an n-type semiconductor, PDIF-CN2,113 this method resulted in crystalline films around every inclining plate. Similar results408,409 were also found by using a perfluoropolyether (PFPE) mould to confine the solutions. The PFPE possesses the advantage of repelling the organic solvents.
Bao and co-workers68,410 have also reported a solution-shearing method for aligning single crystals. Solution-shearing is a method which adopts a moving non-stick substrate to shear the solution and leave oriented crystalline films behind on the stationary substrate.411 This is somewhat similar to the aforementioned inclining plate used for holding the solutions beneath the plate, in which the plate was modified by hydrophobic SAMs. In order to increase the wetting of the substrate and decrease the adhesion of the solution on the moving substrate, the moving substrates are usually treated to be lyophobic. This can be achieved by using an ODTS modified moving substrate and an unmodified stationary substrate.412 Alternatively, by using moving and stationary substrates treated with ODTS and PTS respectively, similar results can be achieved. The reason is that the PTS modified substrate is more lyophilic than the ODTS modified one as mentioned above.68,410 Normally, the solution-shearing method is used to obtain films during the coating process. The imposed mass transport limitations during the coating process68 often result in void and dendritic structures rather than the desired arrays.413 Bao and co-workers410 improved the solution-shearing method by patterning the shearing blade with micropillar arrays to enhance the mass transport. This approach can facilitate the lateral mass transport; hence they termed it as the fluid-enhanced solution-shearing approach. By using this patterned blade, large crystal arrays with single crystalline domains as large as 1 cm long and 200–1000 mm wide were achieved for TIPS-PEN, which was quite unprecedented for crystal patterning.


3.5.3 Printing techniques for the patterning of organic crystals. 
Besides the printing techniques adopted for patterning inducers as discussed in Section 3.5.2, printing techniques can also be used for the direct patterning of organic crystals. Techniques such as micro-contact printing (μCP) and ink-jet printing have been reported for growing crystal patterns. Such printing techniques are promising for patterning crystals over a large area and make it possible to investigate the fundamental physics of complex electronic devices and even to apply the crystal arrays in large-area integrated circuits at low cost.
3.5.3.1 Micro-contact printing techniques. 
Micro-contact printing is a kind of soft lithography, which utilizes a patterned stamp usually made of commercial polymers such as elastomeric PDMS materials, to hold and release the objects. This can be achieved in several ways. The first is through a soft non-covalent contact (traditional micro-contact printing). Alternatively, in chemical lift-off lithography,414 covalent interactions can enhance the interaction between the stamp and the objects, resulting in precise replication of the stamp features for the purpose of transferring objects to the desired substrates. The stamp with a patterned relief can be obtained by using traditional photolithography techniques or electron beam lithography (EBL). The transferred objects415 can be solids or liquids, including SAM monolayers,101 semiconductors,416 electrodes417 or insulators.418 In the first step, the stamp is softly pressed onto the objects, which will selectively adhere onto the relief of the stamp according to the features of the stamp. Then the stamp with the objects is transferred onto the desired substrate. The objects can be released onto the substrate by removing the stamp through heating417,419 or peeling back420 or some other methods, leading to crystal arrays with topological patterns as on the PDMS stamp.
An interesting way to transfer organic semiconductor solutions onto substrates to generate crystal arrays is capillary force lithography (CFL).421 A great advantage of CFL is that high pressure is not required to adsorb the objects (solutions). For example, C8-BTBT solutions were successfully transferred by this method and resulted in crystalline lines or grids as a replicate of the PDMS mold.416 The problem is that, due to the fast nature of the process, this method may lead to crystalline patterns with several domains in each pattern rather than single crystals. A similar process was reported where a polyurethane acrylate (PUA) mold was used. The authors named the method liquid bridge-mediated nanotransfer molding (LB-nTM).422,423 The difference from the former reports is that in the LB-nTM method, the crystals are formed firstly through self-assembly in the recessed channels of the mold and then transferred to the substrate via a liquid bridge (anti-solvent) between the substrate and the mold. The self-assembly process makes it possible to achieve high quality single crystals. The objects can be small molecular semiconductors such as TIPS-PEN, C60 and 8,16-didodecyl-8,16-dihydrobenzo[a]benzo[6,7]indolo[2,3-h]-carbazole (C12-BBICZ), polymeric semiconductors P3HT and even electrode materials (PEDOT:PSS, Ag ink, etc.). A similar method was also reported by directly drop-casting the solution on the substrate along with CFL afterwards, forming crystals in the template channels.424
It is an attractive option to use pre-deposited crystals for printing. However, unlike organic thin films, large area organic crystals are not easily realized. Through an abrupt heating process (170 °C, 1 min), amorphous rubrene thin films were annealed into crystalline films with the width and length of domains as large as hundreds of micrometers.425 The crystalline films were then selectively removed from the substrate by pressing the PDMS mould onto the crystalline films at 170 °C. Keeping the substrate temperature higher than 160 °C is necessary to help the film to get rid of the substrate. The temperature also increases the adhesion between the stamp and rubrene film to form intimate contact.426 In another example, dodecane, a high temperature boiling solvent with low surface tension, was used in a mixed solvent system with toluene or dichlorobenzene and such mixed solvents made it possible to realize large flat single crystalline TIPS-PEN.427,428 Flat crystals of centimetre size were obtained by using a volume ratio of dodecane and toluene at 1:1. The crystals were then selectively transferred to other substrates by PDMS, as shown in Fig. 24. Similarly, when the temperature was higher than 100 °C, the etching of TIPS-PEN was improved. It was also demonstrated that the crystal arrays could be tailored by selectively transferring the crystals repeatedly (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Crystal patterning by using the micro-contact printing technique by selectively transferring single crystals from a large crystal film as a replication of the stamp features. Reprinted with permission from ref. 428. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Compared with other patterning methods, micro-contact printing is found to be the most efficient for transferring pre-deposited crystals to produce crystal arrays with the same orientation, because the crystal arrays are detached from the same crystal or crystal domain. Besides this technique, only the inducing techniques (substrate is pre-treated) with the assistance of the dip-coating method can provide crystal arrays with the same orientation. In addition, the micro-contact printing method can give rise to crystals at the desired locations with the desired shapes: with the same width, length and height at every lattice. Finally, it should be mentioned that in spite of its success this technique is still full of challenges where large crystal films are concerned.
3.5.3.2 Ink-jet printing techniques. 
Ink-jet printing is a technique which jets droplets onto substrates to form patterns or to produce crystal arrays over a large area. It has been found that hydrophobic or hydrophilic arrays pre-deposited on substrates are useful in assisting the alignment of the droplets.429–431 In order to form high quality crystals from ink-jetted droplets, it is essential to choose suitable solvents for the self-assembly.427,431 A fast printing process and inappropriate solvent will most likely result in low quality crystals and sometimes lead to the undesirable so-called “coffee-ring” effect430–432 where the thickness at the edge is thicker than at the centre. For example, it was found that when dodecane was used as the co-solvent it facilitated the growth of TIPS-PEN crystals (which has already been mentioned in Section 3.5.3.1). By ink-jet printing the TIPS-PEN solution onto hydrophilic patterns (untreated areas) of the ODTS-treated substrate, patterned crystals were obtained.431 It has also been found that the solvent-exchange method is helpful430 in assisting the ink-jet printing process: (1) ink-jetting the poor solvent (or anti-solvent) onto the hydrophilic patterns (untreated patterns of the HMDS treated substrate); (2) ink-jetting the semiconductor solution onto the poor solvent patterns; (3) letting the poor solvent and the solution mix slowly to form crystals (as shown in Fig. 25). In order to retard the mixing of the poor solvent with the solution, the solution is jetted at one side of the patterns. The two sides are connected by a narrower region, a bit like a bottleneck as shown in Fig. 25. The role of this protuberance is similar to the inducing technique example395 mentioned in Section 3.5.2.2, in which a small rectangular hydrophilic region is connected to a larger rectangular hydrophilic region. Such bottleneck is not only helpful in retarding the mixing for achieving high quality crystals but it also facilitates the formation of crystals with the same orientation. Using this ink-jet printing technique, crystal arrays of C8-BTBT were achieved with a mobility as high as 31.3 cm2 (V s)−1, which is one of the highest values reported for solution-processed devices.
 Fig. 25  Schematic diagram of an ink-jet printing technique for growing crystal arrays with the assistance of a solvent-exchange method: (1) ink-jetting of poor solvent (or anti-solvent); (2) ink-jetting of semiconductor solution; (3) crystal growth with evaporation of mixed solvents; (4) complete evaporation of solvents to form crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
A combination of ink-jet printing with CFL was reported by Sung and co-workers.433,434 The solution droplets of organic semiconductors are jetted into the universal mold by ink-jet printing and then form nanowire crystals through capillary-driven flow and drying. The mold and the crystals are transferred onto the substrate that is covered by a thin polar liquid layer, forming a good conformal contact between the nanowires and the substrate. The drying of the liquid layer leads to the pattern of nanowire crystals on the selected locations on the substrate.

3.6 Ultrathin or large crystals: guidelines for controlling crystallization
As discussed above, organic crystals have many advantages, including their perfect molecular arrangements, the elimination of grain boundaries and minimal defects. All of these make it possible to reveal the intrinsic properties of the semiconductors, study the structure–property relationship, investigate the factors for high performance devices, and unveil the charge transport mechanisms. For example, ultrathin organic semiconductor crystals are helpful for studying the thickness-dependence of conducting channels in organic transistors. It is useful to reveal the minimal thickness of the semiconducting layer for efficient charge transport. It is generally believed that the charge carrier transport is located at the interface region and consists of one to several molecular layers.435 However, organic thin films face challenges in revealing such information due to the presence of disordered molecular arrangements and huge grain boundaries and defects, although a few reports have used LB films for investigating this thickness-dependence.436 In contrast, crystals are free from these disadvantages and the experimental results suggest that a semiconducting monolayer is sufficient for achieving charge transport. Secondly, as mentioned in Section 3.5.3.1, large flat thin crystal films are a prerequisite for the patterning of crystals by micro-contact printing techniques. This is quite meaningful for achieving large crystal arrays with the same size (height, length and width) and the same orientation. Although some large flat crystals with thicknesses of only tens of nanometres have been produced by using methods such as PVT and drop-casting methods,38,67,92 controllable methods are rarely reported. Inspired by the mechanical exfoliation of graphene,437 Kloc and co-workers438 reported an “organic crystal cleavage” method (Fig. 26439), which has proven to be efficient for obtaining ultrathin crystals. In place of graphite, F16CuPc or pentacene was used. The authors438 thinned the crystals by repeatedly peeling the organic crystals by using adhesive tape. After several cleavages, thin crystals were gently moved to the substrate by pressing the tape onto the substrate. This method can efficiently decrease the thickness of the crystals from micrometres to tens of nanometres. There is no doubt that crystals with a layer-by-layer structure, such as the case in graphite,439 will be easily exfoliated, especially those with strong in-plane but weak out-of-plane intermolecular interactions. Hence, similar results439 were obtained with even thinner crystal sheets (3–15 nm) over a large area (100–200 mm) based on crystals of B-phase (2Z,2′Z)-3,3′-(1,4-phenylene) bis(2-(3,5-bis-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)acrylonitrile) (CN-TFPA) (Fig. 26A and B).
 Fig. 26  Exfoliated crystals on (A) the scotch tape (scale bar: 30 μm) and (B) the SiO2 substrate after the transfer process (scale bar: 20 μm); (C) schematic diagram of an “organic crystal cleavage” method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Ultrathin organic crystals also can be produced by self-assembly. According to the aforementioned assumptions as discussed in Section 2.2, if one material possesses strong in-plane but weak out-of-plane intermolecular interactions, it is possible to self-assemble the molecules into large crystal films due to the strong dominating intermolecular interactions. Ultra-thin crystals of HTEB,105 as large as millimetres, were obtained by a drop-casting method from its chlorobenzene solution. The HTEB molecules in the ultrathin crystal films grew almost vertically on the substrate in a layer-by-layer growth mode. These results confirm the importance of strong in-plane intermolecular interactions for the self-assembly of large 2D crystal films. Similar results428 can also be found in TIPS-PEN crystals by drop-casting solutions of TIPS-PEN in dodecane–toluene co-solvents.
On the other hand, large crystals are essential for the analysis of the molecular arrangements in order to obtain the molecular structure, intermolecular interactions, crystal lattice parameters and so forth. They are also one of the prerequisites for studying the fundamental physics, especially for TOF, Hall effect measurements and top-gate OFETs. In addition, the in-depth study of large crystals can benefit the large crystal domains for potential large area applications, such as patterned OFET device arrays and applications involving OLED and OPV for achieving large areas of illumination and p–n junctions.
Among the aforementioned methods, melting methods are the most possible methods for achieving large crystals. The crystal size is only confined by the size of the ampoule.8,15 The disadvantage of the melting method is that organic semiconductors may not be stable at high temperature, which will lead to oxidation, decomposition or polymerization among others. Therefore, only some semiconductors have been explored using the melting method, e.g. naphthalene, anthracene, phenanthrene, pyrene, perylene, etc. The vapour-Bridgmann method144 reduces the impact of high temperature on organic semiconductors by using sublimation, which normally can be achieved at temperature lower than the melting point. At the same time, the vapour-Bridgmann method maintains the possibility of large crystal growth, again only confined by the size of the ampoule.
Low pressure can reduce the sublimation point. Hence, the PVT method is widely adopted for the growth of organic semiconductor crystals, where the pressure is usually kept lower than 1 atm. Simultaneously, due to the different vapour pressure, the crystallization regions of the impurities are different from that of the desired material. Hence, this method also facilitates high quality crystals by expelling the impurities. In order to achieve large crystals, the crystallization process should be as slow as possible. To achieve this purpose, there are several factors that need to be considered, including the source temperature which should be approximately equal to the sublimation point, a higher crystallization area which can be controlled by the gas flow and the temperature gradient, steady and slow gas flow, steady and low temperature gradient, and lower pressure. All of these have been discussed above. Fig. 27 shows several examples of large crystals obtained by using PVT methods.
 Fig. 27  Large crystals obtained by using PVT methods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright © 2013 Materials Research Society. 
In order to produce large crystals by solution-processing techniques, it is necessary to decrease the crystallization speed so that a self-assembly process can be achieved. Traditional recrystallization, solvent-exchange and solvent-vapour diffusion methods are the most common methods for growing large crystals. There are three main approaches for reducing the speed of precipitation: reducing the cooling speed, decreasing the evaporation rate of the solvents and reducing the infiltration speed of the poor or anti solvent into the solutions. Details have been discussed in Section 3.3.15 For the semiconductors which exhibit significant changes in solubility at different temperatures, the crystals can be obtained by reducing the solubility by cooling the solutions. There is no doubt that decreasing the cooling speed is a very efficient route to forming large crystals.276 In order to decrease the evaporation rate277 of the solvent, there are a range of means available. These include decreasing the temperature during the evaporation process, using a solvent with low volatility, keeping the solution in a sealed system,440 placing the solution in the solvent atmosphere (a kind of solvent-vapour diffusion method) or reducing the concentration. In order to decrease the infiltration speed of the poor or anti solvent into the solutions, there are two approaches: the solvent-exchange and solvent-vapour diffusion methods. Where the solvent-exchange method is concerned, ideally the solutions and the poor solvent should have different densities. In addition, the low density solvent should be poured onto the one with higher density very slowly to prevent perturbation and mixing. Sometimes, in order to further reduce the infiltration speed, a buffer layer material, a solvent with a medium density and medium solubility of the semiconductor, is first poured onto the solution. The solvent-vapour diffusion method can significantly reduce the speed of infiltration of the poor solvent into the solution. Other experimental factors can also be optimized. For example, the speed can be controlled by adjusting the temperature to change the volatilization of the solvents, by tuning the concentration and the volume ratio of the solution and the poor solvent. Details of the growth control can be found in the relative sections.
4 Device physics of organic semiconductor crystals in optoelectronics
Single crystals of organic semiconductors are free of grain boundaries and have long-range periodic order as well as minimal traps and defects. Hence, single crystal devices are particularly beneficial for revealing the intrinsic properties of organic semiconductors, hence providing a powerful tool not only for examining structure–property relationships but also for studying fundamental physics in organic semiconductors. This in turn further guides molecular design and synthesis to achieve practical applications of organic semiconductors. In this part, we will focus on the device physics of organic semiconductor crystals in optoelectronics, discuss the factors which influence the performance, investigate the structure–property relationships for achieving high performance devices and examine the charge generation, injection, transport and combination mechanisms. An in-depth study of the device physics will benefit further understanding and the future application of organic semiconductors.
4.1 Device physics in organic single crystal field-effect transistors
Field-effect transistors are a type of devices that have three terminals where the current in the channel can be controlled by an external electric field (gate voltage). Compared with diodes, field-effect transistors are superior with high input resistance, low energy consumption and high signal-to-noise ratio. They are commonly used as signal-amplifiers, oscillators and logic switchers in integrated circuits. Organic semiconductors have attracted much attention in field-effect transistors due to their intriguing advantages such as flexibility, light-weight, ease of functionalization, and the possibility of being fabricated over a large area at low cost. Since the first manufacture of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) at the end of the 1980s, progress in this field has been particularly rapid. For example, mobility of OFETs has been improved from 10−5 cm2 (V s)−1 (the first OFET, based on polythiophene441) to over 10 cm2 (V s)−1135,442–445 for thin films and from 0.075 cm2 (V s)−1 (first single crystal OFET based on α-sexithiophene in 1996446) to 40 cm2 (V s)−136,430,447 for single crystals. In addition, the studies of organic single crystals with mechanical flexibility make them more promising.309,448 Particularly, organic single crystal field-effect transistors are of great significance for studying the intrinsic charge transport properties, the structure–property relationship and the charge transport mechanism.

4.1.1 Factors which influence the charge transport. 
4.1.1.1 Device configuration. 
A typical organic field-effect transistor is constituted of a semiconducting layer, an insulating layer (gate dielectric) and three terminal electrodes (the gate, drain and source). According to the different position of the layers, organic field-effect transistors can be classified into four different types, as shown in Fig. 28: (i) the bottom gate-bottom contact (BG-BC), (ii) the bottom gate-top contact (BG-TC), (iii) the top gate-bottom contact (TG-BC) and (iv) the top gate-top contact (TG-TC).
 Fig. 28  Four types of configurations for OFETs based on organic semiconductor crystals. 
Four aspects need to be considered during the fabrication of transistors. The first of these is the size of the organic crystals. Usually, it is difficult to fabricate top gate devices for small organic crystals. On the other hand, the top gate-bottom contact mode (TG-BC) and bottom gate-top contact mode (BG-TC) are unsuitable for thick crystals because the charge carriers are inaccessible to the interface between the semiconductor and the dielectric layer.38,449–451 Secondly, the method of preparing the crystals has to be carefully chosen. There is no doubt that the substrate surface plays an important role in the crystal growth if the crystals grow directly on the substrate. Therefore, a suitable substrate should have a smooth surface, a low nucleation density and a low defect density. In addition, the substrate should not be affected by the crystal growth conditions. From this point of view, the top contact mode is probably more useful for obtaining large high quality crystals than the bottom contact configuration because the pre-deposited electrodes in the latter can act as nucleation sites. The third factor needed to be considered is the deposition method for the insulator and electrode layer of the transistors. Normally, because organic crystals are sensitive to both thermal irradiation and solvents, the BG-BC configuration is preferred where the organic crystals are deposited in the last step and the insulator or electrode layers are pre-deposited. The final factor is the injection and outflow of the charge carriers. The performance of transistors based on the top contact mode is superior to the bottom contact one because it usually results in better contact quality between the crystal and the drain/source electrodes. Flexible and thinner crystals (or substrates) also facilitate the formation of good contact.
4.1.1.2 Crystal phase and molecular packing. 
Normally, it is accepted that the intrinsic electronic properties of organic semiconductors are determined by two parameters: the transfer integral and the reorganization energy. They are highly dependent on the chemical structure and the molecular arrangements. There are a lot of literature reports about their definitions, their calculations and how they determine the charge transport.6,49,155,452 Hence, chemical compositions and chemical structures6 from the point of view of their influence on the molecular arrangements and in turn on the transfer integral and reorganization energy will not be discussed here.
With respect to a specified material with a definite chemical structure, the major factor that affects the transfer integral and reorganization energy is its molecular arrangement. Therefore, it is important to find ways to improve the molecular arrangements for optimized charge transport by using different crystal growth techniques. Theoretically, a slow self-assembly process will favour the packing relying on the nature of the material itself. It will result in crystal growth along the direction with the strongest intermolecular interactions. In other words, a thermodynamically stable phase with a lower enthalpy can be achieved, because this process can avoid the external impacts to the greatest extent. The thermodynamically stable phase usually means the phase with the highest performance. For example, PVT is one method which makes it possible to almost eliminate undesirable external effects. Thereby crystals with a thermodynamically stable phase can be obtained, by controlling the temperature of the sublimation and crystallization regions, the temperature gradient and the flow velocity of the carrier gas. By controlling the temperature of the crystallization region, α and β phase CuPc crystals can be achieved at temperatures lower than 192 °C and higher than 224 °C, respectively. This indicates that the α phase is a metastable phase and the β phase is a more thermodynamically stable phase, because a high temperature of crystallization is conducive for a slow deposition of the molecules.63 The crystals of the α phase63 (with the highest mobility of 0.4 cm2 (V s)−1) exhibited a somewhat lower performance than crystals of the β phase62,256,379,381,453 (with the highest mobility of 1.0 cm2 (V s)−1). Another example is that the rubrene crystals with a more thermodynamically stable state belong to the orthorhombic crystal system. These crystals can be obtained by controlling the PVT conditions, and mobility as high as 20 cm2 (V s)−137,38,70,182 was reported. However, fast precipitation was found to favour the kinetically stable state with monoclinic or triclinic phases.347 Drop-casting methods are regarded as another kind of self-assembly process. However, if the solvent is volatile and a high temperature is adopted, the evaporation of the solvent may be a fast process, which will also lead to a kinetically stable phase. An example is BPEA crystals in which either the thermodynamically or kinetically favoured phase can be obtained by a drop-casting process using chlorobenzene and dichloromethane as the solvents respectively.30,67 The fast evaporation of the dichloromethane solution resulted in a kinetically stable phase, which showed a mobility much lower than that of the crystals obtained from the chlorobenzene solution.
In addition to pursuing preferred molecular arrangements, it could be expected that high performance could also be achieved by decreasing the intermolecular distance. Fig. 29 presents an example where the intermolecular interaction was intentionally increased by bending the CuPc crystals. The bent crystals showed a higher average mobility than the straight ones. These results are in good agreement with the theoretical calculations.454 Similar results68 were found by using different solution-shearing speed to reduce the intermolecular distance of TIPS-PEN. This results in a decrease of the π–π stacking distance from 3.33 to 3.08 Å for evaporated unstrained thin films and solution-sheared strained films (at 8 mm s−1) respectively. Theoretical calculations26,43 demonstrated that decreasing the intermolecular distance can exponentially increase the splitting of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels as shown in Fig. 30A. A higher splitting of the energy orbital means a higher transfer integral and this in turn suggests a higher mobility. On the other hand, the splitting does not increase with the lateral increase of the π–π overlap but rather exhibits oscillations in the value. This indicates that the transfer integral is highly dependent on the relevant molecular orbital overlap rather than simply on the spatial overlap between adjacent molecules (Fig. 30B).
 Fig. 29  Schematic and corresponding representative SEM images of (A) straight and (B) bent CuPc crystals, the grids display the crystal lattice in the crystals and the red and green grids represent the distortion of the crystal lattice after compression and stretching respectively. (C) Schematic illustration of molecular packing of bent crystals, with denser molecular packing inside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 454. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 30  Evolution of the electronic splitting of the HOMO and LUMO as a function of the (A) intermolecular distance and (B) the lateral shift distance. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright © 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences. 
From this analysis, it is clear that the intrinsic property of a particular material is highly dependent on the intermolecular interactions and these can be tuned by different kinds of crystal growth techniques. It is noteworthy that the properties of the devices are affected by the interfaces between the semiconductor and the drain/source electrodes as well as the interface between the semiconductor and the insulator.455 In addition, the charge transport is also dependent on the testing conditions.456 For example, the temperature can affect the drift speed of the charge carriers and the volume of the crystals. The hydrostatic-pressure,457,458 the absorbed species,459 or the traps in the transporting interface all can affect the charge transport properties. In addition, the performance of the transistors is also dependent on the configuration of devices (Section 4.1.1.1), the thickness of crystals as well as the length and width of the conducting channels.
4.1.1.3 Electrodes, dielectrics and interfaces. 
Electrodes, dielectrics and interfaces can also affect the performance of the crystal devices.460–462 The interface between the semiconductor and electrodes is the region where the charge carriers inject into and flow out of the semiconductors. The interface between the semiconductor and the insulator is the region where the charge carriers transport. Meanwhile, the surface of the pre-deposited layers (the insulator layer in the bottom-gate devices and the drain/source electrodes in the bottom-contact devices) can also affect the growth and molecular arrangement of the crystals. These in turn affect the performance of devices.
4.1.1.3.1 Electrodes and semiconductor/electrode interfaces. 
For electrodes, including the gate and drain/source electrodes, a prerequisite is that the material should be highly conductive and should be able to form a uniform electric field. For gate electrodes, different kinds of materials such as highly doped silicon, metals, indium-tin oxide (ITO),463,464 conductive polymers, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)465 and graphene466 can all be used as electrodes (Table 1). In addition, the procedure used in the device fabrication, thickness, transmittance and flexibility must be considered for electrodes in specific applications.467 The drain and source electrodes are directly connected to the active semiconductor layers and determine the injection and the outflow of charge carriers. There are three main factors that influence the interface between the drain/source electrodes and the semiconductor crystals: (1) the tightness of the physical contact; (2) the energy level alignment and (3) the interface compatibility.
Table 1 Common materials for electrodes and their work functions




Material

E (eV)
Material

E (eV)
Material

E (eV)
Material

E (eV)





E: work function; CNT: carbon nanotube; ITO: indium tin oxide; AZO: aluminium doped ZnO.




Ag
4.3
Al
4.2
AZO471
3.7–4.6
Au
5.1


C
5.0
CNT472,473
4.8–5.0
Graphene474
4.6
PEDOT:PSS429
5.1


TTF:TCNQ475
4.6–4.8
Ca
2.9
Co
5.0
Cr
4.5


Cu
4.7
CuI172
5.3
Fe
4.5
In
4.2


ITO476
4.4–4.7
Mg
3.7
Mo
4.6
Ni
5.0


Pb
4.2
Pt
5.6
Sn
4.4
Ti
4.3


W
4.6
Zn
4.3












With respect to the first issue, the methods where the crystals37,468,469 are stamped onto the pre-deposited electrodes to form devices with bottom contact mode are not conducive to the charge transport. The reason can be ascribed to the rigid nature of the crystals. On the other hand, the stamping technique for placing gold or silver films92,453 onto the crystals to form devices with top contact mode suffers negligible restriction. The reason is that the metal film is flexible enough to form an intimate contact with the crystals. From this point of view, the deposition of electrodes using thermal evaporation or electron beam deposition should form good contact with the crystals. However, the experimental results are not as good as expected. The reason is that the diffusion of metal atoms into the crystals results in some damage of the crystals.470 This can be solved by judicious selection of organic materials as the electrodes (e.g. TTF:TCNQ complex) that can be deposited at low temperature.
Where the second issue is concerned, it is well acknowledged that the work function (WF) of the drain/source electrodes should well match with the HOMO or LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors in order to facilitate charge injection and collection.477–479 There are two methods for approaching this target: (i) selecting suitable electrode materials or modifying the electrodes to fit the Fermi level of the electrode to the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors; (ii) functionalizing the semiconductors to tune their HOMO/LUMO energy levels. For p-type semiconductors, the charge carriers are holes and they should be injected from the Fermi levels of the source electrodes into the HOMO energy levels of the semiconductors.480 Most organic semiconductors possess HOMO energy levels lower than −5.0 eV, which match well with metallic materials having work functions around or higher than 5.1 eV.452 Some examples are gold (5.1 eV),38 platinum (5.6 eV),481 nickel (5.0 eV)482 and carbon (5.0 eV)256 (Table 1). Research has suggested that most of the organic semiconductors with high performance have HOMO energy levels around −5.1 ± 0.3 eV. They are close to the work function of Au (5.1 eV),6 which may be one of the reasons that gold is the most widely used electrode material in p-type field-effect transistors. For n-type semiconductors, the charge carriers are electrons and they should be injected from the Fermi levels of the source electrodes into the LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors. Due to the fact that the LUMO energy levels of most semiconductors are higher than −4.0 eV, the low WF metals such as Ca (2.9 eV),451,483–,485 Mg (3.66 eV),486 Ag (4.26 eV)90,92,483,487 and Al (4.2 eV)488 were preferable for achieving electron transport. Therefore, by judicious selection of materials as the drain/source electrodes that are capable of matching the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors, higher performance devices can be expected. Moreover, p- or n-type semiconductors would be expected to exhibit reverse (electron or hole respectively) transporting characteristics. In other words, through tailoring the drain/source electrode materials, ambipolar properties can be obtained. For example, for TIPS-TAP, if a lower WF metal (Ag) is adopted for the drain/source electrodes, the electron mobility increases several times compared to the devices fabricated using higher WF metal (Au) as the electrodes.92 In addition, if using metals with a low work function, such as Ca,451,484,489,490 Ag487,490 or Mg–Ag alloy,486 most typical p-type semiconductors can exhibit electron mobility or ambipolar properties.451,484,487 The problem is that although the metals with low WF facilitate the electron injection, the hole injection is suppressed sequentially due to the mismatch of the work function with the HOMO energy levels.490 Therefore, a more intriguing and efficient method for achieving ambipolar properties is to utilize an asymmetry electrode configuration. The high WF materials used as one electrode are designed to facilitate the hole injection whereas the low WF materials used as the other electrode are for enhancing the electron injection. Such asymmetrical device configuration was also applied in devices with a view to forming stepwise energy levels among the work function of the drain electrode, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the semiconductor and the work function of the source electrode. This stepwise energy levels are helpful for the injection and outflow of the charge carriers.90,380,481 Another method for adjusting the work function of the electrodes is to modify the drain/source electrode.491,492 The work function of the electrodes can be changed by more than 1 eV by using SAMs to modify the electrodes. For example, SAMs with electron-withdrawing groups can increase the work function of the metal electrodes, whereas those with electron-rich groups can negatively shift the work function of the metals. Presently, the most commonly used SAMs are mercaptans, which can form a monolayer on the metals (e.g. Au) anchored through the thiol-group. The thiophenol-modified Au (TP/Au) electrodes493 can enhance the hole mobility from 0.7 to 3.2 cm2 (V s)−1 for BPEA crystals. Another method for modifying the electrodes is by using a thin layer of another material with a work function close to that of the semiconductors. For example, annealing the copper electrodes to form copper oxide (CuxO) can facilitate the hole injection. Compared with the Fermi level of Cu, the CuxO has a similar valance band to the HOMO energy level of the organic semiconductors. Similar results can be obtained by inserting a thin layer of molybdenum oxide (MoOx) between the electrodes and the semiconductor layer. Here, the MoOx has a high work function (5.6 eV) and is supportive to the hole injection into the semiconductors with low HOMO energy levels.208,494 In addition to the adjustment of the work function of the drain/source electrodes, the functionalization of the semiconductor itself is another method which can be used for achieving energy alignment between the work function of the electrodes and the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors. Similarly, electron-withdrawing groups are found to significantly lower the LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors. This is helpful for the good match with the high WF electrodes and makes it possible to avoid using low WF metals due to their low stability.6
Thirdly, in order to improve the interface compatibility between the semiconductor and the drain/source electrodes, there are two approaches: (i) the modification of the traditional metal electrodes by using organic materials such as SAMs; (ii) the direct use of carbon materials or organic conducting materials as the drain/source electrodes, such as graphite, graphene, CNTs, organic charge transfer complexes or conductive polymers. These methods are extremely important for creating devices with crystals grown after the deposition of the drain/source electrodes, because good interface compatibility is helpful for forming a lower density of nucleation sites and better molecular arrangements. The modification of metal electrodes by using organic SAMs is extremely helpful in the case of bottom contact devices.431,495 Sometimes, a thin layer of materials such as insulator sulphur is deposited between the semiconductor and electrodes. This can also improve the contact between the semiconductor and the electrodes and result in higher performance.496 It should be mentioned that the use of carbon materials and organic conductive polymers as electrodes is more efficient for achieving perfect contact between the semiconductors and the electrodes because of their good interface compatibility with organic semiconductors. Carbon materials, such as graphite,497,498 graphene467 and carbon nanotubes (usually adopted as a composite with polymers499), also have aromatic rings as structural units (the same with the organic semiconductors) and therefore are attractive as electrode materials. Graphite was widely adopted for the fabrication of single crystal devices. For instance, graphite ink can be used via painting onto the crystals directly.256 Similarly, carbon nanotubes can be dispersed in organic solvents with different kinds of additives (e.g. polymers to form continuous and homogeneous films for achieving a uniform electric field) and utilized as electrodes. Graphene is ultrathin and flexible, and thereby can lower the device size and reduce the edge effect of the electrodes.500 This suggests a bright future for practical applications in the next generation of transparent and flexible electrodes. Besides carbon materials, organic conductive polymers and charge-transfer complexes can also be used as electrodes. Moreover, polymers, such as polymer blend poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS),429,501,502 can be deposited through various solution-processing techniques such as spin-coating and printing techniques. Organic charge-transfer complexes are usually constituted of two parts: an electron-rich system as the donor and an electron-poor system as the acceptor. For example, tetrathiafulvalene:tetracyanoquinodimethane (TTF:TCNQ)475,503,504 is a well-known conductive charge-transfer complex, which can be formed even by two solids of TTF and TCNQ.45,505 These organic electrodes possess similar advantages to those of conducting polymers. Meanwhile, they can be deposited at lower temperature than metals which is essential for crystals in order to improve the contact between the organic semiconductor and the electrodes. For example, by using TTF:TCNQ (−4.64 to 4.78 eV) as the electrode, a mobility as high as 10–11 cm2 (V s)−1 can be obtained for HMTTF (−4.61 eV)506 crystals, while the mobility values based on devices using Ag (4.2 eV) and Au (5.1 eV) were only 0.12 and 0.02 cm2 (V s)−1, respectively.503 This could be attributed to (1) the better match between the work function of TTF:TCNQ and the HOMO energy level of HMTTF; (2) the lower deposition temperature of TTF:TCNQ which ensures smaller damage to the crystals, and (3) the better interface compatibility in the organic–organic materials. Similarly, TCNQ can also form charge transfer complexes with the electron-donor HMTTF and the film of HMTTF:TCNQ possesses smoother morphology than TTF:TCNQ films. This facilitates the formation of a homogeneous electric field and results in higher device performance.506
4.1.1.3.2 Dielectric and semiconductor/dielectric interface. 
In order to discuss the effect of the dielectric layer on the performance of single crystal field-effect transistors, it is necessary to briefly describe the structure and working mechanism of OFETs. When a gate voltage is applied to an OFET, an electric field will be generated in the dielectric layer and then the charge carriers can be induced at the interface between the semiconductor and the insulator through injection from the source electrodes. An OFET can be regarded as a capacitor, in which the gate electrode and the semiconducting layer act as two electrodes and the insulator acts as a dielectric layer. According to the equation Ci = ε0k/d (where Ci is the density of capacitance, ε0 is the dielectric constant in vacuum, k represents the relative dielectric constant and d is the thickness of the dielectric layer), there are two methods for increasing the capacitance of the dielectric layer: (i) increase the dielectric constant by choosing high k materials, and (ii) decrease the thickness of the dielectric layer. Therefore, the insulator can affect the performance of OFETs in many ways: (i) the dielectric constant (ε), which can affect the electric field intensity and the accumulation of the charges; (ii) the compactness, which affects the leakage current (the insulating property) and further influences the power consumption and ultimately the device performance; (iii) the morphology, the surface energy and the compatibility with the semiconductors. These have an enormous effect not only on the charge transport but also on the crystal growth if the crystals grow directly onto the dielectric layer; (iv) the thickness of the insulator, which affects the dielectric field intensity and the leakage current; (v) the trap density on the surface as well as in the bulk of the insulator, which can dramatically change the conductive performance of the device. The dielectric constants of different insulators are summarized in Table 2. It should be noted that the dielectric constant of the same insulator can vary when using different deposition techniques.
Table 2 The normally used dielectrics in organic transistors and their dielectric constants




Dielectric
Constant
Dielectric
Constant
Dielectric
Constant
Dielectric
Constant




BZT: barium zirconate titanate; BST: barium strontium titanate, BCB: divinyltetramethyldisiloxane-bis(benzocyclobutene); CYEPL: cyanoethylpullulan; cytop: poly(perfluoroalkenylvinyl ether); ODPA: octadecylphosphonic acid; parylene C: poly(2-chloro-para-xylylene); parylene-HT: poly(α,α,α′,α′-tetrafluoro-para-xylylene); parylene N: poly(para-xylylene); PMMA: poly(methylmethacrylate); PMPA: poly(4-methoxyphenylacrylate); PI: polyimide; PPA: poly(phenylacrylate); PQ: 6,13-pentacenequinone; PS: polystyrene; PTBS: poly(t-butylstyrene); PTFMA: poly(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methacrylate); PVA: polyvinylalcohol; PVC: polyvinyl chloride; PVP: polyvinylphenol; P(VDF–TrFE): poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene).




Inorganic gate dielectrics


Al2O3
9
BZT
17.3
BST
16
CeO2
23


Gd2O3
7.4
HfO2
21
Si3N4
7.5
SiO2
3.9


Ta2O5
25
TiO2
41
ZrO2
23










Organic gate dielectrics


BCB
2.5
CYEPL
18.5
Cytop
2.0

ODPA
ODTS

2.5


Parylene-C
3.1
Parylene-D
2.8
Parylene-HT
2.2
Parylene-N
2.65


PMMA
3.5
PMPA
3.4
PI
3.3
PPA
2.9


PQ
3.5
PS
2.6
PTBS
2.4
PTFMA
6.0


PVA
7.8
PVC
4.6
PVP
4.2
P(VDF–TrFE)
12–40


Vacuum/air
1
















A high dielectric constant means a strong ability to induce polarization and a strong capacity to store the charges. Hence, generally, a high k insulator is preferred because a high k dielectric can induce the same electric field at a low drive voltage, and this is expected to exhibit high mobility at low energy consumption.507 On the other hand, if a low-k insulator such as SiO2 is selected, an ultrathin dielectric layer should be adopted in order to increase the capacitance. This will result in a high leakage current and further decrease the device performance. By using high-k insulators as the dielectric layer, a low-voltage operation can be achieved with an operation voltage as low as 1 V. However, for devices with a low-k (e.g. SiO2, or a polymer insulator) dielectric layer, voltages as high as several tens of volts should be applied. Typical high-k insulators507 include Ta2O5, ZrO2, HfO2, TiO2, etc., which can be obtained by anodization, sputtering, e-beam deposition, atomic layer deposition (ALD) or sol–gel methods. Theoretically, a high dielectric constant facilitates the polarization of the dielectric layers when the gate voltage is applied, and this increases the capacitance. A large capacitance is helpful for accumulating more charge carriers at the interface between the semiconductor and the insulator layer in order to achieve high performance. However, the experimental results for rubrene single crystals are quite different.166 The authors concluded that the charge transport in the organic single crystals may be polaron transport. The movement of the polaron will be more hindered by a dielectric layer with a higher dielectric constant. In this situation, lower device mobility will be obtained.165,166,508–510 These have been discussed in Section 2.4. From this point of view, air or vacuum should be good candidates for dielectric layers, because they possess very low dielectric constants (ε = 1), which will result in high mobility. In addition, the defects on the surface of the dielectric layer can be eliminated, which will in turn minimize the charge traps.38,166,182,187,188,511 Similar results179 can also be found for n-type semiconductor PDIF-CN2 crystals. The maximum mobility decreased from 5.1 cm2 (V s)−1 for vacuum dielectrics (ε = 1) to 3.1 cm2 (V s)−1 for Cytop (ε = 2.1) and 2.3 cm2 (V s)−1 for PMMA (ε = 3.8) gate dielectrics.
Polymer insulators are promising for effectively reducing the cost because they are usually obtained by solution-processing techniques. However, thick films (500 nm–1 μm) are desirable in order to eliminate the unavoidable formation of pinholes.507,512 Parylene has attracted much attention, because it is deposited by polymerization and can form compact structures even as thin as 100–200 nm with the absence of pinholes and defects. The fabrication of parylene is similar to the PVT method used to grow single crystals. To summarize, the dimer source of parylene is put into a low temperature zone (∼100 °C), and its vapour is then transported to a high temperature zone (∼700 °C) and pyrolyzed into monomers. Then the monomer is transported to the deposition zone and polymerized into high quality films.9,257,513 The dielectric properties can be adjusted by facile functionalization of the dimer source to form parylene N, parylene C, parylene D and parylene HT with unsubstituted groups, chloro, dichloro and tetrafluoro groups, respectively.51,430,514,515 Due to the absence of solvent and the advantage of the low temperature deposition region, the polymers are widely used in single crystal devices with the top gate mode. For other polymers, one possible method is to introduce a cross-linking agent512,516 to solidify the insulating layer. This makes it possible to adopt a thin dielectric layer with high break-down voltage. For example, 50 nm Cytop (even thinner cytop is achievable by choosing a special device configuration517) exhibits a leakage current 1000 times lower than the drain current after the addition of the cross-linking agent.512 SAMs have also been reported as dielectric layers, because these monolayers usually form compact structures with a smooth surface. The compact structures can result in low leakage current. Typically, the thicknesses of the SAMs are only several nanometers (e.g. 2 nm) which can significantly reduce the driving voltage and power consumption. Normally, the SAMs are anchored onto the substrate with either an inherent or an introduced oxidized layer.518,519 Although polymer insulators have suitable surfaces for growing crystals (smooth surfaces, good compatibility with organic semiconductors, similar surface energies), they always suffer the disadvantages of low thermal stability and high solubility in common solvents. The low thermal stability makes the insulators inappropriate for adoption in melting or PVT crystal growing techniques. It should be noted that polyimide (PI) is a good candidate for use as a thermally stable insulator.520 Where the high solubility is concerned, it faces the challenge to seek suitable orthogonal solvents for growing crystals directly on the insulators or depositing the polymers onto the crystals.
In order to acquire high quality crystals, crystal substrates such as KCl crystals521 have been used for inducing an epitaxial growth. These results suggest the important role of the substrate surface in crystal growth and hence ultimately in the device performance. It is generally accepted that charge carriers transport in the conducting channels with a thickness of one to several molecular layers near the interface between the semiconductor and insulator layers.105,436,461 Hence, the interface also plays a very important role in device performance. This is the reason that the metal oxide dielectric layers are commonly modified by SAMs in order to achieve high device performance. SAMs can decrease or eliminate the defect density at the interface (e.g., hydroxyl groups on metal oxide trap charge carriers) and this modification is an efficient way for improving the device performance.462,522 Meanwhile, the traps also lead to the instability of the device. They can shift the threshold voltage, resulting in hysteresis of the curves. Parylene and cytop are good choices for avoiding this kind of hysteresis,523 because of the trap-free properties. SAMs, especially those with fluoro groups, can also significantly affect the charge distribution at the semiconductor/insulator interface, and thereby can significantly shift the threshold voltage. By suitably adjusting the modification of SAMs, the threshold voltage can be expected to shift to around zero, and thus decrease the energy consumption.255,519,524,525 The decrease or elimination of the traps in the semiconductor/insulator interface is also essential for enhancing the electron transport and producing ambipolar characteristics.526,527 SAM modifications or polymer substrates are encouraging strategies for decreasing the traps in the interface between the gate insulator and the organic crystals. It is worth noting that normally both requirements, including low WF electrodes and the passivation of the dielectric layer, are necessary to achieve ambipolar transport.
In summary, a favourable dielectric layer should possess the following characteristics: (i) a uniform, dense and compact structure in order to decrease the leakage current, (ii) thin enough to achieve low energy consumption and make it possible to scale down the device, (iii) a smooth surface to decrease the density of nucleation sites, (iv) a defect-free surface to reduce the charge trap; (v) a compatible surface with the organic semiconductor, (vi) a suitable dielectric constant to achieve high performance and low-voltage operation for low energy consumption, and (vii) low cost and a reasonable efficient process in order to fabricate the device over a large area. Sometimes, in order to fulfil most of or all these requirements, two or more dielectric layers are adopted to combine their best merits. For example, a double layer of metal oxide dielectrics (e.g. TiO2/Al2O3) can combine the merit of one high k material which helps to achieve low energy consumption and one large band gap material which helps to reduce the leakage current.528,529 The combination of metal oxides and polymers (such as PMMA/SiO2)208,507 can combine the merit of the high k metal oxide to achieve low voltage operation and the advantage of the polymeric compatible surface to form high quality crystals and low defect density.
4.1.1.4 Contact resistance. 
There are many factors which can affect or even determine the final performance of organic transistors. For example, the temperature can change the mobility166,182,530 as discussed in Section 2.4. Moreover, the dielectric materials, the electrode materials, the thickness of the dielectric layers, and the channel dimensions478,531 all can affect the device performance as mentioned above. In this section, we will focus on the influence of contact resistance on the performance of single crystal organic field-effect transistors.
The contact between crystals and electrodes can be observed by using scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM).532 A four-probe configuration is often useful for examining the contact resistance. Two additional electrodes are deposited between the drain and source electrodes along the conducting channel, and act as voltage probes (VXX in Fig. 31A).19,99,179,182,252,257,447,515,533–535 By using this method, the contact resistance between the crystal and drain/source electrodes can be calculated by using the whole resistance minus the channel resistance (proportional to the channel length). The mobility can be defined by using the distance of the two additional electrodes (as the channel length) and the voltage drop between these two electrodes. For example, under the same conditions, the mobility of rubrene crystals was calculated at around 18 cm2 (V s)−1 by the two-probe methods (the traditional device with only two electrodes, i.e. the drain and source electrodes). On the other hand, the mobility estimated using four-probe methods was as high as 40 cm2 (V s)−1 for the same crystal (Fig. 31B).447 These results suggest that the contact resistance plays an important role in the device performance. A precise estimation of the device performance is crucial for investigating the intrinsic properties of the crystals, the structure–property relationship and the charge transport mechanism.
 Fig. 31  (A) Schematic diagram of a device which can estimate the intrinsic mobility by removing the contact resistance. The voltage measured along the channel (VXX) is used for the four-probe method and the voltage measured perpendicular to the channel (VXY) is for investigation of the Hall-effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; (B) the transfer curve (ID as a function of VG) obtained from the traditional two-probe method and the channel conductivity (σ = ID/ΔV) as a function of VG obtained using the four-probe method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 447. Copyright © 2007 American Institute of Physics; (C) the relationship between the transversal Hall voltage and the magnetic field B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The Hall effect can be used for exploring the intrinsic performance of the crystals, because one needs to examine only the voltage as it is not dependent on the contact resistance.179,183,184,275,536 It describes the characteristics of the carriers in the semiconductor when an electric and a magnetic field are applied. When a magnetic field is applied to the field-effect transistor perpendicular to the channel, the charge carriers in the conducting channel will drift to one side of the channel due to the Lorentz force and result in electric potential difference (VXY in Fig. 31A). What is different from the four-probe method is that the two electrodes for the Hall voltage need to be fabricated perpendicular to the conducting channel, and the Hall voltage is obtained from the transversal voltage. Due to the weak dependence on the contact resistance, the experimentally obtained Hall mobility is usually higher than that from the two-probe method. An example of the Hall effect obtained from PDIF-CN2 crystals is shown in Fig. 31C. By using surface functionalization of the organic crystals with PFPE,149 Podzorov and co-workers claimed that the intrinsic mobility can be obtained due to the decrease of trap densities. Moreover, the trap-healing effect makes the observation of an extremely low-noise Hall effect possible, permitting Hall effect measurements in low magnetic fields (<1 T) and at small excitation drain currents (∼1 nA).
Assuming that the contact resistance values at every electrode are the same, the resistance of a transistor will be proportional to the channel length. A method for deducting the contact effect is to fabricate many devices with different channel lengths on the same single crystal,537 which is called the transfer line method (TLM). By using this method, the contact resistance can be removed and the “intrinsic” mobility can then be estimated. Likewise, increasing the channel length is favorable for achieving the intrinsic mobility, in which the proportion of contact resistance within the whole resistance can be reduced and thereby the short-channel effect is minimized.165


4.1.2 Manipulating the factors which influence the charge transport. 
4.1.2.1 Manipulating organic crystals. 
Usually, organic semiconductor crystals are very sensitive to heat and electron beams; therefore, the process for the deposition of insulators or electrodes on crystals is extremely important for device performance. Generally, the bottom gate bottom contact (BG-BC) configuration is most suitable for excluding external influences on the crystals. In this configuration, the crystals are deposited lastly. Hence, all the means such as photolithography, EBL, electron-beam evaporation, thermal evaporation, or solution-processing techniques (spin-coating, drop-casting, dip-coating, etc.) can be adopted188,189,495,538 for the deposition of the electrodes and the dielectric layer. For example, EBL539 or AFM nanolithography540 can be used to fabricate devices with the desired channel dimensions.
Methods such as PVT,101 drop-casting,44,79,87,301,538 dip-coating385 or ink-jet printing431 can all be utilized to grow single crystals on the pre-deposited channels for producing devices with BG-BC mode. It should be emphasized that damage on pre-deposited layers (the insulators and the electrodes) should be avoided during the crystal growth. For example, if a polymer is used as the dielectric layer, high temperature is not suitable for the crystal growth in order to exclude the deterioration of the dielectric properties such as insulating properties, smooth surface and compact structure. For solution-processing techniques, solvents that dissolve the polymer are inappropriate. In order to obtain high quality crystals and precisely control the location of the crystals, modifications of electrodes and insulators are usually employed to decrease the nucleation density of the crystals. This selective modification has been discussed in the section on crystal growth.386
The electrostatic-bonding method37 can be used for flipping the pre-grown crystals onto the channel directly,495 by mechanically placing the pre-grown crystals or dropping a suspension of the pre-grown crystals82 onto the channel. The crystals can be transferred by shaking off, mechanically transferring by forceps or probes, rubbing the substrate with pre-grown crystals, by using PDMS stamps, or floating the crystals from their suspensions.32,38,62,99,180,428,541–544 For this technique, there are almost no special requirements for the dielectric layer and drain/source electrodes. For instance, air gap or vacuum dielectrics38,99,166,182,187,188,511,545 can also be realized. Similarly, ionic liquids546–549 and even organic semiconductor crystals550 (a Schottky junction is used to reduce the leakage current by using a rubrene crystal as the dielectric layer and Ca as the gate electrode) have also been reported as dielectric layers by using this technique. A typical process for the fabrication of BG-BC devices is shown in Fig. 32. All the other layers are fabricated before crystal location. Another merit of this method is that the crystals can be moved away and placed again so that the anisotropic property of the same crystal can be investigated.
 Fig. 32  Schematic diagrams of the electrostatic bonding technique for achieving crystal devices, in which other layers are fabricated before the crystal location (bottom gate-bottom contact). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2004 the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As mentioned in the sections on interfacial effects between the semiconductor and drain/source electrodes, this method used for fabricating crystal devices usually results in large contact resistance.37,469 One reason could be ascribed to the rigid nature of the crystals. Small crystals with flexibility can adhere onto substrates more tightly.189 The modification of drain/source electrodes is also helpful for lowering the contact resistance between the electrodes and the crystals.250,495,535 Another efficient method for getting intimate contact is to utilize a flexible substrate and insulator (e.g. PDMS).37,188,468,551 For example, rubrene crystals on a non-flexible substrate (SiO2) showed a mobility of about 2.6 cm2 (V s)−1. However, when a flexible substrate was used, such as PVP as the dielectric layer and kapton or PET as the substrate, its mobility reached as high as 4.6 cm2 (V s)−1 with a lower threshold voltage and a higher on/off ratio.468
4.1.2.2 Manipulating the dielectric layer and the semiconductor/dielectric interface. 
The utilization of traditional top gate mode (as in organic transistors) meets a big challenge for organic semiconductors. The most critical reason is that organic semiconductors are sensitive to heat, electron beams, solvents and so forth. Hence, the deposition of a dielectric layer on organic semiconductors will affect the device performance, especially when high temperature or solution-processes are utilized. As for organic semiconductor crystals, there is another challenge, i.e. the difficulty in achieving large organic semiconductor crystals.552 Devices using air as the dielectric in the top gate mode can be achieved by directly placing the needle probe above the channel as the gate electrode.553 This method is free from the deposition of the dielectric layer on the crystals; however, it faces its own drawbacks.
The deposition of a dielectric layer on crystals should be approached at low temperature to avoid thermal irradiation to the crystals. When solution-processing techniques are used, the dielectric layer should be obtained from an orthogonal solvent. One strategy is to utilize vapour deposition to deposit the polymer insulators, such as parylene, which can be deposited at room temperature using chemical vapour deposition.152,252,256,257,430,497 This room-temperature and solvent-free deposition eliminates the potential thermal damage and solvent dissolution of the crystals. In addition, the compact structure of the parylene film is helpful for obtaining low current leakage with a thin dielectric layer. Additionally, the dielectric constant of parylene is very low, which facilitates a high mobility. For instance, a mobility as high as 31.3 cm2 (V s)−1 was obtained from a top gate-top contact device (TG-TC) by using parylene as the dielectric layer and C8-BTBT as the semiconducting layer.430 The highest performance based on CuPc single crystals was also obtained by using this kind of device configuration with parylene as the dielectric layer.256 Vapour deposition is not only effective for polymers like parylene, but it also works effectively for small molecules such as 6,13-pentacenequinone (PQ).36 Slow vacuum evaporation can lead to compact PQ films at low thickness (∼200 nm) with low leakage current. Based on this PQ dielectric layer, pentacene crystal transistors exhibit a mobility of up to 40 cm2 (V s)−1.
Some mechanical ways, such as stamping or micro-contact printing techniques, have been developed for transferring insulator films onto crystals. These can eliminate the thermal and solvent damage on the crystals. For example, a 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) single crystal534 was attached onto the surface of the rubrene crystals and it acted as the gate dielectric layer. The traps in the interface between the rubrene crystals and the dielectric layer of the DPA crystals are predicted to be negligible. Podzorov and co-workers554 reported the fabrication of a device by laminating the insulating polymer membrane onto the crystals as the dielectric layer. It was achieved by suspending the membrane above the crystal and then pulling the membrane tightly onto the crystal to form an intimate contact. The schematic diagram of this vacuum lamination approach is presented in Fig. 33. This method is free from high temperature processes, does not need the solvent and can be applied onto any surface. It is particularly useful for crystal surfaces which may affect the growth of the insulator and result in loose structures and high leakage current.128,554 In addition, due to the softness and flexibility of the polymer membrane, the process can be repeated many times onto the crystals without destroying them.
 Fig. 33  Schematic diagrams of the vacuum lamination approach for achieving crystal devices with top gate-top contact mode. The polymer membrane (Mylar®) is laminated onto the crystal as the dielectric layer by vacuum pulling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 554. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another approach for obtaining polymer dielectrics is to use an insulating solution, in which the solvent is orthogonal to the semiconductor.555 For example, a polymer electrolyte556 deposited by drop-casting its acetonitrile solution has been reported as the gate dielectric layer. Acetonitrile is chosen because it is an anti-solvent for the semiconductor. In order to further reduce the influence of the solution on the crystal, a buffer layer can be pre-deposited onto the crystal. Similarly, a droplet of insulator solution onto large crystals to form a dielectric layer was also reported. The leakage current can be reduced by minimizing the overlap between the dielectric layer and the drain/source electrodes. For instance, a polymer gel electrolyte557 in acetonitrile was drop cast on rubrene crystals to form 100–300 μm droplets as the dielectric layer. A gold wire was placed onto the electrolyte to act as the gate electrode. Ionic liquids558 can also be adopted as the dielectric layer by placing a droplet onto the crystals. It has also been reported that pure water can be utilized as the gate dielectric.559 Water is incapable of dissolving typical organic semiconductors and can be dropped onto the crystals to just cover the conducting channel. Similarly, aqueous solutions560–562 containing media such as NaCl have also been adopted. These devices can be used as PH sensors or biosensors. Lee and co-workers563 reported devices based on P3HT nanofibers (the fabrication procedure is shown in Fig. 34). Electrospinning techniques were used to achieve long and continuous fibres. Ionic liquids and poly(ethyleneglycol) diacrylate (PEG-DA) are exploited as the dielectric layer in order to decrease the influence of the deposition procedure on the crystals. The polymer is polymerized after the deposition of the monomer and the UV cross-linking initiator.
 Fig. 34  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for a top gate-bottom contact device based on electrospinning of P3HT fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 563. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
4.1.2.3 Manipulating the source/drain electrodes and the semiconductor/electrode interface. 
In earlier work, drain/source electrodes were fabricated by manually painting onto the crystals directly. The painted electrodes can be Ag,102,515 Au564 or graphite paste,256,257,497 Ag-epoxy,36,57 or even metal nanoparticles with polymers. Thermal evaporation has been widely reported for the deposition of drain/source electrodes,252,257 although this method may result in thermal irradiation of the crystals and metal atoms may diffuse into the crystals, leading to deterioration of the device performance. However, it exhibits some advantages such as (i) the formation of a smooth and continuous film, (ii) the absence of solvents which avoids any potential dissolution of the crystal and (iii) free from damage induced by techniques such as EBL and photolithography. In addition, it can eliminate the mechanical damage occurring in the painting methods. It should be noted that these evaporated electrodes430,503,565,566 can be metals or organic charge transfer salts. Of these materials, the TTF:TCNQ complex is one of the most promising materials because of its low evaporation temperature and possibility of forming intimate contact with organic semiconductors. Micro-contact printing and ink-jet printing (e.g. PEDOT:PSS complex502) can also be used to deposit the drain/source electrodes. This is a superior pathway for achieving electrode arrays.
For small crystals, the manipulation of the source and drain electrodes precisely onto the crystals is one of the toughest issues. The first report of deposition of source/drain electrodes onto individual micro/nanometer sized crystals utilizes a gold wire as the shadow mask.62 The gold wire produces a channel length of 20–25 μm, similar to its diameter. By slightly and parallelly moving the gold wire to deposit the electrodes twice or thrice, the channel length can be even narrower, e.g. ∼5 μm,11,16,62,381 which leads to successful device fabrication based on a crystal with a size over ∼5 μm. Similarly, polymeric fibres (normally, ∼20 μm) can also be used as shadow masks.273,300,340,355 If the electrode materials are changed during the second deposition, asymmetric electrodes can be obtained.90 The process is presented in Fig. 35. The asymmetric drain/source electrodes are helpful for forming stepwise energy levels among the drain electrode, the semiconductor crystal and the source electrode. These stepwise energy levels facilitate the charge transport in the transistors.90 Although the painting technique can also give asymmetric electrodes,102 the multi-deposition through movement of the shadow mask is superior in forming smooth and regular electrodes on micro/nanometer sized crystals and with the absence of mechanical damage.
 Fig. 35  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for deposition of drain/source electrodes by using the shadow mask technique (copper grid or micro/nanometer sized wires/ribbons as the mask). Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another pioneering work used a copper grid as the shadow mask.96 Compared with the painting technique (which normally has channel lengths around or even longer than 1 mm252,257), the copper grid mask provides an efficient way for fabricating devices with small dimensions. A shorter channel length can be obtained by using grids with narrow bars and channel lengths as short as 5 μm have also been reported.567 The channel length can also be decreased by using the shadow effect. By simply changing the relative position between the substrate and the material source, e.g. by rotating the substrate, an oblique incidence can be achieved leading to deposition of the electrodes beneath the mask near its edge.481 This oblique incidence also provides an approach for fabricating asymmetric electrodes, by changing the source material during the second deposition. Theoretically, different types of shadow masks can be used to provide the shadow effect, such as copper grids,438,481 tungsten wires568 or organic crystal ribbons.382
A further decrease in the channel dimension was designed by using organic micro/nanometer sized wires/ribbons as shadow masks.16,54,55,63,67,85,97,302,382,569 The channel length was dependent on the diameter/width of the mask, so that it could be decreased to nanometers. If thinner or “edge-on” crystals are employed, even narrower channels can be obtained.570 In addition, the small mask can be electrostatically bonded onto the probe tip, which makes it feasible to transfer the wire/ribbon mask to any desired place for electrode deposition. Moreover, due to the flexibility of the organic wires/ribbons and their electrostatic bonding effect with the probe tip, this technique can eliminate the mechanical damage which can happen in the other shadow mask techniques. The wire/ribbon mask can also be replaced by other films such as gold films.348,571 It is noteworthy that because of the small size and flexibility of these shadow masks, it is convenient to fabricate devices by crosswise or parallelly placing two or more wires/ribbons as shadow masks on the same crystal. This means it is possible to form 4 or 6 electrodes on an individual crystal which has dimensions of only several micrometers. Lee and co-workers572 reported an electrospinning method for fabricating electrode arrays. Well-aligned polymeric nanowire arrays were fabricated onto the semiconductors using electrospinning and used as shadow masks to deposit metal films. Using this method, electrode arrays with channel lengths scaled down to 100 nm were achieved after removal of the shadow mask.
Even though the shadow mask techniques make it possible to fabricate drain/source electrodes on small crystals, the thermal irradiation onto the crystals is inevitable during the vapour evaporation process. Although some efforts have been made to eliminate the diffusion of the metal atoms into the crystal lattice, such as by increasing the distance between the material source and the crystals, or lowering the temperature of the crystals,257 it is difficult to avoid the damage of the ordered crystal structure. In a pioneering work,449 Bao and colleagues first fabricated divided, round electrode arrays onto the substrate followed by placing a semiconductor crystal into the center of these round electrode arrays using an electrostatic-bonding method. Then a pre-deposited drain/source pair on the PDMS substrate was flipped and pressed onto the crystal. Hence, by moving the top contacted drain/source electrode pair, this method can be used to investigate the performance along the different directions without repeatedly moving the fragile crystals. In order to eliminate thermal irradiation and decrease the mechanical damage, Hu and co-workers explored a “stamping” technique by mechanically transferring the pre-deposited metallic films30,38,80,92,94,105,119,188,342,378,453,454,573 or conducting nanowires379 onto the crystals as electrodes. This process is presented in Fig. 36. A small piece of an electrode film is transferred from a pre-deposited film by using the micromanipulator probe of a probe station. Then the small piece of the electrode film is placed on the crystals directly to form the drain/source electrode. The thickness of the electrode film is about 100 nm, which is dependent on the scalability and ductility of the materials.92 It should be mentioned that channel lengths as narrow as several micrometers can also be obtained using this method, which, therefore, can meet the challenge of fabricating devices onto small crystals and can decrease or eliminate the mechanical, thermal or electron beam damage resulting from other techniques. Additionally, this method can also provide asymmetric drain/source electrodes by stamping two different electrode strips (e.g. a gold and a silver film) as the drain and source electrodes respectively (Fig. 36B). Compared with the aforementioned techniques for fabricating asymmetric drain/source electrodes, this method is extremely superior due to its facile operation and negligible damage to the crystals.
 Fig. 36  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for deposition of (A) symmetric and (B) asymmetric drain/source electrodes through a “stamping” technique by transferring the pre-deposited metal films onto the crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.3 Highlights of important factors for high performance organic field-effect transistors. 
It is believed that organic semiconductors with mobilities greater than or equal to 1.0 cm2 (V s)−1 are necessary for practical applications, because this value is comparable with the mobility of amorphous silicon. In this section, we will summarize the organic semiconductors with reported crystal mobilities greater than or equal to this value in Table 3. Their chemical structures, molecular arrangements and crystal growth methods are also shown for reference. Based on these comparisons and analyses, some rules for high performance devices are expected to be drawn, which are helpful for revealing the intrinsic properties of the crystals, investigating the device physics, studying the structure–property relationship and unveiling the charge injection and transport mechanism. For some materials, such as rubrene and pentacene, because there are many publications referring to their crystal devices, only some representative results are presented here.
Table 3 Representative semiconductors with crystal mobilities greater than or equal to 1.0 cm2 (V s)−1 and together with their chemical structures, molecular arrangements, preparation conditions and properties




p-Type

E
l




E
g



Packingc
Growth techniqued
Insulator
Contact mode, Ee
Df

μ



Ref.





a 
E
l: energy level (eV), HOMO energy levels for p-type semiconductors and LUMO energy levels for n-type semiconductors.
b 
E
g: energy gap (eV) between HOMO and LUMO energy levels.
c P: packing mode, H: herringbone packing, π:π-stacking.
d T: techniques for growth of organic semiconductor crystals.
e C: contact mode, E: the electrode material of drain/source electrodes, BG: bottom gate, TG: top gate, BC: bottom contact, TC: top contact.
f D: crystal directions from which performance data were obtained.
g The unit of μ is cm2 (V s)−1.
h PQ: 6,13-pentacenequinone.
i 4-Nitrobenzenethiol modified Au.
j PFBT: pentafluorobenzenethiol.
k Calculated results.
l DTES: decyltriethoxysilane.
m NA: not applicable.
n The value is obtained by using ion gel as the dielectric layer.
o BCB: divinyltetramethyldisiloxane bis(benzocyclobutene); —: not found.








−5.21
2.57
H
PVT
PDMS
BG BC, Au
—
2.4

551 and 574






−5.0
1.8
H
PVT
PQh
TG TC, Ag-epoxy
—
40

36 and 575






−4.96
1.4
H
PVT
OTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
4.28

576






−4.41
1.95/2.03
H
PVT
SiO2
BG BC, Aui
—
1

577






−5.6
3.0
H
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010]
34

578



[001]
23





—
—
—
Drop-casting with solution epitaxy
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
4.0

579






−5.4
2.6
H
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100]
4.3

55 and 575



[010]
2.2





−5.36
2.21
Slipped π
PVT
PDMS
BG BC, Au
[010], π
15.4

37, 38 and 451



[100]
4.4


Air
BG TC, Au
[010], π
24.5





—
—
Slipped π
PVT
Air
BG BC, Au
—
16

580






—
—
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG BC, Au
[010], π
12

581






−5.93
2.33
Slipped π
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.54

582



Cytop
BG BC, CNT/Au
—
4.8

583






—
—
Slipped π
PVT
Parylene
TG TC, graphite ink
[100], π
1.6

497






−5.7k
—
Slipped π
PVT
Parylene-N
TG TC, graphite ink
[100], π
1.7

498






−5.38
1.98
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100], π
9

584 and 585






−5.49
2.57
Slipped π
Drop-casting
PI
BG BC, TP/Au
[010], π
3.2

30, 396 and 493



Spin-coating
PTS/SiO2
BG TC, Cu
[010], π
3.2





−5.11
1.69
2D π
Solvent-exchange
SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
1.42

88 and 586



Solvent-exchange and aging
SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
1.73

332



Dip-coating
Al2O3
BG TC, Au
[100], π
1.5

284



Ink-jet printing and annealing
SiO2
BG BC, Ti/Au/PFBTj
—
1.7

431



Droplet-pinned crystallization
BCB/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
3.8

404



Solution-shearing
PTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
4.6

68



Fluid-enhanced solution-shearing
PTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
11

410






−5.47
2.2
1D π
Drop-casting
HMDS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100], π
3.7

587






—
—
π
Solution-processing method
Cytop/ZrOx
BG TC, Au
[100], π
4.1

588






−5.3
—
H
PVT
SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100]
2.5

59



[010]
1.3


[110]
0.75


[001]
0.016





−6.01
2.75
Slipped π
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
—
2.1

589






−5.43
2.36
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.91

590






−5.08
2.8
H
Drop-casting
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001]
10.2

591






−5.12
2.8
H
Drop-casting
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001]
1.8





−5.5
3.5
H
Solvent-vapour annealing
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, MO3/Au
[100]
9.1

208, 430 and 592



Ink-jet printing
Parylene-C
TG TC, Au
—
31.3





−5.5
3.5
H
Solvent-vapour annealing
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
6.0

362 and 592






−5.5
3.5
H
Drop-casting
PhTS/SiO2
BG TC, FeCl3/Au
—
4.4

592 and 593






−5.7
—
H
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, MoO3/Au
—
17

494



BG TC, V2O5/Au
—
10.6





−5.48
—
H
PVT
F-SAM/SiO2
BG BC, Au
—
1.3

400



Edge-cast solution crystallization
DTES/SiO2l
BG TC, Au
—
1

400






−5.42
—
H
Edge-cast solution crystallization
DTES/SiO2l
BG TC, Au
—
3.6

400






−5.56
3.36
π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
HMDS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100], π
3.2

282 and 350






—
—
—
Drop-casting with solution epitaxy
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.3

579






−5.6
3.46
H
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001]
1.8

54 and 594



[100]
0.8





−5.6
3.4
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
8.5

595



—
Drop-casting
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010]
18.9





−5.34
2.76
—
Solvent-exchange
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.66

317






−5.68
2.96
H
PVT
FDTS/SiO2
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
—
1.5

596






−5.57
2.90
H
Edge-cast solution crystallization
DTS/SiO2
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
—
1.0

596






−5.64
2.99
H
Gap-cast solution crystallization
DTS/SiO2
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
[011]
6.5

596






—
—
H
Edge-cast solution crystallization
DTS/SiO2
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
[101]
9.5

596






−5.44
3.0
H
PVT
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au/TTF-TCNQ
—
8.3

597 and 598






−5.38
3.0
—
Edge-cast solution crystallization
SAM/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
11

398, 407 and 599



SAM/Al2O3
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
10.7


Cytop
TG TC, Au
9





−5.24
—
H
Edge-cast solution crystallization
β-PTS/SiO2
BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au
—
16

600






−5.2
2.2
H
PVT
PVP
BG BC, Au
[100]
16

601






−5.31
3.37
Slipped π
PVT
Parylene
TG TC, Au paste
[001], π
1.1

564






—
—
H
PVT
Parylene-N
TG TC, colloidal graphite
—
1.5

602






—
—
2D π
PVT
OTS/SiO2
BG BC, Au
—
6

603






—
2.12/1.93
Special π
Solvent-exchange
OTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.6

318






−5.39
2.90
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
2.66

94






−5.3
3.48/3.12
Slipped π
Solvent-exchange
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
2.13

340






−5.7
3.1
—
Solution-process
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
2.1

273 and 355






−5.09
2.76
Slipped π
Drop-casting
ODTS/SiO2
BG BC, Au
[010], π
1.2

44 and 604






—
—
—
PVT
Vacuum
BG BC, Au
—
4

605






−5.14
2.51
Slipped π
Drop-casting
SiO2
BG BC, Au
[010], π
3.6

87 and 606






−4.96
2.4
Slipped π
Drop-casting
SiO2
BG BC, Au
[010], π
1

607 and 608






−4.61
—
2D π
PVT
Parylene-C
TG TC, TTF:TCNQ
[100], π
11.2

503 and 506



Recrystallization
Parylene-C
TG TC, TTF:TCNQ
[100], π
10.4





−5.45
2.78
—
Drop-casting
SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
1.0

105 and 609






−5.08
2.32
—
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
—
1.64

610






−5.32
1.74
—
Drop-casting
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010]
6.2

611






−5.2
1.7
π
PVT
Parylene-N
TG TC, graphite
[010], π
1.0

256 and 612



ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
2.35

613






−6.77k
2.42k
π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[010], π
2.31

613






−5.43
1.7
π
Solvent-exchange
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
2.9

614






—
—
Quasi-2D π
Solvent-exchange
SiO2
BG BC, Au
—
1.8

32






−5.19
2.59
1D π
PVT
SiO2
BG BC, Au
[001], π
1.0

615






−5.11
2.97
H
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Pt–Ag
—
1.0

481






−5.2
2.9
π
Micro-contact printing
SiO2
BG TC, Ag
[100], π
1.8

423






−5.44
2.41
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100], π
3.6

80 and 616






—
—
π
Solvent-exchange
SiO2
BG BC, Au
—
4.4

346






−5.1
1.8
NAm
Electrospinning
Ion gel
TG BC, Au
—
2n

96, 295 and 563






—
—
NAm
Solvent-vapour diffusion
HMDS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
Intramolecule
5.5

280






−5.17
1.64
NAm
Solution-processing technique
OTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
Intramolecule
7

281 and 617







n-Type

E
l




E
g



Pc
Td
Insulator
C, Ee
Df

μ



Ref.







−4.5
1.7
Slipped π
PVT
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ag
[100], π
1.1

613, 618 and 619



BG TC, Au
[100], π
1.24





−3.6
2.3
Slipped π
PVT
Cytop
BG BC, CNT/Au
—
4.2

583






−2.1
3.41
H
PVT
PVP/SiO2
BG TC, Mg–Ag
—
1.5

486, 568, 620 and 621



Vapour sublimation
SiO2
BG TC, Au
—
3.1





−3.64
2.34
Slipped π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001]
3.25

622






−3.84
2.34
Slipped π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100]
2.6

622






−3.84
2.29
1D π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100]
6.55

622






−4.03
2.29
1D π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[100]
12.6

622






−4.10
2.30
Slipped π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
Cytop/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001]
4.66

622






−4.63
2.25
Slipped π
PVT
Air/vacuum
BG BC, Au
[100]
1.6

301, 511 and 623







—
—
π
Co-Sublimation
Parylene-C
TG TC, TTF:TCNQ
[010]
1

565






−4.6
—
π
PVT
Vacuum
BG BC, Au
π
6–7

624 and 625






−3.26
2.75
Slipped π
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
—
2.5

589






−4.01
2.91
Slipped π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Au
[001], π
8.6

356 and 626






−4.1
2.0
Slipped π
Solvent-exchange
SiO2
BG BC, Au
[100], π
1.4

95






−4.5
2.3
2D π
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG BC, Au
—
6

41, 42 and 627






−4.01
1.74
2D π
Solvent-vapour diffusion
OTMS/SiO2
BG TC, Ag
[010], π
1.77

92 and 628






−3.79
2.66
Slipped π
PVT
Parylene
TG TC, graphite
—
3.39

629






−4.22
1.82
—
Solvent-vapour diffusion
ODTS/SiO2
BG TC, Ag
—
4.65

348






−4.5/−3.8
1.7/2.4
NAm
Droplet-pinned crystallization
BCB/SiO2o
BG TC, Au
—
11

120






—
—
1D π
Solvent-exchange
SiO2
BG BC, Au
[100], π
20

32





Through careful analyses of the data presented in Table 3, some useful conclusions can be drawn and will be highlighted here, for further understanding of the fundamental device physics and the charge injection and transport mechanisms, and consequently promoting the practical applications of organic semiconductors:
(i) The most important factor dominating the device performance is the nature of the material itself. The performance presented here should be quite close to the intrinsic properties of these materials, due to the absence of grain boundaries, the minimal defects and the perfect order of the crystals. Since the relationship between the chemical structure and the property is not within the scope of this review, the universal rules for the design and synthesis of organic semiconductors are not discussed here. Issues such as the importance of a planar chemical structure, extended π-systems, C2 symmetry and the π-stacking mode have been well discussed elsewhere.6,452
(ii) The anisotropic properties of the charge transport in the crystals are comprehensible, which can be ascribed to the structural anisotropy. Simply speaking, during the movement of the charge carriers, the micro-environment (different atoms, chemical bonds, intermolecular interactions, intermolecular distance, etc.) along different directions is different, hence leading to different transport characteristics. In other words, the charge transport is highly dependent on the electronic coupling and electron–phonon coupling, and they are affected by the surrounding atmosphere. From Table 3, it is clear that the 5 examples, such as DBTDT, DPV-ant, rubrene and 4,4′-bis((E)-2-(naphthalen-2-yl)vinyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (BNVBP), show strong anisotropic properties. Details of the charge transport mechanism and the internal reasons for the anisotropy are discussed in Section 2.
(iii) It is generally believed that the mobility of an organic crystal depends on its molecular arrangement. The arrangement affects both the integral transfer and the reorganization energy. Hence, for future applications, it is of great significance to ensure that the conducting channel is along the preferred orientation of the charge transport during the device fabrication. As shown in Table 3, besides the examples which show anisotropic mobility, the highest device performances of the other materials are usually obtained when the preferred molecular orientation, i.e., the strongest intermolecular interactions such as π–π stacking directions (e.g. rubrene37), is along the conducting channel. For a herringbone packing mode, similar results can be found and indicate that closer C–H⋯π interactions lead to higher performance (e.g. DPV-Ant,55 DBTDT54). For polymers, the intramolecular interactions are the strongest relevant interactions. Therefore, the highest performance obtained for polymer crystals is along the direction which is parallel to the polymer chains. More details on the structure–property relationship can be found in Sections 2 and 4.1.1.2.
(iv) The energy alignment between the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of organic crystals and the Fermi levels of the source/drain electrodes is very essential for the device fabrication, in order to facilitate charge injection from the source electrode into the HOMO/LUMO energy levels as well as the subsequent outflow from the semiconductor into the drain electrode. The HOMO energy levels of most p-type semiconductors lie around −5.1 ± 0.3 eV. Hence, Au, Pt or carbon are excellent candidates for the drain/source electrodes. The LUMO energy levels of most n-type semiconductors are higher than −4.0 eV, and therefore Ag or Mg–Ag alloys (with even lower Fermi levels) are better choices than Au. It is found that cautious selection of the electrodes to ensure stepwise energy levels can facilitate charge transport for high performance devices.90,481 These asymmetric electrodes are also capable of achieving ambipolar characteristics. Such energy alignments have been discussed in Section 4.1.1.3.1 and the techniques for realizing stepwise energy levels can be found in Section 4.1.2. In addition, suitable modification of the electrodes can change the WF of the electrodes and thereby facilitate the charge injection, leading to enhanced charge transport properties.
(v) The dielectric layer plays a key role in the performance of organic transistors (for details see Sections 2.4 and 4.1.1.3.2). For example, it is believed that the dielectric constant affects the capacitance of the transistors and the polarization of the charge carriers. According to the polaron theory, a low dielectric constant will result in high mobility. As shown from the data in Table 3, it is interesting that high performance devices are always based on insulators with low dielectric constants, such as SiO2, parylene, cytop, PI, PDMS, PVP, etc., and devices with air or vacuum as the dielectric layers can exhibit even higher performance37,38 (for the dielectric constants of these materials, please refer to Table 2).
(vi) The interfacial compatibility also plays an important role in device performance (for details see Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2). This will not only affect the crystal growth on the substrate, but also the density of traps and defects. That is the reason why most of the dielectric layers or drain/source electrodes are modified by SAMs or other interfacial layers, with a view to inducing suitable molecular arrangements, reducing the trap density and decreasing the damage of the latter-layer deposition onto the organic crystals. From this point of view, organic and flexible insulators are beneficial for forming intimate contact with the crystals. Air or vacuum dielectrics can eliminate defects between the dielectrics and the organic crystals, which is helpful for achieving high performance devices. The decrease in trap density is useful for creating high performance devices and ambipolar properties.
(vii) The crystal growth conditions can also significantly affect the device performance (see Section 3). For example, crystals obtained by the PVT method usually result in higher performance due to the absence of any contamination. Similarly, drop-casting, slow solvent-exchange and solvent-vapour diffusion techniques are beneficial for accessing high quality crystals. This can be attributed to the slow self-assembly process. Thermal or solvent annealing processes are expected to further optimize the molecular arrangements and examples can be found for TIPS-PEN crystals.
In addition to the factors discussed, the device configuration, the method of device fabrication (e.g. painting, vacuum evaporation or “stamping” method for fabricating drain/source electrodes), the channel dimension (channel length,531 width and thickness of the crystals) all can affect the device performance. For example, it has been found that the increase of channel length will shift the threshold voltage to more positive values for rubrene crystals.531 This behaviour is ascribed to the change of space charge transferred from the contacts into the semiconductor. Also, the increase in the growth temperature will increase the activity of the molecules, and thereby increase the intermolecular distance. This can be inferred from the lattice parameters of rubrene crystals obtained at different temperatures.70 The imposed external forces will also affect the molecular arrangement (e.g. the solution-shearing method for growing crystals68,410 or intentional bending of the crystals454). These of course lead to a subsequent variation of the properties. In addition, other factors such as the conditions used for device measurements (environment, pressure, temperature,630etc.) will also influence the device performance. For example, the mobility of rubrene exhibited positive and negative pressure coefficients depending on whether it was measured below or above 600 MPa respectively. This effect is reversible when sweeps were repeated back and forth, which suggests that the pressure not only changes the intermolecular distance but also causes additional molecular displacement.186 Also, it was observed that the switch-on of high-vacuum gauges also causes a decrease of the surface mobility and an increase of the threshold voltage in vacuum-gap transistors, probably because the gauges can generate electrically neutral free radicals on the surfaces of semiconductors that act as surface traps.459


4.1.4 Devices based on organic single crystal transistors. 
Because of the absence of grain boundaries, the long-range periodic order as well as the minimized traps and defects, the devices based on single crystals are ideal candidates for ascertaining the factors which influence the device performance, examining the charge generation, injection, transport and combination mechanisms, investigating the structure–property relationships and guiding the future application of organic semiconductors.
4.1.4.1 Inverters and integrated circuits. 
Inverters, one of the basic logic circuits, can be constructed by using one or two transistors. One of the gate electrodes acts as the input and the shared drain/source electrode is regarded as the output. Logically the output is opposite to the input. The truth table is shown in Fig. 37A. Inverters can be fabricated by a wide range of means.631 One simple method is to use an n-type or p-type transistor coupled with a resistor (Fig. 37B). However, there are several disadvantages. First, when the transistor is on, in other words, the input voltage value is higher than the threshold voltage (high input), there is a current flowing through the device. This current will lead to high power consumption, low processing speed and an output voltage lying in the range between VDD and zero rather than an output voltage of 0 (low output). Albeit useful, increasing the load resistance is inadequate for shifting the output voltage to 0 and sharpening the transition region between the high output (VDD) and the low output (0). Secondly, the size of the resistor is usually much larger than that of the transistor. This will obstruct the scaling down of the circuits. Organic inverters consisting of two transistors with the same type (p- or n-type) can also be exploited (Fig. 37C and D). They have the advantage of facile fabrication because only one kind of semiconductor and electrode are adopted. Moreover, both of them occupy a smaller size and have a better overall performance compared with the resistor loaded invertor (Fig. 37B). The problem is that the leakage current still exists when the driver is on, because the load is always active. It is well recognized that the best configuration is the complementary inverter, which contains one n-type and one p-type transistor, as shown in Fig. 37E.
 Fig. 37  Schematic diagrams of inverters. (A) Truth table; (B) p-type inverter with resistor load; (C) p-type inverter with enhancement load (saturated); (D) p-type inverter with depletion load; (E) complementary inverter. 
The power consumption of a complementary inverter is negligible because one of the transistors is always off. And the voltage transfer characteristics exhibit a full output voltage swing between 0 V and VDD with a sharp transition. In addition, the complementary inverter also operates robustly and has a better noise margin. However, the problem for organic semiconductors is that there are few n-type or ambipolar semiconductors with high mobility and high stability, as mentioned in the above sections. This creates a mismatch between the n-type and p-type mobilities.632 In addition, it is difficult to align the HOMO (for the p-type semiconductor) and LUMO energy levels (for the n-type semiconductor) of two semiconductors to facilitate hole and electron injection simultaneously. Nevertheless, complementary inverters (Fig. 37E) based on organic semiconductor crystals have been reported by several groups. For example, tetramethylpentacene (TMPC) and N,N′-di[2,4-difluorophenyl]-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI)577 are adopted in complementary inverters as the p-type and n-type semiconductor crystals respectively. Here the p-type TMPC acts as the load and the n-type PTCDI acts as the driver. A gain of 4.2 is obtained from this inverter. A similar example379 is obtained by using CuPc and F16CuPc as the p-type and n-type semiconductor crystals respectively. Here F16CuPc and CuPc act as the load and the driver respectively. As shown in Fig. 38A–C, SnO2:Sb nanowires are adopted as the electrodes. The voltage transfer characteristics are obtained by applying the input voltage (Vin) onto gate A and the power source (VDD) onto the source electrode (No. 1) of the n-type semiconductor with the p-channel source electrode (No. 5) grounded. Sharp switching character is observed with a gain of up to 7 (Fig. 38D). In another example,79 inverters consisting of n- and p-type crystal arrays are achieved through drop-casting the suspension of the pre-grown crystals onto the patterned electrodes. The inverters exhibit nearly symmetrical voltage transfer characteristics and gate switching, which could be attributed to the good match of the device performance and similar threshold voltage. It should be noted that the match between the electric performance of n- and p-type channels can also be obtained by adjusting the channel dimensions and geometries.577 By using C8-BTBT and PDIF-CN2 as p- and n-type semiconductors respectively, Soeda and co-workers113 reported a complementary inverter which exhibited a maximum gain of 120. They ascribed the high performance to the high mobility of the two materials, the minimized shallow-trap density, the high crystallinity of the two semiconductors and the absence of grain boundaries. Bao and co-workers404 fabricated a complementary inverter based on the crystals which were grown by using droplet-pinned crystallization. In order to realize the p-type and n-type crystals on the same substrate, the substrate surface area between the two droplets was treated by UV-ozone to prevent the inter-diffusion of the two solutions. Due to the high performance of both crystals, inverters with gains as high as 155 were observed. Ambipolar semiconductors are favorable for simplifying the device fabrication process because the transistors based on ambipolar semiconductors can be used as either the load or the driver. An attempt was reported by Zhu and co-workers297 based on co-crystals by using a D–A system where DPTTA was the donor and TCNQ was the acceptor. Inverters based on these co-crystals exhibited a maximum gain of 10 with a simple device configuration where Au was used as the electrodes.
 Fig. 38  (A and B) Schematic diagrams and (C) SEM images of an organic circuit containing an n-type F16CuPc nanowire, a p-type CuPc nanowire and six SnO2:Sb nanowires as electrodes, (D) an example inverter by applying the input voltage onto gate A and the power source onto the source electrode (No. 1) of the n-type semiconductor with the p-channel source electrode (No. 5) grounded, (E) various potential device applications can be achieved by using different connections. Reprinted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The lack of n-type or ambipolar organic semiconductors with high mobility and stability makes it difficult to fabricate high performance complementary inverters. To get around this problem, a hybrid structure is a good choice. This can be achieved by using high performance p-type organic semiconductors and high performance n-type inorganic semiconductors for the inverters. For example, CuPc and ZnO nanowires were integrated into complementary inverters,378 with a maximum gain of 18 obtained by using ZnO as the load and CuPc as the driver. A maximum gain of 29 was achieved by reversing the roles of the two crystals. Judicious choice of different electrode materials to match the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the crystal is another way to make high performance inverters. Suitable electrode materials and configurations can facilitate hole and electron injection simultaneously. Efforts484 using Au and Ca as electrodes for rubrene inverters were reported in the literature. In order to enhance electron transport, the electron conducting channel was designed short but wide. The inverter gain was as high as 140, which could be ascribed to the high switching performance in both the p- and n-channel transistors. Finally, it should be mentioned that other inverter configurations are also applicable for organic semiconductors. For example, two DPV-Ant single crystals,55 which exhibit a high mobility of up to 4.3 cm2 (V s)−1, were utilized in a p-channel inverter with depletion load. The crystals were transferred from pre-grown substrates (using the PVT method) by using a mechanical probe. The inverter exhibited ideal transfer curves with gain as high as 80.
Complex logic circuits are crucial for the potential application of organic semiconductors. Hu and co-workers379 demonstrated the fabrication of logic gates of NOR and NAND by using nanowire crystals of CuPc as the p-type semiconductor, F16CuPc as the n-type semiconductor and SnO2:Sb as the electrodes, respectively. The circuits exhibited low operation voltage (<10 V), low current (<4 pA) and low power dissipation (<40 pW). Such performance was ascribed to the high quality of the semiconductors and electrodes and the energy level matching between them.
In a short summary, because of its negligible power consumption, a complementary inverter consisting of an n-type transistor and a p-type transistor is preferable. There is no doubt that high and comparable performances of the two transistors are favourable to realize high performance inverters. In order to facilitate charge transport, cautious selection of the electrode materials and design of the device configuration are indispensable. For example, the material of the shared electrode should be suitable for matching both the HOMO of the p-type semiconductor and the LUMO of the n-type semiconductor.
4.1.4.2 Photoswitches and phototransistors. 
One important property of semiconductors is that they have appropriate energy gaps, which can absorb light with suitable energy. Where organic semiconductors are concerned, when the electron on the HOMO energy levels absorbs a photon, it can be excited to the LUMO energy levels, thus leading to the positively charged hole. The electron and hole are attracted to each other by electrostatic Coulomb forces and the electron–hole pair is defined as an exciton. The electron–hole pair can be separated into free charge carriers by, for example, a suitable built-in potential in the p–n junction for the photovoltaic effect or by an external potential to form electricity. This light dependence of the electric signal has attracted much attention633,634 due to its potential applications in light detection and energy conversion. These photoresponse phenomena have been used as organic photovoltaic cells (Section 4.3), photoconductors, photodetectors,635 light sensors (Section 4.1.4.4), optoelectronic memories (Section 4.1.4.3), signal amplifiers and circuits.
When an external bias voltage is applied onto the two-terminal devices to dissociate the excitons, the light can be transferred into an electric signal. In this situation, the conductivity of the channel can be tuned or even switched between ON and OFF by controlling the light (photoswitch), similar to the role of the gate voltage in the field-effect transistors.502 Because most organic semiconductors have low conductivity, the devices are OFF under normal states. When they are illuminated, the photoexcited charge carriers change the semiconductor to be more conductive (the photoconductive effect567,636), and the photoswitch is switched on. Research suggests that the photo-generated excitons in crystals have a much longer lifetime317 and longer diffusion lengths (micron magnitude)48,212,213 as long-lived triplet excitons by fission of singlets. The generated singlet excitons215 have a short lifetime of less than 10 ns and most of the singlet excitons can fissure into triplet excitons with a lifetime of ∼100 μs. It has been found that the switch on of the vacuum gauge (generating chemicals that land at the surface of crystals and form surface traps)213 can significantly decrease the photocurrent and a thin protective layer can inhibit the gauge effect. These results imply that the photoconductivity is predominantly a surface effect (Fig. 39A). A possible mechanism is that the long-lived triplet excitons are capable of reaching the surface of the crystals via long-range diffusion, where they dissociate due to the interactions of triplets with surface defects (e.g. lattice discontinuity) and thereby generate a surface photocurrent. The photoconductivity follows a power law with three distinct regimes as the excitation power increases (Fig. 39B), rather than a linear photo-response.213 Moreover, the surface photoconductivity shows different power exponents compared to the bulk photoconductivity, due to the different dominating terms of exciton fission, fusion and diffusion, as well as triplet-charge quenching. The localized photoexcitation and spatially resolved detection of excitonic luminescence visually showed that the triplet exciton is strongly anisotropic with long-range diffusion along the direction of π–π stacking (Section 2.5).48 The competition637 between the luminescence of excitons and the decay of excitons into free carriers determines the photocurrent. It has been suggested that free charge carriers only appear at enough photo energies, and at relatively low photo energies, free charge carriers can only be created through a long-lived intermediate state. The long-lived intermediate state probably refers to the triplet excitons.
 Fig. 39  (A) Effect of a high-vacuum gauge on the photoconductivity of rubrene crystals, suggesting that the surface trapping due to the gauge effect significantly reduces the photoconductivity of rubrene crystals and hence implying that the photoconductivity is predominantly a surface phenomenon. (B) Typical dependence of photocurrent on the excitation power in rubrene crystals, showing three distinct regimes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
A quick response and a large current on/off ratio are necessary for the application of photoswitches in light detectors,638 light sensors, memories318 and circuits. Remarkably, photoswitches with on/off ratios as high as 103 and response times (rise and decay) less than 100 ms have been reported for some organic semiconductor crystals.67,83,355,403,639–642 The charge accumulation and release rates643 can be as high as 1012 cm−2 s−1. It should be noted that besides the light density, the photoresponse is also highly dependent on the wavelength of the light. The reason is that the energy levels of the organic semiconductor are discrete and hence can only be excited by photons with certain energies.639 Besides the aforementioned gauge effect and protective effect, another piece of evidence to manifest the surface-activated photoexcitation is that the switch ratio in the photoswitches639,644 is affected by the area of the crystals under illumination. Hence, the photocurrent can be tuned by modification of the crystal surface by exciton splitters.212 For some semiconductors (e.g., rubrene), the photoresponse is very slow or even irreversible. The persistent ON state could be ascribed to the photo-oxidation of the organic crystals.130,458,644,645 The photoresponse544 effect was also reported in single crystal charge-transfer interfaces, which were formed by laminating two PVT-grown crystals (TCNQ and rubrene) successively onto the substrate. Interestingly, the charge-transfer interface exhibited much higher photoresponse than the sum response of the two individual crystals. This could be ascribed to the interfacial band bending facilitating the photoexciton dissociation.
It is well recognized that gate bias can facilitate the dissociation of the excitons. In this situation, the device is defined as a phototransistor, which can display an even higher on/off ratio (as high as 104–106) than that of a photoswitch.109,301,402,403,502,639,641,646 The photoresponsivity is gate dependent and increases with the increase in the gate bias. This in turn confirms that the gate voltage (the photovoltaic effect567,636) can facilitate the dissociation of the photo-generated excitons.317,643 In photoswitches,641 the semiconductors may not recover back to their initial state after illumination due to residual charges in the conducting channels. However, the gate bias in phototransistors can repel the residual charges, resulting in low OFF current and a high on/off ratio.318 This residual charges may be ascribed to the traps or degradation of the semiconductors as mentioned above.644,647 Therefore, phototransistors exhibit higher sensitivity (signal amplification) and larger on/off ratios (lower noise) than photoswitches. In addition, the mobility643 of the transistor can also be significantly enhanced by exposure to light. It should be noted that the increment of the mobility is also dependent on the wavelength of the incident light.614,643 This is similar to the wavelength dependence of the photoswitch performance. Additionally, the enhancement is particularly large for devices with lower mobility, which can be ascribed to the filling of the traps by the photogenerated carriers. Finally, it is understandable that the photoresponse properties are highly dependent on the dimension of the crystals because the photocurrent can only be generated from the absorption. This is the reason that bottom contact devices result in better performance than top contact devices.643 It is also the reason that the photocurrent increases with the thickness until the current reaches a saturation at a thickness of about 6 μm for 2,6-di(naphthalene-2-yl)-9,10-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)anthracene (TIPSAntNa) single crystals.502 Based on the high sensitivity and large on/off ratio of phototransistors, a series of devices with potential applications can be fabricated.639
4.1.4.3 Memory devices. 
Many methods can be used for constructing memory devices such as using a floating gate, a ferroelectric dielectric layer or photoresponse.641,648 A good non-volatile memory should possess at least two stable states including the initial state (OFF state as “0”) and the “reading” state (ON state as “1”) after the “writing” process, as well as the ability to recover to the initial state through an “erasing” process. Taking an organic phototransistor as an example (Fig. 40),318 (i) when there is no light and the gate voltage is applied on the transistor, it works in the pristine state; (ii) after illumination, it exhibits high conductivity, and this illumination process is the “writing” process. If the highly conductive state is persistent, it can be used as the “reading” state; (iii) when the channel shifts from high conductivity to low conductivity by applying a suitable gate voltage or other approaches, it is an “erasing” process; (iv) a good memory means that it can be operated in at least one complete cycle of “reading”, “writing” and “erasing” processes. For example, rubrene can only be “written” once because of the persistent photoconductivity that originates from the degradation of the organic semiconductors (see Section 4.1.4.2). Kim and co-workers318 reported one unprecedented high photoresponsivity organic semiconductor (an anthracene derivative) crystal, whose phototransistor can be operated through repeated “writing”, “reading” and “erasing” processes as shown in Fig. 40. Similar examples614 can also be found for crystals based on two porphyrin derivatives by using monochromatic light of 474 nm to “write” and a gate voltage of −100 V to “erase”.
 Fig. 40  (A) Transfer characteristics of phototransistor ① in the dark and ② under light irradiation; (B) current dependent on the different process, ① “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process without illumination, ③–⑨ attempted “erasing” process by using different gate voltage; (C) current dependent on the different process through a whole operation cycle, ① “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process, ③ “erasing” process by an applied gate voltage of −90 V; (D) current dependent on the different process through two operation cycles with multi-stage process, ① first “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process, ③ second “writing” and “reading” process by an applied gate voltage of −50 V, ④ “erasing” process by an applied gate voltage of −90 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Polar ferroelectric polymers such as poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its copolymers with trifluoroethylene (TrFE) (PVDF–TrFE) can be applied as the dielectric layer for data storage. The permanent dipole pointing from fluorine to hydrogen in the ferroelectric state can result in macroscopic polarization which can be switched by an electric field. However, this kind of polymers usually possess many structural defects such as grain boundaries, pinholes, residual solvents, and surface roughness, all of which affect the arrangement and morphology of the semiconductor thin film layers on them and hence result in unreliable data retention and high voltage operation. Semiconductor crystals make the studies on this area possible because they can avoid such effects due to their compact structures and inherently low defects. In order to reduce the leakage current of such memory devices, another insulating layer such as a metal oxide or a polymer can be inserted between the gate electrode and the ferroelectric layer. For example, memory devices based on TIPS-PEN crystals exhibited a substantially stable drain–source current modulation with an ON/OFF ratio higher than 103 at a gate voltage sweep of ±30 V and a data retention longer than 5 × 104 s by using PVDF–TrFE as the ferroelectric dielectric layer.649 However, this method usually results in a high voltage operation (e.g. ±30 V) accompanied with high power consumption. The blending of ferroelectric polymers with other polymers is not only capable of achieving smooth films, but is also beneficial for decreasing the thickness of the insulating layer which in turn can lead to low voltage operation. For instance, blends of PVDF–TrFE and PMMA650 showed lower surface roughness even at a thickness of 200–300 nm, which provided hysteresis of TIPS-PEN crystal devices with a drain current bistability of 103 and a data retention time of more than 15 h at ±15 V. A further decrease in the operation voltage651 can be achieved by confining the ferroelectric layer (PVDF–TrFE) in nanoscopic trenches to form a dense PVDF–TrFE layer. The polarization of PVDF–TrFE can be retained with similar crystal orientation, even after melting and recrystallization, because of the confined crystallization. Based on this hybrid ferroelectric layer, the ON/OFF bistability of the TIPS-PEN crystal device was approximately 102 under ambient conditions with a gate voltage sweep of ±8 V and the ON and OFF currents did not change obviously over 2 h. The stacking of ferroelectric materials on the semiconductors acting as a surface modification129 is another way for keeping the polarization as well as reducing the effect on the defects and growth of the semiconducting layer.
4.1.4.4 Sensors. 
As mentioned above, due to the ultra-sensitive conducting channel of OFETs to outside stimuli, e.g., pressure, temperature, light, gas, liquid or bio-analytes, OFETs are suitable for wide applications as sensors and actuators for accurate detection.418,648,652–654 For example, toxic gas molecules (e.g. NO2, CO or organic solvents) can be adsorbed onto the conducting channels and act as defects for charge carriers. This means that the drain–source current can be changed sharply before and after gas adsorption, which makes OFETs ideal for use as gas sensors. Pressure, especially mechanical pressure, can change the intermolecular interactions (Section 4.1.1.2) and light can generate excitons which can be separated into charge carriers (Section 4.1.4.2). Both of them in turn will change the OFET performance.
The electrical properties of the devices are highly dependent on the intermolecular distance or arrangement and therefore organic field-effect transistors can be used to investigate the atmosphere or mechanical pressure because they can change the intermolecular distance or even molecular arrangement. For example, pressure directly applied onto the crystals can change the performance of the devices,454 which can be ascribed to the change in the intermolecular interactions due to the stretching or compression of the crystals. Fig. 41 presents one example418 where the dielectric layer is used to test variations in the pressure. The field-effect transistors used for mechanical pressure sensing consisted of rubrene single crystals as the semiconductor layer and PDMS microstructures as the dielectric layer. The microstructure of the dielectric layer provided a sensitive regime for detecting the mechanical pressure because the pressure can decrease the dielectric thickness and thereby increase the capacitance. The dielectric capacitance is highly dependent on the thickness and compactness of the dielectric layers, which has been discussed in Section 4.1.1.3.2. The drain–source current can be affected by the dielectric capacitance, which is nonlinearly dependent on the pressure. Results suggest that the sensitivity and the pressure range can be adjusted by fine-tuning the shape of the PDMS structures.
 Fig. 41  (A) Schematic diagram of a FET sensor for mechanical pressure sensing based on rubrene crystals and PDMS microstructures as the semiconductor and insulator layer respectively. (B) Output curves at different pressures (loads). (C) The change of drain–source current is proportional to the change in capacitance. This is nonlinearly dependent on the pressure. Inset: Quick response and relaxation of the pressure sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 418 and 655. Copyright © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited and Copyright © 2012 Science China Press. 
Some organic semiconductor crystals are highly sensitive to light. Hence, devices based on these organic semiconductor crystals can be used for detecting irradiation by converting the light signal into an electrical signal. Under illumination, the semiconductor molecules can absorb photons and then generate excitons. When a bias is applied, the excitons can be separated into charge carriers. The generation of excitons is highly dependent on the light density and wavelength. For example, by using 4-hydroxycyanobenzene (4HCB) and 1,8-naphthaleneimide (NTI) as semiconductors, Fraboni and co-workers656 reported an X-ray detector with high stability and reproducibility. They found that high-Z electrodes and substrates can enhance the collected electrical signal, and this effect can be eliminated by shielding the electrodes during irradiation or by using low-Z materials such as organic materials as electrodes (e.g. PEDOT:PSS).
Chemical sensors are one of the most widely studied sensing applications of OFETs. Normally, the chemical is adsorbed onto or diffused into the channel which leads to polarization of the semiconductors,128,399,459 the charge traps,569 the formation of the D–A complex657 or even novel products due to the reaction between the adsorbed chemicals and the organic semiconductors.658 By investigating the change in the electric signal, the adsorbed objects can be detected. A good chemical sensor should possess high selectivity, high responsivity, fast response, fast recovery and high sensitivity. All signals such as conductivity and threshold voltage can be exploited as sensitive detection probes. For example, the adsorption of NO molecules481 onto the surface of indolo[3,2-b]carbazole (ICZ) crystals can positively shift the threshold voltage and increase the drain–source current. On the other hand, the adsorption of ethanol onto 2,8-dichloro-5,11-dihexylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (CHICZ) crystals569 decreases the mobility and reproducible, sensitive and selective response is observed. Research suggests that charge carrier transport occurs at the interface between the semiconductor and insulator and the interface has a thickness of only several nanometers, as mentioned above. Hence, it is generally believed that the chemicals should diffuse, possibly through for example grain boundaries, into this interface for chemical sensing.652 From this point of view, the air dielectric can exhibit much higher sensitivity than the PMMA dielectric, because of the larger area available for adsorption of the toxic gas. The adsorption659 of SO2 enhanced the mobility of CuPc by 764% in 20 ppm SO2 by decreasing the shallow trap density and the air dielectric provided both high sensitivity (119% enhancement at 0.5 ppm) and a high resolution of 100 ppb. High selectivity is also the prerequisite for a senor for practical applications. Li and colleagues reported an ammonia gas sensor with high selectivity, high responsivity (low relative off current when exposed to ammonia), high sensitivity (low concentration detection ability), fast response and recovery rate, good reversibility and stability. This sensor was made by using dip-coated 2,7-dihexyl-dithieno[2,3-d;2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT-C6) crystals for their devices.292 Interestingly, the devices based on rubrene crystals128,459 exhibited a negligible response to normal acetone or water vapors. On the other hand, devices in which the crystals had been modified by SAMs displayed a clear sensitive action on such vapors, in particular for polar species such as acetone, ethanol and water.128,459 Because the chemicals are unlikely to diffuse into the crystals, the sensing of the chemicals is more probable to be a surface phenomenon.
The detection of analytes in solutions can also be accomplished using OFETs where the most convenient way is to use the solution as the dielectric layer. For example, a NaCl aqueous solution560–562 is adopted as the dielectric layer and Ag/AgCl wire or Pt meshes are used to provide the gate bias voltage, in a system that is widely adopted to investigate the pH values. Results suggest that the decrease in pH values can result in protonation which leads to the formation of delocalized radical cations and thereby the conductivity is increased. At the same time, the gate voltage is helpful for increasing the sensitivity with a reverse response at positive/negative voltage. At positive voltage, high pH values correspond to a low drain/source current, whereas at negative voltage, high pH values correspond to a high drain/source current.

4.2 Device physics in organic single crystal light-emitting diodes and light-emitting transistors
Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) consist of two terminals, with hole injection coming from a transparent anode (usually ITO) and the electron injection from a cathode. Holes and electrons combine to form excitons in the organic emitting layer and then decay occurs via irradiation to give off light.660 Normally, thin film OLEDs require at least double layers of organic semiconductors: one layer is p-type for the hole injection and transport, and another layer is n-type for electron injection and transport. The balance of hole and electron injection and transport is the key issue for the high efficiency of OLEDs. The crystal-based OLEDs and the corresponding light-emitting transistors discussed here are dedicated to the study of the intrinsic properties of the semiconductors, the exploration of the charge injection, transport and combination, the investigation of the structure–property relationship, and the examination of the important factors for high performance devices, considering the high quality, the anisotropy and the defect-free characters of the crystals. For example, based on the analysis of the crystal structures, one efficient way for enhancing the light emission is to prevent the quenching by tuning the molecular packing motifs, e.g. shifting the co-facial H-aggregation to head-to-tail J-aggregation.
The first OLEDs based on single crystals661 were reported in 1963 by using very high voltage potential (>400 V). For single layer devices, the active emitting layer should possess ambipolar properties for effective emission. In order to achieve ambipolar transport, one efficient method is to use low work function materials to facilitate electron transport, due to the lack of high performance n-type transport. For example, ambipolar transport was observed for α,ω-bis-biphenyl-4-yl-terthiophene (BP3T) crystals when Al or Li was used as the cathode and Au as the anode. The devices exhibited excellent electroluminescence.662 Similarly, orange emission was observed from perylene crystals663 when Ag and Mg:Ag were used as the two electrodes. 1,4-Bis(2-cyano-2-phenylethenyl)benzene (BCPEB) crystals664 have also been reported which showed green electroluminescence emission with Au as the anode and Al or LiF/Al as the cathode. The devices with LiF/Al as the cathode displayed better performance than those with Al as the cathode. This suggests the importance of the energy level matching between the LUMO energy level of the organic semiconductor crystals and the Fermi level of the cathode. By comparing two crystal materials with the same Au–Ca asymmetrical electrodes, Feng et al. found that the better energy level matching can ensure a more effective hole and electron injection,665 which will result in a lower carrier injection barrier and a lower onset voltage. High luminance intensity can be achieved. However, the external electroluminescence (EL) quantum efficiencies of these single-layer devices are still low, which can be ascribed to the low electron mobility and the poor charge balance between the hole and the electron mobilities. By using pure 1,4-bis(4-methylstyryl)benzene (BSB-Me), tetracene or pentacene doped BSB-Me crystals, three primary colors (blue, green and red respectively) can be achieved.666 The pentacene doped BSB-Me showed a high luminance of 820 cd cm−2 with a high EQE of 0.31%.
Double-layer structures are widely used in thin film OLEDs, which are more likely to be adopted in practical applications. Therefore, double-layer structures667 containing p- and n-type semiconductor crystals are ideal candidates for investigating these systems. It is indisputable that balancing hole and electron transport is necessary for achieving high performance OLEDs. By using 1,4-bis(4-methylstyryl)benzene (CH3-P3V2) and 5,5′-bis(4-trifluoromethyl pheny)[2,2′]bithiophene (P2TCF3) as the hole transport and electron transport materials respectively, the double-layer structure showed an external EL quantum efficiency of up to 0.025%. This is one order of magnitude higher than that of single layer devices, showing the importance of the p–n junction for light emission. Additionally, although the whole thickness of the device was much larger than that of the traditional thin film devices, a current density of 100 mA cm−2 can be obtained at 19 V. This was achieved at much lower electric fields compared with the traditional thin film device due to the high carrier mobility in the single crystals. In order to achieve high mobility to enhance the light emission, therefore, one efficient way is to fabricate double layer devices by utilizing films which contain many crystals as the active layer. For example, coronene nanowires336 are drop-cast onto the n-SiC substrate to form a heterojunction with the n-SiC. This exhibits visible emission with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of about 90 nm at 20 V by using ITO coated quartz and Ti/Au as the cathode and anode respectively. Similar results337 were also reported by using DPA nanostructures as the p-type active layers.
As mentioned above, the gate voltage can control the charge injection and transport in the conducting channels, and this provides an efficient way to control the combination of electrons and holes if an additional gate voltage is applied to the light-emitting diodes. This kind of devices are called organic light-emitting transistors (OLETs), and were first demonstrated in 2003 for tetracene films.632,648,668–671 Due to the planar geometry of OLETs, this is a direct way to access electroluminescence visually compared to the traditional vertically stacked OLEDs. Not surprisingly, because of their potential applications in organic lasers and integrated organic optoelectronic devices such as displays, OLETs have attracted a lot of attention.
In early studies, light emitting properties were observed in unipolar field-effect transistors. In p-type conducting channels, when holes transport to the drain electrode, they combine with electrons from the drain electrode and then emit light near the drain electrode. Because the light emission region is confined to near the drain electrode within a very narrow region it follows that the efficiency of the devices is very low. The efficiency is limited by the injection of electrons and most of the holes are wasted during the propagation rather than contributing to light emission. The efficiency can be improved by the use of an asymmetric electrode configuration to facilitate the electron injection (e.g., BP3T with LUMO at 2.8 eV, HOMO at 5.1 eV). The use of low work function materials as one electrode (Al: 4.3 eV or Mg:Ag alloy:3.7 eV) and high work function materials as another electrode (Au: 5.1 eV)527 is one option. It is generally accepted that low work function materials benefit the electron injection and transport due to the match between their work function and the LUMO energy levels of the organic semiconductors.451
In order to enhance the electron injection and decrease the exciton quenching at the metal electrodes, ambipolar charge transport is preferred. In 2007, Takenobu and co-workers672 reported the first ambipolar OLETs based on organic semiconductor single crystals. Tetracene crystals were adopted as the semiconducting layer and Ag–Ag symmetrical electrodes or Mg–Au asymmetrical electrodes were used as the drain/source electrodes. When the gate voltage was kept constant and the drain voltage was applied, ambipolar transport and light emission were obtained. In addition, the position of the recombination or emission zone could be tuned along the conducting channel by adjusting the drain voltage. Unlike the aforementioned unipolar OLET based on BP3T,527 the ambipolar transport obtained from tetracene can probably be ascribed to the PMMA modification of the substrate which reduced the electron traps between the crystal and the dielectric layer, and the high drain voltage which repelled (or injected) the electrons into the channel. By inserting PMMA between the BP3T crystal and the SiO2 dielectric layer and using Au/Ca asymmetrical electrodes to facilitate the electron transport, ambipolar BP3T610 transport was also reported with hole and electron mobilities as high as 1.64 and 0.17 cm2 (V s)−1, respectively. Fig. 42 presents the device configuration and the light emission of the BP3T crystals. Results confirm that the PMMA modification can significantly decrease the traps in the semiconductor/insulator interface.451 Similar results451,589,673 were found by using Au/Ca asymmetrical devices and the resulting ambipolar FETs can emit light when the gate voltage is almost half of the drain voltage.673,674 All these results indicate that, as has been mentioned in the previous section, the passivation of the dielectric layer and the matching of the energy levels between the Fermi level of the electrodes and the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the semiconductors are very crucial for efficient charge transport.
 Fig. 42  (A) Weak excitation photoluminescence image of a BP3T crystal on a PMMA/SiO2/Si substrate; (B) schematic diagram of an OLET device configuration and the imitation of the injection and recombination of the charge carriers; (C) top view and (D) the side view of the edge emission of the BP3T crystals showing that the emission moves with an increase in the drain voltage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 610. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Because the commonly adopted electrodes for electron injection are susceptible to air, it is useful to keep the fabrication and characterization process free from air and increase the deposition rate and the thickness of electrodes. Moreover, a buffer layer inserted between the electrode/semiconductor interface can facilitate the injection of the charge carriers, For example,675 due to the energy level mismatch between the HOMO energy level of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)p-bis[(p-styryl)styryl]benzene (P5V4) and the work function of the Au electrode, the threshold voltage was found to be as high as −80 ± 3 V. However, the threshold voltage could be reduced to 2 ± 3 V by inserting a thin MoOx layer (2 nm) and the minimum current density increased to 100 A cm−2 under the same conditions. This was two orders of magnitude higher than that of the devices without the MoOx layer. Similarly, it was observed that alkali halide modification of the electrodes, such as by using CsF, can facilitate electron injection, and this led to a higher mobility of 0.2 cm2 (V s)−1 and a lower threshold voltage of 50 V. In the absence of CsF modification, the mobility was 0.1 cm2 (V s)−1 and the threshold voltage was at 120 V.676
Although various attempts have been made to improve the device performance of the OLETs, almost all of them adopted electrode materials with low work functions with a view to facilitating electron injection. These unstable low work function materials usually resulted in low device performance and made the devices unstable. Yamao and co-workers677 reported a kind of OLETs involving an alternating current (AC) bias on the gate. At low frequencies, the device worked similar to that using DC voltage. The device gave off light only when the gate voltage was negative and the major carriers were holes recombining with electrons close to the source electrode. Here the source electrode was defined as the terminal associated with electron injection. However, at high frequencies, when the gate voltage becomes positive, there will be a region of depleting holes near the source electrodes, and the quick injection of electrons will result in highly efficient emission. The results suggest that high frequencies will lead to enhanced and apparently continuous light compared to the blinking light which is observed at low frequencies. These results are quite attractive because the device is based on a symmetrical electrode configuration with stable and high work function electrodes, and no treatment is necessary for the substrates, which of course will significantly simplify the fabrication process. Where the practical application of OLETs is concerned, the emission light should be strong enough and as narrow as possible. By using a square-wave bias instead of the sinusoidal wave, Yamao et al.678 reported a device which showed emission ten times stronger than that of a normal sinusoidal wave AC gate bias and a much narrower spectral line with a FWHM of 1.1 nm. The emission679,680 can also be narrowed by using grating dielectric layers.681 There is no doubt that the recombination of the electrons and holes was confined in the crystals. Therefore, it is to be expected that the recombination of the charge carriers and the luminescence can be confined by current confinement through etching of the crystals.676 By using this method, the current path was confined to the remaining parts of the crystals and thereby current density as high as 33 kA cm−2 could be obtained.
Double-layer structures were also studied for investigating the double-layer OLETs. In bilayer-crystal devices two crystals are laminated onto the substrate successively. For example, AC5-CF3 and BP1T crystals682 were successively placed on the substrate to form the heterojunction. However, the device only exhibited p-channel conduction under the DC bias due to the non-direct contact of the n-type crystal with the electrodes. This device produced much brighter light emission from both p- and n-type crystals under AC bias. The emission was hundreds of times higher than that of the single-layer devices. Further studies683 showed that an additional intermediate contact between the two crystal layers and an additional bottom contact (in this situation every crystal of the double-layer crystals has both bottom and top-contact) made the direct injection of electrons and holes possible. This in turn facilitated the light emission even without any gate bias. Devices based on double-layer crystals such as a coupler and an optical resonator have been addressed.684 We will summarize the representative semiconductor crystals, their chemical structures, growth conditions and properties for OLETs in Table 4.
Table 4 Representative organic crystals in OLETs and their chemical structures, growth conditions and properties




Structure
HOMOa
LUMOa

E
g



PL
Tb
Insulator
C, Ec

μ



EL
Ref.



μ
h


μ
e






a The units of HOMO and LUMO energy levels and the energy gap (Eg) are eV.
b Techniques for organic semiconductor crystal growth.
c C: contact mode, E: drain/source electrode materials, BG: bottom gate, BC: bottom contact, TC: top contact.
d The unit of μ is cm2 (V s)−1.
e The energy levels of the top layer belong to the p-type semiconductor in the double-layer device and the bottom energy levels belong to the n-type semiconductor.
f The hole mobility was obtained from the device with the p channel on the top of the double-layer device. The electron mobility was obtained from the device with the n channel on the top of the double-layer device.
g The energy levels on top belong to tetracene and the bottom energy levels belong to p-distyrylbenzene: tetracene is a dopant (as hole trapping) in the p-distyrylbenzene crystals; —: not found; NO: not observed; EQE: external EL quantum efficiency.








−5.1
−2.8
2.3
80%
PVT
SiO2
BG TC, Au–Au
0.29
NO
NO

527



BG TC, Au–Al
0.22
NO
—


BG TC, Au–MgAg
0.06
NO
—


PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
1.64
0.17

Light: 578 and 616 nm
Current density: 412 A cm−2


610



BG TC, Au–Ca
—
0.27
Current density: 10 kA cm−2

685



BG TC, Au–CsF/Ca
0.2
0.2
Current density: 33 kA cm−2

676






—
—
—
—
PVT
SiO2

BG BC
Cr/Au (or Ti/Pt)

—
—

Blue to green light
EQE: 0.001% (DC gate voltage)
EQE: 0.013% (AC gate voltage)


677



Solution
SiO2
BG TC, Au–MgAg
—
—
Light: 491.5 nm; FWHM: 1.1 nm

678






−4.83
−2.76
2.07
—
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.04
0.02
Yellow light

686






—
—
—
—
Vapor
SiO2
BG TC, Au/Cr–Au/Cr
0.12
—
Yellow light: 563.7 nm; FWHM: 42.1 nm; EQE: 3.7 × 10−4%

679



SiO2 (grating)
Yellow light: 556.3 nm; FWHM: 2.05 nm; EQE: 4.9 × 10−5%






−5.26
−5.51


−1.57
−2.10


3.69
3.41e

—
Vapor
PMMA
BG TC, MgAg–MgAg
10−4–10−3
—

Blue to yellow light
EQE: 0.045%


682







−5.06
−5.51


−1.85
−2.10


3.21
3.41e

—
Vapor
SiO2
BG TC, Au–MgAg
0.01
0.03f
Green to orange light

683






−5.4
−2.4
3.0
<1%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Ag–Ag
0.097
0.013
Light: 540 nm; current density: ∼kA cm−2

672



BG TC, Au–Mg
0.16
0.037


BG TC, Au–Ca
2.3
0.12
Light: 540 nm; EQE: 0.03%; current density: 2 kA cm−2

673






−5.36
−3.15
2.21
<1%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.82
0.27
Light: 650 nm; EQE: 0.015%; current density: 4 kA cm−2

673



PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.57
0.015
Light: 610 nm

451






−5.8
−2.8
3.0
85%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.12
0.013
Light: 472 nm

687



BG TC, Ca–Ca
Blue light: 450 and 472 nm; EQE: 0.06%

249






−5.4
−2.85
2.55
79%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Ca–Ca
0.02
0.012
Green light; EQE: 0.64%; current density: 0.66 A cm−2

249



−5.8
−2.8–2.85
2.95–3g





−5.6
−2.7
2.9
89%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.17
0.009
Blue light: 460 nm; EQE: 0.1%; current density: 3.7 A cm−2

674, 687 and 688






−5.7
−3.0
2.7
52%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.12
0.11
Light: 526 nm; EQE: 0.1%; current density: 6 A cm−2

687






−5.7
−3.1
2.6
40%
PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
0.38
0.28
EQE: 0.08%; current density: 2 A cm−2

675



BG TC, MoOx/Au–Ca
0.14
0.15
EQE: 0.1%; current density: 100 A cm−2





−6.01
−3.26
2.75


PVT
PMMA/SiO2
BG TC, Au–Ca
2.1
2.5
Green light; current density: 100 A cm−2

589





4.3 Device physics in organic single crystal photovoltaic cells
Organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) utilize the photoelectrical effect of organic semiconductors to convert light into electricity. This is the reverse process of generating light from electricity found in OLEDs. OPVs include several basic processes: the absorption of light by organic semiconductors to generate excitons, diffusion and dissociation of excitons into free charge carriers in organic semiconductors, the transport of the free charge carriers, and the collection of charge carriers by the electrodes.689 When the electron jumps into the LUMO orbit after absorption of a photon, the spin property of the electron may remain the same or convert to its opposite spin, leading to singlet or triplet states respectively. After its generation, the exciton may diffuse, or evolve ranging from dissociation into electron–hole pairs, fusion of two excitons into one exciton, fission into two excitons, trapping, annihilation or emission (Sections 2.5, 4.1.4.2 and 4.2). In order to achieve efficient OPVs, the enhanced absorption of the photons, the long-range diffusion and efficient dissociation of the excitons, and the fast transport of the electron and hole free charge carriers to reduce the recombination of the electron–hole pairs are of significant importance. Singlet excitons can split into two triplet excitons and this singlet fission process leads to carrier multiplication in photovoltaics.217,690 The singlet has a very short lifetime (∼ns) and hence the fission of singlets into triplets (lifetime: ∼μs) is essential for OPVs. Crystals open a route for fission of singlet excitons. Moreover, the triplets have a large diffusion length (∼μm) in crystals. The long lifetime and diffusion length of the triplet excitons is helpful in enhancing the dissociation of the excitons, reducing the recombination and quenching and thereby increasing the conversion efficiency.214 From the above sections, it is clear that the crystals are also beneficial for the transport and collection of the free charge carriers, due to the absence of the grain boundary, the ordered molecular stacking and the minimal defect density (Sections 2 and 4). On the other hand, after creation of the excitons, the exciton has to move to an interface where it can be ionized into an electron–hole pair. Therefore, the presence of a heterojunction is essential for the photovoltaic effect which provides an internal built-in potential for dissociating the excitons. In view of these two points, crystals with a p–n junction interface are preferred for prolonging the lifetime of the excitons, extending the diffusion length of the excitons, facilitating the dissociation of excitons, accelerating the charge transport and reducing the recombination. However, until now, only a few reports have addressed OPVs based on organic semiconductor crystals. This is probably due to the difficulty in fabricating heterojunctions based on crystals. Hence, only several examples and perspectives on organic semiconductor crystals are presented here.
The most efficient way to achieve large heterojunctions for dissociation of excitons is to produce structures with regioregular p–n junctions, such as by blending p–n junctions. This method can provide a large p–n junction interface but is less successful in creating highly ordered structures. This results in a slow drifting speed of the charge carriers with subsequent large recombination.691 Recent research on co-crystals297,299,315,316,692 has the potential to pave an avenue for creating organic photovoltaic cells based on organic semiconductor crystals. This kind of crystals contain D–A molecules, which exhibit ambipolar charge transport and can be regarded as blending p–n heterojunctions on the molecular scale.
Another method is to produce structures with separated p–n layers, such as coaxial structures with p–n core–shell structures.693 This method is more likely to achieve ordered structures (or crystals) to facilitate the charge transport, decrease the recombination probability and subsequently improve the power conversion efficiency. However, it suffers from the presence of small p–n junction interfaces simultaneously, which works against dissociation of the excitons and leads to lower device performance. An additional challenge is the need to fabricate this kind of double layer crystal structures.694 The p–n junction can also be achieved by using segments of p- and n-semiconductor crystals. For example, Hu and co-workers119 reported a p–n junction by using epitaxial growth, which exhibited highly ordered structures. The p-type nanowire seeds and the epitaxially grown n-type nanowires were produced by using a PVT method. Then p–n junction nanowire crystals were successfully obtained. The power conversion efficiency of an individual nanowire was estimated to be 0.007% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.35 V. This VOC value is similar to the theoretical value of 0.4 V. The schematic diagram, SEM images, the band diagram and the current–voltage characteristics of the p–n junction crystals are all presented in Fig. 43. Although the power conversion efficiency is not very high, it should be emphasized that this value is obtained from an individual nanowire, which has a very small illuminated area and a small p–n junction interface. Yao et al.382 reported another p–n junction where they used the subsequent simultaneous epitaxial growth of CuPc onto n-type 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)-porphyrin (H2TPyP) hollow structures. The individual nanowire device exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 0.08% with a photocurrent density (JSC) of 0.029 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 0.64 V and a fill factor (FF) of 23%. Similar attempts were also made by using orthogonal solvents to deposit the second nanostructure onto the first crystals. For example, HBC nanowires287 were spin-coated onto PCBM crystals, which are obtained by using a slow dip-coating technique. Although the efficiency was found to be a little low, it is understandable considering the low illumination intensity, the small area of the heterojunction interface and the parallel heterojunction interface to the irradiation. The results suggested that the potential application of these heterojunctions in optoelectronics is highly dependent on the density and size of the nanowires. Crystal films, which contain well oriented heterojunction arrays, can probably provide a higher performance due to the increase in the interfacial areas for efficient dissociation of the excitons and the ordered structures reducing the recombination of the charge carriers. Bilayer crystal films695 were reported by using the solution containing p- and n-type semiconductors, which gave an improved PCE of 0.46%. The Schottky interface between the rubrene crystal and the Al or LiF/Al electrode696 was also utilized for producing the photovoltaic effect. The magnitude of the photovoltage was found to be equal to the built-in potential of the Schottky junction, which equals the work-function differences. The insertion of LiF was found to be efficient for increasing the photovoltage because it can reduce the work function of the Al electrode.
 Fig. 43  (A) Schematic diagram, (B) current–voltage characteristics, (C) band diagram and (D) SEM images of the individual nanowire for OPVs with CuPc as the p-type crystal seed and F16CuPc as the epitaxially grown n-type crystal. Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
It is more common to utilize one n- or p-type semiconductor crystal with thin films of another type of semiconductor to construct OPVs. This can be done in two ways: either by blending them or just using two separated layers. In this situation, the crystals provide an efficient route to transport one kind of charge carrier to the electrodes and the thin films guarantee the necessary large area of the heterojunction interface. All of these can of course facilitate higher power conversion efficiency due to the increase in efficiency for charge dissociation and decreasing the possibility of charge recombination. For example, by using tetracene crystals and C60 thin films to form the heterojunction,697 devices exhibit a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 1.12 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.57 V, a fill factor (FF) of 54% and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.34%. The single-crystal devices show that the PCE was enhanced by decreasing the thickness of the crystal, which probably can be ascribed to the better conformity on the substrate and lower resistance of the thinner crystals. The lower resistance is helpful in facilitating the charge collection because of the less traveling distance. Furthermore, the anisotropic adsorption and anisotropic photovoltaic efficiency were also observed. The recent development of hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite materials for photovoltaic applications698,699 has also attracted extensive attention on the single crystals of these materials. The results suggest that high quality single crystals can be a better choice for fundamental studies and solar energy conversion applications, due to the low impurity and defect concentration (trap densities700,701 can be as low as 109–1010 cm−3, compared with the trap densities of 1015 cm−3 in thin films) and the absence of crystal boundaries which improve the charge transport, increase the carrier diffusion length and reduce the recombination of the excitons.702 Large single crystals of MAPbX3 (MA = CH3NH3+; X = Br− or I−) with volume exceeding 100 cm3 can be obtained by using a temperature-lowering method in hydroiodic acid,703 a solvent-vapour diffusion method (anti-solvent vapour89)700 or using crystal seeds.701 The diffusion length of the carriers could exceed 100 μm for single crystal perovskite materials,701 compared with the nm-level diffusion length for thin films.699 For example, the application704 of MAPbI3 crystals with micrometer grain size and high surface coverage shows a good photovoltaic efficiency of 10.6%.
5 Conclusions and outlook
Over the recent few decades, organic semiconductor crystals have attracted increasing attention with respect to revealing the intrinsic properties of organic semiconductors, providing a powerful tool not only for examining structure–property relationships and investigating the important factors for enhancing the device performance but also for studying the charge transport mechanism in organic semiconductors and guiding further molecular design and synthesis.
A wide range of techniques for organic semiconductor crystals have been developed, from controllable crystal growth to device applications. For example, the PVT method251 was developed for producing high quality crystals with a view to avoiding the low thermal stability of organic semiconductors. Various solution-processing techniques314,352 were studied in order to lower the cost and to solve the problem of those semiconductors which are thermally unstable. In the case of device fabrication based on small crystals, the usage of “organic ribbons” as masks makes the device fabrication possible. Devices with channel lengths down to micro- and nanometer sizes can be achieved.85 The “stamp” method was explored with the intention of thoroughly eliminating the thermal irradiation (present in the traditional deposition methods) of the crystals.453 In addition, new techniques for the study of the charge transporting properties of crystals have also been developed. For example, in the early study of organic semiconductor crystals, the mobility of the crystals was obtained by using TOF measurements,167 the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method705 or using the Hall mobility.706,707 Currently, great progress has also been made with respect to devices based on single crystals and advances in theoretical calculations. In 1996, the first single crystal OFET device446 was fabricated based on sexithiophene and it had a mobility of 0.075 cm2 (V s)−1. After that, tremendous progress has been achieved. For example, a mobility of up to 8 cm2 (V s)−1 was obtained from rubrene single crystals252,257 in 2003. Now, the highest single crystal mobility36 has increased to 40 cm2 (V s)−1, which is comparable to that found for silicon polycrystals. The crystal growth techniques, device fabrication methods, techniques for the study of charge transporting properties and progress of the computation for fundamental physics provide a footstone for investigating the molecular arrangements, the intrinsic properties and the structure–property relationships of the organic semiconductor crystals and the charge transport mechanism. For instance, the suitable growth method and the purification of the crystals provide visual evidence that the thermally activated transport is not due to the small-polaron hopping in which the carrier is localized in the molecule. Similarly, the mechanism of generation, diffusion, fission and fusion of the excitons and their dissociation into charge carriers or degradation into light irradiation can be revealed.
In this review, we have attempted to give an overview of the structure–property relationships of organic semiconductor crystals, summarized the various crystal growth methods and discussed the fundamental physics of organic semiconductor crystals in optoelectronics. For example, it is generally accepted that long-range ordered molecular arrangement and strong intermolecular interactions especially π–π stacking are essential to achieve high performance devices. The energy level matching between the semiconductor and the electrodes, and the compatibility between the semiconductor and the electrodes/insulator are also important factors which will affect the device performance significantly. The recent research also suggests that the intrinsic charge transport mechanism should be the band-like transport (large polaron), in which the charge carriers are delocalized in several molecules and the small-polaron is unlikely to exist in the organic semiconductor crystals especially in the high performance devices. From this systematic analysis, we believe that some guidelines can be provided to the readers on a range of topics. These include (1) the current progress of organic semiconductor crystals, including the growth methods for organic semiconductor crystals, the factors for achieving high performance devices, the intrinsic properties of the materials, the structure–property relationships, and the charge transport mechanism; (2) selection of a suitable method for achieving high quality organic semiconductor crystals with the desired size and dimension. For example, by using PVT, drop-casting, solvent-exchange or solvent-diffusion methods, etc., large high quality crystals can be obtained due to the slow process; (3) optimization of the device performance to achieve the intrinsic properties of the semiconductors through reasonable adjustment of the relative factors. For example, the air/vacuum dielectric layer can be utilized for reducing the dielectric constant and the defects between the semiconductor/insulator interface; (4) prediction of the morphology, molecular arrangement and properties. At the same time, we also give some guidance for the future research of organic semiconductor crystals. These include (i) the urgency to produce high performance n-type, heterojunctions,708 or ambipolar organic semiconductors for inverters, integrated circuits, organic light-emitting diodes, organic light-emitting transistors and organic photovoltaic cells. We also want to point out that the recent research on D–A co-crystals provides a possible solution to meeting these requirements;297,299,315,316,692 (ii) the challenges and opportunities in achieving large organic semiconductor crystals and 2D large crystals for potential practical applications. Finally, it should be noted that thin films are more suitable for practical applications. However, they are facing other challenges, mainly originating from the low long-range order, grain boundaries and defects. For example, it is suggested that the influence of defects is more pronounced in 1D semiconductors than in 2D or 3D ones. Such phenomena can be fatal for thin film devices because of the weak coupling and challenging transport route along other orientations.28 We hope that this review will pave a way to boost further study of organic semiconductor crystals. This is crucial to achieve high performance optoelectronic devices, investigate the fundamental device physics underlying these topics and meet the shortfall in inorganic semiconductors as well as maintain the current advantages of organic semiconductors. An in-depth survey on the organic semiconductor crystals will benefit further understanding of organic semiconducting materials and promote their applications in organic optoelectronics. The applications of crystals in transistors, light-emitting transistors, photovoltaic cells and lasers485,709,710 bring infinite possibilities to the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National 1000-Talents Program, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HUST: 2017KFYXJJ023, HUST: 2017KFXKJC002), Wuhan Science and Technology Bureau (2017010201010141), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2016YFB04001100, 2014CB643600, 2013CB933403, 2013CB933500), National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773071, 91233205, 91222203, 51303185), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB12030300), Beijing NOVA Programme (Z131101000413038), and Beijing Local College Innovation Team Improve Plan (IDHT20140512).
References
D. D. Eley, Nature, 1948, 162, 819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Akamatu, H. Inokuchi and Y. Matsunaga, Nature, 1954, 173, 168–169 CrossRef .
A. J. Epstein, S. Etemad, A. F. Garito and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 5, 952–977 CrossRef .
J. Ferraris, D. O. Cowan, V. Walatka and J. H. Perlstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 948–949 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Dong, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Fielding and F. Gutman, J. Chem. Phys., 1957, 26, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karl, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1989, 171, 157–177 CrossRef .
R. W. I. de Boer, M. E. Gershenson, A. F. Morpurgo and V. Podzorov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1302–1331 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Jiang, Y. Tong, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, H. L. Dong and W. P. Hu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1615–1630 RSC .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang and C. Kloc, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 529–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4994–5007 RSC .
D. Braga and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1473–1486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasegawa and J. Takeya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2009, 10, 024314 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Gershenson, V. Podzorov and A. F. Morpurgo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2006, 78, 973–989 CrossRef CAS .
T. Holstein, Ann. Phys., 1959, 8, 325–342 CAS .
T. Holstein, Ann. Phys., 1959, 8, 343–389 CAS .
P. N. Hai, S. Ohya, M. Tanaka, S. E. Barnes and S. Maekawa, Nature, 2009, 458, 489–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Samoc, J. O. Williams and D. F. Williams, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact., 1981, 4, 149–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. Das, T. Jacobs and L. J. Barbour, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 36–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3325–3329 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vehoff, B. Baumeier, A. Troisi and D. Andrienko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11702–11708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gavezzotti and G. R. Desiraju, Acta Crystallogr., 1988, B44, 427–434 CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Ji, E. Wang, R. Li, H. Jiang, Q. Tang, H. Li and W. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2840–2845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gsanger, J. H. Oh, M. Konemann, H. W. Hoffken, A.-M. Krause, Z. Bao and F. Wurthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 740–743 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-M. Che, C.-F. Chow, M.-Y. Yuen, V. A. L. Roy, W. Lu, Y. Chen, S. S.-Y. Chui and N. Zhu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 216–220 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Dong, H. Li, H. Zhao, Q. Meng and W. Hu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent and C. Rovira, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 4833–4856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mattheus, G. A. de Wijs, R. A. de Groot and T. T. M. Palstra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6323–6330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Jurchescu, M. Popinciuc, B. J. v. Wees and T. T. M. Palstra, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Sundar, J. Zaumseil, V. Podzorov, E. Menard, R. L. Willett, T. Someya, M. E. Gershenson and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2004, 303, 1644–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Dong, Q. Tang, Y. He and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7029–7033 RSC .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Resse, J. M. Hancock, Y. Xiong, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Chesterfield, J. C. McKeen, C. R. Newman, P. C. Ewbank, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Brédas, L. L. Miller, K. R. Mann and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19281–19292 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Jones, M. J. Ahrens, M.-H. Yoon, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6363–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Molinari, H. Alves, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2462–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Brédas, J. P. Calbert, D. A. da Silva and J. Cornil, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5804–5809 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, X. Yang, Z. Cui, Y. Liu, H. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 123505 CrossRef .
H. Alves, A. S. Molinari, H. Xie and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 574–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lee, M. A. Loth, J. E. Anthony and Y.-L. Loo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5436–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Irkhin, A. Ryasnyanskiy, M. Koehler and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 085143 CrossRef .
P. Irkhin and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 017402 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-L. Brédas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971–5004 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Bromley, M. Mas-Torrent, P. Hadley and C. Rovira, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6544–6545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeis, C. Besnard, T. Siegrist, C. Schlockermann, X. L. Chi and C. Kloc, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 244–248 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. Dong, X. Zhan, H. Li, S.-H. Wen, W.-Q. Deng, K.-L. Han and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11335–11339 RSC .
J. Y. Lee, S. Roth and Y. W. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 252106 CrossRef .
R. Li, L. Jiang, Q. Meng, J. Gao, H. Li, Q. Tang, M. He, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4492–4495 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, W. Hu, Z. Wei, W. Xu and H. Meng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3649–3653 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, S. H. Chae, M. H. Hoang, K. H. Kim, J. A. Huh, Y. Kim, S.-J. Kim, D. H. Choi and S. J. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2247–2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fraboni, C. Femoni, I. Mencarelli, L. Setti, R. Di Pietro, A. Cavallini and A. Fraleoni-Morgera, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1835–1839 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fraboni, A. Fraleoni-Morgera and A. Cavallini, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, X. Zhang, J. Jia, Y. Li and X. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2171–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Bernstein, Polymorphism in Molecular Crystals, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  2002 Search PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8342–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. X. Tang, H. X. Li, M. He, W. P. Hu, C. M. Liu, K. Q. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, R. Li, J. Tao, E. A. Payzant, I. N. Ivanov, A. A. Puretzky, W. Hu and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3776–3780 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hoshino, Y. Takenaka and H. Miyaji, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2003, 59, 393–403 Search PubMed .
P. Erk, H. Hengelsberg, M. F. Haddow and R. van Gelder, CrystEngComm, 2004, 6, 474–483 RSC .
G. R. Desiraju, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 77–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wei, H. Li, W. Xu and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 143302 CrossRef .
G. Giri, E. Verploegen, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. Atahan-Evrenk, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. A. Becerril, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nature, 2011, 480, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Liu and X. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 590–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Jurchescu, A. Meetsma and T. T. M. Palstra, Acta Crystallogr., 2006, B62, 330–334 CAS .
G. M. J. Schmidt, Pure Appl. Chem., 1971, 27, 647 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sarma and G. R. Desiraju, Acc. Chem. Res., 1986, 19, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Berkovitch-Yellin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 8239–8253 CrossRef CAS .
R. Docherty, G. Clydesdale, K. J. Roberts and P. Bennema, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1991, 24, 89–99 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Zhang, H. Dong, Q. Li, Z. Shuai and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1697–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. H. Donnay and D. Harker, Am. Mineral., 1937, 22, 446–467 CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, M. Zhou, L. Liang, S. Singh, H. Zhao, A. Schober and Y. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Singh and A. Banerjee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2413–2425 CAS .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Reese, J. M. Hancock, Y. Xiong, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2847–2853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, W. Hong, H. Geng, C. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Li, W. Xu, Z. Shuai, W. Hu, Q. Wang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Xu, L. Liang, M. Zhou, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1777–1786 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, X. Lu, Y. Xiong, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 668–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Fu, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3937–3941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Laudise, C. Kloc, P. G. Simpkins and T. Siegrist, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 187, 449–454 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. H. Gao, E. J. Wang, H. X. Li, Z. H. Wang and W. P. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2735–2740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Yuan, Q. Li, B. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, J. C. Chang, C.-s. Lee and S.-t. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6945–6950 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent, M. Durkut, P. Hadley, X. Ribas and C. Rovira, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 984–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Lee, H. S. Lee, W. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, J. I. Han and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 678–682 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Fang, L. Wen, M. Zhou, Y. Xu, H. Zhao, L. De Cola, W. Hu and Y. Lei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10990–10995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, H. Li, Y. Liu and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14634–14639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yoon, H. J. Song, I. C. Hwang, K. S. Kim and H. C. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 231–233 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Liang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, N. Zhao, Q. Miao, W. Hu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15201–15204 RSC .
Y. M. Sun, L. Tan, S. D. Jiang, H. L. Qian, Z. H. Wang, D. W. Yan, C. G. Di, Y. Wang, W. P. Wu, G. Yu, S. K. Yan, C. R. Wang, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1882–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, W. Jiang, L. Jiang, S. Jiang, Z. Wang, S. Yan and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153306 CrossRef .
J. H. Oh, H. W. Lee, S. Mannsfeld, R. M. Stoltenberg, E. Jung, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim, J. B. Yoo and Z. N. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6065–6070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. T. Han, Y. D. Park, Y. Jang, J. H. Cho, M. Hwang and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 719–723 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, S. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. Liu, H. Li, W. Hu, E. Wang, S. Yan, Z. Wei, W. Xu and X. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17315–17320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yoon, I.-C. Hwang, K. S. Kim and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2506–2509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xie, K. Willa, Y. Wu, R. Häusermann, K. Takimiya, B. Batlogg and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3478–3484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Northrup, M. L. Tiago and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 121404 CrossRef .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Y. Butko, X. Chi, D. V. Lang and A. P. Ramirez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4773–4775 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Gao, Y. Fu, H. Dong, H. Zhao, H. Li, Q. Tang, K. Chen and W. Hu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2652–2656 RSC .
H. S. Shin, S. M. Yoon, Q. Tang, B. Chon, T. Joo and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 693–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, H. L. Dong, Q. Meng, H. X. Li, M. He, Z. M. Wei, Y. D. He and W. P. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2059–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Yu and W. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3358–3406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Fritz, S. M. Martin, C. D. Frisbie, M. D. Ward and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4084–4085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mukherjee, K. Sim, T. J. Shin, J. Lee, M. Mukherjee, M. Ree and S. Pyo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3192–3200 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. Ren, K. A. McGarry, M. J. Bruzek, C. J. Douglas and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700117 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Soeda, T. Uemura, Y. Mizuno, A. Nakao, Y. Nakazawa, A. Facchetti and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3681–3685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Menard, A. Marchenko, V. Podzorov, M. E. Gershenson, D. Fichou and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1552–1556 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minato, H. Aoki, H. Fukidome, T. Wagner and K. Itaya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093302 CrossRef .
C.-H. Lee, T. Schiros, E. J. G. Santos, B. Kim, K. G. Yager, S. J. Kang, S. Lee, J. Yu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, E. Kaxiras, C. Nuckolls and P. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2812–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uemura, Y. Hirose, M. Uno, K. Takimiya and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 111501 CrossRef .
A. Pick, M. Klues, A. Rinn, K. Harms, S. Chatterjee and G. Witte, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 5495–5504 CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Dong, Q. Tang, S. Ferdous, F. Liu, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, W. Hu and A. L. Briseno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11580–11584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, B. C. K. Tee, J. J. Cha, Y. Cui, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2760–2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. V. Pho, F. M. Toma, M. L. Chabinyc and F. Wudl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1446–1451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Shrestha, Y. Yamauchi, J. P. Hill, K. i. Miyazawa and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 586–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, D. C. Martin and J. E. Anthony, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 1701–1709 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Eggeman, S. Illig, A. Troisi, H. Sirringhaus and P. A. Midgley, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1045–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Troisi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2347–2358 RSC .
F. Provencher, N. Bérubé, J.-F. Laprade, G. Simard, J. Tant, V. d. Halleux, Y. Geerts, C. Silva and M. Côté, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 034706 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Naab, S. Himmelberger, Y. Diao, K. Vandewal, P. Wei, B. Lussem, A. Salleo and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4663–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Calhoun, J. Sanchez, D. Olaya, M. E. Gershenson and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 84–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, C. Fan, G. Xue, T. Ye, S. Liu, R. Lin, H. Chen, H. L. Xin, R.-G. Xiong and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4476–4480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mitrofanov, D. V. Lang, C. Kloc, J. M. Wikberg, T. Siegrist, W.-Y. So, M. A. Sergent and A. P. Ramirez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 166601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Najafov, D. Mastrogiovanni, E. Garfunkel, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 981–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Jurchescu, J. Baas and T. T. M. Palstra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3061–3063 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Kalb, S. Haas, C. Krellner, T. Mathis and B. Batlogg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 155315 CrossRef .
J. Chen, C. K. Tee, M. Shtein, J. Anthony and D. C. Martin, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 114513 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, G. Giri, A. L. Ayzner, A. P. Zoombelt, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Chen, D. Nordlund, M. F. Toney, J. Huang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, A. R. Han, H. Yu, T. J. Shin, C. Yang and J. H. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9540–9547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tsetseris and S. T. Pantelides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 153202 CrossRef .
J. E. Northrup and M. L. Chabinyc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 041202 CrossRef .
D. Knipp and J. E. Northrup, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2511–2515 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Lang, X. Chi, T. Siegrist, A. M. Sergent and A. P. Ramirez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 076601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Lang, X. Chi, T. Siegrist, A. M. Sergent and A. P. Ramirez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Barbe and C. R. Westgate, J. Chem. Phys., 1970, 52, 4046–4054 CrossRef CAS .
W. Warta, R. Stehle and N. Karl, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1985, 36, 163–170 CrossRef .
J. Niemax, A. K. Tripathi and J. Pflaum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 122105 CrossRef .
J. Pflaum, J. Niemax and A. K. Tripathi, Chem. Phys., 2006, 325, 152–159 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. Kemerink, A. Sharma, M. Cölle, P. A. Bobbert, R. A. J. Janssen and D. M. deLeeuw, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 975–979 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3859–3873 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goldmann, C. Krellner, K. P. Pernstich, S. Haas, D. J. Gundlach and B. Batlogg, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 034507 CrossRef .
B. Lee, Y. Chen, D. Fu, H. T. Yi, K. Czelen, H. Najafov and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1125–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Ellison, B. Lee, V. Podzorov and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 502–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. I. d. Boer, M. Jochemsen, T. M. Klapwijk, A. F. Morpurgo, J. Niemax, A. K. Tripathi and J. Pflaum, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 1196–1202 CrossRef .
T. Hasegawa, K. Mattenberger, J. Takeya and B. Batlogg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 245115 CrossRef .
Y. Shirota and H. Kageyama, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 953–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Podzorov, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 15–24 CrossRef .
L. Wang, G. Nan, X. Yang, Q. Peng, Q. Li and Z. Shuai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 423–434 RSC .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva Filho, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Coropceanu, Y. Li, Y. Yi, L. Zhu and J.-L. Brédas, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
T. Holstein, Ann. Phys., 2000, 281, 725–773 CAS .
G. Horowitz, R. Hajlaoui, R. Bourguiga and M. Hajlaoui, Synth. Met., 1999, 101, 401–404 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, V. Podzorov, N. Sai, M. C. Martin, M. E. Gershenson, M. Di Ventra and D. N. Basov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Troisi, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1988–1991 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Germs, K. Guo, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 016601 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Sánchez-Carrera, P. Paramonov, G. M. Day, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14437–14446 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Girlando, L. Grisanti, M. Masino, I. Bilotti, A. Brillante, R. G. Della Valle and E. Venuti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 035208 CrossRef .
A. F. Stassen, R. W. I. de Boer, N. N. Iosad and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3899–3901 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Hulea, S. Fratini, H. Xie, C. L. Mulder, N. N. Iossad, G. Rastelli, S. Ciuchi and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 982–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. H. LeBlanc, J. Chem. Phys., 1960, 33, 626 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Kepler, Phys. Rev., 1960, 119, 1226–1229 CrossRef CAS .
W. Warta and N. Karl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 1172–1182 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ostroverkhova, D. G. Cooke, F. A. Hegmann, J. E. Anthony, V. Podzorov, M. E. Gershenson, O. D. Jurchescu and T. T. M. Palstra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 162101 CrossRef .
N. Karl and J. Marktanner, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2001, 355, 149–173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kotani, K. Kakinuma, M. Yoshimura, K. Ishii, S. Yamazaki, T. Kobori, H. Okuyama, H. Kobayashi and H. Tada, Chem. Phys., 2006, 325, 160–169 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Tripathi, M. Heinrich, T. Siegrist and J. Pflaum, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2097–2101 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karl, K.-H. Kraft, J. Marktanner, M. Münch, F. Schatz, R. Stehle and H.-M. Uhde, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1999, 17, 2318–2328 CAS .
N. Karl, J. Marktanner, R. Stehle and W. Warta, Synth. Met., 1991, 42, 2473–2481 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Jurchescu, J. Baas and T. T. M. Palstra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 052102 CrossRef .
V. K. Thorsmølle, R. D. Averitt, X. Chi, D. J. Hilton, D. L. Smith, A. P. Ramirez and A. J. Taylor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 891–893 CrossRef .
A. Saeki, S. Seki, T. Takenobu, Y. Iwasa and S. Tagawa, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 920–923 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Minder, S. Ono, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 503–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Newman, R. J. Chesterfield, J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 422–424 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakanoue and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 736–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Podzorov, E. Menard, A. Borissov, V. Kiryukhin, J. A. Rogers and M. E. Gershenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Takeya, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L1393–L1396 CrossRef CAS .
V. Podzorov, E. Menard, J. A. Rogers and M. E. Gershenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 226601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uemura, K. Nakayama, Y. Hirose, J. Soeda, M. Uno, W. Li, M. Yamagishi, Y. Okada and J. Takeya, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, S87–S91 CrossRef .
Y. Okada, K. Sakai, T. Uemura, Y. Nakazawa and J. Takeya, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245308 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, V. Kalihari, C. D. Frisbie, N. K. Oh and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 162106 CrossRef .
Q. X. Tang, Y. H. Tong, H. X. Li and W. P. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083309 CrossRef .
R. W. I. d. Boer, T. M. Klapwijk and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4345–4347 CrossRef .
T. Sekitani, Y. Takamatsu, S. Nakano, T. Sakurai and T. Someya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253508 CrossRef .
M. Yamagishi, J. Soeda, T. Uemura, Y. Okada, Y. Takatsuki, T. Nishikawa, Y. Nakazawa, I. Doi, K. Takimiya and J. Takeya, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 161306 CrossRef .
J.-F. Chang, T. Sakanoue, Y. Olivier, T. Uemura, M.-B. Dufourg-Madec, S. G. Yeates, J. Cornil, J. Takeya, A. Troisi and H. Sirringhaus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 066601 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Minder, S. Lu, S. Fratini, S. Ciuchi, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1254–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Marumoto, S.-i. Kuroda, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 256603 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Matsui, T. Hasegawa, Y. Tokura, M. Hiraoka and T. Yamada, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 126601 CrossRef PubMed .
R. W. Munn and R. Silbey, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 83, 1843–1853 CrossRef CAS .
A. Troisi, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2000–2004 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hannewald, V. M. Stojanović, J. M. T. Schellekens, P. A. Bobbert, G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075211 CrossRef .
J. D. Picon, M. N. Bussac and L. Zuppiroli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 235106 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245201 CrossRef .
Y. Li, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 204713 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fratini and S. Ciuchi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 266601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Puschnig, S. Berkebile, A. J. Fleming, G. Koller, K. Emtsev, T. Seyller, J. D. Riley, C. Ambrosch-Draxl, F. P. Netzer and M. G. Ramsey, Science, 2009, 326, 702–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-i. Machida, Y. Nakayama, S. Duhm, Q. Xin, A. Funakoshi, N. Ogawa, S. Kera, N. Ueno and H. Ishii, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 156401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ding, C. Reese, A. J. Mäkinen, Z. Bao and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 222106 CrossRef .
R. C. Hatch, D. L. Huber and H. Höchst, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 047601 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ciuchi and S. Fratini, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 166403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, T. Minari, X. Lu, A. Kumatani, K. Takimiya and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 523–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Bardeen, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 65–71 CrossRef .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tao, N. Ohtani, R. Uchida, T. Miyamoto, Y. Matsui, H. Yada, H. Uemura, H. Matsuzaki, T. Uemura, J. Takeya and H. Okamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 097403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Irkhin, H. Najafov and V. Podzorov, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Poletayev, J. Clark, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, Y. Makino, S. Hotta and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 919–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Najafov, B. Lyu, I. Biaggio and V. Podzorov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125202 CrossRef .
A. Ryasnyanskiy and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 193203 CrossRef .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Akselrod, P. B. Deotare, N. J. Thompson, J. Lee, W. A. Tisdale, M. A. Baldo, V. M. Menon and V. Bulović, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3646 CAS .
B. J. Walker, A. J. Musser, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shpaisman, O. Niitsoo, I. Lubomirsky and D. Cahen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1541–1546 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Chan, M. Ligges and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 840–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Pfann, J. Met., 1952, 4, 747–753 CAS .
W. R. Wilcox, R. Friedenberg and N. Back, Chem. Rev., 1964, 64, 187–220 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Pfann, Science, 1962, 135, 1101–1109 CAS .
I. H. Hong, K. J. Tan, M. Toh, H. Jiang, K. Zhang and C. Kloc, J. Cryst. Growth, 2013, 363, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Kloc, T. Siegrist and J. Pflaum, Growth of Single-Crystal Organic Semiconductors, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2010 Search PubMed .
D. C. Hoesterey, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 36, 557–558 CrossRef CAS .
D. Adam, P. Schuhmacher, J. Simmerer, L. Haussling, K. Siemensmeyer, K. H. Etzbachi, H. Ringsdorf and D. Haarer, Nature, 1994, 371, 141–143 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karl, J. Cryst. Growth, 1990, 99, 1009–1016 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Reucroft, A. R. McGhie, E. E. Hillman and V. V. Damiano, J. Cryst. Growth, 1971, 11, 355–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Prabhakaran, R. R. Babu, P. Velusamy and K. Ramamurthi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 1781–1785 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thakur and S. Meyler, Macromolecules, 1985, 18, 2341–2344 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Liu and A. J. Bard, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2353–2362 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schweicher, N. Paquay, C. Amato, R. Resel, M. Koini, S. Talvy, V. Lemaur, J. r. m. Cornil, Y. Geerts and G. Gbabode, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3663–3672 CAS .
T. Miyahara and M. Shimizu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 226, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyahara and M. Shimizu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 229, 553–557 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Wang, Y. Chang, S. Yu, C. Ma, K. Ye, C. Cheng and G. Du, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 290, 544–547 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Laudise, P. M. Bridenbaugh, C. Kloc and S. L. Jouppi, J. Cryst. Growth, 1997, 178, 585–592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niemax and J. Pflaum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 241921 CrossRef .
E. Frankevich, Y. Maruyama and H. Ogata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 214, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Jones, Mol. Cryst., 1968, 3, 393–396 CrossRef .
M. Ichikawa, R. Hibino, M. Inoue, T. Haritani, S. Hotta, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, B. Bachet, A. Yassar, P. Lang, F. Demanze, J.-L. Fave and F. Garnier, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1337–1341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fichou, B. Bachet, F. Demanze, I. Billy, G. Horowitz and F. Garnier, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 500–504 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. McGhie, A. F. Garito and A. J. Heeger, J. Cryst. Growth, 1974, 22, 295–297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Li, B. Gao, Z. Xie, S. Liu, C. Wang, D. Hu, F. Shen, Y. Xu, H. Shang, Q. Chen, Y. Ma and H. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4945–4950 CAS .
H. Nakanotani, M. Saito, H. Nakamura and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1610–1615 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Aleshin, J. Y. Lee, S. W. Chu, J. S. Kim and Y. W. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 5383–5385 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kloc, P. G. Simpkins, T. Siegrist and R. A. Laudise, J. Cryst. Growth, 1997, 182, 416–427 CrossRef CAS .
V. Podzorov, S. E. Sysoev, E. Loginova, V. M. Pudalov and M. E. Gershenson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3504–3506 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, M. Son, M. Hong, G. Lee and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6383–6388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Siegrist, C. Kloc, R. A. Laudise, H. E. Katz and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, J. Min, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1731–1735 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zeis, T. Siegrist and C. Kloc, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 022103 CrossRef .
V. Podzorov, V. M. Pudalov and M. E. Gershenson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1739–1741 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Roberson, J. Kowalik, L. M. Tolbert, C. Kloc, R. Zeis, X. L. Chi, R. Fleming and C. Wilkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3069–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jo, H. Yoshikawa, A. Fujii and M. Takenaga, Synth. Met., 2005, 150, 223–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5681–5686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mikami and H. Yanagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 563–565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagi and T. Morikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagi, T. Morikawa, S. Hotta and K. Yase, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ichikawa, H. Yanagi, Y. Shimizu, S. Hotta, N. Suganuma, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1272–1275 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Wilkinson, R. F. Norwood, J. M. McLellan, L. R. Lawson and D. L. Patrick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16468–16469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takeyama, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsumoto, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 2273–2278 CAS .
Y. Takeyama, S. Ono and Y. Matsumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 083303 CrossRef .
J. Liu, M. Arif, J. Zou, S. I. Khondaker and L. Zhai, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9390–9393 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lim, F. Liu, S. Ferdous, M. Muthukumar and A. L. Briseno, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, Y. D. Park, Y. Jang, S. Kim and K. Cho, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 834–839 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, N. Stingelin, N. Kayunkid, M. Sommer, F. P. V. Koch, H. Nguyen, O. Coulembier, P. Dubois, M. Brinkmann and G. Reiter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11131–11135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Ihn, J. Moulton and P. Smith, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1993, 31, 735–742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Lei, L. Wang, J. Pei, Y. Cao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1484–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, A. Datar, K. Balakrishnan and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7234–7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imaeda, Y. Yamashita, Y. F. Li, T. Mori, H. Inokuchi and M. Sano, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 115–118 RSC .
T. Matsukawa, M. Yoshimura, K. Sasai, M. Uchiyama, M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, Y. Takahashi, J. Takeya, Y. Kitaoka, Y. Mori and T. Sasaki, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 310–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ashizawa, K. Yamada, A. Fukaya, R. Kato, K. Hara and J. Takeya, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4883–4890 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3748–3753 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yoon, S. K. Park, I. Cho, J.-A. Oh, J. H. Kim and S. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3519–3524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Kappl, I. Liebewirth, M. Müller, K. Kirchhoff, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 417–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. H. Lee, D. S. Yang, D. U. Heo, K. H. Kim, J. Shin, H.-J. Kim, K.-Y. Baek, K. Lee, H. Baik, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4102–4106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, D. Beckmann, H. N. Tsao, X. Feng, V. Enkelmann, M. Baumgarten, W. Pisula and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Li, P. Gao, K. C. Schuermann, S. Ostendorp, W. C. Wang, C. A. Du, Y. Lei, H. Fuchs, L. De Cola, K. Mullen and L. F. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8807–8809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang, S. Nam, K. Im, J. Hur, S. N. Cha, J. Kim, H. B. Son, H. Suh, M. A. Loth, J. E. Anthony, J. J. Park, C. E. Park, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1005–1014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Kiersnowski, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4015–4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, Q. Tang, H. T. Lemke, K. Moth-Poulsen, F. Westerlund, P. Hammershøj, K. Bechgaard, W. Hu and T. Bjørnholm, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1130–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dabirian, X. Feng, L. Ortolani, A. Liscio, V. Morandi, K. Mullen, P. Samori and V. Palermo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4473–4480 RSC .
S. H. Wang, M. Kivala, I. Lieberwirth, K. Kirchhoff, X. L. Feng, W. Pisula and K. Mullen, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 1648–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wang, J. Swensen, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 6137–6141 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, Y. Zhou, N. Ai, C. Luo, J. Peng, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14710–14715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Rogowski, A. Dzwilewski, M. Kemerink and A. A. Darhuber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11758–11762 CAS .
L. Li, P. Gao, M. Baumgarten, K. Müllen, N. Lu, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3419–3425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Sele, B. K. C. Kjellander, B. Niesen, M. J. Thornton, J. B. P. H. van der Putten, K. Myny, H. J. Wondergem, A. Moser, R. Resel, A. J. J. M. van Breemen, N. van Aerle, P. Heremans, J. E. Anthony and G. H. Gelinck, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4926–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hong, M. C. Um, S. R. Nam, J. I. Hong and S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 310–312 RSC .
J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19169–19179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Mu, W. F. Song, Y. Zhang, K. Q. Ye, H. Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4905–4909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Geng, T. S. Virk, Y. Zhao, J. Tan, C.-a. Di, W. Xu, K. Singh, W. Hu, Z. Shuai, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2603–2607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Geng, G. Zhao, W. Xu, W. Hu, Z. Shuai and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4093–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Tan, Z. Ma, W. Xu, G. Zhao, H. Geng, C. Di, W. Hu, Z. Shuai, K. Singh and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 558–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, W.-J. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Wang, L. Qi, Y. Cao, J. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12386–12387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, X. Yang, Z. Cui, Y. Liu, H. Li and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123308 CrossRef .
R. Li, H. Dong, X. Zhan, Y. He, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6014–6018 RSC .
S. Ibe, R. Ise, Y. Oaki and H. Imai, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7444–7449 RSC .
J.-P. Hong and S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3096–3098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Wang, Y.-Q. Liu, H.-D. Wu, Y. Xiao and G.-B. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 422–425 RSC .
X. Li, B. K. C. Kjellander, J. E. Anthony, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer and G. H. Gelinck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3610–3617 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lee, D. H. Kim, Y. Jang, J. H. Cho, M. Hwang, Y. D. Park, Y. H. Kim, J. I. Han and K. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 132106 CrossRef .
J. Rivnay, L. H. Jimison, J. E. Northrup, M. F. Toney, R. Noriega, S. Lu, T. J. Marks, A. Facchetti and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yi, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony and V. Podzorov, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1259 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. McGrath, K. Jang, K. A. Robins and D.-C. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4070–4077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Datar, K. Balakrishnan, X. Yang, X. Zuo, J. Huang, R. Oitker, M. Yen, J. Zhao, D. M. Tiede and L. Zang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12327–12332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, X. Yang, K. Balakrishnan, J. Zuo and L. Zang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2930–2934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Feng, J. Gao and M. Bouvet, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 368, 387–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyazawa, Y. Kuwasaki, A. Obayashi and M. Kuwabara, J. Mater. Res., 2002, 17, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wakahara, M. Sathish, K. i. Miyazawa, C. Hu, Y. Tateyama, Y. Nemoto, T. Sasaki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9940–9944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wakahara, P. D’Angelo, K. i. Miyazawa, Y. Nemoto, O. Ito, N. Tanigaki, D. D. C. Bradley and T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7204–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, C. Du, G. Yu, C.-a. Di, S. Jiang, H. Xi, J. Zheng, S. Yan, C. Yu, W. Hu and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, S. Y. Bae, Y. S. Kim, J. A. Hur, M. H. Hoang, T. W. Lee, M. J. Cho, Y. Kim, M. Kim, J.-I. Jin, S.-J. Kim, K. Lee, S. J. Lee and D. H. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3095–3099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Hoang, Y. Kim, S.-J. Kim, D. H. Choi and S. J. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 7772–7776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Heo, H. J. Lee, S.-M. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8365–8371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Boobalan, P. M. Imran and S. Nagarajan, Supramol.
Chem., 2012, 24, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
J.-i. Minato and K. i. Miyazawa, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2837–2841 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish and K. i. Miyazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13816–13817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathish, K. i. Miyazawa, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6372–6373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogawa, T. Kato, A. Ikegami, H. Tsuji, N. Aoki, Y. Ochiai and J. P. Bird, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 112109 CrossRef .
H. Kasai, H. S. Nalwa, H. Oikawa, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, N. Minami, A. Kakuta, K. Ono, A. Mukoh and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 31, L1132–L1134 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasai, H. Kamatani, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, H. Matsuda and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, L221–L223 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, R. Oitker, H. Chen, J. Zuo and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10496–10497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Chase, A. G. Fix, S. J. Kang, B. D. Rose, C. D. Weber, Y. Zhong, L. N. Zakharov, M. C. Lonergan, C. Nuckolls and M. M. Haley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10349–10352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Guo, H. P. Zhao, G. Yu, C. A. Di, W. Liu, S. D. Jiang, S. K. Yan, C. R. Wang, H. L. Zhang, X. N. Sun, X. Tao and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4835–4839 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeong, W.-S. Kim, S.-I. Park, T.-S. Yoon and B. H. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12976–12981 CAS .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2752–2756 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, J. Xu, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7301–7305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Rigas, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, P. N. Horton, F. A. Castro and M. Shkunov, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, Q. Liao, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10038–10043 CAS .
J. Xiao, H. Yang, Z. Yin, J. Guo, F. Boey, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1423–1427 RSC .
B. Yang, J. Xiao, J. I. Wong, J. Guo, Y. Wu, L. Ong, L. L. Lao, F. Boey, H. Zhang, H. Y. Yang and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7924–7927 CAS .
J.-S. Hu, G. Guo, H.-P. Liang, L.-J. Wan and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17090–17095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, Y. Yan, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2784–2788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, Y. Zhou, H. Geng, S. Jiang, S. Yan, W. Hu, Z. Wang, Z. Shuai and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 1–3 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Hegmann, R. R. Tykwinski, K. P. H. Lui, J. E. Bullock and J. E. Anthony, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 227403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, R. Liu, Q. Li, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2841–2843 RSC .
E. Ahmed, T. Earmme, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5786–5796 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Ji, J.-S. Hu, L.-J. Wan, Q.-X. Tang and W.-P. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 328–332 RSC .
K. V. Rao, K. Jayaramulu, T. K. Maji and S. J. George, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4218–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Sagade, K. V. Rao, U. Mogera, S. J. George, A. Datta and G. U. Kulkarni, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. Fu, J. Ma and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 159–166 RSC .
A. Lv, S. R. Puniredd, J. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Zhu, W. Jiang, H. Dong, Y. He, L. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Pisula, Q. Meng, W. Hu and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2626–2630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, H. Wang, N. Gao, F. Shen, X. Li and Y. Ma, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 869–874 RSC .
S. Wang, P. Gao, I. Liebewirth, K. Kirchhoff, S. Pang, X. Feng, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4960–4964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Dössel, A. Mavrinskiy, P. Gao, X. Feng, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Small, 2011, 7, 2841–2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, W. Zhang, X. Yang, T. Naddo, J. Huang, J. Zuo, M. Yen, J. S. Moore and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6576–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, X. Qin, Y. Li, Y. He, C. Zhong, J. Pan, H. Dong, W. Xu, T. Li, W. Hu, J.-L. Brédas and O. M. Bakr, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501491 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Dong, S. Jiang, G. Zhao, Q. Shi, J. Tan, L. Jiang, W. Hu and X. Zhan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3745–3749 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6951–6955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, T. Naddo, J. Huang, R. Oitker, M. Yen, J. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7390–7398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Datar, R. Oitker and L. Zang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1649–1651 RSC .
A. Babel, J. D. Wind and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lee, J. A. Lim, D. Kwak, J. H. Cho, H. S. Lee, H. H. Choi and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4243–4248 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Mascaro, M. E. Thompson, H. I. Smith and V. Bulović, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. Minari, Y. Li, A. Kumatani, M. V. Lee, S. H. Athena Pan, K. Takimiya and K. Tsukagoshi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8462–8469 RSC .
A. Kumatani, C. Liu, Y. Li, P. Darmawan, K. Takimiya, T. Minari and K. Tsukagoshi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 393 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, Z. Hu, Z. Wang and T. He, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14604–14610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Park, S. Varghese, J. H. Kim, S.-J. Yoon, O. K. Kwon, B.-K. An, J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4757–4764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120–1121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, I. N. Ivanov, A. A. Puretzky, Z. Liu and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2184–2188 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, J. Tao, Z. Pan, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, S. J. Pennycook and D. B. Geohegan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2650–2654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Li, D. Tu, Z. Ji, C. Wang, Q. Tang, M. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12917–12922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Ji, Q. Tang, L. Jiang, H. Li, M. He, W. Hu, D. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Wang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2953–2957 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Ji, J.-S. Hu, Y.-G. Guo, W.-G. Song and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4879–4882 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Wu, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2163–2167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, S. Bai, Y. Wu, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. Fu and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6402–6404 RSC .
L. Kang, Z. Wang, Z. Cao, Y. Ma, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7305–7312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Luo, G. Liu, L. Huang, X. Cao, M. Liu, H. Fu and J. Yao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 263312 CrossRef .
L. Kang, H. Fu, X. Cao, Q. Shi and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1895–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Marcon and S. Brochsztain, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1747–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Tang, H. Li and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 203304 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, Y. Tong, W. Hu, Q. Wan and T. Bjørnholm, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4234–4237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumaki, T. Umeda and S. Tokito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013301 CrossRef .
Q. X. Tang, H. X. Li, Y. B. Song, W. Xu, W. P. Hu, L. Jiang, Y. Q. Liu, X. K. Wang and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3010–3014 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Cui, L. Jiang, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao, W. Hu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2332–2336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Liu, A. Kumatani, P. Darmawan, T. Minari and K. Tsukagoshi, AIP Adv., 2011, 1, 022149 CrossRef .
S. D. Vusser, S. Steudel, K. Myny, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 103501 CrossRef .
A. L. Briseno, J. Aizenberg, Y. J. Han, R. A. Penkala, H. Moon, A. J. Lovinger, C. Kloc and Z. N. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12164–12165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Sharei, S. H. Liu, M. E. Roberts, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4044–4048 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Choi, S. H. Kim and J. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 732–736 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sugimura, K. Ushiyama, A. Hozumi and O. Takai, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 885–888 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minari, M. Kano, T. Miyadera, S.-D. Wang, Y. Aoyagi, M. Seto, T. Nemoto, S. Isoda and K. Tsukagoshi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173301 CrossRef .
M. Kano, T. Minari and K. Tsukagoshi, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 051601 CrossRef .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. L. Briseno, S. Liu, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3545–3553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, W. M. Wang, Y.-S. Sun, R. M. Stoltenberg and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minari, C. Liu, M. Kano and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 299–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, W. M. Wang, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Locklin, P. Erk, M. Gomez, F. Richter and Z. Bao, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7428–7432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Goto, S. Tomiya, Y. Murakami, A. Shinozaki, A. Toda, J. Kasahara and D. Hobara, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1117–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, X. Zhang, L. Huang and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7305–7312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, J. Tao, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, S. T. Retterer, S. J. Pennycook and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3043–3048 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ou-Yang, T. Uemura, K. Miyake, S. Onish, T. Kato, M. Katayama, M. Kang, K. Takimiya, M. Ikeda, H. Kuwabara, M. Hamada and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 223304 CrossRef .
J. Soeda, Y. Hirose, M. Yamagishi, A. Nakao, T. Uemura, K. Nakayama, M. Uno, Y. Nakazawa, K. Takimiya and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3309–3314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mitsui, J. Soeda, K. Miwa, H. Tsuji, J. Takeya and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5448–5451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mukherjee, T. J. Shin, K. Sim, M. Mukherjee, J. Lee, S. H. Kim and S. Pyo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9047–9051 RSC .
A. K. Palai, J. Lee, S. Das, J. Lee, H. Cho, S.-U. Park and S. Pyo, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2553–2560 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mukherjee, M. Mukherjee, K. Sim and S. Pyo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1931–1936 RSC .
H. Li, B. C. K. Tee, G. Giri, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2588–2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fan, A. P. Zoombelt, H. Jiang, W. Fu, J. Wu, W. Yuan, Y. Wang, H. Li, H. Chen and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5762–5766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Mei, A. L. Ayzner, M. F. Toney, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2450–2460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakayama, Y. Hirose, J. Soeda, M. Yoshizumi, T. Uemura, M. Uno, W. Li, M. J. Kang, M. Yamagishi, Y. Okada, E. Miyazaki, Y. Nakazawa, A. Nakao, K. Takimiya and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1626–1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Akkerman, A. C. Chang, E. Verploegen, C. J. Bettinger, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 235–243 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Akkerman, H. Li and Z. Bao, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2056–2062 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, B. C. K. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, D. H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Headrick, S. Wo, F. Sansoz and J. E. Anthony, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063302 CrossRef .
M. Stolte, M. Gsanger, R. Hofmockel, S.-L. Suraru and F. Wurthner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14181–14185 RSC .
H. A. Becerril, M. E. Roberts, Z. Liu, J. Locklin and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2588–2594 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Liao, S. Cheunkar, H. H. Cao, H. R. Bednar, P. S. Weiss and A. M. Andrews, Science, 2012, 337, 1517–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carlson, A. M. Bowen, Y. Huang, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5284–5318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Jo, A. Vailionis, Y. M. Park and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3269–3274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Hur, D.-Y. Khang, C. Kocabas and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5730–5732 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, B. C. K. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. V. H. H. Chen, S. Barman, B. V. O. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ofuji, A. J. Lovinger, C. Kloc, T. Siegrist, A. J. Maliakal and H. E. Katz, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5748–5753 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers, Z. Bao, K. Baldwin, A. Dodabalapur, B. Crone, V. R. Raju, V. Kuck, H. Katz, K. Amundson, J. Ewing and P. Drzaic, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 4835–4840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Suh, Y. S. Kim and H. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1386–1389 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Park, B. Cho, J. Baek, J. K. Hwang, H. Lee and M. M. Sung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4776–4784 CAS .
K. S. Park, S. M. Salunkhe, I. Lim, C.-G. Cho, S.-H. Han and M. M. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3351–3356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, Y. Rho, Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, S. G. Hahm and C. E. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Lee, H. Moon, H.-S. Kim, Y. N. Kim, S.-M. Choi, S. Yoo and S. O. Cho, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1446–1453 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Lee, J. J. Kim, J. H. Choi and S. O. Cho, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8352–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lim, W. H. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. H. Lee, Y. D. Park and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bae, S. J. Kang, Y. J. Shin, Y. J. Park, R. H. Kim, F. Mathevet and C. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3398–3402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. H. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, Science, 2000, 290, 2123–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. y. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Nature, 2011, 475, 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, B. Yoo, J. E. Anthony and S. K. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 497–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Park, J. Baek, Y. Park, L. Lee, Y.-E. K. Lee, Y. Kang and M. M. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2874–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, J. Baek, Y. Park, L. Lee, J. Hyon, Y.-E. Koo Lee, N. K. Shrestha, Y. Kang and M. M. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603285 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dodabalapur, L. Torsi and H. E. Katz, Science, 1995, 268, 270–271 CAS .
Z. M. Wei, Y. Cao, W. Z. Ma, C. L. Wang, W. Xu, X. F. Guo, W. P. Hu and D. B. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033304 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, K. J. Tan, K. K. Zhang, X. D. Chen and C. Kloc, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4771–4773 RSC .
S. K. Park, J. H. Kim, S.-J. Yoon, O. K. Kwon, B.-K. An and S. Y. Park, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3263–3268 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zaitseva, L. Carman, A. Glenn, J. Newby, M. Faust, S. Hamel, N. Cherepy and S. Payne, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 314, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsumura, H. Koezuka and T. Ando, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 1210–1212 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Li, Q. X. Tang, H. X. Li, X. D. Yang, W. P. Hu, Y. B. Song, Z. G. Shuai, W. Xu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2613–2617 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Amin, A. Khassanov, K. Reuter, T. Meyer-Friedrichsen and M. Halik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16548–16550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, B. Su, L. Jiang and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6526–6533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhao, H. S. Tan, Y. Guo, C.-A. Di, G. Yu, Y. Liu, M. Lin, S. H. Lim, Y. Zhou, H. Su and B. S. Ong, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 754 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Horowitz, F. Garnier, A. Yassar, R. Hajlaoui and F. Kouki, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 52–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Takeya, M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, R. Hirahara, Y. Nakazawa, T. Nishikawa, T. Kawase, T. Shimoda and S. Ogawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 102120 CrossRef .
M. A. Reyes-Martinez, A. Ramasubramaniam, A. L. Briseno and A. J. Crosby, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5548–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-M. Ling, C. Reese, A. L. Briseno and Z. Bao, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
P. Darmawan, T. Minari, Y. Xu, S.-L. Li, H. Song, M. Chan and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4577–4583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Kumashiro, R. Nouchi, N. Komatsu and K. Tanigaki, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 124912 CrossRef .

          C. Wang, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Organic/polymeric field-effect Transistors, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2013 Search PubMed .
Q. Tang, Y. Tong, H. Li, Z. Ji, L. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Y. Tong, Y. Zheng, Y. He, Y. Zhang, H. Dong, W. Hu, T. Hassenkam and T. Bjørnholm, Small, 2011, 7, 189–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, K. K. Zhang, J. Ye, F. Wei, P. Hu, J. Guo, C. Liang, X. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. E. McNeil, W. Hu and C. Kloc, Small, 2013, 9, 990–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Lee, H. T. Yi, S. S. Lee, M. M. Payne, S. Pola, C. H. Kuo, Y. L. Loo, J. E. Anthony, Y. T. Tao and V. Podzorov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14142–14151 RSC .
Z. Rang, A. Haraldsson, D. M. Kim, P. P. Ruden, M. I. Nathan, R. J. Chesterfield and C. D. Frisbie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2731–2733 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rang, M. I. Nathan, P. P. Ruden, V. Podzorov, M. E. Gershenson, C. R. Newman and C. D. Frisbie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123501 CrossRef .
V. Podzorov, E. Menard, S. Pereversev, B. Yakshinsky, T. Madey, J. A. Rogers and M. E. Gershenson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 093505 CrossRef .
Y. D. Park, J. A. Lim, H. S. Lee and K. Cho, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Di, Y. Q. Liu, G. Yu and D. B. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1573–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. DiBenedetto, A. Facchetti, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1407–1433 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, B. L. Jackson, J. Zhu, C.-Q. Miao, C.-H. Chung, Y. J. Park, K. Sun, J. Woo and Y.-H. Xie, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3927–3932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Pal, B. M. Dhar, K. C. See and H. E. Katz, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 898–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Artukovic, M. Kaempgen, D. S. Hecht, S. Roth and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 757–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chen, Y. F. Xu, K. Zhao, X. J. Wan, J. C. Deng and W. B. Yan, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 714–721 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, R. J. Tseng, M. M. Ling, E. H. L. Talcao, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2320–2324 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, J. Liu, H. S. Chan and Q. Miao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3965–3969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-a. Di, G. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Wang, W. Wu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1286–1290 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, S.-H. Han, H. S. Jung, H. Shin, J. Lee, J.-H. Noh, S. Lee, I.-S. Cho, J.-K. Lee, J. Kim and H. Shin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7185–7189 CAS .
W. S. Su, T. C. Leung, B. Li and C. T. Chan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163103 CrossRef .
P. Liu, Q. Sun, F. Zhu, K. Liu, K. Jiang, L. Liu, Q. Li and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Song, J. K. Park, O. J. Sul and B. J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3887–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mamada, J. I. Nishida, D. Kumaki, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3442–3447 RSC .
Y. Zhou, J. W. Shim, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, A. Sharma, K. A. Knauer, A. J. Giordano, S. R. Marder and B. Kippelen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12014–12021 RSC .
T. Kaji, T. Takenobu, A. F. Morpurgo and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3689–3693 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molinari, I. Gutierrez, I. N. Hulea, S. Russo and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 212103 CrossRef .
D. Braga, M. Campione, A. Borghesi and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Murphy and J. M. J. Frechet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1066–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, H. Zhao, K. K. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Kloc and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5075–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Hulea, S. Russo, A. Molinari and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 113512 CrossRef .
K. Yamada, J. Takeya, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253311 CrossRef .
T. Uemura, M. Yamagishi, Y. Okada, K. Nakayama, M. Yoshizumi, M. Uno and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Li, I. Ravia, B. Gao, Y. Li, V. Medvedev, H. Sun, N. Tessler and Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3770–3777 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, Y. Shimuzu, H. Kuriki, T. Katagiri and S. Hotta, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 01AB01 Search PubMed .
T. Takahashi, T. Takenobu, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 033505 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, J. W. Chung, Y. Jung, S.-J. Yoon, B.-K. An, H. S. Huh, S. W. Lee and S. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10103–10106 RSC .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, T. Takahashi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183304 CrossRef .
T. Takenobu, T. Takahashi, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 013507 CrossRef .
I. H. Campbell, J. D. Kress, R. L. Martin, D. L. Smith, N. N. Barashkov and J. P. Ferraris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 3528–3530 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Campbell, S. Rubin, T. A. Zawodzinski, J. D. Kress, R. L. Martin, D. L. Smith, N. N. Barashkov and J. P. Ferraris, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, R14321–R14324 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, D. Ji, L. Jiang, G. Zhao, J. Tan, G. Tian, J. Li and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063305 CrossRef .
G. Schweicher, V. Lemaur, C. Niebel, C. Ruzié, Y. Diao, O. Goto, W.-Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J.-B. Arlin, J. Karpinska, A. R. Kennedy, S. R. Parkin, Y. Olivier, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Cornil, Y. H. Geerts and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3066–3072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Goldmann, S. Haas, C. Krellner, K. P. Pernstich, D. J. Gundlach and B. Batlogg, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 2080–2086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, Y. Liu, C.-a. Di, Y. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Guo, J. Zheng, W. Wu, S. Ye and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1631–1635 CrossRef CAS .
H. Moon, R. Zeis, E. J. Borkent, C. Besnard, A. J. Lovinger, T. Siegrist, C. Kloc and Z. N. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15322–15323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Chi, D. W. Li, H. Q. Zhang, Y. S. Chen, V. Garcia, C. Garcia and T. Siegrist, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, M. Hirtz, W. Wang, C. Du, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1374–1378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Chung, W. M. Yun, S. Nam, S. H. Kim, C. E. Park, J. W. Park, S.-K. Kwon and Y.-H. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043303 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, T. Hasegawa, S. Horiuchi, R. Kumai, Y. Tokura and G. Saito, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6382–6384 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, R. Kumai, Y. Takahashi and T. Hasegawa, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5810–5812 RSC .
J. Xiao, Z. Yin, H. Li, Q. Zhang, F. Boey, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6926–6928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanno, Y. Bando, T. Shirahata, J. I. Inoue, H. Wada and T. Mori, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6548–6555 RSC .
R. P. Ortiz, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 205–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Veres, S. D. Ogier, S. W. Leeming, D. C. Cupertino and S. M. Khaffaf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 199–204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, M. Bird, T. Richards and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3893–3898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. I. d. Boer, N. N. Iosad, A. F. Stassen, T. M. Klapwijk and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 032103 CrossRef .
E. Menard, V. Podzorov, S. H. Hur, A. Gaur, M. E. Gershenson and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2097–2101 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, M. Caironi, Y.-Y. Noh, J. Wang, C. Newman, H. Yan, A. Facchetti and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1559–1566 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Dolbier and W. F. Beach, J. Fluorine Chem., 2003, 122, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dhindsa, S. Kuiper and J. Heikenfeld, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 3346–3351 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamada, J. Takeya, K. Shigeto, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 122110 CrossRef .
J.-W. Chang, C.-G. Wang, C.-Y. Huang, T.-D. Tsai, T.-F. Guo and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4077–4081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Walser, W. L. Kalb, T. Mathis and B. Batlogg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 233301 CrossRef .
M. Halik, H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang, G. Schmid, C. Dehm, M. Schutz, S. Maisch, F. Effenberger, M. Brunnbauer and F. Stellacci, Nature, 2004, 431, 963–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Zschieschang, F. Ante, M. Schlörholz, M. Schmidt, K. Kern and H. Klauk, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4489–4493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, T. Someya and T. Sakurai, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 024513 CrossRef .
H. Yanagi, Y. Araki, T. Ohara, S. Hotta, M. Ichikawa and Y. Taniguchi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 767–773 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. S. Lee, H. C. Yang, L. Yang and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1363–1370 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Ismail and I. G. Hill, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1033–1042 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, T. Nishikawa, T. Takenobu, S. Mori, T. Shimoda, T. Mitani, H. Shimotani, N. Yoshimoto, S. Ogawa and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 317–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Takeya, T. Nishikawa, T. Takenobu, S. Kobayashi, Y. Iwasa, T. Mitani, C. Goldmann, C. Krellner and B. Batlogg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5078–5080 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Chua, J. Zaumseil, J. F. Chang, E. C. W. Ou, P. K. H. Ho, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2005, 434, 194–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakamura, M. Ichikawa, R. Fushiki, T. Kamikawa, M. Inoue, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L1367–L1369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Robertson, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2004, 28, 265–291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. D. Xia, B. Xu, J. Yin and Z. G. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 101, 034102 Search PubMed .
E. G. Kim, V. Coropceanu, N. E. Gruhn, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, R. Snoeberger, A. J. Matzger and J. L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13072–13081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. G. Lezama and A. F. Morpurgo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 066803 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Teague, O. D. Jurchescu, C. A. Richter, S. Subramanian, J. E. Anthony, T. N. Jackson, D. J. Gundlach and J. G. Kushmerick, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 203305 CrossRef .
M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, T. Uemura and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 053305 CrossRef .
M. Yamagishi, J. Takeya, Y. Tominari, Y. Nakazawa, T. Kuroda, S. Ikehata, M. Uno, T. Nishikawa and T. Kawase, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 182117 CrossRef .
J. Takeya, C. Goldmann, S. Haas, K. P. Pernstich, B. Ketterer and B. Batlogg, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 5800–5804 CrossRef CAS .
J. Takeya, J. Kato, K. Hara, M. Yamagishi, R. Hirahara, K. Yamada, Y. Nakazawa, S. Ikehata, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 196804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 763–771 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent, P. Hadley, S. T. Bromley, X. Ribas, J. Tarres, M. Mas, E. Molins, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8546–8553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kawanishi, T. Fujiwara, M. Akai-Kasaya, A. Saito, M. Aono, J. Takeya and Y. Kuwahara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023303 CrossRef .
Y. He, H. Dong, T. Li, C. Wang, W. Shao, Y. Zhang, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 133301 CrossRef .
H. E. Katz, C. Kloc, V. Sundar, J. Zaumseil, A. L. Briseno and Z. Bao, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1995–1998 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Locklin, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, A. J. Lovinger and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uno, Y. Tominari, M. Yamagishi, I. Doi, E. Miyazaki, K. Takimiya and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223308 CrossRef .
H. Alves, R. M. Pinto and E. S. Maçôas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1842 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, J. H. Cho, J. Lee, P. P. Ruden and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2174–2179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ono, K. Miwa, S. Seki and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063301 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, W. Xie, P. P. Ruden and C. D. Frisbie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 036802 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Uemura, M. Yamagishi, S. Ono and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 103301 CrossRef .
S. Ono, N. Minder, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143307 CrossRef .
I. G. Lezama, M. Nakano, N. A. Minder, Z. Chen, F. V. Di Girolamo, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 788–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Reese, W.-J. Chung, M.-m. Ling, M. Roberts and Z. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 202108 CrossRef .
R. W. I. d. Boer, A. F. Stassen, M. F. Craciun, C. L. Mulder, A. Molinari, S. Rogge and A. F. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 262109 CrossRef .
Y. Wakayama, R. Hayakawa, T. Chikyow, S. Machida, T. Nakayama, S. Egger, D. G. de Oteyza, H. Dosch and K. Kobayashi, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3273–3277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yi, Y. Chen, K. Czelen and V. Podzorov, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5807–5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shimotani, H. Asanuma, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 203501 CrossRef .
M. J. Panzer and C. D. Frisbie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203504 CrossRef .
J. Takeya, K. Yamada, K. Hara, K. Shigeto, K. Tsukagoshi, S. Ikehata and Y. Aoyagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 112102 CrossRef .
S. Ono, S. Seki, R. Hirahara, Y. Tominari and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103313 CrossRef .
L. Kergoat, L. Herlogsson, D. Braga, B. Piro, M. C. Pham, X. Crispin, M. Berggren and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2565–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alam, J. Wang, Y. Guo, S. P. Lee and H.-R. Tseng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12777–12784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Shirale, M. A. Bangar, W. Chen, N. V. Myung and A. Mulchandani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13375–13380 CAS .
A. K. Wanekaya, M. A. Bangar, M. Yun, W. Chen, N. V. Myung and A. Mulchandani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5218–5221 CAS .
S. W. Lee, H. J. Lee, J. H. Choi, W. G. Koh, J. M. Myoung, J. H. Hur, J. J. Park, J. H. Cho and U. Jeong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 347–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamada, T. Okamoto, K. Kudoh, A. Wakamiya, S. Yamaguchi and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 072102 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, T. Hasegawa, Y. Abe, Y. Tokura, K. Nishimura and G. Saito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063504 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, T. Hasegawa, Y. Abe, Y. Tokura and G. Saito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073504 CrossRef .
H.-X. Ji, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2653–2655 RSC .
Y. Inada, T. Yamao, M. Inada, T. Itami and S. Hotta, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 1869–1877 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, H. Dong, L. Jiang, H. Zhao, X. Qin and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 103302 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, H. Dong, Q. Meng, J. Tan, W. Jiang, C. Xu, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 694–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lv, Y. Li, W. Yue, L. Jiang, H. Dong, G. Zhao, Q. Meng, W. Jiang, Y. He, Z. Li, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5154–5156 RSC .
S.-Y. Min, T.-S. Kim, B. J. Kim, H. Cho, Y.-Y. Noh, H. Yang, J. H. Cho and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1773 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, H. Dong, Q. Meng, L. Jiang, W. Shao, L. He and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5502–5507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Muller and T. M. Swager, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 273–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang, R. T. Weitz, H. Meng, F. Sun, G. Nunes, D. E. Keys, C. R. Fincher and Z. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3882–3887 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, Y. J. Chang, S.-W. Liu, T.-H. Chao, K. Goto, M. IslamMd, C.-H. Yuan, Y.-T. Tao, T. Shinmyozu and T. J. Chow, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, R. J. Tseng, S.-H. Li, C.-W. Chu, Y. Yang, E. H. L. Falcao, F. Wudl, M.-M. Ling, H. Z. Chen, Z. Bao, H. Meng and C. Kloc, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 222111 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Zhang, H. Dong, L. Meng, L. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Yu, Y. Sun, W. Hu and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. He, J. Liu, A. Cui, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, W. Chen and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9519–9523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xie, K. A. McGarry, F. Liu, Y. Wu, P. P. Ruden, C. J. Douglas and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11522–11529 CAS .
S. Haas, A. F. Stassen, G. Schuck, K. P. Pernstich, D. J. Gundlach, B. Batlogg, U. Berens and H. J. Kirner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 115203 CrossRef .
K. A. McGarry, W. Xie, C. Sutton, C. Risko, Y. Wu, V. G. Young, J.-L. Brédas, C. D. Frisbie and C. J. Douglas, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2254–2263 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, P. L. Prabhumirashi, Y. Nakayama, K. A. McGarry, M. L. Geier, Y. Uragami, K. Mase, C. J. Douglas, H. Ishii, M. C. Hersam and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10245–10256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. Wang, S. Ren, X. Gao, W. Hong, H. Li and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10496–10500 RSC .
M. Wang, J. Li, G. Zhao, Q. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Hu, X. Gao, H. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2229–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kaur, W. L. Jia, R. P. Kopreski, S. Selvarasah, M. R. Dokmeci, C. Pramanik, N. E. McGruer and G. P. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16274–16286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Chung, J. W. Park, J. H. Park, D. Moon, G. H. Kim, H. S. Lee, D. H. Lee, H. K. Shim, S. K. Kwon and C. E. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 524–530 RSC .
D. S. Chung, T. K. An, C. E. Park, H.-J. Yun, S.-K. Kwon and Y.-H. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193304 CrossRef .
J. Deng, Y. Xu, L. Liu, C. Feng, J. Tang, Y. Gao, Y. Wang, B. Yang, P. Lu, W. Yang and Y. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2370–2373 RSC .
H. Zhang, H. Dong, Y. Li, W. Jiang, Y. Zhen, L. Jiang, Z. Wang, W. Chen, A. Wittmann and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7466–7471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yang, T. Yasuda, H. Kakizoe, H. Mieno, H. Kino, Y. Tateyama and C. Adachi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6483–6485 RSC .
H. Ebata, T. Izawa, E. Miyazaki, K. Takimiya, M. Ikeda, H. Kuwabara and T. Yui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15732–15733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Xu, T. Minari, S. Li, K. Takimiya and K. Tsukagoshi, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2975–2984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, R. Li, L. Li, Q. Meng, H. Jiang, H. Li and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3008–3011 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, Z. Tu, G. Zhao, Y. Zhen, H. Geng, Y. Yi, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Liu, X. Lu, X. Fu, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, D. Ji, L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 825–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Okamoto, C. Mitsui, M. Yamagishi, K. Nakahara, J. Soeda, Y. Hirose, K. Miwa, H. Sato, A. Yamano, T. Matsushita, T. Uemura and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6392–6397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamamoto and K. Takimiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2224–2225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haas, Y. Takahashi, K. Takimiya and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 022111 CrossRef .
M. J. Kang, I. Doi, H. Mori, E. Miyazaki, K. Takimiya, M. Ikeda and H. Kuwabara, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mitsui, T. Okamoto, M. Yamagishi, J. Tsurumi, K. Yoshimoto, K. Nakahara, J. Soeda, Y. Hirose, H. Sato, A. Yamano, T. Uemura and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4546–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Sokolov, S. Atahan-Evrenk, R. Mondal, H. B. Akkerman, R. S. Sánchez-Carrera, S. Granados-Focil, J. Schrier, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. P. Zoombelt, Z. Bao and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 437 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zeis, C. Kloc, K. Takimiya, Y. Kunugi, Y. Konda, N. Niihara and T. Otsubo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3712–3714 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Jurchescu, S. Subramanian, R. J. Kline, S. D. Hudson, J. E. Anthony, T. N. Jackson and D. J. Gundlach, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6733–6737 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chu, J. Ouyang, J.-H. Tseng and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1440–1443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, H. Alves and A. F. Morpurgo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 245305 CrossRef .
M. Leufgen, O. Rost, C. Gould, G. Schmidt, J. Geurts, L. W. Molenkamp, N. S. Oxtoby, M. Mas-Torrent, N. Crivillers, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1101–1106 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent, P. Hadley, S. T. Bromley, N. Crivillers, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 012110 CrossRef .
Naraso, J.-i. Nishida, S. Ando, J. Yamaguchi, K. Itaka, H. Koinuma, H. Tada, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10142–10143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Meng, J. Gao, R. Li, L. Jiang, C. Wang, H. Zhao, C. Liu, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1477–1482 RSC .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, Y. Yomogida, H. Shimotani, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1728–1735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, H. Zhang, L. Yang, M. Bai, Y. Yao, H. Chen, L. Gan, T. Yang, H. Jiang, S. Hou, L. Wan and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5576–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, P. Hu, J. Ye, Y. Li, H. Li, X. Zhang, R. Li, H. Dong, W. Hu and C. Kloc, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605053 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Hoang, Y. Kim, M. Kim, K. H. Kim, T. W. Lee, D. N. Nguyen, S.-J. Kim, K. Lee, S. J. Lee and D. H. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5363–5367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ahmed, A. L. Briseno, Y. Xia and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1118–1119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, Z. M. Wei, H. X. Xi, W. Xu, W. P. Hu, Q. R. Wang and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4814–4820 RSC .
M. Shahid, R. S. Ashraf, Z. Huang, A. J. Kronemeijer, T. McCarthy-Ward, I. McCulloch, J. R. Durrant, H. Sirringhaus and M. Heeney, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12817–12823 RSC .
H. Jiang, J. Ye, P. Hu, F. Wei, K. Du, N. Wang, T. Ba, S. Feng and C. Kloc, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Senku, K. Kaname, K. Eiji, I. Takashi, N. Toshio, O. Yukio and S. Kazuhiko, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3760 CrossRef .
S. Hotta, Y. Shimizu, T. Yamao, M. Goto and R. Azumi, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 294–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ichikawa, T. Kato, T. Uchino, T. Tsuzuki, M. Inoue, H.-G. Jeon, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1549–1554 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Dou, Y.-Q. Zheng, Z.-F. Yao, Z.-A. Yu, T. Lei, X. Shen, X.-Y. Luo, J. Sun, S.-D. Zhang, Y.-F. Ding, G. Han, Y. Yi, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15947–15956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kozaki, A. Isoyama, K. Akita and K. Okada, Org. Lett., 2004, 7, 115–118 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Krupskaya, M. Gibertini, N. Marzari and A. F. Morpurgo, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2453–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kanai, K. Akaike, K. Koyasu, K. Sakai, T. Nishi, Y. Kamizuru, T. Nishi, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 95, 309–313 CrossRef .
J. H. Oh, S. L. Suraru, W.-Y. Lee, M. Könemann, H. W. Höffken, C. Röger, R. Schmidt, Y. Chung, W.-C. Chen, F. Würthner and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2148–2156 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Jones, A. Facchetti, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15259–15278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, Q. Tang, J. Xu and Q. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1535–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Islam, S. Pola and Y.-T. Tao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6356–6358 RSC .
Y. Kawasugi, H. M. Yamamoto, N. Tajima, T. Fukunaga, K. Tsukagoshi and R. Kato, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 116801 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gelinck, P. Heremans, K. Nomoto and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3778–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hiramoto, A. Miki, M. Yoshida and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 2002, 81, 1500–1502 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, F. Kouki, P. Valat, P. Delannoy and J. Roussel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 10651–10656 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, E. Pavlica, X. Zhong, F. Liscio, S. Li, G. Bratina, E. Orgiu and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605760 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Yin, J. Xiao, Y. Liu, F. Wei, K. J. Tan, C. Kloc, L. Huang, Q. Yan, F. Hu, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1883–1886 CAS .
H. Najafov, I. Biaggio, V. Podzorov, M. F. Calhoun and M. E. Gershenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 056604 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379–2383 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, L. Li, Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. Li, W. Xu, W. Hu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2624–2628 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Schwab, D. E. Smith, B. Bond-Watts, D. E. Johnston, J. Hone, A. T. Johnson, J. C. de Paula and W. F. Smith, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1261–1265 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mas-Torrent, P. Hadley, N. Crivillers, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 86–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, X. Yang, G. Liu, C. Yu, H. Ji, J. Zuo, J. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5743–5750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Z. Bao and J. H. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 629–639 CrossRef CAS .
V. Podzorov, V. M. Pudalov and M. E. Gershenson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6039–6041 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Maliakal, J. Y. C. Chen, W.-Y. So, S. Jockusch, B. Kim, M. F. Ottaviani, A. Modelli, N. J. Turro, C. Nuckolls and A. P. Ramirez, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5519–5526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun Kim, S. Young Bae, K. Hwan Kim, T. Wan Lee, J. A. Hur, M. Ha Hoang, M. Ju Cho, S.-J. Kim, Y. Kim, M. Kim, K. Lee, S. Joong Lee and D. Hoon Choi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8907–8909 RSC .
N. Mathews, D. Fichou, E. Menard, V. Podzorov and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 212108 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4427–4447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kang, I. Bae, Y. J. Park, T. H. Park, J. Sung, S. C. Yoon, K. H. Kim, D. H. Choi and C. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1609–1616 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, Y. J. Park, I. Bae, K. J. Kim, H.-C. Kim, S. Bauer, E. L. Thomas and C. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2812–2818 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, I. Bae, Y. J. Shin, Y. J. Park, J. Huh, S.-M. Park, H.-C. Kim and C. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 138–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Sokolov, M. E. Roberts and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 12–20 CrossRef .
B. Ding, M. Wang, X. Wang, J. Yu and G. Sun, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 16–27 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Kameoka, D. A. Czaplewski and H. G. Craighead, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 671–675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tok and Z. Bao, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 718–725 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fraboni, A. Ciavatti, F. Merlo, L. Pasquini, A. Cavallini, A. Quaranta, A. Bonfiglio and A. Fraleoni-Morgera, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2289–2293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, A. Datar, X. Yang, T. Naddo, J. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6354–6355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Zhang, K. Tan, C. Zou, M. Wikberg, L. E. McNeil, S. G. Mhaisalkar and C. Kloc, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1928–1934 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shaymurat, Q. Tang, Y. Tong, L. Dong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2269–2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1965, 14, 229–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pope, H. P. Kallmann and P. Magnante, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2042–2043 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ichikawa, K. Nakamura, M. Inoue, H. Mishima, T. Haritani, R. Hibino, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 221113 CrossRef .
K. W. Yee, M. Yokoyama and M. Hiramoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 083511 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Xu, F. Li and Y. Ma, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 762–766 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ding, J. Feng, X.-L. Zhang, W. Zhou, H.-H. Fang, Y.-F. Liu, Q.-D. Chen, H.-Y. Wang and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7085–7092 CAS .
R. Ding, J. Feng, F.-X. Dong, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, X.-L. Zhang, X.-P. Wang, H.-H. Fang, B. Xu, X.-B. Li, H.-Y. Wang, S. Hotta and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604659 CrossRef .
H. Nakanotani and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053301 CrossRef .
F. Cicoira and C. Santato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3421–3434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cornil, J. L. Brédas, J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1791–1799 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hepp, H. Heil, W. Weise, M. Ahles, R. Schmechel and H. von Seggern, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 157406 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hotta, T. Yamao, S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 965–980 RSC .
T. Takahashi, T. Takenobu, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenobu, S. Z. Bisri, T. Takahashi, M. Yahiro, C. Adachi and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 066601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nakanotani, R. Kabe, M. Yahiro, T. Takenobu, Y. Iwasa and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 091801 CrossRef .
H. Nakanotani, M. Saito, H. Nakamura and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 103307 CrossRef .
K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, M. Nakano, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6141–6146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamao, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4109–4112 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, K. Terasaki, Y. Shimizu and S. Hotta, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamao, Y. Sakurai, K. Terasaki, Y. Shimizu, H. Jinnai and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3708–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hotta, Y. Sakurai, Y. Okuda, T. Miki, K. Matsunaga, F. Hirato, T. Yamao and H. Jinnai, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 440–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ding, H.-H. Fang, Y. Wang, S.-Y. Lu, X.-L. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Feng, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1602–1605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kajiwara, K. Terasaki, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hayashi, K. Terasaki, K. Kajiwara, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 08HF06 CrossRef .
S. Z. Bisri, K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, K. Maruyama, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 985 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sawabe, T. Takenobu, S. Z. Bisri, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 043307 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, R. Kumashiro, Z. Li, R. Nouchi and K. Tanigaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 103306 CrossRef .
H. Nakanotani, M. Saito, H. Nakamura and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033308 CrossRef .
R. Kabe, H. Nakanotani, T. Sakanoue, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4034–4038 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, H. Zhu, Q. Meng, X. Gong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754–1808 RSC .
H. Tamura, M. Huix-Rotllant, I. Burghardt, Y. Olivier and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 107401 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, J. W. Lee, S. H. Lee, Y. B. Lee, E. H. Cho, H.-S. Noh, S. G. Jo and J. Joo, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1695–1700 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Miller, E. Cho, M. J. N. Junk, R. Gysel, C. Risko, D. Kim, S. Sweetnam, C. E. Miller, L. J. Richter, R. J. Kline, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, A. Amassian, D. Acevedo-Feliz, C. Knox, M. R. Hansen, D. Dudenko, B. F. Chmelka, M. F. Toney, J.-L. Brédas and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6071–6079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, K. S. Lee, J. Baek, L. Lee, B. H. Son, Y.-E. Koo Lee, Y. H. Ahn, W. I. Park, Y. Kang and M. M. Sung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10273–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, T. W. Holcombe, A. I. Boukai, E. C. Garnett, S. W. Shelton, J. J. M. Fréchet and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 334–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Fan, W. Fu, H. L. Xin and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 956–960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karak, J. A. Lim, S. Ferdous, V. V. Duzhko and A. L. Briseno, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1039–1046 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Tseng, R. Chan, V. C. Tung and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 435–438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, W. Fu, J. Wu, Z. Yu, X. Jin, H. Chen and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1214–1217 CAS .
Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Lu, G. Liu, H. Xia and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 665–670 RSC .
Y. Fu, F. Meng, M. B. Rowley, B. J. Thompson, M. J. Shearer, D. Ma, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mark and W. Helfrich, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 205–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dresner, Phys. Rev., 1966, 143, 558–563 CrossRef CAS .
G. Delacote and M. Schott, Solid State Commun., 1966, 4, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Q. Li, G. Xue, H. Chen and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606101 CrossRef PubMed .
I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1272–1295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierschner, S. Varghese and S. Y. Park, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 348–364 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Chengliang Wang
	Chengliang Wang is a Professor in Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University in 2005 and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2010. He then worked in the Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Muenster and Technical University of Ilmenau. He was selected in the National 1000-Talents Program for Young Scholars and joined HUST in 2016. His research topics include the design and synthesis of novel conjugated materials, crystals, nanostructures and their applications in organic optoelectronics and flexible batteries.

Huanli Dong
	Huanli Dong is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. She received her MS degree (2006) from Fujian Institute of Material Structure, CAS, and her PhD (2009) from the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. She was awarded the Outstanding Young Scientist of NSFC in 2012 and the Prize for Young Chemists of Chinese Chemical Society in 2014. Her research interests include molecular materials, crystals and devices of organic/polymeric semiconductors. Currently, she has more than 140 refereed publications with over 4500 citations.

Lang Jiang
	Lang Jiang is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BS degree in Applied Physics from the School of Physics and Microelectronics Science, Hunan University in 2004 and his PhD degree from ICCAS in 2011. Then he became an Assistant Professor in ICCAS. In 2013, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Henning Sirringhaus in Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge. In 2016, he moved back to ICCAS, as part of the Hundred Talents Program. His current research focuses on molecular electronics including crystalline organic semiconductors and device engineering and their circuit applications.

Wenping Hu
	Wenping Hu is a Professor at Tianjin University. He received his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. Then he joined Osaka University and Stuttgart University as a research fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences and Alexander von Humboldt, respectively. In 2003 he returned to the Institute of Chemistry from Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (Japan), and was then promoted to full professor in the institute. He was awarded the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2007 and was appointed as Cheung Kong Professor of Ministry of Education of China in 2014. He was elected as an assistant president of Tianjin University in 2013 and vice president of the university in 2016. His research interests include organic semiconducting materials, single crystals and devices. He has published more than 470 refereed publications with over 15000 citations (H index = 62) and has edited 4 books for Wiley-VCH, etc. He was an associate editor of Polymer Chemistry (RSC) from 2013 to 2016, and an editorial member of several journals including Advanced Energy Materials, Advanced Electronic Materials, Nano Research, Science China Materials, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Typical molecular packing motifs in organic semiconductor crystals: (A–D) schematic diagrams and (E–H) the representative molecular arrangements. (E) Pentacene, Ref Code PENCEN from CSD; (F) rubrene, Ref Code QQQCIG04 from CSD; (G) C8-PTCDI, Ref Code GILFUD from CSD; (H) PDIF-CN2, Ref Code FEHROA from CSD. All the hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Mobility-anisotropy of rubrene along the a, b and c axes. (A) Left: Schematic diagram of devices based on rubrene crystals. The electrodes were fabricated on the (100) face. A mobility of 5.3 cm2 (V s)−1 was found along the [010] direction and 1.8 cm2 (V s)−1 along the [001] direction; right: rubrene crystallographic structure along the two directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society. (B) Polar plot of the mobility in the (001) face, in which the angle was measured between the [010] direction and the conducting channel, indicating that the maximum mobility is along the [010] direction with minimum mobility along the [100] direction and (C) four-probe conductivity as a function of gate voltage along the [010] and [100] directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Thermodynamic and kinetic outcomes of crystallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright © 2002 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Packing diagrams of four CuPc polymorphs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2004 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (A) A typical DBTDT crystal with shape and dihedral angles coincident with (B) its theoretically predicted morphology. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) A typical HTP crystal showing a preferred orientation in the [010] direction which agrees well with the (D) theoretically predicted elongation orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A and B) AFM images of PDIF-CN2 crystal films, and (C) cross-sectional profile along the line in (B). (D) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of PDIF-CN2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  The growth direction of (A) CuPc, (B) F16CuPc and (C) CuPc/F16CuPc heterojunction crystals obtained by a combination of TEM images and the corresponding SAED patterns. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Representative trap density of states (DOS) data in small molecule organic semiconductors. The trap densities of single crystal (SC) FETs (red lines) are much lower than those of thin film transistors (TFTs, black lines), indicating that the structural defects such as grain boundaries tend to dominate in thin films. The trap densities of bulk single crystals (blue lines) are lower than those of SC-FETs. This suggests that the trap densities are much more likely to be on the surface or interface. Importantly, the highly hydrophobic CytopTM gate dielectric can significantly reduce the trap density. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2010 The American Physical Society. (B) Distribution of band and localized states for polycrystalline pentacene. Acceptor-like states are formed around 0.29 eV above the VBM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. VB: valence band, CB: conduction band.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 
μ = etS/m*

 		 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Electron and hole mobilities in ultrapure naphthalene as a function of temperature examined using TOF measurements; they exhibit a negative correlation with temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 1985 The American Physical Society. (B) Temperature dependence of carrier mobility for different insulators based on field-effect transistor measurements, which shows a transition from negative to positive correlation with temperature, with increasing dielectric constant. The mobility increases with decreasing dielectric constant, indicating that the charge carrier transports as a polaron. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 9  Temperature dependent mobility of PDIF-CN2 (full squares) and its derivatives with two more CF2 units (open circles) with (A) vacuum, (B) cytop and (C) PMMA gate dielectrics. (D) Plot of T* versus Et extracted from panels A–C. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Anisotropy in exciton diffusion, showing preferential diffusion along the π–π stacking (b axis) in rubrene single crystals, obtained by using localized photoexcitation and spatially resolved detection of excitonic luminescence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright © 2011 American Physical Society. (B) Typical time-resolved photoluminescence decay based on a tetracene single crystal, showing the regimes of prompt (inset) and delayed fluorescence that correspond to the radiative singlet decay and triplet decay respectively. The triplet is generated from fission of singlets and the recombination of two triplets forms a radiative singlet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of a typical zone melting apparatus, which contains one molten zone (heater). Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. (B) Zone-refined anthracene. The impurities moved to both ends of the ampoule, as shown in the dark and light parts at both ends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright © 2010 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic diagram of a typical three phase diagram; (B) centimeter-sized crystal of tetracene obtained by using the vapour-Bridgman growth method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2005 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of a typical PVT process. The dark blue crystals are identified as pentacene and the red and yellow crystals as impurities. Adapted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A and B) Vapor sublimation of tetracene crystals induced by an oriented LC solvent. The scale bar in the upper part of (B) is 100 μm and that in the bottom part is 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society. (C and D) Vacuum deposition of pentacene crystals assisted by the droplet of an ionic liquid solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright © 2012 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the dip-coating process for crystal growth; (B) typical AFM images of TIPS-PEN crystals obtained through the dip-coating technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of a typical solvent-exchange method (A) by injecting the poor solvent (or solution) onto the solution (or poor solvent) to form a distinct mixture interface. The mixtures are normally kept in a quasi-closed container on a stationary surface to retard evaporation and mixing; (B) by injecting the solution (or poor solvent) into the poor solvents (or solution), the crystals can be precipitated directly.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of organic crystal arrays by rubbing the substrate with a pre-deposited crystal sample and its (B) ideal result and (C) actual result. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright © 2010 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of a filtration-and-transfer (FAT) alignment method for patterning crystal film arrays, MW: microwires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright © 2009 The National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Epitaxial growth of F16CuPc crystals onto CuPc crystals by PVT methods; (B) schematic top view of the (001) planes of CuPc and F16CuPc crystals, which pack along the [100] and [010] directions respectively (π–π stacking orientation). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Patterning of crystals on SAM patterns which were obtained by micro-contact printing techniques. The crystals were located on the rough SAM patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright © 2006 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 21  Patterning of crystals by utilizing the areas with different surface energies. Au pads: lyophilic area, and substrate: lyophobic area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 386. Copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Patterning of crystals by using pillar arrays to sustain the solutions around the pillars (edge casting); (B) patterning of crystals by using inclining plate arrays (or stamps with inclined surfaces at intended positions) to hold the solutions beneath the plate (gap casting). The arrows represent the direction of the crystal growth. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 23  Patterning of crystals by utilizing pillars or pinners to sustain the solutions around the pillars or pinners. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Crystal patterning by using the micro-contact printing technique by selectively transferring single crystals from a large crystal film as a replication of the stamp features. Reprinted with permission from ref. 428. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic diagram of an ink-jet printing technique for growing crystal arrays with the assistance of a solvent-exchange method: (1) ink-jetting of poor solvent (or anti-solvent); (2) ink-jetting of semiconductor solution; (3) crystal growth with evaporation of mixed solvents; (4) complete evaporation of solvents to form crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 26  Exfoliated crystals on (A) the scotch tape (scale bar: 30 μm) and (B) the SiO2 substrate after the transfer process (scale bar: 20 μm); (C) schematic diagram of an “organic crystal cleavage” method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Large crystals obtained by using PVT methods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright © 2013 Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Four types of configurations for OFETs based on organic semiconductor crystals.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic and corresponding representative SEM images of (A) straight and (B) bent CuPc crystals, the grids display the crystal lattice in the crystals and the red and green grids represent the distortion of the crystal lattice after compression and stretching respectively. (C) Schematic illustration of molecular packing of bent crystals, with denser molecular packing inside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 454. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 30  Evolution of the electronic splitting of the HOMO and LUMO as a function of the (A) intermolecular distance and (B) the lateral shift distance. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright © 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences.	 


Ag	4.3	Al	4.2	AZO471	3.7–4.6	Au	5.1
C	5.0	CNT472,473	4.8–5.0	Graphene474	4.6	PEDOT:PSS429	5.1
TTF:TCNQ475	4.6–4.8	Ca	2.9	Co	5.0	Cr	4.5
Cu	4.7	CuI172	5.3	Fe	4.5	In	4.2
ITO476	4.4–4.7	Mg	3.7	Mo	4.6	Ni	5.0
Pb	4.2	Pt	5.6	Sn	4.4	Ti	4.3
W	4.6	Zn	4.3	
	
	
	



Inorganic gate dielectrics
Al2O3	9	BZT	17.3	BST	16	CeO2	23
Gd2O3	7.4	HfO2	21	Si3N4	7.5	SiO2	3.9
Ta2O5	25	TiO2	41	ZrO2	23	
	



Organic gate dielectrics
BCB	2.5	CYEPL	18.5	Cytop	2.0	
ODPA
ODTS
	2.5
Parylene-C	3.1	Parylene-D	2.8	Parylene-HT	2.2	Parylene-N	2.65
PMMA	3.5	PMPA	3.4	PI	3.3	PPA	2.9
PQ	3.5	PS	2.6	PTBS	2.4	PTFMA	6.0
PVA	7.8	PVC	4.6	PVP	4.2	P(VDF–TrFE)	12–40
Vacuum/air	1	
	
	
	
	
	


 	Fig. 31  (A) Schematic diagram of a device which can estimate the intrinsic mobility by removing the contact resistance. The voltage measured along the channel (VXX) is used for the four-probe method and the voltage measured perpendicular to the channel (VXY) is for investigation of the Hall-effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; (B) the transfer curve (ID as a function of VG) obtained from the traditional two-probe method and the channel conductivity (σ = ID/ΔV) as a function of VG obtained using the four-probe method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 447. Copyright © 2007 American Institute of Physics; (C) the relationship between the transversal Hall voltage and the magnetic field B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 32  Schematic diagrams of the electrostatic bonding technique for achieving crystal devices, in which other layers are fabricated before the crystal location (bottom gate-bottom contact). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright © 2004 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic diagrams of the vacuum lamination approach for achieving crystal devices with top gate-top contact mode. The polymer membrane (Mylar®) is laminated onto the crystal as the dielectric layer by vacuum pulling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 554. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for a top gate-bottom contact device based on electrospinning of P3HT fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 563. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for deposition of drain/source electrodes by using the shadow mask technique (copper grid or micro/nanometer sized wires/ribbons as the mask). Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic diagrams of a fabrication procedure for deposition of (A) symmetric and (B) asymmetric drain/source electrodes through a “stamping” technique by transferring the pre-deposited metal films onto the crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 




	−5.21	2.57	H	PVT	PDMS	BG BC, Au	—	2.4	
551 and 574



	−5.0	1.8	H	PVT	PQh	TG TC, Ag-epoxy	—	40	
36 and 575



	−4.96	1.4	H	PVT	OTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	4.28	
576



	−4.41	1.95/2.03	H	PVT	SiO2	BG BC, Aui	—	1	
577



	−5.6	3.0	H	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010]	34	
578

[001]	23


	—	—	—	Drop-casting with solution epitaxy	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	4.0	
579



	−5.4	2.6	H	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100]	4.3	
55 and 575

[010]	2.2


	−5.36	2.21	Slipped π	PVT	PDMS	BG BC, Au	[010], π	15.4	
37, 38 and 451

[100]	4.4
Air	BG TC, Au	[010], π	24.5


	—	—	Slipped π	PVT	Air	BG BC, Au	—	16	
580



	—	—	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG BC, Au	[010], π	12	
581



	−5.93	2.33	Slipped π	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.54	
582

Cytop	BG BC, CNT/Au	—	4.8	
583



	—	—	Slipped π	PVT	Parylene	TG TC, graphite ink	[100], π	1.6	
497



	−5.7k	—	Slipped π	PVT	Parylene-N	TG TC, graphite ink	[100], π	1.7	
498



	−5.38	1.98	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100], π	9	
584 and 585



	−5.49	2.57	Slipped π	Drop-casting	PI	BG BC, TP/Au	[010], π	3.2	
30, 396 and 493

Spin-coating	PTS/SiO2	BG TC, Cu	[010], π	3.2


	−5.11	1.69	2D π	Solvent-exchange	SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	1.42	
88 and 586

Solvent-exchange and aging	SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	1.73	
332

Dip-coating	Al2O3	BG TC, Au	[100], π	1.5	
284

Ink-jet printing and annealing	SiO2	BG BC, Ti/Au/PFBTj	—	1.7	
431

Droplet-pinned crystallization	BCB/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	3.8	
404

Solution-shearing	PTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	4.6	
68

Fluid-enhanced solution-shearing	PTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	11	
410



	−5.47	2.2	1D π	Drop-casting	HMDS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100], π	3.7	
587



	—	—	π	Solution-processing method	Cytop/ZrOx	BG TC, Au	[100], π	4.1	
588



	−5.3	—	H	PVT	SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100]	2.5	
59

[010]	1.3
[110]	0.75
[001]	0.016


	−6.01	2.75	Slipped π	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	—	2.1	
589



	−5.43	2.36	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.91	
590



	−5.08	2.8	H	Drop-casting	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001]	10.2	
591



	−5.12	2.8	H	Drop-casting	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001]	1.8


	−5.5	3.5	H	Solvent-vapour annealing	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, MO3/Au	[100]	9.1	
208, 430 and 592

Ink-jet printing	Parylene-C	TG TC, Au	—	31.3


	−5.5	3.5	H	Solvent-vapour annealing	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	6.0	
362 and 592



	−5.5	3.5	H	Drop-casting	PhTS/SiO2	BG TC, FeCl3/Au	—	4.4	
592 and 593



	−5.7	—	H	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, MoO3/Au	—	17	
494

BG TC, V2O5/Au	—	10.6


	−5.48	—	H	PVT	F-SAM/SiO2	BG BC, Au	—	1.3	
400

Edge-cast solution crystallization	DTES/SiO2l	BG TC, Au	—	1	
400



	−5.42	—	H	Edge-cast solution crystallization	DTES/SiO2l	BG TC, Au	—	3.6	
400



	−5.56	3.36	π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	HMDS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100], π	3.2	
282 and 350



	—	—	—	Drop-casting with solution epitaxy	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.3	
579



	−5.6	3.46	H	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001]	1.8	
54 and 594

[100]	0.8


	−5.6	3.4	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	8.5	
595

—	Drop-casting	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010]	18.9


	−5.34	2.76	—	Solvent-exchange	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.66	
317



	−5.68	2.96	H	PVT	FDTS/SiO2	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	—	1.5	
596



	−5.57	2.90	H	Edge-cast solution crystallization	DTS/SiO2	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	—	1.0	
596



	−5.64	2.99	H	Gap-cast solution crystallization	DTS/SiO2	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	[011]	6.5	
596



	—	—	H	Edge-cast solution crystallization	DTS/SiO2	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	[101]	9.5	
596



	−5.44	3.0	H	PVT	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au/TTF-TCNQ	—	8.3	
597 and 598



	−5.38	3.0	—	Edge-cast solution crystallization	SAM/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	11	
398, 407 and 599

SAM/Al2O3	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	10.7
Cytop	TG TC, Au	9


	−5.24	—	H	Edge-cast solution crystallization	β-PTS/SiO2	BG TC, F4TCNQ/Au	—	16	
600



	−5.2	2.2	H	PVT	PVP	BG BC, Au	[100]	16	
601



	−5.31	3.37	Slipped π	PVT	Parylene	TG TC, Au paste	[001], π	1.1	
564



	—	—	H	PVT	Parylene-N	TG TC, colloidal graphite	—	1.5	
602



	—	—	2D π	PVT	OTS/SiO2	BG BC, Au	—	6	
603



	—	2.12/1.93	Special π	Solvent-exchange	OTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.6	
318



	−5.39	2.90	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	2.66	
94



	−5.3	3.48/3.12	Slipped π	Solvent-exchange	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	2.13	
340



	−5.7	3.1	—	Solution-process	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	2.1	
273 and 355



	−5.09	2.76	Slipped π	Drop-casting	ODTS/SiO2	BG BC, Au	[010], π	1.2	
44 and 604



	—	—	—	PVT	Vacuum	BG BC, Au	—	4	
605



	−5.14	2.51	Slipped π	Drop-casting	SiO2	BG BC, Au	[010], π	3.6	
87 and 606



	−4.96	2.4	Slipped π	Drop-casting	SiO2	BG BC, Au	[010], π	1	
607 and 608



	−4.61	—	2D π	PVT	Parylene-C	TG TC, TTF:TCNQ	[100], π	11.2	
503 and 506

Recrystallization	Parylene-C	TG TC, TTF:TCNQ	[100], π	10.4


	−5.45	2.78	—	Drop-casting	SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	1.0	
105 and 609



	−5.08	2.32	—	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	—	1.64	
610



	−5.32	1.74	—	Drop-casting	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010]	6.2	
611



	−5.2	1.7	π	PVT	Parylene-N	TG TC, graphite	[010], π	1.0	
256 and 612

ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	2.35	
613



	−6.77k	2.42k	π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[010], π	2.31	
613



	−5.43	1.7	π	Solvent-exchange	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	2.9	
614



	—	—	Quasi-2D π	Solvent-exchange	SiO2	BG BC, Au	—	1.8	
32



	−5.19	2.59	1D π	PVT	SiO2	BG BC, Au	[001], π	1.0	
615



	−5.11	2.97	H	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Pt–Ag	—	1.0	
481



	−5.2	2.9	π	Micro-contact printing	SiO2	BG TC, Ag	[100], π	1.8	
423



	−5.44	2.41	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100], π	3.6	
80 and 616



	—	—	π	Solvent-exchange	SiO2	BG BC, Au	—	4.4	
346



	−5.1	1.8	NAm	Electrospinning	Ion gel	TG BC, Au	—	2n	
96, 295 and 563



	—	—	NAm	Solvent-vapour diffusion	HMDS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	Intramolecule	5.5	
280



	−5.17	1.64	NAm	Solution-processing technique	OTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	Intramolecule	7	
281 and 617




	−4.5	1.7	Slipped π	PVT	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ag	[100], π	1.1	
613, 618 and 619

BG TC, Au	[100], π	1.24


	−3.6	2.3	Slipped π	PVT	Cytop	BG BC, CNT/Au	—	4.2	
583



	−2.1	3.41	H	PVT	PVP/SiO2	BG TC, Mg–Ag	—	1.5	
486, 568, 620 and 621

Vapour sublimation	SiO2	BG TC, Au	—	3.1


	−3.64	2.34	Slipped π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001]	3.25	
622



	−3.84	2.34	Slipped π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100]	2.6	
622



	−3.84	2.29	1D π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100]	6.55	
622



	−4.03	2.29	1D π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[100]	12.6	
622



	−4.10	2.30	Slipped π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	Cytop/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001]	4.66	
622



	−4.63	2.25	Slipped π	PVT	Air/vacuum	BG BC, Au	[100]	1.6	
301, 511 and 623




	—	—	π	Co-Sublimation	Parylene-C	TG TC, TTF:TCNQ	[010]	1	
565



	−4.6	—	π	PVT	Vacuum	BG BC, Au	π	6–7	
624 and 625



	−3.26	2.75	Slipped π	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	—	2.5	
589



	−4.01	2.91	Slipped π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Au	[001], π	8.6	
356 and 626



	−4.1	2.0	Slipped π	Solvent-exchange	SiO2	BG BC, Au	[100], π	1.4	
95



	−4.5	2.3	2D π	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG BC, Au	—	6	
41, 42 and 627



	−4.01	1.74	2D π	Solvent-vapour diffusion	OTMS/SiO2	BG TC, Ag	[010], π	1.77	
92 and 628



	−3.79	2.66	Slipped π	PVT	Parylene	TG TC, graphite	—	3.39	
629



	−4.22	1.82	—	Solvent-vapour diffusion	ODTS/SiO2	BG TC, Ag	—	4.65	
348



	−4.5/−3.8	1.7/2.4	NAm	Droplet-pinned crystallization	BCB/SiO2o	BG TC, Au	—	11	
120



	—	—	1D π	Solvent-exchange	SiO2	BG BC, Au	[100], π	20	
32


 	Fig. 37  Schematic diagrams of inverters. (A) Truth table; (B) p-type inverter with resistor load; (C) p-type inverter with enhancement load (saturated); (D) p-type inverter with depletion load; (E) complementary inverter.	 

 	Fig. 38  (A and B) Schematic diagrams and (C) SEM images of an organic circuit containing an n-type F16CuPc nanowire, a p-type CuPc nanowire and six SnO2:Sb nanowires as electrodes, (D) an example inverter by applying the input voltage onto gate A and the power source onto the source electrode (No. 1) of the n-type semiconductor with the p-channel source electrode (No. 5) grounded, (E) various potential device applications can be achieved by using different connections. Reprinted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 39  (A) Effect of a high-vacuum gauge on the photoconductivity of rubrene crystals, suggesting that the surface trapping due to the gauge effect significantly reduces the photoconductivity of rubrene crystals and hence implying that the photoconductivity is predominantly a surface phenomenon. (B) Typical dependence of photocurrent on the excitation power in rubrene crystals, showing three distinct regimes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 40  (A) Transfer characteristics of phototransistor ① in the dark and ② under light irradiation; (B) current dependent on the different process, ① “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process without illumination, ③–⑨ attempted “erasing” process by using different gate voltage; (C) current dependent on the different process through a whole operation cycle, ① “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process, ③ “erasing” process by an applied gate voltage of −90 V; (D) current dependent on the different process through two operation cycles with multi-stage process, ① first “writing” process by applied illumination, ② “reading” process, ③ second “writing” and “reading” process by an applied gate voltage of −50 V, ④ “erasing” process by an applied gate voltage of −90 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 41  (A) Schematic diagram of a FET sensor for mechanical pressure sensing based on rubrene crystals and PDMS microstructures as the semiconductor and insulator layer respectively. (B) Output curves at different pressures (loads). (C) The change of drain–source current is proportional to the change in capacitance. This is nonlinearly dependent on the pressure. Inset: Quick response and relaxation of the pressure sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 418 and 655. Copyright © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited and Copyright © 2012 Science China Press.	 

 	Fig. 42  (A) Weak excitation photoluminescence image of a BP3T crystal on a PMMA/SiO2/Si substrate; (B) schematic diagram of an OLET device configuration and the imitation of the injection and recombination of the charge carriers; (C) top view and (D) the side view of the edge emission of the BP3T crystals showing that the emission moves with an increase in the drain voltage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 610. Copyright © 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 





	−5.1	−2.8	2.3	80%	PVT	SiO2	BG TC, Au–Au	0.29	NO	NO	
527

BG TC, Au–Al	0.22	NO	—
BG TC, Au–MgAg	0.06	NO	—
PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	1.64	0.17	
Light: 578 and 616 nm
Current density: 412 A cm−2
	
610

BG TC, Au–Ca	—	0.27	Current density: 10 kA cm−2	
685

BG TC, Au–CsF/Ca	0.2	0.2	Current density: 33 kA cm−2	
676



	—	—	—	—	PVT	SiO2	
BG BC
Cr/Au (or Ti/Pt)
	—	—	
Blue to green light
EQE: 0.001% (DC gate voltage)
EQE: 0.013% (AC gate voltage)
	
677

Solution	SiO2	BG TC, Au–MgAg	—	—	Light: 491.5 nm; FWHM: 1.1 nm	
678



	−4.83	−2.76	2.07	—	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.04	0.02	Yellow light	
686



	—	—	—	—	Vapor	SiO2	BG TC, Au/Cr–Au/Cr	0.12	—	Yellow light: 563.7 nm; FWHM: 42.1 nm; EQE: 3.7 × 10−4%	
679

SiO2 (grating)	Yellow light: 556.3 nm; FWHM: 2.05 nm; EQE: 4.9 × 10−5%


	
−5.26
−5.51
	
−1.57
−2.10
	
3.69
3.41e
	—	Vapor	PMMA	BG TC, MgAg–MgAg	10−4–10−3	—	
Blue to yellow light
EQE: 0.045%
	
682



	
−5.06
−5.51
	
−1.85
−2.10
	
3.21
3.41e
	—	Vapor	SiO2	BG TC, Au–MgAg	0.01	0.03f	Green to orange light	
683



	−5.4	−2.4	3.0	<1%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Ag–Ag	0.097	0.013	Light: 540 nm; current density: ∼kA cm−2	
672

BG TC, Au–Mg	0.16	0.037
BG TC, Au–Ca	2.3	0.12	Light: 540 nm; EQE: 0.03%; current density: 2 kA cm−2	
673



	−5.36	−3.15	2.21	<1%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.82	0.27	Light: 650 nm; EQE: 0.015%; current density: 4 kA cm−2	
673

PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.57	0.015	Light: 610 nm	
451



	−5.8	−2.8	3.0	85%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.12	0.013	Light: 472 nm	
687

BG TC, Ca–Ca	Blue light: 450 and 472 nm; EQE: 0.06%	
249



	−5.4	−2.85	2.55	79%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Ca–Ca	0.02	0.012	Green light; EQE: 0.64%; current density: 0.66 A cm−2	
249

−5.8	−2.8–2.85	2.95–3g


	−5.6	−2.7	2.9	89%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.17	0.009	Blue light: 460 nm; EQE: 0.1%; current density: 3.7 A cm−2	
674, 687 and 688



	−5.7	−3.0	2.7	52%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.12	0.11	Light: 526 nm; EQE: 0.1%; current density: 6 A cm−2	
687



	−5.7	−3.1	2.6	40%	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	0.38	0.28	EQE: 0.08%; current density: 2 A cm−2	
675

BG TC, MoOx/Au–Ca	0.14	0.15	EQE: 0.1%; current density: 100 A cm−2


	−6.01	−3.26	2.75	
	PVT	PMMA/SiO2	BG TC, Au–Ca	2.1	2.5	Green light; current density: 100 A cm−2	
589


 	Fig. 43  (A) Schematic diagram, (B) current–voltage characteristics, (C) band diagram and (D) SEM images of the individual nanowire for OPVs with CuPc as the p-type crystal seed and F16CuPc as the epitaxially grown n-type crystal. Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
