High-performance organic second- and third-order nonlinear optical materials for ultrafast information processing   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03224G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03224G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15009-15026High-performance organic second- and third-order nonlinear optical materials for ultrafast information processing†

        
          
            Jieyun 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhong’an 
            Li
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Jingdong 
            Luo
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Alex K.-Y. 
            Jen
          
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Chemistry and Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: jingdluo@cityu.edu.hk; alexjen@cityu.edu.hk
bSchool of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, Key Lab of Optical Fiber Sensing and Communication (Ministry of Education), University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. E-mail: jieyunwu@uestc.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory for Material Chemistry of Energy Conversion and Storage (Ministry of Education), School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: lizha@hust.edu.cn
dDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China
Received 
      7th July 2020
    , Accepted 28th August 2020First published on 6th October 2020AbstractOrganic nonlinear optical (NLO) materials are very important for high-speed information processing in addressing the challenges of reduced energy consumption and enhanced speed and bandwidth. In particular, organic second-order NLO materials are very promising for meeting the combined requirements of ultra-low energy and ultra-high bandwidth in electro-optic (EO) modulation, while organic third-order NLO materials have good potential for applications in ultra-speed all-optical signal processing (AOSP). This review highlights the recent significant progress made in organic second- and third-order NLO materials. For second-order NLO materials, the recent advances in the efficient and cost-effective synthesis of dipolar polyene chromophores and thin-film engineering for efficient electric field poling are summarized. The applications and prospects of these high-performance EO materials are also discussed. For third-order NLO materials, we discuss the molecular design strategies of cyanine dyes for AOSP applications, particularly focusing on anionic tricyanofuran (TCF)-based cyanines. We aim to provide a better understanding of the structure–property relationships for cyanine-based AOSP materials. Finally, a summary and outlook for advancing high-performance organic NLO materials are provided.
Jieyun Wu
Jieyun Wu is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He received his BSc from Nankai University in 2008 and his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry (Chinese Academy of Sciences) in 2013. In 2014, he worked at the University of Washington (Seattle) as a Visiting Scholar, supported by the China Scholarship Council under the supervision of Prof. Alex Jen and Dr Jingdong Luo. His research interests include organic electro-optic materials, optical waveguide devices for optical fiber communication and sensing.
Zhong’an Li
Zhong’an Li received his PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University under the supervision of Professor Zhen Li in 2009. From 2009 to 2016, he worked with Prof. Alex Jen at the University of Washington as a Postdoctoral Research Associate. He started his independent career in 2016 at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterization of new organic/polymeric optoelectric materials.
Jingdong Luo
Jingdong Luo received his BSc from Nankai University (1992) and PhD from Wuhan University (2000). He was a Postdoctoral fellow at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology from 2000 to 2001. Then, he worked at the University of Washington and Soluxra in Seattle, Washington. He joined the City University of Hong Kong in the summer of 2017 as an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry. His scientific achievements include developing high-performance electro-optic polymers (such as SEO100 and SEO125) for organic photonics and aggregation-induced emission mechanisms. His research focuses on materials chemistry and the supramolecular assembly of organic nonlinear optical materials.
Alex K.-Y. Jen
Professor Alex K.-Y. Jen received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1984. He was the Boeing-Johnson Chair Professor and Chair of the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at the University of Washington. He joined the City University of Hong Kong as Provost and Chair Professor in 2016. For his contributions in organic photonics and electronics, he was elected as a Member of the European Academy of Sciences, Washington State Academy of Sciences, and Fellow by AAAS, MRS, ACS, PMSE, OSA, SPIE. His interdisciplinary research include areas of organic/hybrid functional materials and devices for photonics, energy, sensors, and nanomedicine.
1. Introduction
With the global internet traffic growing at an exponential rate, the digital traffic jams threaten to throttle the information technology revolution.1,2 Current networks are far from ready for the era of information explosion due to newly emerging technologies such as big data, cloud computing, autonomous vehicles, virtual reality and high-definition video.3 There is an urgent need for constructing transformative photonic devices with ultra-low energy consumption, ultra-large bandwidth, and ultra-high-speed for data centers, metro networks and supercomputing facilities.4 Undoubtedly, this challenge requires synergetic innovation from fundamental chemistry in photonic materials to device engineering and further construction of communication systems.
There is overwhelming evidence that organic nonlinear optical (NLO) materials play a critical role in the development of photonic platforms.5–12 The successful deployment of organic second-order NLO (or organic electro-optic, EO) polymers has contributed significantly to photonic applications.13–19 Plasmonic-organic hybrid (POH) modulators with organic EO materials take advantage of silicon photonics, organic electro-optics and plasmonic sub-wavelength light confinement, while they overcome both the speed limitations of electronics and photonics of the efficient EO modulation of micrometer footprints.20–24 POH EO modulators with energy consumption as low as 30 fJ per bit have been fabricated in a single metal layer.25 The POH in-phase/quadrature (IQ) electro-optic modulators exhibited ultra-low energy consumption at the level of attojoule per bit (0.07 fJ per bit at 50 Gbit per s, or 0.3 fJ per bit at 200 Gbit per s).26 The proof-of-concept THz-to-optical conversion in 16 m wireless communications using an ultra-broadband POH EO modulator with a 3 dB bandwidth of 0.36 THz (360 GHz) was successfully demonstrated.27 Silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) EO modulators showed a comprehensive performance improvement of bandwidth (>100 GHz), half-wave voltage (Vπ < 1 V), and optical loss on millimeter footprints.28–34 The innovation in device structure, such as the silicon slot waveguide, photonic crystal waveguide, and micro-ring resonator, combining the highly efficient and stable EO materials has significantly advanced the progress of CMOS-compatible active photonic devices for coherent optical communication.29,35–40 Hybrid polymer EO modulators using sol–gel conductive cladding are exceptionally promising in high-bandwidth and low-VπL EO modulation.41–47
Organic third-order NLO materials are intriguing materials for all-optical signal processing for realizing very high-speed optical switching and modulation.48–51 The silicon-organic hybrid waveguides with bandwidths exceeding 100 Gbit per s have been achieved by integrating organic NLO materials. Recently, a silicon-organic hybrid waveguide with a record nonlinearity coefficient of γ ≈ 1 × 105 W−1 km−1 and all-optical demultiplexing of 170.8 Gbit per s to 42.7 Gbit per s were achieved in all-optical signal processing.52 Third-order NLO materials can also be used for three-dimensional (3D) micro- and nanofabrication by taking advantage of two-photon or multiphoton absorption.53
Overall, the improvement in the NLO effect of organic materials together with the systematic design and engineering in POH, SOH, sol–gel hybrid and all-polymer waveguide devices have resulted in substantial and significant progress in device performance, including energy consumption at the level of attojoules per bit, Vπ lower than 0.5 V, bandwidth of higher than 300 GHz, signal processing speed of higher than 200 Gb s−1, and device footprints of the order of μm2. It should be noted that without the endeavours from the researchers in organic NLO materials, it is impossible to speed up the development of hybrid photonic platforms. On the other hand, the collaboration between materials and devices provides a stage to achieve unprecedented high-performance organic NLO materials. This review provides a summary of the recent progress in organic second- and third-order NLO materials in the Jen group. Particular emphasis is placed on how we remove the barrier for the application of second-order NLO materials in concise chromophore synthesis and thin-film engineering. For third-order NLO materials, we introduce our recent advances in designing cyanines with large macroscopic NLO effects, which are suitable for all-optical signal processing (AOSP) applications. The applications and perspectives of advanced organic NLO materials are also discussed, which we believe will inspire more close synergetic innovation ranging from fundamental studies in materials to photonic device engineering and overall system architecture.
2. Principles of nonlinear optics
Nonlinear optics is the science of the nonlinear relationship between the response of matter under intense light (laser) and the field strength. When light propagates in a medium, the valence electrons in the medium under the action of the photoelectric field produce a charge transfer relative to the atoms, causing the medium's polarization. The relationship between its polarization intensity and the photoelectric field intensity E of the incident light can be express as p = αE + βE2 + γE3+ …(1.1)or P = ε0χ(1)E + ε0χ(2)E2 + ε0χ(3)E3+ …(1.2)In eqn (1.1), p is the polarization intensity of a microscopic molecule under an applied electric field, and α, β and γ are the linear polarizability, the first-order hyperpolarizability, and the second-order hyperpolarizability. The term β denotes the second-order NLO coefficient of the molecule and γ denotes the third-order NLO coefficient. In eqn (1.2), P is the macroscopic polarization strength of the material, ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, χ(1) is the first-order (linear) polarization rate, χ(2) is the second-order nonlinear polarizability, χ(3) is the third-order nonlinear polarizability, and so on.
In the case of a weak electric field, the high-order terms of eqn (1.1) and (1.2) can be neglected from the second term onwards. Therefore, the polarization and the electric field strength E are linearly related, which belong to the category of linear optics. When under laser action, the optical field is stronger, and the high-order terms from the 2nd to nth term in eqn (1.1) and their corresponding terms in eqn (1.2) cannot be ignored. As such, the microscopic polarization p and macroscopic P of the medium are not linearly related to the strength of the applied electric field E, which is the NLO effect. The effect associated with the 2nd term is called the second-order NLO effect, referred to as the “microscopic second-order polarizability (β)” at the molecular level and as the “macroscopic second-order susceptibility (χ(2))” at the level of the materials. For second-order NLO materials, macroscopic second-order susceptibility is described by the following equation: χ(2) = Nf(ω)βijk〈cos3θ〉 = Nf(ω)βijkμEp/5kT(1.3)where N is the number of dipolar molecules, f(ω) is the Lorenz–Onsager local field factor, β is the hyperpolarizability of the dipolar molecules, μ is the dipole moment, Ep is the poling electric field, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. The dipole moment μ interacting with a poling field of Ep competes with thermal randomization to define the dipolar order 〈cos3θ〉. For organic second-order NLO materials, the product μβ is often referred to as the microscopic molecular figure-of-merit for push–pull chromophores. For a film poled in the z-axis, the macroscopic nonlinearity is r33, which is also named Pockels effect or the electro-optic (EO) effect, and the product n3r33 is referred to as the macroscopic figure of merit. A typical application of organic EO materials is as electro-optic modulators for phase or intensity modulation. The input light is launched into the first Y branch of a Mach–Zehnder interferometer (Fig. 1a), which is divided into two paths and transmitted along the two arms with different widths, respectively, and the paths finally combine in the second Y branch to produce interference. The electric field is applied by the coplanar electrode to induce the refractive index change in the two arms (EO polymers) by Pockels effect, resulting in significant changes in the phase difference between two arms and hence a palpable drift in the output spectrum. The electric signal can, therefore, be used to modulate the optical signal.
 Fig. 1  (a) An illustration of EO modulation in the polymer Mach–Zehnder interferometer waveguide with coplanar electrodes. (b) Illustration of AOSP using a Mach–Zehnder configuration in a silicon-organic hybrid device. (b) is modified from ref. 56. Copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The effect correlated to the third-order of the electric field (E3) is the third-order NLO effect, which is referred to as the “microscopic third-order polarizability (γ)” at the molecular level and as the “macroscopic third-order susceptibility (χ(3))” at the materials level. Based on the sum-over-states (SOS) approach, γ can be simply described by the following equation:54 (1.4)where μ, Δμ and E represent the transition dipole moments, the difference in state dipole moments, and the transition energies, respectively. ℏω is the photon energy, Γ is the damping factor, while g, e, and e′ subscripts denote the ground, first excited, and higher-lying excited states, respectively. Three terms have been included in this equation, known as D for the dipolar term, T for the two-photon term and N for the negative term, respectively. Since the D and T terms contain two-photon resonances (2ℏω) in their denominators, both of them are directly related to the process of two-photon absorption (TPA), and are referred to as the imaginary component of γ, i.e., (Im(γ)). On the other hand, the N term belongs to the real component of γ, i.e., (Re(γ)), which is proportional to the nonlinear refractive index that describes the change in the refractive index under high-intensity light irradiance. Re(γ) can be positive or negative and, in general, the larger |Re(γ)| means that a more pronounced change in the material index will be generated upon increasing the light intensity; this attractive feature can therefore be used for a variety of optical switching applications such as AOSP.55Fig. 1b shows a typical Mach–Zehnder device structure for AOSP.56 In this device, the output signal is similar to the incoming one without an external perturbing control light. However, when a control light is applied, the refractive index of the NLO material will be modulated substantially to enable a clear optical phase change in the signal light passing through the NLO material, thereby producing a new output signal.
3. Organic second-order NLO materials
The ideal EO materials for photonic device applications need to simultaneously possess large Pockels coefficients (macroscopic r33 value), broad bandwidth capacity, high optical power handling, excellent processability, low dielectric constant, and low dielectric loss tangent. The past two decades of vigorous research and development have produced a very significant fundamental understanding of the structure–property relationship of organic EO materials.57,58 In the past five years, we have been focused on the concise synthesis of high-performance polyene-based chromophores and self-assembled dendrimers. Considerable efforts have been made on the efficient poling of EO polymer films by nano-doping, wafer-scale poling on soda-lime glass substrates and the exploitation of transparent graphene electrodes for cladding-free poling. These research efforts are expected to remove the barrier to real application and to meet these specifications for photonic applications of high-performance organic EO materials.
3.1 Concise synthesis of highly efficient dipolar chromophores
The design and synthesis of donor–bridge–acceptor (D–π–A) chromophores exhibiting large molecular hyperpolarizabilities is one of the central themes in the research of highly efficient organic NLO materials for photonic applications.59–63 Over the past two decades, the extensive investigation of the structure–property relationship for these highly NLO-active dipolar chromophores has significantly contributed to the understanding of their optical nonlinearity at the molecular level. It also provided a feedstock of organic EO materials enabling the development of advanced EO devices for optical modulation. Among those dipolar chromophores, push–pull tetraene chromophores containing strong CF3-TCF acceptors are the best-performing for NLO applications.21,24,27 The conventional synthetic strategy for tetraene chromophores is the step-wise forward synthesis (Fig. 2a), which is complicated and often gives low overall yields from multiple-step reactions with considerable efforts in purification.64–66 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 3a, the critical steps in the synthesis of NLO chromophores include cryogenic lithiation and/or metal-hydride reduction.67 These reaction protocols clearly demand well-trained synthetic chemists with special know-how and experience, and specific apparatus and equipment for both lab synthesis and scale-up production, posing limitations and operational costs in scale-up synthesis.
 Fig. 2  (A) The step-wise forward synthesis of dipolar NLO chromophores. (B) Convergence and MCR are the keys to high synthetic efficacy to overcome the current limitation of the step-wise routes. D: electron-donor; π: conjugated bridge; A: electron-acceptor. 
 Fig. 3  The traditional step-wise forward synthesis (a) and the three-component modified concise synthesis (b) of tetraene-based chromophores. 
Inspired by the recent surge of interest in multicomponent reactions (MCRs), the synthesis of push–pull polymethine chromophores was designed and optimized via new protocols for the three-component reaction (3-CR) by mixing the donor, the conjugated bridge and acceptor in one pot (Fig. 2b).68,69 The use of highly reactive bisaldehydes is the key to improving the synthetic efficacy of heptamethine merocyanines over that of dipolar polyenes. As shown in Fig. 3b, the high chemo-selectivity of bisaldehydes and their relative condensation reaction rates with both basic and acidic active methylene compounds drive the predominant formation of asymmetric dipolar structures under 3-CR conditions. In comparison to sequential multistep synthesis, the 3-CR conditions are concise and without the use of pyrophoric organo-lithium reagents. In electro-optics, very large EO coefficients up to 150 pm V−1 at 1.3 μm have been obtained in poled polymers (chromophore loading density 33%), which is comparable to that of a push–pull tetraene chromophore containing the CF3-TCF (2-(3-cyano-5-methyl-5-(trifluoromethyl)furan-2(5H)-ylidene)malononitrile) acceptor. These new efforts may fulfill the critical transition from the lab to the scale-up synthesis of highly efficient NLO chromophores for EO polymers. Further investigation can emphasize the more in-depth analysis of the structure–property relationships and structure modification on the electron-bridge, where the chloride on the bridge provides an active site for the introduction of site-isolating groups.
Molecular glass is one of the most attractive chromophores due to its high chromophore loading density, enabling high refractive indexes and large macroscopic r33 values in poled film.14,70 Through intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen-bonding, π–π stacking, or van der Waals interactions, neat chromophores can self-assemble into monolithic molecular glass films. The first demonstration of EO molecular glass was based on the π–π stacking self-assembly (ArH–ArF interactions) of dendritic phenyl groups on the donor and dendritic pentafluoro-phenyl groups on the bridge.71 Polyene-based molecular glasses with dendritic aryl (phenyl, naphthyl and anthracyl) and pentafluoro-phenyl groups were synthesized to tune the self-assembly to realize the ultra-large r33 value of up to 318 pm V−1 @ 1310 nm, as shown in Fig. 4a.72 Their self-assembly is driven by the enhanced cohesive energy of heterodimers, the schematic illustration of which is shown in Fig. 5a. Notably, self-assembled molecular glasses based on heterodimers require two different dendritic groups. In association with the complicated protocol of the tetraene chromophore (Fig. 4a), the synthetic efforts of such molecular glasses with heterodimerization are time-consuming and show low-efficiency in comparison with those chromophores for guest–host doping.
 Fig. 4  The synthesis of tetraene chromophores with different self-assembled dendrons (a) and with the same dendrons (b). (c) The synthesis of tethered binary NLO chromophores. 
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the heterodimerization (a) and homodimerization (b) self-assembly of molecular glass and the poling process of tethered binary chromophores (c). Reproduced from ref. 74 and 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, we developed a new self-assembly strategy of supramolecular homodimerization to self-assemble EO dendritic films, in which two dendritic units with semifluorinated dipolar 1,2,3-trifluorobenzene (TFB) moieties were attached to the donor end and the π-bridge of push–pull tetraene chromophores.73,74 In these new dendrimers, monolithic and semifluorinated TFB rings replaced the heterodimers of the phenyl and pentafluorophenyl moieties. As shown in Fig. 4b, this greatly simplified the synthesis of EO dendrimers and their thin-film processing. The semifluorinated TFB contains a dipole moment of 3.0 D, which is prone to antiparallel packing due to dipole–dipole interaction. Unlike ArH–ArF heterodimerization, the self-assembly between TFBs is homogeneous (Fig. 5b). The poled films of these self-assembled dendritic EO films showed very large EO coefficients, up to 248 pm V−1 at the wavelength of 1310 nm, and excellent temporal stability at room temperature with a very minimal change of ∼5% for over 1000 hours. Our study, therefore, illustrated that the homodimer stacking of TFB rings through the dipole–dipole stacking gives stabilization energy similar to that of the quadrupolar interaction of phenyl and pentafluorophenyl heterodimeric pairs. More significantly, the poling efficiency (r33/Ep, Fig. 6; Ep: poling electric field) of TFB-containing self-assembled EO dendrimers was much higher than the ArH–ArF self-assembled dendrimers (TED 1–3) and guest–host films, due to the highly dipolar dielectric environment with dipolar TFB dendrons. Therefore, the efficiency in the synthesis and poling are both improved, paving the way for the application of self-assembled chromophores in photonic devices.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the poling efficiency of the EO molecular glass and guest–host EO polymer. AJL50: 13 wt% chromophore in PMMA; AJL33: 25 wt% chromophore in PMMA. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new molecular glass design of tethered binary chromophores has been studied for electro-optics. As shown in Fig. 4c, a push–pull tetraene structure with a strong dialkylaminophenyl donor and CF3-TCF acceptor was used as the primary chromophore due to its large hyperpolarizability, and a short cyanoacetate dye with relatively smaller dipole moment and very different molecular aspect ratio was used as a secondary dipolar structure for dipole engineering.75 We found that such binary chromophore systems (exemplified as chromophore C1) exhibited significantly improved poling efficiency and thermal stability in poled films of guest–host polymers and monolithic glass. The introduction of the secondary dipolar cyanoacetate dye (dipole moment: ∼5 D) significantly attenuated the dipole–dipole electrostatic interactions and prevented close packing between the primary dipolar structures (illustrated in Fig. 5c). An ultrahigh r33 value of 273 pm V−1 and a high refractive index of 2.12 at the wavelength of 1300 nm were achieved from the monolithic glass of C1, which represent a record-high n3r33 figure-of-merit of 2601 pm V−1 with good temporal stability. This exceptional result is a great demonstration of the advantages offered by dynamically assisted dipolar polarization enhancement of tethered binary chromophores, for significantly improving the poling efficiency and thermal stability of organic EO materials for efficient optical modulation.
3.2 Efficient poling of EO polymer films for optical waveguides
The noncentrosymmetric order of dipolar chromophores through electric-field poling is the critical initial step in processing EO polymer films for their application in optical waveguides. The most commonly used poling is contact poling, which has been used in various electro-optic devices such as SOH, POH and all-polymer EO waveguide. However, contact poling still suffers from thin-film dielectric breakdown due to current injection from the metal electrode. Therefore, achieving large-area and efficient poling is still a challenge. The high optical absorption losses of metal electrodes greatly limit the waveguide fabrication and poling efficiency, which is also a problematic issue for electro-optic polymer applications. Although the use of BCB dielectric protective layers, pyroelectric poling, and sol–gel highly conductive cladding have been reported to solve the poling difficulty, high-efficiency electric field poling remains an important challenge that needs to be addressed.76–84 Recently, we investigated the regulation of the dielectric constant by nano-doping, preparation and large-area poling of EO polymers on soda-lime glasses, as well as the development of low-optical-loss graphene electrodes to replace metal electrodes for electric field poling. These efforts are expected to facilitate the efficient poling of EO polymers in waveguide devices for a wide range of applications.
The high electron affinity, electron mobility and percolated networks for electron transport of fullerene derivatives, such as PCBM, have established them as excellent electron acceptors and transport materials in organic solar cells and electronic devices.85 In this work, PCBM was doped into the EO polymers to regulate the dielectric constant of EO films (Fig. 7a).86 It was found that the dielectric constant was significantly increased from 3.54 (P1) to 4.02 (P1/PCBM), and the refractive index increased from 1.6335 to 1.6554. Temperature-dependent dielectric constant measurements (Fig. 7b and c) revealed that at the poling temperature, the dipole moment of AJ28 in P1/PCBM was significantly increased to three-fold the original dipole moment at room temperature. This enhanced dipole and polarizable environment of chromophores in P1/PCBM resulted in the significant improvement of the poling efficiency, as shown in Fig. 7d. A larger EO coefficient (197 pm V−1versus 133 pm V−1) and figure-of-merit n3r33 (1002.9 pm V−1versus 632.2 pm V−1), as well as higher-order parameters (15.7% versus 10.6%) and birefringence were achieved in the PCBM-doped film, P1/PCBM. These results revealed how the change in the microscopic environment of the chromophore influenced the macroscopic EO activities, demonstrating the significant application potential of fullerenes in organic EO materials and devices for efficient poling.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structures of fullerene PCBM, guest chromophore AJ28 and host polymer PMMA–PS. (b) The temperature-dependent dielectric constants of EO films. (c) The dielectric constants of EO films at frequencies ranging from 1 kHz to 100 kHz. (d) EO coefficients under different poling electric-fields. P1/PCBM: 20 wt% AJ28 and 5% PCBM in PMMA–PS; P1: 20 wt% AJ28 in PMMA–PS. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Efficient poling of high-performance electro-optic (EO) polymer thin films at the wafer-scale (>10 cm2) is a key step towards the realization of integrated photonic systems, capitalizing on the significant improvement of the performance of these materials.61 However, in common poling protocols of EO polymers, the poled areas are mostly limited to the range of 0.10 × 0.50 cm2 (Fig. 8a) in order to obtain consistent results of poled thin film samples in good yields. It remains a great challenge for researchers to further increase the effective poled area. In this work, we demonstrate a simple protocol for the repeatable and efficient contact poling of guest–host EO polymer thin films over large areas on soda-lime glass substrates (Fig. 8b and c).87 At temperatures close to Tg, the leak-through current of single-layer films showed a characteristic spike under high poling fields just prior to the dielectric breakdown of the polymer film, as shown in Fig. 8d. In contrast, the poled film on soda-lime (DL) gave a steady pseudo-linear increase of leak-through current (LTC) from 40 °C to 110 °C and no current spikes were observed. The poled large-area (Fig. 8c, up to 13.5 cm2, the largest poled film, to the best of our knowledge) thin films exhibited very large second-order nonlinear susceptibilities (d33 values of 330–520 pm V−1) for second-harmonic generation (SHG) and associated large Pockels coefficients (r33 values of 105–180 pm V−1) at the wavelength of 1.3 μm, as listed in Table 1. The order parameter of the poled film on soda-lime glass was comparable to that of conventional SL films. The poling protocol also produced poled EO thin films with excellent optical homogeneity and large positive birefringence with small variations (∼10−3) in refractive indices over the poled large areas. Since it is very easy to fabricate waveguides by the ion exchange of soda-lime glass, this study suggests a viable and scalable path towards the realization of integrated photonics based on pre-poled thin films of high-performance EO polymers.
 Fig. 8  (a) Standard poling of a single-layer EO polymer film sandwiched between two electrodes. (b) Large-area poling design of this study using a double-layer stack consisting of a μm-thick EO thin film and a millimeter-thick soda-lime glass substrate sandwiched between an ITO electrode and a gold electrode (marked in yellow). (c) A photograph of a large area (13.5 cm2) EO film on soda-lime glass. (d) Current density versus temperature plots for different poled samples of AJLZ53/PMMA–PS (SL: single layer, (a); DL: double layer, (b)). The current profile of Corning's soda-lime glass (1.0 mm thick) was provided for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 87 from the Optical Society of America. 
Table 1 Poling results of EO polymer ALZ53/PMMA–PS




Sample entry
Configuration, poled area
Poling field (V μm−1)

r
33 at 1.3 μm (pm V−1)

n
TE/nTM at 1.3 μm
Order parameter (%)





a SL: single-layer EO thin films, corresponding to the configuration shown in Fig. 8a.
b DL: double-layer containing EO thin film and soda-lime glass substrate, corresponding to the configuration shown in Fig. 8b.
c 
r
33 values are extrapolated from the order parameters of poled samples.





1
—
—
0
1.592/1.590
—


2
SL,a 0.5 cm2
51
50
1.590/1.602
4.0


3
SL, 0.5 cm2
77
74
1.586/1.615
9.4


4
SL, 0.5 cm2
100
101
1.583/1.632
15.4


5
SL, 0.5 cm2
128
125
1.580/1.653
21.9


6
DL,b 3.2 cm2
115
110c
1.581/1.642
18.8


7
DL, 13.5 cm2
110
105c
1.581/1.636
17.2




In terms of optical loss, most of the poled second-order NLO polymer films showed a measured transmission loss of 1 to 2 dB cm−1. Such optical loss is routine for all-polymer EO devices. For a compact silicon waveguide with a high refractive index contrast between the EO material and silicon, the device footprints are in the range of several millimeters. Therefore, the transmission loss ascribed to the EO material is less than 1 dB. For a more compact plasmonic waveguide, the length of the electro-optic modulation is always less than 1 millimeter, in which the EO material-induced optical loss is negligible. However, the metal and indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes used in electric poling are of high loss. To reduce the electrode-induced optical loss, there should be a thick buffer layer placed between the bottom metal or ITO electrode and the EO film. The presence of the buffer layer increases the poling voltage. The choice of a buffer material that has both high conductivity and good optical transparency is a challenge. To address this issue, we have developed the monolayer graphene as the poling electrode for the electric-field poling of EO polymer films.88 Two kinds of EO polymer slab waveguides were fabricated. In the reference samples S1 and S2 (Fig. 9a), the EO polymer films were sandwiched between ITO and gold (Au) electrodes with a buffer layer epoxy resin. For the other samples S3 and S4 (Fig. 9b), the EO polymer films were sandwiched between two graphene electrodes without any buffer layers so that the EO polymer films were in direct contact with the graphene electrodes. We calculated the graphene-induced losses of the TM mode, where the monolayer graphene electrodes were modeled as conductive boundaries with a complex conductivity of 6.084 × 10−5–7.519 × 10−6 at 1550 nm. As shown in Fig. 9c, the graphene-induced loss was highly related to the thickness and refractive index of the EO film, which was explained by the fact that stronger light confinement in the EO polymer film with a thicker film or with larger refractive index leads to a weaker mode field at the graphene electrodes and hence a smaller graphene-induced loss. Theoretically, the graphene-induced optical loss can be as low as 1 dB cm−1 for each single-layer graphene electrode. Our results also showed that poling with graphene electrodes did not introduce significant additional optical losses to the EO polymer. The poling results are listed in Table 2. We achieved high EO coefficients of 82 pm V−1 at 1541 nm and 110 pm V−1 at 1300 nm with a poling voltage of only 420 V, which was much lower than that required by using traditional metal electrodes. The use of graphene electrodes for poling allows the use of inexpensive cladding material and more flexible waveguide designs. The upper graphene electrode can be further patterned to form low-loss modulation electrodes for the EO device to be made. Such a graphene/EO polymer hybrid platform can be explored as a key solution to overcome the traditional trade-off between the poling efficiency and optical loss. It significantly simplifies the design and fabrication of waveguide devices based on EO polymers.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of EO polymer slab waveguides with (a) conventional Au/ITO electrodes and (b) graphene electrodes, where light propagates in the y-direction. (c) The transmission loss of a slab waveguide as a function of the thickness of the EO polymer film, which is sandwiched by top and bottom graphene electrodes (as shown in b, ncladding = 1.573). (d) A photograph of a poled sample using a transparent graphene electrode. The EO polymer used in this study is a simple guest–host system obtained by doping 15 wt% of dipolar polyene chromophore AJLZ53 into PMMA–PS. Reproduced from ref. 88 from the Optical Society of America. 
Table 2 Summary of the poling results for Samples S1, S2, S3, and S4






Poling field (V)

n
TE/nTM @ 1300 nm

n
TE/nTM @ 1541 nm

r
33 @ 1.3 μm/pm V−1

r
33 @ 1.5 μm/pm V−1




Configuration of slab waveguides S1 and S2: Fig. 9a; S3 and S4: Fig. 9b.




S1
910
1.592/1.621
1.577/1.598
70
33


S2
800
1.588/1.638
1.574/1.610
100
67


S3
350
1.586/1.628
1.573/1.604
91
54


S4
420
1.585/1.646
1.573/1.617
110
82




3.3 Application of EO polymers: unprecedented high-performance EO modulation
For developing a range of prospective applications, optical modulators need to have high modulation speeds, large bandwidths and small footprints, low losses, and ultralow power consumption. However, these requirements often contradict each other in silicon-based or III–V semiconductor modulators. Our high-performance EO polymers can be considered as a sufficiently viable technological solution, and are also very competitive with semiconductor materials. The rapid progress of EO materials has pushed many significant advances in the development of high-speed and broadband information technologies.
Electro-optic polymers have been widely used in different types of photonic devices such as POH, SOH, sol–gel/polymer hybrids and all-polymer EO modulators. Table 3 lists the state-of-the-art EO modulation with EO polymer SEO125 or SEO100 provided by our group in the past three years. Low-loss fiber-optic links have the potential to connect superconducting quantum processors over long distances to form large-scale quantum networks. A key component of these future networks is a quantum transducer that coherently and bi-directionally converts photons from microwave frequencies into optical frequencies. In 2016, we verified the EO properties of poled guest–host EO polymers at 7 K consisting of AJLZ53 chromophores for the first time, indicating the potential of EO polymers for photonic devices for quantum communication.89 In 2020, our collaborators from Stanford University presented a platform for electro-optic photon conversion based on silicon-organic hybrid devices with SEO100.90 This EO device combined high-quality factor microwaves and optical resonators with electro-optic polymer cladding to perform microwave-to-optical photon conversion from 6.7 GHz to 193 THz (1558 nm). The device achieved an electro-optic coupling rate of 590 Hz in a milliKelvin (7 mK) dilution refrigerator environment. Electro-optic polymers have a low dielectric constant and thus allow for excellent speed matching of light waves and RF signals. Our collaborators from Karlsruhe Institute of Technology used SEO100 to fabricate a plasmonic waveguide EO modulator, enabling high-speed electro-optic modulation with record-breaking bandwidth up to 360 GHz, the phase shifter length of 20 μm and a proof-of-concept demonstration of 16-meter-long terahertz communication.27 In the SOH EO modulator filled with SEO100 in-slot, line rates of up to 120 Gbit per s and Vp of less than 1 V were achieved.91,92 In a waveguide micro-ring resonator with sub-wavelength grating structures, the use of SEO125 as a cladding resulted in energy consumption as low as 2.6 fJ per bit.93,94 In the SOH EO modulator using the SEO125 material in combination with the one-dimensional photonic crystal and slot structure, we achieved a bandwidth of up to 61 GHz and an in-device EO of 490 pm V−1.33,95 There have been significant advances in the bandwidth optimization of sol–gel/polymer hybrid devices, and bandwidths of up to 120 GHz have been achieved with VpL as low as 1.8 V cm.96 In all-polymer devices, the scientists from the University of Maryland used SEO125 to realize millimeter-wave phase modulation with high figure-of-merit and RF power density of 15 W m−1.2,97 Besides the on-chip modulation, Ren et al. recently demonstrated a surface-normal plasmonic modulator using sub-wavelength metal grating.98 The device consists of a 1.77 μm efficiently poled electro-optic polymer film, sandwiched between a plasmonic grating and an indium-tin-oxide film. A strong Fano resonance with a sharp plasmonic bandgap at 1522 nm was observed and electro-optical modulation was demonstrated with Vp of 20 V for three-dimensional optical interconnects.
Table 3 The state-of-the-art SOH, POH, sol–gel/polymer and all-polymer EO waveguides with organic EO materials SEO125 or SEO100 (2017 to present)




Device type
Device configuration
Device performance
EO material
EO coefficients in device




SOH quantum microwave-to-optical transducer
Photonic crystal reflector
Electro-optic coupling rate: 590 Hz at 7 mK; bandwidth: 20.3 MHz
SEO100
106 pm V−1


POH EO modulator
Mach–Zehnder interferometer
3 dB bandwidth >360 GHz (0.36 THz)
SEO100
64 pm V−1


SOH EO modulator
MZI slot waveguide
line rates of up to 120 Gbit per s; Vp = 0.9 V
SEO100
146 pm V−1


SOH EO modulator
Sub-wavelength grating waveguide ring resonator
3 dB bandwidth >40 GHz; power consumption: 2.6 fJ per bit
SEO125
54.7 pm V−1


SOH EO modulator
One-dimensional photonic crystal slot

V
p
L = 1 V cm; bandwidth = 61 GHz;
SEO125
490 pm V−1 (with slow-light effect)


Sol–gel/polymer hybrid EO modulator
Mach–Zehnder interferometer
3 dB bandwidth: 120 GHz; VpL = 1.8 V cm
SEO100
160 pm V−1


All-polymer millimeter-wave EO phase modulator
Channel waveguide with in-plane slotted patch antennas
Modulation index: 0.03 rad (RF power density of 15 W m−2); figure-of-merit: 1.1 W−1/2
SEO125
50 pm V−1


Surface-normal plasmonic EO modulator for free space communication
Sub-wavelength metal grating

V
p = 20 V @ 1 kHz
15 wt% AJLZ53 in PMPS
60 pm V−1 @ 1522 nm




In general, those applications of EO materials in different types of hybrid waveguides significantly solved the problems of energy consumption, rate and bandwidth in electro-optic modulation. The successful deployment of these EO polymer-based materials and subsystems will significantly contribute to a broad spectrum of photonic technologies for applications, including systems such as fiber optic networks for future internet infrastructures, broad-band and chip-level optical interconnects for next-generation supercomputers in smart data centers and enterprise networks, light-weight high bandwidth optical links for intra-aircraft communications, quantum communication, terahertz imaging/sensing, optical synthesizers, nonintrusive electric-field sensors, beam-steering in-phase array radar and antennas, sensors, etc.
4. Organic third-order nonlinear materials
4.1 Cyanine-based AOSP materials
For third-order nonlinear optics, the design guidelines and optimal structure of active chromophores is quite different from those for second-order nonlinear optics. Typically, chromophores for third-order NLO consist of symmetric structures of donor–bridge–donor (D–π–D) or acceptor–bridge–acceptor (A–π–A). For application in AOSP at the wavelength of interest, the used third-order NLO materials should not only have large nonlinear optical coefficients, but should also exhibit very low optical losses, including both linear and nonlinear losses. Typically, for transparent materials, the NLO loss mainly arises from TPA. As a result, it is quite useful to define a TPA figure-of-merit (FOM) for AOSP materials, which is denoted as |Re(γ)/(Im(γ))| at the molecular level, and |Reχ(3)/Imχ(3)| at the bulk materials level. In general, the material FOM value needs to be beyond 12 to ensure a feasible AOSP.55,99 Silicon is one of the attractive candidate materials for AOSP applications due to its ability to guide light at the nanoscale, and the ease of chip-scale photonic integration; its third-order NLO response is, however, limited by the deleterious TPA and long-lived free-carrier effects, thereby leading to poor material FOMs.55 Thus, numerous efforts have been devoted to exploring new organic materials with extensive π-systems for AOSP applications, among which the interest in using symmetrical cyanine dyes has rapidly increased due to their very excellent molecular third-order NLO effects achieved at optical telecommunication wavelengths (1300 nm and 1550 nm).50,56 For example, in Fig. 10a is shown the structure of a representative selenopyrylium-based cyanine dye (Se-7C) reported by Prof. Marder and Prof. Perry et al. in 2010, which demonstrates a quite large Re(γ) value of 2 × 10−31 esu at 1550 nm, and also an unprecedentedly high molecular FOM up to 190.100
 Fig. 10  (a) The chemical structure of a representative selenopyrylium-based cyanine (Se-7C) with Re(γ) and |Re(γ)/(Im(γ))| values noted (left), and an illustration of the cyanine merits (right). (b) Variation in the polarization γ versus BLA for a simple donor–acceptor polyene. (c) Nondegenerate 2PA spectra of the Se-7C solution under different pump wavelengths. Fig. 10c is adapted from ref. 91. Copyright, 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Cyanine dyes are an intriguing class of ionic π-conjugated organic molecules having an odd-number of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms in the polymethine-based conjugated bridge.101 In general, the charges of symmetrical cyanines are highly delocalized over the conjugated bridge, making the bond-length alternation (BLA) between the adjacent C–C bonds almost close to zero, the so-called “cyanine” limit. At this “cyanine” limit, the magnitude of Re(γ) can reach the maximal value according to the simplified SOS perturbation theory shown in Fig. 10b.102 This is because the above structural feature of cyanines can endow them with a large transition dipole moment (μge) and a small energy gap (Ege) between the ground-state and the first-excited state. Symmetric cyanines exhibit a narrow electronic absorption band with a sharp low-energy band edge, and also a large energy spacing between the first (one-photon (1PA) allowed) and the second (two-photon (2PA) allowed) excited states, thereby giving rise to the advantages of low linear and NLO absorption at the desired operational wavelengths.100 Note that the energy of the 2PA state is always about 1.7 times that of the 1PA state. Fig. 10c shows the nondegenerate 2PA spectra of Se-7C in solution under different pump wavelengths, from which we can easily see a salient region where the 2PA is quite weak. Another advantage of cyanines is their easily tunable structure by simply regulating the conjugation bridge, the terminated end-groups, and the counterions. Encouragingly, it has been well demonstrated that the magnitude of Re(γ) can be dramatically increased by extending the conjugation length L, i.e. Re(γ) ∝ Ln.103 For example, for selenopyrylium-based cyanines, upon increasing the conjugation length from 3C (three carbon atoms) to 5C (five carbon atoms), and to 7C (seven carbon atoms), the resulting |Re(γ)| can accordingly show an order of magnitude growth from 2.8 × 10−33 esu, to 2.3 × 10−32 esu, and to 2.2 × 10−31 esu.100 Nonetheless, it is worth noting that if L is greater than C9 (nine carbon atoms), a Peierls-type symmetry breaking that localizes the charge on one end of the molecule will often occur to cause the loss of the above-mentioned advantageous optical properties of cyanines.104–106 As a result, maintaining the symmetry of cyanines at long conjugation lengths beyond 9C, or maximizing the NLO effects as large as possible at a fixed conjugation length, have been topics of interest for research in the field.
To achieve practical AOSP applications, these cyanine dyes have to be processable as high optical quality thin films with high loading chromophore density,56 meaning that the excellent molecular γ of cyanines should be efficiently translated into the bulk χ(3), which is a major challenge in the field. This is because cyanines are highly polarizable ionic molecules that are inevitably susceptible to strong chromophore–counterion (intramolecular) and chromophore–chromophore (intermolecular) interactions in the solid-state due to ion-paring or random aggregation (Fig. 11).107,108 This would lead to undesirable charge localization (the charges of cyanines are localized toward one of the terminal end groups or aggregates) to distort the favorable molecular symmetry of cyanines. Such symmetry breaking would undoubtedly increase the BLA and thus result in a dramatic reduction in χ(3). Moreover, these strong intra- and intermolecular interactions can also enable the mixing of the excited state wave functions to shift and broaden both the 1PA and 2PA bands, causing the loss of the original excellent optical transparency window that significantly increased the linear absorption and TPA loss.109,110 To control and/or mitigate these adverse interactions, various molecular design strategies have been developed such as the use of bulky, soft counterions,111 the introduction of bulky, rigid spacers,112–115 the formation of polyelectrolyte–cyanine complexes, and so on.116
 Fig. 11  Optimized ground-state structures (a) of monomeric streptocyanines (5C and 7C) and (b) representations of the 5C aggregate dimers in the perpendicular, cofacial-x, cofacial-z, and parallel-displaced configurations as determined at the uB97X-D/cc-pVDZ level of theory (carbons are represented in grey; hydrogens, white; nitrogens, blue; and chlorides, green). 
4.1 Design strategies of TCF–cyanines for AOSP applications
In the past decade, our research group has devoted significant efforts to studying anionic tricyanofuran (TCF)-terminated heptamethine dyes (Fig. 12a) for AOSP applications. TCF is a strong electron-withdrawing group widely used in the second-order NLO field,61 and as the terminal groups, the resulting anionic cyanines can display good solubility, intense and sharp NIR absorption centered at ∼900 nm (Fig. 12b),117 and respectable chemical/photochemical stability, and comparable γ (>10−32 esu) to chalcogenopyrylium cyanines.118 More importantly, we were also attracted by the advantage of TCF–cyanines being, to some degree, resistant to aggregation-induced effects based on the similarity between the solution and solid-state linear absorption spectra, attributed to the two steric methyl substituents in the TCF end-groups. However, when using the neutral polycarbonate (APC) as the host polymer to process high number density TCF–cyanine films, the resulting guest–host films always suffer from significant phase separation (Fig. 12b, inset), leading to undesirable scattering and loss of optical absorption. To address this issue, we introduced tetraphenyl-substituted phosphonium-based cations with a somewhat delocalized positive charge to replace those traditional ammonium salts as the counterions for TCF–cyanines, which can reduce the ion-pairing effect, and also effectively improve the miscibility of cyanines and the host polymer.118 As displayed in Fig. 12c, AJBC1721 and AJBC1722 -based 50 wt% doped guest–host films showed a phase-separation at a magnification of 100×, while the AJBC 1725 film remained optically homogeneous.
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of the TCF–cyanines AJBC1721–1725. (b) Linear absorption of AJBC1721 in DCM solution (inset: photograph of the thick guest–host APC film doped with 50 wt% of AJBC1721). (c) Optical transmission micrographs of thick guest–host APC films doped with 50 wt% of different cyanines under 100× magnification. Fig. 12c was adapted from ref. 109. Copyright, 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
Third-order NLO properties of guest–host polymers of AJBC1722–1725 were carefully studied through the femtosecond pulsed Z-scan method, which demonstrated that the effects of the modulation of counterions on the third-order NLO properties are small in both the solution and film state, with the magnitude of Reχ(3) being about 3 × 10−11 esu at 1550 nm. However, due to large TPA loss, a sub-optimal bulk FOM below 3 was achieved. Nonetheless, the excellent processability of these TCF–cyanines imparted through the use of polymer guest–host blends (25 wt%) allowed for the cladding of silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) waveguides (Fig. 13a) to be applied via a facile spin-casting method. On this basis, we successfully fabricated SOH waveguides based on AJBC1723, which can enable efficient optical wavelength conversion by four-wave mixing (FWM, Fig. 13b), and also optical power modulation via 2PA.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM micrograph of the cross-section of a fabricated slotted waveguide with 100 nm and 310 nm width silicon rails, 180 nm slot width and 200 nm silicon rail thickness. (b) Optical spectrum showing the idler wavelength generated by near-degenerate four-wave mixing in the SOH waveguide coated with guest–host APC film doped with 25 wt% of AJBC1723. Adapted from ref. 109. Copyright, 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
To further understand the impact of counterions on the electronic structure of cyanines and their linear and NLO properties, we also used phosphonium-based counterions with multiple charges (di- and hexa-cations) to organize cyanines into multi-chromophore salt complexes (C2 and C6, Fig. 14).119 A study of the linear and NLO properties (Table 4) of these complexes over a large range of molecular concentrations was carefully conducted. We found that the optical properties of hexa-cationic C6 can endure much stronger intramolecular polymethine–counterion interactions, due to its spatially constrained geometry that could not provide adequate freedom for the solvent molecules to effectively dissociate six cyanine units and hexa-cations, thereby inducing a higher local charge density. On the contrary, the optical properties of mono-cationic AJBC1723 and di-cationic C2 are more susceptible to chromophore–chromophore intermolecular interactions at high number density, while C6 is encouragingly not immune to these interactions. Consequently, as shown in Table 4, C6 can exhibit the highest |Reχ(3)| among these three complexes at both 1300 nm and 1550 nm, although it has the smallest |Re(γ)|. The above results strongly suggest that the organization of cyanines into structures with multiple charges can provide a steric repulsive effect to mitigate the inter-complex interactions in the solid-state, resulting in a more efficient translation between microscopic and macroscopic optical properties.
 Fig. 14  Chemical structures of cyanine complexes C2 and C6, and conjugated polycyanine AJMPC02 and its complementary cyanine slot complex AJMPC02-TCF. 
Table 4 Third-order NLO properties in solutions and neat films characterized by the Z-scan method




No.

λ
film



Excitation wavelength [nm]
Re(γ) [10−32 esu]
|Re(γ)/Im(γ)|
Reχ(3) [10−11 esu]
|Reχ(3)/Imχ(3)|





a The maximum absorption wavelength as neat thin films.
b From ref. 125.






AJBC1723

936
1300
−1.3
7.8
−3.3
7.8


1500
−1.6
1.6
−2.3
1.4



C2

936
1300
−1.2
7.1
−3.6
6.9


1550
−1.2
1.6
−3.4
1.8



C6

936
1300
−0.88
5.1
−3.8
5.2


1550
−1.0
1.7
−3.6
1.8



AJMPC02

960
1300
−7.3
1.2
—
—



AJMPC02-TCF

930
1300
−4.5
2.7
−15.0
1.5


1550
—
—
6.1
0.7



PE1-TCF1

924
1300
−5.8
39
−1.6
≥20.0


1550
−7.0
10.1
−2.8
≥9.2



PE1-TCF2

957
1300
−6.8
17.4
−15.5
≥7.4


Si〈110〉b
—
1270
—
—
0.81
3.5


1540
—
—
1.3
4.6




As mentioned previously, a Peierls-type symmetry breaking will occur for a cyanine if its L is greater than C9. A well-demonstrated solution is to use charge-stabilized end groups to enable more efficient delocalization of the π-electrons while still maintaining L < C9.100,120,121 In 2015, we reported an alternative approach to solving this problem by polymerizing cyanine molecules into fully conjugated polycyanines,122 since it can provide extended exciton delocalization pathways beyond each individual cyanine unit along the polymeric chain. In our design, a simple indolium-based bi-functional “Janus core” and a substituted C7 conjugation bridge were used as the monomers to afford a new cationic polyindolinium, AJMPC2 (Fig. 14), via a simple polycondensation. In order to improve the solubility/processability of polycyanine and also to mitigate adverse aggregation effects, two rigid and bulky substituents (carbazole and fluorene moieties) were introduced into the center of the conjugation bridges as efficient spacers. As shown in Fig. 15, the absorption band of AJMPC02 nicely retained the characteristics of the highly polarizable and symmetric cyanines, and also showed a large bathochromic shift of 180 nm as compared to its monomeric cyanine, with an absorption centered at 1009 nm. The NLO properties of AJMPC02 were studied by an accurate and sensitive Dual-Arm Z-scan technique,123 and as expected, it showed an enhanced Re(γ) value of −7.3 × 10−32 esu at 1300 nm (Table 4) as compared to indoline- and TCF–cyanines,118,124 indicating that γ can be significantly enhanced without the need to extend L. Moreover, considering that AJMPC02 can be seen as a conjugated polyelectrolyte and can thus be used as a host polymer to form complementary polymeric cyanine salt complexes with anionic cyanines, we further prepared AJMPC02-TCF (Fig. 14) by using TCF cyanines with the same conjugation bridge as the counterions for AJMPC02. In solution, this polymeric complex exhibits two absorption bands located at 900 nm and 1003 nm (Fig. 15), corresponding to the absorption of TCF cyanine and polycyanine, respectively. Encouragingly, it exhibits very good processability for device applications, and the resulting neat films possess a sharp absorption band with a significantly reduced long-wavelength tail (Fig. 15), indicating that the undesired ion-pairing and/or aggregation effects have been somewhat alleviated. As a result, neat films of AJMPC02-TCF can deliver one of the highest magnitudes of |Reχ(3)| among organic/inorganic NLO materials, 1.5 × 10−10 esu at 1300 nm and 6.1 × 10−11 esu at 1550 nm, respectively (Table 4). By comparison, as shown in Table 4, the magnitudes of |Reχ(3)| of bulk crystalline silicon along the 〈110〉 direction were only determined to be 0.81 × 10−11 esu at 1270 nm and 1.3 × 10−11 esu at 1540 nm.125
 Fig. 15  Absorption spectra of AJMPC02 and AJMPC02-TCF in dichloromethane (DCM) solutions, and as thin films for AJMPC02-TCF. 
The above results clearly manifest that the polyelectrolyte–cyanine salt complex could be an attractive material system to efficiently translate large γ into a large Reχ(3) in films. However, we also note that the material FOM of AJMPC02-TCF was only ∼1.5, which is much lower than that required by practical AOSP applications. Thus, it is highly desirable for designing new polyelectrolyte–cyanine salt complexes that can reduce TPA loss while maintaining a large |Reχ(3)|. To this end, we have rationally designed and synthesized a new phosphonium-based polyelectrolyte PE1 by using the co-polyfluorene as a polymeric backbone via a “click”-type polymer functionalization strategy, and through a simple ion-exchange with PE1, two polyelectrolyte–cyanine complexes PE1-TCF1 and PE1-TCF2 were then obtained as shown in Fig. 16a.116 Bis-4-fluorophenyl-functionalized TCF end-groups in the cyanines of PE1-TCF2 can enhance the electron-withdrawing strength of the end groups, leading to a red shift of ∼35 nm in the absorption maximum (Fig. 16b). It was encouragingly found that the use of cationic PE1 as the host polymer for TCF–cyanines can significantly reduce the strong and random aggregations between cyanines in the solid-state by comparing their absorption spectra with that of guest–host films of AJBC1723 with similar effective chromophore density (Fig. 16c), which could be attributed to the efficient dispersion of TCF–cyanines in the polyelectrolyte via Coulombic interactions. Such a favorable dispersion effect can thus help to effectively translate the large γ of cyanines into large Reχ(3) in high number density films as shown in Table 4. The material FOMs of PE1-TCF1 were found to be larger than 20 at 1300 nm and larger than 9.2 at 1550 nm, both of which are comparable to the corresponding |Re(γ)/Im(γ)| ratios. More encouragingly, at 1550 nm, PE1-TCF2 exhibits one of the largest |Reχ(3)| values of 1.55 × 10−10 esu with a material FOM greater than 7.4, which are among the best for organic/inorganic third-order NLO materials in this spectral window. In addition to the favorable dispersion effect derived from the host polyelectrolyte, the higher NLO effects for PE1-TCF2 could be also due to its bis-4-fluorophenyl substituents in the TCF end-groups, which can act as effective spacers to prevent the cyanine aggregations.
 Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structures of polyelectrolyte–cyanine complexes (PE1-TCF1 and PE1-TCF2). Absorption spectra of PE1-TCF1 and PE1-TCF2 in diluted DCM solutions (b) and neat thin films (c); the guest–host film absorption of AJBC1723 in APC (50 wt%) was provided for comparison. 
As discussed above, random aggregations have been shown to play a significantly negative role; however, we believe well-controlled J-aggregates should be useful for achieving large χ(3), given the fact that the exciton delocalization can occur among molecules in J-aggregates to enable the sizable enhancement of the nonlinearities.126,127 Furthermore, as is well-known, the absorption band induced by J-aggregates is particularly very sharp,128 potentially reducing the linear optical loss if they are controlled in a suitable optical window. However, the self-assembly of cyanines with long conjugation length (L ≥ 7) into the J-aggregate form remains a big challenge, although the discovery of the dye J-aggregate was from a cyanine, i.e., a pseudoisocyanine (PIC).129 It is also very challenging to achieve J-aggregates in the solid-state rather than in solution. Due to the ionic nature of cyanines, we recently proposed a new design strategy that can achieve supramolecular J-aggregates of highly polarizable TCF–heptamethines in the crystal state by organizing anionic and cationic cyanines into complementary salts.130 We designed a cationic quinolinium–heptamethine with a phenyl substituent at the center of the conjugation bridge as the counterion, and the anionic TCF–heptamethine with the same conjugation bridge, and in the crystal structure of the resulting complementary salt CC4, the oppositely-charged cyanines formed a cooperative self-assembly and were individually packed in an alternating J-type fashion (Fig. 17). Both cationic and anionic cyanines in the CC4 can maintain overall symmetric geometries in the crystal state, and thus their BLAs were calculated to be only 0.015 Å and 0.020 Å, respectively, which are much smaller than those reported in the literature. Nonetheless, we have to note that we could not grow sufficiently large-sized crystals containing J-aggregates and we could not find any effective approaches that could keep these favorable J-aggregates in the optical quality films, thereby limiting their further AOSP applications. Nonetheless, our work has provided a good understanding of the structural properties of the cyanine aggregates at the molecular level.
 Fig. 17  The chemical structure of the complementary cyanine–cyanine salt CC4 and its crystal structure viewed along the b-axis. Adapted from ref. 120. Copyright, 2015, American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions
This review highlights the recent advances in organic second-order and third-order NLO materials. Regarding the current research status and application prospects of EO polymers, our research emphasizes how to improve the efficiency of the synthesis of chromophores to achieve large-scale and cost-effective synthesis. Multi-component condensation methods can significantly shorten the synthetic time and have high yields. Combining multicomponent condensation methods with supramolecular self-assembly techniques holds the promise for the future rapid and concise mass synthesis of high-performance self-assembled chromophores. The processing and efficient poling of EO polymer films are the keys to advancing their applications. We investigated the regulation of the dielectric constant by nano-doping, preparation and large-area poling of EO polymers on soda-lime glass and the development of low optical loss graphene electrodes to replace metal electrodes for electric field poling. These efforts are expected to facilitate the efficient poling of EO polymers in different types of waveguide devices. Over the past two decades, we have witnessed continuous breakthroughs in the performance of electro-optic polymer materials. Device applications of the EO materials have also been pursued in recent years, which require the efforts and cooperation of material and device researchers. We predict that the future development of electro-optic polymers will focus on the following two points.
(1) It is highly urgent to further improve the processability of the materials and develop electro-optic polymers with high chemical stability against acid/alkali, and high thermal stability at 85 °C. This is a challenge that must be addressed for a wide range of applications in EO waveguide devices.
(2) The performance of organic EO materials and hybrid devices has increased remarkably in recent years, making them an exciting prospect for the launch of 5G/6G technology. However, the progressive research and development of organic EO materials has been harmed by the lack of reliable EO characterization techniques and in-depth understanding of the structure–property relationship. Similar to a few other research fields in optoelectronic materials and devices, the credibility and reliability of the field can be damaged by the frequent occurrence of the incorrect and unreliable data-reporting of ultrahigh EO coefficients. For any new thin-film EO materials, it is essential to present a complete set of data based on the experimental data and the details of data analysis, including the EO measurement, the poling-induced birefringence or absorption change, order parameters, dielectric properties and thermal stability, etc. Independent evaluations based on the results of thin films, slab waveguides and EO devices should be continuously updated to complete the database of high-performance organic EO materials and eliminate the ones with poor reproducibility and reliability. Furthermore, it is necessary to analyze the intrinsic hyperpolarizabilities of chromophores from the experimental measurements in solutions and poled films with the help of computational analysis, so that for a given D–π–A structure, the upper limit of the materials’ EO performance can be quantitatively justified based on the number density and poling efficiency of the materials.
For cyanine-based organic AOSP materials, although encouraging research progress has been made by rationally designing the structure of counterions and/or introducing bulky, rigid spacers into cyanines to reduce undesired ion-pairing and aggregation effects, it seems that the achievement of a large |Reχ(3)|magnitude beyond 10−10 esu with a high material FOM over 12 remains a significant challenge in the field. Based on our previous work,107 the construction of polyelectrolyte–cyanine complexes could be a promising approach. However, we think the use of polyelectrolytes to achieve homogeneous dispersions of cyanines has not fully realized its value. As mentioned above, not all aggregates necessarily play a negative role in the solid-state third-order NLO properties, and highly-ordered J-aggregates with suitable absorption windows should be very useful. Since one attractive feature of polyelectrolytes is their templating effect in achieving a supramolecular assembly, we hope that future efforts will be devoted to designing new polyelectrolytes that can assemble these cyanines with large γ into J-aggregates in optical quality composite films. Moreover, we also expect that other material systems having high third-order NLO performance like cyanines can be developed.
Aside from the material design, the future of organic NLO materials should also focus on broadening their applications in diverse organic–inorganic hybrid waveguide systems. The rational design, high throughput processing and device engineering of high-performance organic NLO materials, will leverage the mature manufacturing infrastructure of electronics to be fed into the development of major integrated photonic platforms, including silicon photonics, plasmonics, and dielectric waveguides of sol–gel silica and polymers. It will also benefit a broad spectrum of technologies in telecommunications, computation systems, spectroscopy, and remote sensing/imaging systems. In particular, the development can meet the huge demand for the expansion and speeding-up of optical interconnect technology, providing new high-bandwidth, low-energy information processing systems for the next generation of 5G mobile wireless communication systems, data centers, laser radar, terahertz communication and sensing, as well as enterprise networks.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This review is dedicated to Professor Tobin J. Marks on the occasion of his 75th birthday, in recognition of his outstanding contribution to organic second-order and third-order nonlinear optical materials. The research in second-order NLO materials was supported by grants from Natural Science Foundation of China (21975213), Shenzhen Science & Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20180507181718203), General Research Fund of HKSAR (RGC Ref No. 11306320), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (ZYGX2019Z005), APRC-CityU New Research Initiatives/Infrastructure Support from Central (Project 9610389), Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA8650-14-C-5005). We are grateful to the following collaborators for their outstanding work in second-order NLO materials and devices: Professors Robert Norwood and Nasser Peyghambarian (University of Arizona), Ray T. Chen (University of Texas at Austin and Omega Optics), Larry Dalton and Bruce Robinson (University of Washington), L. Michael Hayden (University of Maryland, Baltimore County), Enami Yasufumi (Nagasaki University), Alan Wang (Oregon State University), Amir H. Safavi-Naeini (Stanford University), Manfred Eich (Hamburg University of Technology), Christian Koos and Wolfgang Freude (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology), Ming Li (Changchun University of Technology), Zhanchen Cui (Jilin University), Kin Seng Chiang (City University of Hong Kong), Kaixin Chen (University of Electronic Science and Technology of China), Harish Subbaraman (Boise State University), Dr Dong-Hun Park (Laboratory for Physical Sciences). This work related to third-order NLO materials was supported by grants from the AFOSR MURI (FA9550-10-1-0558); the DARPA ZOE Program (W31P4Q-09-1-0012). We also appreciate our collaborators Joseph W. Perry, Seth R. Marder and Jean-Luc Brédas (Georgia Institute of Technology), David J. Hagan and Eric W. Van Stryland (University of Central Florida), Robert Norwood and Nasser Peyghambarian (University of Arizona).
Notes and references
J. Hecht, Nature, 2016, 536, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Witzens, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 459–462 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hilbert and P. Lopez, Science, 2011, 332, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
W. Heni, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Haffner, H. Zwickel, C. Kieninger, S. Wolf, M. Lauermann, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. F. Tillack, L. E. Johnson, D. L. Elder, B. H. Robinson, W. Freude, C. Koos, J. Leuthold and L. R. Dalton, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1576–1590 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koos, J. Leuthold, W. Freude, M. Kohl, L. Dalton, W. Bogaerts, A. L. Giesecke, M. Lauermann, A. Melikyan, S. Koeber, S. Wolf, C. Weimann, S. Muehlbrandt, K. Koehnle, J. Pfeifle, W. Hartmann, Y. Kutuvantavida, S. Ummethala, R. Palmer, D. Korn, L. Alloatti, P. C. Schindler, D. L. Elder, T. Wahlbrink and J. Bolten, J. Light Technol., 2016, 34, 256–268 CAS .
J. L. Liu, G. M. Xu, F. G. Liu, I. Kityk, X. H. Liua and Z. Zhen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15784–15794 RSC .
Y. Q. Shi, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. H. Bechtel, L. R. Dalton, B. H. Robinson and W. H. Steier, Science, 2000, 288, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, H. E. Katz, C. Erben, D. M. Gill, P. Gopalan, J. D. Heber and D. J. McGee, Science, 2002, 298, 1401–1403 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hu, Z. Chen, H. Y. Xiao, Z. Zhen, X. H. Liu and S. H. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5111–5118 RSC .
Y. H. Yang, H. J. Xu, F. G. Liu, H. R. Wang, G. W. Deng, P. Si, H. Y. Huang, S. H. Bo, J. L. Liu, L. Qiu, Z. Zhen and X. H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5124–5132 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. H. Yang, H. Y. Xiao, F. G. Liu, F. Y. Huo, L. Chen, Z. Chen, S. H. Bo, L. Qiu and Z. Zhen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6704–6712 RSC .
Y. L. He, L. Chen, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, F. Y. Huo, B. Li, Z. Zhen, X. H. Liu and S. H. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1031–1037 RSC .
R. L. Tang and Z. Li, Chem. Rec., 2017, 17, 71–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Luo, X. H. Zhou and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7410–7424 RSC .
M. Li, Y. Li, H. Zhang, S. W. Wang, Y. H. Ao and Z. C. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4111–4122 RSC .
R. Tang, S. Zhou, Z. Cheng, G. Yu, Q. Peng, H. Zeng, G. Guo, Q. Li and Z. Li, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 340–347 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Wu, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 856–863 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, Q. Li, G. Yu, L. Xiao, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, G. Liu, Q. Li, Z. a. Li and Z. Li, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 4012–4021 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marpaung, J. P. Yao and J. Capmany, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 80–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haffner, D. Chelladurai, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. Josten, B. Baeuerle, W. Heni, T. Watanabe, T. Cui, B. J. Cheng, S. Saha, D. L. Elder, L. R. Dalton, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev, N. Kinsey and J. Leuthold, Nature, 2018, 556, 483–486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Woessner, Y. D. Gao, I. Torre, M. B. Lundeberg, C. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. Hillenbrand, J. Hone, M. Polini and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 421–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, X. Guan, X. Zhu, H. Hu, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, L. K. Oxenlowe, K. J. Jin, N. A. Mortensen and S. Xiao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15576–15581 RSC .
A. Melikyan, L. Alloatti, A. Muslija, D. Hillerkuss, P. C. Schindler, J. Li, R. Palmer, D. Korn, S. Muehlbrandt, D. Van Thourhout, B. Chen, R. Dinu, M. Sommer, C. Koos, M. Kohl, W. Freude and J. Leuthold, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 229–233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ayata, Y. Fedoryshyn, W. Heni, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, M. Zahner, U. Koch, Y. Salamin, C. Hoessbacher, C. Haffner, D. L. Elder, L. R. Dalton and J. Leuthold, Science, 2017, 358, 630–632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Heni, Y. Fedoryshyn, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, C. B. Hoessbacher, A. Messner, C. Haffner, T. Watanabe, Y. Salamin, U. Koch, D. L. Elder, L. R. Dalton and J. Leuthold, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1694 CrossRef .
S. Ummethala, T. Harter, K. Koehnle, Z. Li, S. Muehlbrandt, Y. Kutuvantavida, J. Kemal, P. Marin-Palomo, J. Schaefer, A. Tessmann, S. K. Garlapati, A. Bacher, L. Hahn, M. Walther, T. Zwick, S. Randel, W. Freude and C. Koos, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 519–522 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wulbern, S. Prorok, J. Hampe, A. Petrov, M. Eich, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen, M. Jenett and A. Jacob, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 2753–2755 CrossRef .
X. L. Wang, C. Y. Lin, S. Chakravarty, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and R. T. Chen, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 882–884 CrossRef CAS .
L. Alloatti, R. Palmer, S. Diebold, K. P. Pahl, B. Q. Chen, R. Dinu, M. Fournier, J. M. Fedeli, T. Zwick, W. Freude, C. Koos and J. Leuthold, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lauermann, S. Wolf, P. C. Schindler, R. Palmer, S. Koeber, D. Korn, L. Alloatti, T. Wahlbrink, J. Bolten, M. Waldow, M. Koenigsmann, M. Kohler, D. Malsam, D. L. Elder, P. V. Johnston, N. Phillips-Sylvain, P. A. Sullivan, L. R. Dalton, J. Leuthold, W. Freude and C. Koos, J. Light Technol., 2015, 33, 1210–1216 CAS .
M. Lauermann, S. Wolf, W. Hartmann, R. Palmer, Y. Kutuvantavida, H. Zwickel, A. Bielik, L. Altenhain, J. Lutz, R. Schmid, T. Wahlbrink, J. Bolten, A. L. Giesecke, W. Freude and C. Koos, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 9389–9396 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, X. C. Xu, C. J. Chung, H. Subbaraman, Z. Y. Pan, S. Chakravarty and R. T. Chen, Opt. Lett., 2016, 41, 5466–5469 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, D. L. Elder, S. Wolf, H. Zwickel, M. Blaicher, J. N. Kemal, M. Lauermann, S. Randel, W. Freude, L. R. Dalton and C. Koos, Optica, 2018, 5, 739–748 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, F. Yu, I. Aoki, A. Otomo and S. Yokoyama, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, L84–L88 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, H. Miura, D. Maeda, M. A. Ozawa, K. Odoi and S. Yokoyama, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 780–783 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, J. X. Hong, H. Miura, T. Kashino, T. Kikuchi, M. Ozawa, H. Nawata, K. Odoi and S. Yokoyama, Laser Photonics Rev., 2017, 11, 1700061 CrossRef .
H. Miura, F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, T. Kashino, T. Kikuchi, M. Ozawa, H. Nawata, K. Odoi and S. Yokoyama, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 28643–28649 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, A. Hosseini, S. Chakravarty, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and R. T. Chen, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 4931–4934 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, C. J. Chung, A. Hosseini, H. Subbaraman, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen, R. L. Nelson, C. Y. C. Lee and R. T. Chen, J. Lightwave Technol., 2016, 34, 2941–2951 CAS .
R. Himmelhuber, R. A. Norwood, Y. Enami and N. Peyghambarian, Sensors, 2015, 15, 18239–18255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Enami, H. Nakamura, J. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, Opt. Commun., 2016, 362, 77–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Enami, D. Mathine, C. T. DeRose, R. A. Norwood, J. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and N. Peyghambarian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 213513 CrossRef .
Y. Enami, D. Mathine, C. T. DeRose, R. A. Norwood, J. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and N. Peyghambarian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193508 CrossRef .
Y. Enami, Y. Kayaba, J. D. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 16418–16423 CrossRef .
Y. Enami, Y. Jouane, J. D. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 30191–30199 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Enami, C. T. Derose, D. Mathine, C. Loychik, C. Greenlee, R. A. Norwood, T. D. Kim, J. Luo, Y. Tian, A. K. Y. Jen and N. Peyghambarian, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 423 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Shiring, R. L. Gieseking, C. Risko and J. L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14166–14175 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hales, S. Barlow, H. Kim, S. Mukhopadhyay, J. L. Bredas, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 549–560 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Marder, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 53–62 CrossRef .
M. Hochberg, T. Baehr-Jones, G. X. Wang, M. Shearn, K. Harvard, J. D. Luo, B. Q. Chen, Z. W. Shi, R. Lawson, P. Sullivan, A. K. Y. Jen, L. Dalton and A. Scherer, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koos, P. Vorreau, T. Vallaitis, P. Dumon, W. Bogaerts, R. Baets, B. Esembeson, I. Biaggio, T. Michinobu, F. Diederich, W. Freude and J. Leuthold, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 216–219 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Marder, J.-L. Brédas and J. W. Perry, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Gieseking, S. Mukhopadhyay, C. Risko, S. R. Marder and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 68–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leuthold, C. Koos and W. Freude, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 535–544 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hales, S. Barlow, H. Kim, S. Mukhopadhyay, J.-L. Brédas, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 549–560 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Li and Z. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 962–973 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Wu, R. L. Tang, Q. Q. Li and Z. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3997–4022 RSC .
A. J. T. Lou, S. Righetto, C. Barger, C. Zuccaccia, E. Cariati, A. Macchioni and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8746–8755 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. A. Haller, H. Ma, L. R. Dalton, S. H. Jang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 603–607 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Dalton, P. A. Sullivan and D. H. Bale, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 25–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, A. Facchetti, H. Jiang, E. Cariati, S. Righetto, R. Ugo, C. Zuccaccia, A. Macchioni, C. L. Stern, Z. F. Liu, S. T. Ho, E. C. Brown, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3267–3286 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bourhill, J. L. Bredas, L. T. Cheng, S. R. Marder, F. Meyers, J. W. Perry and B. G. Tiemann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 2619–2620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cheng, J. D. Luo, S. Hau, D. H. Bale, T. D. Kim, Z. W. Shi, D. B. Lao, N. M. Tucker, Y. Q. Tian, L. R. Dalton, P. J. Reid and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1154–1163 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Luo, Y. J. Cheng, T. D. Kim, S. Hau, S. H. Jang, Z. W. Shi, X. H. Zhou and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Luo, S. Huang, Y. J. Cheng, T. D. Kim, Z. W. Shi, X. H. Zhou and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 4471–4474 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. R. Dalton, M. C. Oh, H. Zhang and W. H. Steier, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3043–3050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, F. Lin, Z. A. Li, M. Li, T. D. Kim, S. H. Jang and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2230–2234 RSC .
W. Bentoumi, J. C. Mulatier, P. A. Bouit, O. Maury, A. Barsella, J. P. Vola, E. Chastaing, L. Divay, F. Soyer, P. Le Barny, Y. Bretonniere and C. Andraud, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 8909–8913 CAS .
H. J. Xu, J. P. Liu, J. Liu, C. W. Yu, Z. F. Zhai, G. Z. Qina and F. G. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 168–175 RSC .
T. D. Kim, J. W. Kang, J. D. Luo, S. H. Jang, J. W. Ka, N. Tucker, J. B. Benedict, L. R. Dalton, T. Gray, R. M. Overney, D. H. Park, W. N. Herman and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 488–489 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhou, J. D. Luo, S. Huang, T. D. Kim, Z. W. Shi, Y. J. Cheng, S. H. Jang, D. B. Knorr, R. M. Overney and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1976–1981 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wu, B. Wu, W. Wang, K. S. Chiang, A. K. Y. Jen and J. D. Luo, Conf. Laser Electr., 2018, JTu2A.147 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Wu, B. Wu, W. Wang, K. S. Chiang, A. K. Y. Jen and J. D. Luo, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1046 RSC .
M. Li, S. Huang, X. H. Zhou, Y. Zang, J. Y. Wu, Z. C. Cui, J. D. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6737–6744 RSC .
D. L. Elder, C. Haffner, W. Heni, Y. Fedoryshyn, K. E. Garrett, L. E. Johnson, R. A. Campbell, J. D. Avila, B. H. Robinson, J. Leuthold and L. R. Dalton, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6457–6471 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Xu, D. L. Elder, L. E. Johnson, B. H. Robinson and L. R. Dalton, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21058–21068 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Enami, G. Meredith, N. Peyghambarian, M. Kawazu and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 490–492 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Norwood, C. Derose, Y. Enami, H. Gan, C. Greenlee, R. Himmelhuber, O. Kropachev, C. Loychik, D. Mathine, Y. Merzylak, M. Fallahi and N. Peyghambarian, J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. Mater., 2007, 16, 217–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, J. D. Luo, H. L. Yip, A. Ayazi, X. H. Zhou, M. Gould, A. Chen, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, Op42–Op47 CAS .
S. Huang, J. D. Luo, Z. A. Jin, M. Li, T. D. Kim, A. T. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183305 CrossRef .
W. W. Jin, P. V. Johnston, D. L. Elder, K. T. Manner, K. E. Garrett, W. Kaminsky, R. M. Xu, B. H. Robinson and L. R. Dalton, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3119–3124 RSC .
W. W. Jin, P. V. Johnston, D. L. Elder, A. F. Tillack, B. C. Olbricht, J. S. Song, P. J. Reid, R. M. Xu, B. H. Robinson and L. R. Dalton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 243304 CrossRef .
H. J. Xu, F. G. Liu, D. L. Elder, L. E. Johnson, Y. de Coene, K. Clays, B. H. Robinson and L. R. Dalton, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1408–1421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wu, J. D. Luo, N. Cernetic, K. X. Chen, K. S. Chiang and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10286–10292 RSC .
J. D. Luo, D. H. Park, R. Himmelhuber, Z. L. Zhu, M. Li, R. A. Norwood and A. K. Y. Jen, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 1909–1916 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Y. Wu, K. X. Chen, Q. D. Huang, J. D. Luo and K. S. Chiang, Opt. Lett., 2020, 45, 2383–2386 CrossRef .
D. H. Park, V. Yun, J. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and W. N. Herman, Electron. Lett., 2016, 52, 1703–1705 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Witmer, T. P. McKenna, P. Arrangoiz-Arriola, R. Van Laer, E. A. Wollack, F. C. Lin, A. K. Y. Jen, J. D. Luo and A. H. Safavi-Naeini, Quantum Sci. Technol., 2020, 5, 034004 CrossRef .
S. Wolf, H. Zwickel, W. Hartmann, M. Lauermann, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Kieninger, L. Altenhain, R. Schmid, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen, S. Randel, W. Freude and C. Koos, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2598 CrossRef .
H. Zwickel, S. Wolf, C. Kieninger, Y. Kutuvantavida, M. Lauermann, T. de Keulenaer, A. Vyncke, R. Vaernewyck, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen, W. Freude, J. Bauwelinck, S. Randel and C. Koos, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 23784–23800 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Pan, X. C. Xu, C. J. Chung, H. Dalir, H. Yan, K. Chen, Y. G. Wang, B. H. Jia and R. T. Chen, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700300 CrossRef .

          Z. Y. Pan, X. C. Xu, C. J. Chung, H. Dalir, H. Yan, K. Chen, Y. G. Wang and R. T. Chen, 2018 Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exposition (Ofc), 2018.
H. Yan, X. C. Xu, C. J. Chung, H. Subbaraman, Z. Y. Pan, S. Chakravarty and R. T. Chen, Proc. SPIE, 2017, 10109, 101090O CrossRef .
Y. Enami, A. Seki, S. Masuda, T. Joichi, J. D. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Lightwave Technol., 2018, 36, 4181–4189 CAS .
D. Park, V. R. Pagan, P. S. Cho, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and P. V. Petruzzi, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 29885–29895 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Ren, M. Li, Q. Gao, W. Cowell, J. D. Luo, A. K. Y. Jen and A. X. Wang, Opt. Commun., 2015, 352, 116–120 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Stegeman and R. H. Stolen, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1989, 6, 652–662 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hales, J. Matichak, S. Barlow, S. Ohira, K. Yesudas, J. L. Bredas, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Science, 2010, 327, 1485–1488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, R. K. Behera, P. K. Behera, B. K. Mishra and G. B. Behera, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1973–2012 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meyers, S. R. Marder, B. M. Pierce and J. L. Bredas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 10703–10714 CrossRef CAS .
T. Johr, W. Werncke, M. Pfeiffer, A. Lau and L. Dähne, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 246, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Tolbert and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 3253–3258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, O. V. Przhonska, F. Terenziani, A. Painelli, D. Fishman, T. R. Ensley, M. Reichert, S. Webster, J. L. Bricks and A. D. Kachkovski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7666–7678 RSC .
A. E. Masunov, D. Anderson, A. Y. Freidzon and A. A. Bagaturyants, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 6807–6815 CrossRef CAS .
A. Scarpaci, A. Nantalaksaku, J. M. Hales, J. D. Matichak, S. Barlow, M. Rumi, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1606–1618 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukhopadhyay, C. Risko, S. R. Marder and J.-L. Bredas, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3103–3112 RSC .
R. L. Gieseking, S. Mukhopadhyay, S. B. Shiring, C. Risko and J.-L. Brédas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23575–23585 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Gieseking, S. Mukhopadhyay, C. Risko, S. R. Marder and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6439–6447 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Bouit, C. Aronica, L. Toupet, B. Le Guennic, C. Andraud and O. Maury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4328–4335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barlow, J.-L. Bredas, Y. A. Getmanenko, R. L. Gieseking, J. M. Hales, H. Kim, S. R. Marder, J. W. Perry, C. Risko and Y. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 577–581 RSC .
Y. A. Getmanenko, T. G. Allen, H. Kim, J. M. Hales, B. Sandhu, M. S. Fonari, K. Y. Suponitsky, Y. Zhang, V. N. Khrustalev, J. D. Matichak, T. V. Timofeeva, S. Barlow, S.-H. Chi, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804073 CrossRef .
I. Davydenko, S. Barlow, R. Sharma, S. Benis, J. Simon, T. G. Allen, M. W. Cooper, V. Khrustalev, E. V. Jucov and R. l. Castañeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10112–10115 CrossRef CAS .
I. Davydenko, S. Benis, S. B. Shiring, J. Simon, R. Sharma, T. G. Allen, S.-H. Chi, Q. Zhang, Y. A. Getmanenko, T. C. Parker, J. W. Perry, J.-L. Brédas, D. J. Hagan, E. W. Van Stryland, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3613–3620 RSC .
Z. a. Li, A. A. Syed, P. Zhao, J. C. Yang, R. Sharma, T. R. Ensley, J. D. Matichak, I. Davydenko, S.-H. Jang and D. J. Hagan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17331–17336 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Bouit, E. Di Piazza, S. Rigaut, B. Le Guennic, C. Aronica, L. Toupet, C. Andraud and O. Maury, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 4159–4162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. a. Li, Y. Liu, H. Kim, J. M. Hales, S.-H. Jang, J. Luo, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, S. R. Marder, J. W. Perry and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP326–OP330 CAS .
Z. a. Li, H. Kim, S.-H. Chi, J. M. Hales, S.-H. Jang, J. W. Perry and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3115–3121 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Lin, H. Kim, S. Barlow, J. M. Hales, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 782–784 RSC .
J. D. Matichak, J. M. Hales, S. Ohira, S. Barlow, S. H. Jang, A. K. Y. Jen, J. L. Brédas, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
Z. a. Li, T. R. Ensley, H. Hu, Y. Zhang, S.-H. Jang, S. R. Marder, D. J. Hagan, E. W. Van Stryland and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 900–906 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ferdinandus, M. Reichert, T. R. Ensley, H. Hu, D. A. Fishman, S. Webster, D. J. Hagan and E. W. Van Stryland, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 1776–1790 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Matichak, J. M. Hales, S. Barlow, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 2160–2168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dinu, F. Quochi and H. Garcia, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2954–2956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eisfeld and J. S. Briggs, Chem. Phys., 2002, 281, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Shelkovnikov, F. A. Zhuravlev, N. A. Orlova, A. I. Plekhanov and V. P. Safonov, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 1331–1334 RSC .
F. Wuerthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Moeller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Jelley, Nature, 1936, 138, 1009–1010 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Mukhopadhyay, S. H. Jang, J. L. Bredas and A. K. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11920–11923 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor Tobin J. Marks on the occasion of his 75th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Jieyun Wu
	Jieyun Wu is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He received his BSc from Nankai University in 2008 and his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry (Chinese Academy of Sciences) in 2013. In 2014, he worked at the University of Washington (Seattle) as a Visiting Scholar, supported by the China Scholarship Council under the supervision of Prof. Alex Jen and Dr Jingdong Luo. His research interests include organic electro-optic materials, optical waveguide devices for optical fiber communication and sensing.

Zhong’an Li
	Zhong’an Li received his PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University under the supervision of Professor Zhen Li in 2009. From 2009 to 2016, he worked with Prof. Alex Jen at the University of Washington as a Postdoctoral Research Associate. He started his independent career in 2016 at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterization of new organic/polymeric optoelectric materials.

Jingdong Luo
	Jingdong Luo received his BSc from Nankai University (1992) and PhD from Wuhan University (2000). He was a Postdoctoral fellow at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology from 2000 to 2001. Then, he worked at the University of Washington and Soluxra in Seattle, Washington. He joined the City University of Hong Kong in the summer of 2017 as an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry. His scientific achievements include developing high-performance electro-optic polymers (such as SEO100 and SEO125) for organic photonics and aggregation-induced emission mechanisms. His research focuses on materials chemistry and the supramolecular assembly of organic nonlinear optical materials.

Alex K.-Y. Jen
	Professor Alex K.-Y. Jen received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1984. He was the Boeing-Johnson Chair Professor and Chair of the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at the University of Washington. He joined the City University of Hong Kong as Provost and Chair Professor in 2016. For his contributions in organic photonics and electronics, he was elected as a Member of the European Academy of Sciences, Washington State Academy of Sciences, and Fellow by AAAS, MRS, ACS, PMSE, OSA, SPIE. His interdisciplinary research include areas of organic/hybrid functional materials and devices for photonics, energy, sensors, and nanomedicine.
p = αE + βE2 + γE3+ …	(1.1)
P = ε0χ(1)E + ε0χ(2)E2 + ε0χ(3)E3+ …	(1.2)
χ(2) = Nf(ω)βijk〈cos3θ〉 = Nf(ω)βijkμEp/5kT	(1.3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) An illustration of EO modulation in the polymer Mach–Zehnder interferometer waveguide with coplanar electrodes. (b) Illustration of AOSP using a Mach–Zehnder configuration in a silicon-organic hybrid device. (b) is modified from ref. 56. Copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
	(1.4)

 	Fig. 2  (A) The step-wise forward synthesis of dipolar NLO chromophores. (B) Convergence and MCR are the keys to high synthetic efficacy to overcome the current limitation of the step-wise routes. D: electron-donor; π: conjugated bridge; A: electron-acceptor.	 

 	Fig. 3  The traditional step-wise forward synthesis (a) and the three-component modified concise synthesis (b) of tetraene-based chromophores.	 

 	Fig. 4  The synthesis of tetraene chromophores with different self-assembled dendrons (a) and with the same dendrons (b). (c) The synthesis of tethered binary NLO chromophores.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the heterodimerization (a) and homodimerization (b) self-assembly of molecular glass and the poling process of tethered binary chromophores (c). Reproduced from ref. 74 and 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the poling efficiency of the EO molecular glass and guest–host EO polymer. AJL50: 13 wt% chromophore in PMMA; AJL33: 25 wt% chromophore in PMMA. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structures of fullerene PCBM, guest chromophore AJ28 and host polymer PMMA–PS. (b) The temperature-dependent dielectric constants of EO films. (c) The dielectric constants of EO films at frequencies ranging from 1 kHz to 100 kHz. (d) EO coefficients under different poling electric-fields. P1/PCBM: 20 wt% AJ28 and 5% PCBM in PMMA–PS; P1: 20 wt% AJ28 in PMMA–PS. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Standard poling of a single-layer EO polymer film sandwiched between two electrodes. (b) Large-area poling design of this study using a double-layer stack consisting of a μm-thick EO thin film and a millimeter-thick soda-lime glass substrate sandwiched between an ITO electrode and a gold electrode (marked in yellow). (c) A photograph of a large area (13.5 cm2) EO film on soda-lime glass. (d) Current density versus temperature plots for different poled samples of AJLZ53/PMMA–PS (SL: single layer, (a); DL: double layer, (b)). The current profile of Corning's soda-lime glass (1.0 mm thick) was provided for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 87 from the Optical Society of America.	 


1	—	—	0	1.592/1.590	—
2	SL,a 0.5 cm2	51	50	1.590/1.602	4.0
3	SL, 0.5 cm2	77	74	1.586/1.615	9.4
4	SL, 0.5 cm2	100	101	1.583/1.632	15.4
5	SL, 0.5 cm2	128	125	1.580/1.653	21.9
6	DL,b 3.2 cm2	115	110c	1.581/1.642	18.8
7	DL, 13.5 cm2	110	105c	1.581/1.636	17.2

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of EO polymer slab waveguides with (a) conventional Au/ITO electrodes and (b) graphene electrodes, where light propagates in the y-direction. (c) The transmission loss of a slab waveguide as a function of the thickness of the EO polymer film, which is sandwiched by top and bottom graphene electrodes (as shown in b, ncladding = 1.573). (d) A photograph of a poled sample using a transparent graphene electrode. The EO polymer used in this study is a simple guest–host system obtained by doping 15 wt% of dipolar polyene chromophore AJLZ53 into PMMA–PS. Reproduced from ref. 88 from the Optical Society of America.	 


S1	910	1.592/1.621	1.577/1.598	70	33
S2	800	1.588/1.638	1.574/1.610	100	67
S3	350	1.586/1.628	1.573/1.604	91	54
S4	420	1.585/1.646	1.573/1.617	110	82

SOH quantum microwave-to-optical transducer	Photonic crystal reflector	Electro-optic coupling rate: 590 Hz at 7 mK; bandwidth: 20.3 MHz	SEO100	106 pm V−1
POH EO modulator	Mach–Zehnder interferometer	3 dB bandwidth >360 GHz (0.36 THz)	SEO100	64 pm V−1
SOH EO modulator	MZI slot waveguide	line rates of up to 120 Gbit per s; Vp = 0.9 V	SEO100	146 pm V−1
SOH EO modulator	Sub-wavelength grating waveguide ring resonator	3 dB bandwidth >40 GHz; power consumption: 2.6 fJ per bit	SEO125	54.7 pm V−1
SOH EO modulator	One-dimensional photonic crystal slot	
V
p
L = 1 V cm; bandwidth = 61 GHz;	SEO125	490 pm V−1 (with slow-light effect)
Sol–gel/polymer hybrid EO modulator	Mach–Zehnder interferometer	3 dB bandwidth: 120 GHz; VpL = 1.8 V cm	SEO100	160 pm V−1
All-polymer millimeter-wave EO phase modulator	Channel waveguide with in-plane slotted patch antennas	Modulation index: 0.03 rad (RF power density of 15 W m−2); figure-of-merit: 1.1 W−1/2	SEO125	50 pm V−1
Surface-normal plasmonic EO modulator for free space communication	Sub-wavelength metal grating	
V
p = 20 V @ 1 kHz	15 wt% AJLZ53 in PMPS	60 pm V−1 @ 1522 nm

 	Fig. 10  (a) The chemical structure of a representative selenopyrylium-based cyanine (Se-7C) with Re(γ) and |Re(γ)/(Im(γ))| values noted (left), and an illustration of the cyanine merits (right). (b) Variation in the polarization γ versus BLA for a simple donor–acceptor polyene. (c) Nondegenerate 2PA spectra of the Se-7C solution under different pump wavelengths. Fig. 10c is adapted from ref. 91. Copyright, 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  Optimized ground-state structures (a) of monomeric streptocyanines (5C and 7C) and (b) representations of the 5C aggregate dimers in the perpendicular, cofacial-x, cofacial-z, and parallel-displaced configurations as determined at the uB97X-D/cc-pVDZ level of theory (carbons are represented in grey; hydrogens, white; nitrogens, blue; and chlorides, green).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of the TCF–cyanines AJBC1721–1725. (b) Linear absorption of AJBC1721 in DCM solution (inset: photograph of the thick guest–host APC film doped with 50 wt% of AJBC1721). (c) Optical transmission micrographs of thick guest–host APC films doped with 50 wt% of different cyanines under 100× magnification. Fig. 12c was adapted from ref. 109. Copyright, 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM micrograph of the cross-section of a fabricated slotted waveguide with 100 nm and 310 nm width silicon rails, 180 nm slot width and 200 nm silicon rail thickness. (b) Optical spectrum showing the idler wavelength generated by near-degenerate four-wave mixing in the SOH waveguide coated with guest–host APC film doped with 25 wt% of AJBC1723. Adapted from ref. 109. Copyright, 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structures of cyanine complexes C2 and C6, and conjugated polycyanine AJMPC02 and its complementary cyanine slot complex AJMPC02-TCF.	 



AJBC1723
	936	1300	−1.3	7.8	−3.3	7.8
1500	−1.6	1.6	−2.3	1.4

C2
	936	1300	−1.2	7.1	−3.6	6.9
1550	−1.2	1.6	−3.4	1.8

C6
	936	1300	−0.88	5.1	−3.8	5.2
1550	−1.0	1.7	−3.6	1.8

AJMPC02
	960	1300	−7.3	1.2	—	—

AJMPC02-TCF
	930	1300	−4.5	2.7	−15.0	1.5
1550	—	—	6.1	0.7

PE1-TCF1
	924	1300	−5.8	39	−1.6	≥20.0
1550	−7.0	10.1	−2.8	≥9.2

PE1-TCF2
	957	1300	−6.8	17.4	−15.5	≥7.4
Si〈110〉b	—	1270	—	—	0.81	3.5
1540	—	—	1.3	4.6

 	Fig. 15  Absorption spectra of AJMPC02 and AJMPC02-TCF in dichloromethane (DCM) solutions, and as thin films for AJMPC02-TCF.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structures of polyelectrolyte–cyanine complexes (PE1-TCF1 and PE1-TCF2). Absorption spectra of PE1-TCF1 and PE1-TCF2 in diluted DCM solutions (b) and neat thin films (c); the guest–host film absorption of AJBC1723 in APC (50 wt%) was provided for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 17  The chemical structure of the complementary cyanine–cyanine salt CC4 and its crystal structure viewed along the b-axis. Adapted from ref. 120. Copyright, 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor Tobin J. Marks on the occasion of his 75th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
