Synthesis of chemicals by metabolic engineering of microbes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00159E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00159E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3760-3785Synthesis of chemicals by metabolic engineering of microbes

        
          
            Xinxiao 
            Sun†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolin 
            Shen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Rachit 
            Jain†
b, 
      
        
          
            Yuheng 
            Lin
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yajun 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Qipeng 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, 15#, Beisanhuan East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: yuanqp@mail.buct.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-13601162675
bCollege of Engineering, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
cBioChemical Engineering Program, College of Engineering, University of Georgia, 601B Driftmier Engineering Center, Athens, GA 30602, USA. E-mail: yajunyan@uga.edu;   Tel: +1-706-542-8293
Received 
      19th February 2015
    First published on 5th May 2015AbstractMetabolic engineering is a powerful tool for the sustainable production of chemicals. Over the years, the exploration of microbial, animal and plant metabolism has generated a wealth of valuable genetic information. The prudent application of this knowledge on cellular metabolism and biochemistry has enabled the construction of novel metabolic pathways that do not exist in nature or enhance existing ones. The hand in hand development of computational technology, protein science and genetic manipulation tools has formed the basis of powerful emerging technologies that make the production of green chemicals and fuels a reality. Microbial production of chemicals is more feasible compared to plant and animal systems, due to simpler genetic make-up and amenable growth rates. Here, we summarize the recent progress in the synthesis of biofuels, value added chemicals, pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals via metabolic engineering of microbes.
Xinxiao Sun
Xinxiao Sun obtained his BS degree in Pharmaceutical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2008). He then joined Prof. Qipeng Yuan's group and is now a PhD candidate. Since 2012, he has been working as a visiting student in Dr Yajun Yan's group. His research work mainly focuses on metabolic engineering and synthetic biology.
Xiaolin Shen
Xiaolin Shen obtained her PhD degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2013). From 2011 to 2012 she was working as a visiting student in Dr Yajun Yan's group and her research focus is on biosynthesis of chemicals. From 2013, she has been working as a lecturer in Beijing University of Chemical Technology. She is currently interested in metabolic engineering and protein engineering.
Rachit Jain
Rachit Jain is a Doctoral Candidate at the University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. He has been working in Dr Yajun Yan's research group since 2010. He obtained BE (2009) in Biotechnology from Visvesvaraya Technological University, India. His current research interests include the biological manufacture of high value and bulk chemicals by metabolic engineering and protein engineering.
Yuheng Lin
Yuheng Lin is the Chief Technology Officer of BiotecEra Inc. He received his PhD degree in 2014 from the University of Georgia. His research is focused on the development of enzymatic and microbial platforms for the cost-effective production of biofuels, bulk chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The projects involve multiple disciplines including biochemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology.
Yajun Yan
Yajun Yan is an Assistant Professor of BioChemical Engineering at the College of Engineering, the University of Georgia. He obtained BS (1999) and MS (2002) in Biochemical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, and PhD (2008) in Chemical and Biological Engineering from the State University of New York at Buffalo. He was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California, Los Angeles from 2008–2010. His research focuses on developing enzymatic and microbial approaches for the production of pharmaceutically important compounds, fuels and renewable chemicals. He founded BiotecEra Inc. in 2014, to commercialize technologies related to the microbial production of value-added chemicals.
Qipeng Yuan
Qipeng Yuan is a professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University (1997). He then started postdoctoral research with Prof. Runyu Ma in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (1997–1999). His research interests cover many fields in biochemical engineering, metabolic engineering, especially biosynthesis of natural products.
1. Introduction
Since the industrial revolution oil has become the blood of our economy, serving as the major source of energy, petrochemicals and influencing the market of a plethora of industries globally. Over-dependence on oil has on one hand led to rapid urbanization, and on the other hand has led to severe environmental damage and pollution. Immoderate exploitation and consumption has depleted oil reserves drastically over the past 150 years as the majority of the fuels and chemicals are currently produced using petrochemical feedstocks. Generally, the production of chemicals via chemical approaches has advantages of being a well established production platform associated with low production costs. However, some severe drawbacks exist in petroleum-based manufacturing approaches, such as: (a) the use of toxic/environmentally harmful or expensive catalysts, (b) the generation of toxic intermediates, (c) requirements of high temperature–pressure processes, (d) high energy inputs, (e) the production of stereo-specific chemicals is difficult. The concerns of oil crisis and environmental deterioration compel us to look for alternative ways to produce petroleum-based fuels and chemicals.
While the biological production of commodity chemicals has gained significant interest over the years by tapping into the petrochemical market, the biosynthesis of natural products via metabolic engineering has tapped into the large pharmaceutical and food industry markets. Natural products are a rich source of food additives, pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals, which are widely used in our daily life. The industrial scale production of these compounds by extraction is inefficient and uneconomical due to two reasons: (1) native producers are known to usually grow slowly; (2) the amount of target compounds generated by native producers is not in significant quantities. Metabolic engineering of microbes provides a promising alternative for the production of these petroleum-derived or natural compounds.
Metabolic engineering is a technique that first emerged in the early 1990s. Since then, this technology has been developing rapidly, which has been greatly dependent on the significant advances in its contiguous fields. DNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis reveal new metabolic pathways and enzyme variants; enrichment in protein structure information provides foundation for rational protein engineering; advanced analytical tools identify pathway bottlenecks from RNA, protein or metabolite levels; the availability of a series of genetic tools facilitates pathway optimization; advancement in fermentation technology enables scale up for industrial scale production.1
Microbes (eukaryotic or prokaryotic) that have a simple genetic background and a fast growth rate are usually used as hosts to produce various compounds. This strategy serves both metabolic logic as well as industrial scale process economics. Some successful examples include the production of 1,3-propanediol in Escherichia coli,2 engineering Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the production of antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic acid.3 While E. coli and S. cerevisiae are the two most commonly used hosts for metabolic engineering, other non-conventional hosts have also been explored for their distinctiveness. In this review, we summarize the recent progress in the microbial production of chemicals including biofuels, value added chemicals, pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals, by metabolic engineering (Table 1). We emphasize powerful metabolic engineering efforts with the goal of large scale manufacture. In this light, the metabolic engineering strategies to enable efficient production platforms such as the evaluation of thermodynamic feasibility of pathway(s), protein engineering, carbon flux redirection, manipulation of cellular energetics, use of alternate carbon sources, engineering substrate uptake mechanism, removal of final products from culture broth to alleviate end-product inhibition and cell toxicity, optimization of process parameters, etc. will be discussed.
Table 1 Synthesis of chemicals by metabolic engineering of microbes. This table represents the most significant metabolic engineering efforts and may not necessarily represent the highest titers achieved biologically




Category
Subcategory
Chemical
Applications
Host/carbon source
Titer (g L−1)
Ref.




Biofuels
Alcohols
Ethanol
Fuel additive, plastics, solvents, p-xylene, isobutyl acetate, isobutyl esters

S. cerevisiae/DEHU and mannitol
36.2

15



1-Propanol

E. coli/glucose
10.8

23



Isopropanol

E. coli/glucose
143

26



1-Butnaol

E. coli/glucose
30

35



Isobutanol

E. coli/glucose
50

37



Fatty acids


Fuel additive, detergents, paints, food products, cosmetics, etc.

E. coli/glucose
6.9

60



Alkanes/alkenes


Natural gas, gasoline, diesel, aviation kerosene

E. coli/glucose
0.58

66



Other
Hydrogen
Fuel

E. coli/glycerol
1 mol mol−1

69







Bulk chemicals
Diols
2,3-Butanediol
Polymers, antifreeze, perfumes, printing ink, food supplements, pharmaceuticals, fumigants, solvents, cosmetics, detergents

Serratia marcescens/sucrose
152

81



1,4-Butanediol

E. coli/glucose
18

84



1,3-Propanediol

E. coli/glucose
135

2



1,2-Propanediol

E. coli/glucose
5.1

21



Organic acids
Lactic acid
Pharmaceuticals, polymer precursors, food additives, antibacterial agents, solvents, detergents

E. coli/glucose
142.2

115



Succinic acid

E. coli/glucose
99.2

121



Fumaric acid

E. coli/glycerol
41.5

128



Muconic acid

E. coli/glucose
38.6

134



Malic acid

S. cerevisiae/glucose
59

140



3-Hydroxypropionic acid

K. pneumoniaea/glycerol
49.3

144







Pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals
Amino acids

L-Glutamate
Feed additives, food nutraceuticals, hormones, antibiotics, anti-cancer drugs

C. glutamicum/glucose
37

159




L-Lysine

C. glutamicum/glucose
120

165




L-Phenylalanine

E. coli/glucose
50

172




L-Tyrosine

E. coli/glucose
55

175



Hydroxycinnamic acids

p-Coumaric acid
Pharmaceuticals, supplements in foods, cosmetics

E. coli/glucose
0.974

198



Caffeic acid

E. coli/glucose and glycerol
0.776

203



Flavonoids
Naringenin

E. coli/glucose
0.474

211



Pinocembrin

E. coli/glucose
0.429

209



Stilbenoids
Resveratrol

E. coli/p-coumaric acid
2.3

219



Coumarins
4-Hydroxycoumarin

E. coli/glycerol
0.5

224



Isoprenoids
Amorpha-4,11-diene

E. coli/glucose
27.4

231



Taxadiene

E. coli/glycerol
1

236



Lycopene

E. coli/glucose, glycerol, L-arabinose
1.35

248



β-Carotene

E. coli/glycerol
2.47

249





2. Microbial production of biofuels
Globally, over 50% of crude oil is used for manufacturing transportation fuels.4 Biofuels are compatible with internal combustion engines and can be used as fuel additives to reduce the consumption of oil. Among biofuels, bioethanol and biodiesel are currently the most widely used. In recent years, the microbial production of higher alcohols, also called advanced biofuels, has drawn increasing attention. Compared with ethanol, higher alcohols have energy density closer to petroleum and are less corrosive to the existing infrastructure. Other alternative biofuels include biologically produced alkanes/alkenes and hydrogen. In this section, we highlight the recent advances in the production of these biofuels by metabolic engineering.
2.1 Alcohols

Ethanol. 
Currently, ethanol is the most widely used biofuel. In 2013, approximately 1040 million m3 of ethanol was produced worldwide, over 80% of which was consumed for application as a fuel additive. The largest producer of bioethanol is USA with 518 million m3, followed by Brazil with 277 million m3. It is reported that annually over 98% of bioethanol is made from corn.5 As the concerns of fuel and food competition increase, the production of biofuels from non-edible feedstocks has gained increasing attention. Here we summarize the recent progress in the metabolic engineering of microorganisms to use non-edible feedstocks, such as lignocellulosics and brown macroalgae for ethanol production.
Lignocellulosics have been long considered as a good alternative carbon source for biofuel production. However, due to its recalcitrant nature, lignocellulosic biomass usually needs to be pretreated and hydrolyzed before it can be used by microorganisms for biofuel production. Lignocellulosic biomass contains several hexoses and pentoses, with glucose and xylose as the two most abundant components. S. cerevisiae can efficiently produce ethanol from glucose but is unable to natively use pentose sugars such as xylose as a carbon source.6 To enable D-xylose fermentation the conversion of D-xylose to D-xylulose is necessary, for which heterologous enzymes such as xylose reductase (XR) and xylitol dehydrogenase (XDH) or just xylose isomerase (XI) are required. The expression XI has the advantage of overcoming redox imbalance, which is commonly an issue while expressing the XR–XDH system. However, bacterial XI genes are not well expressed in yeast. To surpass this hurdle, a fungal XI gene was identified and shown to have high activity in yeast. When it was over-expressed along with the genes of the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, the resulting yeast strain grew anaerobically on D-xylose and produced ethanol with the yield comparable with that on glucose.6 Transportation of D-xylose into the cell is another factor that limits xylose utilization. To further improve ethanol production from S. cerevisiae, a sugar transporter gene was expressed in a xylose-assimilating yeast strain. Xylose uptake ability and ethanol productivity were significantly improved via both xylose fermentation and xylose–glucose co-fermentation.7 Another problem that hinders the successful utilization of mixed sugars in cellulosic hydrolysates is the sequential consumption of xylose after glucose depletion. To address this difficulty, an engineered S. cerevisiae strain was constructed to co-ferment xylose and cellobiose. Cellobiose was transported into yeast cells by a high-affinity cellodextrin transporter, and then hydrolyzed by an intracellular β-glucosidase. It was found that the intracellular hydrolysis of cellobiose minimizes glucose repression on xylose fermentation. The resulting yeast strains utilized xylose and cellobiose simultaneously, leading to an increase in ethanol titer of about 20% compared to that of glucose and xylose co-fermentation.8
The above-mentioned process requires pretreatment and lignocellulosic hydrolyzation to fermentable sugars before large scale production. Consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) combines cellulase secretary expression, cellulose hydrolysis, and biofuel production into a single step and represents a more effective technology for biofuel production.9 To achieve CBP, ethanologenic microorganisms have been engineered to express either non-complexed or complexed cellulase (cellulosomes) systems. A non-complexed cellulase system was constructed by expressing an endoglucanase and β-glucosidase in S. cerevisiae. The resulting strain was able to grow on amorphous cellulose and produced up to 1.0 g L−1 of ethanol under anaerobic conditions.10 Compared to non-complexed cellulase systems, the cellulosomes exhibit much higher degradation efficiency because of their highly ordered structural organization. Tsai and coworkers assembled a functional mini cellulosome on the yeast surface by using a synthetic yeast consortium.11 One yeast strain displayed a trifunctional scaffoldin carrying three divergent cohesin domains. The other three strains secreted one of the three corresponding dockerin-tagged cellulases. The secreted cellulases were docked onto the displayed scaffoldin in a highly organized manner. By adjusting the ratios of these four strains, 1.87 g L−1 ethanol was produced and the yield reached 93% of the theoretical maximum value.11
To simplify this system, researchers co-expressed scaffoldin and dockerin-tagged cellulases in one yeast cell. Wen and coworkers displayed a series of uni-, bi-, and trifunctional mini cellulosomes. Compared with the uni- and bifunctional mini cellulosomes, the trifunctional complexes showed better cellulose hydrolysis efficiency. The engineered yeast strain produced 1.8 g L−1 ethanol using phosphoric acid-swollen cellulose as a carbon source.12 To further increase the display level, Fan and coworkers displayed cellulosomes using two individual mini scaffoldins. The engineered S. cerevisiae was able to hydrolyze microcrystalline cellulose efficiently, and produce ethanol with a titer of 1.4 g L−1.13 Sakamoto and coworkers constructed a S. cerevisiae strain that not only hydrolyzed hemicelluloses by co-displaying endoxylanase, β-xylosidase, and β-glucosidase but that also assimilated xylose by expressing XR, XDH and xylulokinase. The recombinant strain produced 8.2 g L−1 of ethanol directly from rice straw hydrolysate with the yield of 0.41 g g−1.14
Besides lignocellulosics, brown macroalgae have also been investigated as a feedstock for bioethanol production. Its cultivation requires no arable land, fresh water or fertilizers. Alginate, mannitol and glucan are the main sugars in brown macroalgae and these sugars can be easily separated by simple biorefinery processes such as milling, leaching and extraction. A yeast strain was engineered to assimilate major sugars in brown macroalgae for ethanol production. An alginate monomer (4-deoxy-L-erythro-5-hexoseulose uronate, or DEHU) transporter was discovered from Asteromyces cruciatus. The expression of this transporter gene together with other alginate and mannitol catabolism genes enabled a S. cerevisiae strain to efficiently metabolize DEHU and mannitol. Under anaerobic conditions, 36.2 g L−1 of ethanol was produced, which corresponds to 83% of the maximum theoretical yield.15E. coli has also been engineered to use brown macroalgae as the sustainable feedstock for ethanol production. First, a secretable alginate lyase system was introduced into E. coli to enable efficient and rapid degradation of alginate. Coupling this system with the alginate uptake and metabolic pathway generated a microbial platform that can produce ethanol directly from macroalgal biomass with a titer of 4.7% v/v and a yield of 0.281 g g−1 macroalgae (80% of the theoretical maximum yield).16


1-Propanol. 
Compared to ethanol, 1-propanol has a higher octane number and is considered to be a better biofuel. 1-Propanol is also an important feed stock in the chemical industry and its annual market is over 130000 tonnes. It can be dehydrated to produce propylene, a starting material for polypropylene plastics. It can also replace methanol during the production of biodiesel fuel to avoid using organic solvents.17
1-Propanol can be biosynthesized via different precursors, such as 2-ketobutyrate, 1,2-propanediol and propionyl-coenzyme A (CoA). 1-Propanol production from 2-ketobutyrate is an example of synthesis of higher alcohols using keto-acid pathways.18 Through these pathways, various alcohols can be synthesized from the corresponding keto acids, which are catalyzed by promiscuous keto-acid decarboxylase (KDC) and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (Fig. 1). Shen and Liao reported the production of 2-ketobutyrate by extending the E. coli threonine biosynthetic pathway.19 The production of 1-propanol was systematically optimized through elimination of competing pathways and deregulation of amino-acid biosynthesis, leading to a final titer of about 1 g L−1. Atsumi and Liao designed a shorter route which bypasses threonine biosynthesis and directly converts pyruvate to 2-ketobutyrate.17 This pathway relies on a foreign enzyme citramalate synthase (CimA). CimA variants with improved activity and resistance to feedback inhibition were obtained by directed evolution. These efforts led to 1-propanol production at 3.5 g L−1 after 92 hours.17
 Fig. 1  Microbial production of higher alcohols by keto acid pathways. ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; KDC, keto acid decarboxylase; LeuABCD: leucine biosynthesis operon. 
The production of 1-propanol via 1,2-propanediol commences from dihydroxyacetone-phosphate (DHAP), an intermediate in the glycolysis pathway. First, the production of 1,2-propanediol was achieved via 3 steps at 0.8 g L−1 by screening for efficient enzymes. To further realize 1-propanol production, three diol dehydratases were tested for catalytic efficiency and the one from Klebsiella oxytoca (encoded by ppdABC) was identified to be optimal. Introduction of this enzyme into 1,2-propanediol producing strains resulted in the biosynthesis of 0.25 g L−1 of 1-propanol.20 Based on this work, a fusion diol dehydratase with higher catalytic efficiency towards 1,2-propanediol was then constructed by linking its 3 subunits. Expression of this fusion dehydratase led to the production of 1-propanol at 0.62 g L−1. A further enhancement in 1-propanol production was achieved by utilizing a dual strain strategy to express the 1,2-propanediol pathway and the 1-propanol pathway separately. These efforts led to 1-propanol production at 2.91 g L−1.21
1-Propanol production via propionyl-CoA was first achieved in Thermobifida fusca.22 Based upon computational analysis of the metabolic network, two distinct pathways leading to the synthesis of propionyl-CoA were identified by extending the threonine biosynthesis pathway or the succinyl-CoA pathway (Fig. 2). The introduction of a bifunctional butyraldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase led to 1-propanol production from various carbon sources. The highest 1-propanol titer (0.48 g L−1) was obtained using switchgrass as a carbon source. These two propionyl-CoA based pathways have been reconstituted in E. coli, resulting 1-propanol production at 10.8 g L−1 and 150 mg L−1, respectively.23,24
 Fig. 2  Microbial production of alcohols using CoA-dependent pathways. AcoAT, acetoacetyl-CoA transferase; ADC, acetoacetate decarboxylase; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; AdhE2, aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase; ALDH, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase; AtoB, acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase; BktB, β-ketothiolase; Crt, crotonase; Hbd, acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase; Ter, trans-enoyl-coenzyme A reductase. 


Isopropanol. 
Isopropanol is natively produced by several species of Clostridium. It can also be used as a biofuel. In the chemical industry, isopropanol can be dehydrated to yield propylene, a monomer for manufacturing polypropylene. Isopropanol is also used as an alternative to methanol to produce biodiesel.25 Currently, the only reported isopropanol pathway is the extension of the Clostridium acetone pathway. Acetyl-CoA is converted to isopropanol by the sequential catalysis of acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (AtoB), acetoacetyl-CoA transferase (AcoAT), acetoacetate decarboxylase (ADC), and secondary alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (Fig. 2). Hanai and coworkers screened these enzymes from different microorganisms to identify the most suitable candidates.25 The expression of the most suitable set of enzymes resulted in the production of 81.6 mM isopropanol with a yield of 43.5% (mol mol−1) in shake flask studies.25 In a fed-batch process incorporated with a gas stripping recovery method, 143 g L−1 of isopropanol was produced after 240 hours with a yield of 67.4% (mol mol−1).26
Soma and coworkers investigated isopropanol production from lignocellulosic biomass. In their work, a recombinant E. coli strain displaying β-glucosidase on the cell surface and expressing the isopropanol synthetic pathway produced 69 mM isopropanol after 21 hours of fermentation from cellobiose.27 Kusakabe and coworkers constructed the isopropanol pathway in cyanobacteria Synechococcus elongatus. The enzyme-coding genes were integrated into the genome. Under optimized conditions, the engineered cyanobacteria produced 26.5 mg L−1 of isopropanol directly from solar energy and carbon dioxide.28 This pathway was also introduced into Cupriavidus necator strain Re2133. The synthetic production pathway was rationally designed through codon optimization, gene replacement, and manipulating gene expression levels in order to efficiently divert carbon flux toward isopropanol. These efforts led to 3.44 g L−1 isopropanol from fructose.29


1-Butanol. 
1-Butanol has been considered as an excellent biofuel due to hydrophobicity and similar energy density to gasoline. 1-Butanol can be mixed with gasoline at any ratio or completely replace gasoline. It is not corrosive and is compatible with existing pipeline infrastructure. In addition, the vapor pressure of 1-butanol (4 mm Hg at 20 °C) is much lower than that of ethanol (45 mm Hg at 20 °C), which makes its separation more cost-effective.30 1-Butanol can be produced by two distinct biosynthetic pathways: the keto-acid pathway and the CoA-dependent pathway. In the keto-acid pathway, the precursor 2-ketovalerate is synthesized from 2-ketobutyrate by the action of LeuABCD (leucine biosynthesis operon) and then 2-ketovalerate is converted to 1-butanol by the two broad substrate enzymes KDC and ADH. Using this pathway, about 1 g L−1 of 1-butanol was produced from E. coli31 and 242.8 mg L−1 from S. cerevisiae.32
1-Butanol can be produced natively via a CoA-dependent pathway by various species of Clostridium. This pathway starts from acetyl-CoA, and the enzymes involved include acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (Thl), acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (Hbd), 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (Crt), butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (Bcd), electron transfer flavoprotein (Etf), aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase (AdhE2) (Fig. 2). However, as Clostridium species are strict anaerobes and the growth rate is slower than E. coli, metabolic engineering strategies have been adopted to construct recombinant strains of aerobic microorganisms for 1-butanol production with a high titer and productivity.33,34 Atsumi and coworkers reconstituted the Clostridium 1-butanol pathway in E. coli and the initial strain produced was only 13.9 mg L−1 of 1-butanol.34 The pathway was further optimized by the identification of alternative enzymes from other organisms, the deletion of competing pathways and the optimization of culture media. These efforts led to improving 1-butanol titer up to 552 mg L−1 in rich media supplemented with glycerol.34
Three major hurdles were identified with the Clostridium 1-butanol pathway: firstly, all the reactions are reversible; secondly, a total of four NADH molecules were consumed to produce one 1-butanol molecule; thirdly, the condensation reaction of acetyl-CoA to produce acetoacetyl-CoA was determined to be rate limiting. The first concern was addressed by introducing an irreversible trans-enoyl-CoA reductase (Ter). To address the second difficulty, (competing) NADH-consuming pathways were disrupted and a formate dehydrogenase was expressed to generate more NADH from formate. In order to overcome the third hurdle, the Clostridium Thl was replaced with E. coli native AtoB due to its higher specific activity. These modifications resulted in NADH and acetyl-CoA driving forces and enabled a high-titer (30 g L−1) and high-yield production of 1-butanol anaerobically.35


Isobutanol. 
Isobutanol is another potential biofuel with a high octane value and energy density. It can mix with gasoline at any proportion and is also known to be compatible with existing combustion engines and fuel transportation infrastructure.36 As an important building block, it is used as the feedstock for the production of p-xylene, isobutyl acetate and isobutyl esters.
Isobutanol production has been reported from 2-keto-isovalerate, the intermediate of valine biosynthesis. The by-product generating pathways that consume pyruvate and acetyl-CoA were disrupted. The resultant strain JCL260 achieved isobutanol production at 22 g L−1 from shake flasks under micro-aerobic conditions.18 In a 1-L bioreactor this strain achieved over 50 g L−1 isobutanol within 72 hours with in situ isobutanol removal using gas stripping.37
Desai and coworkers engineered E. coli to produce isobutanol from cellobiose. A beta-glucosidase was expressed extracellularly by either excretion into the media or anchoring to the cell membrane. The excretion system allowed E. coli to grow with cellobiose as a sole carbon source at rates comparable to those with glucose. The genes expressing isobutanol production pathway enzymes were then introduced to this system. The most productive strain converted cellobiose to isobutanol with a titer of 7.64 g L−1 and a productivity of 0.16 g L−1 h−1.38
Unlike carbohydrates and lipids, proteins are not commonly used as feedstocks for biofuel production. Recently, Huo and coworkers engineered E. coli to assimilate protein hydrolysates by introducing three heterologous transamination and deamination cycles for isobutanol production. Isobutanol was produced from different protein sources, such as the biomass generated from S. cerevisiae, E. coli and Bacillus subtilis. An isobutanol titer of 4 g L−1 was achieved, which corresponds to about 56% of theoretical yield.39
Isobutanol production from S. cerevisiae has also been investigated. Overall, the titers are lower than those obtained in E. coli. Matsuda and coworkers improved isobutanol production from S. cerevisiae by eliminating competing pathways and resolving cofactor imbalance.40 The precursor pyruvate pool was increased by disrupting genes related to pyruvate metabolism. NADPH supply was improved by introducing transhydrogenase-like shunts. This resulted in 1.62 g L−1 of isobutanol production with a yield of 0.016 g g−1 glucose via batch fermentation.40 It was determined that in yeast, the upstream pathway is confined to mitochondria, whereas the downstream pathway is located in the cytoplasm. The transport of the intermediate 2-keto-isovalerate across membranes decreases productivity. To improve isobutanol production, the valine biosynthesis enzymes were relocated from the mitochondrial matrix into the cytosol.41 To this end, the N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequences of Ilv2, Ilv3 and Ilv5 were deleted. About 0.63 g L−1 of isobutanol was produced at a yield of 15 mg g−1 glucose. In another work, the isobutanol pathway was completely assembled in the mitochondria. Compared with the control, compartmentalization of the pathway into mitochondria improved isobutanol production by 260%, whereas the over-expression of the same pathway in the cytoplasm only increased yields by 10%.42


Other alcohols. 
Besides the above mentioned alcohols, other alcohols with even longer chains have also drawn increasing attention. Both 2-methyl-1-butanol (2MB) and 3-methyl-1-butanol (3MB) were produced via the keto-acid pathways. 2-Keto-3-methylvalerate (KMV), an intermediate in the isoleucine biosynthetic pathway, is converted to 2MB by KDC and ADH. Over-expressing the key enzymes in the upper pathway and deleting competing pathways led to an E. coli strain that produces 1.25 g L−1 2MB in 24 hours with yields of up to 0.17 g g−1 glucose.43 Similarly, 3-methyl-1-butanol (3MB) was synthesized from 2-ketoisocaproate (KIC), the direct precursor to leucine. With pathway optimization, 1.3 g L−1 3MB was produced.44 Marcheschi and coworkers engineered E. coli LeuA by structure-based protein engineering to carry out recursive chain elongation reactions of keto-acids.45 This enzyme has been successfully used for the production of a series of long chain alcohols, such as 1-pentanol, 1-hexanol, 1-heptanol, 1-octanol, directly from glucose (Fig. 1).45
Production of 1-hexanol and 1-pentanol was also achieved by extending the CoA-dependent 1-butanol pathway (Fig. 2). β-Ketothiolase (BktB) catalyzed the condensation of acetyl-CoA and butyryl-CoA to 3-ketohexanoyl-CoA. The subsequent reactions were catalyzed by Hbd, Crt, Ter, AdhE2, leading to 1-hexanol production. Under anaerobic conditions 1-hexanol was produced at a titer of 47 mg L−1 from glucose.46 Similarly, to achieve 1-pentanol production, BktB was used to catalyze the condensation of acetyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA to form 3-ketovaleryl-CoA. Through several reduction and dehydration reactions, 3-ketovaleryl-CoA was converted to 1-pentanol. After systematic pathway optimization and strain engineering, the engineered E. coli strain achieved 19 mg L−1 of 1-pentanol production from glucose and 109 mg L−1 of 1-pentanol from glycerol.47

2.2 Fatty acids and biodiesel
As a renewable, biodegradable and non-toxic fuel, biodiesel is proposed as an environmentally friendly solution to energy dilemma. Fatty acids can be used as precursors for the production of biodiesel or chemicals.48,49 Among all the fuel molecules produced from living organisms, fatty acids and their derivatives have the highest volumetric energy density as most of the carbons in the long hydrocarbon chains are in the reduced state.50
As shown in Fig. 3, the first committed step of the fatty acid elongation cycle is the conversion of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA, which is catalyzed by acetyl-CoA carboxylase (AccABCD). Malonyl-CoA is converted to malonyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) by malonyl-CoA-ACP transacylase (FabD), and further to acetoacetyl-ACP by the action of β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase III (FabH). Acetoacetyl-ACP undergoes reduction, dehydration and elongation, and subsequently enters another chain elongation cycle.51–53 In the additional cycles FabH is replaced by β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I (FabF) and β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase II (FabB). Acyl-ACP thioesterase (AAL) can break the elongation cycle and release fatty acids, so the production of fatty acids can be achieved by introducing an AAL. Zhang and coworkers characterized several AALs from different sources and investigated their effect on fatty acid production.51 These enzymes showed distinct degrees of chain length specificity, and the quantity and compositions of fatty acids produced depend on the AAL used.51 To assess the limiting steps in fatty acid biosynthesis, E. coli fatty acid synthase (FAS) was reconstituted in vitro and steady-state analysis was carried out. The results showed that fatty acid production was strongly depended on the availability of malonyl-CoA54 and compared to other components, higher concentrations of holo-ACP and AAL were required to give maximum FAS activity.55 Modular engineering strategies have been used to optimize fatty acid production in E. coli. The fatty acid pathway was split into three modules: the upstream acetyl-CoA formation module; the intermediary acetyl-CoA activation module; and the downstream fatty acid synthase module. These modules were optimized and balanced at both transcriptional and translational levels. The engineered strain produced 8.6 g L−1 of fatty acids via fed-batch cultivation.56 Fatty acid production has been pursued usually under aerobic conditions. However, anaerobic conditions can conserve the carbon source for product synthesis and provide more reducing equivalents (NADH). To achieve the anaerobic production of fatty acid, a homolog of E. coli FabG (β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase) was identified from Cupriavidus taiwanensis, with 35-fold higher preference for NADH than NADPH. Compared with the control, the titer of free fatty acid was improved by 60% under anaerobic conditions.57 To achieve the production of fatty acid short-chain esters (FASEs) the fatty and 2-keto acid pathways were combined. The engineered E. coli strain produced 1 g L−1 of FASEs in fed-batch experiments.58
 Fig. 3  Biosynthesis of fatty acids, biodiesel, alkanes/alkenes and hydrogen. AAR, fatty acyl-CoA reductase; AccABCD, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACR, fatty acyl-ACP reductase; ADD, aldehyde decarbonylase; FabA, 3-hydroxydecanoyl-ACP dehydratase; FabD, malonyl-CoA-ACP transacylase; FabH/B/F, β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase; FabG, 3-oxoacyl-ACP reductase; FabI, enoyl-ACP reductase; FadD, fatty acyl-CoA synthetase; FHL, formate hydrogen lyase; PFL, pyruvate-formate lyase; TesA, fatty acyl-ACP thioesterase. 
It has been shown that fatty acids can also be produced via a reverse β-oxidation pathway. In the previous section, we have reviewed alcohol production using this pathway (CoA-dependent 1-butanol pathway). E. coli strains with an engineered reverse β-oxidation cycle, coupled with thioesterases, can produce fatty acids with different chain lengths (C4–C12).59 Steen and coworkers demonstrated the engineering of E. coli to produce structurally tailored fatty esters, fatty alcohols, and waxes directly from simple sugars.49 They eliminated the first two competing enzymes associated with β-oxidation, FadD and FadE, resulting in 1.2 g L−1 of fatty acids.49 Using a similar method, Dellomonaco and coworkers engineered the reverse β-oxidation pathway and over-expressed endogenous dehydrogenases and thioesterases, to achieve 6.9 g L−1 fatty acid production in E. coli.60
2.3 Alkanes/alkenes
Many microorganisms have shown great capacity for the production of bioethanol and biodiesel. Other hydrocarbon products, like alkanes, alkenes and hydrogen are also important biofuels and can be produced from biomass or even directly from sunlight and CO2.61
Alkanes and alkenes are the most important components of natural gas, gasoline, diesel and aviation kerosene. Alkanes/alkenes containing carbon numbers more than four are present as liquids, implying that a majority of them can be produced via regular bioreactors. Usually, C3–C12 alkanes and alkenes are referred to as short-chain alkanes/alkenes while the C13–C17 ones are referred to as long-chain alkanes/alkenes.62
Methane, the simplest alkane, is the major component of natural gas. Two distinct pathways for methane have been identified and characterized in methanogens.63 This provides the foundation for constructing methane over-producing strains. However, two challenges are required to be addressed for methane production. Firstly, methane production requires strict anaerobic conditions, and secondly, capture and storage of methane is difficult.63 In addition, the emission of methane into the atmosphere will intensify the green house effect. Considering these disadvantages, the production of alkanes and alkenes with longer chain lengths has gained more attention.
In 2010, an alkane biosynthesis pathway was identified from cyanobacteria.64 In this pathway, fatty acyl-ACP, the intermediate of fatty acid metabolism, was converted to fatty aldehyde by an acyl-ACP reductase (AAR), and subsequently into alkanes and alkenes by the action of an aldehyde decarbonylase (ADD) (Fig. 3). This pathway was introduced into E. coli, which led to the production of alkanes and alkenes with varying chain lengths (C13 to C17).64 The activity of ADDs is a major impediment in efficient alkane biosynthesis. To improve the activity of ADDs, an ADD–AAR fusion protein was constructed and expressed in E. coli.65 Compared with the strain expressing two enzymes separately, alkane production increased by 4.8-fold in the strains expressing the fusion protein. Meanwhile, the assembly of ADD and AAR on the DNA scaffold resulted in a 8.8-fold increase in alkane production.65 In 2013, a novel pathway was designed to achieve the production of shorter chain alkanes (SCAs).66 Short-chain fatty acyl-ACPs were converted to the corresponding free fatty acids (FFAs) by a mutated thioesterase. FFAs were further converted to SCAs, by the action of fatty acyl-CoA synthetase (FadD), acyl-CoA reductase (ACR) and ADD (Fig. 3). The genes fadE and fadR were disrupted to prevent the degradation of fatty acyl-CoAs and enhance fatty acid biosynthesis. The resultant strain produced 580.8 mg L−1 of SCAs.66 Recently, a similar strategy has been used for propane production. This pathway relies on a thioesterase specific for butyryl-ACP, achieving 32 mg L−1 of propane from shake flask studies.67
2.4 Hydrogen
Hydrogen has a high energy content (142 MJ kg−1) and is regarded as an efficient and clean energy resource.68 In nature, green algae can produce hydrogen by utilizing just water and sunlight. Compared with microalgal hydrogen production, fermentative hydrogen production does not require high density light and holds great potential. E. coli is the most common host used for hydrogen production. In E. coli, hydrogen is produced from formate using the formate hydrogen lyase (FHL) system (Fig. 3). Under anaerobic conditions, formate is produced from pyruvate by pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL). Metabolic engineering efforts have enhanced hydrogen production in E. coli.68,69 Gene fhlA encoding an essential activator of FHL was over-expressed while several other genes related to formate and hydrogen consumption were deleted. The best strain produced 141 fold more hydrogen than the control strain from formate and threefold more hydrogen from glucose.68 In another study E. coli strain with the best combination of gene knockouts produced hydrogen from glycerol with the maximum theoretical yield (1 mol H2 per mol glycerol).69
3. Microbial production of bulk chemicals
3.1 Diols
The biological manufacture of attractive petrochemical derived diols has gained significant commercial interest over the past decade due to their diverse applications and increasing annual global demand. The commercial scale biological manufacture of 1,3-propanediol (1,3-PDO) has been undertaken by DuPont,70 Tate & Lyle71 and Genencor;72 while the commercial scale bio-manufacturing of 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO) is established by Genomatica.73 In the following section, the microbial production of C4 diols (2,3-butanediol and 1,4-butanediol) and C3 diols (1,3-propanediol and 1,2-propanediol) will be highlighted.

2,3-Butanediol. 
The three stereo isomers of 2,3-butanediol (2,3-BDO) find application in various industries and their derivatives have an annual combined market of over 32 million tons.74 (R,R)-2,3-BDO in particular is used as an antifreeze; while 2,3-BDOs in general are used for the production of various chemicals like methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), 1,3-butadiene, acetoin, diacetyl, etc. Additionally, 2,3-BDOs find application in the manufacture of perfumes, printing ink, food supplements, pharmaceuticals, fumigants, etc.74
The microbial production of 2,3-butanediol has been pursued by both native producers and heterologous hosts.75 The metabolism of native producers generally results in generating a mixture of 2,3-BDO stereoisomers. For instance, Klebsiella and Enterobacter species are known to produce both (S,S)- and meso-2,3-BDO, while Bacillus species are known to produce both (R,R)- and meso-2,3-BDO.75 By engineering Klebsiella pneumoniae, a 2,3-BDO titer of 150 g L−1 has already been achieved via fed-batch fermentation.76 The production of enantio-pure 2,3-BDO has been largely achieved by introducing stereo-specific 2,3-BDO pathways in heterologous microbes such as E. coli. Due to the large market of 2,3-BDO and its derivatives, significant progress in its biological production from a variety of carbon sources has been achieved.75 In this section, the general biochemical scheme of its microbial production, followed by metabolic engineering strategies implemented to achieve enhanced production in both native producers and in E. coli will be discussed.
The biosynthesis of meso/(R,R)-2,3-BDO is a 3 step metabolic process from an endogenous precursor metabolite produced in nearly all microbes – pyruvate. The enzymes involved in its bio-catalysis include acetolactate synthase (ALS), acetolactate decarboxylase (ALDC) and a stereospecific secondary alcohol dehydrogenase (sADH) leading to the formation of acetolactate, acetoin and 2,3-BDO respectively (Fig. 4). It has been determined that the expression of K. pneumoniae meso-dehydrogenase as the sADH leads to the formation of meso-2,3-BDO, while the expression of B. subtilis/C. beijerinckii/T. brockii sADH leads to the formation of (R,R)-2,3-BDO from acetoin.77 The biosynthesis of (S,S)-2,3-BDO can be achieved from diacetyl as a target precursor, contrary to pyruvate. The expression of diacetyl reductase leads to the generation of (S)-acetoin from diacetyl, while the subsequent expression of (S)-2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase catalyzes the formation of (S,S)-2,3-BDO.78
 Fig. 4  Microbial routes for the production of 2,3-butanediol, 1,4-butanediol, 1,3-propanediol and 1,2-propanediol. Intermediates: 4HB, 4-hydroxybutyrate; 4HB-CoA, 4-hydroxybutyrl-CoA; 4HBA, 4-hydroxybutyraldehyde; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone-phosphate; G3P, glycerol 3-phosphate; GA3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; OAA, oxaloacetate; SSA, succinyl semialdehyde. Enzymes: 4HBd, 4-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase; ALDC, acetolactate decarboxylase; ALS, acetolactate synthase; AdhE2, aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase; Cat1, succinate-CoA transferase; Cat2, 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA transferase; Dar1, glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; DhaB123, glycerol dehydratase; FucO, 1,2-PDO oxidoreductase; GldA, glycerol dehydrogenase; Gpp2, glycerol 3-phosphate phosphatase; MgsA, methylglyoxal synthase; sADH, stereospecific secondary alcohol dehydrogenase; SucA, 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase; SucD, succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase; YdjG, methylglyoxal reductase; YqhD, 1,3-PDO oxidoreductase. 
In 1993, high titer production of 2,3-BDO was achieved at 118 g L−1 from K. oxytoca using molasses, where the biomass generated from a batch process was recycled for use in subsequent batch processes. This strategy overcame growth inhibition in the presence of high initial substrate concentrations and achieved a productivity of 2.4 g L−1 h−1.79 Recently, further engineering of K. oxytoca resulted in achieving a 2,3-BDO titer of 130 g L−1 with a yield of 0.48 g g−1 glucose in fed-batch studies. In their work, K. oxytoca was engineered to eliminate the production of a dominant by-product – ethanol via disruption of aldA. This resulted in diverting the carbon flux into the 2,3-BDO pathway.80
In another metabolic engineering work, the production of 2,3-BDO by K. pneumoniae achieved a titer of 150 g L−1 with an impressive productivity of 4.21 g L−1 h−1. In order to achieve this, first shake flask studies were performed to identify significant factors influencing nutritional requirements. Following the identification of corn steep liquor powder and (NH4)2HPO4 as significant factors, an optimal medium was designed to promote 2,3-BDO production. Finally, the parameters influencing fed-batch studies were optimized.76 Recently, an engineered Serratia marcescens strain growing on sucrose reported the highest 2,3-BDO titer of 152 g L−1via fed-batch studies. In their work, the disruption of swrW encoding serrawettin W1 synthase significantly lowered the production of serrawettin W1 (a harmful exolipid that causes excessive foaming). Fed-batch culture of the engineered strain resulted in 2,3-BDO productivity of 2.67 g L−1 h−1.81
The production of enantio-pure 2,3-BDO has been demonstrated by engineering E. coli. The production enantio-pure meso-2,3-BDO from glucose was reported by expressing K. pneumoniae ALS, ALDC, and meso-2,3-BDO dehydrogenase in E. coli achieving a titer of 17.7 g L−1.82 In another work, the production of enantio-pure meso- or (R,R)-2,3-BDO was achieved from E. coli growing on glucose. In order to achieve stereo-specific production, the activity of sADH from K. pneumoniae, B. subtilis/C. beijerinckii/T. brockii was characterized. By expressing the complete pathway using the stereo-specific sADH, the production of either meso-2,3-BDO or (R,R)-2,3-BDO was reported.77 Based on this work, the production of enantio-pure (R,R)-2,3-BDO from glycerol was also reported by engineering E. coli. It was determined that the disruption of pathways leading to acetate accumulation (ackA/poxB) prevented its accumulation and also the accumulation of acetoin. The engineered strain achieved (R,R)-2,3-BDO biosynthesis at 9.56 g L−1 from 10 mL shake flask studies.74
The production of enantio-pure (S,S)-2,3-BDO from E. coli was achieved at 73% conversion efficiency by feeding diacetyl to cultures.78 In their work, the expression of K. pneumoniae diacetyl reductase (also known as meso-2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase) and Brevibacterium saccharolyticum (S)-2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase led to the production of (S,S)-2,3-BDO via the formation of (S)-acetoin.78 Recently, highly pure (S,S)-2,3-BDO production at 26.8 g L−1 was achieved by feeding 40 g L−1 diacetyl. In their work, 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase from an Enterobacter cloacae species was expressed in E. coli. Using optimal fed-batch strategies to feed diacetyl at regular time intervals, (S,S)-2,3-BDO production was achieved.83
The production of 2,3-BDO from carbon sources such as xylose, corn-corb hydrolysate, molasses, acid hydrolysates of Jatropha hulls, Jerusalem artichoke stalk and tuber, sucrose, even steel industry gas wastes and syngas has been reviewed elsewhere.75


1,4-Butanediol. 
Among butanediols, the biological manufacture of 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO) was achieved most recently.84 1,4-BDO has an annual market of over 2.5 million tons worldwide and finds applications in the manufacture of plastics, solvents, fibers, polyesters, etc.84 Until 2011, the production of 1,4-butanediol was solely dependent on petrochemical derivatives due to the lack of any identified natural plant/microbial routes. In 2011, the de novo biosynthesis of 1,4-BDO via a biological platform was reported for the first time.84 In their work, two heterologous pathways led to the production of 1,4-BDO in E. coli by channeling carbon from the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) intermediates – succinate and α-ketoglutarate via 6 and 5 steps respectively (Fig. 4). In both routes, the production of common precursor 4-hydroxybutyrate (4-HB) was first achieved followed by the establishment of a downstream pathway leading to 1,4-BDO production. The production of 4-HB from succinate required the expression of two heterologous enzymes – succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase and 4-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase. Whereas, the production of 4-HB from α-ketoglutarate required the expression of heterologous enzyme 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase in addition to 4-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase. With the successful production of key intermediate 4-HB, an efficient bio-catalytic method for conversion of 4-HB to 1,4-BDO was then pursued. 4-HB was catalyzed to 4-hydroxybutyrl-CoA, via the action of 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA transferase. In order to catalyze the final two steps leading to 1,4-BDO, a bifunctional alcohol dehydrogenase was expressed. For de novo biosynthesis, the upstream and downstream pathways were co-expressed in E. coli. Furthermore, in order to establish an efficient production platform, a metabolic model based approach was utilized as a guide to engineer E. coli's native metabolism, promoting a more thermodynamically favorable process. The metabolic routes leading to the production of native fermentative products (lactate, succinate, ethanol, and formate) were disrupted; additionally, the carbon flux towards the reductive TCA cycle was disrupted to promote oxidative TCA cycle metabolism. With this, more reducing power was endogenously available to drive desired biocatalysis leading to efficient 1,4-BDO biosynthesis from renewable feedstocks such as glucose, xylose. Their work demonstrates the effective utilization of metabolic engineering strategies to optimize synthetic metabolic routes, exemplified by achieving over 18 g L−1 1,4-BDO in 2 L bioreactors.84
Although 18 g L−1 of 1,4-BDO was achieved, the final two steps leading to 1,4-BDO production were determined to be inefficient. It was shown that the bifunctional alcohol dehydrogenase (AdhE2) catalyzing 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA and 4-hydroxybutyrlaldehyde to 1,4-BDO displayed low specificity.84,85 Recently, another approach to efficiently catalyze these two reactions was reported with the use of two substrate specific dehydrogenases. In their work, Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (Bld) was engineered to enhance specificity towards 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA, while C. saccharoperbutylacetonicum butanol dehydrogenase (Bdh) was used for the catalysis of the final reaction.85 In order to enhance the activity of Bld towards 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA, random mutagenesis was performed, which led to the identification of a critical amino acid site (L273) influencing the cofactor binding affinity and structural stability. A four-fold increase in the titer of 1,4-BDO biosynthesis was achieved with the use of the Bld (L273T)–Bdh module compared with the module utilizing AdhE2 for the final two catalytic steps.85


1,3-Propanediol. 
Among the C3 diols, 1,3-propanediol (1,3-PDO) is regarded as an important platform chemical with an annual demand of over one million tons; widely used for the manufacture of various polymers with desirable properties, for the production of drugs, cosmetics, lubricants, etc.70,86 The first report of the microbial production of 1,3-propanediol was in 1881 by Clostridium pasteurianum growing on glycerol anaerobically.87 The biological production of 1,3-PDO has since been achieved from a wide range of microorganisms using glucose or glycerol as a carbon source. Some of the microbes known to natively produce 1,3-PDO include Clostridium, Lactobacilli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Citrobacter.87,88 Among these, the fermentation of glycerol led to achieving 83.6 g L−1 of 1,3-PDO with a yield of 0.54 g g−1 glycerol using an engineered C. acetobutylicum strain as reported by Metabolic Explorer researchers.89 Furthermore, the highest reported titer of 1,3-PDO at 135 g L−1 was achieved using glucose fermentation from an engineered E. coli strain.2 The most successful metabolic engineering strategies to enhance the production of 1,3-PDO will be discussed in this section.
While utilizing glycerol as a carbon source, 1,3-PDO production is achieved by engineering its reductive branch via two steps (Fig. 4). In the first step, 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (3-HPA) is generated by the action of glycerol dehydratase by dehydrating glycerol. Following subsequent reduction by a 1,3-PDO oxidoreductase, 1,3-PDO is produced. However, the oxidative branch of the glycerol dissimilation pathway is known to compete for glycerol via the action of glycerol dehydrogenase and dihydroxyacetone kinase, leading to the formation of DHAP.87 The major bottlenecks to improve 1,3-PDO include the oxygen sensitive nature of dehydratase, NADH availability and harmful by-product accumulation.
It was observed that under aerobic conditions, when the substrate is absent, coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol dehydratase undergoes inactivation.90 In order to overcome this limitation, strategies such as the addition of ATP, Mg+2, the expression of B12-independent dehydratase, and reactivating factors have been used.91,92 The production of 1,3-PDO at high titers also results in the toxic accumulation of 3-HPA, which is detrimental to achieving industrial scale production. In order to overcome this hurdle, a two stage fed-batch fermentation strategy was utilized by sequentially feeding glycerol to achieve 38.1 g L−1 1,3-PDO without 3-HPA toxification by a K. pneumoniae strain.93 Several studies have since been conducted to identify Klebsiella strains with improved tolerance to high 1,3-PDO titers. In 2009, K. pneumoniae strain HR526 enabled 1,3-PDO production at 102.06 g L−1via fed-batch fermentation using glycerol as a carbon source. In order to achieve this, K. pneumoniae strain was engineered to disrupt lactate dehydrogenase activity to prevent the accumulation of lactate.94
Metabolic engineering of C. acetobutylicum with the introduction of a B12-independent pathway of C. butyricum led to 1,3-PDO production at 1104 mM (83.6 g L−1). Fed-batch studies resulted in high volumetric productivity (3 g L−1 h−1) of 1,3-PDO, emphasizing the advantage of an alternative dehydratase.89,95
In order to establish a more efficient production platform, an E. coli strain was engineered to generate glycerol from glucose. The S. cerevisiae glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (dar1) and glycerol 3-phosphate phosphatase (gpp2) enzymes were expressed in E. coli in addition to the expression of K. pneumoniae glycerol dehydratase and its reactivating factors (dhaB1, dhaB2, dhaB3, dhaBX and orfX). E. coli strains natively expressing NADPH dependent YqhD for 1,3-PDO oxido-reductase activity were found to be more efficient in 1,3-PDO production, as compared to a strain expressing NADH dependent heterologous DhaT. Further metabolic engineering strategies include the down-regulation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase to limit the carbon flux towards the TCA cycle; replacement of the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)-dependent glucose uptake system with the ATP-dependent glucose transport system to enhance glucose uptake efficiency. This was achieved via replacement of PTS with galactose permease and glucokinase. Additionally, in order to prevent the loss of glycerol to native metabolism, major competing pathways (glpK, gldA) were disrupted. These efforts resulted in achieving 1,3-PDO at 135 g L−1 from 10 L fed batch fermentations with a high yield of 0.62 mol mol−1 (at a rate of 3.5 g L−1 h−1).2,70,96 In another work, the improvement of YqhD activity towards 3-HPA was pursued in order to overcome the limitation of 1,3-PDO oxidoreductase activity via error-prone PCR. This led to the identification of a mutant (D99QN147H) with 4 four-fold higher activity towards 3-HPA. The expression of this mutant YqhD in E. coli led to an increase in 1,3-PDO conversion from 3-HPA.97
Detailed reviews encompassing metabolic engineering efforts to engineer the glycerol dissimilation pathways, use of two stage fermentations, improvement of strain tolerance, use of glucose to produce glycerol, and engineering Clostridia, S. cerevisiae, Klebsiella microbes for 1,3-PDO production can be found elsewhere.2,70,87,95,96


1,2-Propanediol. 
1,2-Propanediol (1,2-PDO) has a reported annual market of over 1 billion pounds and is primarily used as an antifreeze; while also finding applications in the textile industry for the manufacture of ink, in the pharmaceutical industry, and also for the manufacture of detergents, cosmetics.98,99 The biosynthesis of 1,2-PDO was first reported in 1954, when a Clostridium species was identified to be capable of its production natively.100 Since then several bacterial and yeast species have been identified with the ability of natively producing 1,2-PDO. Initially, the production of 1,2-PDO from E. coli was reported via the fermentation of uncommon sugars like fucose and rhamnose.101 Additionally, it was reported that under phosphate limiting conditions, C. sphenoides was capable producing of 1,2-PDO from fructose, mannose and cellobiose as well. In their work, it was reported that the maximum amount of 1,2-PDO (72.6 mM) was produced with the fermentation of rhamnose.102 The highest reported titer of 1,2-PDO to date was achieved at 9.1 g L−1 with a yield of 0.20 g g−1 glucose using C. thermosaccharolyticum via fermentation.103 Recently, metabolic engineering efforts have enabled the anaerobic production of 1,2-PDO in E. coli using glucose.98,104,105 It was also reported that the utilization of more reduced carbon sources like sorbitol and gluconate did not improve 1,2-PDO production in E. coli.99 Furthermore, the production of 1,2-PDO using S. cerevisiae has been demonstrated by metabolic engineering using glucose and glycerol.106,107 Here, the biochemical pathways leading to 1,2-propanediol using fucose/rhamnose or glucose/glycerol will be highlighted with an emphasis on important metabolic engineering efforts to enhance its production depending on the microorganism (E. coli/S. cerevisiae/cyanobacteria).
The two major biochemical pathways leading to 1,2-PDO production involve the production of lactaldehyde as its immediate precursor. It was initially found that L-rhamnose is first isomerized to L-rhamnulose followed by subsequent phosphorylation to L-rhamnulose-1-phosphate. Similarly, L-fucolose-1-phosphate is produced via isomerization and phosphorylation of L-fucose. Following cleavage of these two phosphorylated sugars by aldolase, DHAP and L-lactaldehyde are generated simultaneously. L-Lactaldehyde is then reduced to L-1,2-PDO via the action of propanediol oxidoreductase.100 Although the metabolic routes from rhamnose and fucose involve only 4 steps, the high cost of these sugars prevents commercial scale manufacture.100 Due to this, the majority of metabolic engineering efforts for its production have focused on the utilization of cheaper carbon sources like glucose and glycerol.
The production of 1,2-PDO from glucose/glycerol involves the production of methylglyoxal from the glycolytic intermediate DHAP via the action of methylglyoxal synthase (Fig. 4). The production of 1,2-PDO from methylglyoxal can be achieved either through the formation of lactaldehyde or through the formation of hydroxyacetone (acetol) via the action of secondary alcohol dehydrogenase or methylglyoxal reductase respectively. The subsequent action of alcohol dehydrogenase on lactaldehyde/hydroxyacetone leads to the formation of 1,2-PDO.20 It was initially determined that just the over-expression of either methylglyoxal synthase or alcohol dehydrogenase led to the production of 1,2-PDO in E. coli using glucose.98 Enhanced production of 1,2-PDO was then achieved using glucose, by expressing the complete pathway via lactaldehyde (E. coli methylglyoxal synthase, glycerol dehydrogenase and 1,2-propanediol oxidoreductase) in an engineered E. coli strain lacking lactate dehydrogenase activity. About 4.5 g L−1 of 1,2-PDO was produced with a yield of 0.19 g g−1 glucose in 2 L fed-batch anaerobic fermentations.105 The highest reported titer of 1,2-PDO (5.6 g L−1) achieved in E. coli was reported by engineering its glycerol dissimilation pathway. In their work, DHAP availability was increased by replacing E. coli's native PEP-dependent dihydroxyacetone kinase with C. freundii ATP-dependent dihydroxyacetone kinase. By over-expressing E. coli methylglyoxal synthase, glycerol dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidoreductase, 1,2-PDO production was achieved. Combining these strategies with the disruption of major fermentative by-product pathways (lactate and acetate) led to 1,2-propanediol production at 5.6 g L−1 in a fermenter with 400 mL media containing glycerol.108
The production of 1,2-PDO from S. cerevisiae was achieved by engineering the glycolysis pathway along with the expression of E. coli methylglyoxal synthase and glycerol dehydrogenase enzymes. With the disruption of the gene encoding triose phosphate isomerase, carbon flux to DHAP was increased in the engineered S. cerevisiae strain which led to 1,2-PDO production at 1.11 g L−1.106 In another report, S. cerevisiae was engineered to increase the glycerol uptake rate as a strategy to enhance 1,2-PDO production. With the over-expression of the glycerol dissimilation pathways along with E. coli methylglyoxal synthase and glycerol dehydrogenase enzymes, 1,2-PDO was produced at 2.19 g L−1 using a modified YEPD medium containing 1% glycerol and 0.1% galactose.107
While the production of 1,2-PDO has been largely pursued utilizing a range of carbon sources and metabolic engineering of E. coli and S. cerevisiae, in 2013, its production was reported from CO2, using an engineered cyanobacterial strain. In their work, the E. coli 1,2-PDO pathway was introduced in cyanobacteria, however, by the replacement of NADH-specific secondary alcohol dehydrogenase with a C. beijerinckii NADPH-specific secondary alcohol dehydrogenase to enhance its production. This strategy resulted in 0.15 g L−1 of 1,2-PDO production with the consumption of CO2.109 Recently, 1,2-propanediol production was achieved from E. coli at an enhanced titer and yield simultaneously for the first time.21 In their work, the expression of optimal minimal set of enzymes, carbon flux redirection and manipulation of cellular energetics (NADH availability) led to 1,2-propanediol production initially at 0.59 g L−1 (with a yield of 0.34 g g−1 glucose). Furthermore, adapting the engineered strain to the fermentation environment during the preparation of inoculum enhanced the titer of 1,2-propanediol (5.13 g L−1) with 94% theoretical maximum yield (0.48 g g−1 glucose). This work represents the highest 1,2-propanediol yield and titers achieved to date from shake flask studies.21

3.2 Organic acids
Organic acids play important roles in various modern industries. They can be used as pharmaceuticals, polymer precursors, food additives, antibacterial agents. In this section, we summarized the production of important organic acids like lactic acid, succinic acid, fumaric acid, muconic acid, malic acid and 3-hydroxypropionic acid by metabolic engineering.

Lactic acid. 
Lactic acid is a widely used compound in the food and pharmaceutical industry. Lactic acid bacteria have the capability to produce abundant lactate under low pH conditions.110 However, these bacteria require a complex medium and produce a mixture of lactic acid stereoisomers. E. coli was used for lactic acid production with metabolic engineering that focused on disruption of competing pathways.111 After deleting the genes encoding fumarate reductase (frdABCD), alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase (adhE), pyruvate formate lyase (pflB), and acetate kinase (ackA), the resulting strain could oxidize NADH only viaD-lactate synthesis in a simple medium with glucose, and achieved 96% of the maximum theoretical yield. In the mineral salt medium, an engineered E. coli W derivative strain efficiently consumed 120 g L−1 glucose and produced 110 g L−1D-lactate.111 After further optimization by deleting methylglyoxal synthase gene mgsA to eliminate L-lactate production, D-lactate producing strain, TG114, converted 120 g L−1 glucose to 118 g L−1D-lactate with a high yield (98%) and impressive productivity (2.88 g L−1 h−1).112 To alleviate the inhibition effect of D-lactate production on cell growth in the early stage, the native promoter of D-lactate dehydrogenase gene (ldhA) was replaced with a thermo-controllable promoter. Expression of ldhA was turned off at 33 °C and the cell growth was improved by 10%. The temperature was then switched to 42 °C and 122.8 g L−1 of D-lactate was produced.113 To achieve L-lactate production in E. coli, the native D-lactate specific dehydrogenase was replaced with L-lactate dehydrogenase from Streptococcus bovis, and the methylglyoxal bypass pathways and native aerobic L-lactate dehydrogenase were disrupted. The engineered strain produced 50 g L−1 of L-lactate from 56 g L−1 of crude glycerol at a yield of 93% of the theoretical maximum and with high optical (99.9%) and chemical (97%) purity.114 Recently, similar strains were constructed using a temperature-shifting fermentation strategy, 142.2 g L−1 of L-lactate was produced.115


Succinic acid. 
Succinic acid, a dicarboxylic acid, is a platform chemical that can be used for the manufacture of solvents, plastics, detergents, anti-bacterial and neutralizing agents. While the current global succinic acid production is 30000 to 50000 tons annually, with the market price of 2400–3000 US $ per ton, the market is expected to reach 125000 tons by 2020.116,117 Succinic acid can be produced by chemical approaches, however, these processes produce succinic acid with low yields and purity.118,119
Succinic acid is an intermediate metabolite of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and is known to be produced as a fermentative product. E. coli is one of the most studied microorganisms for succinate production. Metabolic engineering approaches have been used for high yield succinic acid production, which include the knockout of by-product pathways, the improvement of substrate transportation and utilization, the enhancement of pathways directly involved in succinate production, and enabling of the redox balance.
The initial strategy for succinic acid production in E. coli focused on deletion of competitive pathways, such as alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase (AdhE), lactate dehydrogenase (LdhA), and acetate kinase (AckA). However, the resulting strains grew poorly in the mineral salt medium under anaerobic conditions and accumulated only trace amounts of succinate. The same phenomenon was observed in pyruvate formate-lyase (PflB) deficient strain because these deletions led to the lack of cellular energy or insufficient levels of electron acceptors.120 Metabolic evolution was used to improve both cell growth and succinate production. After inactivation of pflB and mgsA to eliminate formate and lactate production, the final strain KJ073 produced near 670 mM succinate (80 g L−1) in the mineral salt medium with a high yield (1.2 mol mol−1 glucose) and a high productivity (0.82 g L−1 h−1).120 Through the inactivation of the pflB, ldhA, and ptsG genes and the over-expression of the pyruvate carboxylase gene, strain AFP111/pTrc99A-pyc produced 99.2 g L−1 succinate with a yield of 1.1 g g−1 glucose by the use of a dual-phase fermentation process.121 A directed evolution strategy has been used to improve succinate production in E. coli without introduction of plasmids or foreign genes. Together with gene deletions, the resulting strains produced 622–733 mM of succinate with molar yields of 1.2–1.6 mol mol−1 glucose.122 In evolved strains, PEP carboxykinase (pck) served as the major carboxylation pathway instead of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc). Meanwhile, the GalP permease (galP) and glucokinase (glk) replaced the native PEP-dependent phosphotransferase system as the major glucose transporter. These changes increased energy efficiency of succinate production.123


Fumaric acid. 
Fumaric acid is a four-carbon dicarboxylic acid and is known to be 1.5 times more acidic than citric acid. So, it is commonly used as an antibacterial agent in food and beverage industries. Fumaric acid can also be polymerized to produce synthetic paper resin, plasticizers, and environmentally friendly polymers.124 As an important intermediate of the TCA cycle, fumaric acid is a valuable feedstock in the preparation of food additives, such as L-malic acid and L-aspartic acid.125
Fermentation production of fumaric acid began since early last century. Among the fumaric acid producing microbes, Rhizopus species were shown to be the best producers. Recently, 22.81 g L−1 of fumaric acid was produced using R. arrhizus in the co-fermentation of crude glycerol and glucose at 144 h.126
In most microbes, fumaric acid synthesis involves three enzymes commencing from pyruvate. Pyruvate carboxylase is the first enzyme that catalyzes the carboxylation of pyruvate to oxaloacetate with the consumption of ATP and CO2. Oxaloacetate is then converted to malic acid by malate dehydrogenase and then to fumaric acid by fumarase. Recently, yeast and E. coli were engineered for fumaric acid production.127 In fed-batch culture, the engineered E. coli strain produced 41.5 g L−1 fumaric acid from glycerol with 70% of theoretical maximum yield.128 In E. coli, succinate is converted to fumaric acid by succinate dehydrogenase, and fumaric acid is then catalyzed to malate through fumarase. There are three known fumarases in E. coli,129 which are encoded by fumA, fumB and fumC, respectively. Based on previous research, fumarase A and C mainly function under aerobic and microaerobic conditions, while fumarase B was determined to be the dominant enzyme expressed under anaerobic conditions. It was reported that knockout of fumAC genes failed to improve fumaric acid accumulation, but the simultaneous deletion of fumAC and fumB resulted in increasing fumaric acid production.130 Li and coworkers disrupted these three genes in a succinate over-producing E. coli strain and achieved 3.65 g L−1 fumaric acid production.128


Muconic acid. 
Muconic acid (MA), a six-carbon dicarboxylic acid, is an important platform chemical in the plastic industry. It is a synthetic precursor to terephthalic acid, a chemical used for manufacturing polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyester.131 MA can also be easily hydrogenated and converted to adipic acid, which is a raw material for nylon-6,6 and polyurethane.132 The global annual demand of terephthalate and adipic acid is about 71 million and 2.8 metric tons, respectively.131 Currently, both compounds are synthesized from petroleum-derived chemicals, which are non-renewable and environmentally unfriendly.
In 1994, Draths and Frost first reported a de novo route for MA biosynthesis by an engineered E. coli strain.133 This pathway was extended from the shikimic acid (SA) pathway. Three foreign enzymes, 3-dehydroshikimate dehydratase (AroZ), protocatechuate decarboxylase (AroY) and catechol 1,2-dioxygenase (CatA) were introduced in E. coli and the intermediate 3-dihydroshikimate (DHQ) was converted to muconic acid via protocatechuate and catechol (Fig. 5). The E. coli SA pathway was strengthened by over-expressing tktA, aroF and aroB while shikimate dehydrogenase gene was inactivated to prevent DHQ consumption. The engineered strain was reported to produce 2.4 g L−1 and 38.6 g L−1 of muconic acid in shake flask studies and fed-batch fermentations, respectively.133,134 This pathway has also been constructed in S. cerevisiae, where new pathway enzymes were screened and MA production was achieved at a titer of 141 mg L−1.131
 Fig. 5  Engineering and extending shikimate pathway for the production of muconic acid. Intermediates: PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; E4P, erythrose 4-phosphate; DAHP, 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate; 3-DHS, 3-dihydroxy shikimate; TYR, tyrosine; TRP, tryptophan; PHE, phenylalanine. Enzymes: AroF/G/H, 2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphoheptonate aldolase; AroB, 3-dehydroquinate synthase; AroD, 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase; AroE, shikimate dehydrogenase; AroL/K, shikimate kinase; AroA, 3-phosphoshikimate-1-carboxyvinyltransferase; AroC, chorismate synthase; PDC, protocatechuate decarboxylase; CDO, catechol 1,2-dioxygenase; ADO, anthranilate 1,2 dioxygenase; TrpEfbrG, anthranilate synthase (fed-back inhibition resistance mutant); ICS, isochorismate synthase; IPL, isochorismate pyruvate lyase; SMO, salicylate1-monoxygenase; EntC, isochorismate synthase; EntB, isochorismatase; EntA, 2,3-dihydro-2,3-DHBA dehydrogenase; BDC, 2,3-DHBA decarboxylase. 
Recently, three novel pathways have been developed for MA production in E. coli (Fig. 5). These pathways are all shunted from chorismate, the end product of the SA pathway. In the first pathway, E. coli native anthranilate synthase was utilized to convert chorismate to anthranilate. Subsequently, two foreign enzymes, anthranilate 1,2-dioxygenase (ADO) and catechol 1,2-dioxygenase (CDO), catalyzed anthranilate to MA via catechol. Efficient ADO and CDO were screened from different microorganisms and enabled MA production from anthranilate. By expressing the key enzymes in the SA pathway, blocking tryptophan biosynthesis and introducing a glutamine recycling system, de novo production of MA was achieved at a titer of 389.96 mg L−1.132 In the second pathway, four enzymes: isochorismate synthase (ICS), isochorismate pyruvate lyase (IPL), salicylate1-monoxygenase (SMO) and CDO were required to produce MA from chorismate via salicylate and catechol. A phenylalanine over-producing E. coli strain was engineered into a salicylate over-producer by expressing efficient ICS and IPL and enhancement of the shikimate pathway. Introducing SMO and CDO into the salicylate over-producer led to de novo production of MA. After modular pathway optimization, 1.5 g L−1 of MA was produced in shake flask studies.135 Similarly, in the third pathway, two foreign enzymes, 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid decarboxylase (BDC) and CDO catalyzed E. coli native 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid (2,3-DHBA) into MA via catechol. Over-expression of entCBA and the key enzymes in the SA pathway resulted in the production of 900 mg L−1 of 2,3-DHBA. Assembly of the complete pathway led to the de novo production of muconic acid up to 480 mg L−1.136


Other acids. 
Malic acid is another important C4 dicarboxylic acid which is used by food and pharmaceutical industries, as well as for the production of polymers.137 The production of malic acid from glucose was achieved at 9.25 g L−1 using an engineered E. coli strain expressing a heterologous PEP carboxykinase from Mannheimia succiniciproducens.137 Another approach to engineer E. coli for the production of malic acid involved the disruption of target genes followed by growth-based evolution, leading to its production at 516 mM.138 Further metabolic engineering efforts improved the production of malic acid using E. coli to 34 g L−1,139 and using S. cerevisiae to 59 g L−1.140 Recently, a new approach was developed for the production of malic acid from its polymer polymalic acid (PMA). A PMA producing Aureobasidium pullulans strain was used for fermentation studies which led to the production of PMA at high titers from a fibrous-bed reactor. The resultant PMA was then recovered and purified at high efficiency following which malic acid was produced via acid hydrolysis at 142.2 g L−1 with a productivity of 0.74 g L−1 h−1.141
3-Hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) is an important chemical recognized by the US Department of Energy (DOE) due to its wide applications. 3-HP is used for the production of chemicals (1,3-PDO, ethyl 3-HP, acrylic acid, acrylamide, malonic acid, poly 3-HP), and also in the manufacture of polyesters, metal lubricants, textiles, etc.142 The initial efforts for the biological production of 3-HP were pursued from glycerol using different Lactobacillus sp., from acrylic acid using Byssochlamys sp., Geotrichum sp. and Trichoderma sp. The microbial routes for the production of 3-HP have been extensively reviewed recently.142 In order to pursue the commercial production of 3-HP, glucose and glycerol were used as carbon sources. The highest reported titer of 3-HP to date has been achieved from glucose (49 g L−1), with a yield of 0.46 mol mol−1 using an E. coli strain in 1 L fed-batch studies.143 While the highest titer of 3-HP reported to date from glycerol (49.3 g L−1) has been achieved using a K. pneumoniaea strain having a yield of 0.18 mol mol−1via 5 L fed-batch studies.144 Recently, the highest yield of 3-HP production in E. coli from glycerol (54.1% mol mol−1) was reported by using dual synthetic pathways at a titer of 56.1 mM.145

4. Microbial production of pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals
4.1 Amino acids
Amino acids, as the building blocks for life, are some of the most important and widely distributed natural chemicals in biological systems. Amino acids have been long used as feed additives to animals or food nutraceuticals to humans. Essential proteinogenic amino acids including L-valine, L-leucine, L-isoleucine, L-lysine, L-threonine, L-methionine, L-histidine, L-phenylalanine and L-tryptophan cannot be synthesized in animals and humans.146 Some amino acids have shown to exhibit even pharmaceutical functions like L-glutamine against gastroenterological disorders and gastric ulcer, L-tryptophan against depression and L-tyrosine against Basedow's disease.147,148 Besides, amino acids of different scaffolds are key precursors for synthesis of enormous metabolites of critical biological importance like hormones, antibiotics and anti-cancer drugs.149,150 Nowadays, nutrition supply and health maintenance are the main impetus for a large scale production of amino acids. Major food flavoring and feed additive amino acids L-glutamate and L-lysine have been produced at over 5 million tons in 2013 and the commercial market for amino acids is increasing with an annual growth rate of 6–8%.151,152 Compared with traditional processes to produce amino acids (extraction, chemical synthesis and enzymatic catalysis), microbial synthesis has accelerated the industrial production of amino acids since the discovery of glutamate production by Corynebacterium glutamicum more than 50 years ago.153 Microbial synthesis is becoming the dominant and optimal process for amino acid production because of its ease to produce enantiomerically pure amino acids, low costs and ecological acceptability.147,152 Particularly, recent progress in systematic metabolic engineering of C. glutamicum and E. coli enabled the feasible large scale production of nearly all amino acids.

L-Glutamate is one of the most largely produced amino acids and its sodium salt mono-sodium glutamate (MSG) is used worldwide as a commercial flavor enhancer. Metabolic engineering efforts for L-glutamate production have been largely pursued in C. glutamicum. To increase L-glutamate production, improving the availability or reducing the consumption of precursor 2-oxoglutarate by deleting native competing pathways were the main strategies.152 2-oxoglutarate production was also achieved by the over-expression of pyruvate carboxylase or deletion of competing pyruvate kinase.154,155 Meanwhile, consumption of 2-oxoglutarate was reduced by deletion of oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (ODHC) or inhibition of ODHC either by antisense RNA or by the use of an enzyme inhibitor (OdhI).156–158 Over-expression of heterologous genes into C. glutamicum was another strategy to increase L-glutamate titer. By over-expressing Vitreoscilla hemoglobin (VHb) gene vgb into C. glutamicum, both cell growth and L-glutamate productivity were enhanced.159 Over-expression of polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) biosynthesis genes phbCAB from R. eutropha was found to regulate L-glutamate production in C. glutamicum and increased the L-glutamate titer by 39–68%.160L-Glutamate production was also reported to be enhanced by reducing carbon dioxide emission levels via employing a phosphoketolase (PKT) pathway from Bifidobacterium animalis into C. glutamicum.161 With this, the carbon flux was directed to L-glutamate production via metabolic engineering of the native PKT pathway.

L-Lysine is a preferred additive to animal feeds for pig breeding and poultry, with 1.5 million tons produced annually.146,152 Metabolic engineering for L-lysine production by C. glutamicum has been enhanced by the use of synthetic biology tools. An outstanding example is using promoter engineering to redirect the carbon flux to improve L-lysine production. Oxaloacetate, the precursor for L-lysine production, is generated from carboxylation of pyruvate. Exchange of the native promoter of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) with a reduced dapA promoter variant led to an enhanced production of L-lysine.162 The activity of isocitrate dehydrogenase (ICD) was reduced by mutating its start codon; this also resulted in reducing the carbon flux towards the TCA cycle. These efforts enhanced L-lysine production by 40%.163 These two approaches addressed precursor supply from central metabolism, concomitant with improving cell growth. Other attempts encompassed increasing availability of NADPH via over-expression of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (encoded by fbp) or G6P dehydrogenase (encoded by zwf), which are required for L-lysine production.164 Recently, by systems metabolic engineering of wild type C. glutamicum, an L-lysine over-producing strain was constructed, capable of achieving a titer of 120 g L−1 in fed-batch cultures.165
Aromatic amino acids, including L-tyrosine, L-phenylalanine and L-tryptophan, are known to be produced via a SA pathway in bacteria, fungi, algae, parasites and plants. They are essential amino acids for human diet and are also important precursors for synthesis of a plethora of high value by-products (nitric oxide, polyamines, glutathione, taurine, thyroid hormones, serotonin, etc.). Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis is initiated by the condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and erythrose 4-phosphate (E4P) to form 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate (DAHP), which is subsequently catalyzed into chorismate, the branching point of the three aromatic amino acid pathways.166–168 Thus, metabolic engineering of aromatic amino acids has firstly focused on strengthening the pathway leading to chorismate. Over-expression of PEP synthase (encoded by ppsA) and transketolase (encoded by tktA) is a commonly used strategy to improve the supply of intracellular PEP and E4P. Feedback inhibition-resistant (fbr) enzymes DAHP synthase (encoded by aroGfbr) and chorismate mutase-prephenate dehydrogenase (encoded by tyrAfbr) were constructed and used for chorismate accumulation and subsequent L-tyrosine over-production.166,167 Secondly, TyrR and TrpR-mediated repression were determined to alleviate the production of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. Removal of transcriptional attenuation via deletion of tyrR resulted in improved production of L-phenylalanine or L-tyrosine.167,168 Additionally, disruption of a global regulatory gene csrA led to a two-fold increase in L-phenylalanine production.169 Additionally, engineering the transport mechanism of aromatic amino acids was used as a strategy to increase yields. The in vivo accumulation or uptake of aromatic acids was found to inhibit production capacity, which was relieved by modifying transport systems.170,171 Applications of these approaches for metabolic engineering of E. coli and Corynebacterium glutamicum have achieved L-phenylalanine, L-tyrosine and L-tryptophan production with titers as high as 50 g L−1, 55 g L−1 and 60 g L−1 respectively.172–175
Recently, metabolic engineering for production of branched chain amino acids including L-valine, L-leucine and L-isoleucine have gained significant interest for their potential applications in the animal feed additive, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals.176 Microbial production of L-threonine,177L-proline,178L-serine,179L-cysteine,180L-arginine181 and L-alanine182 has also been achieved by metabolic engineering. With understanding of genetic background and amenability of metabolic engineering in C. glutamicum or E. coli, microbial production of amino acids will be further elevated to meet the increasing demand for amino acids.183 Metabolic engineering for amino acid production has been achieved by utilizing different carbon sources like glucose, starch, arabinose, molasses, sucrose, fructose, xylose and even methanol in engineered microbes.148,184–187 In addition to metabolic engineering of biosynthetic pathways, other improvements have been made to achieve the industrial scale production of amino acids including the optimizing cultivating process, utilizing different carbon sources dynamically controlling the pathway. Recent metabolic engineering of the production of amino acids has been successfully extended to their derivative chemicals like L-glutamate derived γ-amino-butyrate,188,189L-tyrosine derived caffeic acid190 and L-tryptophan derived 5-hydroxytryptophan.191,192
4.2 Phenylpropanoids
Phenylpropanoids are a diverse family of plant secondary metabolites derived from phenylalanine. According to their molecular structure, this family can be further classified as hydroxycinnamic acids, flavonoids, stilbenoids, coumains, etc.193 Their broad use as supplements in foods and cosmetics and potentially even as pharmaceuticals is due to their superior antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-virus and anti-cancer activities.194,195 Naturally-occurring phenylpropanoids are usually conjugated with one another or with other molecules such as sugars or organic acids but rarely exist in free forms. Therefore, it is laborious and inefficient to manufacture these compounds through conventional extraction methods. Alternatively, the reconstitution of heterologous biosynthetic pathways in microbial hosts such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae with advantageous genetic and fermentation properties has led to a facile production of various phenylpropanoids from inexpensive precursors or even simple carbon sources (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids. 4CL, 4-coumaroyl-CoA ligase; C2′H, p-coumaroyl-CoA o-hydroxylase; C3H, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase; C4H, cinnamate 4-hydroxylase; CHI, chalcone isomerase; CHS, chalcone synthase; F6′H, feruloyl-CoA o-hydroxylase; ICS, isochorismate synthase; IPL, isochorismate pyruvate lyase; OMT, 3-O-methyltransferase; PAL, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; PQS, Pseudomonas quinolone synthase; SCL, salicoyl-CoA lyase; TAL, tyrosine ammonia lyase; STS, stilbene synthase. 

Hydroxycinnamic acids. 
Hydroxycinnamic acids refer to the hydroxylated analogs of cinnamic acid with simple substituent groups, such as p-coumaric, caffeic and ferulic acid. p-Coumaric acid is a central intermediate for the biosynthesis of a majority of phenylpropanoids. In plants, it is produced through phenylalanine deamination by the action of phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), followed by para-hydroxylation catalyzed by cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C4H). This pathway was initially reconstituted in yeast, leading to the production of p-coumaric acid.196 However, its efficiency is very low due to the employment of C4H, a cytochrome P450 hydroxylase. A more straightforward approach was established to produce p-coumaric acid directly from tyrosine deamination catalyzed by tyrosine ammonia lyase (TAL) or PALs with broad substrate tolerance.197 Notably, this pathway is compatible with the E. coli system, which enabled the efficient de novo production of p-coumaric acid from utilizing simple carbon sources. About 974 mg L−1 of p-coumaric acid was produced in shake flask studies by a tyrosine over-producing strain with the over-expression of Saccharothrix espanaensis TAL (encoded by sam8).198
The natural caffeic acid biosynthesis in plant involves another cytochrome P450 enzyme, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase (C3H).199,200 Recently, the identification of C3H substitutes that can replace the plant P450 enzyme has enabled the microbial production of caffeic acid. The earliest identified C3H of bacterial origin was the Sam5 from S. espanaensis.201 Interestingly, it was reported that bacterial species including E. coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa natively possess 4-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylases (4HPA3H) and are highly capable of hydroxylating p-coumaric acid.190,202 Furthermore, it was reported that 10.2 g L−1 of caffeic acid was produced by feeding p-coumaric acid from E. coli strains carrying 4HPA3H from P. aeruginosa.202 In order to achieve de novo biosynthesis of caffeic acid, both 4HPA3H and TAL were expressed in E. coli.190 Engineering of a phenylalanine over-producer to increase tyrosine supply in combination with the heterologous pathway optimization allowed caffeic acid production up to 776 mg L−1 in shake flask studies from glucose and glycerol.203 In the same period, Sam5 and Sam8-mediated caffeic acid biosynthesis was also established, leading to caffeic acid production from glucose, although the titer achieved was lower than that of the 4HPA3H-mediated pathway.198 The additional expression of the O-methyltransferase from Arabidopsis thaliana with the above mentioned enzymes led to the extension of the caffeic acid pathway and achieved the production of ferulic acid.198 By utilizing the broad substrate specificity of 4HPA3H, production of salvianic acid A (or 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl lactic acid) was also achieved by shunting the tyrosine biosynthesis pathway via 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate. A metabolically optimized strain was reported to produce this molecule up to 7.1 g L−1 by fed-batch fermentation, with a yield of 0.47 mol mol−1 glucose.204 In addition to free acids, microbial production of hydroxycinnamic acid esters has been reported recently. For example, E. coli over-expressing 4-coumarate CoA: ligase (4CL) and hydroxycinnamoyl transferases (HCTs) can make use of endogenously produced quinate and shikimate, as well as supplemented p-coumaric acid to produce chlorogenic acid and p-coumaroyl shikimates, respectively.205 Furthermore, de novo production of rosmarinic acid was also achieved in E. coli by simultaneous reconstitution of caffeic acid and 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl lactic acid biosynthesis pathways, in combination with the action of rosmarinic acid synthase.206


Flavonoids. 
Flavonoids consist of various phenylpropanoids such as flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, flavanols, flavonols and anthocynidins. So far, the majority of studies concerning flavonoid biosynthesis have been focused on pinocembrin and naringenin, the simplest flavanones serving as gateway molecules to all other flavonoid compounds. Biosynthesis of pinocembrin and naringenin starts from the ligation of CoA with cinnamic acid and p-coumaric acid catalyzed by 4CL to form the starter molecules cinnamoyl-CoA and p-coumaroyl-CoA, respectively. Then chalcone synthase (CHS) catalyzes the repeated condensation of 3 molecules of malonyl-CoA with the starter molecules to form flavanone chalcones via Claisen cyclization. Finally, the chalcones can be converted to pinocembrin and naringenin either spontaneously or by the action of chalcone isomerase (CHI). An engineered E. coli strain expressing PAL/TAL, 4CL, CHS and CHI produced Naringenin and pinocembrin, 58 mg L−1 of pinocembrin from phenylalanine and 60 mg L−1 of naringenin from tyrosine.207 Similarly, S. cerevisiae strains expressing 4CL, CHS and CHI produced 16.3 mg L−1 of pinocembrin and 0.2 mg L−1 of naringenin from the corresponding phenylpropanoid acids.208
A further increase in the production of flavanones was achieved by elevating the intracellular malonyl-CoA availability. On one hand, the over-expression of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and biotin ligase can increase the conversion of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA, leading to a significant improvement in the production of pinocembrin (429 mg L−1), naringenin (119 mg L−1) and eriodictyol (52 mg L−1) from cinnamic acid, p-coumaric acid and caffeic acid, respectively.207,209 On the other hand, over-expression of malonyl-CoA synthetase (MatB) and a putative malonate transporter (MatC) that promotes the conversion of exogenous malonate to malonyl-CoA resulted in a similar improvement in flavanones production.210 Besides, minimization of genetic interventions assisted by a genome-sale metabolic model allowed the carbon flux to be redirected to malonyl-CoA and led to higher titers of naringenin (474 mg L−1).211 Recently, a strategy employing antisense RNAs was reported to enrich malonyl-CoA concentration, which shows the potential to replace the use of certain antibiotics that inhibit fatty acid synthesis.212 Optimized modular expression by adjusting promoter strengths and plasmid copy numbers enabled the balance of metabolic pathways, capable of producing 100.64 mg L−1 (2S)-naringenin in E. coli from glucose.213
Production of more complicated flavanoids derived from flavonones, such as 5-deoxyflavanones, flavones, isoflavones, flavonols and anthocyanins, has been reviewed elsewhere.214


Stilbenoids. 
Stilbenoids are the analogs of stilbene with simple substituent groups. A representative of this group is resveratrol which is well-known for its antioxidant, anti-aging, and cancer preventative effects. Similar to naringenin, resveratrol is also biosynthesized via decarboxylative condensation of 3 malonyl-CoA molecules with the p-coumaroyl-CoA (Fig. 6); whereas the final cyclization step follows the Adol rather than the Claisen pattern.215 Heterologous production of resveratrol was initially established in S. cerevisiae by co-expressing 4CL and STS utilizing supplemented p-coumaric as a substrate.216,217 An optimized industrial yeast strain was reported to produce 391 mg L−1 resveratrol when the 4CL1 from A. thaliana and STS from Vitis vinifera were introduced simultaneously.218 Further efforts to enhance resveratrol production in E. coli included synthetic biology approaches to engineer different vectors, leading to its biosynthesis at 1.4 g L−1. In their work, improving malonyl-CoA availability further enhanced resveratrol production to 2.3 g L−1.219 Recently, 4HPA3Hs from E. coli and P. aeruginosa were found to display high catalytic efficiency to hydroxylate resveratrol to piceatannol.220,221


Coumarins. 
Compared with flanovoids and stilbenoids, microbial production of plant-specific coumarins is less explored due to the limited knowledge on their biosynthesis pathways.222 Recently, Yan group reported the first microbial synthesis of scopoletin and umbelliferone using an artificial pathway that circumvented the unknown steps and obviated the use of P450 hydroxylases.223 Based on the 4HPA3H-mediated caffeic acid biosynthesis pathway, the additional expression of caffeate 3-O-methyltransferase, 4CL and feruloyl-CoA 6′-hydroxylase led to the production of scopoletin. In addition, another different biosynthesis mechanism not derived from phenylpropanoids was explored for the production of 4-hydroxycoumarin (4HC), a precursor for the anticoagulant warfarin. By introducing isochorismate synthase (ICS), isochorismate pyruvate lyase, salicyol-CoA ligase and a promiscuous bacterial quinolone synthase (PqsD) into E. coli, endogenous metabolites chorismate and malonyl-CoA were converted to 4HC via salicylate.224 Very recently, the E. coli 4HPA3H was reported to be capable of catalyzing the region-specific hydroxylation of umbelliferone to esculetin with a high yield (2.7 g L−1). Interestingly, this enzyme also displays the capability of hydroxylating resveratrol into piceatannol (1.2 g L−1), which exhibited superior activity than all the identified and engineered CYP hydroxylases.220

4.3 Isoprenoids
Isoprenoids, some of the largest classes of plant natural products, have been identified with more than 40000 different molecules.225 Some pharmaceutically important compounds such as taxol (a potent anticancer drug), artemisinin (a widely used anti-malarial drug) and carotenoids (e.g. lycopene and β-carotene) belong to this class. Their biosynthesis usually starts from the generation of two common precursors, isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP). Carbon chain elongation is then achieved via the continuous condensation of IPP to DMAPP. In nature, IPP and DMAPP are generated from two distinct isoprenoid pathways: the mevalonate (MVA) pathway occurs in all eukaryotes and the 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway in most bacteria (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Biosynthesis of isoprenoids. Intermediates: DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; FPP, farnesyl diphosphate; GA3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl diphosphate; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; MEP, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate; MVA, mevalonate. Enzymes: ADS, amorphadiene synthase; AMO, amorphadiene oxidase; CPR, cytochrome P450 reductase; FPPS, FPP synthase; GGPPS, GGPP synthase; IPPI, IPP isomerase; LCY, lycopene β-cyclase; PD, phytoene desaturase; PS, phytoene synthase; TS, taxadiene synthase. 

Artemisinin precursors. 
Artemisinin is a sesquiterpenoid lactone endoperoxide produced by Artemisia annua. So far, the direct microbial production of artemisinin has not been achieved yet. Alternatively, the biosynthesis of its precursor artemisinic acid has been extensively studied, since it can be easily converted to artemisinin via chemical processes. The first step towards artemisinic acid production is the formation of the intermediate amorpha-4,11-diene by expressing the amorpha-4,11-diene synthase (ADS) from A. annua which catalyzes the cyclization of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP).226 Engineering of the MVA pathway in S. cerevisiae to increase supply of FPP and the introduction of the amorphadiene synthase and a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (AMO, along with its reductase) responsible for the final oxidation steps resulted in the production of a significant amount of artemisinic acid up to 100 mg L−1.3 Further improvement was reported by optimizing the selection markers and media compositions. The use of a high-density fed-batch fermentation process allowed the titer of artemisinic acid to be enhanced to 2.5 g L−1 when galactose was used as a sole carbon source.227 Other than yeast, biosynthesis of artemisinic acid was also explored in E. coli. Indeed, E. coli natively carries the MEP, as well as the prenyldiphosphate pathway. The initial expression of heterologous enzymes in the downstream isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways led to the first E. coli strains producing plant sesquiterpenes. However, the titers achieved were very low due to the low availability of prenyldiphosphate which significantly limited isoprenoid production.228 To overcome this, the MVA pathway from S. cerevisiae was partially or entirely reconstituted in E. coli.229 Optimization of the expression level of the MVA pathway enzymes alleviated the growth inhibition caused by the accumulation of a toxic intermediate and further improved isoprenoid production.230 In addition, employment of HMG-CoA synthase and HMG-CoA reductase from Staphylococcus aureus instead of the counterparts from S. cerevisiae achieved a two-fold increase in the production of amorpha-4,11-diene. This led to boosting the titer to 27.4 g L−1 in fermenter under carbon and nitrogen-restricted conditions.231 Based on this, expression of the codon-optimized genes of AMO and CPR from A. annua allowed their functional expression in E. coli, leading to the conversion of amorpha-4,11-diene to artemisinic acid. Interestingly, replacement of the AMO membrane anchor with the sequences from other cytochrome P450s (CYPs) resulted in the accumulation of 100 mg L−1 artemisinic acid under optimized cultivation conditions.232 Alternatively, a distinct semi-biosynthetic approach for artemisinin production was established via a non-natural intermediate artemisinic-11S,12-epoxide. This compound was produced up to 250 mg L−1 through the selective oxidation of amorpha-4,11-diene catalyzed by a rationally engineered hydroxylase P450 BM3 from Bacillus megaterium.233


Taxol precursors. 
Taxol (paclitaxel) is a widely used cancer drug that was first isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew tree. Due to its extremely low abundance in nature, exploration of the microbial synthesis of taxol is highly desirable to achieve its inexpensive supply.234 Compared with artemisinin, the reconstitution of the taxol biosynthesis pathway is more challenging. This pathway involves 19 enzymatic steps, about half of which are catalyzed by cytochrome P450 related enzymes.234 So far, direct production of taxol in microorganisms has not been realized yet. Taxa-11,4-diene is a major intermediate that has been targeted for microbial production. The earliest attempt to taxa-11,4-diene production was through a series of in vitro enzymatic reactions catalyzed by isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase from Schizosaccharomyces pombe, taxadiene synthase, and geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase from Erwinia herbicola. Based on this, expression of the three enzymes in combination with the native deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate (DXP) synthase in E. coli led to the reconstitution of a hybrid biosynthetic pathway and the production of taxadiene (1.3 mg L−1) in vivo.235 Recently, a multivariate modular optimization approach was successfully employed, which improved taxadiene production dramatically.236 In their work, the taxadiene biosynthesis pathway was divided into two modules: the native MEP upstream pathway forming IPP and the heterologous pathway yielding taxadiene. A systematic adjustment of their expression levels separately resulted in a balanced metabolism by which the accumulation of a toxic molecule indole was minimized. The optimized strain was capable of producing taxadiene up to 300 mg L−1 in shake flask studies. This titer was finally boosted to about 1 g L−1 in fed-batch fermentation using glycerol as a carbon source. In the same study, one more step towards taxol biosynthesis was also explored to convert taxadiene to taxadien-5α-ol by a cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation.236 In addition, taxadiene production has also been investigated in yeast.237 Introduction of the geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) synthase and the taxadiene synthase from Taxus chinensis reconstituted a part of the pathway from IPP and DMAPP, leading to the taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene in S. cerevisiae. Similarly, taxadiene production was also improved by the elevation of precursor supply. Moreover, 50% increase in titer was achieved by the truncation of HMG-CoA reductase that alleviated feedback inhibition. Finally, 8.7 mg L−1 of taxadiene was produced by replacement of T. chinensis geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase with its counterpart from Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, as well as the use of a codon-optimized T. chinensis taxadiene synthase gene.237


Carotenoids. 
Carotenoids are tetraterpenoids that are biosynthesized by condensing two molecules of GGPP. The initial metabolic engineering efforts for their production were in yeast. However, enhanced production has been reported in E. coli, notably for the production of β-carotene and lycopene. Since E. coli natively harbors the MEP and prenyldiphosphate pathway, the expression of phytoene synthase (PS) and phytoene desaturase (PD) from Erwinia enabled the production of lycopene in E. coli. Based on this, the production of β-carotene was achieved by expressing a lycopene β-cyclase.238 Two approaches were utilized to improve carotenoid production in E. coli – enhancing the prenyldiphosphate pathway to improve GGPP and DMAPP availability or enhancing the MEP pathway to improve IPP and DMAPP availability. The prenyldiphosphate pathway was engineered via over-expression of native GGPP synthase (GGPPS) and IPP isomerase. Alternatively, over-expression of heterologous GGPPS and IPP isomerase also resulted in enhancing carotenoid production.239,240 In another approach, IPP and DMAPP availability was increased via over-expression of the MEP pathway enzymes.241 Other than these two strategies, a similar approach to that used in artemisinic acid production was also used to circumvent the undesirable native regulatory mechanisms. This was achieved via engineering of an exogenous MVA pathway in E. coli consisting of an upper pathway module and a lower pathway module from Streptococcus pneumonia and Enterococcus faecalis, respectively. These efforts boosted lycopene titer to 465 mg L−1 in E. coli.242 Additionally, another critical insight to improve lycopene production in E. coli was elucidated by shifting the balance of intracellular pyruvate availability towards glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P).243
In addition to the commonly used metabolic engineering strategies mentioned above, carotenoid production was also explored with intriguing synthetic biology approaches. For instance, an artificial dynamic regulatory circuit capable of responding to cellular metabolic states was used in order to direct the carbon flow into the heterologous carotenoid (lycopene) producing pathway. This strategy overcame metabolic imbalance and improved lycopene production from trace amounts to 150 mg L−1.244
A computational analysis of the lycopene production pathway led to the identification of critical mutagenesis targets and guided the construction of superior strains, producing lycopene at about 18 mg g−1 DCW.245 Another approach to identify critical genes influencing lycopene production was by building a shotgun library and carefully screening it via colorimetric methods.246,247 Apart from genetic manipulations, the effects of process optimization via feeding different carbon sources or amino acids have also been studied. This was shown to achieve β-carotene production at 2.47 g L−1 and lycopene production at 1.35 g L−1.248,249 The lycopene/β-carotene pathways have been further expanded to other valuable carotenoids such as zeaxanthin, astaxanthin, lutein.250

5. Challenges and perspectives
The synthesis of chemicals from microbes can be assigned to three categories. (1) The production of simple, naturally occurring chemicals which are achieved via traditional metabolic engineering efforts. (2) The production of natural chemicals involving complex reaction chemistry (polyketide synthases, CYPs, membrane bound proteins) and molecules that can be achieved via the efficient production of the target chemical's precursor, following which chemical methods can be used for its production. (3) The most challenging category of metabolic engineering involves the biological production of non-natural chemicals. The hurdle of achieving their biological production can be overcome by identifying enzymes capable of carrying out similar reaction chemistry to that by the chemical routes. An example of this approach is well demonstrated for the production of 1,4-butanediol.84
The establishment of novel metabolic pathways often requires expansion and/or manipulation of native metabolism. To this end, bottlenecks in enhancing their production can be overcome by the use of synthetic biology and protein engineering tools. Regulation of metabolic pathways, fine tuning protein expression levels and improving biocatalysis have been demonstrated via recent developments in enabling technologies such as antisense RNA,251 MAGE (multiplex automated genome engineering),252 compartmentalization of metabolic pathways,42 use of DNA/protein scaffolds,253 directed evolution.17
Although a number of metabolic routes have been established for the production of chemicals, there is a dearth in the number of successful industrial scale production processes. Various hurdles need to be overcome for commercialization of biological processes. First, the microbial host has to be systematically engineered, following which the target chemical has to be produced at a high titer, high yield and high volumetric productivity. Furthermore, manufacturing costs need to be reduced via process optimization and scale up, and lastly the separation process needs to be economical and efficient. More detailed discussions on these approaches have been extensively reviewed recently.254–256
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by grants from The National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2011AA02A207); National Natural Science Foundation of China (21176018, 21376017 and 21406010) and Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team (IRT13045). We also acknowledge the support from National Science Foundation, USA (grants 1335856 and 1349499); and the American Heart Association Scientist Development grant (11SDG6960001).
References
J. W. Lee, D. Na, J. M. Park, J. Lee, S. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2012, 8, 536–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Nakamura and G. M. Whited, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2003, 14, 454–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Ro, E. M. Paradise, M. Ouellet, K. J. Fisher, K. L. Newman, J. M. Ndungu, K. A. Ho, R. A. Eachus, T. S. Ham, J. Kirby, M. C. Chang, S. T. Withers, Y. Shiba, R. Sarpong and J. D. Keasling, Nature, 2006, 440, 940–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Escobar, E. S. Lora, O. J. Venturini, E. E. Yáñez, E. F. Castillo and O. Almazan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 1275–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
RFA pocket guide to ethanol, 2014.
A. J. van Maris, A. A. Winkler, M. Kuyper, W. T. de Laat, J. P. van Dijken and J. T. Pronk, Adv. Biochem. Eng./Biotechnol., 2007, 108, 179–204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Katahira, M. Ito, H. Takema, Y. Fujita, T. Tanino, T. Tanaka, H. Fukuda and A. Kondo, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2008, 43, 115–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Ha, J. M. Galazka, S. R. Kim, J. H. Choi, X. Yang, J. H. Seo, N. L. Glass, J. H. Cate and Y. S. Jin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 504–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Lynd, M. S. Laser, D. Bransby, B. E. Dale, B. Davison, R. Hamilton, M. Himmel, M. Keller, J. D. McMillan, J. Sheehan and C. E. Wyman, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Den Haan, S. H. Rose, L. R. Lynd and W. H. van Zyl, Metab. Eng., 2007, 9, 87–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Tsai, G. Goyal and W. Chen, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 7514–7520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen, J. Sun and H. Zhao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 1251–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Fan, Z. J. Zhang, X. Y. Yu, Y. X. Xue and T. W. Tan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13260–13265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakamoto, T. Hasunuma, Y. Hori, R. Yamada and A. Kondo, J. Biotechnol., 2012, 158, 203–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Enquist-Newman, A. M. Faust, D. D. Bravo, C. N. Santos, R. M. Raisner, A. Hanel, P. Sarvabhowman, C. Le, D. D. Regitsky, S. R. Cooper, L. Peereboom, A. Clark, Y. Martinez, J. Goldsmith, M. Y. Cho, P. D. Donohoue, L. Luo, B. Lamberson, P. Tamrakar, E. J. Kim, J. L. Villari, A. Gill, S. A. Tripathi, P. Karamchedu, C. J. Paredes, V. Rajgarhia, H. K. Kotlar, R. B. Bailey, D. J. Miller, N. L. Ohler, C. Swimmer and Y. Yoshikuni, Nature, 2014, 505, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Wargacki, E. Leonard, M. N. Win, D. D. Regitsky, C. N. Santos, P. B. Kim, S. R. Cooper, R. M. Raisner, A. Herman, A. B. Sivitz, A. Lakshmanaswamy, Y. Kashiyama, D. Baker and Y. Yoshikuni, Science, 2012, 335, 308–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Atsumi and J. C. Liao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 7802–7808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Atsumi, T. Hanai and J. C. Liao, Nature, 2008, 451, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Shen and J. C. Liao, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 312–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jain and Y. Yan, Microb. Cell Fact., 2011, 10, 97,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-10-97 .
R. Jain, X. Sun, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, ACS Synth. Biol., 2014 DOI:10.1021/sb500345t .
Y. Deng and S. S. Fong, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 570–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Choi, J. H. Park, T. Y. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Metab. Eng., 2012, 14, 477–486 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Srirangan, L. Akawi, X. Liu, A. Westbrook, E. J. Blondeel, M. G. Aucoin, M. Moo-Young and C. P. Chou, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2013, 6, 139,  DOI:10.1186/1754-6834-6-139 .
T. Hanai, S. Atsumi and J. C. Liao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 7814–7818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Inokuma, J. C. Liao, M. Okamoto and T. Hanai, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2010, 110, 696–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Soma, K. Inokuma, T. Tanaka, C. Ogino, A. Kondo, M. Okamoto and T. Hanai, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2012, 114, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kusakabe, T. Tatsuke, K. Tsuruno, Y. Hirokawa, S. Atsumi, J. C. Liao and T. Hanai, Metab. Eng., 2013, 20, 101–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Grousseau, J. Lu, N. Gorret, S. E. Guillouet and A. J. Sinskey, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 4277–4290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Atsumi, A. F. Cann, M. R. Connor, C. R. Shen, K. M. Smith, M. P. Brynildsen, K. J. Chou, T. Hanai and J. C. Liao, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Shen and J. C. Liao, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 312–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Si, Y. Luo, H. Xiao and H. Zhao, Metab. Eng., 2014, 22, 60–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Inui, M. Suda, S. Kimura, K. Yasuda, H. Suzuki, H. Toda, S. Yamamoto, S. Okino, N. Suzuki and H. Yukawa, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 77, 1305–1316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Atsumi, A. F. Cann, M. R. Connor, C. R. Shen, K. M. Smith, M. P. Brynildsen, K. J. Chou, T. Hanai and J. C. Liao, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Shen, E. I. Lan, Y. Dekishima, A. Baez, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 2905–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bastian, X. Liu, J. T. Meyerowitz, C. D. Snow, M. M. Chen and F. H. Arnold, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Baez, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 90, 1681–1690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Desai, C. A. Rabinovitch-Deere, Y. Tashiro and S. Atsumi, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 3727–3736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Huo, K. M. Cho, J. G. Rivera, E. Monte, C. R. Shen, Y. Yan and J. C. Liao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 346–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matsuda, J. Ishii, T. Kondo, K. Ida, H. Tezuka and A. Kondo, Microb. Cell Fact., 2013, 12, 119,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-12-119 .
D. Brat, C. Weber, W. Lorenzen, H. B. Bode and E. Boles, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2012, 5, 65,  DOI:10.1186/1754-6834-5-65 .
J. L. Avalos, G. R. Fink and G. Stephanopoulos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 335–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Cann and J. C. Liao, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 81, 89–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Connor and J. C. Liao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 5769–5775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Marcheschi, H. Li, K. Zhang, E. L. Noey, S. Kim, A. Chaubey, K. N. Houk and J. C. Liao, ACS Chem. Biol., 2012, 7, 689–697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Tseng and K. L. Prather, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17925–17930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dekishima, E. I. Lan, C. R. Shen, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11399–11401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu and M. A. G. Koffas, Biofuels, 2010, 1, 493–504 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Steen, Y. Kang, G. Bokinsky, Z. Hu, A. Schirmer, A. McClure, S. B. Del Cardayre and J. D. Keasling, Nature, 2010, 463, 559–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Handke, S. A. Lynch and R. T. Gill, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 28–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Li, A. Agrawal and K. Y. San, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 713–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, X. Zhang, A. Agrawal and K. Y. San, Metab. Eng., 2012, 14, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, H. Vora and C. Khosla, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 333–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, H. Vora and C. Khosla, Metab. Eng., 2010, 12, 378–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, T. Liu, F. Zhu and C. Khosla, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 18643–18648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, Q. Gu, W. Wang, L. Wong, A. G. Bower, C. H. Collins and M. A. Koffas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1409,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms2425 .
P. Javidpour, J. H. Pereira, E. B. Goh, R. P. McAndrew, S. M. Ma, G. D. Friedland, J. D. Keasling, S. R. Chhabra, P. D. Adams and H. R. Beller, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2014, 80, 497–505 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Guo, J. Zhu, Z. Deng and T. Liu, Metab. Eng., 2014, 22, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Clomburg, J. E. Vick, M. D. Blankschien, M. Rodriguez-Moya and R. Gonzalez, ACS Synth. Biol., 2012, 1, 541–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dellomonaco, J. M. Clomburg, E. N. Miller and R. Gonzalez, Nature, 2011, 476, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Melis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5531–5539 CAS .
P. P. Peralta-Yahya, F. Zhang, S. B. Del Cardayre and J. D. Keasling, Nature, 2012, 488, 320–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lieber, J. Catlett, N. Madayiputhiya, R. Nandakumar, M. M. Lopez, W. W. Metcalf and N. R. Buan, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e107563 Search PubMed .
A. Schirmer, M. A. Rude, X. Li, E. Popova and S. B. Del Cardayre, Science, 2010, 329, 559–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Rahman, B. H. Sung, J.-Y. Yi, L. M. Bui, J. H. Lee and S. C. Kim, J. Biotechnol., 2014, 192, 187–191,  DOI:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.10.014 .
Y. J. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Nature, 2013, 502, 571–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kallio, A. Pásztor, K. Thiel, M. K. Akhtar and P. R. Jones, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 DOI:10.1038/ncomms5731 .
T. Maeda, V. Sanchez-Torres and T. K. Wood, Microb. Biotechnol., 2008, 1, 30–39 CAS .
K. T. Tran, T. Maeda and T. K. Wood, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 4757–4770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Celinska, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 519–530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Kraus, Clean, 2008, 36, 648–651 CAS .
C. E. Nakamura and G. M. Whited, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2003, 14, 454–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Burk, Int. Sugar J., 2010, 112, 30–35 CAS .
X. Shen, Y. Lin, R. Jain, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 39, 1725–1729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X.-J. Ji and H. Huang, in Bioprocessing of Renewable Resources to Commodity Bioproducts, ed. V. S. Bisaria and A. Kondo, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1st edn,  2014, pp. 261–288 Search PubMed .
C. Ma, A. Wang, J. Qin, L. Li, X. Ai, T. Jiang, H. Tang and P. Xu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009, 82, 49–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, C. C. Lee and J. C. Liao, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 3914–3917 CAS .
S. Ui, Y. Takusagawa, T. Sato, T. Ohtsuki, A. Mimura, M. Ohkuma and T. Kudo, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 2004, 39, 533–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Afschar, C. E. V. Rosscli, R. Jonas, A. Q. Chanto and K. Schaller, J. Biotechnol., 1993, 27, 317–329 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Ji, H. Huang, J. G. Zhu, L. J. Ren, Z. K. Nie, J. Du and S. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1751–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Hao, J. Zhu, J. Chu, D. Wei and Y. Shen, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 37, 857–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ui, Y. Okajima, A. Mimura, H. Kanai and T. Kudo, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1997, 84, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Ma, A. Wang, F. Tao and P. Xu, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 115, 111–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yim, R. Haselbeck, W. Niu, C. Pujol-Baxley, A. Bugard, J. Boldt, J. Khandurina, J. D. Trawick, R. E. Osterhout, R. Stephen, J. Estadilla, S. Teisan, H. B. Schreyer, S. Andrae, T. H. Yang, S. Y. Lee, M. J. Burk and S. V. Dien, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2011, 7, 445–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Hwang, J. H. Park, J. H. Kim, M. K. Kong, J. W. Kim, J. W. Park, K. M. Cho and P. C. Lee, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2014, 111, 1374–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, Y. Tan, H. Zhu, K. Zhao and W. Shen, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 1628–1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Saxena, P. Anand, S. Saran and J. Isar, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 895–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Jang, B. Kim, J. H. Shin, Y. J. Choi, S. Choi, C. W. Song, J. Lee, G. H. Park and S. Y. Lee, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2012, 109, 2437–2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gonzalez-Pajuelo, I. Meynial-Salles, F. Mendes, J. C. Andrade, I. Vasconcelos and P. Soucaille, Metab. Eng., 2005, 7, 329–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tobimatsu, H. Kajiura and T. Toraya, Arch. Microbiol., 2000, 174, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Honda, T. Toraya and S. Fukui, J. Bacteriol., 1980, 143, 1458–1465 CAS .
X. L. Xu, G. L. Zhang, L. W. Wang, B. B. Ma and C. Li, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2009, 56, 108–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, B. Ma, X. Xu, C. Li and L. Wang, Biochem. Eng. J., 2007, 37, 256–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Xu, N. N. Guo, Z. M. Zheng, X. J. Ou, H. J. Liu and D. H. Liu, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 965–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Raynaud, P. Sarcabal, I. Meynial-Salles, C. Croux and P. Soucaille, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 5010–5015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. T. Maervoet, M. D. Mey, J. Beauprez, S. D. Maeseneire and W. K. Soetaert, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 189–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Chen and Y. Li, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2008, 18, 1519–1524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Altaras and D. C. Cameron, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1999, 65, 1180–1185 CAS .
S. J. Berrios-Rivera, K. Y. San and G. N. Bennett, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 30, 34–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Saxena, P. Anand, S. Saran, J. Isar and L. Agarwal, Indian J. Microbiol., 2010, 50, 2–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boronat and J. Aguilar, J. Bacteriol., 1981, 147, 181–185 CAS .
K. Tran-Din and G. Gottaschalk, Arch. Microbiol., 1985, 142, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sanchez-Rivera, D. C. Cameron and C. L. Cooney, Biotechnol. Lett., 1987, 9, 449–454 CrossRef .
D. C. Cameron, N. E. Altaras, M. L. Hoffman and A. J. Shaw, Biotechnol. Prog., 1998, 14, 116–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Altaras and D. C. Cameron, Biotechnol. Prog., 2000, 16, 940–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joon-Young, E.-S. Choi and M.-K. Oh, J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 18, 1797–1802 Search PubMed .
J. Joon-Young, E.-S. Choi, H. S. Yun, J. Lee and M. K. Oh, J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 21, 846–853 CrossRef .
J. M. Clomburg and R. Gonzalez, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2011, 108, 867–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and J. C. Liao, Microb. Cell Fact., 2013, 12, 4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Benthin and J. Villadsen, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1995, 42, 826–829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, L. P. Yomano, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Lett., 2005, 27, 1891–1896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Grabar, S. Zhou, K. T. Shanmugam, L. P. Yomano and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Lett., 2006, 28, 1527–1535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, D. D. Niu, K. M. Tian, X. Z. Chen, B. A. Prior, W. Shen, G. Y. Shi, S. Singh and Z. X. Wang, Metab. Eng., 2012, 14, 560–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mazumdar, M. D. Blankschien, J. M. Clomburg and R. Gonzalez, Microb. Cell Fact., 2013, 12, 7,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-12-7 .
D. Niu, K. Tian, B. A. Prior, M. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Lu and S. Singh, Microb. Cell Fact., 2014, 13, 78,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-13-78 .
A. Cukalovic and C. V. Stevens, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2008, 2, 505–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Adsul, M. S. Singhvi, S. A. Gaikaiwari and D. V. Gokhale, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 4304–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vasudevan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1995, 25, 176–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Muzumdar, S. B. Sawant and V. G. Pangarkar, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2004, 8, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jantama, X. Zhang, J. C. Moore, K. T. Shanmugam, S. A. Svoronos and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 101, 881–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Vemuri, M. A. Eiteman and E. Altman, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2002, 28, 325–332 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jantama, M. J. Haupt, S. A. Svoronos, X. Zhang, J. C. Moore, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 99, 1140–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, K. Jantama, J. C. Moore, L. R. Jarboe, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20180–20185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Roa Engel, W. M. van Gulik, L. Marang, L. A. van der Wielen and A. J. Straathof, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2011, 48, 39–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Goldberg, J. S. Rokem and O. Pines, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2006, 81, 1601–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, K. Nie, X. Zhang, S. Liu, M. Wang, L. Deng, F. Wang and T. Tan, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 163, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, L. Liu and J. Chen, Microb. Cell Fact., 2012, 11, 24,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-11-24 .
N. Li, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. J. Tang, T. Chen and X. Zhao, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 174, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Cao, G. T. Tsao, J. Du and C. S. Gong, Adv. Biochem. Eng./Biotechnol., 1999, 65, 243–280 CrossRef .
C. W. Song, D. I. Kim, S. Choi, J. W. Jang and S. Y. Lee, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 2025–2034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Curran, J. M. Leavitt, A. S. Karim and H. S. Alper, Metab. Eng., 2013, 15, 55–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Lin, Q. Huang, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79, 4024–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Draths and J. W. Frost, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 399 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wei, K. M. Draths and J. W. Frost, Biotechnol. Prog., 2002, 18, 201–211 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Sun, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, Metab. Eng., 2014, 23, 62–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Lin, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2478–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Moon, S. H. Hong, T. Y. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Biochem. Eng. J., 2008, 40, 312–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jantama, M. J. Haupt, S. A. Svoronos, X. Zhang, J. C. Moore, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 99, 1140–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 427–434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Zelle, E. d. Hulster, W. A. v. Winden, P. d. Waard, C. Dijkema, A. A. Winkler, J.-M. A. Geertman, J. P. v. Dijken, J. T. Pronk and A. J. A. v. Maris, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 2766–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, Y. Zhou and S.-T. Yang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 2105–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kumar, S. Ashok and S. Park, Biotechnol. Adv., 2013, 31, 945–961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. D. Lynch, R. T. Gill and T. Warnecke-Lipscomb, US Pat., PCT/US2010/050436,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, Z. Li, K. Shimizu and Q. Ye, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 103, 351–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Honjo, K. Tsuruno, T. Tatsuke, M. Sato and T. Hanai, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.jbiosc.2014.12.023 .
W. Leuchtenberger, K. Huthmacher and K. Drauz, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2005, 69, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Ikeda, Microbial production of l-amino acids, Springer,  2003, pp. 1–35 Search PubMed .
T. Hermann, J. Biotechnol., 2003, 104, 155–172 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, Amino Acids, 2009, 37, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, Amino Acids, 2013, 45, 407–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. F. Wendisch, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 30, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Becker and C. Wittmann, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2012, 23, 718–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinoshita, J. Gen. Appl. Microbiol., 1957, 3, 193–205 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Peters-Wendisch, B. Schiel, V. F. Wendisch, E. Katsoulidis, B. Mockel, H. Sahm and B. J. Eikmanns, J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2001, 3, 295–300 CAS .
K. Sawada, S. Zen-In, M. Wada and A. Yokota, Metab. Eng., 2010, 12, 401–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, T. Hirasawa, Y. Sato, K. Nagahisa, C. Furusawa and H. Shimizu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009, 81, 1097–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Fukuda, T. Hirasawa, K. Nagahisa, K. Nagai, M. Wachi and H. Shimizu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 86, 911–920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Asakura, E. Kimura, Y. Usuda, Y. Kawahara, K. Matsui, T. Osumi and T. Nakamatsu, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 1308–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Zhang, X.-X. Wei, S.-P. Ouyang, Q. Wu and G.-Q. Chen, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 77, 1297–1304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, S.-P. Ouyang, J. Kim and G.-Q. Chen, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 132, 273–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chinen, Y. I. Kozlov, Y. Hara, H. Izui and H. Yasueda, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2007, 103, 262–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Buchholz, A. Schwentner, B. Brunnenkan, C. Gabris, S. Grimm, R. Gerstmeir, R. Takors, B. J. Eikmanns and B. Blombach, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79, 5566–5575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Becker, C. Klopprogge, H. Schröder and C. Wittmann, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 7866–7869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Becker, C. Klopprogge, A. Herold, O. Zelder, C. J. Bolten and C. Wittmann, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 132, 99–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Becker, O. Zelder, S. Häfner, H. Schröder and C. Wittmann, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 159–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Chávez-Béjar, A. R. Lara, H. López, G. Hernández-Chávez, A. Martinez, O. T. Ramírez, F. Bolívar and G. Gosset, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 3284–3290 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lütke-Eversloh and G. Stephanopoulos, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 75, 103–110 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Polen, M. Krämer, J. Bongaerts, M. Wubbolts and V. F. Wendisch, J. Biotechnol., 2005, 115, 221–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tatarko and T. Romeo, Curr. Microbiol., 2001, 43, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ikeda and R. Katsumata, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1994, 78, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikeda and R. Katsumata, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 1995, 59, 1600–1602 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikeda, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2006, 69, 615–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Sprenger, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 75, 739–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Backman, M. J. O'Connor, A. Maruya, E. Rudd, D. McKay, R. Balakrishnan, M. Radjai, V. DiPasquantonio, D. Shoda and R. Hatch, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1990, 589, 16–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Patnaik, R. R. Zolandz, D. A. Green and D. F. Kraynie, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 99, 741–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park and S. Y. Lee, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 491–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, J. H. Park, T. Y. Kim, H. U. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Mol. Syst. Biol., 2007, 3 DOI:10.1038/msb4100196 .
P. Peters-Wendisch, M. Stolz, H. Etterich, N. Kennerknecht, H. Sahm and L. Eggeling, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 7139–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nakamori, S.-i. Kobayashi, C. Kobayashi and H. Takagi, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1998, 64, 1607–1611 CAS .
M. Ikeda, S. Mitsuhashi, K. Tanaka and M. Hayashi, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 1635–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jojima, M. Fujii, E. Mori, M. Inui and H. Yukawa, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 87, 159–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. K. Jensen and V. F. Wendisch, Microb. Cell Fact., 2013, 12, 63,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-12-63 .
J. Kalinowski, B. Bathe, D. Bartels, N. Bischoff, M. Bott, A. Burkovski, N. Dusch, L. Eggeling, B. J. Eikmanns and L. Gaigalat, J. Biotechnol., 2003, 104, 5–25 CrossRef CAS .
G. Seibold, M. Auchter, S. Berens, J. Kalinowski and B. J. Eikmanns, J. Biotechnol., 2006, 124, 381–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Georgi, D. Rittmann and V. F. Wendisch, Metab. Eng., 2005, 7, 291–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, K. Niermann and V. F. Wendisch, J. Biotechnol., 2011, 154, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Meiswinkel, V. Gopinath, S. N. Lindner, K. M. Nampoothiri and V. F. Wendisch, Microb. Biotechnol., 2013, 6, 131–140 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Takahashi, J. Shirakawa, T. Tsuchidate, N. Okai, K. Hatada, H. Nakayama, T. Tateno, C. Ogino and A. Kondo, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2012, 51, 171–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shi, J. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Li and Y. Xie, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2013, 40, 1285–1296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin and Y. Yan, Microb. Cell Fact., 2012, 11, 42,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-11-42 .
Y. Lin, X. Sun, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, ACS Synth. Biol., 2014, 3, 497–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Lin, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, ACS Synth. Biol., 2014 DOI:10.1021/sb500303q .
T. Vogt, Mol. Plant, 2010, 3, 2–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Scalbert, I. T. Johnson and M. Saltmarsh, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2005, 81, 215S–217S CAS .
C. Manach, A. Scalbert, C. Morand, C. Remesy and L. Jimenez, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2004, 79, 727–747 CAS .
D. K. Ro and C. J. Douglas, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 2600–2607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Vannelli, W. Wei Qi, J. Sweigard, A. A. Gatenby and F. S. Sariaslani, Metab. Eng., 2007, 9, 142–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Kang, O. Choi, J. K. Lee, B. Y. Hwang, T. B. Uhm and Y. S. Hong, Microb. Cell Fact., 2012, 11, 153,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-11-153 .
Y. H. Kim, T. Kwon, H. J. Yang, W. Kim, H. Youn, J. Y. Lee and B. Youn, Protein Expression Purif., 2011, 79, 149–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kojima and W. Takeuchi, J. Biochem., 1989, 105, 265–270 CAS .
M. Berner, D. Krug, C. Bihlmaier, A. Vente, R. Muller and A. Bechthold, J. Bacteriol., 2006, 188, 2666–2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Furuya and K. Kino, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2013 DOI:10.1007/s00253-013-4958-y .
Q. Huang, Y. Lin and Y. Yan, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 3188–3196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yao, C. S. Wang, J. Qiao and G. R. Zhao, Metab. Eng., 2013, 19, 79–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Kim, W. D. Jung, H. Mok and J. H. Ahn, Microb. Cell Fact., 2013, 12, 15,  DOI:10.1186/1475-2859-12-15 .
S. E. Bloch and C. Schmidt-Dannert, ChemBioChem, 2014, 15, 2393–2401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Miyahisa, M. Kaneko, N. Funa, H. Kawasaki, H. Kojima, Y. Ohnishi and S. Horinouchi, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2005, 68, 498–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, A. Kohli and M. A. Koffas, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 5610–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Leonard, K. H. Lim, P. N. Saw and M. A. Koffas, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 3877–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Leonard, Y. Yan, Z. L. Fowler, Z. Li, C. G. Lim, K. H. Lim and M. A. Koffas, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2008, 5, 257–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, S. Ranganathan, Z. L. Fowler, C. D. Maranas and M. A. Koffas, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 578–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, O. Yu, G. Du, J. Zhou and J. Chen, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2014 DOI:10.1128/AEM.02411-14 .
J. Wu, T. Zhou, G. Du, J. Zhou and J. Chen, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e101492 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, R. Jain and Y. Yan, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 26, 71–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Austin, M. E. Bowman, J. L. Ferrer, J. Schroder and J. P. Noel, Chem. Biol., 2004, 11, 1179–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Beekwilder, R. Wolswinkel, H. Jonker, R. Hall, C. H. de Vos and A. Bovy, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 5670–5672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Z. Li, J. Li, X. Pan, R. E. Cahoon, J. G. Jaworski, X. Wang, J. M. Jez, F. Chen and O. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13030–13031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sydor, S. Schaffer and E. Boles, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 3361–3363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Lim, Z. L. Fowler, T. Hueller, S. Schaffer and M. A. Koffas, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 3451–3460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin and Y. Yan, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2014, 111, 1895–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Furuya and K. Kino, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 2853–2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. F. Bourgaud, R. Larbat, S. Doerper, E. Gontier, S. Kellner and U. Matern, Phytochem. Rev., 2006, 5, 293–308 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Sun, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, Metab. Eng., 2013, 18, 69–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Shen, Q. Yuan and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2603,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms3603 .
J. Bohlmann and C. I. Keeling, Plant J., 2008, 54, 656–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Lindahl, M. E. Olsson, P. Mercke, O. Tollbom, J. Schelin, M. Brodelius and P. E. Brodelius, Biotechnol. Lett., 2006, 28, 571–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lenihan, H. Tsuruta, D. Diola, N. S. Renninger and R. Regentin, Biotechnol. Prog., 2008, 24, 1026–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. Martin, Y. Yoshikuni and J. D. Keasling, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 75, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. J. Martin, D. J. Pitera, S. T. Withers, J. D. Newman and J. D. Keasling, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 796–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Pitera, C. J. Paddon, J. D. Newman and J. D. Keasling, Metab. Eng., 2007, 9, 193–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsuruta, C. J. Paddon, D. Eng, J. R. Lenihan, T. Horning, L. C. Anthony, R. Regentin, J. D. Keasling, N. S. Renninger and J. D. Newman, PLoS One, 2009, 4, e4489 Search PubMed .
M. C. Chang, R. A. Eachus, W. Trieu, D. K. Ro and J. D. Keasling, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 274–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Dietrich, Y. Yoshikuni, K. J. Fisher, F. X. Woolard, D. Ockey, D. J. McPhee, N. S. Renninger, M. C. Chang, D. Baker and J. D. Keasling, ACS Chem. Biol., 2009, 4, 261–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Marienhagen and M. Bott, J. Biotechnol., 2013, 163, 166–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, C. A. Roessner, R. Croteau and A. I. Scott, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2001, 9, 2237–2242 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ajikumar, W. H. Xiao, K. E. Tyo, Y. Wang, F. Simeon, E. Leonard, O. Mucha, T. H. Phon, B. Pfeifer and G. Stephanopoulos, Science, 2010, 330, 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Engels, P. Dahm and S. Jennewein, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 201–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Misawa, M. Nakagawa, K. Kobayashi, S. Yamano, Y. Izawa, K. Nakamura and K. Harashima, J. Bacteriol., 1990, 172, 6704–6712 CAS .
N. Misawa, Y. Satomi, K. Kondo, A. Yokoyama, S. Kajiwara, T. Saito, T. Ohtani and W. Miki, J. Bacteriol., 1995, 177, 6575–6584 CAS .
S. Kajiwara, P. D. Fraser, K. Kondo and N. Misawa, Biochem. J., 1997, 324(pt 2), 421–426 CAS .
S. W. Kim and J. D. Keasling, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 72, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yoon, S. H. Lee, A. Das, H. K. Ryu, H. J. Jang, J. Y. Kim, D. K. Oh, J. D. Keasling and S. W. Kim, J. Biotechnol., 2009, 140, 218–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Farmer and J. C. Liao, Biotechnol. Prog., 2001, 17, 57–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Farmer and J. C. Liao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 533–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alper, K. Miyaoku and G. Stephanopoulos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 612–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kang, Y. M. Lee, S. H. Yoon, J. H. Kim, S. W. Ock, K. H. Jung, Y. C. Shin, J. D. Keasling and S. W. Kim, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2005, 91, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Jin and G. Stephanopoulos, Metab. Eng., 2007, 9, 337–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, N. H. Kim, S. J. Yeom, S. W. Kim and D. K. Oh, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 90, 489–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Nam, J. G. Choi, J. H. Lee, S. W. Kim and D. K. Oh, Biotechnol. Lett., 2013, 35, 265–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Ye and S. K. Bhatia, Biotechnol. Lett., 2012, 34, 1405–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Na, S. M. Yoo, H. Chung, H. Park, J. H. Park and S. Y. Lee, Nat. Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 170–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wang, F. J. Isaacs, P. A. Carr, Z. Z. Sun, G. Xu, C. R. Forest and G. M. Church, Nature, 2009, 460, 894–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Dueber, G. C. Wu, G. R. Malmirchegini, T. S. Moon, C. J. Petzold, A. V. Ullal, K. L. Prather and J. D. Keasling, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. Na, J. M. Park, J. Lee, S. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2012, 8, 536–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, T. Y. Kim, Y. S. Jang, S. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 370–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Na, T. Y. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 2010, 13, 363–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Xinxiao Sun, Xiaolin Shen and Rachit Jain contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Xinxiao Sun
	Xinxiao Sun obtained his BS degree in Pharmaceutical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2008). He then joined Prof. Qipeng Yuan's group and is now a PhD candidate. Since 2012, he has been working as a visiting student in Dr Yajun Yan's group. His research work mainly focuses on metabolic engineering and synthetic biology.

Xiaolin Shen
	Xiaolin Shen obtained her PhD degree from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2013). From 2011 to 2012 she was working as a visiting student in Dr Yajun Yan's group and her research focus is on biosynthesis of chemicals. From 2013, she has been working as a lecturer in Beijing University of Chemical Technology. She is currently interested in metabolic engineering and protein engineering.

Rachit Jain
	Rachit Jain is a Doctoral Candidate at the University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. He has been working in Dr Yajun Yan's research group since 2010. He obtained BE (2009) in Biotechnology from Visvesvaraya Technological University, India. His current research interests include the biological manufacture of high value and bulk chemicals by metabolic engineering and protein engineering.

Yuheng Lin
	Yuheng Lin is the Chief Technology Officer of BiotecEra Inc. He received his PhD degree in 2014 from the University of Georgia. His research is focused on the development of enzymatic and microbial platforms for the cost-effective production of biofuels, bulk chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The projects involve multiple disciplines including biochemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology.

Yajun Yan
	Yajun Yan is an Assistant Professor of BioChemical Engineering at the College of Engineering, the University of Georgia. He obtained BS (1999) and MS (2002) in Biochemical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, and PhD (2008) in Chemical and Biological Engineering from the State University of New York at Buffalo. He was a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California, Los Angeles from 2008–2010. His research focuses on developing enzymatic and microbial approaches for the production of pharmaceutically important compounds, fuels and renewable chemicals. He founded BiotecEra Inc. in 2014, to commercialize technologies related to the microbial production of value-added chemicals.

Qipeng Yuan
	Qipeng Yuan is a professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University (1997). He then started postdoctoral research with Prof. Runyu Ma in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (1997–1999). His research interests cover many fields in biochemical engineering, metabolic engineering, especially biosynthesis of natural products.

Biofuels	Alcohols	Ethanol	Fuel additive, plastics, solvents, p-xylene, isobutyl acetate, isobutyl esters	
S. cerevisiae/DEHU and mannitol	36.2	
15

1-Propanol	
E. coli/glucose	10.8	
23

Isopropanol	
E. coli/glucose	143	
26

1-Butnaol	
E. coli/glucose	30	
35

Isobutanol	
E. coli/glucose	50	
37

Fatty acids	
	Fuel additive, detergents, paints, food products, cosmetics, etc.	
E. coli/glucose	6.9	
60

Alkanes/alkenes	
	Natural gas, gasoline, diesel, aviation kerosene	
E. coli/glucose	0.58	
66

Other	Hydrogen	Fuel	
E. coli/glycerol	1 mol mol−1	
69



Bulk chemicals	Diols	2,3-Butanediol	Polymers, antifreeze, perfumes, printing ink, food supplements, pharmaceuticals, fumigants, solvents, cosmetics, detergents	
Serratia marcescens/sucrose	152	
81

1,4-Butanediol	
E. coli/glucose	18	
84

1,3-Propanediol	
E. coli/glucose	135	
2

1,2-Propanediol	
E. coli/glucose	5.1	
21

Organic acids	Lactic acid	Pharmaceuticals, polymer precursors, food additives, antibacterial agents, solvents, detergents	
E. coli/glucose	142.2	
115

Succinic acid	
E. coli/glucose	99.2	
121

Fumaric acid	
E. coli/glycerol	41.5	
128

Muconic acid	
E. coli/glucose	38.6	
134

Malic acid	
S. cerevisiae/glucose	59	
140

3-Hydroxypropionic acid	
K. pneumoniaea/glycerol	49.3	
144



Pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals	Amino acids	
L-Glutamate	Feed additives, food nutraceuticals, hormones, antibiotics, anti-cancer drugs	
C. glutamicum/glucose	37	
159


L-Lysine	
C. glutamicum/glucose	120	
165


L-Phenylalanine	
E. coli/glucose	50	
172


L-Tyrosine	
E. coli/glucose	55	
175

Hydroxycinnamic acids	
p-Coumaric acid	Pharmaceuticals, supplements in foods, cosmetics	
E. coli/glucose	0.974	
198

Caffeic acid	
E. coli/glucose and glycerol	0.776	
203

Flavonoids	Naringenin	
E. coli/glucose	0.474	
211

Pinocembrin	
E. coli/glucose	0.429	
209

Stilbenoids	Resveratrol	
E. coli/p-coumaric acid	2.3	
219

Coumarins	4-Hydroxycoumarin	
E. coli/glycerol	0.5	
224

Isoprenoids	Amorpha-4,11-diene	
E. coli/glucose	27.4	
231

Taxadiene	
E. coli/glycerol	1	
236

Lycopene	
E. coli/glucose, glycerol, L-arabinose	1.35	
248

β-Carotene	
E. coli/glycerol	2.47	
249


 	Fig. 1  Microbial production of higher alcohols by keto acid pathways. ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; KDC, keto acid decarboxylase; LeuABCD: leucine biosynthesis operon.	 

 	Fig. 2  Microbial production of alcohols using CoA-dependent pathways. AcoAT, acetoacetyl-CoA transferase; ADC, acetoacetate decarboxylase; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; AdhE2, aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase; ALDH, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase; AtoB, acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase; BktB, β-ketothiolase; Crt, crotonase; Hbd, acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase; Ter, trans-enoyl-coenzyme A reductase.	 

 	Fig. 3  Biosynthesis of fatty acids, biodiesel, alkanes/alkenes and hydrogen. AAR, fatty acyl-CoA reductase; AccABCD, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACR, fatty acyl-ACP reductase; ADD, aldehyde decarbonylase; FabA, 3-hydroxydecanoyl-ACP dehydratase; FabD, malonyl-CoA-ACP transacylase; FabH/B/F, β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase; FabG, 3-oxoacyl-ACP reductase; FabI, enoyl-ACP reductase; FadD, fatty acyl-CoA synthetase; FHL, formate hydrogen lyase; PFL, pyruvate-formate lyase; TesA, fatty acyl-ACP thioesterase.	 

 	Fig. 4  Microbial routes for the production of 2,3-butanediol, 1,4-butanediol, 1,3-propanediol and 1,2-propanediol. Intermediates: 4HB, 4-hydroxybutyrate; 4HB-CoA, 4-hydroxybutyrl-CoA; 4HBA, 4-hydroxybutyraldehyde; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone-phosphate; G3P, glycerol 3-phosphate; GA3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; OAA, oxaloacetate; SSA, succinyl semialdehyde. Enzymes: 4HBd, 4-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase; ALDC, acetolactate decarboxylase; ALS, acetolactate synthase; AdhE2, aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase; Cat1, succinate-CoA transferase; Cat2, 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA transferase; Dar1, glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; DhaB123, glycerol dehydratase; FucO, 1,2-PDO oxidoreductase; GldA, glycerol dehydrogenase; Gpp2, glycerol 3-phosphate phosphatase; MgsA, methylglyoxal synthase; sADH, stereospecific secondary alcohol dehydrogenase; SucA, 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase; SucD, succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase; YdjG, methylglyoxal reductase; YqhD, 1,3-PDO oxidoreductase.	 

 	Fig. 5  Engineering and extending shikimate pathway for the production of muconic acid. Intermediates: PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; E4P, erythrose 4-phosphate; DAHP, 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate; 3-DHS, 3-dihydroxy shikimate; TYR, tyrosine; TRP, tryptophan; PHE, phenylalanine. Enzymes: AroF/G/H, 2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphoheptonate aldolase; AroB, 3-dehydroquinate synthase; AroD, 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase; AroE, shikimate dehydrogenase; AroL/K, shikimate kinase; AroA, 3-phosphoshikimate-1-carboxyvinyltransferase; AroC, chorismate synthase; PDC, protocatechuate decarboxylase; CDO, catechol 1,2-dioxygenase; ADO, anthranilate 1,2 dioxygenase; TrpEfbrG, anthranilate synthase (fed-back inhibition resistance mutant); ICS, isochorismate synthase; IPL, isochorismate pyruvate lyase; SMO, salicylate1-monoxygenase; EntC, isochorismate synthase; EntB, isochorismatase; EntA, 2,3-dihydro-2,3-DHBA dehydrogenase; BDC, 2,3-DHBA decarboxylase.	 

 	Fig. 6  Biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids. 4CL, 4-coumaroyl-CoA ligase; C2′H, p-coumaroyl-CoA o-hydroxylase; C3H, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase; C4H, cinnamate 4-hydroxylase; CHI, chalcone isomerase; CHS, chalcone synthase; F6′H, feruloyl-CoA o-hydroxylase; ICS, isochorismate synthase; IPL, isochorismate pyruvate lyase; OMT, 3-O-methyltransferase; PAL, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; PQS, Pseudomonas quinolone synthase; SCL, salicoyl-CoA lyase; TAL, tyrosine ammonia lyase; STS, stilbene synthase.	 

 	Fig. 7  Biosynthesis of isoprenoids. Intermediates: DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; FPP, farnesyl diphosphate; GA3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl diphosphate; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; MEP, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate; MVA, mevalonate. Enzymes: ADS, amorphadiene synthase; AMO, amorphadiene oxidase; CPR, cytochrome P450 reductase; FPPS, FPP synthase; GGPPS, GGPP synthase; IPPI, IPP isomerase; LCY, lycopene β-cyclase; PD, phytoene desaturase; PS, phytoene synthase; TS, taxadiene synthase.	 
Footnote
† Xinxiao Sun, Xiaolin Shen and Rachit Jain contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
