A Mini-Review: MXene composites for sodium/potassium-ion batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR04111D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR04111D
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15993-16007A Mini-Review: MXene composites for sodium/potassium-ion batteries

        
          
            Muhammad Kashif 
            Aslam
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Maowen 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute for Clean energy and Materials, School of Materials and Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, PR China
bKey Laboratory for Advance Materials and Technologies of Clean Energies, Chongqing 400715, PR China. E-mail: xumaowen@swu.edu.cn
Received 
      29th May 2020
    , Accepted 30th June 2020First published on 30th June 2020AbstractMXenes, as a new type of two-dimensional layered structure material, have attracted much attention. MXenes have high electronic conductivity, a large specific area, excellent mechanical properties and a unique layered structure and have been extensively used in energy storage, adsorption, catalysis and other fields. In recent years, Mxenes and their composite materials have been widely used in the field of secondary batteries. Although oxides, sulfides and other materials have high capacity, there are problems such as low conductivity, volume expansion in the reaction process, poor cycling stability, etc. Therefore, building composite materials with MXenes can not only improve the capacity but also enhance the electronic conductivity of the materials, effectively alleviate volume expansion in the reaction process, and achieve better electrochemical performance. This article reviews the latest research status of MXenes, the synthesis methods, properties and application of MXenes and their composite materials in sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs), briefly introduces the research background of SIBs, PIBs and MXenes, and focuses on the application research of MXene composite materials in SIBs and PIBs, including classification according to sulfide, oxide and carbon materials. Finally, the development and application prospects of MXenes and their composite materials are summarized.Muhammad Kashif AslamMuhammad Kashif Aslam is a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Maowen Xu at Southwest University. He received his Ph.D. degree (2019) in Metal–Organic-Framework (MOF) derived Nanomaterials and others for Energy Storage from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University under the supervision of Prof. Changguo Chen. His current research interest is nanostructure engineering and the synthesis of electrode materials for sodium-ion, sodium–sulfur and lithium–sulfur batteries.Maowen XuMaowen Xu is a professor at the Faculty of Materials and Energy, Southwest University. He earned his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou University. He worked as a postdoctoral scholar in Prof. J. B. Goodenough's group of the University of Texas at Austin from 2011–2013. He has published over 180 peer-reviewed journal papers. His current research is focused on the design and synthesis of electrode materials for sodium-ion batteries and lithium/sodium–sulfur batteries.
Introduction
In recent years, the development and utilization of renewable energy have become the most important energy revolution from fossil fuels to sustainable energy supply and clean energy utilization.1,2 Using solar energy, wind energy, tidal energy and other renewable energy to generate electricity can effectively reduce greenhouse gas emissions and are primary alternatives for the power industry in the future. However, renewable energy is unstable, intermittent, and greatly affected by the environment and climate, and requires efficient energy storage equipment. Electrochemical energy storage has the advantages of high energy density, long service life, environmental protection and no memory effect, and is considered as an ideal energy storage method. Among possible solutions, rechargeable secondary batteries and supercapacitors are the most effective electrochemical energy storage technologies, and they have been widely used in portable electronic equipment and electric vehicles, and are being gradually extended to smart grids, micro grid energy storage, aerospace and other fields.3 Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are leading the market of portable and intelligent electronic devices due to their high energy density, excellent cycling stability and environmental friendliness, and have developed rapidly.4–6 However, the amount of lithium in the Earth's crust is limited and unevenly distributed. With the development of research and application of LIBs, lithium resources will be in short supply. The cost of LIBs will increase significantly with the shortage of lithium resources, which is challenging to meet the increasing demand for electric vehicles and energy storage systems.
Sodium and lithium are in the first group of the periodic table and have similar physical and chemical properties. The content of metallic sodium in the Earth's crust is 2.83%, ranking the sixth most abundant, and has the characteristics of abundant resources and low cost. Therefore, SIBs based on the sodium-ion reaction have been paid more and more attention from academia. The chemical properties and reserves of potassium are similar to those of sodium.7–9 The content of potassium in the crust is 2.09%, next to sodium. K ions show lower desolvation energy (119.2 kJ mol−1, based on propylene carbonate solvent), and can form smaller solvation ions than Li+ (215.8 kJ mol−1) and Na+ (158.2 kJ mol−1), with faster diffusion kinetics.10,11 Besides, in an organic non-aqueous electrolyte, the electrode potential of K/K+ is lower than that of Na/Na+ (−2.93 V vs. SHE). The low potential is beneficial to improve the energy density of the battery. For PIBs and SIBs, since Al does not form an alloy with sodium or potassium, Al foil can be used as the negative current collector, while LIBs can only use more expensive Cu foil as the current collector, further reducing the cost of the battery. Under the traction of electric vehicles and energy storage applications, PIBs with low cost, long life and high energy density have attracted more and more attention. However, the radius of K+ (1.38 Å) is much larger than that of Li+ (0.76 Å) and Na+ (1.02 Å), which leads to slow reaction kinetics and large volume expansion of active materials during charging and discharging, which shows rapid attenuation, and presents new challenges to the development of electrode and electrolyte materials. Therefore, the design of high-performance anode and cathode materials is of great significance for the development of PIBs.12
Since graphene was successfully prepared by Geim of Manchester University in 2004,14 two-dimensional materials have come into people's view. Transition metal sulfur compounds, two-dimensional metal–organic frameworks, metal coordination polymers and other materials have attracted more and more attention.13,14 In 2011, Gogotsi et al. first obtained a new two-dimensional transition metal carbide and nitride (MXene) by selective etching of the Al layer in the Ti3AlC2 phase with hydrofluoric acid (HF), which aroused great interest.15–18
MXene materials have the characteristics of both metals and ceramics, with high rigidity, high corrosion resistance, high electronic conductivity and excellent thermal conductivity. In addition, MXenes also have good hydrophilicity, flexibility and plasticity,19 and have gradually become a research hotspot of two-dimensional materials.20 They have been widely used in energy storage,21–24 catalysis,25 methanol oxidation and hydrogen evolution,26 supercapacitors27–30 and other fields. MXenes have been a research hotspot in the battery field since 2013 (Fig. 1), and relevant research papers have been growing rapidly.
 Fig. 1  The publication record of MXenes, MXene energy and graphene (source: web of science, including expected publications in the year 2020). 
Furthermore, in recent studies, titanium-based MXenes have also been used as precursors for the preparation of oxides, sulfides and nitrides, such as TiOxNy/C,31 TiO2/C,32 NaTi1.5O8.3,33 K2Ti4O933 and TiS2/Cpvp,34 and all these MXene derived materials are used as energy storage devices. Some of them are used for sodium-ion batteries, some for potassium ion batteries. Interestingly, they all show high reversible capacity, stable cycling and high energy densities. The excellent electrochemical properties of all these MXene derivatives are due to the large interlayer spacing between them and the high intercalation of Na and K ions. This paper mainly summarizes the application of new two-dimensional MXenes and their composite materials in SIBs and PIBs, and predicts the existing problems and development prospects of MXene materials.
Synthesis and structure of MXenes
The preparation process of MXenes is shown in Fig. 2a.16,17 HF of different concentrations and a mixture of fluoride salts (LiF, NaF, KF, NH4F and NH4HF235) and concentrated HCl are used to etch the MAX material.21 Compared with HF, fluoride salts have significant advantages: due to the intercalation of metal cations and water molecules, this method easily obtains single or few layer MXenes without additional stripping steps. However, there are safety issues when using dangerous HF to avoid any deformities. Halim et al.36 proposed NH4HF2 as a new fluoride base corrosion agent. Because NH3 and NH4+ intercalate in MXene layers and the lattice parameter of layers is 25% higher than those of HF etched Mxenes. Ghidiu et al.37 used a mixture of fluoride salt and acid as etchants instead of toxic HF. HF (in situ formed) can etch A atom layers rapidly and selectively, which is a simple, safe and fast method. Because of the intercalation of water and cations between MXene layers, the MXene sheets obtained have larger interlayer spacing and weaker interactions. Compared with the toxic HF sheets, the sheets with mild properties of LiF and HCl do not have nano defects. In addition, NaF, KF, CaF2 and tetrabutylammonium can also replace LiF, while H2SO4 can replace HCl. Nb2CTx,38 (Nb0.8Zr0.2)4C3Tx,38 Ti2CTx,38 Mo2TiC2Tx,39 Mo2Ti2C3Tx,39 Cr2TiC2Tx,39 and Mo2CTx40 were successfully prepared by this method. Liu et al.41 synthesized Ti2CTx MXenes by fluoride salt etching. MXene layers are effectively separated with large layer spacing, as shown in Fig. 2b–d. They show that when KF + NH4F + HCl mixed salt is used at 40 °C, the layer spacing is larger than that synthesized with other fluoride salt compositions and temperatures. Interestingly, the MXene lattice parameter obtained by HF etching is C = 20 Å, while the MXene lattice parameter obtained by salt etching is greater than ≈40 Å. Furthermore, single-layer or multilayer MXenes are usually obtained by etching in various polar organic solvents, such as hydrazine, urea, dimethyl sulfoxide, isopropylamine or organic base molecules, which can be intercalated in the MXene layer. Single-layer or multilayer MXenes can be obtained by mechanical vibration, such as ultrasonication, ball milling and so on. In addition, MAX can also be etched and peeled by organic bases.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of etching and delamination of the MAX phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; FESEM images of MXene (Ti2CTx) etched using fluoride salt at different temperatures (b) LiF + HCl + 50 °C, (c) NaF + HCl + 60 °C and (d) NH4F + KF + HCl + 40 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Geng et al.42 realized one-step etching and stripping by treating the MAX pre-treated with HF at low concentration with organic base tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH), and obtained a single layer MXene with rich Al(OH)4− functional groups on its surface. Li et al.43 prepared large-scale single-layer MXenes by etching and stripping at 180 °C for 24 h with inorganic strong base KOH and a small amount of water, the surface of which has no F-functional group. The MAX phase can be expressed as Mn+1AXn (n is 1, 2, 3) (Fig. 3a).44 Its crystal structure is formed by alternate stacking of Mn+1Xn lamellae and closely packed A-group atomic planes. Among them, M is the transition metal element Ti, V, Nb, Mo, Sc, Zr, Cr, Hf, Ta, etc., A is the main group element Al, Si, Ga, etc., and X is C, N or CN. The currently known MXenes mainly include Ti2CTx, V2CTx, Ti3C2Tx, etc., most of which are etched MAX species with the A position of Al via HF or a mixed solution of HCl and fluoride salts. Therefore, these flakes usually have O–, HO–, F–, and other groups, and Mn+1XnTx (T refers to the surface terminal) can be used to represent MXenes.45 Some MXenes (such as α-Mo2C) can also be obtained by CVD or high-temperature etching of the MAX (Ti4N3Tx).21
 Fig. 3  Structures of different types of MAX phases and corresponding MXenes after etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
The synthesis strategy and etchant selection directly affect the subsequent performance of MXenes, including the morphology, surface termination and surface defects of flakes.47 It is obvious that HF etching can produce small-scale flakes with uniform morphology and rich defects. Sang et al.48 found that HF concentration can control the defect distribution of MXene layers. Specifically, lower HF concentration, shorter etching time and no ultrasonic delamination will make MXenes have lower defects, a larger sheet size and lower yield, thus obtaining higher electronic conductivity. In addition, it is also found that the defects of MXenes and active cations usually lead to reactions, so the coulombic efficiency decreases in the first cycle.24 In addition, it is important to achieve risk assessment when dealing with dangerous HF.21,49 With NH4HF2 and LiF + HCl as etchants, Ti3C2Tx particles with a large sheet size, few defects, low risk, long time and high temperature can be obtained. Various etchants have been proposed to synthesize MXenes, and all may be suitable for specific applications. For example, when high conductivity, a large sheet size, large layer spacing and mechanical properties are needed, mild etchant conditions are recommended, and HF will be more and more suitable to obtain MXenes with a small sheet size and rich defects. Therefore, the structure, properties, materials and target applications of MXenes should be considered when choosing the appropriate etching strategy.
Yamada et al.50 revealed the sodium storage mechanism of MXenes in a non-aqueous electrolyte by NMR and DFT of 23Na solids, which was mainly by the intercalation of Na+ between MXene layers. During the first sodium intercalation, Na+ intercalation and intercalation of some solvent molecules took place between MXene layers. The intercalation distance increased from 9.7 to 12.5 Å. In the next cycle, some Na+ ions will remain in the interlayer as a “support column” to maintain the expanded layer spacing of MXenes, which is convenient for the insertion/de-insertion of Na+, and to maintain the excellent cycling stability of MXenes in SIBs. The mechanism of potassium storage in MXenes is similar to that of sodium. Osti et al.51 used X-ray and neutron scattering technology combined with molecular dynamics simulation to verify that the intercalation of K+ makes MXenes more stable. Er et al.52 calculated the electronic structure and theoretical specific capacity of MXenes as a metal ion battery to absorb Li+, Na+, K+, and Ca2+ using first principles. The adsorption energy of Ti3C2 MXenes for potassium ions is 15.39 eV, and the K+ diffusion barrier is 0.103 eV. The low diffusion barrier indicates the fast K+ transfer and good rate performance. The theoretical capacity of potassium storage is 191.8 mA h g−1. During the embedding process, Na+/K+ will have side reactions with O–, HO–, F– and other groups on MXenes. According to Eames et al.,53 the different functional groups on the surface of MXenes and the type of transition metal ion directly affect the working potential and specific capacity of the material. The MXenes having light transition metals and a nonfunctional surface have the highest specific capacity. Furthermore, the surface functional groups also affect the voltage. For light transition metals (Sc, Ti, V, Cr) and nonfunctional MXenes the voltage range is usually 0.0 to 1.0 V and for O-terminated MXenes it is >0.5 V; for H or HO terminated MXenes, the voltage is negative; while F-terminated MXenes have various voltage values. The key question is, why does the change of functional groups cause such a significant change in the voltage and capacity of the same transition metal and intercalation species? Charge density difference is a useful tool to explain the electronic structure and bonding changes in the intercalation process. By subtracting the charge density before the intercalation from the charge density after the intercalation, we can see the charge transfer on the intercalation. However, the removal of functional groups will lead to the reduction of the specific capacity of the material. At the same time, the number of layers of MXenes also has a certain impact on the Na+/K+ storage. Single or few layer MXenes are not only conducive to making full use of the specific surface area to enhance the ion transport and electrolyte penetration, but also conducive to the formation of a two-dimensional structure of the composite when compounded with other materials to increase the specific capacity and energy density.
Properties of MXenes
Lattice energy is an important parameter to judge the stability of crystals. The larger the negative value of lattice energy, the more stable the crystal. Shein et al.54 calculated the energy band structure by first principles and showed that the lattice energy of MXenes is negative, so MXenes can exist stably. The lattice energy difference (ΔE) between the stable three-dimensional crystal TiC and the precursor MAX phase and TiC decreases with the increase of n, and the change of ΔE of MXenes is more significant, that is, the stability of MXenes increases with the increase of n. The formation energy of MXenes generated by the chemical reaction of MX and M is positive, which means that the reaction of a simple metal substance (M) and metal carbide or nitride (MX) to generate MXenes directly is an endothermic reaction. If this reaction is not impossible, it is very difficult to carry out. The formation of MXenes and MAX can decrease with the increase of n. The formation of Tin+1Nn is higher than that of Tin+1Cn, which means that the stability of nitrogen-containing MXenes is worse than that of carbon containing MXenes. Barsoum et al.16 also showed that MXenes with carbon are more stable than those with nitrogen. In addition, Barsoum et al. showed that under 200 kV electron beam irradiation of a TEM, the Ti3C2 nano film layer was more stable and more resistant to electron irradiation than graphene. Murat et al.55 calculated structural properties of two-dimensional transition metal carbides, such as Ti2C, Ti3C2, Ti4C3, V2C, Cr2C, Zr2C, Hf2C, Ta2C, Ta3C2, and Ta4C3, by using the theory of generalized gradient approximate density function and Fig. 4a represents the unit cell used for calculation. The results show that MXenes have high elasticity. The mechanical properties of Ti4C3 and Ta4C3 are much better than those of graphene with the same thickness. At the same time, the theoretical calculation shows that the elastic modulus of single-layer Ti3C2(OH)2 is about 300 GPa, which is smaller than that of graphene, equivalent to that of typical transition metal carbides, but higher than that of most oxides and layered clays.
 Fig. 4  (a) Unit cells of MXenes used for the calculation of electronic and elastic properties of M2C, M3C2 and M4C3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012, Cambridge University Press; (b) calculated band structure of F-, HO-functional and bare MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (c) band structures of semiconducting MXene systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (d) synthesis scheme of the polymer–CF–MXene composite and (e and f) comparison of thermal conductivities of the MXene composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Shein et al.54 calculated with first principles that the density of near Fermi energy states of Tin+1Cn and Tin+1Nn is 2.5–4.5 times that of their precursor MAX phase. This is because the 3D state of Ti in the broken Ti–Al bond changes into the metal bond state of Ti1–Ti1, so that the MXene shows metal characteristics, which is consistent with the calculation results in the literature.55 However, due to the limitation of preparation methods, pure MXenes cannot be obtained at present, but only MXenes with F–, HO–, O– and other functional groups can be prepared by the HF etched MAX equivalent chemical liquid phase etching method, and the existence of these functional groups will change the electronic characteristics of MXenes.
The theoretical calculation shows that Ti3C2 with F– and HO– functional groups has obvious semiconductor characteristics, and its valence band and conduction band are 0.05 eV and 0.1 eV, respectively (Fig. 4b).56 Mohammad Khazaei et al.57 calculated M2C (M = SC, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Ta, HF) and M2N (M = Ti, Cr, Zr,) with F–, HO–, O– and other functional groups in MXenes by using first principles, and showed that Sc2CF2, Sc2C(OH)2, Sc2CO2, Ti2CO2, Zr2CO2 and Hf2CO2 are all semiconductors. Their band gaps are 0.25–2.0 eV (Fig. 4c), and have an obvious thermoelectric effect at low temperature, especially at 100 K; their Seebeck coefficient is very high (≥1140 μV K−1), while the previous literature shows that MXenes have metal properties, which shows that the existence of functional groups has indeed changed the electronic properties of MXenes. On the other hand, composites of MXenes also show excellent mechanical and electrical properties. Recently, Guo et al.58 reported a vertically oriented carbon fiber–MXene composite foam material prepared by the freeze-drying method (Fig. 4d), and then enhanced its thermal conductivity with a epoxy resin composite. Its preparation process and composite material sample are shown in Fig. 4d. When the total filler content of carbon fiber MXenes is 30.2 wt% and MXenes account for 20 wt% of the total filler content, the synergistic reinforcement effect is the most obvious. The thermal conductivity of the epoxy composite reaches 9.68 W mK−1, which is 45 times higher than that of pure epoxy resin, as shown in Fig. 4e and f. In addition, the epoxy resin composite has high glass transition temperature, a low thermal expansion coefficient and excellent mechanical properties, and is expected to replace traditional polymer materials to solve the heat dissipation problem of electronic and electrical equipment. It can be seen from the above discussion that MXenes have good mechanical and electrical properties. In MXene-composites, MXenes improve the mechanical and electrical properties of composites, which are the most important factors for energy storage devices.
Sodium storage of MXenes and their composites
Sodium and lithium are both alkali metal group elements, and have many similarities in physical and chemical properties. For many lithium-containing oxides with electrochemical activity, being replaced by sodium leads to similar activity. For this reason, through learning from the research experience of LIB materials, the research of SIB materials has made more progress and seen rapid technological development in recent years. However, it cannot be ignored that there are also many differences between sodium and lithium. Among them, the most basic difference is that the radius of sodium ions (1.02 Å) is larger than that of lithium ions (0.76 Å); at the same time, the electrode potential of sodium ions (E°(Na/Na+) = −2.71 V) is about 300 mV higher than that of lithium ions (E°(Li/Li+) = −3.05 V); these factors together lead to the mass energy density of SIBs being lower than that of LIBs. The key technology of sodium ion batteries is mainly materials technology. The key to developing long-life batteries is to develop materials with high stability, including positive materials, negative materials and electrolytes. Only by developing electrode materials with stable intercalation/deintercalation ability can a practical breakthrough of SIBs be made. At present, the main bottleneck restricting the practical application of SIBs is the lack of long-life electrode materials, which can stably intercalate/deintercalate sodium ions. However, at present, the general research status of SIB materials is that the material types mainly focus on new type layered materials. The two-dimensional layered material has an open two-dimensional ion transport channel and a significant specific surface area, which can provide a large number of active sites59,60 for sodium-ion storage. MXenes are a new two-dimensional material that have been studied in recent years. Because of their excellent electronic conductivity, low ion diffusion barrier and unique structure, MXenes have been used in electrochemical energy storage. However, the electrochemical performance of MXenes is limited by the inevitable stacking phenomenon and low theoretical specific capacity. In order to utilize MXenes effectively, more and more research studies have been performed to improve the electrochemical performance of MXenes by compositing with other materials. When MXenes are compounded with other materials, MXenes with a layered structure can provide more channels for ion movement, and other materials uniformly adhere to or grow between MXene sheets, expanding MXene’s layered space. The theoretical capacity of oxides and sulfides is relatively high and their cost is relatively low. Therefore, oxides and sulfides can be used as the anode material of SIBs. In the same way, they also have the problems of low electronic conductivity and serious volume expansion resulting in poor cycle performance and rate performance. In general, reducing their size and compounding them with high conductivity materials is an effective way to improve their electrochemical performance. Therefore, their combination with layered materials (such as 2D-MXene composites) can show cycling stability and stable intercalation/deintercalation, which is the bottleneck of research. Next, the application of MXenes in SIBs will be reviewed from the aspects of pure MXenes and their composite sulfide, oxide and carbon materials.
Sodium storage of MXenes
Jung et al.61 studied the application of various MXenes in sodium anode materials by DFT calculations, and believed that the interaction between MXenes and Na+ is weak. Although the energy barrier of ion migration in MXenes may be affected by various factors, the lower diffusion activation energy of SIBs indicates that MXenes are a kind of potential high-power electrode material. Xiong et al.3 studied the electrochemical performance of Ti3C2Tx. The initial discharge capacity is 270 mA h g−1. After several initial cycles, Ti3C2Tx showed good cycling stability, with a specific capacity of about 100 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Zhang Xiaogang et al.62 used DMSO as a solvent as an embedding agent to synthesize few layer MXene nano-tablets. It was found that few layer MXenes have high specific capacity, excellent cycling stability and good rate performance. At a current density of 0.1 A g−1, the reversible specific capacity is 267 mA h g−1. After 1500 cycles with a current density of 1 A g−1, a reversible capacity of 76 mA h g−1 can be maintained.
Zhao et al.63 recently found that adding HCl and other common acids to the Ti3C2Tx suspension may cause the sheet to wrinkle. Therefore, they reported a new strategy to construct three-dimensional porous Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 5) by alkali induced wrinkling of Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes. The selected bases are different kinds of bases, i.e. 0.5–24 mol NaOH, LiOH, KOH TBAOH, etc. The experimental results show that the electrochemical performance of NaOH is better than that of other bases. The SEM images of Na-c-Ti3C2Tx show that there are many irregular macropores with a diameter of 100400 nm. The pore wall is very thin and composed of several separate sheets, but it will not occur when other bases are added. In addition, the specific capacity of Na-c-Ti3CTx is 130 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles, and 54 mA h g−1 can be maintained after 1000 cycles at a current density of 1.5 A g−1, with an excellent capacity retention rate. Li-c-Ti3C2Tx with LiOH has the best performance. At 0.1 A g−1, the capacity is about 160 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles. This new method of designing 3D porous MXene materials can be used in catalysis, environmental, biomedicine and other fields. It is a very important discovery.
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of M′-c-Ti3C2Tx MXenes by the flocculation method (Li+, Na+, K+ and TBA+), (b) high-resolution FESEM image of Na+-c-Ti3C2Tx and (c) HRTEM image of Na+-c-Ti3C2Tx shows stacked layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, there are many other methods to treat MXenes which show good electrochemical performance. Fan et al.64 used alcohol and DMSO to further improve the specific surface area and realize the preparation of few-layer MXenes by simple mechanical agitation and ultrasonic stripping of Ti3C2Tx to expand the layer spacing. Zhao et al.65 assembled a 2D MXene sheet into a hollow sphere and three-dimensional structure. Due to good contact between spheres and metal conductivity of MXenes, 3D large hole MXenes have high conductivity. In addition, Islam et al.53 systematically studied the electrochemical properties of a large number of new 2D transition metal carbides by the DFT method, providing valuable theoretical guidance for exploring various high capacity M2C based MXenes.
Sodium storage of MXene/sulfide composites
The theoretical capacity of CoS is relatively high, and its cost is relatively low, and the Co–S bond is weak. Therefore, CoS can be used as the anode material of SIBs. Similarly, it also has the problems of low electronic conductivity and serious volume expansion resulting in poor cycle performance and rate performance. In general, reducing the size of CoS and compounding it with high conductivity materials is an effective way to improve its electrochemical performance. Zhang et al.69 successfully synthesized CoS/Ti3C2 (CoS/MXene) composite materials by combining the advantages of CoS and MXenes. MXenes were mainly prepared through the reaction of HCl, LiF and MAX. Co in CoS mainly came from Co(NO3)2·6H2O and S mainly from thioacetamide (Fig. 6a). MXene sheets can provide a stable conductive network to improve the electronic conductivity of the composite, and their open 2D structure can expose more active sites for a rapid electrochemical reaction. Fig. 6b and c show the morphology of CoS/MXene. At a current density of 2 A g−1, the high reversible capacity of the CoS/MXene composite is still 267 mA h g−1 after 1700 cycles, and the capacity fade per cycle is only 0.00072%. TEM after 1000 cycles showed that the structural integrity of the CoS/MXene composite was good; the capacity of pure MXenes was only 55 mA h g−1 after 700 cycles; the capacity of pure CoS after 1000 cycles was only 162 mA h g−1 after 1600 cycles, and the capacity of the CoS/MXene electrode was 80 mA h g−1; even at high current density. When the current density is reduced to 0.1 A g−1, the reversible capacity of the CoS/MXene electrode is still 505 mA h g−1 (Fig. 6d). SnS2 is a typical layered Cdl2 crystal structure. Sulfur atoms are closely stacked to form two layers. Sn atoms are sandwiched between the two layers to form an octahedron structure. The adjacent S atom layers are connected by a weak van der Waals force. The larger layer spacing of SnS2 is favourable to the transmission of Li+ and Na+, and Na+ can be combined with Sn atoms in the layered structure.67,68 Using the synergy of SnS2 and MXenes, it is an effective strategy to build a heterostructure based on MXenes with high metal conductivity and SnS2 with high capacity. Wu et al.70 prepared the self-assembled heterostructures of MXenes and SnS2 nanochips by vacuum filtration (Fig. 6e). SnS2 nano tablets were prepared by the hydrothermal method with SnCl4·5H2O and thioacetamide as raw materials. MXenes are mainly obtained by HF etched MAX (Ti3AlC2) assisted ultrasonic stripping. The MXene@SnS2 composite was prepared by adding the SnS2 dispersion to the colloidal solution of MXenes. Thanks to the large layer spacing and heterostructure of SnS2, when MXene:SnS2 = 5:1 (Fig. 6f–h), the reversible capacity can reach 322 mA h g−1 (Fig. 6i) after 200 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, and the performance is better than that of pure MXene and other proportion composite materials, and has excellent rate performance and cycling stability.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of CoS@MXene composite synthesis, (b and c) TEM images of the CoS@MXene composite, and (d) rate capabilities of the CoS@MXene composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) schematic illustration of the synthesis of the SnS2@MXene composite, (f–h) FESEM images of SnS2@MXene with 1:10, 1:5 and 1:2, respectively and (i) rate performance of SnS2@MXene composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
SnS is formed by the coordination of Sn atoms with six S atoms, and has high theoretical capacity, but its application is limited by the problems of low conductivity and large volume expansion. For this reason, Zhang et al.71 synthesized MXene@SnS composite materials by a simple hydrothermal method. SnS nanoparticles expanded the layer spacing of MXenes and provided high reversible capacity and MXenes improved the conductivity of SnS materials. The composite was synthesized by dispersing 50 mg Ti3C2Tx in an anhydrous ethanol solution containing SnCl4·5H2O and undergoing hydrothermal reaction at 160 °C. The electrochemical tests show that the composite exhibits good rate performance at different current densities, and the discharge capacity remains at 255.9 mA h g−1 even at 1000 mA g−1. At the same time, the composite also shows excellent cycling properties. At a current density of 500 mA g−1, the specific capacity is 320 mA h g−1, and the Coulomb efficiency is 98%. They also compared the electrochemical properties of SnS and Ti3C2Tx, and found that the specific capacity of SnS was higher than that of the MXene@SnS composite at the beginning, but decreased rapidly, while the specific capacity of Ti3C2Tx was 1013 mA h g−1. In a word, the synergistic effect of SnS with high theoretical capacity and Ti3C2Tx with good conductivity makes the MXene@SnS composite exhibit excellent electrochemical properties and have good application prospects.
MoS2 is a two-dimensional layered material that has been studied a lot. MoS2 follows the embedded conversion mechanism and stores Na+ in a voltage window of 0.01–3.0 V. In the conversion reaction, MoS2 is completely converted into Mo metal and Na2S, providing high specific capacity. However, MoS2 suffers from low conductivity and a huge volume change in the process of charging/discharging. A pure MoS2 electrode shows the rate characteristics of travel and rapid capacity attenuation.72 Huang et al.90 reported that a MoS2 nanosheet was inserted into the interlayer of Ti3C2Tx MXene by the hydrothermal method to construct two-dimensional/two-dimensional composite materials. MoS2 nanochips are uniformly coated in a MXene conductive network for modification, extending the layer spacing of MXenes. At a current density of 100 mA g−1, a high reversible capacity of 250.9 mA h g−1 can be maintained after 1000 cycles, which is 88% of the initial reversible capacity. Even at a high current density of 1000 mA g−1, a capacity of 160 mA h g−1 can be obtained. Wu et al.73 also studied MoS2/Ti3C2-MXene@C, and found that it has good electrochemical performance. When the current density is 0.2 A g−1, the initial capacity reaches 1200 mA h g−1; when the current density is 10 A g−1, the initial capacity can reach 700 mA h g−1; when the current density is 20 A g−1, the capacity retention rate can reach 95% after 3000 cycles. Bao Shujuan et al.74 also studied the application of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite in SIBs and LIBs. The composite has high specific capacity and cycle performance.
Sodium storage of MXene/oxide composites
The theoretical specific capacity of Sb2O3 is 1103 mA h g−1, but there are few reports about its application in batteries, which may be due to the poor reversibility of the first cycle of Sb2O3. Wang et al. used the Cokendal effect to oxidize Sb in one step to obtain Sb2O3 nanorods, and use titanium dioxide to coat Sb2O3@TiO2 composite materials.75 A hollow structure and TiO2 surface coating can effectively reduce the volume expansion of Sb2O3 during charging and discharging, and improve the ion conduction rate of the material. When the Sb2O3@TiO2 composite was used as the anode material of LIBs, the specific discharge capacity of the Sb2O3@TiO2 composite was 593 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 current density. Guo et al.76 prepared a Sb2O3/MXene (Ti3C2Tx) composite by a solution-phase method, which has high electron conduction and Na+ diffusion rate. At the same time, Sb2O3 nanoparticles can prevent Ti3C2Tx from stacking again, and the gap generated in the process of self-assembly can adapt to volume expansion, thus maintaining the structural stability. The capacity of Sb2O3/Ti3C2Tx reached 472 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 current density when it was used as the negative electrode of sodium ion batteries. In addition, it also shows excellent rate performance. At a current density of 2 A g−1, a capacity of 295 mA h g−1 is achieved. Compared with the unmodified Sb2O3 anode, the electrochemical performance is significantly improved.
Na0.23TiO2 is a nontoxic titanium-based compound.79 The 3D Na0.23TiO2/Ti3C2 composite synthesized by Huang et al.80 is formed by growing interwoven amorphous Na0.23TiO2 nanoribbons on layered Ti3C2 nanowafers, showing a sandwich structure. This design is conducive to providing integrated advantages for the electrode materials. Ti3C2 nanosheets can improve the conductivity of the composite materials and promote the transfer of interface electrons from the electrode to the nanobelt. The sandwich structure of composite materials is conducive to the penetration of the electrolyte and the rapid transport of ions. The smaller size of Na0.23TiO2 shortens the diffusion path of Na+, which can achieve high magnification and good cycling stability. After 4000 cycles, the discharge capacity can be kept at 56 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 2 A g−1, and the capacity retention rate is close to 100%. After 180 cycles, when the current density returns to the initial value of 0.1 A g−1, a high capacity retention rate of 89.1% can be obtained.
CoNiO2 is a typical transition metal oxide, which has been widely studied in the negative electrode materials of LIBs. It has a high theoretical reversible capacity,81 but rarely reported in the SIB. Therefore, our group Xu et al.,77 successfully prepared the CoNiO2/MXene composite by a simple hydrothermal method combined with annealing treatment. Fig. 7b shows the FESEM image of CoNiO2/MXene and Fig. 7c shows the TEM image CoNiO2/MXene. The composite shows good electrochemical performance in SIBs. After 140 cycles, the capacity of the composite is maintained at 223 mA h g−1 (Fig. 7d), the Coulomb efficiency is maintained at about 98.7%, and a high-level discharge capacity of 223 mA h g−1 is obtained at 100 mA g−1, and the excellent rate performance of 188 mA h g−1 is shown at 300 mA g−1. We believe that the layered Ti3C2Tx can buffer the volume expansion of CoNiO2 and facilitate ion transfer, while CoNiO2 increases the electrochemically active site and shortens the diffusion path of Na+ during the circulation process (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Mechanism of charge transfer of CoNiO2@MXene, (b) FESEM image of CoNiO2@MXene, (c) TEM image of CoNiO2@MXene with the inset of the HRTEM image and (d) cycling performance of CoNiO2@MXene and pure MXenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e) schematic diagram of the formation of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2, (f) FESEM image of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 with the inset showing the PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 flexible film, (g) cycling performance of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 and other different composites at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and (h) cycling performance of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 at 1 A g−1 for 2000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Sodium storage of MXene/carbon composites
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have a one-dimensional structure, ultra-high mechanical strength, a large specific surface area and low resistance (5 × 10−8–6 × 10−2 Ω m). They can also carry large current density.82,83 As advanced carbon materials, CNTs have been widely studied. Ren et al.84 prepared porous two-dimensional Ti3C2Tx MXenes in aqueous solution at room temperature, and then added carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to make flexible films. Xie et al.85 also reported porous Ti3C2 MXene/CNT thin film electrodes for sodium-ion batteries. The results show that CNTs can show good electrochemical performance. By using CNTs as the electrostatic bonding of the nano level barrier, the stacking of 2D MXene nano-chips can be hindered. The synthesized MXene/CNTs showed a high volume capacity of 421 mA h cm−3 at 20 mA g−1, and maintained a capacity of 89 mA h cm−3 even at a current density of 5000 mA g−1, showing good rate performance and cycling stability.
Sodium storage of other MXene composites
Ren et al.86 synthesized a new high performance electrode material PANI-Ti3C2 by in situ polymerization. The specific capacitance of PANI-Ti3C2 can reach up to 164 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1, which is 1.26 times higher than that of Ti3C2 (131 F g−1). It also shows excellent cycling stability and maintains 96% of its initial capacitance after 3000 cycles. Zhang et al.87 prepared few layer MXene nano dots (nano dots, thickness of about 2–5 nm, size of 6 nm) by ball milling micro size Ti3C2Tx with red phosphorus. The composite of MXene nano dots and P showed high specific capacity and excellent cycling performance. In addition, Zhao et al.78 have used electrostatic adsorption to self-assemble layers of the stacked PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 heterojunction, Fig. 7e. Due to the two components coming in contact face to face, almost all active sites are located on the surface, which leads to the dominant pseudocapacitance behavior. The parallel two-dimensional interlayer spacing provides an effective channel for charge transfer and ion diffusion and accelerates the electrochemical kinetics. DFT calculations show that the binding energy between Na and BP can be effectively reduced by the strong interaction between BP and Ti3C2. More importantly, BP nanoparticles in the PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 heterojunction material can be converted into monodisperse BP nanoparticles, which are distributed between Ti3C2 nanosheets through chemical action, to buffer volume expansion and prevent BP aggregation, and as a stronger synergistic adsorption site to accelerate the process of sodium intercalation. Fig. 7f shows the SEM image of PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 with the inset showing flexible wrapped PDDA-BP/Ti3C2. At a current density of 0.1 A g−1, the structure shows a super high reversible capacity of 1112 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles (Fig. 7g), even at a current density of 2.0 A g−1, it can still maintain a reversible capacity of 464 mA h g−1, and has excellent cycling stability and rate performance. More importantly, the reversible capacity of ∼658 mA h g−1 was obtained after 2000 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 (Fig. 7h), with an average capacity decay rate of 0.05% per cycle, showing super long cycling stability. In addition, the electrochemical performance of the PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 molecular heterojunction electrode material is significantly better than that of the BP-Ti3C2 electrode material, which improves the utilization rate of BP materials. Furthermore, PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 indicates that MXene composites with a large interlayer space electrode have obvious advantages.
Potassium storage of MXenes and their composites
PIBs are a new kind of electrochemical energy storage device88,89 that have a bright future in low-cost and long-life energy storage applications. Although these distinct advantages make PIBs show bright application prospects in large-scale energy storage systems, potassium has higher relative atomic mass, which theoretically limits the energy density of PIBs. At the same time, the larger radius of potassium ions means a slower kinetic process of intercalation, and the larger the structural stress the electrode material bears in the process of repeated intercalation, resulting in unsatisfactory electrochemical cycle performance and rate performance of PIBs. Therefore, the key to improve the electrochemical performance of PIBs is to develop electrode materials that are conducive to reversible insertion and removal of potassium ions and the electrolyte matching with them. However, at present, the general research status of PIB materials is that the researchers are mainly developing new layered type materials. The two-dimensional layered material has an open two-dimensional ion transport channel and a significant specific surface area, which can provide a large number of active sites59,60 for potassium-ion storage. MXenes, as a new two-dimensional material, have attracted more and more attention in PIBs. Dong et al.33 prepared alkaline MXene nanoribbons (a-Ti3C2) by continuously shaking Ti3C2 MXenes in KOH aqueous solution. Their potassium storage capacity was studied at a current density of 200 mA g−1 and they exhibit a reversible capacity of 78 mA h g−1. The good electrochemical performance is mainly attributed to the enlargement of layer spacing, short ion diffusion path, large specific surface area and unique 3D porous framework. This method of preparing a-Ti3C2 is considered as a new strategy for the preparation of a large number of alkaline MXene materials because of its simplicity and operability.
In addition, Ti-based materials, especially sodium titanate (NTO) and potassium titanate (KTO)78,79,91,92 have been widely studied as new two-dimensional materials in SIBs/PIBs due to their low working potential, appropriate layer spacing, high chemical stability and environmental friendliness. The main difficulties limiting their application are slow ion diffusion and lattice volume expansion. Dong et al.33 studied the potassium titanate and sodium titanate nanoribbons, using Ti3C2 MXenes as the precursor, which were obtained by simultaneous oxidation and K/Na conversion. Firstly, Ti3C2 MXenes were prepared by selectively etching the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase in 40% HF. Secondly, in the presence of H2O2, at 140 °C, Ti3C2 MXenes were hydrothermally treated with NaOH or KOH solution to generate M-NTO or M-KTO nanoribbons (Fig. 8a). When Ti3C2 MXenes were treated with KOH and H2O2, the M-KTO obtained was a light yellow product and its open pore structure was seen from SEM images (Fig. 8b and c) with a lattice spacing of 0.93 nm (Fig. 8d). At the same time, from the CV curve of M-KTO, it can be seen that it has good reversibility, the second cycle and the third cycle coincide (Fig. 8e), and from the charge–discharge curve, it can also be seen that it has good stability (Fig. 8f). On this basis, Dong et al.33 used two-dimensional MXenes and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanoflakes as precursors to prepare self-supporting membrane electrodes with the sandwich structure of graphene layer/ultrathin sodium titanate or potassium titanate nanoflakes. The flexible NTO/rGO and KTO/rGO membrane electrodes showed excellent rate performance and long cycling stability. The excellent electrochemical performance is attributed to the unique sandwich structure, which shortens the diffusion distance of ions, enhances the electronic conductivity and the good binding force between the layered nano chips. The anode material of KTO/rGO-10% of PIBs shows a high initial discharge capacity of 1094 mA h g−1. After 700 cycles at a current density of 2 A g−1, the capacity remains at 75 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration diagram of the formation of M-KTO or M-NTO nanobelts and their atomic structures, (b and c) FESEM images of M-KTO nanobelts with inset of powdered M-KTO, (d) HRTEM image of M-KTO with the inset showing the SAED pattern, (e) first three CV profiles of M-KTO at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate and (f) charge–discharge profiles of M-KTO at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g) schematic illustration of the formation of MoSe2@MXene/C composite, (h) rate capabilities of MoSe2@MXene/C at different current densities and (i) cycling performance of MoSe2@MXene/C and other different composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, to highlight the importance of the heterostructure and composites of MXenes, in 2019, Huang et al.90 reported carbon-coated MoSe2/MXenes for K+ ion storage. 2D ultrathin nano-sheets of MoSe2 were decorated on the surface of MXene flakes with surface terminated oxygen atoms under self-linkage to prepare a 3D hierarchical heterostructure (Fig. 8g).
These ultra-thin nano-sheets act as a buffer for the volume strain by increasing interlayer spaces. Moreover, the carbon coating on the MoSe2/MXene strengthens the structure and enhances the conductivity of MXenes. Moreover, strong chemical interactions are found between the MXene flakes and 2D sheets of MoSe2, which is favorable for the structure durability. The hetero-structured MoSe2/MXene@C displays excellent electrochemical performance with ultra-fast insertion and deinsertion of K+ ions. At a current density of 200 mA g−1 it displays 355 mA h g−1 reversible capacity after 100 cycles. Furthermore, it shows extraordinary cycling stability and rate capability, as shown in Fig. 8h and i. It exhibits 183 mA h g−1 reversible capacity at a high current density of 10 A g−1. The excellent performance of MoSe2/MXene@C heterostructures, such as excellent rate performance and outstanding cycling stability, also supports the above conclusions. That is to say, the MXene heterostructure hybrid composite has large interlayer spacing, and can withstand volume expansion when large size K+ is inserted and deinserted, resulting in excellent electrochemical performance. Considering the existing research results, material cost and other factors, MXene based composite materials are still the focus of research and development in the future. Therefore, this paper mainly analyzes the latest development of two-dimensional layered MXene composites for intercalation/deintercalation and stable cycling of sodium ion batteries.
Conclusions and outlook
This paper mainly introduces the application of MXenes and their composite materials in SIBs and PIBs. In the SIBs, there are many research studies on MXenes and sulfides, including SnS, SnS2, CoS, MoS2 and so on. There are a few carbon materials and oxides. However, in the PIBs, they are in the early stage of research. The composite materials have excellent electrochemical performance compared to MXenes. Among them, some methods for preparing composite materials, such as designing 3D porous MXene materials, can also have good application potential in other fields. MXenes, as a promising two-dimensional transition metal carbide/nitride, have great research value. This paper introduces composites of various electrode materials and MXenes, which have excellent electrochemical performance, especially for applications requiring high volume energy density in the future. Nevertheless, at present, MXenes mainly face the following challenges: (1) the stability of MXenes: they cannot be prepared in a normal temperature and pressure environment, and they easily oxidize in air; (2) green macro synthesis: the preparation of MXenes usually uses HF etching or a mixture of hydrochloric acid and fluoride (such as HCl LiF); (3) the preparation technology of single-layer MXenes with a perfect structure; (4) the lower specific capacity is difficult to meet the application requirements. In the future research, we should study the structure–activity relationship between MXene surface functional groups, dopants, composites and material properties, explore more advanced and friendly preparation methods (such as electrospinning, vapour deposition, 3D printing, etc.), make the reaction process more simple and efficient, make it easy to control the structure morphology, and significantly improve the material performance; moreover, theoretical calculations and experiments are combined to explore a new two-dimensional MXene. In addition, the storage mechanism of MXene materials is the focus of future research, and the influence of chemical and thermal stability on energy storage performance is also the most important. We believe that with the development of research, MXenes and their composite materials will show great application prospects in the fields of energy storage (such as secondary batteries and supercapacitors), catalysis (electrocatalysis and photocatalysis), and the environment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21773188) and Program for Innovation Team Building at Institutions of Higher Education in Chongqing (XDJK2019AA002).
References
X. Xie, S. Wang, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 499, 17–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. San Baek, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24564–24579 RSC .
D. Xiong, X. Li, Z. Bai and S. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703419 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nie, G. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Dou, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Shi, R. Fu and X. Zhang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700272 CrossRef .
P. Nie, Z. Le, G. Chen, D. Liu, X. Liu, H. B. Wu, P. Xu, X. Li, F. Liu and L. Chang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800635 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nie, G. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Dou, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Shi, R. Fu and X. Zhang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700272 CrossRef .
P. Nie, J. Yuan, J. Wang, Z. Le, G. Xu, L. Hao, G. Pang, Y. Wu, H. Dou and X. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20306–20312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Xu, W. Zhang, M. Mao, Z. Wei, L. Wang, C. Cui, Y. Zhu and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8815–8838 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Liu, T. Wang, L.-Z. Fan and L. Jiao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 986–1006 RSC .
K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, T. Hosaka, S. Kumakura and S. Komaba, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 459–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, C. Chu, X. Xu, Y. Du, J. Yang, Z. Bai and S. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801888 CrossRef .
W. Cao, E. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Ge, X. Yu, H. Yang and B. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Novoselov, A. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. Dubonos, I. Grigorieva and A. Firsov, Google Scholar Crossref, CAS,  2005.
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang and C. Ge, Materials, 2018, 11, 2281 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. Mochalin and A. Dall, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
X. Tang, X. Guo, W. Wu and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801897 CrossRef .
M. Okubo, A. Sugahara, S. Kajiyama and A. Yamada, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 591–599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 73–85 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Xie, X. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Liu, W.-H. Fang, X. Shi, G. Cui and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24031–24035 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, G. Han, C. Du, Q. Deng, Y. Gao, G. Yin and Y. Song, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 2411–2417 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, H. Zhang, K. Ye, W. Zhao, J. Yan, K. Cheng, G. Wang, B. Yang and D. Cao, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 3018–3025 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, C.-H. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2094–2100 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhang and V. Nicolosi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 102–125 CrossRef .
S. Sun, C. Liao, A. M. Hafez, H. Zhu and S. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 27–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tao, G. Du, Y. Zhang, W. Gao, D. Liu, Y. Luo, J. Jiang, S. Bao and M. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 828–833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Gao, H. Chen, A. G. Zhou, Z. Y. Li, F. F. Liu, Q. K. Hu and L. B. Wang, Nano, 2015, 10, 1550064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Z.-S. Wu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Qin, S. Wang, X. Shi and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4792–4800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, X. Huang, T. Lin, T. Qiu, H. Huang, X. Zhu, Q. Gu, B. Luo and L. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 550–559 CrossRef .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L.-Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and P. Eklund, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L.-Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Naguib, M. Ghidiu, L.-M. Pan, J. Gu, J. Nanda, J. Halim, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 660–666 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M.-Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, A. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Jia, W. Zhou, L. Wang and Q. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 781–789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xuan, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Liang, L. Cheng, X. Yang, Z. Liu, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and F. Geng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14569–14574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, B. Wu and L. Li, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9000–9006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Barsoum, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2000, 28, 201–281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099–5102 RSC .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. C. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Osti, M. Naguib, A. Ostadhossein, Y. Xie, P. R. Kent, B. Dyatkin, G. Rother, W. T. Heller, A. C. van Duin and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8859–8863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames and M. S. Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270–16276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. Shein and A. L. Ivanovskii, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 65, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kurtoglu, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C. Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Z. Zhang, M. Li, R. Kang, Y. Chen, G. Song, S.-T. Han, C.-T. Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Compos. Commun., 2020, 19, 134–141 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Jiang, B. Ding, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Cao and G. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2742–2757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yang, H. Ji, J. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5000–5005 RSC .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Wang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39610–39617 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, M. Clites, G. Ying, S. Kota, J. Wang, V. Natu, X. Wang, E. Pomerantseva, M. Cao and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4533–4536 RSC .
G. Lv, J. Wang, Z. Shi and L. Fan, Mater. Lett., 2018, 219, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, M. Clites, G. Ying, S. Kota, J. Wang, V. Natu, X. Wang, E. Pomerantseva, M. Cao and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4533–4536 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhu, X. Wu, N. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 774, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Yao and L. Guan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, Q. Xu, H. Liu, M. Tao, Y. Luo, S. Bao, C. Li and M. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, L. Wu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 932–938 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Guo, L. Hu, Q. Xu, Y. Li, D. Liu and M. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502161 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, L. Xiu and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607017 CrossRef .
G. Du, M. Tao, W. Gao, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, S. Bao and M. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 117–125 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Cheng, Q. Li, L. Chang and L. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, X. Xie, S. Choi, Y. Zhao, H. Liu, C. Wang, S. Chang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12445–12452 RSC .
M. Tao, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, B. Guo, Q. Xu and M. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 230, 173–176 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, X. Hui, G. Jiang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104037 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, J. P. Zhou, Z. Q. Guo, Y. X. Lei and Q. U. Hassan, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2018, 53, 1700153 CrossRef .
J. Huang, R. Meng, L. Zu, Z. Wang, N. Feng, Z. Yang, Y. Yu and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, K. Wang, S. Zhu, L. Huang, Z. He, M. Chen, H. Shao and J. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, Y. Su, C. Zhou, L. Yao, J. Hu, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 770, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohan and R. Paulose, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 6878–6885 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, K. Maleski, C. E. Ren, J. Li, B. W. Byles, E. Pomerantseva, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Wu and F. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 214, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Jiang, G. Li, Q. Yao and J. Y. Lee, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 56–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pramudita, D. Sehrawat, D. Goonetilleke and N. Sharma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602911 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. C. Kim, M. Bianchini, D. H. Seo, J. Rodriguez-Garcia and G. Ceder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702384 CrossRef .
H. Huang, J. Cui, G. Liu, R. Bi and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, F. Li, Y. Liu, X. Yuan, L. Zhang and S. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zeng, F. Xie, X. Yang, M. Jaroniec, L. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8540–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Muhammad Kashif Aslam	Muhammad Kashif Aslam is a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Maowen Xu at Southwest University. He received his Ph.D. degree (2019) in Metal–Organic-Framework (MOF) derived Nanomaterials and others for Energy Storage from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University under the supervision of Prof. Changguo Chen. His current research interest is nanostructure engineering and the synthesis of electrode materials for sodium-ion, sodium–sulfur and lithium–sulfur batteries.
Maowen Xu	Maowen Xu is a professor at the Faculty of Materials and Energy, Southwest University. He earned his Ph.D. degree from Lanzhou University. He worked as a postdoctoral scholar in Prof. J. B. Goodenough's group of the University of Texas at Austin from 2011–2013. He has published over 180 peer-reviewed journal papers. His current research is focused on the design and synthesis of electrode materials for sodium-ion batteries and lithium/sodium–sulfur batteries.

 	Fig. 1  The publication record of MXenes, MXene energy and graphene (source: web of science, including expected publications in the year 2020).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of etching and delamination of the MAX phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; FESEM images of MXene (Ti2CTx) etched using fluoride salt at different temperatures (b) LiF + HCl + 50 °C, (c) NaF + HCl + 60 °C and (d) NH4F + KF + HCl + 40 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of different types of MAX phases and corresponding MXenes after etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Unit cells of MXenes used for the calculation of electronic and elastic properties of M2C, M3C2 and M4C3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012, Cambridge University Press; (b) calculated band structure of F-, HO-functional and bare MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (c) band structures of semiconducting MXene systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (d) synthesis scheme of the polymer–CF–MXene composite and (e and f) comparison of thermal conductivities of the MXene composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of M′-c-Ti3C2Tx MXenes by the flocculation method (Li+, Na+, K+ and TBA+), (b) high-resolution FESEM image of Na+-c-Ti3C2Tx and (c) HRTEM image of Na+-c-Ti3C2Tx shows stacked layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of CoS@MXene composite synthesis, (b and c) TEM images of the CoS@MXene composite, and (d) rate capabilities of the CoS@MXene composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) schematic illustration of the synthesis of the SnS2@MXene composite, (f–h) FESEM images of SnS2@MXene with 1:10, 1:5 and 1:2, respectively and (i) rate performance of SnS2@MXene composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Mechanism of charge transfer of CoNiO2@MXene, (b) FESEM image of CoNiO2@MXene, (c) TEM image of CoNiO2@MXene with the inset of the HRTEM image and (d) cycling performance of CoNiO2@MXene and pure MXenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e) schematic diagram of the formation of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2, (f) FESEM image of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 with the inset showing the PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 flexible film, (g) cycling performance of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 and other different composites at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and (h) cycling performance of PDDA-BP@Ti3C2 at 1 A g−1 for 2000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration diagram of the formation of M-KTO or M-NTO nanobelts and their atomic structures, (b and c) FESEM images of M-KTO nanobelts with inset of powdered M-KTO, (d) HRTEM image of M-KTO with the inset showing the SAED pattern, (e) first three CV profiles of M-KTO at 0.1 mV s−1 scan rate and (f) charge–discharge profiles of M-KTO at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g) schematic illustration of the formation of MoSe2@MXene/C composite, (h) rate capabilities of MoSe2@MXene/C at different current densities and (i) cycling performance of MoSe2@MXene/C and other different composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
