Atomic site electrocatalysts for water splitting, oxygen reduction and selective oxidation  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00869A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00869A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215-2264Atomic site electrocatalysts for water splitting, oxygen reduction and selective oxidation

        
          
            Di 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zewen 
            Zhuang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Cao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Peng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Chen
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yadong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: cchen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; ydli@tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      11th December 2019
    First published on 5th March 2020AbstractElectrocatalysis plays a central role in clean energy conversion, enabling a number of processes for future sustainable technologies. Atomic site electrocatalysts (ASCs), including single-atomic site catalysts (SASCs) and diatomic site catalysis (DASCs), are being pursued as economical alternatives to noble-metal-based catalysts for these reactions by virtue of their exceptionally high atom utilization efficiencies, well-defined active sites and high selectivities. In this review, we start from a systematic review on the fabrication routes of ASCs followed by an overview of some new and effective characterization methods to precisely probe the atomic structure. Then we give a comprehensive summary on the current advances in some typical clean energy reactions: water splitting, including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER); oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), including selective 4e− – ORR toward H2O/OH− and 2e− – ORR toward H2O2/HO2−; selective electrooxidation of formic acid, methanol and ethanol (FAOR, MOR and EOR). At the end of this paper, we present a brief conclusion, and discuss the challenges and opportunities on the further development of more selective, active, stable and less expensive ASCs.
Di Zhao
Di Zhao is currently a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Yadong Li at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University in 2011 and her PhD degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in 2017, Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials and their applications in energy storage and conversion.
Chen Chen
Chen Chen received his BS degree from the Department of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology in 2006, and his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2011 under the direction of Prof. Yadong Li. After postdoctoral work at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory with Prof. Peidong Yang, he joined the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University as an associate professor in 2015. His research interests are focused on nanomaterials and catalysis.
Yadong Li
Yadong Li received his BS degree from the Department of Chemistry, Anhui Normal University in 1986 and his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China in 1998, with Prof. Yitai Qian. He joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 1999 as a full professor. His research interests are focused on the synthesis, assembly, structure, and application exploration of nanomaterials.
1 Introduction
In view of the forthcoming fossil fuel exhaustion and environmental issues, clean, affordable and reliable energy has garnered global attention.1 Energy conversion technologies based on sustainable and renewable energy sources such as water, solar, wind, and even air, are regarded as promising pathways for developing clean energy devices.2–4 The core of these clean energy devices involves a series of electrochemical redox reactions, such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the cathode and anode of a water-splitting electrolyzer, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the air electrodes of regenerative fuel cells or rechargeable metal–air batteries or even as a green route to produce H2O2, and hydrocarbon conversion reactions for fuel cells (electrooxidation of formic acid, methanol, and ethanol). However, for the implementation of the cost-effective, large-scale production based on these technologies, the key prerequisite is electrocatalysts with high performances.4 These reactions are conventionally catalysed by platinum-based (Pt-based) materials or other precious metals or related oxides, such as Pd, Au, IrO2 or RuO2,5,6 which all suffer from low abundances and high costs. Therefore, there is an urgent need to lower the loadings of precious metals for future electrocatalysts.7,8
To this end, one strategy is to minimize the usage of precious metals without compromising the catalytic performance; another strategy is to explore alternative electrocatalysts based on non-precious species. Compared with bulk materials, nanomaterials commonly show enhanced activity by virtue of their unique properties arising from their sizes, morphologies, surfaces and electronic structures.4 During catalysis, the reactions generally take place on the surfaces or interfaces of catalysts, where reactants are adsorbed and subsequently converted to products desorbing from the catalyst surface.9,10 Therefore, only a fraction of the surface atoms (rather than the entire particles) are involved in the catalytic reaction. As we all know, smaller nanoparticles (NPs) have a higher fraction of surface atoms; thus in principle, reducing their dimension down to clusters and even separately distributed metal atoms can significantly increase the atom utilization efficiency, potentially to 100% (like in homogeneous molecular catalysts).11 If the active metal atoms are individually isolated, the surface selectivity would be greatly increased, as explained by site isolation effect.9 Moreover, as the microscopic environments of the single atoms are highly uniform, the catalytic mechanisms can be better interpreted by rational design and computational models.12 However, atoms with high surface free energy can hardly exist alone, and need to be stabilized and individually dispersed on appropriate supports.13 Metals, metal oxides, metal chlorides, metal carbides/nitrides, layered double hydroxides (LDHs), hetero-doped carbon materials, etc. can all be employed as supports to anchor active metal atoms through a variety of interactions.13–16 Tuning these interactions is one of the most important and feasible ways to engineer the atomic site catalysts.
In recent five years, with the development of preparation methods and characterization techniques for catalysts, the concept of single-atomic site catalysts (SASCs), also known as single-atom catalysts (SACs), has been extensively studied. The construction of SASCs has been demonstrated to be an effective way to showcase and exploit the outstanding catalytic performances of metals (Fig. 1). A variety of SASCs have been therefore developed for thermocatalytic reactions (e.g., CO oxidation,17 water–gas shift reaction,18 methane conversion19), organic catalytic reactions (e.g., benzene oxidation,20,21 alcohols oxidation22 and quinoline hydrogenation23), photocatalytic reactions (e.g., photocatalytic H2 evolution24 and CO2 reduction25), as well as electrocatalytic reactions (e.g., HER,26,27 ORR,28,29 CO2RR,30,31 NRR32 and H2N2 oxidation,33 HCOOH oxidation,34 and CH3OH oxidation11,35).
 Fig. 1  Number of publications per year from 2005 to 2019 based on Web of Science database. Search: single near/2 (atom or atomic) near/2 catal* and electrocatal* or electrochem*, respectively. 
In fact, the discovery of SASCs can be traced back to 1995, when Thomas et al. synthesized highly dispersed Ti species on mesoporous silica for the epoxidation of cyclic alkenes.36 Later, the researchers came to realize that for many reactions, a single metal atom is capable of catalysis, rather than an ensemble of metal atoms.37–39 However, as can be seen from the numbers of published articles in early years based on Web of Science database (Fig. 1), this notion did not attract much research interest. This may be due to the lack of characterization methods to identify the SASCs. In 2011, Zhang et al. prepared single Pt atoms supported on iron oxide (Pt1/FeOx) via a co-precipitation method.17 With the help of atomic-resolution high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, they characterized the structure of this SASC and unveiled the nature of its high activity and stability for CO oxidation. From then on, reports regarding single-atom or atomic catalysts began to accumulate (Fig. 1). Up to now, the number of related published papers has risen to about 1200. However, the discovery of potential application of SASCs in electrocatalysis is relatively late, which started from about 2012 (Fig. 1). In 2016, Li et al. prepared Co single atoms on nitrogen-doped porous carbon (Co SAs/N–C) via pyrolysis of predesigned bimetallic Zn/Co metal–organic frameworks (MOF); the catalyst featured a high metal loading of 4 wt%, which is a significant breakthrough to construct metal active sites with high loadings.40 The catalyst exhibited a ORR performance superior to that of commercial Pt/C. Moreover, this method later gradually evolved into a general method for preparing various atomic electrocatalysts.41,42 Subsequently, various methods (such as pyrolysis of other MOFs or metal-containing polymers, and tuning defects on supports) have been successfully developed.43–47 From 2016, the number of related publications (on electrocatalysis or electrochemistry) substantially increased; up to 2019, the total number is about 450, which is only ∼1/3 of the total number for catalysis. Therefore, the development of SASCs is still in its infancy, especially for the application field of electrocatalysis.
In principle, SASCs are not competent for reactions whose pathways require two or more adjacent active metal atoms.12 Therefore, based on SASCs, synergistic catalysts with diatomic metal sites, such as homonuclear paired and heteronuclear paired catalysts,48–51 have also been attracting researchers’ interest. In this review, we will provide a summary on atomic site catalysts (ASCs), especially electrocatalysts, including SASCs and diatomic sites catalysis (DASCs) for renewable energy applications (Fig. 2). First, we will systematically summarize the advanced methods for preparing different types of ASCs. Second, we will present an overview on some new and effective characterization methods to precisely probe the atomic structures of ASCs. Third, we will highlight the key developments in using these ASCs for water splitting (including HER and OER), ORR (including 4e− – ORR pathway and 2e− – ORR pathway), and selective electrooxidation of formic acid, methanol and ethanol (FAOR, MOR and EOR). At the end of this review, we will present a brief discussion on the challenges and some perspectives of the future developments of ASCs.
 Fig. 2  Overview of the topics covered in this review. 
2 Preparation methods
Controlled preparation of uniformly dispersed single metal atoms on appropriate supports is a prerequisite for the application of ASCs. Till now, a range of preparation methods have been developed, such as wet-chemistry methods, ball milling strategy, the galvanic-replacement (GR) method, atomic layer deposition (ALD), high-temperature pyrolysis and high-temperature atomic migration. On the basis of the integration mode of components, these methods can be classified into two major categories: the bottom-up strategy, and the top-down strategy (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Preparation methods for ASCs: bottom-up strategy and top-down strategy. 
2.1 Bottom-up preparation of ASCs
In the bottom-up method, the mononuclear or multinuclear metal precursors are commonly first adsorbed, then reduced and finally confined by the vacancies or defects of the supports. However, the preparation still remains challenging owing to the strong tendency of migration and aggregation of active atoms during the preparation and the application processes. Thus, in order to obtain ASCs, three aspects have to be taken into consideration: (1) the metal loadings need to be lowered (so as to avoid aggregation into NPs); (2) the interactions between metal atoms and support need to be strengthened; and (3) defects or voids are often introduced on the support. Until now, several strategies such as using spatial confinement effect, coordination effect, chemical bonding or defect confinement effect have been reported to prepare isolated metal sites.24,29,43,44,46,47,52–54

2.1.1 Wet-chemistry method. 
Wet-chemistry approaches are currently regarded as the most simple, promising and successful methods to prepare ASCs, and can be routinely carried out in a common lab without specialized equipment.55–57 The common approach for preparing dispersed metal catalysts requires three processes: (1) introduction of the metal precursor on the support by impregnation/ion exchange,52,58–60 coprecipitation,17,61–63 or deposition–precipitation46,64 under appropriate pH; (2) drying; and (3) calcination reduction,58,59 microwave irradiation,65 or photochemical route,66etc., to make the interaction stronger and the metal more reactive. In the wet-chemistry approaches, the precursors always contain the target metal species to be anchored on the supports via chemical coordination. The precursors can be mononuclear or multinuclear, which can be used to get isolated ASCs, binary or ternary metal cluster catalysts. However, isolated atoms feature much higher surface energy than NP counterparts, and thus have a strong tendency to aggregate in both the preparation and catalysis processes. As a result, the strong interaction between the single metal atoms and the support is a key factor to guarantee the dispersion of isolated metal atoms on the surface of the support and to prevent the atoms from aggregation. In this case, optimizing the precursors and supporting materials as well as controlling the preparation procedures play an essential role in stabilizing the atomic metal species. In particular, the anchoring sites on the supporting materials play a key role in tuning the corresponding interactions between atoms and the supports. If the anchoring sites on the support are of low density, low loading of metals is generally obtained, which is a major disadvantage of this method.13,44 Therefore, it is necessary and vital for the preparation of ASCs to adopt some strategies to achieve monodispersed atoms on appropriate support. Until now, several strategies have been used to prepare isolated metal sites, which will be discussed separately as follows.
2.1.1.1 Coprecipitation strategy. 
Because of its easy operation, no requirement on additional complicated steps and special equipment, the coprecipitation strategy has been employed as one of the most common method to prepare metal SASCs.17,61,62,67,68 A typical coprecipitation route for ASCs include several steps: mixture of anion and cation solutions; nucleation and growth; agglomeration and precipitation; filtration; calcination or activation. During coprecipitation, there are three main mechanisms: inclusion, occlusion, and adsorption.69 An inclusion takes place when other ions are incorporated into the crystal lattice as a coprecipitated impurity, in which the size and charge of interfering ions are commonly similar to those of a lattice ion. An occlusion occurs when the interfering ions get physically trapped inside the crystal as it grows. Adsorption is a phenomenon that the impurity adsorbs to the surface of a precipitate. The mechanism of inclusion is the most common type of impurity. In term of ASCs, these interfering ions are single atoms, and these crystal main phases are supports. According to the above mechanisms, the obtained single atoms with this method can be located in the crystal lattice to replace one of the atoms, or in the interstices between crystal lattice, or on the surface of the crystal lattice. For example, Zhang et al. synthesized a SASCs (denoted as Pt1/FeOx) by coprecipitation of an aqueous solution of chloroplatinic acid and ferric nitrate with sodium carbonate.17 After structural characterization and DFT studies, they found that the single Pt atoms occupied exactly the positions of the Fe atoms when single Fe atoms were exposed on the (001) surface. Because of its unique structure, the single Pt atoms had positive charge, partially vacant 5d orbitals and high valence, which contributed to lowering both the CO adsorption energy and the activation barriers for CO oxidation. In addition, Bao et al. successfully introduced single Pt atoms into the in-plane domain of few-layer MoS2 nanosheets (Pt–MoS2) via one-pot coprecipitation method, in which single Pt atoms exactly occupied the positions of the Mo atoms.70 They found that the catalytic activity of in-plane S atoms of MoS2 could be triggered via single-atom Pt doping in HER. Owing to their high symmetry, heteropoly acids offer a very limited amount of binding sites, so Yan et al. presented SASCs of Rh1/NPTA, in which all Rh atoms were located at the same 4-fold hollow sites, following the mechanisms of occlusion.67 In addition to replacing one of the atom and being anchored between of the crystal lattices, the single atoms can be located on the surface of the crystal lattice as well. For instance, Song et al. synthesized single Ru atoms supported on monolayer NiFe-LDH (Ru1/mono-NiFe) using the facile one-step coprecipitation method, which showed a high activity for the hydrazine electrooxidation reaction.33 They demonstrated that the single Ru atoms were located on the top of the Fe-metal atom of mono-NiFe via three oxygen atoms.
As we all know, coprecipitation strategy is operationally simple, applicable to large-scale production without special equipment, and can be done in almost all chemistry laboratories.55,68 However, there are still some disadvantages. For example, the single metal ions are probably buried in the interfacial region or within the support bulk during coprecipitation, which would reduce atom utilization. In addition, coprecipitation are applicable for formation of ASCs with metal oxides, sulphides, LDHs, heteropoly acids, etc. However, for crystalline metal compound, such as metal oxides, are not suitable for electrochemical testing because of their low conductivity and easy corrosivity under acidic conditions.55
2.1.1.2 Defect/vacancy confinement strategy. 
The defects or vacancies with coordination-unsaturated sites can tune the surrounding electronic structure and coordination environment.43,71,72 Therefore, the surface defects or vacancies of materials are known to be able to stabilize isolated metal atoms, notably by acting as “traps” to capture metal precursors to effectively pin the metal species on the surface and then inhibit further agglomeration during post-treatment.43,72 The density and stability of defects or vacancies are therefore intrinsically linked to the concentration of atomically-dispersed metals, and their stability and as well the catalytic performance of the target catalyst.71,73
Thus far, as a typical type of defects, oxygen vacancy defects on oxides have been widely studied.74,75 As shown in Fig. 4a, Li et al. first subjected the perfect TiO2 nanosheets to thermal treatment in a reducing atmosphere (5 vol% H2/Ar) for 2 hours at different temperatures to obtain defective TiO2 nanosheets. Then the single-atomic Au catalysts with a mass percentage of 0.3% were anchored on the surface oxygen-vacancy-rich defective TiO2 nanosheets.46 In addition, it was proved that the Au atoms were stabilized in the oxygen vacancies by forming the Ti–Au–Ti structure, which promoted the catalytic properties on CO oxidation reactions. The results indicated that metal oxides, especially reducible metal oxide supports like CeO2, TiO2, and FeOx, can be considered as ideal supports to design catalysts.17,76,77 Defect engineering not only can tune the anchoring sites of metal atoms, but also can tailor the material properties and catalytic activities. In addition to oxygen vacancy defects, sulfur (S) vacancies with high surface free energy and high affinity to small molecules can also serve as anchoring sites for metal atoms or clusters.78,79 Recently, Tsang et al. successfully synthesized isolated Co atoms anchored on S vacancies on the basal planes of MoS2 monolayer sheets.79 During chemical exfoliation process, with the charge transfer of Li to the layer and S2− leaching, the left single MoS2 molecular layers contain a large concentration of S vacancies on the basal plane. The Co complex ion [Co(thiourea)4]2+ after hydrothermal method refilled some of the surface S vacancy sites of MoS2. Experimental results showed that Co atoms substituted the S sites, resulting in rich Co–S–Mo active sites for the hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) reaction with high activity, selectivity and stability. Other light elements, such as C vacancies in graphene or carbon materials80,81 or B vacancies in BN,81,82 can serve as anionic vacancies to anchor sites to bind single metal atoms. For example, because of the high ionicity of B–N bonds and possible vacancy defects in h-BN monolayer, the BN may be superior to graphene to support single metal atoms.82–84 Yang et al. synthesized atomic Au supported by h-BN monolayer with B vacancies.82 Interestingly, this SASCs catalyst showed a superior catalytic performance via a new tri-molecular E–R mechanism, which greatly decreased the reaction energy barrier compared with traditional bimolecular L–H mechanism.
 Fig. 4  Some examples for designing strategies in wet-chemistry method. (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure for Au-SA/Def-TiO2 with O vacancies as anchoring sites. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the simultaneous self-reduction-stabilization synthesis procedure for Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty with Ti vacancies as anchoring sites. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure for Pt-ISAS@NaY via in situ separation and confinement of Pt precursor in β-cage. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of preparation process of Pt1δ+/TiO2 with 2D layer space as confinement sites. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Synthesis route of the pfSAC-Fe catalyst with N in COF as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Structure of [Pd]mpg-C3N4 with N in C3N4 as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Synthesis process of Co–N5/HNPCSs with N in N-doped carbon as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis for Pt/HSC with S in S-doped carbon as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Apart from anionic defects/vacancies, many cationic defects/vacancies, such as Tiδ+, Ni2+, Al3+ vacancies, have also been recently exploited for synthesizing ASCs.47,52,85,86 With abundant Ni2+ vacancies on nickel hydroxide (Ni(OH)x) nanoboards support, the Pt SASCs were synthesized with a high Pt loading of 2.3 wt%.52 Moreover, Li et al. found a new method to stabilize SASCs method via a simultaneous self-reduction stabilization process at room temperature using ultrathin two-dimensional Ti3−xC2Ty MXene nanosheets. Because of its abundant Ti vacancy defects and a high reducing capability, the Pt atoms could be reduced and then simultaneously stabilized in Ti vacancies by the MXene nanosheets without any additional reducing agent (Fig. 4b).47
For the defect/vacancy confinement strategy to fabricate ACSs, we should first optimize or tune the construction conditions of defects, such as the type, quantity and uniformity of defects. In addition, these conditions should be clearly characterized, which would be beneficial for selecting suitable metal species as precursors and preventing the migration of metal atoms to aggregate into particles during the post-treatment process.43 It is worth mentioning that not only the defects in the supports can anchor metal atoms, tune the metal loading content by controlling its concentration, but also the defects with unique atomic structure can alter its catalytic performance. This will greatly expand the application of ASCs in thermocatalysis, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis as well. Thus far, creating a high density of thermally stable support defects, and the fabrication of ASCs with high metal loadings is still a formidable challenge.
2.1.1.3 Spatial confinement strategy. 
In wet-chemistry methods, spatial confinement strategy is also an effective way to prepare and stabilize single atoms. Spatial confinement strategy can be achieved by encapsulating suitable mononuclear or multinuclear metal precursors into molecular-scale cages with the aid of porous or lamellar materials, such as zeolites,87–89 two-dimensional materials,90 to prevent migration and aggregation. For instance, the [Pt(NH3)4]2+ complex ions can be confined by three-dimensional molecular-scale pores of the KLTL zeolite via ion exchange with K+. Then the supported [Pt(NH3)4]2+ complexes were oxidized in flowing 10% O2 ramped from 298 to 633 K to get a stable site-isolated mononuclear Pt catalyst.87 Then, a well-defined single-site Pt catalyst was obtained by oxidation treatment. Unlike the post-treatment, another strategy is to in situ encapsulate metal precursors into zeolite frameworks during the self-assembly crystallization process, thus ensuring the uniform dispersion of the precursors in the entire bulk.43,88 Recently, based on this strategy, Li et al. developed a general method for fabricating SASCs within Y zeolite (M-ISAS@Y, M = Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, Co, Ni, Cu) (Fig. 4c).88 They first in situ confined metal–ethanediamine (M–EDA) complex into the β-cages of Y zeolite during crystallization process, and then conducted thermal reduction. With this method, M–EDA was monodispersed in each β-cage, which effectively avoided agglomeration; as a result, metal atoms were firmly and evenly stabilized by skeletal oxygens in the plane of six-membered rings. In addition to porous materials, two-dimensional layered materials consist of layers, and the abundant interlayer metal ions can also be used to spatially confine and stabilize single atoms.90 Recently, Li et al. reported a partially charged single-atom Pt supported on anatase TiO2 (Pt1δ+/TiO2) catalyst via an electrostatic-induction ion exchange and two-dimensional confinement strategy.90 During the process, the cationic Pt complex ions [Pt(NH3)4]2+ were first adsorbed onto the negatively charged 2D Ti3O72− sheet via electrostatic attraction (Fig. 4d). After ion exchange with interlayered Na+ sheets, [Pt(NH3)4]2+ were located between interlayers and confined by 2D Ti3O72− sheets. By calcination in air and 5% H2/N2 atmosphere, partially charged isolated Pt atoms were formed, which exhibited a remarkable activity and optimized selectivity towards anti-Markovnikov alkene hydrosilylation.
2.1.1.4 Coordination design strategy. 
Because the atomically dispersed metal catalysts are highly unstable and prone to agglomeration owing to their high surface energy, if the supports have a large amount of uniform coordination sites, these sites would function like ‘‘paws’’ to adsorb and bind metal precursors or metal atoms against migration and agglomeration during post-treatment.43 Therefore, selecting suitable mononuclear metal precursors and coordination sites to ensure a strong interaction between them plays a vital role during the entire synthesis process of ASCs. Some elements with lone pairs of electrons, such as N, O, S, which are often involved in covalent organic frameworks (COFs), MOFs, N- or S-doped graphene, heteropoly acid, etc., can form strong interaction with metal species.24,91–97 This coordination can be used as an effective way to stabilize ASCs (Fig. 4e–h). Moreover, it is worth mentioning that coordination design strategy is often adopted along with spatial confinement strategy. As shown in Fig. 4e, the SAC-Fe catalyst has N atoms in COF as coordination sites.29 Graphitic carbon nitrides (C3N4) has a unique lattice-hole structure, which contains characteristic N-coordinating cavities called “six-fold cavities” as they are delimited by six C3N4 rings (Fig. 4f).91,98 This structure gives rise to unique mechanical, electronic, and conducting properties, which can be used to strongly anchor various isolated metal species into host cavities, such as Pd,91 Au,99 Ru,100 Fe.58 N- or S-doped graphene or carbon materials have large specific surface area and rich anchoring sites, and thus have been considered as excellent supports for ASCs.65,85,92,101–103 For instance, Li et al. first synthesized polymer-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres, which had a large surface area, rich coordination N sites and high electrical conductivity (Fig. 4g). Then, by taking advantage of its strong interaction with cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc), they anchored atomically dispersed Co species on the N-doped porous carbon.92 Results of electronic structure and coordination environment examinations indicated that the Co atom was coordinated by five N atoms. The single-atom Co–N5 site was the dominating active centre, which exhibited a high selectivity for CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) with CO faradaic efficiency above 90%. Similarly, Choi et al. first introduced abundant S coordination sites on zeolite-templated carbon, and then stabilized atomically dispersed Pt with a high loading of 5 wt% via Pt–S bonds (Fig. 4h).94 In addition, abundant O atoms in LDHs95 or phosphomolybdic acid,93 and even adsorbed oxygen molecules from the air to supports can also serve as anchoring sites to stabilize isolated atoms.96
From the above analysis, we can see that as-formed single metal atoms exhibit higher stability by virtue of the strong interactions with coordination atoms on supports. However, the interactions can be affected by the synthesis conditions, such as pH of solution, solvents, temperature and even post-treatment conditions. Besides, the single metal atom contents also affect the activity of the formed ASCs. The porous supports obtained via templating method can provide more anchoring site for active metal atoms. Therefore, even with suitable metal atoms and coordination atoms, precise control of synthesis conditions is still vital for the successful synthesis of ASCs. In addition, the electronic structure of single-atom active centres can be tuned by the surrounding coordination atoms. Therefore, to choose appropriate metal atoms, supports and interaction between them according to the different reactions is very necessary for further successful synthesis and application of ASCs.
2.1.1.5 Electrochemical deposition strategy. 
Electrodeposition is a well-known conventional surface modification method, which can be used to alter the surface characteristics or to decorate the surface of materials. This method is low-cost and energy-efficient. Here, we consider that the electrochemical deposition strategy includes two sub-strategies. One is conventional electrodeposition, in which the electrolyte contains the target metal atoms to be deposited on the working electrodes (that is, the support for ASCs in this situation).104,105 For example, Zhang et al. first prepared of NiFe LDH on Ti mesh,105 and then used a piece of the Ti mesh as the working electrode (the electrolyte solution consists of HAuCl4). After stepping the potential to −0.6 V for 5 s and then stepping back to −0.2 V for 5 s for five cycles, single-atom Au was deposited on NiFe LDH. The other sub-strategy is quasi-electrodeposition, also known as potential cycling method, in which the counter electrode contains the target metal atoms for deposition.50,106–108 In recent years, many works have demonstrated that with Pt wires or Pt foils as counter electrodes, HER performance would be gradually elevated with the increase of tested numbers.106,108–111 This is because Pt atoms can be dissolved from the Pt anodes into acidic or alkaline media at high voltages, and then be transferred and deposited onto cathodes. Ingeniously, many researchers used this principle to synthesize atomically dispersed of Pt electrocatalysts. As shown in Fig. 5a, Li and collaborators prepared double transition metal MXene (Mo2TiC2Tx) nanosheets with abundant surface Mo vacancies (VMo) by electrochemical exfoliation.108 During the electrochemical exfoliation, the Pt atoms dissolved from Pt anodes were simultaneously transferred and immobilized on the Mo vacancies by the formation of covalent Pt–C bonds. Similarly, using Pt foil as counter electrode in cyclic voltammetry (CV) in a three-electrode cell containing 0.5 M H2SO4, Tan et al. successfully realized slight dissolution of Co atoms from the np-Co0.85Se to form Co vacancies, and Pt atoms were embedded into Co vacancies simultaneously (Fig. 5b).27 In addition, with N-doped carbon as supports, the Pt atoms dissolved from Pt anodes can also be stabilized. As shown in Fig. 5c, the atomic Co–Pt coupled species at carbon defects were prepared, which exhibited high activity and robust durability for both ORR and HER.50,107
 Fig. 5  Several examples for electrochemical deposition strategy. (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical exfoliation process of MXene and simultaneous immobilization of single Pt atoms. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Pt/np-Co0.85Se synthesized by electrochemical deposition strategy with Pt as counter electrode with Co-vacancy-rich np-Co0.85Se. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of A-CoPtNC. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
We can conclude that, with the former sub-strategy, there are more choices for the atoms to be deposited. However, for the latter, until now, only Pt atoms can be selected. In addition, for the electrochemical deposition process, the supports with abundant defects/vacancies or other anchoring sites would be good for fixing atoms.
2.1.1.6 Other strategies. 
In wet-chemistry methods, in addition to the aforementioned synthesis strategies, some clever methods have also been developed for the synthesis of ASCs. Recently, Li et al. reported a novel ion-exchange method to synthesize high-concentration isolated Pt atoms catalysts (24.8 at%) embedded in a unique hollow CuSx support (denoted as h-Pt1CuSx) (Fig. 6a).60 Cu1.94S NPs were first synthesized through solvothermal method. Then, with H2PtCl6·6H2O in ethylene glycol solution, by carefully controlling the ion-exchange reaction rate, Pt atoms selectively replaced copper (Cu) atoms, and were introduced into the sites with rich surrounding S atoms, resulting in a high density of precisely isolated Pt atoms. To boost the activity of Pt nanocatalysts with minimal loss in surface active sites, Duan et al. reported a single-nickel-atom-modified Pt nanowires via partial electrochemical dealloying of PtNi alloy nanowires (Fig. 6b).112 The single atom tailoring approach offers an effective strategy to optimize the activity of surface Pt atoms and enhance the mass activity for diverse electrochemical reactions. To prevent the aggregation of metal atoms, Wu et al. used photochemical reduction of frozen solution of chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation (Fig. 6c).113 With this strategy, the Pt atoms can be stabilized on various substrates, including mesoporous carbon, graphene, carbon nanotubes, metal oxides materials. Similarly, based on the theory, at low temperatures, the formation kinetics of nuclei is slower than that at higher temperatures; isolated Co atoms on N-doped mesoporous carbon substrates were obtained at −60 °C, which could be used as an efficient electrocatalyst for ORR.114 In addition, for graphdiyne (GDY), a one-atom-thick two-dimensional carbon material, the sp hybridization of CC bond enables the arbitrary angle rotation of π/π* perpendicular to the axis, making it possible to chelate single metal atoms, such as Pt, Mo, Fe and Ni atoms, via M–C bonding (Fig. 6d).115–118 The M–C bonding in this system could be better understood as orbital charge overlaps rather than the realistic and conventional covalent/ionic bonds. Therefore, for GDY supports, the defects are indeed different with the aforementioned coordination strategies.
 Fig. 6  Other strategies. (a) Schematic illustration of h-Pt1-CuSxvia a novel ion-exchange method. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (b) SANi–PtNWs catalyst prepared by a partial electrochemical dealloying approach. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Pt1/MC catalyst synthesized by iced-photochemical reduction method. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Illustration for the synthesis of single atom Pt on GDY (Pt-GDY1 and Pt-GDY2). Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.2 Mass-selected soft-landing method. 
In the early years, the mass-selected soft-landing technique has been widely used for preparing supported metal clusters or even ASCs, because this technique can precisely control of the size of metal species by using mass-selected molecular or atom beams.13,38,71,119 Using a combination of gas-phase cluster ion sources, mass spectrometry, and soft-landing techniques, the number of atoms in the deposited clusters can be precisely controlled. Meanwhile, the rapid evolution of the atomic and electronic structure makes it essential to have precise control over the cluster size, especially for small nanoclusters (typically 0.5–2 nm, <200 atoms).55 Unlike conventional physical or chemical vapor deposition techniques, which are limited by the nucleation and growth characteristics of the specific cluster–substrate combination, cluster deposition allows for independent control of cluster size, coverage, and stoichiometry. In other words, in principle, any flat substrate materials, such as metals, oxides, carbon/diamond, can be used to support clusters or atoms without constraints of nucleation and growth.71,120 Therefore, this technique can provide excellent model supported culsters, and also atomically dispersed catalysts for further fundamental studies. It is worth noting that, for this method, surface defects/vacancies are also essential for the binding sites for metal clusters or metal atoms and for preventing agglomeration.71,121 However, this technique is of high cost and low yield, and thus not suitable for high-surface-area supports or mesoporous support materials.13,120 These disadvantages significantly limit its wide implementation and further practical industrial applications.


2.1.3 Atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. 
ALD is a growth technique for thin films, similar to chemical vapor deposition (CVD), except that the deposition is divided into cycles, each of which involves a sequence of two surface self-limiting reactions.122 In the ALD process, the selected support material is alternately exposed to the pulsing vapors of different reactive precursors, during which the surface reaction between precursors and functional groups on the support is realized. The reaction ceases when all available surface functional groups are consumed. Because each surface reaction step is self-limiting, the amount of deposited material can be controlled precisely by tuning the number of ALD cycles.122 Meanwhile, with the character of self-limiting, this method can guarantee uniform deposition on substrates regardless of whether the surfaces are flat or have high-aspect-ratio features or of high surface area, which can hardly be achieved by the above-mentioned mass-selected soft-landing method or CVD method.56,122,123 Moreover, ALD can deposit not only compound materials but also single-element materials.124 Therefore, this technique is a potential and powerful approach to constructing atomic catalysts, and it is also useful for the exploration of structure–performance relationships.11,26,125–130
Inspired by the fact that the corner and edge sites of catalysts often have a superior activity, Song et al. produced an isolated Pt catalyst on nanosized onion-like carbon (OLC) supports (Pt1/OLC).129 As shown in Fig. 7a, they first prepared the OLC supports with an appropriate density of oxygen species via a thermal annealing method. Then they deposited Pt precursors at 150 °C using the MeCpPtMe3 and O3 on the OLC supports via ALD. It was worth noting that the oxygen functionalities on the supports is very important for single-metal atom distribution, which is positively related the Pt loading. The obtained SASCs exhibited a high efficiency for HER. DFT calculations indicated that this unique architecture with a high curvature could accumulate electrons around the Pt regions, which then induces a local electric field and speeds up the catalytic kinetics. In addition, Sun et al. fabricated single Pt atoms and clusters supported on N-doped graphene nanosheets (NGNs) by simply adjusting the number of ALD cycles from 0–100 cycles.26 As shown in Fig. 7b, after the first conventional ALD cycle with Pt precursor (MeCpPtMe3) and O2, a new layer of adsorbed oxygen forms on the Pt surface, which provides functional groups for the next ALD cycle.26 As a result, the single Pt atom catalysts were capable of exhibiting a catalytic activity for the HER that is comparable to the state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C and Pt cluster catalysts. This significantly decreased the cost of the catalyst. Similarly, before Pd ALD on graphene nanosheets, Lu et al. also first precisely tuned the type and amount of surface oxygen anchor sites on pristine graphene nanosheets via oxidation and then reduction via thermal deoxygenation (Fig. 7c).125 In addition to deposit single atoms, ALD method can be used to precisely control the synthesis of metal dimers. For instance, Lu et al. precisely fabricated Pt2 dimers on graphene via ALD method using the first-cycle deposited Pt1 single-atom deposition as new nucleation sites for the second cycle.127
 Fig. 7  Examples for ALD method. (a) The schematic illustration of the Pt1/OLC catalyst prepared via ALD. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic illustration of the Pt ALD mechanism on NGNs for ALDPt/NGNs catalysts. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Synthesis of Pd1/graphene catalyst via a process of anchor sites creation and selection and Pd ALD. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In conclusion, the ALD method with self-limited surface chemical reactions can afford promising prospect for accurately controlled synthesis of atomically dispersed catalysts. However, some disadvantages, such as high cost and slow deposition rate, would limit its wide application in common chemistry laboratories and even large-scale application from the research laboratory into the catalytic industry. Whether the ALD technique is adopted or not by catalyst manufacturers will largely depend on the value of the final products.55,122


2.1.4 The galvanic replacement (GR) method. 
Over the past decade or so, GR methods have been demonstrated to be a particularly simple and versatile approach to controlling the size and shape, and tune the composition, internal structure, and morphology of the resulting nanostructures.68,131,132 GR is a redox process, in which a metal is corroded (sacrificed) by the ions of a second metal when they are in contact in a solution phase, which is driven by the difference in the equilibrium potentials of the two metal/metal ion redox pairs.132 In theory, the reduction potential of the second metal has to be higher than that of the first metal.131,132 Once the reactants are in contact in solution, the GR will take place spontaneously on the surface, where the metal ions in templates will be oxidized and dissolved into the solution, and the second metal ions will be reduced and deposited onto the outer surface of the template. Consequently, this simple reaction can be employed to generate a wide variety of metal nanostructures, with the simple requirement of a suitable difference in their reduction potentials of the two metals. For instance, for the system of Ag NP and HAuCl4 solution (Fig. 8a),131 when the HAuCl4 solution is added into an aqueous suspension of Ag NPs, the GR will be initiated immediately. During the process, Ag atoms will be oxidized and dissolved into the solution, and Au atoms in the solution will be reduced by the electrons generated from the above oxidization, and deposited epitaxially on the surface of the Ag NPs (step 1 in Fig. 8a). As the process continues, the hollow interior and an alloyed shell will be developed (step 2–3 in Fig. 8a). Moreover, with more HAuCl4 added into the reaction system, the HAuCl4 will cause dealloying for the Au–Ag shells, leading to hollow nanostructures with porous walls and then finally collapse into small fragments of pure Au.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the morphological and structural evolution at different stages of the GR reaction between Ag NP and HAuCl4 aqueous solution. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the deposition of top Au atoms on Pd clusters by the GR method. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. 
Therefore, during the last two decades, the GR method has been established as a viable method mainly for the synthesis of alloys, compounds, etc. with versatile nanostructures and well-controlled properties. In recently years, using this method by controlling the amount of the second metal, novel single-atom alloys (SAAs) that are composed of singly dispersed active metal atoms embedded into a less active host metal, have been prepared and reported, such as single-atom Pt/Cu alloy,133–140 single-atom Pd/Cu alloy,138,139 and single-atom Pd/Au alloy.141 As illustrated in Fig. 8b, Toshima et al. deposited top Au atoms on Pd template clusters by the GR reaction method with Pd147 as sacrificed clusters in a HAuCl4 solutions.141 Because the single atoms are surrounded by the host metal, isolated and thermodynamically stable SAAs often exhibit unique catalytic activity and selectivity, such as for glucose oxidation,141 aerobic alcohol oxidation, C–H bond activation,136,139 hydrogenation133–135 and dehydrogenation reactions.140 Moreover, the ability of weak binding of CO for isolated Pt atom geometries is not only helpful to improve the hydrogenation reactions, but also is vital to enhance the catalytic activity and stability of electrochemical MOR, and hydrogen fuel cells.137 This provides a new idea to design high-effeciency Pt-based SAA electrocatalyst. Although the GR method has been demonstrated to be a simple and cost-effective method for the preparation of catalysts for many important electrochemical reactions, the reports for ASCs as electrocatalysts are still scarce.132 There are three possible limitations: (1) two metal/metal ion redox pairs with different equilibrium potentials are necessary, which limits its universality; (2) the reduction potential of the second metal (which is often a precious metal) has to be higher than that of the first metal;131 (3) by controlling the amount of the second metal, this method is only reported to be used for synthesizing the novel SAAs with precious metal as singly dispersed active metal atoms.


2.1.5 Ball milling method. 
High-energy ball milling has been one of the powerful bottom-up methods for preparing SASCs, as it can effectively break the molecules of precursors and then reconstruct the chemical bonds between metal atoms and the supports.55,68,142 Ball milling is a mechanical process, which involves balls and a mill chamber. During the ball milling process, all the structural and chemical changes can be induced by mechanical energy. As a typical example, Bao et al. have successfully synthesized several catalysts with this method.19,21,143,144 In 2014, they prepared lattice-confined single iron sites embedded in a silica matrix (Fe@SiO2), which enabled direct, non-oxidative conversion of methane, exclusively to ethylene and aromatics.19 The catalysts were obtained by ball milling the mixture of Fe2SiO4 and SiO2 and subjecting the obtained mixture to heat treatment at 1973 K in air, followed by leaching NPs with aqueous HNO3. Subsequently, they again used this ball billing method and synthesized a series of coordination-unsaturated single metal catalysts confined in graphene (MN4/GN, M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, or Cu) via high-energy ball milling of metal phthalocyanine precursors (MPc) and graphene nanosheets (GNs) under controllable conditions.21,143,144 Among the obtained catalysts, CoN4/GN could be used in highly active and stable counter electrode for the interconversion of the redox couple of I−/I3−;143 FeN4/GN exhibited high performance in the direct catalytic oxidation of benzene to phenol at room temperature with a conversion of 23.4%.21 Moreover, with DFT calculations, they found that the confined FeN4 centres can efficiently activate O species. Therefore, they again used this catalyst in ORR, which showed expectedly a high ORR activity and stability.144
In general, high-energy ball milling is an inexpensive and simple process, which can be used as a promising method to synthesize ASCs on supports of oxides, graphene, etc. The sizes of catalysts can be tuned by the speed of the rotation of the balls. However, the morphologies of the catalysts are always irregular. Meanwhile, because of the balls and milling additives, the obtained catalysts probably have contaminants. These drawbacks may negatively impact the catalytic performance, which will limit its practical applications as well.
As the earliest and most widely used method for synthesis of ASCs, the bottom-up methods still suffer from some disadvantages. One of the major disadvantages is always the low metal loading. Specifically, for coprecipitation strategy, the single metal ions are always buried within the support bulk, reducing atom utilization; for ALD and mass-selected soft-landing techniques, they are of high cost and not suitable for high-surface-area supports or mesoporous support materials, limiting practical industrial applications. In addition, the bottom-up methods are more preferable to synthesize ASCs supported on metal oxides, sulphide, LDH, heteropoly acids, crystalline metal compound, etc.; some of them are not suitable for electrochemical testing because of low conductivity and high susceptibility to corrosion under acidic conditions. Therefore, these drawbacks should be considered and overcome before the design of ASCs as highly effective electrocatalysts.

2.2 Top-down synthesis of ASCs
Different from bottom-up approaches to synthesize ASCs, top-down approaches are based on the disbanding of well-organized nanostructures or organic polymer precursors into smaller pieces to give the desired structures. Thus far, extensive research effort has been paid to pursue these goals. High-temperature pyrolysis and high-temperature gas-phase atomic migration are the two main methods in this regard.20,45,55,68

2.2.1 High-temperature pyrolysis method. 
High-temperature pyrolysis is one of the effective top-down approaches to synthesizing ASCs through the thermal decomposition of selected precursors at appropriate pyrolysis temperatures, such as 600–1000 °C.44,55,68 According to the differences of precursors, the methods can be divided into two classes: high-temperature pyrolysis of specific metal-containing complexes (mainly including MOF-based precursors), and high-temperature pyrolysis of irregular metal-containing complexes, metal-containing organic polymers and mixture with metal and carbon sources. Different precursors involved would lead to different atomic structures and in turn different catalytic performances. Moreover, during the pyrolysis process, the selection of temperature and atmosphere are vital to obtain specific and high-activity catalyst. As a typical synthesis process, the precursors always contain metals (such as Pt, Ru, Co, Fe, Ni), C sources, and doped or coordination atoms (such as N, S). They are often treated under a protective atmosphere, such as N2, Ar, H2, NH3 and sometimes their mixtures.
2.2.1.1 Pyrolysis of specific metal-containing complexes (MOF-based precursors). 
MOFs, a class of crystalline porous materials constructed by metal ions and versatile organic linkers, have recently been demonstrated to be viable precursors/templates to produce porous carbon-based materials via pyrolysis. Their interconnected 3D molecular-scale cages can make them highly accessible for small molecules. Moreover, different MOFs possess different external morphologies, which can be used as self-sacrificed templates to flexibly control the fabrication of novel carbon nanomaterials, and to effectively tune the catalytic performances. Especially, MOFs composed of metal nodes and N-containing organic linkers have been generally employed to serve as specific precursors with precise structures. High-temperature pyrolysis of this class of MOF-based precursors can yield porous carbon catalysts containing N-coordinated metal sites, high porosity and surface area, as well as uniformly dispersed metal and N atoms with improved catalytic (especially electrocatalytic) performance.
In this field, Li and collaborators have developed many pioneering and systematic works.22,23,40,53,145–150 As a subclass of MOFs, the zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), such as zinc-based ZIF, ZIF-8, and cobalt-based ZIF, ZIF-67, with high content of N dopants in the organic ligands and flexibility to dope various metals into the 3D frameworks, have been explored as a new platform to prepare MOF-derived ASCs via pyrolysis strategy.40,41,151,152 They found that after direct pyrolysis of ZIF-67, severe agglomeration of Co atoms to produce Co NPs is observed. In this case, if they want to get ASCs, an acid-leaching process becomes inevitable to remove the Co-containing particles. Also, a subsequent heat treatment is always required after the acid treatments to repair the broken carbon structures to further improve the catalytic properties. However, in many cases, a large number of metallic Co NPs are protected by graphitic carbon shells, even with these tedious efforts, and Co NPs are still retained and lead to significant decrease for the catalytic performance.40 As we all know, the Zn atoms, with a low boiling point of 907 °C, can be evaporated in the high-temperature pyrolysis process. Therefore, if incorporating Zn atoms with Co within Zn/Co MOFs, the Zn atoms can be used to efficiently modulate the spatial distance between Co atoms, thus effectively preventing the agglomeration of Co atoms to form Co NPs (Fig. 9a).40,68 During this pyrolysis process, the Zn atoms can be evaporated to provide abundant N sites. The Co nodes can be reduced in situ by carbonization of the organic linkers in MOFs and stabilized on the as-obtained N-doped porous carbon support. Using this effective strategy, they can achieve particularly high loading of single Co atoms of over 4 wt%.40 This is a pioneering work in this field and the strategy of isolating other poorly volatile metal atoms with Zn atoms has been used more widely.
 Fig. 9  Four strategies to construct specific structures of MOF precursors according to the residing positions of target metal atoms. (a) The formation of Co SAs/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Co residing in their nodes. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) The formation process of Ru SAs/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Ru residing in their ligands. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The formation process of Fe-ISAs/CN (top) and Ru3/CN (bottom) via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Fe or Ru residing in their cavities. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Preparation of (Fe,Co)/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis a designed MOF precursor with Co residing in their nodes and Fe residing in their cavities. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Until now, based on the evaporation of Zn atoms to prepare single atoms supported on N-doped porous carbon via the pyrolysis process, there are four strategies to construct specific structures of MOF precursors according to the target metal atom positions: (i) the target metal atoms are in the metal nodes of MOFs, like Zn atoms, such as the above examples of Zn/Co ZIFs (Fig. 9a);40,147 the target metal atoms are in the ligand of MOFs, which is especially suitable for precious metal atoms rarely used as the nodes of MOFs (Fig. 9b);23,153–156 (iii) the target metal atoms are in the cavity of MOFs, which should be large enough to accommodate the target metal molecules (Fig. 9c and d);22,32,51,53,149,157 (iv) the target metal atoms are distributed simultaneously in two or three positions in the aforementioned strategies, which is often used to produce di-atom or multi-atom catalysts (Fig. 9e).146,158 These works have been summarized in Fig. 9 and elaborated well in other reviews, and thus we would not discuss in length here again.41,44,68 So far, with these strategies, a variety of atomically dispersed catalysts have been successfully synthesized, from atomic non-precious metals such as Fe,28,48,51,151,157,159–164 Co,51,147,165,166 Ni,145,158 Cu,30 Mn,167 Cr168 catalysts, to precious Ir,169 Ru32,53 atoms catalysts. Very recently, Chen et al. developed an Ir–N–C SASCs (Ir-SAC) with homogeneous Ir porphyrins for high-efficiency ORR catalysis.169 The electrocatalyst was synthesized using ZIF-8 with a cavity diameter of 11.6 Å as active site host to in situ encapsulate smaller Ir acetylacetonate molecules (9.8 Å). And the precise Ir-ZIF-8 precursors were pyrolysed under flowing Ar/H2 gas at 950 °C for 1 h. This design concept is similar to the 3rd strategy mentioned before: space-confinement strategy, namely, the target metal atoms are in the cavity of MOFs. Likewise, using this strategy with ZIF-8 as host to provide spaces and with hydrated CrCl3 as guest, Xing et al. for the first time obtained Cr/N/C SASCs, in which the atomically dispersed Cr atoms were confirmed in Cr–N4 coordination structure.168 The Cr/N/C electrocatalysts not only exhibited excellent ORR activity, but also restrained the Fenton reaction, showing a superb stability. Apart SASCs, di-atom or multi-atom catalysts can also be synthesized using this strategy. Recently, in situ encapsulating binuclear Fe2(CO)9 or trinuclear Ru3(CO)12 in the cavity of ZIF-8 with subsequent pyrolysis treatments has been demonstrated to be an effective approach to fabricating di-atomic Fe2 clusters and tri-atomic Ru3 clusters anchored on N-doped carbon catalysts.48,53
In conclusion, ZIFs have been reported as precise precursors to produce ASCs with high structural tailorability, high N content, and the pore confinement effect. However, the microporosity of ZIFs and their carbonized derivatives hamper mass transfer and the accessibility of the active sites, because those metal active sites buried in the dense carbon matrix are rendered inactive.160 Therefore, it is imperative to rationally design different MOFs precursors to develop ASCs that can possess hierarchical pores, provide efficient active sites and large mass transfer to improve catalytic performances.153
One strategy is to develop and utilize new types of MOFs, which can be used as templates to tune the metal atoms, surface areas and pore sizes of the obtained derived carbon catalysts by controlling the length of organic linkers.55,153 As show in Fig. 10a, Xu et al. selected Zn-based octahedron-shaped and triazole-rich energetic MOFs (EMOFs) as precise precursors, in which each Zn ion was coordinated by six N atoms.51 After incorporation of target metal ions (Fe and Co ions) into its spaces, transition-metal-doped MET-6 (TM@MET-6) were obtained. Upon one-step carbonization, the Zn nodes were reduced and evaporated, and TM@MET-6 was converted into homogeneously dispersed target metal ions on hierarchically porous carbon networks (TM@C). Interestingly, the energetic triazole ligands could decompose and generate a large amount of gases, foaming the carbon networks with interconnected channels, massive macropores, abundant mesopores and micropores throughout the entire skeleton. This hierarchically porous structure and abundant Fe and Co active sits were conducive to the exposure and accessibility of active sits, electron transfer, mass transport, and electrolyte penetration, ensuring superior electrocatalytic performances towards ORR. As another example, Mn-based MOFs was used as precursor to prepared atomically dispersed Mn catalyst, which exhibited superior performances for the ORR and zinc–air batteries under alkaline conditions.170 In addition, Zr6-based UiO-66-NH2 and Zr4-based PCN-222 have also been used for synthesizing isolated Pd154 or Ru155 sites anchored on ZrO2 supports, or isolated Fe,153 W150 or Ru155 sites anchored on N-doped carbon supports after removal of ZrO2. For example, single-atom Pd sites anchored on ZrO2 supports were prepared via two-step pyrolysis.154 In the first step, under the protection of Ar, the ultrasmall ZrO2 formed along with the carbon skeletons anchor the Pd sites, forming Pd1–N/C interface. In the second step, after switching Ar to air, the linker-derived NC would be selectively etched, and Pd atoms migrated from NC supports to the ZrO2 nanonet. If the ZrO2 supports were removed, the SASCs would be obtained with N-doped carbon supports. As shown in Fig. 10b, a porphyrinic Zr4-based MOF, PCN-222, featuring 1D mesochannels with a diameter of 3.2 nm, was chosen as a representative precursor.153 To inhibit the molecular stacking and increase the distance of adjacent Fe atoms, the authors tuned the ratio between Fe–TCPP (TCPP = tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin) and H2–TCPP ligands to get a series of isostructural MOFs, denoted as Fex-PCN-222. After pyrolysis and removal of ZrO2 with HF solution, the optimized Fe20-PCN-222 was converted into single-atom Fe sites implanted hierarchically porous N-doped carbon (FeSA–N–C). The optimized FeSA–N–C electrocatalysts with highly active single Fe atoms and oriented mesopores facilitated the access of active sites and the mass transfer, leading to the superb ORR activity and ultrahigh stability. We can see that, if ZrO2 is adopted as the support, the electrical conductivity would be low. If the supports are N-doped carbon, a high electrical conductivity would be guaranteed. However, the HF solution is very toxic and is not environmentally benign.
 Fig. 10  Two strategies to improve active sites and mass transfer: (a and b) developing and utilizing new types of MOFs and (c and d) using hard and soft templates. (a) Synthesis of CoFe@C via high-temperature pyrolysis of Co,Fe co-doped MET-6 MOF. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the fabrication of FeSA–N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis of Fe20-PCN-222. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) A schematic synthesis process of concave-shaped TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C with coating, preheating, etching silica off, absorbing TPI and carbonization. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) The synthetic route for hollow Fe-SAs/NPS-HC with PZS and bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)sulfone as P, S, N sources and soft templates. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Another strategy to elevate porosity and provide more efficient active sites is to use hard sacrificial templates, such as SiO2,160 KCl,171 Te nanotubes,172 polystyrene (PS) spheres,173 or surfactant/organic monomer-assisted soft templates.160,161,171 As shown in Fig. 10c, Shui et al. produced a class of concave Fe–N–C single-atom catalysts featuring an enhanced external surface area and mesoporosity, and the ORR performance is even comparable to that of the 2018 Pt-group-metal-free catalysts (PGM-free catalyst).160 During the synthesis process, the team first prepared ZIF-8 precursors coated with mesoporous SiO2. Then the precursors were heated at 650 °C in an Ar ambient, and the Si layer was etched to form a concave-shaped host with enlarged micropores, which allowed the Fe source to be easily absorbed. After pyrolysis the integrated precursor, the target concave-shaped Fe–N–C SASCs were obtained. They found that the SiO2-coating and preheating treatments were crucial to achieve the unique structure catalyst. As for examples for soft templates, Li et al. used the monomers of poly(cyclotriphospazene-co-4,4′-sulfonyldiphenol) (PZS) and iron precursors to mixed with ZIF-8 to form ZIF-8/Fe@PZS core–shell composites precursors by polymerization (Fig. 10d).161 After pyrolysis, the polymer-based coating ZIF-8/Fe@PZS precursors transformed to a hollow carbon structure with single-atomic-site Fe catalysts via the Kirkendall effect, which enhanced the kinetics and activity for ORR in both alkaline and acid media. In conclusion, apart from enhancing their porosity of the resulted electrocatalysts, using templates can also provide more efficient active sites via either exposing more efficient active sites or improving the active metal contents.
2.2.1.2 Pyrolysis of irregular metal-containing complexes. 
As alternatives to metal-containing specific complexes, transition metal and N-containing irregular complexes or polymers have also been widely used as precursors to prepare atomically dispersed metal catalysts via pyrolysis, especially catalysts with N-doped carbon material as supports (M–Nx–C, M = Fe,174–192 Co,45,54,176,193–198 Ni,31,199,200 Cu,201–203 Zn,204,205 Mn,206,207 Mo,208,209 Ru,210,211etc.). As shown in Fig. 11a, various ASCs on carbon nanospheres M/p-CN (M = Co, Ni, Cu, Mn, Pd) were synthesized by high-temperature treatment of metal-complex-encapsulated polymers, which were formed by simple polymerization of the corresponding metal acetylacetonate complexes and monomers.45 In a recent work, Zhang et al. reported an atomically dispersed Mn electrocatalysts with halogen and N dual-coordination by pyrolyzing a pre-formed polymer Mn–EDA–Cl (EDA = ethylenediamine) precursors.206 As an electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction, it exhibited a maximum CO faradaic efficiency of 97%, because the unique coordination environment could modulate the electronic structure of Mn atom. However, during the synthesis process, acid has to be used to remove the free metallic residues. It is worth noting that, in most of these cases, the step of leaching NPs in the calcined product is not inevitable.31,174,176,177,194,198 Similarly, the fact that Zn tends to evaporate at high temperature can also be used in this strategy, which can not only create abundant pores after evaporation, but also consequently inhibit the agglomeration of target atoms, thus improving the concentration of active metal–Nx (M–Nx) sites.177,185
 Fig. 11  Pyrolysis of irregular metal containing complexes without (a) and with templates (b–d). (a) The synthesis of Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Co-SAS/HOPNC with F127 and silica opal as dual-template. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Schematic Illustration of the synthesis of SA-Fe/CN with α-FeOOH as hard templates and Fe source. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of 0.2Pt/m-Al2O3–H2 with P123 as soft templates. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Similarly, in the design of novel 3D porous nanocarbon-based electrocatalysts, the hard templates, such as SiO2,177,178,181,189,196,207 SBA,183,195,212,213 α-FeOOH,20 Te nanowires,211 Mg(OH)2/MoO,176,214 can be used as sacrificial pore-forming agent. Meanwhile, some large organic molecules, such as tri-n-octyllphosphine-oxide (TOPO),210 polyethylene glycol (PEG),194 (EO)20(PO)70(EO)20 triblock copolymer (P123),215 triblock copolymer Pluronic F127196 can act as both carbon, N, S or P sources and soft sacrificial pore-forming templates. Therefore, according to target pores size, we can select suitable hard or soft templates. As shown in Fig. 11b, Li et al. prepared single-atomic Co sites embedded in hierarchically ordered porous N-doped carbon (Co-SAS/HOPNC) through a facile dual-template cooperative pyrolysis approach, during which Si colloidal crystal (opal) and F127 were used as macroporous mold and mesostructural template, respectively.196 In addition, carbonizing the polydopamine-coated α-FeOOH nanorod and leaching unstable Fe species with HCl led to the formation of single Fe atoms anchored on the hollow N-doped carbon substrates (Fig. 11c).20 In this process, the α-FeOOH nanorods acted as a sacrificial template for obtaining a hollow structure with high surface area and provided Fe sources stabilized by N species. Another example is using Te nanowires as sacrificial templates to synthesize one-dimensional Ru, N-codoped carbon NWs, whose catalytic performance was markedly better than that of commercial Pt/C catalyst.211 Amphiphilic P123 macromolecules were often used as templates to construct mesoporous structures.216 As shown in Fig. 11d, Yan et al. reported an atomically dispersed Pt catalyst supported on mesoporous Al2O3, in which the P123 template decomposed to form rigid, well-aligned mesoporous Al2O3 framework.215
In general, high-temperature pyrolysis method has been developed to be one of the most effective and mature methods for preparing ASCs, especially for preparing electrocatalysts with N-doped porous carbon carriers. Pyrolysis of accurate MOF-based precursors can precisely control the size of MOF-derived carbon supports, coordination number, dispersion tendencies and binding mode.68 Its interconnected 3D molecular-scale cages offer abundant mass transfer channels and active sites. Compared with MOF-based precursors, it is more difficult to control the morphology and precise atomic structure of the products via pyrolysis of metal-containing non-specific complexes. However, for this strategy, there are more kinds of metal sources, carbon sources and heteroatom sources available.
The template-assisted strategy can further enhance their porosity of carbonized derivatives and improve their catalytic activity. It is also beneficial to regulate the pore size and interface environment between the carrier and the single atoms according to the choice of hard and soft templates, optimizing the catalytic path, and achieving efficient and stable catalytic performance. Therefore, the choice of template is crucial. Hard templates are of high stability and well-defined structures, whose structural integrity is easily retained, even in large-scale preparation.55 For examples, SiO2 has a wide pore size range and a strong replica morphology.217 The size of SiO2 can be tuned according to the required apertures. However, SiO2 needs to be synthesized in advance, and removal of the template requires the use of toxic HF solution or strong alkaline NaOH. Other kinds of hard templates also suffer from similar issues. Soft templates are relatively easier to remove; however, soft templates, such as F127, p123, are often more effective for construction of mesoporous structure, and are probably more difficult to obtain microporous or macroporous materials.


2.2.2 High-temperature atomic migration and trapping method. 
In high-temperature catalytic processes, small metal NPs, which contain the active sites in heterogeneous catalysts, have the tendency to aggregate into larger particles owing to their high surface free energy, leading to the loss of catalyst activity.218 This is known as sintering, or thermal deactivation. The mechanism for sintering of NPs is dominated by Ostwald ripening, which involves the migration of atomic metal species between NPs and the coalescence of neighbouring metal NPs. These two pathways led to larger particles growing at the expense of smaller particles owing to the differences in surface energy.218,219 However, if in this process, the migrated atomic metal species are trapped by supports to form strong metal–support interactions, the surface energy and the tendency of metal atom migration to form large particles would be effectively reduced.219–222 By take advantage of this phenomenon, high-temperature atomic migration and trapping is gradually developed as an effective method for synthesizing atomically dispersed catalysts, which is not only suitable for metal NPs but also for bulk metal to produce ASCs.219,220,222–227
2.2.2.1 From NPs to single atoms. 
For the anchoring of single atoms, the NPs can be immobilized in the target support via in situ trapping or separated to each other via space migration and then trapping. For example, Tang et al. first prepared Ag NPs supported on Hollandite-type manganese oxide (HMO) nanorods. After thermal treatment, the resulting Ag atoms thermally migrated along the external surfaces to the ends of the HMO nanorods, resulting in single Ag atoms anchored at the tunnel openings of the HMO.222 As another example, Li et al. utilized N-doped carbon derived from a ZIF-8 as the anchoring substrate to capture the migrating metal atoms at high temperatures (Fig. 12a).219 They first encapsulated noble metal NPs (M: Pd, Pt, Au) into ZIF-8 crystal to form M-NPs@ZIF-8 composites. Then the nanocomposites were treated at high temperature (900 °C) under an inert atmosphere to get thermally stable single atoms dispersed on N-doped carbon. This method is not only suitable for noble metals, but also can be used to synthesize Ni single atoms anchored on the surface of N-doped carbon support with slight modification.223 Very recently, Hu et al. used controllable high-temperature shockwaves to synthesize and stabilize single atoms. For example, Pt single atoms on CO2-activated carbon nanofibre (CA-CNF) substrates were obtained at very high temperatures (1500–2000 K) using a programmable, periodic on–off heating pattern that features a short “on” state and a ten-times longer “off” state (Fig. 12b).224 The key in this process is short heating followed by a rapid quenching. At high temperature, CNF created suitable defect sites through the reverse Boudouard reaction (CO2 + C → 2CO), which allowed the volatilized Pt to anchor into these vacancy sites. Multiple pulses of heat led to complete dispersion of Pt. In contrast, conventional slow heating only leads to the growth of NPs.221 The obtained single atoms (HT-SAs) with Pt loading of ∼0.24 wt% demonstrated a superior stability in direct methane conversion and a hydrothermal stability after steam treatment at 973 K. In addition, the shockwave method is quite general, which is suitable for synthesizing single-atom Pt, Ru and Co on carbon, C3N4 and TiO2 substrates. When Fe powder and N-doped carbon were separately placed on the porcelain boat, at high temperature, the volatile Fe atoms produced from Fe powder were still successfully migrated to the N-doped carbon support under N2 flow.228 Apart from metal particles, metal oxides can also be directly converted into single atoms. As shown in Fig. 12c, at high-temperature, in a flowing N2 atmosphere, a series of commercially available Cu2O were directly transformed into isolated single-atom Cu onto the N-doped carbon, which delivered excellent ORR performance with a half-wave potential of 0.92 VRHE.225
 Fig. 12  High-temperature atomic migration and trapping from NPs to single atoms. (a) Scheme of the transformation of Pd NPs to single atoms Pd. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Scheme of the HT-SAs synthesis and dispersion process with high-temperature shockwaves method (grey, C; cyan, metal precursor; red, metallic atoms). Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Scheme of the formation isolated single-atom Cu on N-doped carbon. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
2.2.2.2 From bulk metals to single atoms. 
In addition to the synthesis of ASCs from NPs, studies of the direct fabrication of ASCs from inexpensive and readily available bulk metal materials have also been reported. However, representative works are still very scarce, mainly coming from Wu and Li et al.226,227 Based on the results reported, the conversion from bulk metal materials to atoms is probably challenging, because ammonia atmosphere or a substance that can produce ammonia have to be used to haul the surface metal atoms to form volatile M(NH3)x species. As shown in Fig. 13a, the Cu foam and powder of ZIF-8 were separately placed on a porcelain boat. The porcelain boat was heated in a tube furnace to 1173 K, during which ZIF-8 were carbonized into N-doped carbon support with empty Zn nodes and abundant defect sites, and Cu atoms were hauled out via volatile species. Then, the species were trapped by the defects in the N-doped carbon substrate, forming the isolated Cu-SAs/N–C catalysts with a loading of 1.26 wt%.227 Without NH3, it would be unable to haul the Cu atoms out of the bulk Cu foam. However, the use of corrosive NH3 will lead to harsh experiment, environmental pollution and increase the cost of ASCs. Under high temperature, dicyandiamide (DCD) can generate NH3 gas.226 Taking advantage of this reaction, Pt atoms from Pt net could form strong coordination interaction with NH3, and then generate the possible volatile Pt(NH3)x species (Fig. 13b). The species were further trapped by the defective graphene (DG), generating the isolated Pt SAs/DG catalysts. As electrocatalysts for HER, the resultant Pt SAs/DG catalyst showed even better performance than commercial Pt/C in terms of both overpotentials and Tafel slopes.226 This method is also general, and can also be applied to other single metal atoms, such as Au and Pd. The metal bulk is relatively inexpensive and widely accepted; thus, with this strategy, the goal of producing functional ASCs at industrial levels seems achievable. However, compared with metal NPs, metal bulk is relatively difficult to be volatilized to its corresponding metal atoms and migrate to supports. In this process, the volatilized metal atoms, such as Cu, Ni, Pt, Co, must be able to form strong coordination interaction with NH3 to generate metal complexes, M(NH3)x species.
 Fig. 13  High-temperature atomic migration and trapping from bulk metal to single atoms. (a) Schematic of the preparation of Cu-SAs/N–C and its proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Reaction mechanism for the synthesis of Pt SAs/DG. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In general, the high-temperature atomic migration and trapping method conversion has shown great promise in industrial applications for synthesizing ASCs directly from metal NPs and metal foam/net. The method is simple and feasible under three prerequisites: (1) a metal raw material, such as metal NPs, nanocrystalline or metal foam/net, which can be volatilized to generate the corresponding metal atoms; (2) appropriate pyrolysis conditions, such as temperature and atmosphere, which must provide the activation energy for atom dispersion and atom-transport ability to supports; (3) support, which possesses suitable sites for trapping the metal atoms. Consequently, the high-temperature synthesis method leads to SASCs with good thermal durability, because only the atoms strongly bound to the supports can survive during high-temperature treatment.221 In addition, the potential implications for converting NPs into single atoms are huge, which can be used for regeneration and reuse of sintered industrial metal nanocatalysts by simply heating them to high temperatures.55,221 This would reduce the expense of the precious metals and probably provide a large-scale preparation method for high-performance thermally stable electrocatalysts.

3 Characterization methods
In fact, before the concept of SASCs was first clearly presented by Zhang et al. in 2011, the possibility of atomic site catalysts has been discovered. As early as 1995, Thomas et al. obtained the heterogeneous catalyst Ti1/MCM-41 by grafting metallocene complex Ticp2Cl2 onto the mesoporous silica MCM-41 for the epoxidation of cyclohexene.36 In 2003, Flytzani-Stephanopoulos et al. found that non-metallic Au and Pt species are responsible for the water–gas shift catalysis, rather than metal NPs.39 However, the characterization methods at that time limited the in-depth understanding of the atomic structure and hampered the development of atomic site catalysts.
Therefore, the direct observation and the structure identification of the active sites play a significant role in atomic site catalysts, and the characterization techniques are not limited to the conventional material characterization technologies such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). With the development of advanced characterization techniques, the structure and fundamental mechanisms of the SASCs have been comprehensively studied. There are some major methods to investigate the atomic structure of ASCs, including (i) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), in which the single metal atoms can be directly observed; (ii) XAS, which gives the information on electronic structure and the coordination environment; (iii) atom probe tomography (APT), which can reveal atomic-level three-dimensional (3D) imaging and chemical composition. These characterization methods are usually used together to analyse the structure of SASCs. Besides, some special technologies, such as Mössbauer spectroscopy and IR spectroscopy of CO adsorption, can also provide useful information on the atomic site catalysts. Yet still, their applications are limited to several specific elements, so we would not discuss those methods in this review owing to their lack of generality. In addition, a number of in situ/operando studies using the methods above have been conducted to capture the reaction intermediates, identify the active sites, and monitor the dynamic catalytic behaviours of ASCs, which will be discussed along with the corresponding techniques.
3.1 Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM)
The wavelength of electron beam with an accelerating voltage of 100 keV is 0.037 Angstroms, whereas the resolution of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and STEM can only reach the nanometer or sub-nanometer scale owing to the aberration of the magnetic lenses. The aberration-corrected STEM (AC-STEM) has been developed to further elevate the resolution to sub-angstrom in the past decades, which makes it possible to directly identify the isolated single atoms on supporting materials.
In the aberration-corrected HAADF STEM (AC-HAADF STEM), isolated single heavy atoms can be discerned according to the contrast of single atoms and the supported materials, which closely relies on the atomic number of the observed atoms. The higher the atomic number, in most cases, the brighter the spots. For example, individual and randomly distributed Fe atoms are directly observed to be embedded in the graphene nanosheets (Fig. 14a).190 In Fig. 14c, the heavy Pt atoms, manifested as brighter spots, are identified on the MXene nanosheets.108 The STEM simulation based on the density functional theory (DFT)-optimized structure can help the in-depth analysis of the structure of SASCs. Wang et al. conducted the STEM simulation based on the Pt single-atom immobilized in the Mo vacancies of Mo2Ti2C2Tx, and the simulated results shown in Fig. 14c are in agreement with the measured image. It should be noted that there is a limitation of AC-HAADF STEM in distinguishing atoms with similar atomic numbers and thus showing similar brightness.
 Fig. 14  STEM and STM characterization. (a) AC HAADF-STEM image of isolated Fe atoms (labelled 1, 2, and 3) in a few-layer graphene sheet. (b) EELS of the N K-edge and Fe L-edge acquired from atoms 1–3 in (a). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) AC HAADF-STEM image of Pt single atoms immobilized in Mo2TiC2Tx and the corresponding simulated image. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Low-temperature STM image of FeN4/GN-2.7. (e) Simulated STM image for (d). The grey, blue, and light blue balls in (d) and (e) represent C, N, and Fe atoms, respectively. (f) dI/dV spectra acquired along the white line in the inset image. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) coupled with AC-STEM can help to provide the composition information of the active site of ASCs. Zelenay et al. directly visualized the Fe–N active sites in the PGM-free catalyst with the STEM-EELS (Fig. 14a and b).190 The EELS results obtained directly around the Fe showed the Fe–N association, and the quantification results from the EELS data yielded an average composition of Fe–N4. Therefore, the AC-STEM combined with HAADF and EELS has become one of the most powerful and direct method to characterize the metal ASCs, and has been significantly accelerating the development of ASCs. Various isolated single metal atoms have been successfully discerned to be anchored on different supports including metal oxides, carbon, zeolites, MXenes.
Another powerful technique to direct observe and locate the atomic sites is scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). The principle of STM is to scan the surface of catalysts with a needle tip and acquire the atomic-resolution microscopic images through tunnelling current. Bao et al. performed the low-temperature STM (4 K) and obtained an atomic-resolution image of a FeN4 site embedded in the graphene matrix (Fig. 14d).21 More importantly, the STM can be used to further obtain the electronic structure information of FeN4 sites. The Fe centre is resolved as a bright spot in Fig. 14d, and the neighbouring N and C atoms also appear brighter than C atoms far away from FeN4 site, suggesting the electronically rich property. The STM simulation (Fig. 14e) is well consistent with the experimental results, indicating that the Fe centre significantly modifies the electronic structure of the adjacent atoms. Furthermore, the scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) measurements of FeN4 site shows a sharp resonance state at −0.63 eV below the Fermi level, suggesting that the FeN4 site strongly interacts with the graphene lattice so that it generates a new electronic state near the Fermi level (Fig. 14f). However, the rigorous experimental conditions and demanding specimen requirements hampered STM to be a universal characterization technique for ASCs.
The recent development of in situ environmental TEM (ETEM) enables researchers to direct observe the dynamic structure evolution of SASCs. Li et al. observed the competing sintering and atomization processes during transformation from the noble metal NP to the single atoms using the in situ ETEM.219 Rümmeli et al. reported in situ observation of single Fe atom catalysing the dynamic growth process of graphene.229
3.2 X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)
In addition to the microscopy methods which only give the limited information on the specific local area of ASCs, synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS, also known as X-ray absorption fine-structure, XAFS) offers more detailed, sensitive and overall structure information on the electronic state and the coordination environment of the probed atom, and thus has become an indispensable technical support to confirm and analyse the atomic structure. In brief, when the X-ray photon energy is absorbed by the probed atom, the inner-shell electrons would be excited to the unoccupied continuum level. The X-ray absorption coefficient of the probed atom is plotted as a function of X-ray energy, which can be divided into X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES, a sharp rise and strong oscillation near the absorption edge) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS, a series of weak oscillatory wiggles beyond about 50 eV above the absorption edge).230 XANES is highly sensitive to the electronic structure and spatial arrangement of the coordinating atoms, whereas the EXAFS is used to obtain the neighboring geometry information of the probed atoms including the coordination atoms, distance and numbers. The atomic and electronic structure of the ASCs can be obtained by combining the XANES and EXAFS results. Moreover, the operando XAS allows researchers to monitor the dynamic behaviors of the ASCs under reaction conditions.

3.2.1 Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). 
EXAFS can be understood as the wave-phase behavior of photoelectrons during X-ray absorption, and can be interpreted by the Fourier transformation (FT) and wavelet transformation (WT).
FT-EXAFS. 
FT can transform the EXAFS signal into the radial structure function (R space), and directly enable the separation of backscattering atoms. The FT-EXAFS has become a straightforward method to distinguish the single-atomic structure by estimating the coordination shells of the probed atoms according to the radial distance in the R space. Generally, the single-atomic structure exhibits a major peak corresponding to the metal–light atoms (C, N, O, etc.) bond in the nonmetallic support or metal–second metal bond in the single-atom alloy.
Huang et al. identified the atomic structure of transition metals embedded in N-doped holey graphene frameworks (M-NHGFs) by systematic X-ray absorption fine structure analyses. The FT-EXAFS was first conducted.103 The metal foils and oxides samples were used as references. As shown in Fig. 15a, the Ni foil shows a major peak at 2.18 Å, which resulted from the Ni–Ni contribution. The Ni-NHGF exhibits a major peak at 1.44 Å, which can be attributed to the backscattering between Ni and light elements C/N/O. The major peak of other M-NHGFs can be also assigned to the metal–C/N/O contributions. In most cases of the FT-EXAFS of ASCs, the metal–metal bond can be definitely precluded if there exist no peaks for metal–metal contributions at higher R value to confirm the atomic dispersion of metals. In this case, a minor signal at 2.01 Å can be found overlapping partially with the Ni–Ni peak, which was attributed to the Ni–C backscattering in the second coordination shell according to the in-depth WT-EXAFS (discussed in the next part) and fitting analysis.
 Fig. 15  FT-EXAFS studies of atomic metal sites catalysts. (a) FT magnitudes of the K-edge EXAFS of atomic transition metals embedded in N-doped holey graphene frameworks (M-NHGFs) and the reference samples. (b) The EXAFS analysis of Ni-NHGF in k space. (c) The EXAFS analysis of Ni-NHGF in R space. The inset shows the structure model of a NiN4C4 moiety. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) The formation process of Co–N4 and Co–N2. (e) The FT-EXAFS analysis of Co–Nx species. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) The FT-EXAFS analysis of Fe–Nx species. Reproduced with permission.231 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
By a least-square curve fitting of the experimental EXAFS data to the standard EXAFS equation, further quantitative local structure such as coordination distance and numbers of the absorbing atoms can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 15b and c, the Ni–N, Ni–O and Ni–C backscattering pairs were used to analyze the FT-EXAFS spectra. The best fitting shows a NiN4C4 moiety with four N atoms coordinated with a single Ni atom in the first shell, four C atoms in the second coordinating sphere and one O atom in the axial direction. It should be noted that the relative standard deviation of coordination number is about 20%, which makes the identification of accurate atomic structure still ambiguous. Moreover, it is still vague for FT-EXAFS to distinguish the first-shell coordination atomic species between the light atoms like N and C.
Another directly useful information that can be obtained from the FT-EXAFS is the coordination number changes of probed atoms, which is positively correlated to the intensity of R space. Wu et al. developed a series of Co-NC ASCs for CO2 reduction derived from pyrolysis at different temperatures (800, 900 and 1000 °C) (Fig. 15d).147 As shown in Fig. 15e, all the Co atoms in these three samples exhibited atomic dispersion with a single prominent peak at 1.4 Å from Co–N contribution. Interestingly, the intensity of the Co–N peak for the three samples declined significantly as the pyrolysis temperature increased, indicating the decreased surrounding N number of Co centres. The further fitting results showed the Co–N coordination numbers are 4.1, 3.1 and 2.2 for these three samples, respectively. In addition, Chen et al. developed a polymerization-regulated pyrolysis strategy and obtained a series of ASCs with different Fe–N coordination environments.231 As shown in Fig. 15f, the intensity of Fe–N shell in R space decreases with the increase of pyrolysis temperature, again demonstrating the decreased coordinating N numbers of Fe centre.
WT-EXAFS. 
The wavelet-transform (WT) EXAFS can provide powerful resolution in both k and R spaces. As discussed above, the FT-EXAFS can be used to identify the backscattering paths according to the radial distance in the R space. However, if the coordination shells constitute different types of atoms at one distance, the FT-EXAFS analysis can be rather difficult to distinguish the coordination environment of the probed atoms. Besides, there are some situations in which the backscattering between metal and the next nearest-neighbor light atoms overlaps the metal–metal contributions at FT-EXAFS. These issues can be effectively resolved by the WT-EXAFS analysis, because it can provide not only radial distance resolution but also k-space resolution, so researchers can decipher the backscattering atoms even if they overlap in the R space according to the k locations of intensity maxima in the WT distribution.
As discussed above in Fig. 15a, a minor peak at 2.01 Å in the Ni-NHGF overlaps partially with the Ni–Ni peak, which makes it difficult to distinguish the scattering pair. Therefore, the wavelet transform for the k3-weighted Ni K-edge EXAFS signals was further performed based on Morlet wavelets with optimum resolutions at 2.0 Å−1. It can be observed that the maxima near 4.0 Å−1 are associated with the Ni–O contributions, whereas the maxima at about 7.0 Å−1 are associated with the Ni–Ni contributions. As shown in Fig. 16a, WT-EXAFS of Ni-NHGFs shows only one intensity maximum at about 4.0 Å−1 which can be assigned to the Ni–C/N/O contributions, in contrast to the intensity maximum at about 7.0 Å−1 for the metal–metal bond, confirming the single-atomic structure of Ni-NHGFs. Therefore, the WT can be readily used to exclude the presence of metal–metal bond without any fitting process.103
 Fig. 16  WT-EXAFS studies of atomic metal sites catalysts. (a) Wavelet transforms for the k3-weighted Ni K-edge EXAFS signals of bulk Ni, NiO and Ni-NHGF. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Wavelet transforms for the k3-weighted Co K-edge EXAFS signals of Co-G and Co-NG. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
The WT maximum is affected by the path length R, Debye–Waller factors σ2, energy shift ΔE and atomic number Z. For an atomic metal–C/N/O path, the WT maximum showed little dependence on R, σ2 and ΔE, but it is largely affected by different Z.232 Therefore, the WT-EXAFS can be used to distinguish atoms with different scattering abilities in the same coordination shell (such as C/N/O). Tour et al. reported a series of electrocatalysts based on very small amounts of cobalt atomically dispersed on nitrogen-doped graphene (Co-NG) and graphene without N doping (Co-G).197 The high-resolution WT-EXAFS was conducted to distinguish the coordination environments of Co centres in the Co-NG and Co-G. The R space of FT-EXAFS showed a single prominent peak at ∼1.6 Å corresponding to the Co and the light elements. As shown in the Fig. 16b, the WT-EXAFS of Co-NG and Co-G showed only one intensity maximum at 3.4 Å−1 and 3.2 Å−1, respectively. As discussed above, the location of the maximum of WT-EXAFS is largely affected by the backscattering atoms with different atomic number Z, theoretically. Therefore, the intensity maximum at 3.4 Å−1 for Co-NG and 3.2 Å−1 for Co-G can be attributed to Co–N path and Co–C path, respectively. The maximum feature of Co-NG at 9.0 Å−1 may be associated with the multiple scattering paths between the light atoms, in contrast to the Co–Co path with the intensity maximum at 6.8 Å−1. The least-square curve fitting of FT-EXAFS shows a good agreement of experimental curves, which confirmed the validity of the above WT-EXAFS interpretation.
Therefore, the combination of FT-EXFAS and WT-EXAFS can be powerful tools to analysize the coordination environments (especially the first shell) of ASCs. Besides the atomic metal sites embedded in the carbon matrix, EXAFS can be also used to analysize ASCs supported in the non-carbon substrates such as the metal oxides,46 metal/alloys,59 MXenes,47etc. Similar to the ASCs on the carbon matrix discussed above, the EXAFS analysis procedure of ASCs on the non-carbon substrate includes the complementary of FT-EXAFS and WT-EXAFS to preclude the metal–metal interaction, identify the coordination environment of the probed atoms and clarify the metal–support interaction.


3.2.2 X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES). 
Compared with the EXAFS, the interpretation of XANES is rather complicated owing to the contribution of multiple scattering, many-body effect and polarization effect. The edge energy position and the shape of XANES spectrum are closely related to the valence state, coordination species and coordination environment of the probed atom; therefore, in certain sense, XANES can be used as the fingerprint of the phase.
The XANES contains three regions: (1) pre-edge: some discrete peaks which originate from the transition of core electrons to the bound empty state. The pre-edge of XANES can provide the information of dipole or quadrupole, symmetry as well as hybrid information of the probed atoms. (2) Edge: during the ionization process, the absorption coefficient continues to rise to the maximum value (also called white line peak). The absorption edge of XANES can be used to identify the oxidation state of the absorbing atoms; (3) post-edge: superposition of photoelectron scattering paths, which is correlated to the geometric configuration of probed atoms. The XANES commonly involves analysis methods including oxidation state analysis, characteristic peak analysis and theoretical analysis.
Oxidation state analysis. 
For most 3d transition metals, the chemical states of the probed atoms can be reflected by the shift of the absorption edge position, which is determined by the first derivative of XANES data. Qualitative analysis can be conducted on the basis of the shift of the absorption edge; generally, as the valence state becomes higher, the absorption edge would move toward the higher energy. Liu et al. reported a series of single-Ni-atom catalysts prepared without and with addition of a S precursor (L-cysteine) (denoted A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG, respectively) for CO2 electroreduction.31 As shown in the Fig. 17a, the absorption edge positions of A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG were between those of Ni foil and NiPc, which indicates that the valence states of A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG were between 0 and +2. The semi-quantitative valence analysis can be conducted according to the linear fitting between the valence state and the adsorption edge. The adsorption edge can be determined by the peak position of the first derivative XANES or the inflection point of the second-derivative spectra. As shown in the Fig. 17b, the energy position of the rising-edge for A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG are determined to be 8337.9 and 8338.1 eV, respectively, whereas those for Ni metal and Ni(II)Pc are 8337.1 eV and 8338.8 eV. For Ni, the K-edge XAS edge position shifts by about 0.7 eV per oxidation state,31 suggesting that the oxidation state of Ni atoms in A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG would be +1 with a 3d9, S = 1/2 electron configuration.
 Fig. 17  Oxidation state and characteristic peak analysis of XANES. (a) Ni K-edge XANES spectra of A-Ni-NG, A-Ni-NSG and NiPc. (b) The second derivative spectra obtained from (a). Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra and (d) corresponding linear fitting curve of h-Pt1–CuSx and reference materials. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (e) Fe K-edge XANES spectra. (f) S K-edge XANES spectra and (g) corresponding linear fitting curve of Fe-ISA/SNC and reference materials. (h) Molecular structure of the FeN4S2 active site in Fe-ISA/SNC. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
For some noble metals, the valence analysis method is different from the 3d transition metals. The white line peak, related to the hole state density of the final state, is connected with the oxidation state. Li et al. report the synthesis of hollow nanospheres constructed by atomically dispersing platinum in amorphous CuSx support (h-Pt1–CuSx) for selective O2 reduction to H2O2 in acidic solution.60 As shown in the Fig. 17c, the white line intensity of h-Pt1–CuSx is between those of Pt foil and Pt(acac)2 or PtO2, and closer to that of Pt foil, implying that the Pt atoms carry slightly positive charges. A semi-quantitative analysis based on the white line intensity shows that the valence of Pt is near +0.75 (Fig. 17d), which is lower than that of previously reported single atomic Pt catalysts, probably because of the lower electronegativity of S than oxygen or nitrogen. By contrast, rather than the white line intensity, the white line position of Ir can reflect the formal d-band hole count, which is related to the oxidation state of Ir.233
The interaction between isolated metal atoms and the support plays a key role in the synthesis and catalytic application. To better understand the oxidation state of the atomic metal sites, the XANES spectra of the coordination atoms have also been widely studied. Li et al. reported an atomically isolated Fe sites on S,N co-doped carbon (Fe-ISA/SNC) by copolymer pyrolysis strategy for oxygen reduction reaction.186 As shown in the Fig. 17e, the absorption edge of Fe-ISA/SNC located between that of FeO and Fe2O3, indicating the valence of Fe species in Fe-ISA/SNC situated between Fe2+ and Fe3+. The valence of SUS was investigated by S K-edge XANES (Fig. 17f). Similar to the cases for transition metals, the oxidation states of S are also linearly correlated to the position of K-edge.234 The linear fitting curve of standard samples with different S oxidation states and the Fe-ISA/SNC showed that the valence state of S in Fe-ISA/SNC is approximately +1.2 (Fig. 17g), which may be attributed to their coordination with N atoms, since N has stronger electronegativity (3.04) compared with S (2.58). Together the XANES of Fe K-edge and S K-edge with the EXAFS analysis, the FeN4S2 active site in Fe-ISA/SNC is estimated in the Fig. 17h.
Besides, the XANES is often combined with the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) for the analysis of the oxidation states of the probed atoms. The X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) can also provide useful information in this regard.
Characteristic peak analysis. 
Reliable information on the oxidation state and the coordination symmetry can be given on the basis of the position and intensity of some characteristic peaks, such as the white line peak and the pre-edge features. For example, two pre-edge peaks of 3d transition metal can be observed in the XANES. The peak at lower energy is attributable to the dipole forbidden 1s to 3d transitions or to the 3d–4p orbital mixing. The peak at higher energy results from a 1s–4pz shakedown transition characteristic for a square-planar configuration with high D4h symmetry.230
As shown in Fig. 17a, peak A represents the dipole-forbidden but quadrupole-allowed 1s → 3d transition. The peak A intensity of NiPc is very weak compared with those of A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG, which may be attributed to the high D4h symmetry of NiPc and the increased dipole-allowed 1s–4p transitions of A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG.235 The peak B represents 1s → 4pz transition which can act as a fingerprint of the square-planar M–N4 moieties.236 The peak B intensities of A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG are reduced significantly compared with that of NiPc, confirming the distorted D4h symmetry of the Ni centre in A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG. Peak C and D represent 1s → 4px,y transitions and multiple scattering processes, respectively. The increased relative intensity ratios for peak C and D (IC/ID) has been found to correlated with the enhanced electrocatalytic performance.237 As shown in Fig. 17a, A-Ni-NG and A-Ni-NSG showed much larger IC/ID ratios, indicating the good electrocatalytic activities.
Theoretical analysis. 
The simulations and fits of XANES spectra offered a reliable way to better resolve the atomic fine structure of ASCs. Besides, the XANES fitting can extract the quantitative structural information, such as bond distances and bond angles, to refine the moiety used for XANES simulations.
As discussed above, the XANES is the fingerprint of the electronic structure and geometry configuration of the probed atoms; therefore, the XANES fitting is highly sensitive to various moiety structure models. Huang et al. conducted a series of XANES simulation to resolve the atomic site structure of the Ni-NHGF discussed above.15 The porphyrin-based NiN4C12 was first evaluated with axial oxygen considered; however, the simulated spectra are significantly different from the experimental spectra (Fig. 18a).103 Then, the author conducted the simulation based on the pyridinic-N-based NiN4C8, yet unfortunately, the simulated spectra also show poor agreement with the experimental spectra (Fig. 18b). When the simulation was conducted by embedding the NiN4C4 moieties into the graphene lattice, the agreement is drastically improved and the addition of an axial dioxygen ligand on the Ni centre leads to a better agreement. As shown in Fig. 18c, the positions and the relative intensities of the peaks a–f are well reproduced in the simulation XANES spectrum compared to the experiment spectrum over the entire near-edge range. Therefore, these XANES simulations clearly demonstrate the atomic Ni centres coordinated with four N atoms and one adsorbed O atom in the first coordination shell and four C atoms in the second coordination sphere, which is excellently consistent with the EXAFS fitting results as discussed in the Fig. 16c. Furthermore, the structure refinement of the NiN4C4 based on the XANES fitting shows an excellent match with experiment spectrum, and the bond metrics are also in good agreement with those determined by EXAFS analysis and DFT prediction (Fig. 18d).
 Fig. 18  Theoretical simulation of XANES. (a–c) Comparison between the experimental Ni K-edge XANES spectrum of Ni-NHGF and the theoretical spectra calculated with the depicted structures based on a porphyrin-based NiN4C12 (a), pyridinic-N-based NiN4C8 (b) and NiN4C4 moieties (c). (d) Comparison between the experimental XANES spectra (black dotted lines) for Ni–NHGFs and the best-fit theoretical spectra (solid red lines). Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) The XANES spectra of Cu–APC and Cu foil, and the corresponding calculation of XANES spectra of varying numbers of Cu atoms. (f) Structure of Cu atom pair anchored on Pd10Te3 nanowire. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Chen et al. synthesized a series of Cu-doped Pd10Te3 nanowires with different Cu loadings (0.02, 0.06, 0.10, 0.16 and 0.20 wt%) for CO2 electroreduction.49 Interestingly, they found that with a trace amount of Cu (loadings from 0.02 to 0.16%) introduced, the total current density was significantly elevated. Notably, the sample with 0.10% Cu loading (denoted as Cu–APC) showed highly efficient and selectivity activity of CO2 reduction to CO. EXAFS analysis suggests that Cu atoms of Cu–APC exist in the form of Cux and display atomic-level dispersion in the defects of Pd10Te3. To further clarify the value of x in Cux, the authors conducted theoretical simulation of XANES spectra (Fig. 18e). By comparing the experimental XANES of Cu–APC and theoretically calculated for Cu4, Cu13, Cu19 and Cu43, it was found that the profiles Cu–APC and Cu4 showed a good agreement. In addition, the EXAFS fitting based on the Cu4–Ox@Pd10Te3 model (Fig. 18f) gives bond lengths in good consistency with those obtained by DFT calculation. Therefore, combining the XANES simulation results with the DFT calculation, it can be inferred that the Cu4–Ox structure is the active site for CO2 reduction into CO.
To summarize, the XAS studies combined with the experimental and simulated EXAFS/XANES provides compelling evidence of the short-range structure information of the probed atoms, and thus have become the most powerful technique to resolve the electronic structure and the coordination environment of the ASCs.


3.2.3 
            Operando XAS studies. 
The operando XAS has been widely conducted on single site electrocatalysts to monitor the dynamic behaviors of the electronic structure and geometric environment of the atomic metal sites.238 Wei et al. carried out the operando XAS studies to explore the origin of the activity of single-atomic Co sites under HER conditions.98 In this work, the atomically dispersed Co was immobilized by forming a structurally uniform Co1–N4 moiety in the framework of phosphorized carbon nitride (PCN). As shown in Fig. 19a, the absorption edge of the ex situ Co1/PCN is closed to that of CoO, indicating an oxidation state of +2. Under the open-circuit condition, the absorption edge of Co was shifted to higher energy. Moreover, when the cathodic potentials of −0.04 and −0.1 V vs. RHE were applied, the absorption edges were further shifted, indicating a continuous increase of the Co oxidation state (Fig. 19a and b). The fitted average states of Co were analyzed to determine the precise valence state, which shows an increase from +2.02 to +2.20 and +2.40 for the Co1/PCN under the open-circuit condition and at −0.04 V under HER condition, respectively (Fig. 19c).
 Fig. 19  
Operando XAS studies of Co1/PCN under HER condition. (a) Operando XANES spectrum at Co K-edge. (b) First derivative curves for Co K-edge XANES. (c) The fitted average oxidation states of Co from XANES. (d) The k3-weighted Fourier transform (FT) EXAFS analysis of Co in R space. (e) First-shell fitting of EXAFS spectra, and (f) the corresponding Re(k3χ(k)) oscillations. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
The EXAFS was further carried out to reveal the local environment evolution under HER condition. As shown in the Fig. 19d, the main peak positions of EXAFS-FT in the R-space for ex situ Co1/PCN and under the open-circuit or HER condition are shifted from 1.63 Å to 1.56 Å, demonstrating the different coordination environments of the atomic metal sites. The EXAFS fitting was then applied to quantitatively determine the geometric environment evolutions. The best fittings shown in Fig. 19e and f indicate that the four Co–N coordination of the ex situ Co1/PCN changed into two-fold Co–N coordination and one Co–O coordination under the open-circuit condition, and into two-fold Co–N coordination companied with two Co–O coordination under the HER condition. Such evolution resulted from the possible adsorption of the oxo group from the electrolyte and a further adsorption of a H2O molecule in the Volmer step. Combined with the operando XANES and EXAFS, Wei et al. revealed the formation of a high-valence HO–Co1N2 generated by the electrolyte hydroxide binding with the Co–N4 sites, which further absorbed a H2O molecule to form the reaction intermediate H2O–(HO–Co1N2).

3.3 Atom probe tomography (APT)
The imaging principle of STEM determines that the results are two-dimensional projections, which cannot reflect the real atomic distribution of three-dimensional catalysts. Limited by the low resolution for the elements with low atomic number, such as C, N, O, it is difficult to obtain the chemical compositions of SASCs in atomic-level for STEM (still not easy even when combined with EELS). Also, the EXAFS coordination fitting results cannot distinguish the M–C and M–N bonds. Therefore, the atom probe tomography (APT) is developed, which is an imaging technique that enables three-dimensional atomic-scale analysis of the elemental composition of solid catalysts.
In APT, the needle-shaped specimen is connected to high voltage under ultra-high vacuum, and then the pulsed laser is superimposed on the tip of the specimen, which extracts the tip atoms into ions in a controlled manner. These ions are captured by a high-resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometer equipped with a two-dimensional (2D) single-ion-sensitive detector (Fig. 20a). The element type is determined by the mass spectrum, and the longitudinal coordinate is obtained according to the order in which these ions reach the time-resolved 2D detector. Finally, the chemical composition of the target material at the 3D atomic scale can be obtained by model computation combining the data above.3,239,240
 Fig. 20  APT characterization. (a) The schematic of the fabrication procedure of APT specimen tips. (b) The cross-section SEM image of sandwich sample after FIB cutting. (c) SEM image of the final APT specimen tip. (d) Reconstructed APT tomography. (e) a 2D contour plot of C atomic concentration. (f) The corresponding reconstruction for a region of 40 × 40 × 80 nm surrounding a CNT. (g) Side and top view of CNT planes. Atom labels, Au in yellow, Fe in green, C in grey, and O in red in (d)–(g); scale bars, 500 nm in (b), 200 nm in (c), 20 nm in (d)–(f), and 2 nm in (g). Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
A needle-shaped specimen is needed to realize the field evacuation with the assistance of the applied electric field and the pulsed laser. Wang et al. used a sandwich method to prepare the specimen tip, in which the Ni substrate gives sufficient material support and Au layers serves as a marker for the original surface of the target catalysts Fe–CNT. The focus ion beam (FIB) procedures are applied to obtain the APT-compatible specimen tip (Fig. 20b and c).3 The 3D reconstructed tomography of the specimen is obtained by collecting 9 million atoms, and the projected 2D image is shown in Fig. 17d. Each green dot represents an isolated single Fe atom, which is randomly dispersed in the carbon support with no neighboring Fe atoms (Fig. 20e and f). The side view and top view of the CNT planes shows that the single Fe atoms may coordinate with neighboring C and O, indicating the possible coordination of Fe–C–O centre. DFT calculations suggests that such Fe–C–O sites are responsible for the electrochemical oxygen reduction via 2e− pathway to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
For M–N/C atomic electrocatalysts, the precise metal coordination environment is the key to understanding the intrinsic catalytic mechanism. However, whether the metal atomic sites are coordinated with N or C or both still remains under debate owing to the ambiguous characterization results. Although the APT cannot provide an exact atomic structure of the isolated single atom on account of the loss of ion signals during the detection process as well as the APT resolution, it could still be one of the best techniques to help scientists identify the possible coordination environment of ASCs. Wang et al. synthesized Ni single atoms coordinated in a graphene shell for aqueous CO2 reduction to CO, and conducted the APT to elucidate the atomic structure of Ni atomic sites.241 The APT results show that only 0.2% Ni single atoms are directly coordinated with N atoms. Combined with DFT calculations, researchers suggested that the Ni atoms coordinated in the graphene vacancies are the major active sites for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO rather than the Ni–N species. Different from the well-known Ni–N4 active sites for CO2 reduction, Wang et al. provides an interesting viewpoint about the role of Ni–C species in their own particular system based on the APT results. Therefore, APT can serve as a powerful complementary characterization technique to STEM and XAS to provide supporting information about the real atomic structure of the catalytically active sites.
4 Electrocatalytic applications
In recent years, many supported ASCs catalysts have been reported as outstanding electrocatalysts. As discussed in the above synthesis methods, the so-called ASCs are singly dispersed in a specific support, often via coordination to carbon and heteroatoms such as O, N, S, which exhibit maximum atomic efficiency and possess well-defined active sites, facilitating mechanistic understanding. In the following sections, we discuss the recent examples to demonstrate the capability and great potential of ASCs as electrocatalysts in several electrochemical energy conversion processes.
4.1 Water splitting
The electrochemical water splitting reaction (i.e., H2O → H2 + 1/2O2), which involves HER and OER, provides a promising method to convert electricity and water into high-purity hydrogen fuel.242,243 Catalysts are needed to improve HER and OER efficiencies by minimizing reaction kinetic barriers, which are referred to as overpotentials (η). The overpotential required to reach an HER or OER current density (j) of −10 mA cm−2 (η10) is a key HER performance metric. Table 1 shows the summary of ASCs along with the corresponding materials, metal contents, synthesis methods and their performances for HER and OER, according to the order: from precious metals to cheap metals, and from HER to OER. Next, in this section, we will discuss various ASCs, including their composites, nanostructures and their applications in HER and OER, with an emphasis on the role of single atoms in electrocatalysis.
Table 1 Summary of ASCs along with the corresponding materials, metal contents, synthesis methods and their performances for HER and OER




Electrocatalysts
Metal content
Synthesis method
Reactions
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Mass activity
Ref.
Year




Pt/C
—
commercial
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼55
31
0.27 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV

26

2016


ALD50Pt/NGNs
2.1 wt% (ICP-AES)
ALD
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼50
29
10.1 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV

26

2016


PtSA-NT-NF
1.76 wt% (ICP-OES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
pH 7.2 (PBS)
24
30
0.07 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV

106

2017


Pt1/MC
2.6 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼30
26
10.0 A mgPt−1; η = 65 mV

113

2017


Pt1@Fe–N–C
2.1 wt% Pt (ICP-OES and XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
60
42
—

96

2018


OER
0.1 M KOH
310
62


Pt SASs/AG
0.44 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
12
29.33
22.4 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV

65

2019


Pt SAs/DG
2.1 wt%
High-temperature pyrolysis
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
23
25
26.2 A mgPt−1; η = 50

226

2019


Pt@PCM
0.53 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
105
65.3
∼0.4 A mgPt−1; η = 200 mV

244

2018


1.0 M KOH
139
73.6


Pt1/OLC
0.27 wt% (ICP-AES)
ALD
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼38
36
7.4 A mgPt−1; η = 38 mV

129

2019


Pt-GDY1 (C1-Pt-Cl4)
4.65 mg cm−2 (ICP-AES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼30
49
7.26 A mgPt−1; 23640 A gPt−1; η = 100 mV

116

2018


Pt-GDY2 (C2-Pt-Cl2)
∼70
38


Pt1/hNCNC
2.92 wt% (UV-vis)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
15
24
7.6 A mgPt−1; η = 20 mV

85

2019


Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA
1.2 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
30
30
8.3 A mgPt−1; η = 77 mV

108

2018


Pt–MoS2
1.7 wt% (ICP-OES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.1 M H2SO4
∼130
96
—

70

2015


Pt/np-Co0.85Se
∼1.03 wt% (ICP-OES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
pH = 7.0 (PBS)
55
35
1.32 A mgPt−1; η = 100 mV

27

2019


Pd/Cu–Pt NRs
Cu: 5 atom% (ICP-AES); Pt: 1.5 atom% (STEM-EDX)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
22.8
25
3.0 A mgPd+Pt−1; η = 50 mV

245

2017


A-CoPt-NC


Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
27
31
224 A mgPt−1; 45 A mgPt−1; η = 70 mV

50

2019


1 M KOH
50
48


SANi–PtNWs
6 at% (ICP-AES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
1 M KOH
70
60.3
∼11.8 A mgPt−1; η = 70 mV

112

2019


RuSAs@PN
0.33 wt% (ICP-AES)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
24
38
—

102

2018


Co-Substituted Ru
6 at% (EDX)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
1 M KOH
13
29
—

246

2018


Mo1N1C2
1.32 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
154
86
—

208

2017


1 M KOH
132
90


Mo0/GDY
7.5 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
48
33
15.10 A mgMo−1; η = 200 mV

117

2019


W1N1C3
1.21 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
HER
0.1 M KOH
85
53
—

150

2018


Fe/GD
Fe: 0.68 wt%; 0.278 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
66
37.8
—

115

2018


Ni/GD
88
45.8


Fe–N4 SAs/NPC
1.96 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
HER
1 M KOH
202
123
—

148

2018


OER
1 M KOH
43
95
—


np-Ni/graphene
4–8 at% (EDS)
Wet-chemistry method
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
∼180
45
—

80

2015


Co-NG
0.57 at% (XPS and ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
147
82
—

197

2015


Co1/PCN
∼0.3 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method
HER
1 M KOH
89
52
—

98

2018


0.5 M H2SO4
151
—


Co-SAS/HOPNC
0.49 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
137
52
—

196

2018


aNi@G5775
1.24 wt% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
70
31
—

200

2018


aNi@G585
OER
1 M KOH
270
47


Ni–NHGF
∼0.05 at% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
OER
1 M KOH
331
63
—

103

2018


Co–NHGF
402
80


Fe–NHGF
488
164



sAu/NiFe LDH
0.4 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
OER
1 M KOH
237
36
—

105

2018


Ru1–Pt3Cu
Ru: 8.2 at%; Pt: 68.7 at% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
OER
0.1 M HClO4
220
—
6.62 A mgRu−1; 0.78 A mgRu+Pt−1; η = 280 mV

247

2019


W-Ni(OH)2
5.5 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
OER
1 M KOH
237
33
—

248

2019


Ru/CoFe-LDHs
0.45 wt% (ICP)
Wet-chemistry method
OER
1 M KOH
198
39
—

95

2019


Ru–N–C
1.0 wt% (ICP-OES)
Wet-chemistry method
OER
0.5 M H2SO4
267
52.6
3.571 A mgRu−1; η = 300 mV

249

2019


Co–C3N4/CNT
∼0.2% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
OER
1 M KOH
380
68.4
—

193

2017


Co-N,B-CSs
0.52 at% (XPS)
High temperature pyrolysis
OER
0.1 M KOH
430
—
—

194

2018


Co–Fe–N–C
—
High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method
OER
1 M KOH (10 ppm Fe(III))
309
37
—

176

2019





4.1.1 HER. 
HER is the cathodic reaction in the electrolysis of water (2H+ + 2e− → H2). In acidic electrolytes, HER occurs in two steps: (1) starting with proton adsorption by the Volmer mechanism: H+ + e− + * → H* (where * denotes an unoccupied active site); (2) the desorption of H2 gas by the Heyrovsky mechanism: H* + H+ + e− → H2, or the Tafel mechanism: 2H* → H2.250 In alkaline media, the typical process of HER can be summarized as two radical steps (Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway): H2O + e− → H* + OH− and H2O + H* + e− → H2 + OH−. Now it is clear from both theoretical and experimental perspectives that the adsorption free energy of H* (ΔGH*) is the key factor for describing the HER activity of an electrode in acidic solutions. When its value is close to zero, the HER reaction is favorable, despite the existence of reaction barriers.57,251 In alkaline solutions, besides thermodynamic ΔGH*, the kinetic barrier to water dissociation may also govern the overall reaction rate. In addition, appropriate OH− binding energies are also one of the important factors.251 All these values depend largely on the geometric and electronic structures of the electrocatalysts. Consequently, the rational design of electrocatalysts is the heart of high activities for HER.
For conventional systems, Pt NPs supported on carbon is the state-of-the-art catalyst for H2 evolution. As shown in Table 1, to reduce the amount of precious metal, various singly dispersed Pt atoms supported on carbon or N-doped carbon, such as PtSA-NT-NF,106 Pt1/MC,113 ALD50Pt/NGNs,26 Pt SASs/AG,65 Pt1/OLC,129 Pt1/hNCNC,85 or on some selenides, sulphides, and carbides, such as Pt/np-Co0.85Se,27 Pt–MoS2,70 Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA,108 have been developed as electrocatalysts for HER. In addition to metal Pt, other precious metal ASCs, such as Pd/Cu–Pt NRs245 and RuSAs@PN,102 have also been synthesized as electrocatalysts for HER. It is worth noting that, until now, almost all of the precious metal ASCs were prepared via ALD and wet-chemistry method. Therefore, in terms of synthesis methods, there is still much room for developing precious metal ASCs. As shown in Table 1, when compared to conventional Pt/C catalyst, most of the single-atom Pt catalysts showed comparable and even better η10 and Tafel slope. However, for the precious metal catalysts, mass activity is indeed an important parameter for industrial applications. For single-atom Pt catalysts, they exhibit dozens of times higher mass activities and much higher stability than those of conventional Pt/C both in acid and alkaline media. Fig. 21a and b shows ADF STEM images of different sizes of the Pt catalysts supported on N-doped graphene nanosheets: ALDPt50/NGNs and ALDPt100/NGNs with ALD cycles of 50 and 100, respectively.26 For ALD50Pt/NGNs catalysts, there are numerous individual Pt atoms and very small Pt clusters, whereas in ALDPt100/NGNs, some Pt clusters have grown to form NPs at a larger quantity. The HER activity of ALDPt50/NGNs, ALDPt100/NGNs and commercial Pt/C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 are summarized in Fig. 21c. Both ALDPt/NGN and Pt/C catalysts exhibited excellent catalytic activities towards the HER. Interestingly, the ALDPt/NGN catalysts exhibited even much higher HER activities than the commercial Pt/C catalysts. And the HER catalytic activity of the ALDPt/NGNs decreased with an increased number of ALD cycles, indicating the extra Pt was wasted. When normalized according to the Pt loading (Fig. 21d), the HER mass activity at the overpotential of 0.05 VRHE for the ALD50Pt/NGNs catalysts was 10.1 A mg−1, which was 7.8 times greater than that of the ALD100Pt/NGNs catalyst (2.12 A mg−1), and 37.4 times greater than that of the Pt/C catalyst (0.27 A mg−1). The excellent performance comes from the partially unoccupied density of states of the 5d orbitals of Pt atoms on the N-doped graphene. These results demonstrated that after downsizing Pt NPs to Pt clusters and even to single Pt atoms, the HER activity will not be decreased, and the Pt utilization can be maximized, decreasing the cost of the catalyst for the HER. In addition to activity, the long-term stability can also be improved by downsizing to single atoms. As shown in Fig. 21e, polarization curves of the ALD50Pt/NGNs measured after 1000 cycles retained a similar performance to that in the initial test. Fig. 21f compared their mass activities at 0.05 VRHE, the ALD50Pt/NGNs showed a loss of only 4% loss, which was lower than those of ALD50Pt/NGNs (∼10%) and Pt/C (∼19%). The lower stability of the Pt/C catalysts may be due to a weak interaction between the supported Pt particles and the C substrate, resulting in the detachment and/or agglomeration of the Pt NPs. By contrast, single Pt atoms were firmly anchored on the N-doped graphene with unique electronic structure, leading to exceptionally high activity and stability. Similar results have also been reported, such as the single atomic Pt immobilized onto the hierarchical N-doped carbon nanocages (Pt1/hNCNC) by a simple impregnation–adsorption method.85 Moreover, a series of Pt1/hNCNC catalysts with different Pt loadings (0.75–5.68 wt%) were prepared for optimizing the HER performance, during which the last Pt1/hNCNC catalysts with 5.68 wt% had slight aggregation of Pt atoms. They found the η10 decreased with increasing Pt loading, demonstrating that the catalysts possessed more active sites with the increase of Pt loading.
 Fig. 21  ADF STEM images of ALDPt/NGNs samples with (a) 50 and (b) 100 ALD cycles. Scale bars, 10 nm. (c) The HER polarization curves for ALDPt50/NGNs, ALDPt100/NGNs, NGNs and Pt/C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. The inset shows the enlarged curves at the onset potential region of the HER for the different catalysts. (d) Mass activity at 0.05 VRHE of the ALDPt50/NGNs, ALDPt100/NGNs, and Pt/C catalysts. (e) Durability measurement of the ALD50Pt/NGNs recorded initially and after 1000 cyclic voltammetry sweeps between +0.4 and −0.15 VRHE. (f) Mass activity at 0.05 VRHE of the ALDPt/NGNs and Pt/C catalysts for the HER before and after durability test. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
However, when precious metal atoms are anchored on some selenides, sulphides, and carbides, which are types of promising catalysts for HER applications in nature, the atomic-level engineered metals are not only the active sites, but play the role to optimize surface states of catalyst active centres, thus effectively improving its catalytic properties. For example, single-atom Pt decorated nanoporous Co0.85Se (Pt/np-Co0.85Se) electrocatalysts were reported as efficient electrocatalysts for HER.27 Results of experimental investigations and theoretical calculations indicated that the initially inert Co atoms were triggered by single atom Pt as new active sites for HER. Moreover, the introduction of atomic-level Pt significantly reduced energy barriers of water dissociation and improved adsorption/desorption behaviours of hydrogen, thus synergistically promoting HER performance. As another example, after incorporation of single-atom Pt into MoS2 supports, the catalytic HER activity of in-plane S atoms of MoS2 could be triggered via neighbouring Pt atoms.70 Therefore, in the design of single atom electrocatalysts, the strong covalent interactions between single meta atoms and supports will play a key role for improving catalytic performance and/or stability.108,129
The key aspect for scalable H2 production is to develop high-efficiency yet low-cost electrocatalysts with lower overpotentials. To further lower the cost of electrocatalysts, alternative electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements are needed. As shown in Table 1, several atomically dispersed electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements, for example, Mo1N1C2,208 W1N1C3,150 Fe–N4 SAs/NPC,148 Co-NG,197 aNi@G5775,200 have been developed for HER. Different from precious metal-based ASCs (except the ASCs with graphdiyne (GDY) as supports), most of these electrocatalysts were synthesized via high-temperature pyrolysis, and anchored on carbon-based materials. This is probably because this method can produce carbon or N-doped carbon with large specific surface area, good stability and high electrical conductivity, which will further improve the activity of catalysts based on earth-abundant elements.197 Compared with the catalytic performance of noble-metal-based ASCs, the HER performances of earth-abundant-metal-based catalysts are much lower. As shown in Table 1, except graphdiyne-based ASCs with low η10 and Tafel slope, the performances of most catalysts are unsatisfactory. For example, for an electrocatalyst with single Mo atom (Mo-SAs) supported on N-doped carbon, which exhibited a η10 of 154 mV and a Tafel slope of 86 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, and a η10 of 132 mV and a Tafel slope of 90 mV dec−1 in 0.1 M KOH solution.208 As another example, for an electrocatalysts with atomically dispersed Fe–N4 on N-doped porous carbon (Fe–N4 SAs NPC), it needed a η10 of 202 mV with Tafel slope of 123 mV dec−1, which was much larger than those of Pt/C (η10 < 50 mV and Tafel slope < 40 mV dec−1).148 In this regard, the catalytic activity of earth-abundant-metal-based ASCs still have much room for improvement.


4.1.2 OER. 
In electrocatalytic water splitting, compared with HER, the half reaction of OER is kinetically sluggish, which is considered to be a bottleneck hindering its development. The generally accepted overall reaction pathways for OER are: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e− (in alkaline media); 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e− (in acidic media).252 OER involves two steps: O–H bond breaking, and attendant O–O bond formation, which is a four electron–proton coupled reaction, whereas HER is only a two electron-transfer reaction.176,248,253 Hence, OER requires a higher energy (and thus higher overpotentials) to overcome the kinetic barrier.253,254 Therefore, the design of efficient, stable and low-cost OER electrocatalysts is of great importance and urgency for overall water splitting. In general, the noble metal-based catalysts, such as RuO2 and IrO2, exhibit attractive OER activity. Yet they have several disadvantages. First, the low abundance of noble metals in nature hinders their large-scale production. Secondly, these catalysts are not stable in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes. In particular, RuO2 is highly unstable under high anodic potentials in both electrolytes, in which it would be oxidized to form RuO4 and then dissolved in solution during OER.253 Third, as heterogeneous catalysts made of NPs, it will be difficult to probe the nature of their active sites in catalytic reactions.176 In recent years, ASCs have promised new opportunities for the design of novel electrocatalysts. For one thing, ASCs with maximum atomic efficiency can reduced the usage of precious metals; for another, ASCs feature well-defined uniform active sites, which is conducive to mechanistic understanding. Table 1 summarized the reported ASCs for OER. It can be seen that, compared with reported electrocatalysts for HER, the reported electrocatalysts for OER are relatively rare. In addition, we can see that only precious metal-based ASCs can show OER activity in acidic media, and non-precious metal-based ASCs have good activity only in alkaline media.
Nevertheless, more and more interesting discoveries are being reported. Precious metal-based ASCs not only can hold the promise of perfect atom utilization, but also can significantly improve the stability of precious metal-based electrocatalysts. Pt3Cu alloy-supported single-atom Ru were constructed through sequential acid etching and electrochemical leaching, which delivered a η10 of 220 mV in acidic media (Fig. 22a and b).247 By virtue of the atomic dispersion of the active Ru species, Ru1–Pt3Cu showed a remarkable mass activity of 6.615 A mgRu−1 and 0.78 A mgRu+Pt−1 at η = 280 mV. More importantly, it had a lifetime ten times longer than commercial RuO2. As shown in Fig. 22c, during 28 h long-term test on Ru1–Pt3Cu, the potential required for η10 was decreased by only 2.1%, whereas for RuO2, the performance was significantly decreased after less than 2 h. After quantifying the mass loss of Pt, Cu and Ru after stability test using ICP-MS, the team found a slight loss in mass of Ru for Ru1–Pt3Cu, whereas for RuO2, almost 100% mass was lost owing to dissolution. The great stability of Ru1–Pt3Cu might arise from the unique periodic nano-islands, which prevented migration and aggregation of atomically dispersed Ru1. Experiments showed that the lattice constant was closely related to OER activity. Further, DFT investigation revealed that the electronic structure and redox behaviour of single atom Ru were effectively engineered by the compressive strain of the Ptskin shell, thus optimizing the binding of oxygen intermediates and providing better resistance to over-oxidation and further dissolution.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic atom model of Ru1–Pt3Cu. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of Ru1–Pt3Cu and reference electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution. (c) Chronopotentiometric curve obtained with Ru1–Pt3Cu of and commercial RuO2 at 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) LSV curves and (e) Tafel plots for Ni–NHGF, Co–NHGF, Fe–NHGF and with RuO2/C catalyst evaluated in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) LSV curves and corresponding Tafel slopes (g) of the Co–N–C at different kinds of KOH (with different concentration of Fe3+). (h) Proposed model for the formation of Co–Fe double-atom catalyst. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from precious metal-based ASCs, non-precious metal-based ASCs also gradually show their application potentials because of their good stability in alkaline solutions under high anodic potentials.97,103,148,176,193,253,255 In 2016, based on DFT calculations, Jiang et al. proposed that single-atom metal (e.g., Pt, Pd, Co, Ni, Cu) supported on g-C3N4 (TM@CN) could be used as promising high-performance OER catalyst.256 Afterwards, Qiao et al. developed a range of graphitic g-C3N4 coordinated transition metals (M–C3N4), during which they found that Co–C3N4 catalyst exhibited comparable electrocatalytic activity to that of precious metal for OER in alkaline media.193 Experimental and computational results confirmed that their high activity originated from the precise M–N2 coordination in the g-C3N4 matrix. A series of monodispersed transition metal atoms embedded in N-doped graphene with a common MN4C4 (M: Fe, Co, Ni) motifs (M–NHGF) were also reported as efficient OER catalysts. As shown in Fig. 22d and e, their activities followed the order of Ni–NHGF > Co–NHGF > Fe–NHGF with the overpotentials of 331, 402 and 488 mV at η10 and Tafel slopes of 63, 80, 164 mV dec−1, respectively.103 DFT revealed that their catalytic activity and mechanistic pathways were strongly dependent on the d-orbital configurations of the metals. For Fe (Nd = 6) and Co (Nd =7), all intermediates were bounded more strongly at the M site, and the reaction proceeded through the single-site mechanism. By contrast, for Ni (Nd = 8), O* and OH* intermediates preferred to reside at the C site, whereas OOH* was adsorbed on the M atom, following the dual-site mechanism. Instead of SASCs, the so-called di-atom catalyst would be more active for OER, just as bimetallic NP catalysts are often more active than monometallic catalysts.176,257 After the incorporation of the second metal centre (M2) to metal pyridyl-porphyrin MOF (M1TPyP) to create bimetallic structures (M1TPyP–M2, M1, M2 = Fe, Co). The obtained bimetallic M1TPyP–M2 showed remarkably enhanced activities and stabilities compared with single atom M1TPyP catalyst.97 Hu et al. found that Co species atomically dispersed on N-doped carbon (Co–N–C) could be activated by electrochemical activation in Fe-containing alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 22f and g).176 Interestingly, during the above process, the Fe species were incorporated into Co–N–C to form a Co–Fe di-atom catalyst (Co–Fe–N–C). The activity of Co–Fe–N–C depended critically on the amount of Fe, indicating the essentialness of Fe for the enhanced activity of Co–Fe–N–C compared to Co–N–C. Operando XAS was used to probe the changes of the structures of the catalytic sites during activation and catalysis under OER conditions. As shown in Fig. 22h, after Co–N–C precatalyst, two N atoms were replaced by O, and then Fe ions were bonded with Co ions to form the double atom motif. This work provides a new concept with double atoms to design highly efficient OER electrocatalysts.
As is well known, it is necessary to stabilize the single atoms with a support. Apart from acting as anchoring sites, the support may also have a significant impact on the activity and stability of the catalysts.95 If the supports themselves are considered as active catalysts, these single metal atoms supported on these supports can act either as the new active sites for catalytic reactions or as regulator to boost the catalytic performance of supports. For example, LDHs, also known as anionic or hydrotalcite-like clays, are believed to be effective alternative OER electrocatalysts. Moreover, LDHs contain transition metals (Co, Ni, Fe, etc.) with high active surface area, confinement effect and abundant base active sites, which can provide special anchoring sites to support other metal atoms.95,258–260 Inert Au single-atom supported on NiFe LDH (sAu/NiFe LDH) exhibited a six-fold enhancement in OER activity by only 0.4 wt% sAu incorporation. DFT results demonstrated that, Fe atoms in NiFe LDH were still active sites. sAu could transfer electrons to LDH, tuning the electronic structure of nearby Fe sites and thus further improving the catalytic performance. However, when stable single Ru atoms are anchored on the surface of CoFe-LDHs (Ru/CoFe-LDHs), the single atom Ru played a different role for HER. The electrocatalyst of Ru/CoFe-LDHs with 0.45 wt% Ru loading exhibited outstanding activity with an overpotential of 198 mV at η10 and a small Tafel slope of 39 mV dec−1 (Fig. 23a and b).95 DFT plus Hubbard U (DFT+U) calculation revealed that the Fe ion in CoFe-LDHs and the Ru ion coordinating with five oxygen atoms on Ru/CoFe-LDHs acted as their active sites, respectively (Fig. 23c and d). By comparing their free energy plots in Fig. 23e and f, Ru atom sites on the surface of CoFe-LDHs showed a lower Gibbs free energy (1.52 eV) of the rate-determining step (step III) than that of the Fe atom sites on the edge of CoFe-LDHs (1.94 eV), further indicating that the single Ru atoms were the new active sites for Ru/CoFe-LDHs. Similarly, one single atom W6+ doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheet sample (W-Ni(OH)2) promoted the electrocatalytic water oxidation, in which the O radical and O–O coupling were both generated at the exposed W sites of the Ni(OH)2 nanosheet.248
 Fig. 23  (a) Polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ru/CoFe-LDHs, CoFe-LDHs, carbon paper and the commercial RuO2 catalyst. Proposed 4e− mechanism of OER on CoFe-LDHs (c) and Ru/CoFe-LDHs (d) with DFT+U calculation. Gibbs free-energy diagram for the 4e− mechanism on (e) CoFe-LDHs and (f) Ru/CoFe-LDHs. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 

4.2 ORR
Electrocatalysis of ORR is of paramount significance for controlling the performance of various next-generation energy conversion and storage devices, such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and certain electrolyzers.261–263 For proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), ORR catalysts are used at the cathode in acidic media. Unfortunately, ORR is inherently slower by six orders of magnitude than the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) at the anode, thus seriously limiting large-scale commercialization of fuel cell-powered vehicles.8,55,190 Similarly, for metal–air batteries, the output energy capacity is highly dependent on the activity and stability of the cathodic ORR.8,202,264 However, both the anode and the cathode consist of highly dispersed Pt-based or other noble metal-based NPs on carbon black, which are still the current benchmark catalysts. Therefore, reducing their loading or even completely replacing them with earth-abundant and inexpensive metals would be advantageous and necessary.
As shown in Table 2, the overall electrochemical ORR proceeds through either a direct four-electron (4e−) pathway or two-step two-electron (2e− + 2e−) transfer by reducing O2 to H2O or OH− as end products in acidic or alkaline media, respectively. As reported, in acidic media, a direct 4e− pathway is a dissociation pathway of O2.7,55,265,266
Table 2 Overall reaction equations of ORR in acidic and alkaline solutions




Type
Electrolyte
Electro transfer
Reactions




ORR toward H2O or OH−
Acidic media
Direct 4e− pathway
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → H2O


Acidic media
2e− pathway + 2e− pathway
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2


H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O


Alkaline media
Direct 4e− pathway
O2 + H2O + 4e− → 4OH−


Alkaline media
2e− pathway + 2e− pathway
O2 + H2O + 2e− → OOH− + OH−


OOH− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−


ORR toward H2O2
Acidic media
2e− pathway
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2


Alkaline media
2e− pathway
O2 + H2O + 2e− → OOH− + OH−




Dissociation pathway: O2* → O* + O*(3.2.1) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(3.2.2) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*(3.2.3)
While, the 4e− pathway of two-step 2e− transfer includes two possible mechanisms: associative and peroxo pathways.
Associative pathway: O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*(3.2.4) OOH* → O* + OH*(3.2.5) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(3.2.6) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*(3.2.7)
Peroxo pathway: O2* → HOOH*(3.2.8) HOOH* → OH* + OH*(3.2.9) OH* + H+ + e– → H2O*(3.2.10)
In fuel cell operations, a direct 4e− pathway is highly preferred in order to get high efficiency and to prohibit severe degradation of the perfluorinated sulfonic acid membranes caused by the hydroxyl radicals derived from H2O2.10 By contrast, the less efficient two-step, 2e− electroreduction pathway involves the formation of hydrogen peroxide ions as an intermediate, which can be used for H2O2 production in industrial.55,252,267 Therefore, based on the selectivity of different electrocatalysts, molecular O2 can be selectively reduced to H2O via a 4e− pathway, or H2O2 with 2e− transferred in aqueous solutions.3 The former pathway is preferred in fuel cell applications to maximize the energy conversion efficiencies,190,262,268 and the latter one provides a green synthesis route for a versatile clean oxidant H2O2, which is valuable in many applications, including paper bleaching, disinfection, and wastewater treatment.59,269–271 Therefore, understanding the selectivity between H2O2 and H2O would help to enhance the performance of fuel cells and the efficiency of production of H2O2. Additionally, understanding these trends could aid in better design for metal–air batteries, such as lithium–air batteries, in which selective 2e− reduction of O2 to Li2O2 is expected for rechargeable chemistry.272,273

4.2.1 The selectivity of ORR between 4e− pathway and 2e− pathway. 
Whether the reaction takes a dissociative or an associative pathway primarily depends on the surface properties of the electrocatalysts, which gives the initial O2 dissociating energy barrier.252,274 Several DFT calculation studies showed that, compared with those on carbon surfaces, the dissociation energy barrier on most metal surfaces, especially noble metals, are very small, normally leading a dissociative pathway owing to the strong adsorption of O2.252,275,276 This theoretical result is also consistent with experimental findings that Pt-based materials are still the most promising catalysts especially for commercialized PEMFCs in the present situation, which always show perfect 4e− reduction selectivity.5,266,271,277–279 Just as shown in Fig. 24a, on pristine Pt/C surface, O2 prefers to be adsorbed in a side-on configuration and then is reduced to H2O with the dominant 4e− through (1) dissociative (elementary steps from 3.2.1 to 3.2.3), (2) associative (elementary steps from 3.2.4 to 3.2.7), and (3) peroxo pathways (elementary steps from 3.2.8 to 3.2.10).280 This is because the side-on adsorption of O2 weakens O–O bonding and thus induces the cleavage of O–O, leading the 4e− pathway. Interestingly, this is not always the case. The electrochemical ORR pathway can be tuned by geometry (or ensemble) effects, which are associated with the geometric arrangement of atoms on the catalyst surface.281–283 After coating the Pt catalysts with amorphous carbon layers (Fig. 24b), the selectivity toward H2O2 is significantly elevated. For carbon-coated Pt, O2 is chemisorbed in the end-on configuration, which can reduce the dissociation of O–O bonding, facilitating the production of H2O2. Furthermore, the produced H2O2 would not be further reduced on the Pt surface owing to a hindrance by the carbon layer. In principle, the adjacent metal atoms (“ensemble”) can provide separate binding sites for O–O bonding in O2 and H2O2 to promote the dissociative adsorption of O2 and also the consecutive decomposition of H2O2.14,59,280 Thus, eliminating the accessible active metal ensembles can improve the H2O2 production selectivity. Conversely, it will be beneficial to the production of H2O.
 Fig. 24  (a) ORR pathways on the pristine Pt/C: O2 prefers to adsorb on the Pt surface in a side-on configuration and then reduces to H2O. (b) ORR Pathways on the carbon-coated Pt: O2 absorbs on the Pt surface in an end-on configuration and then produces H2O and H2O2 as end products. (1) Dissociative, (2) associative, and (3) peroxo pathways. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Theoretically calculated ORR volcano plot for the two-electron (blue) and four-electron (red) pathways, with the limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGHO* (lower horizontal axis) and ΔGHOO* (upper horizontal axis). Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Apart from geometry (or ensemble) effects, the selectivity of ORR can also be adjusted by electronic effects. The selectivity towards H2O2 or H2O is determined by the binding free energies of reaction intermediates and its tendency to break the O–O bond.59,281 The binding of the reaction intermediates is controlled by electronic effects.284 For the 2e− – ORR reduction, when pH < 11.6, it proceeds toward H2O2, whereas when pH > 11.6, it proceeds to deprotonated anion (HO2−). Therefore, the catalytic activity and selectivity can be determined by the binding strength of the key reaction intermediate, *OOH.3 Varying the catalyst material can tune the binding of HOO* to the surface, so the HOO* binding energy (ΔGHOO*) is the key parameter in controlling the catalyst activity. Meanwhile, because ΔGHOO* scales linearly with that of ΔGHO*, ΔGHO* can also be used as a descriptor. As shown in Fig. 24c, theoretically calculated oxygen reduction volcano plot was made for the 2e− (blue) and 4e− (red) pathways, with the limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGHO* (lower horizontal axis) and ΔGHOO* (upper horizontal axis).281 Catalysts on the right side of the volcano are limited by HOO* formation, such as Au(211), which requires a thermodynamic overpotential of 0.41 V to drive the reaction of producing H2O2. Catalysts on the left side, such as Pt or Pd, bind HOO* intermediates too strongly. The ideal catalysts are at the peak of the volcano, and have a ΔGHOO* ∼ 4.2 ± 0.2 eV and ηO2/H2O2 = 0. In addition, to the left side of the peak with strong HO* binding for both the four- and two-electron volcanoes, it is more downhill in free energy to form H2O from HO* with the 4e− pathway as the dominant route, as is the case for Pt and Pd. At the peak of the 2e− volcano with weak HO* binding for both 2e− and 4e− volcanoes overlap, both pathways will occur in tandem to produce both H2O2 and H2O. Moving further right, the interaction with O* and HO* weakens significantly, so it becomes more difficult to break the O–O bond, increasing the selectivity of H2O2via the 2e− pathway.
Considering the above discussion, ORR selectivity can be controlled via two effects: geometry effects and electronic effects. In principle, isolating the accessible active metal sites can tune the selectivity of H2O production to H2O2 production selectivity. Several strategies have been reported to realize this modulation, such as transition alloying active metal (e.g., Pt and Pd) catalysts isolated with inactive metals (e.g., Au and Hg)269,271,281,282 or poisoning with chalcogenides (e.g., S and Se)285 and organic molecules (e.g., calix[4]arene).286 These strategies can both eliminate the accessible active metal ensembles in space and adjust the electronic structure. As another example, coating the Pt catalysts with amorphous carbon layers can significantly elevate the selectivity toward electrochemical H2O2 production via reducing the accessible active Pt ensembles. In addition, isolated single-atom active metal sites, which are surrounded by more inert metal14,281 or non-metal materials,3,60,94,287 such as carbon, N, chalcogenides, have been demonstrated as a potential method to tune the selectivity of ORR toward H2O and H2O2 as end products.
In the next two sections, we will briefly summarize the developments of ASCs in ORR application toward H2O and H2O2 as end products, including their composites, nanostructures and interactions between support construction and regulation of electronic structures.


4.2.2 4e− – ORR toward H2O/OH−. 
To meet the clean energy requirements in the future, the acidic PEMFC and rechargeable metal–air batteries with high energy densities have been considered as the most promising vehicle power technologies.187,262 The electrochemical ORR is a key and limiting reaction for their sluggish kinetics and high overpotentials, which has been a bottleneck for the implementation of these energy technologies.161,288 Currently, costly carbon-supported Pt-based electrocatalysts are used extensively. Intrinsically, only a small portion of Pt atoms on the particle surface are involved in catalytic reaction, leading to the high cost of conventional Pt-based electrocatalysts or the large consumption of Pt.266,288 Therefore, low-Pt metal catalysts and Pt-free catalysts are urgently needed to improve performance and reduce the cost. In principle, downsizing the Pt NPs to single atoms presents one of the most effective ways to reduce the cost of Pt catalysts via elevating the Pt utilization efficiency.81,288 In addition, atomically dispersed non-precious metals, such as Fe, Co, and Mn, correlated to nonmetallic elements such as P, S, N, or C embedded in a carbon-based matrix represent one of the most promising alternatives.277,296 Among these systems, transition metal coordinated with N on carbon-based materials (M–N–C, M = Fe, Co, Mn, etc.) show the most promising activity and stability in acidic media for the ORR.

Table 3 summarized the ASCs for ORR via 4e− pathway toward H2O/OH− reported in recent five years. The rotating disk electrode (RDE) method with ready operability and low cost was adopted to quickly screen the ORR catalytic performance of new electrocatalysts. The ORR polarization curve is measured in an O2-saturated solution (usually 0.1 M HClO4, 0.5 M H2SO4, or 0.1 M KOH). The onset potential (Eonset VRHE), half-wave potential (E1/2 VRHE) and the kinetic current (Jk mA cm−2) are selected as typically indexes for electrochemical evaluation.7 As can be seen from Table 3, almost all the atomically dispersed electrocatalysts are synthesized via high-temperature pyrolysis or/and wet-chemistry methods. And the metal atoms are mostly anchored on the carbon materials, indicating the carbon supports with optimal graphitization degree and porosity play an important role in enhancing the overall performance.277 In addition, apart from several electrocatalysts with higher metal atom loadings, such as Cu–N–C with 20.9 wt% (ICP-OES) and FeSA-G with 7.7 ± 1.3 wt% (ICP), most of ASCs possess low metal atom loadings typically less than 2 wt%. Many reports have demonstrated that increasing the density of active sites would improve the catalytic performance of the whole electrocatalysts.96,277,292 Therefore, increasing the density of active sites to improve ORR performance still has great potentials.
Table 3 Summary of ASCs reported from the last several years along with the corresponding material, metal contents, synthesis method and their performance for ORR via 4e− pathway toward H2O/OH−. The onset (Eonset) and half-wave potential (E1/2) are reported versus RHE. Jk is the kinetic current, extracting from the Levich–Koutechy equation




Electrocatalysts
Metal content (wt%)
Synthesis method
Electrolyte

E
onset (V vs. RHE)

E
1/2 (V vs. RHE)

J
k (mA cm−2)
Ref.
Year




Noble metal–N–C ASCs


Pt1–N/BP
0.4 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method + high-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.76
—

288

2017


0.1 M KOH
—
0.87
—


Ru–N/G-750
1.7 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
0.89
0.75
—

289

2017


Pt1.1/BPdefect
1.1 wt% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
0.1 M HClO4
—
∼0.85
—

81

2019


Ir-SAC
0.2 wt% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
0.97
0.864
9.76 at 0.85 V

169

2019






Fe–N–C ASCs


(CM + PANI)–Fe–C
0.3 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.8
—

190

2017


ISA Fe/CN
2.16 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
0.986
0.9
37.83 at 0.85 V

149

2017


Fe-ZIF50nm
0.45 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.85
—

290

2017


Fe/SNC
0.20 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.77
∼25 at 0.73 V

183

2017


FeBNC
0.084 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.968
0.838
—

174

2017


CNT@Fe–N–PC
0.3 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
1.01
0.82
—

185

2018


FeSA–N–C
1.76 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
1
0.891
23.27 at 0.85 V

153

2018


Fe–N4 SAs/NPC
1.96 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
0.972
0.885
—

148

2018


Fe-ISA/SNC
0.947 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.896
100.7 at 0.85 V

186

2018


Fe SAs–N/C20
0.20 wt% (ICP-MS)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
—
0.915
—

28

2018


FeCl1N4/CNS
1.5 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.921
41.11 at 0.85 V

178

2018


SA-Fe/NG
0.6 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.5 M H2SO4
0.9
0.8
15.6 at 0.75 V

187

2018


0.1 M KOH
—
0.88
52.4 at 0.8 V


Fe2-Z8-C
3 wt%
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4
0.902
0.805
—

291

2018


FeSAs/NPS-HC
1.54 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
—
0.912
71.9 at 0.85 V

161

2018


0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.791
18.8 at 0.85 V


Fe–N/C
3.8 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
1.04
0.895
—

157

2018


Fe–N–C HNSs
1.4 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
1.046
0.87
—

189

2018


SA-Fe-HPC
0.80 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M H2SO4


0.81
—

188

2018


0.1 M KOH
0.89


FeSA-G
7.7 ± 1.3 wt% Fe (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
0.950
0.804
—

184

2019


Fe–N–C
2.78 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.823
—

160

2019


1.5Fe-ZIF
1.5 at% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4
0.98
0.88
—

292

2019


Fe–Nx–C
0.81 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
1.05
0.91
14.7

162

2019


Fe–NC SAC
1.21 wt% (TGA)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.98
0.9
—

293

2019


C-FeZIF-1.44-950
1 wt% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
0.99
0.864
—

151

2019


0.1 M HClO4
0.91
0.78



pfSAC-Fe
0.94 wt% (ICP-AES)
Wet-chemistry method
0.1 M KOH
1.01
0.91
25.86 at 0.85 V

29

2019


Fe2–N–C
0.38 wt% (ICP-MS) for Fe2–N–C
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4


0.78
2.89 at 0.8 V for Fe2–N–C

48

2019


Fe1–N–C
0.715


Fe3–N–C
0.762






Co–N–C ASCs


Co SAs/N–C
4 wt%
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
0.982
0.881 V
21.5 at 0.8 V

40

2016


ISAS-Co/HNCS
2.2 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.773
—

54

2017


Co0.05N_pCNT
0.4 (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
1
0.87
—

172

2017


Co-N,B-CSs
0.52 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.89
0.83
—

194

2018


20Co-NC-1100
—
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.5 M H2SO4
0.93
0.80
—

166

2018


Co-ISAS/p-CN
0.42 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.838
5.1 at 0.83 V

45

2018


CoNC700
0.73 at% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
∼0.96
∼0.8
—

294

2018


0.1 M HClO4
∼0.89
∼0.73


Co–N–C@F127
6.2 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.5 M H2SO4
0.93 V
0.84
—

165

2018


CoN4/NG
—
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.98
0.87
23.4 at 0.85 V

264

2018


Co-SAS/HOPNC
0.49 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.892
5.42 at 0.9 V

196

2018


Co/NMCLT900
4.66% (ICP-MS)
Wet-chemistry method
0.1 M KOH
1.03
0.897
46.8 at 0.85 V

114

2019


SCoNC
∼15.3 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
—
0.91
—

171

2019






Other non-precious metal–N–C ASCs


Cu–N@C-60
8.5 wt% (TG)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
∼0.8
—

202

2016


Cu–N–C
20.9 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.869
11.84 at 0.85 V

201

2018


Cu-SAs/N–C
0.54% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.99
0.895
7.5 at 0.9 V

227

2018


0.1 M HClO4
0.83
∼0.75


Zn–N–C
5.64 wt% (ICP-MS); 9.33 wt% (EDX)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.746
—

205

2019


0.1 M KOH
—
0.873
—


ZnNC
4.03 wt% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.857
7.9 at 0.85 V

204

2019


20Mn-NC-second
3.03 wt% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method
0.5 M H2SO4
—
0.8
—

167

2018


Mn/C–NO
0.23 at% (XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
—
0.86
—

170

2018


MnNPC-900
0.39 wt% (ICP-OES)
High-temperature pyrolysis
0.1 M KOH
0.97
0.84
—

207

2019


Cr/N/C-950
1.9 wt% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.761
10 at 0. 75 V

168

2019






Mix metal–N–C ASCs


(Fe,Co)/N–C
Fe: 0.93 wt%; Co: 1.17 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M HClO4
1.06
0.863
2.842 at 0.9 V

146

2017


(Fe,Co)/CNT
Fe: 1.21%; Co: 1.13% (ICP)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
1.15
0.954
17.51 at 0.9 V

152

2018


CoFe@C
Fe: 0.37 wt%; Co: 1 0.5 wt% (ICP-AES)
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M KOH
0.98
0.89
—

51

2019


FeCoNx/C
—
High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF
0.1 M HClO4
1.02
0.86
—

295

2019


Pt1@Fe–N–C
2.1 wt% Pt (ICP-OES and XPS)
High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method
0.5 M H2SO4
0.93
0.8
—

96

2018


A-CoPt-NC
Co: ∼1.72 wt%; Pt: ∼0.16 wt% (ICP-AES and EDS)
Wet-chemistry method
0.1 M KOH
—
0.96
—

107

2018


0.1 M HClO4
—
∼0.75
—




Noble metal–N–C ASCs. 
For the large-scale sustainable implementation of fuel cells in vehicles, high-performance electrocatalysts with low Pt or noble metal consumption are desirable for cathode materials. Several noble-based ASCs have been developed, such as Pt1–N/BP,288 Ru–N/G-750,289 Pt1.1/BPdefect81 and Ir-SAC.169 For example, after downsizing Pt NPs on carbon to Pt ASCs supported on carbon, the obtained Pt1-N/BP showed high Pt utilization of 0.13 gPt kW−1.288 The Pt1–N/BP with a Pt loading of 0.4 wt% and N 2.7 wt% was synthesized with inexpensive carbon black as support, urea and H2PtCl6·H2O as N and Pt precursors, respectively. As Fig. 25a shows, in acidic media, the Pt1–N/BP showed much higher catalytic activity with E1/2 of 0.76 VRHE compared with N/BP or Pt1/BP (0.51 or 0.44 VRHE, respectively), indicating that the intrinsic catalytic activity of Pt single atoms could be exploited by the synergetic effect between doped-N and Pt single atoms. Compared with commercial Pt/C, the Pt1–N/BP showed high tolerance to methanol or CO in O2-saturated solution (Fig. 25b). DFT theoretical results revealed that, compared with Pt NPs, the single atom Pt on Pt1–N/BP active sites shows weaker adsorption of CO than O2. In addition, long-term operation stability of the Pt1–N/BP catalyst by CV cycling also showed higher durability than commercial Pt/C (Fig. 25c). In summary, Pt1–N/BP exhibited high ORR activity, stability and tolerance to poison in acidic solution. Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the single-pyridinic-N-atom-anchored single-Pt-atom centres are the main effective sites on Pt1–N/BP electrocatalysts, which can not only provide high activity but also endure CO/methanol poisoning (Fig. 25d). Single Pt atoms can also be anchored stably by four carbon atoms in carbon divacancies (Pt–C4), becoming the main active centres to show comparable ORR performance with Pt/C.81 Apart from noble metal Pt, single atom Ru and Ir with high ORR activity and stability have also been demonstrated to be effective alternative to Pt.169,289
 Fig. 25  (a) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1/BP, Pt1–N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (b) The tolerance of Pt1–N/BP to CO and methanol in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Long-term operation stability of Pt1–N/BP in 0.1 M HClO4. (d) The proposed reaction pathways for complete ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Fe–N–C ASCs. 
Compared with noble metal-based ASCs electrocatalysts, non-precious metal-based ASCs are more capable of reducing the costs of ORR-related technologies. Among the current electrocatalysts based on non-precious transition metal atom sites, Fe-based catalysts are by far the most extensively studied.277,297 First, Fe-based ASCs catalysts have the advantages of high abundance and environmental friendliness. Second, they exhibit a very good catalytic capability in both acidic and alkaline media, when coordinated in a carbon matrix comprising N (denoted as Fe–N–C electrocatalysts).296 Experimental results, DFT calculations, XAS, and Mössbauer spectroscopy analyses suggest that FeN4 or FeN2+2 moieties are most likely the active sites149,160,261,298–300 Wang et al. employed the first-principle DFT calculations to predict some key parameters of ORR.299 As shown in Fig. 26a–c, there are three FeN4-type active sites with different local carbon structures: FeN4–C10, FeN4–C12, and FeN4–C8/FeN2+2–C8. All of them have a planar structure embedded in a graphene layer and with a nearly square ligand field. They found that the FeN4–C8/FeN2+2–C8 site with the edge of micropores has the lowest activation energy (about 0.20 eV) for O–O bond breaking for promoting a direct 4e− – ORR (Fig. 26d). The second is FeN4–C10 site with the lower activation energy for O–O bond breaking of 0.56 eV. These results probably provide one future direction to design advanced Fe–N–C SASCs.
 Fig. 26  (a) Atomistic structures of the ORR active site (a) FeN4–C10, (b) FeN4–C12, and (c) FeN4–C8. (d) Calculated free energy evolution diagrams for the O2 reduction through an OOH dissociation pathway on above three different active sites under an electrode potential of 0.69 V in acidic medium. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

Table 3 summarizes the reported Fe–N–C electrocatalysts in the recent three years; almost all of the corresponding E1/2 in alkaline media are above 0.85 VRHE and even 0.9 VRHE, which are higher than that of commercial Pt/C (about 0.84 VRHE149). In acidic media, the E1/2 are a little inferior to that of commercial Pt/C; for example, the E1/2 of SA-Fe/NG showed 30 mV lower than 20% Pt/C in acidic media.187 In addition, these reported Fe–N–C single atom electrocatalysts are mainly synthesized by high-temperature pyrolysis method: pyrolysis of metal-containing specific complexes (MOF-based precursors) or pyrolysis of metal-containing nonspecific complexes. For example, after high-temperature pyrolysis of designed precursors via Fe ions partially replacing Zn ions in tetrahedral Zn–N4 complexes of ZIF-8, these Fe–N4 were in situ converted into FeN4 active sites.290 The obtained Fe–N–C SASCs, with highly porous and uniform polyhedral morphology retained from ZIF-8 and rich defects from evaporation of Zn or organic functional groups, showed a E1/2 of 0.85 VRHE, leaving a gap of only 30 mV with Pt/C. Meanwhile, with this method, a series of electrocatalysts with different sizes from 20 to 1000 nm were synthesized (Fig. 27a). After evaluating their performances, they found that the best ORR activity was obtained with the electrocatalyst with a size of 50 nm. Further reducing the size to 20 nm led to significant particle agglomeration, thus decreasing the activity. That is to say, the size control can be used to tune the ORR activity via altering the number of active sites.
 Fig. 27  Some strategies to engineer electrocatalyst to improve activities. (a) Precisely controlled sizes of the Fe-ZIF catalysts from 20 to 1000 nm; polarization plots for Fe-ZIF-derived catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and Pt/C catalysts in 0.1 M HClO4; calculated H2O2 yield for Fe-ZIF catalysts as a function of particle size. Reproduced with permission.290 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the strategy for tuning kinetic activity of a single Fe–N4 site by incorporation of thiophene like S (C–S–C) and oxidized S (C–SOx) on with electron-donating and electron-withdrawing properties of a carbon plane, respectively. The inset is their corresponding catalytic activity. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration of the triple-phase boundary (TPB) active sites in three Fe–N–C catalyst-based electrodes of TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C, TPI@Z8-650-C, Z8/TPI; polarization curves of the three electrodes in the half-cell of O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (0.1 M HClO4) for Pt/C; polarization and power density curves under 2.5 bar H2–O2. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic representation of the strategy for tuning the density of FeN4 active sites from low, high contents and then becoming clusters and the relationship between the content and catalytic activity. Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to size control, there are some other strategies to engineer the electrocatalyst to improve their activities, such as modifying the electronic structures of Fe–Nx active centres, optimizing shape and porosity, and increasing the density of active sites (Fig. 27b–d). For example, the kinetic activity of a single Fe–N4 site can be tuned by incorporating other heteroatoms. As shown in Fig. 27b, ORR activity of a single Fe–N4 catalytic site was controlled by introducing S functional entities with electron-withdrawing/donating groups to the carbon basal plane.300 Experiments and theoretical calculations demonstrated electron-withdrawing oxidized S (C–SOx) decreased the d-band centre of Fe and then induced an increase of ORR activity of Fe–N4 sites, whereas electron-donating thiophene-like S (C–S–C) led to a decrease of ORR activity. In another example, intruding phosphorus (P) as co-coordinated atoms to form FeNPC catalyst is demonstrated to be also able to tune electronic structures of Fe–Nx active centres.301 The active sites of the FeNPC are the quasi-octahedral O2-FeNxPy species, which can modify the electronic configuration of Fe centres and weaken the adsorption of the OH* intermediate, thus leading to the promoted ORR performance. In addition, a concave-shaped Fe–N–C SAC (TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C) with enhanced external surface area and dense Fe–N2+2 moieties was synthesized using SiO2 as hard template through a combination of electrostatic absorption, space-confinement pyrolysis and anisotropic thermal microstress (Fig. 27c).160 In half cell test, the E1/2 of TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C and TPI@Z8-650-C were 0.823 and 0.811 VRHE, respectively, with a gap of only 12 mV between them. However, in full cell of PEMFCs, at high current density, TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C displayed a similar slow voltage decay to Pt/C until 2 mA cm−2, whereas TPI@Z8-650-C exhibited an abrupt drop in voltage, indicating the poor mass transport in conventional microporous solid NPs. The extremely high PEMFC activity of TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C is the result of a rationally designed morphology with large external surface area and mesoporosity that help to highly expose the originally inaccessible Fe–N4 moieties inside the NP catalyst and to enhance the mass transport of the catalyst. The activity can also be improved directly by increasing the Fe–Nx active site contents (Fig. 27d). Too little Fe results in an insufficient density of FeN4 sites, and too much Fe leads to the formation of clusters and then a significant loss in catalytic activity.292
Although among non-precious metal-based catalysts Fe–N–C electrocatalysts show the highest catalytic activity for the ORR, their durability has yet to be improved. Just as several DFT calculation studies showed that this dissociation energy barrier value of O–O bonding for carbon surfaces is normally very high, and thus not conducive to the 4e− dissociative pathway.252,276 Therefore, for almost carbon materials, the experimentally measured electron transfer numbers are smaller than four, indicating the H2O2 formation is unavoidable in ORR.168 By contrast, for Fe–N–C catalysts, there is possible dissolution of Fe to form Fe2+, which reacts with H2O2 to generate free radicals through the Fenton reaction, such as hydroxyl species, which would attack the PEMFC membrane and then cause serious performance degradation and cell failure. In addition, carbon corrosion of catalysts also promotes dissolution of the metal sites, and induces significant charge- and mass-transport resistances.302 A lower degree of graphitization, that is, higher amorphous carbon without long-range ordered graphitic structures, are more susceptible to corrosion.277 However, increased graphitization probably leaves fewer defects to anchor metal and N atoms, decreasing the catalytic activity. Therefore, in terms of M–N–C catalysts with carbon materials supports, a balance between activity and stability should be taken into consideration. Thus, to solve the durability issue via alleviating Fenton reaction, non-precious metal-based and Fe-free electrocatalysts with suitable degree of graphitized carbon supports have recently attracted great attention.
Co–N–C ASCs. 
As shown in Table 3, the Co–N–C electrocatalysts were also synthesized by pyrolyzing separate metal, N and carbon precursors. However, they exhibited a little lower activity for ORR. Yet still, the Co–N–C electrocatalysts are of interest because of their relatively lower activity for the Fenton reactions, and therefore are the most promising alternative transition metal to replace Fe. Similarly, Jaouen et al. prepared single atom Co–N–C and Fe–N–C electrocatalysts and investigated the behaviours of Co- and Fe-based moieties for ORR in acidic media using operando X-ray absorption. Co–N–C showed no change in electrochemical potential over the entire ORR range, but a major change was observed for Fe–N–C. This result indicated that the Co–N–C moieties do not change their structure during the ORR in acidic media, whereas the Fe–N–C moieties do change their structure owing to the change of oxidation and/or the spin state. Further verifying that the Co–N–C electrocatalysts have better stability. Because of the weaker adsorption of O2 on CoN4 compared with FeN4 moieties, Co–N–C electrocatalysts are intrinsically less active than Fe–N–C.303 Similarly with Fe–N–C electrocatalysts, DFT calculations predicted that the CoN2+2 sites on the edge of carbon layers tended to catalyse the 4e− – ORR, exhibiting comparable activity to FeN4 sites, whereas the CoN4 sites embedded inside compact carbon layers mainly preferred the 2e− – ORR.165 Therefore, an atomically dispersed Co sites anchored on carbon catalyst with core–shell structure was obtained by pyrolysis of the Co-doped ZIF nanocrystal precursors coated with a surfactant layer. The resulting electrocatalyst contained substantial CoN2+2 sites and hence displayed high activity and selectivity for the desirable 4e− – ORR with a E1/2 of 0.84 VRHE and enhanced stability in the corrosive acidic media.165 In addition, compositional engineering of atomic scaled Co–N–C catalysts can also boost their performance for ORR. Atomically dispersed Co surrounded by B and N atoms (Co–Nx–By) confined in hierarchical porous carbon sheets could accelerate the reaction kinetics in the 4e− ORR and OER. Introducing B element gave an electron-deficient Co site, which activated the electron transfer around the Co–Nx–By site and then strengthened the interaction with oxygenated species. As a result, the catalyst showed Pt-like ORR performance with a E1/2 of 0.83 VRHE.194 However, similar to Fe–N–C catalysts, Co-based catalysts also suffer from the problem of stability with more or less Fenton reactions. Meanwhile, compared to Fe, the cost of Co is a little higher.277 Therefore, more stable and low-cost non-precious metal-based catalysts are still needed.
Other non-precious metal–N–C ASCs. 
As shown in Table 3, other non-precious metal-based ASCs, such as atomically dispersed Cu-based,201,202,227 Zn-based,204,205 Mn-based167,170,207 as well as Cr-based catalysts,168 have been reported as promising alternatives to Fe-based ORR electrocatalysts. DFT calculations revealed that the single-atomic Cu exhibited suitable adsorption energies with O2 and OOH, as well as improved O–O bond stretching, accelerating the oxygen reduction process on the active sites.201 When the atomically dispersed Cu–N–C active sites were anchored in the ultrathin nanosheet structure with abundant single atomic Cu active sites (20.9 wt%) and maximum Cu atom exposure, the Cu–N–C exhibited 3.2 times higher kinetic current at 0.85 VRHE, a better methanol/CO tolerance and long-term stability than commercial Pt/C.201 In addition, the valence state of Cu coordinated with different numbers of N atoms affects the ORR activity. Electrochemical measurements and DFT calculations demonstrated that, compared with the inert Cu(II)–N sites in the CuPc precursor, the Cu(I)–N active site with structure of Cu–N2 in the Cu–N@C catalysts showed high ORR activity and stability.202 Therefore, engineering the coordination-unsaturated Cu(I)–N active sites embedded within N-doped graphene probably provides a good direction for developing highly active and durable ORR catalysts for zinc–air batteries. Mn ions involves insignificant Fenton reactions and can also promote the formation of highly graphitized carbon, improving the corrosion resistance in electrochemical oxidative environments.167 Atomically dispersed N-coordinated single Mn sites on partially graphitized carbon (Mn–N–C) with a high active sites density of 3.03 wt% was developed through a two-step doping and adsorption approach, which exhibited a half-wave potential of 0.80 VRHE and outstanding stability in acidic media.167 The high activity of the Mn–N–C catalyst resulted from intrinsic atomically dispersed MnN4 sites, which had a favourable binding energy for O-related intermediate species and suitable energy barrier to break O–O bonds during the 4e− – ORR. The good stability was due to the robust MnN4 sites and the enhanced corrosion resistance of partially graphitized carbon. In addition to Mn-based ASCs, Cr–N–C electrocatalyst is also explored to circumvent the ORR stability issue, because the Cr ASCs are far less active in catalysing the Fenton reaction compared with the Fe ASCs counterpart.168 The Cr/N/C catalyst with Cr–N4 coordination structure exhibited E1/2 of 0.773 VRHE in acidic media, which still falls short of that those of Fe ASCs.168
Double metal–N–C ASCs. 
Recently, some DASCs were reported as electrocatalysts for OER49,176 and CO2 reduction,49,176 and exhibited higher activity than SASCs. Similarly, as shown in Table 3, the DASCs exhibited extremely high activities for ORR as well via the so-called synergistic effect between the two adjacent metal atoms.51,96,107,146,152 As shown in Fig. 28a and b, Fe–Co dual sites embedded on N-doped porous carbon ((Fe,Co)/N–C) were developed by pyrolysis of Zn/Co/Fe trimetallic MOF precursors via a host–guest strategy. The obtained electrocatalyst exhibited superior ORR performance in terms of Eonset (1.06 VRHE) and E1/2 (0.863 VRHE), which were comparable to those of commercial Pt/C (1.03 and 0.858 VRHE, respectively) (Fig. 28c).146 The calculated Jk at 0.9 V was 2.842 mA cm−2, which surpassed all control electrocatalysts including state-of-art commercial Pt/C (Fig. 28d). DFT calculations demonstrated that the cleavage of O–O bond on Fe–Co dual site proceeds easily because of the strong binding of O2 on Fe–Co dual site (Fig. 28e). Compared with those on single Fe SAs/N–C or Co SAs/N–C site, the Fe–Co dual site possessed a lower dissociation barrier energy of O2 and OOH into O and OH. Thus, the synergistic effect between adjacent Fe and Co atoms in the (Fe,Co)/N–C dual site can lower the cleavage barrier of O–O bond to achieve high activity for ORR and high selectivity for the 4e− reduction pathway. Other double M–N–C electrocatalysts were also synthesized, such as (Fe,Co)/CNT,152 A-CoPt-NC,107 and they all displayed higher catalytic activity than their corresponding SASCs. When a second metal is cooperated into original M–N sites, their stabilities can also be improved. For example, grafting a Pt atom onto the Fe–N4 centre through a bridging oxygen molecule (Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4) could remarkably improve ORR stabilities in acidic media, and even significantly enhance the catalytic activities for OER and HER.96 Therefore, designing double M–N–C ASCs may pave a new way to both improve catalytic activity and stabilities.
 Fig. 28  An example of double metal–N–C ASCs. (a) Magnified HAADF-STEM of (Fe,Co)/N–C with Fe–Co dual sites d. Inset: Proposed architectures of Fe–Co dual sites. (b) Corresponding intensity profiles obtained on the red circles in panel (a). (c) Polarization curves of (Fe,Co)/N–C, CoSAs/N-C, Fe SAs/NC, and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Inset: Eonset of different catalysts. (d) E1/2 and Jk for different catalysts. (e) DFT calculated energies of intermediates and transition states in mechanism of ORR for (Fe,Co)/N–C. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.3 2e− – ORR toward H2O2. 
H2O2 is an important chemical agent for a variety of industries, such as chemical synthesis, pulp and paper industry and water-cleaning.280,281,304 Currently, H2O2 is primarily manufactured via the indirect, energy-demanding, and waste-intensive anthraquinone redox process.271,304 The overall process requires centralized infrastructure and generates H2O2 mixtures with low concentrations of 1 to 2 wt%. Before commercial use, further costly purifications and distillations are needed to reach appropriate concentrations.304 Meanwhile, mixing high-pressure H2 and O2 leads to a great risk of flammability hazard.60 Compared with the traditional method, electrochemical synthesis of H2O2 becomes a promising alternative route.304 First, it proceeds under ambient conditions at variable rates and requires little auxiliary plant. Secondly, it can utilize renewable electricity from natural wind, water or solar energy as the energy source without fossil fuel consumptions. In addition, it can start with green precursors, such as water and air.3,281,304 Therefore, shifting electrochemical ORR towards the 2e− pathway to H2O2 (instead of the aforementioned 4e− to water) is indeed a green, safe and promising route to on-site and small-scale production of H2O2.
Noble metal ASCs anchored on metal, alloy, carbide, nitride or sulphide-based supports. 
Although a variety of highly active catalysts have been developed to improve the ORR performance via the 4e− pathway, there are fewer catalysts that can selectively reduce O2 into H2O2. Noble metals and their alloys, such as carbon-coated Pt,280 Pt–Hg,281 Pd–Au,282 Pd–Hg269 and Au–Pt–Ni271 are currently the most efficient catalysts, requiring small overpotentials and high H2O2 selectivity (up to 95%). As discussed in Section 3.2.1, there are two strategies to pivot the 4e− – ORR to 2e− – ORR to produce H2O2. One is geometry effects, and the other is electronic effects. Based on the geometry effects, eliminating the accessible active metal ensembles can elevate the H2O2 production selectivity. Alloying process is a very effective method to optimize the electronic and catalytic properties of catalysts. For example, using DFT, Rossmeisl et al. screened 30 alloys for new alloy catalysts for the effective 2e− – ORR toward H2O2 with some main criteria, such as optimal activity with ΔGHOO* of 4.2 ± 0.2 eV, each of the constituent elements being stable.281 In each of the alloys, the reactive metal atoms were isolated by more inert elements. This strategy is consistent with the previous geometry effects and as well as the design concept of ASCs.282 Several reports have demonstrated that, compared with reactive metal NPs, the isolated reactive metal atoms had high selectivity for H2O2 production. For example, Schiffrin et al. revealed that isolated alloying atoms of Pd, Pt, or Rh placed within the Au surface can enhance the H2O2 production relative to pure Au.282 For example, for metal Pd atoms, when the Pd content increased from 8% to 50%, the H2O2 selectivity would decrease from 95% to 10%. This is because, with lower Pd content of 8%, the Pd existed as monomers surrounded by Au atoms at the surface of Au–Pd nanoalloys, whereas when the Pd content was increased to 50%, the electrocatalyst have contiguous Pd atoms, thus preferring the formation of H2O instead of H2O2, in agreement with DFT modeling results. Another example is a SASCs of Pt supported on titanium nitride (TiN) NPs, in which a single-atom Pt were stabilized on a N-vacancy site of the TiN.59 The obtained 0.35% Pt/TiN displayed a H2O2 selectivity of 62%, because of the absence of Pt ensembles. That is to say, downsizing Pt NPs to single Pt atoms would substantially change the reaction pathway. These results indicate that ASCs not only provide an ideal platform for reducing the usage of noble metals, but also can improve the H2O2 selectivity for ORR.
The active metal atoms in ASCs are coordinated with the surface atoms of the support, which are just like ligand molecules in homogeneous catalysts that not only stabilize the metal atoms but also participate in the catalytic reactions.14 Therefore, the supports play a significant role on the catalytic properties. For example, a single-atomic Pt catalyst were prepared by anchoring on two different supports: titanium carbide (Pt1/TiC) and Pt1/TiN. At 0.2 VRHE, 0.2 wt% Pt1/TiC showed a H2O2 selectivity of 68.0%, whereas 0.2 wt% Pt1/TiN exhibited a H2O2 selectivity of 53.1%. DFT calculations presented that, compared with Pt1/TiC, Pt1/TiN had a weaker affinity for oxygen species, more easily preserving O–O bonds with higher selectivity toward H2O2 production. This demonstrates that the supports in ASCs not only act as anchoring sites for single atoms, but also participate in the surface reaction. Therefore, a careful selection of the support material is indispensable for the development of better ASCs.
In addition to selecting appropriate supports, increasing the active sites can also improve the selectivity and activity of electrocatalysts. Hollow nanospheres constructed by atomically dispersing Pt in amorphous CuSx support (h-Pt1–CuSx) with as high as 24.8 at% of single atomic Pt sites were synthesized by an ion-exchange method (Fig. 29).60,305 XANES spectra and FT-EXAFS spectra of Pt L3-edge analysis informed that the Pt atoms were isolated by four S atoms without Pt–Pt bonds (Fig. 29a). The rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) method were used to measure the catalytic activities for H2O2 production in 0.1 M O2-saturated HClO4 electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 29b, unlike most ORR catalysts, a large ring current was observed for h-Pt1–CuSx, indicating its high selectivity for H2O2. Meanwhile, h-Pt1–CuSx displayed high H2O2 selectivity of 92–96% over a wide potential range of 0.05–0.7 VRHE and high long-term stability (Fig. 29c). After the h-Pt1–CuSx catalyst was coupled with a hydrogen oxidation electrode, a device that could synthesize H2O2 directly from H2 and O2 was fabricated, and a steady output current of around 10 mA was observed (Fig. 29d and e). Meanwhile, the amount of produced H2O2 were calculated to be ∼546 mol kgcat−1 h−1, which was much higher than the best reported single atomic electrocatalysts and thermochemical catalysts.
 Fig. 29  Electrochemical measurement of the selective 2e− – ORR to H2O2 for h-Pt1CuSx electrocatalysts in 0.1 M O2-saturated HClO4 electrolyte. (a) Structural model of the hollow structure of h-Pt1CuSx electrocatalysts and their corresponding atomic structure. (b) RRDE measurement. (c) H2O2 selectivity. (d) The electrochemical device used for the electrochemical synthesis of H2O2. (e) The amount of generated H2O2 along with reaction time. The inset is the chronoamperometry curve of the cell. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
ASCs anchored on carbon-based supports. 
Carbon materials with earth-abundant and highly tunable characteristics have been reported as promising alternative ORR catalysts for electrochemical H2O2 production.270,306 Although their performance can be tuned by heteroatom doping and material structure, a serious issue is their very high ORR overpotential, which restricts the geometric current density of H2O2 production.270,287,306,307 However, carbon-based materials can provide a good electronic conductivity and a large surface area, and show great promise as alternative supports for anchoring single metal atoms.94,270 This can be achieved by shifting from metallic surfaces to the atomic dispersion of metal elements within a carbon matrix doped with N or S elements, such as Pt–S–C, Fe–N–C, Co–N–C, etc.3,94,267,287 Atomically dispersed Pt atoms with a high loading of 5 wt% were stabilized on S-doped carbon with Pt–S4 atomic structure (Pt/HSC).94 RRDE results revealed that Pt/HSC produced H2O2 with up to 96% selectivity in a wide potential range. Moreover, the electrocatalysts showed increased H2O2 selectivity as the size of Ptn clusters decreased, and a maximized H2O2 selectivity was observed with the smallest Pt existing as atomically dispersed sites. These results again demonstrated that, different with Pt NPs, atomically dispersed Pt catalyst can selectively catalyse a 2e− – ORR toward H2O2. However, the noble metal-based ASCs tend to agglomerate into metal clusters during operation, which is in favour of 4e− – ORR again. Therefore, developing highly efficient and durable ASCs for electrochemical H2O2 production is still challenging.
The electrocatalytic activities of non-precious metal–N–C materials toward 4e− – ORR to H2O have attracted great research interest for replacing precious metal-based catalysts at the fuel cells or metal–air batteries. Among these systems, Fe–N–C materials display the highest catalytic activity and selectivity toward 4e− – ORR, which is consistent with the behaviours of Fe–porphyrins and Fe–phthalocyanines.308 Early studies demonstrated Co-porphyrins and Co-phthalocyanines generally catalysed the 2e− – ORR, predominantly producing H2O2.283 Therefore, better understanding the catalytic activity and selectivity toward 4e− or 2e− – ORR for M–N–C materials appear highly desirable. Strasser et al. synthesized a series of M–N–C materials (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) with atomically dispersed M–Nx sites via low-energy ball milling and subsequently flash-pyrolysis precursors of ZIF-8 and 10-phenanthroline.287 After RRDE and RDE tests (Fig. 30a and b), they found the Co–N–C material exhibited the highest catalytic activity and selectivity toward H2O2 production, and Fe–N–C displayed highest activity for 4e− – ORR. The H2O2 selectivity followed the order of Fe–N–C (28%) < Cu–N–C (36%) < Mn–N–C (43%) < N–C (45%) < Ni–N–C (52%) < Co–N–C (80%) at 0.1 VRHE. Fig. 30c showed the activity and selectivity volcanoes for both the 4e− and 2e− – ORR pathways over the different M–N–C catalysts based on their binding free energies of the HO* intermediate (GHO). For Fe–N–C catalysts, the strong binding of HO* resulted in the predominance of 4e− – ORR, which was consistent with Fe–N4–O motif (inset in Fig. 30a). By contrast, for Co–N–C catalysts with Co–N4 motif (inset in Fig. 30a) stood at the binding free energy of near the top of the H2O2 production volcano, leading to the highest H2O2 selectivity. However, for metal single atoms anchored on carbon-based materials, the order of the H2O2 activity and selectivity is not immutable, which can be tuned by the metal coordination motifs. For example, the selectivity of Co–N4 motif can be further tailored by fine-tuning its surrounding atomic configuration.309 When an electron-rich species, such as O*, is adsorbed near the Co–N4 moiety, its selectivity toward H2O2 would be improved. Conversely, when electron-poor species, such as H+, are adsorbed near the Co–N4 moiety, its selectivity toward H2O would be improved. In addition to the indirect coordination atoms with active metal that can affect the selectivity, the direct or these first coordination atoms can also significantly affect the selectivity. For example, a series of metal single atoms including Fe, Pd, Co, and Mn anchored into carbon nanotube (TM–CNT) vacancies (Fe–CNT, Pd–CNT, Co–CNT, and Mn–CNT) with M–C–O motifs were prepared by Wang et al.3 They found the order of H2O2 selectivity was Fe–CNT > Pd–CNT > Mn–CNT > Co–CNT. For Fe–CNT electrocatalyst with the highest activity and selectivity, when its neighbouring O was replaced by N, the 2e− – ORR was successfully shifted to 4e− – ORR, indicating that the Fe–C–O motifs, rather than the well-known Fe–C–N motifs, were responsible for the 2e− – ORR pathway. These results indicate that the surrounding atomic configuration of ASCs mediates the H2O2 production activity of metal centres. Moreover, metal atoms, supports, non-metal dopants and synthesis methods can all tune the activity and selectivity for ORR.
 Fig. 30  (a) LSV curves in a RRDE setup at +1.2 VRHE. (b) Corresponding H2O2 selectivity and the number of electrons (n) at +0.1 VRHE. (c) Thermodynamic relations (volcano) lines for 2e− – ORR (green solid line) and 4e− – ORR (black solid line) based on their binding free energies of the HO* intermediate (GHO). Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

4.3 Selective formic acid/methanol/ethanol electrooxidation
With the pressing issues of global energy demand and environmental pollution, there is a growing interest in developing different kinds of high-efficiency and low-cost clean energy devices, such as fuel cells. Apart from H2, some other fuel types have been used for fuel cells, including formic acid, methanol and ethanol. Based on the electrocatalytic oxidation of these small organic molecules, they can be classified as direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs), direct ethanol fuel cells (DEFCs) and direct formic acid fuel cells (DFAFCs), respectively. Despite the considerable advances achieved in recent years, their widespread application is hindered by several technical and economical barriers. Electrocatalysts play a vital role in the above fundamental electrochemical reactions. However, the currently available catalysts are dominated by precious-metal-based materials, such as Pt-based catalysts for MOR11,35,112 and FAOR,34,59,310–314 Pd-based catalysts for EOR,315–317 thus significantly limiting their practical and wide application as a result of cost, scarcity and unsatisfying electrocatalytic activity. ASCs can offer efficient utilization of the expensive metals and provide unique selectivity because of the absence of ensemble sites.314,318
In theory, DMFCs and DEFCs can produce higher current densities than PEMFCs. Methanol and ethanol have very high energy densities of 6.09 and 8.00 kW h kg−1, respectively, which are even comparable to hydrocarbons and gasoline with energy densities of 10 and 11 kW h kg−1, respectively.319 To improve the activity of electrocatalysts and minimize the usage of precious metals, many studies have been conducted. For EOR, its electrocatalytic mechanism is rather complex owing to two different adsorbed intermediates with one or two carbon atoms.57 Nevertheless, some researchers tried to find the possible application values of ASCs in EOR via a series of experimental analysis. Anderson et al. prepared Ptn+ on ITO with Pt centres ranging from single atoms to Pt14via a mass-selected soft-landing method.320 After investigating the size-dependent electrocatalytic activity in the EOR, they found Pt4/ITO and Pt10/ITO had the best EOR activity, whereas Pt1/ITO with isolated Pt was not an efficient electrocatalyst for the reaction. These results indicated that small clusters (rather than ASCs) might be an attractive target for high-efficiency EOR electrocatalyst. Another example can also support this inference. Jiang et al. demonstrated that Au@AgML@Pd nanowires with a Pd coverage of 1/16 to 1/4 ML dominated of isolated Pd atoms were almost electrocatalytically inert.57,316 By contrast, Au@Pd NWs, in which Pd existed as continuous atoms, showed high EOR performance. Their results further confirmed that Pd ensembles (rather than single Pd atoms) are the active site for EOR. Therefore, in this regard we will not discuss in length about EOR.
MOR involves both ‘‘indirect’’ and ‘‘direct’’ pathways, which are governed by the initial C–H and O–H bond activation, respectively.321 The indirect pathway proceeds via the formation of CO followed by its subsequent oxidation to CO2. In MOR, this is the major pathway to CO2 over a wide range of potentials, which requires 3–4 Pt atoms to accommodate the carbon bound CHxO fragments.321 The direct pathway involves the first formation of soluble intermediates, such as formaldehyde and formic acid, and then these intermediates are oxidized to CO2. This pathway requires at most 1 to 2 metal atoms. To reduce the usage of noble metals, size control of Pt from single atoms to clusters on multiwalled carbon nanotubes (Pt–S-MWNT and Pth-q/MWNT) were investigated.35 After investigating their electrocatalytic activities, they found that the electrocatalytic MOR activity increased as the size of the Pt clusters decreased. However, single Pt atoms of Pt–S-MWNT have no MOR activity, indicating that single Pt atoms are not favourable for MOR no matter via the indirect or direct pathway. However, Sun et al. synthesized single-atomic Pt and Pt clusters on graphene with abundant vacancies and defects using ALD method.11,57 They found that the ALD50Pt/GNS sample obtained with 50 ALD cycles exhibited the best MOR performance in terms of the current density and onset potential and superior CO tolerance. Combining XAFS analyses, the authors concluded that the low-coordination and partially unoccupied densities of states of 5d orbital of Pt atoms were responsible for the excellent performance. Based on the above theory, if single Pt atoms play the dominant role for the performance, the MOR proceeded most probably via the direct pathway. Another possibility is that the vacancies and defects on graphene were involved to provide new active sites in the MOR.321 However, as shown by HAADF-STEM images, single Pt atoms and Pt clusters coexisted in ALD50Pt/GNS samples, which made it difficult to understand the real role of the single Pt atoms.
DFAFCs with high energy density and simple system integration are promising as next-generation power sources for portable devices. In addition, compared with highly pressurized H2 fuel, liquid fuel formic acid is much safer to store and transport. Compared with methanol fuel, formic acid is less toxic.314 In addition, the oxidation of formic acid is considered to be significantly easier than methanol, because –CO2 is already part of the molecule.321 Similar to MOR, FAOR also involves two different pathways. One proceeds via an indirect dehydration pathway (HCOOH → H2O + COads) and the subsequent oxidation of CO to CO2; the other is a direct dehydrogenation pathway (HCOOH → 2H + CO2). The direct pathway appears to occur over just 1 or 2 Pt atoms, whereas the indirect pathway requires a greater ensemble size and defect sites.321 However, different from in MOR, in FAOR, the direct pathway is the dominant one to CO2 over nearly all potentials. In this case, it is feasible to construct ASCs to boost FAOR with a high efficiency of Pt utilization. Based on this, several single atom Pt catalysts have been reported with high electrocatalytic activity.34,59,310,314 For example, Zhang et al. prepared a series of Pt–Au bimetallic NPs with tailored Pt contents on surface forming single Pt atoms or Pt clusters via a facile colloidal method (Fig. 31a).34 Pt mass-normalized anodic sweeps (right) and peek currents (left) are shown in Fig. 31b. Interestingly, the highest activities were observed for Pt4Au96 and Pt7Au93, which contained the least Pt and almost exclusively as single-atomic sites surrounded by atoms of Au (Fig. 31c). Another peak at 0.85 VRHE in the CV plot was attributed to the electrochemical oxidation of adsorbed CO molecules, which will poison the surface of Pt and decrease its catalytic activity. However, for Pt4Au96 and Pt7Au93, this peak was absent, suggesting a resistance to CO poisoning. DFT calculations further supported these results, showing that CO adsorption was weakened at all the adsorption sites on both few-atom and single atom Pt surfaces relative to bulk Pt (Fig. 31d). These results indicated that one Pt adsorption site is sufficient for formic acid dehydrogenation, whereas the indirect dehydration pathway requires a greater number of continuous atoms (Fig. 31e and f). In addition, other examples of single-atomic Pt catalysts, such as single-atom Pt on TiN (Pt/TiN),59 single-atom Pt on Au nano-octahedra310 and single-atom Pt on tin oxide (Pt1/ATO),314 exhibited high catalytic FAOR performance as well. All these results suggest that, different from EOR and MOR, constructing discrete sites is an effective strategy to improve catalytic performance of FAOR (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 31  (a) Illustration of the formation of PtAu bimetallic NPs via a facile colloidal method. (b) Pt mass-normalized anodic sweeps (right) and peek currents (left) obtained from PtAu NP catalysts in 0.1 M of both HClO4 and HCOOH. (c) The plotted FT-EXAFS spectra obtained from Pt and Au L3-edge absorption spectra of PtAu NPs. (d) Calculated adsorption energies for the different CO adsorption sites. Predominant FAOR reaction pathways on few-atom (e) and single-atom Pt surfaces (f). Spheres: Au, yellow; C, black; H, white; O, red, Pt, blue. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 32  Illustration of the selectivity for FAOR, EOR and MOR on single-atomic sites and ensemble sites with different reaction pathways based on the reported results. Spheres: active metal atom, yellow; supporting metal atoms, red. 
5 Summary and future opportunities
ASCs are being pursued as economical alternatives to noble metal-based catalysts for future clean energy conversion technologies. In this review, we first discussed synthesis methods for ASCs in two categories: the bottom-up and the top-down methods. For the earliest and most widely used bottom-up methods, we described five subcategories, including wet-chemistry methods, mass-selected soft-landing techniques, the ALD method, the GR method and high-energy ball milling method. For the top-down methods, we mainly focused on high-temperature pyrolysis and high-temperature gas-phase atomic migration. Although a lot of promising advances have been achieved, challenges still remain in the preparation of ASCs. One is that the loading of active materials in ASCs is generally low, leading to the production of only a low current density unfit for practical applications. Therefore, developing and optimizing of synthesis strategies to obtain high metal atom loadings and stable ASCs is in urgent need. Another challenge is scaling up the synthesis of ASCs. Simple and large-scale synthesis of ASCs with precise and uniform metal active centres is directly related to the practical value of ASCs.
In the second part, we overviewed some new and effective characterization methods to precisely understand the atomic structure and catalytic mechanism. STEM and STM technologies can help to directly observe the single metal atoms. XAS analyses including EXAFS and XANES are used as powerful tools to determine the geometric and electronic structure of the active metals, such as the oxidation state of the metal centre, bond lengths, coordination numbers and coordination geometries. Limited by the low resolution of STEM for the elements with low atomic numbers (such as C, N, O) and low resolution of EXAFS for metal coordination between M–C, M–N, or M–O bonds. APT is a new imaging technique that enables three-dimensional atomic-scale analysis of the specific elemental composition of catalysts. Information gained from these advanced technologies combined with conventional material characterization technologies (XRD, TEM, XPS, FTIR, Raman, NMR, etc.) can help to understand the ASCs in a more comprehensive way. More importantly, with the precise identification of the active site structures, it is more effective to establish the structure–activity relationship. And the theoretical calculations and molecular modelling should match the experimental conditions, and help to obtain a more reasonable interpretation of experimental results. However, even though catalysts are dynamic under reaction conditions, we normally build “static” models for the catalytic processes. Therefore, more in-depth understanding is still absent on this aspect. Consequently, advanced in situ and operando surface techniques, such as operando XAS, IR, XPS, or STEM that allow for monitoring the catalyst evolution during reaction will be most helpful to understand catalytic mechanisms at the atomic level.
In the third part, we focused on some representative reactions for electrocatalytic energy conversion applications: water splitting (HER and OER), ORR, and hydrocarbon conversion reactions for fuel cells (FAOR, MOR and EOR). For each reaction, we discussed their unique structure-dependent electrocatalytic performance together with the underlying mechanism. We then comprehensively summarize the current advances in the above reactions for various reported ASCs. Studies demonstrated the capability of ASCs for the electrochemical applications to lower or replace the state-of-art noble metal-based catalysts for these reactions. Crucial to enabling this vision is the development of improved electrocatalysts with the appropriate selectivity, activity and stability for the chemical transformations involved (Fig. 33). Various experimental characterizations and computational calculations revealed that their performances are strongly correlated to a variety of factors, such as different metal elements, different metal catalytic sites (structure, number, and electronic state, etc.). As shown in Fig. 33, different strategies are shown to further optimize the selectivity, activity and stability of ASCs. In most cases, these factors are not mutually exclusive, and they can tailor their performance simultaneously. The future development opportunities for ideal ASCs are specified below.
 Fig. 33  Electrocatalyst development strategies, which aim to increase the selectivity, activity and stability of ASCs. 
(i) The selectivity of ASCs. ASCs, which contain isolated metal atoms singly dispersed on supports, are known for high atom utilization, high selectivity and high activity. The high selectivity of many ASCs is thought to arise from the uniform structure of atom active centres. In theory, ASCs are not suitable for reaction pathways that require two nearby active metal atoms.12 Therefore, the selectivity on some reactions, such as ORR and selective electrooxidation for small organic small molecules in fuel cells, is still worth further investigation. The selectivity of ASCs can be adjusted by the metal elements, single atoms and atom ensemble, as well as coordination environment. For example, on Pt/C NP surface, O2 prefers to be reduced to H2O via the dominant 4e− – ORR pathway, whereas when Pt catalysts with amorphous carbon layers or existing as single Pt atoms isolated by other more inert atoms, O2 tends to be reduced to H2O2 through the dominant 2e− – ORR pathway.280,281 Therefore, compared to Pt NPs or Pt clusters, atomically dispersed Pt electrocatalysts usually have higher selectivity for H2O2. In addition, based on experimental and DFT results, some reports confirmed that Pd ensemble rather than single Pd atom is the active site for EOR.57,316 For MOR, single-atomic Pt is not favourable no matter via the indirect or direct pathway.57 By contrast, for FAOR, constructing atomically dispersed sites is an effective way to improve catalytic performance of FAOR.34,59,310,314 Coordination environment is also very important for tuning the selectivity. For example, when its neighbouring O is replaced by N,Fe–CNT electrocatalyst successfully shifted from 4e− – ORR to 2e− – ORR pathway. Another example showed that when an electron-rich species, such as O*, is adsorbed near the Co–N4 moiety, its selectivity toward H2O2 would be improved.309
(ii) The activity of ASCs. There are generally two approaches toward high catalytic activity per mass: one involves increasing the active site density, and the other involves increasing the intrinsic activity of each active site (Fig. 33). The active site density can be increased through increasing active site loading and improving exposed active sites area via structuring, such as size control and morphology control.96,160,290,292 In addition to increasing the active site density, improving the intrinsic kinetic activity is a more important prerequisite for improving the activity of ASCs. As reported, the difference of intrinsic activity between a good catalyst and a bad catalyst can be as large as 10 orders of magnitude, whereas the difference between a high-loading and a low-loading catalyst is only 2–3 orders of magnitude.242,322 The intrinsic activity of ASCs can be tuned by various factors, such as the metal nature, the coordination configuration of the metal moieties, properties of the supports (conductivity, porosity, etc.), the interaction between single atoms and supports, the heteroatom-doped carbon supports or the synergetic effect between diatomic metal sites (homonuclear paired and heteronuclear paired sites). Among these factors, regulating the coordination configuration of the metal moieties is considered to be the most effective and most widely used strategy. ASCs are not really “atoms” of zero valence state, in which the atomically dispersed metal species interact strongly with the neighbouring atoms on the support and exhibit valence states. Therefore, metal moieties are the active sites, which originated from the unique coordination structures between the single metal atoms and surrounding non-metallic or sometimes metallic atoms. The coordination structures can be tuned by varying the coordination number and coordination atom (non-metallic atoms: N, C, O, S, B, P, Cl or other metallic atoms).15,178,323 In addition, atoms on supports, which are not directly coordinated with active metal atoms, are also very important. For example, in the M–N–C ASCs, carbon material supports with appropriate heteroatom dopants (such as B, S, P) would significantly improve the catalytic performance of ASCs.161,174 In fact, the incorporation of these multiple dopants with electron-donating/withdrawing capability, no matter they are coordinated directly with active metal atoms or not, could all tune the electronic structure and therefore the intrinsic activity of the metal centres. Therefore, fundamental understanding of the relationships between electronic and geometric structures and catalytic activity is strongly required. Theoretical calculations provide an important way to understand the reaction mechanisms and how these factors influence the catalytic activity at the atomic level. Therefore, a theoretical understanding along with experimental verification is an effective method to rationally design of new-generation high-performance ASCs.
(iii) The stability of ASCs. The stability problem must be addressed so as to make ASCs practically viable. In general, for ASCs, the stability remains a great challenge owing to the possible aggregation or leaching during catalytic process. Therefore, selecting suitable supports and improving the interaction between single metal atoms and supports are among the most important strategies to address their stability issues (Fig. 33). Supports made of non-precious transition metal compounds, such as oxides, sulphides, are unstable, especially in acidic environments, which leads to metal leaching and larger over-potentials.55 For M–N–C electrocatalysts, the carbon phase supports will be electrooxidized to CO2 and CO at high (>0.9 VRHE) potentials, which directly leads to the destruction of the carbon surface, and indirectly result in the destruction of active sites.277,302 Increasing the graphitization degree in catalysts may ensure the catalyst stability by mitigating carbon electrooxidation and corrosion, although it would lower the N dopants and accommodating ability for metal atoms.277 Moreover, stability is related to both the supports and metal active centres. Thus, selecting appropriate metal is also an effective strategy to promote stability. For example, for M–N–C catalysts, Fe–N–C electrocatalysts exhibit the highest activity, but Fe–N–C electrocatalysts suffer from serious Fenton reaction, leading to performance degradation and cell failure. Thus, Fe-free electrocatalysts, such as Mn–N–C, Co–N–C, or Cr–N–C, were developed, which exhibited inferior activities, yet their stabilities were improved compared with Fe–N–C electrocatalysts.166–168 In addition, engineering diatomic metal sites is demonstrated to be an effective method to elevate the stability of electrocatalysts. For example, electrocatalysts with the active moiety of Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4 were obtained via grafting of a Pt atom onto the Fe centre through a bridging oxygen molecule, which exhibited remarkably improved ORR stability in acidic media.96
Precisely understanding of the relationship between structure and performance as well as the reaction mechanisms of ASCs at the atomic level will allow for greater control of device functionality. For now, ASCs have demonstrated outstanding performances in laboratory scale for many clean-energy devices. In the future, their commercialization in energy applications is of intense interest, which depends both on ASCs development (including large-scale synthesis, characterization, catalytic performance, cost) and energy device manufacturing. Hence, in order to successfully integrate ASCs to future renewable and cost-effective energy systems, fundamental research, manufacturing as well as technoeconomic analysis need to be pursued simultaneously.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFA0702003, 2017YFA0700101, 2016YFA0202801), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21925202, 21872076, 21890383), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (JQ18007), Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission (Z191100007219003), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M631445), National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX201700131) and Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program.
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, K. Jiang, H. Wang and X. Yao, Chem, 2019, 5, 1371–1397 CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Back, A. J. Akey, C. Xia, Y. Hu, W. Liang, D. Schaak, E. Stavitski, J. K. Norskov, S. Siahrostami and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3997 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, S. Kühl, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2016, 1, 16009 CAS .
Y. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184–2202 RSC .
X. Tian, P. Zhao and W. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808066 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J. P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ball, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 690–693 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, Z. Niu, D. Kim, M. Li and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 2, 1184–1249 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Sun, G. X. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. G. Zhou, S. L. Yang, W. F. Chen, X. B. Meng, D. S. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Y. Li, S. Y. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. J. Tak, J. Kim, A. Soon and H. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Siyu Yao, W. Zhou, R. Gao, W. Xu, Y. Ye, L. Lin, X. Wen, P. Liu, B. Chen, E. Crumlin, J. Guo, Z. Zuo, W. Li, J. Xie, L. Lu, C. J. Kiely, L. Gu, C. Shi, J. A. Rodriguez and D. Ma, Science, 2017, 357, 389–393 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, G. Fang, G. Li, H. Ma, H. Fan, L. Yu, C. Ma, X. Wu, D. Deng, M. Wei, D. Tan, R. Si, S. Zhang, J. Li, L. Sun, Z. Tang, X. Pan and X. Bao, Science, 2014, 344, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, J. Dong, L. Zheng, J. Luo, J. Wan, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10976–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu, P. Du, R. Si, J. Wang, X. Cui, H. Li, J. Xiao, T. Xu, J. Deng, F. Yang, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Li, X. Pan and X. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, Q. Fu, Y. Chen, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Wang, L. Gu, W. He, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Y. Huang, X. Duan, D. Wang, C. Draxl and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9795–9798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Chen, L. Zhang, T. Yao, W. Liu, Y. Lin, H. Ju, J. Dong, L. Zheng, W. Yan, X. Zheng, Z. Li, X. Wang, J. Yang, D. He, Y. Wang, Z. Deng, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9419–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, Q. Shang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao, T. Yao, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705112 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, L. Li, T. Sheng, G. Hu, Y. Chen and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11594–11598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, C. Mi, X. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. Xiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2322 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Lin, Q. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S. F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. M. Xu, Y. Xu, L. Tan, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Duan and Y. F. Song, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 378–384 RSC .
P. N. Duchesne, Z. Y. Li, C. P. Deming, V. Fung, X. Zhao, J. Yuan, T. Regier, A. Aldalbahi, Z. Almarhoon, S. Chen, D. E. Jiang, N. Zheng and P. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1033–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Kim, K. Ohshima, K. Higashimine, T. Uruga, M. Takata, H. Suematsu and T. Mitani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 421–425 CrossRef .
T. Maschmeyer, F. Rey, G. Sankar and J. M. Thomas, Nature, 1995, 378, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .
F. Humblot, J. P. Candy, F. Le Peltier, B. Didillon and J. M. Basset, J. Catal., 1998, 179, 459–468 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abbet, A. Sanchez, U. Heiz, W. D. Schneider, A. M. Ferrari, G. Pacchioni and N. Rösch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3453–3457 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, H. Saltsburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2003, 301, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Sun, L. B. Xu, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2067–2080 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Han, B. Q. Wang, A. Kumar, Y. J. Qin, J. Jin, X. H. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong, Y. Jia, J. F. Liu and X. M. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800471 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801649 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Han, W. Chen, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Zhang, S. Ji, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706508 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, W. C. Cheong, L. Zheng, F. Ren, G. Ying, X. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Peng, G. Wang and C. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ye, S. Chen, Y. Lin, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Zheng, Z. Qi, C. Wang, R. Long, M. Chen, J. Zhu, P. Gao, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem, 2019, 5, 2865–2878 CAS .
J. Jiao, R. Lin, S. Liu, W. C. Cheong, C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, J. Tang, K. Wu, S. F. Hung, H. M. Chen, L. Zheng, Q. Lu, X. Yang, B. Xu, H. Xiao, J. Li, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 222–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, X. Yan, C. Lang, X. Wang, D. Yang, K. Huang, S. Feng and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9404–9408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, S. Gao, C. Yang, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, C. Qu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Wu, W. C. Cheong, W. Chen, R. Lin, J. Li, L. Zheng, W. Yan, L. Gu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1002 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, S. Zhao, W. Chen, L. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Dong, Z. Li, F. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, J. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4271–4275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R. A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W. C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Liu, L. L. Wang, K. N. Zhao, S. S. Shi, Q. S. Shao, L. Zhang, X. L. Sun, Y. F. Zhao and J. J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
H. B. Zhang, G. G. Liu, L. Shi and J. H. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tian, Q. Fu, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W. C. Cheong, R. Yu, L. Gu, J. Dong, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. Draxl, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2353 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shen, W. Chen, Q. Peng, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Cao, Y. Wang, W. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 2099–2110 CAS .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D. R. Yang, W. X. Xu, C. Wang, F. B. Wang, J. J. Xu, X. H. Xia and H. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15479–15485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Gu, B. Qiao, C. Q. Huang, W. C. Ding, K. Sun, E. Zhan, T. Zhang, J. Liu and W. X. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3886–3890 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. O. yang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
P. X. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. X. Qin, S. G. Mo, G. X. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. D. Zang, B. H. Wu, G. Fu and N. F. Zeng, Science, 2016, 352, 797–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Hulsey, B. Zhang, Z. Ma, H. Asakura, D. A. Do, W. Chen, T. Tanaka, P. Zhang, Z. Wu and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1330 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673–689 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Harvey, Modern Analytical Chemistry, McGraw-Hill,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
S. Vajda and M. G. White, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7152–7176 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lang, W. Xi, J. C. Liu, Y. T. Cui, T. Li, A. F. Lee, F. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Li, L. Li, J. Lin, S. Miao, X. Liu, A. Q. Wang, X. Wang, J. Luo, B. Qiao, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Gates, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, D. A. Dixon and A. Katz, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4259–4275 RSC .
D. Matthey, J. G. Wang, S. Wendt, J. Matthiesen, R. Schaub, E. Laegsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2007, 315, 1692–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Nguyen, J. X. Liang, J. Shan, J. J. Liu, A. I. Frenkel, A. Patlolla, W. Huang, J. Li and F. F. Tao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, A. Gulec, A. M. Johnson, N. M. Schweitzer, G. D. Stucky, L. D. Marks and P. C. Stair, Science, 2015, 350, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Guo, P. P. Du, X. P. Fu, C. Ma, J. Zeng, R. Si, Y. Y. Huang, C. J. Jia, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. Wang, H. Sawada, G. G. Han, T. Samuels, C. S. Allen, A. I. Kirkland, J. C. Grossman and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3392–3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y. C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Gu, Z. Zhou and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mao, L. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Pei, X. C. Zeng, X. Wu and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, A. Lyalin and T. Taketsugu, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 034701 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhao, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, S. J. Li and G. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 515, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhou, C. Chen, Z. Han, B. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, L. Du, Y. Bu, P. Wang, X. Wang, H. Yang and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1657 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tang, Y. Cong, Q. Shang, C. Wu, G. Xu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5987–5991 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Kistler, N. Chotigkrai, P. Xu, B. Enderle, P. Praserthdam, C. Y. Chen, N. D. Browning and B. C. Gates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8904–8907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Liu, Z. Li, Q. Y. Yu, Y. F. Chen, Z. W. Chai, G. F. Zhao, S. J. Liu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Pan, Q. H. Zhang, L. Gu, L. R. Zheng, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, D. S. Wang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Y. Q. Liu, L. M. Liu, J. S. Chen and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9305–9311 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, U. Diaz, R. Arenal, G. Agostini, P. Concepcion and A. Corma, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 132–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, W. Sun, W. Chen, J. Dong, J. Wen, J. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Zheng, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7407–7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Vile, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. Lopez and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. De and N. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8319–8323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, M. Wang, X. Duan, L. Zheng, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, Q. Ma, Z. Feng, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1711 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
B. Wurster, D. Grumelli, D. Hotger, R. Gutzler and K. Kern, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3623–3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2018, 2, 134–141 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Dong, H. Yao, X. Zhang, X. Tong, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen, W. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704720 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Gong, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Q. Xu, C. Chen, C. Chen, Q. Peng, L. Gu, H. Zhao, P. Hu, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11161–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8450–8458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. Chen, X. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, J. Dong, W. Chen, W. Yan, T. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9495–9500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. E. Dick and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17677–17682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Han, H. Liu, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1–6 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, J. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C. L. Dong, R. S. Liu, C. P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. M. Yin, X. B. Li, E. Okunishi, Y. L. Shen, J. He, Z.-K. Tang, W. X. Wang, E. Yücelen, C. Li, Y. Gong, L. Gu, S. Miao, L. M. Liu, J. Luo and Y. Ding, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17111 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, M. Fang, H. Wang, S. Yip, H. Y. Cheung, F. Wang, C.-Y. Wong, S. T. Chu and J. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13080–13086 RSC .
R. Chen, C. Yang, W. Cai, H. Y. Wang, J. Miao, L. Zhang, S. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1070–1075 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, K. Duanmu, C. Wan, T. Cheng, L. Zhang, S. Dai, W. Chen, Z. Zhao, P. Li, H. Fei, Y. Zhu, R. Yu, J. Luo, K. Zang, Z. Lin, M. Ding, J. Huang, H. Sun, J. Guo, X. Pan, W. A. Goddard, P. Sautet, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L. M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Huang, L. Zhang, T. Xu, H. Wei, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Ge, M. Lei, J. Y. Ma, L. M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
X. P. Yin, H. J. Wang, S. F. Tang, X. L. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T. B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, S. Y. Ma, P. Zhou, C. X. Zhang, C. He and L. Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26313–26321 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Kaden, T. Wu, W. A. Kunkel and S. L. Anderson, Science, 2009, 326, 826–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 34–59 CrossRef .
P. Capiod, L. Bardotti, A. Tamion, O. Boisron, C. Albin, V. Dupuis, G. Renaud, P. Ohresser and F. Tournus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 122, 106802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. W. Elam and P. C. Stair, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. P. Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Piernavieja-Hermida, Z. Lu, A. White, K. B. Low, T. Wu, J. W. Elam, Z. Wu and Y. Lei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15348–15356 RSC .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, X. Zhao, N. Guo, Z. Lyu, Y. Du, S. Xi, R. Guo, C. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Liu, C. Yao, J. Li, S. J. Pennycook, W. Chen, C. Su, C. Zhang and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3197 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Papaderakis, I. Mintsouli, J. Georgieva and S. Sotiropoulos, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 80 CrossRef .
G. Kyriakou, M. B. Boucher, A. D. Jewell, E. A. Lewis, T. J. Lawton, A. E. Baber, H. L. Tierney, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. Sykes, Science, 2012, 335, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Boucher, B. Zugic, G. Cladaras, J. Kammert, M. D. Marcinkowski, T. J. Lawton, E. C. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12187–12196 RSC .
F. R. Lucci, J. Liu, M. D. Marcinkowski, M. Yang, L. F. Allard, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. Sykes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8550 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Marcinkowski, M. T. Darby, J. Liu, J. M. Wimble, F. R. Lucci, S. Lee, A. Michaelides, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M. Stamatakis and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 325–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. R. Lucci, M. Yang, S. Lee, M. D. Marcinkowski, A. J. Therrien, C. T. Williams, E. C. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6396–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, A. Mirjalili, J. Wheeler, W. Xie and B. W. L. Jang, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2015, 9, 442–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan, J. Liu, M. Li, S. Lustig, S. Lee and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 534–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Marcinkowski, J. Liu, C. J. Murphy, M. L. Liriano, N. A. Wasio, F. R. Lucci, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 413–420 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, T. Watanabe, M. Okumura, M. Haruta and N. Toshima, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 49–52 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, Y. R. Shin, G. J. Sohn, H. J. Choi, S. Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, D. Wook Chang, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, J. Xiao, Y. Wu, P. Du, R. Si, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, W. H. Zhang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6708–6712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Yu, S. Wang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, A. Han, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, Q. Zhang, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Dong, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, J. Mao, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Deng, B. Chi, J. Li, G. H. Wang, L. Zheng, X. D. Shi, Z. M. Cui, L. Du, S. J. Liao, K. T. Zang, J. Luo, Y. F. Hu and X. L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802856 CrossRef .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Zhou, W. Chen, Y. Tong, C. Zhao, Y. Lin, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Z. Xue, W. C. Cheong, B. Jin, F. Zhou, W. Wang, M. Chen, X. Hong, J. Dong, S. Wei, Y. Li and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10590–10594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L.-X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 5, 204–214 CAS .
Y. Lin, P. Liu, E. Velasco, G. Yao, Z. Tian, L. Zhang and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808193 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wei, X. Shi, P. Gao, S. Wang, W. Hu, X. Zhao, Y. Ni, X. Xu, Y. Xu, W. Yan, H. Ji and M. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, X. Tan, W. Yang, C. Jia, S. Xu, K. Wang, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6972–6976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, C. S. Hsu, L. C. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. L. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, X. F. Liu, Y. C. Li, R. H. Yu, L. R. Zheng, W. S. Yan, H. Wang, M. Xu and J. L. Shui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Han, X. Y. Meng, L. Lu, J. J. Bian, Z. P. Li and C. W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808872 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, P. Yuan, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, S. Mu, J. Zhou, H. Li, H. Xia, J. He and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804504 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, H. Li, C. Yan, H. Li, R. Si, M. Li, J. Xiao, G. Wang and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Li, M. J. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Y. Wang, B. Y. Li, K. X. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, H. G. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. X. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. F. Wang, Z. B. Wang and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
E. Luo, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Gao, L. Gong, T. Zhao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, C. Liu and W. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Xiao, J. B. Zhu, G. R. Li, N. Li, S. Li, Z. P. Cano, L. Ma, P. X. Cui, P. Xu, G. P. Jiang, H. L. Jin, S. Wang, T. P. Wu, J. Lu, A. P. Yu, D. Su and Z. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 9742–9747 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, K. Mao, S. Gao, H. Huang, G. Xia, Z. Lin, P. Jiang, C. Wang, H. Wang and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801732 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Wu, H. Zhou, Q. Li, M. Chen, J. Wan, N. A. Zhang, L. K. Xiong, S. Li, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng, M. L. Liu and L. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900149 CrossRef .
S. H. Ahn, M. J. Klein and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601979 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, C. C. Yang, C. H. Lin and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3511–3515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yuan, S. Sfaelou, M. Qiu, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, X. Zhuang, Y. Chen, C. Yuan, X. Feng and U. Scherf, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 252–260 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, W. Choi, X. Pu and C. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1799–1807 RSC .
L. Bai, C. S. Hsu, D. T. L. Alexander, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14190–14199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
Y. Han, Y. Wang, R. Xu, W. Chen, L. Zheng, A. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2348–2352 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Li, S. Xi, Y. Du, X. Hai, J. Wang, H. Xu, G. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14871–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, S. P. Sasikala, D. H. Kim, J. Bak, I.-D. Kim, E. Cho and S. O. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 524–530 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, X. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Pan, W.-C. Cheong, W. Zhu, X. Cao, R. Shen, W. Chen, J. Luo, W. Yan, L. Zheng, Z. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 6260–6269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, K. Zang, J. Luo, L. Wang, S. Gao, X. Mamat, G. Hu, T. Wagberg and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13800–13804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, S. He, S. Lu, J. P. Veder, B. Johannessen, L. Thomsen, M. Saunders, T. Becker, R. De Marco, Q. Li, S. Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802066 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Li, Z. Q. Yang, D. M. Tang, L. Zhang, P. X. Hou, S. Y. Zhao, C. Liu, M. Cheng, G. X. Li, F. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, e461 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, W. Chen, H. Xiao, Y. Gong, Z. Li, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, N. Fu, L. Gu, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800588 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6626–6631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Sun, F. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Zhu, D. Sun, X. Liu, L. Xu and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1806312 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhang, S. Z. Yang, J. J. Wu, M. J. Liu, S. Yazdi, M. Q. Ren, J. W. Sha, J. Zhong, K. Q. Nie, A. S. Jalilov, Z. Y. Li, H. M. Li, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Wu, E. L. Ringe, H. Xu, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703487 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, X. Chen, J. Liu, J. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2402–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, I. S. Amiinu, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Xia, Z. Song, Q. Xu and S. Mu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1894–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Z. Wang, R. Xu, W. Zhang, W. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, K. Wu, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Q. Liu, P. Hu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11262–11266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, S. Zhao, W. Chen, D. Zhai, J. Dong, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, A. Han, L. Gu, R. Yu, X. Wen, H. Ren, L. Xu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 12692–12697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jimenez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Sun, J. Luo, W. Chen, T. Cao, L. Zheng, J. Dong, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3861 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Hou, P. Liu, J. Yang, T. Zhang, X. D. Zhuang, M. W. Chen, B. Yang, L. C. Lei, C. Yuan, M. Qiu and X. L. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 149–156 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
F. Li, G. F. Han, H. J. Noh, S. J. Kim, Y. L. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. P. Fu and J. B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
H. Wu, H. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, J. Xiao, S. Xie, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, X. Guo, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3736–3745 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, P. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18093–18100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Bu, G. F. Han, H. J. Noh, S. J. Kim, I. Ahmad, Y. Lu, P. Zhang, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu, Q. Zhong and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2623 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Shi, D. Tan, L. Liu, F. Zhang, C. Lu, Z. Su, X. Tan, X. Cheng, B. Han, L. Zheng and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2980 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, R. Amal and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804524 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, X. Liu, J. Chen, R. Lin, H. Liu, F. Lu, S. Bak, Z. Liang, S. Zhao, E. Stavitski, J. Luo, R. R. Adzic and H. L. Xin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2321–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, A. M. Harzandi, M. Ha, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, P. Thangavel, A. N. Singh, P. Sharma, S. S. Chandrasekaran, F. Salehnia, J. W. Jang, H. S. Shin, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900931 CrossRef .
B. Lu, L. Guo, F. Wu, Y. Peng, J. E. Lu, T. J. Smart, N. Wang, Y. Z. Finfrock, D. Morris, P. Zhang, N. Li, P. Gao, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, H. Tang, X. Mamat, T. Wagberg, G. Hu and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Cheong, W. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Zhao, S. Liu, K. Wu, Q. Liu, C. Zhang, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33819–33824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Platschek, A. Keilbach and T. Bein, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2395–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Guo, J. J. Huo, Y. Liu, W. J. Wu, Y. Wang, M. H. Wu, H. Liu and G. X. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900159 CrossRef .
T. W. Hansen, A. T. Delariva, S. R. Challa and A. K. Datye, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1720–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, A. Li, J.-C. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Gong, Q. Zhang, W.-C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, H. Xiao, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, L. Gu, X. Han, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 856–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. John, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. Pereira Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Datye, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 817–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Gu, Q. Cao, P. Hu, J. Hao, J. Li and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4198–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, Z. Huang, P. Xie, L. Wu, L. Ma, T. Li, Z. Pang, M. Jiao, Z. Liang, J. Gao, Y. He, D. J. Kline, M. R. Zachariah, C. Wang, J. Lu, T. Wu, T. Li, C. Wang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar and L. Hu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 851–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, B. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Qu, F. Zhou, C. Zhao, Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, X. Duan and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3734 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Xiong, X. Liu, M. Qiao, Z. Li, T. Yuan, J. Wang, Y. Qu, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Q. Xu, S. Wang, M. Chen, W. Wang, Y. Li, T. Yao, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2285–2288 RSC .
J. Zhao, Q. Deng, S. M. Avdoshenko, L. Fu, J. Eckert and M. H. Rummeli, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 15641–15646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Rehr and R. C. Albers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2000, 72, 621–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Chen, K. Wu, Z. Chen, S. Liu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, T. Meng, J. Luo, L. Zheng, C. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Li and C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4290 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Rehr, J. J. Kas, F. D. Vila, M. P. Prange and K. Jorissen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 5503–5513 RSC .
Z. Zhuang, Y. Wang, C. Q. Xu, S. Liu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Z. Zhuang, H. Xiao, Y. Pan, S. Lu, R. Yu, W. C. Cheong, X. Cao, K. Wu, K. Sun, Y. Wang, D. Wang, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4875 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xia, F. Weesner, W. F. Bleam, P. R. Bloom, U. L. Skyllberg and P. A. Helmke, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 1998, 62, 1240–1246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37, 572–584 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dauth and J. A. Love, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 7876–7878 RSC .
G. Rossi, F. d'Acapito, L. Amidani, F. Boscherini and M. Pedio, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23686–23694 RSC .
S. Bordiga, E. Groppo, G. Agostini, J. A. van Bokhoven and C. Lamberti, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 1736–1850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Miller and E. A. Kenik, Microsc. Microanal., 2004, 10, 336–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Kelly and M. K. Miller, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 031101 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. Li, Z. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Hill, W.-B. Cai, D. Bell, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, K. Sun, W. C. Cheong, L. Zheng, C. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, Y. Pan, Z. Zhuang, B. Hu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019 DOI:10.1002/anie.201908760 .
H. Zhang, P. An, W. Zhou, B. Y. Guan, P. Zhang, J. Dong and X. W. D. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6657 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, C. T. He, J. Pei, W. Chen, D. He, Y. He, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4958 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Yao, S. L. Hu, W. X. Chen, Z. Q. Huang, W. C. Wei, T. Yao, R. R. Liu, K. T. Zang, X. Q. Wang, G. Wu, W. J. Yuan, T. W. Yuan, B. Q. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. J. Li, D. S. He, Z. G. Xue, Y. Wang, X. S. Zheng, J. C. Dong, C. R. Chang, Y. X. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Q. Wei, W. X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. E. Wu and Y. D. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, L. Kong, Y. Ji, J. White, Y. Li, J. Zhang, P. An, S. Liu, S. T. Lee and T. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2149 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Liu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2–14 CrossRef .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Y. Ding, R. Schlögl and S. Heumann, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3860–3877 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, A. Klyushin, X. Huang, T. Jones, D. Teschner, F. Girgsdies, T. Rodenas, R. Schlogl and S. Heumann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3514–3518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. Cui, W. Zhong, J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13233–13236 RSC .
H. Shin, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, 3rd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6745–6748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fan, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7040–7066 RSC .
B. F. Sels, D. E. De Vos and P. A. Jacobs, Catal. Rev., 2001, 43, 443–488 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mori, T. Taga and H. Yamashita, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. J. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, J. S. Hu, Z. Wei and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chong, J. Wen, J. Kubal, F. G. Sen, J. Zou, J. Greeley, M. Chan, H. Barkholtz, W. Ding and D. J. Liu, Science, 2018, 362, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Perry, D. Pangotra, L. Vieira, L.-I. Csepei, V. Sieber, L. Wang, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 442–458 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Deiana, M. Karamad, S. Siahrostami, P. Malacrida, T. W. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. Stephens, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, G. Chen, S. Siahrostami, Z. Chen, K. Liu, J. Xie, L. Liao, T. Wu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Y. H. Ng, D.-W. Wang and R. Amal, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9949–9955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2948–2951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, X. Pan, X. Cao, P. Hu and X. Bao, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ou, F. Yang, Y. Liu and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20657–20665 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yan, B. Xu, S. Q. Shi and C. Y. Ouyang, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 104316 CrossRef .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Escudero-Escribano, P. Malacrida, M. H. Hansen, U. G. Vej-Hansen, A. Velazquez-Palenzuela, V. Tripkovic, J. Schiotz, J. Rossmeisl, I. E. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2016, 352, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, H. C. Kwon, S. Yook, H. Shin, H. Kim and M. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 30063–30070 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siahrostami, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, M. Karamad, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, B. Wickman, M. Escudero-Escribano, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, T. W. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. Stephens and J. Rossmeisl, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Jirkovsky, I. Panas, E. Ahlberg, M. Halasa, S. Romani and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19432–19441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Siahrostami, M. E. Bjorketun, P. Strasser, J. Greeley and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9326–9334 RSC .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Mo and D. A. Scherson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E39–E46 CrossRef CAS .
B. Genorio, D. Strmcnik, R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, G. Karapetrov, V. R. Stamenkovic, S. Pejovnik and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 998–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Silvioli, N. R. Sahraie, W. Ju, J. Li, A. Zitolo, S. Li, A. Bagger, L. Arnarson, X. Wang, T. Moeller, D. Bernsmeier, J. Rossmeisl, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12372–12381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, X. Zou, N. Zhao, H. Yu, Z. Jiang, E. Ringe, B. I. Yakobson, J. Dong, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6930–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Karakalos, L. Luo, Z. Qiao, X. Xie, C. Wang, D. Su, Y. Shao and G. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14143–14149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Liu, L. Zheng and J. Shui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1204–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Zhang, H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, S. Wagner, U. I. Kramm, K. L. More, P. Zelenay and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2548–2558 RSC .
L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, C. He, Z. Y. Wu, L. J. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Yang, L. Gu, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1278 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wan, P. Yu, H. Chen, J. Wen, C. J. Sun, H. Zhou, N. Zhang, Q. Li, W. Zhao, B. Xie, T. Li and J. Shi, Small, 2018, 14, 1704319 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sharifi, E. Gracia-Espino, A. Chen, G. Hu and T. Wågberg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1902084,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201902084 .
U. Martinez, S. Komini Babu, E. F. Holby, H. T. Chung, X. Yin and P. Zelenay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806545 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Kneebone, S. L. Daifuku, J. A. Kehl, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, M. Y. Hu, E. E. Alp, K. L. More, P. Zelenay, E. F. Holby and M. L. Neidig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16283–16290 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, G. Wu and G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11319–11324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6254–6262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Tan, K. H. Wu, C. L. Chiang, Y. C. Lin, Y. G. Lin, D. W. Wang, S. Smith, X. Lu and R. Amal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14732–14742 RSC .
C. H. Choi, C. Baldizzone, J. P. Grote, A. K. Schuppert, F. Jaouen and K. J. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12753–12757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xia, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, L. Fan and H. Wang, Science, 2019, 366, 226–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Melchionna and P. Fornasiero, Chem, 2019, 5, 1927–1928 CAS .
D. Iglesias, A. Giuliani, M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan, A. Criado, L. Nasi, M. Bevilacqua, C. Tavagnacco, F. Vizza, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, Chem, 2018, 4, 106–123 CAS .
J. Park, Y. Nabae, T. Hayakawa and M.-A. Kakimoto, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3749–3754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jung, H. Shin, B. H. Lee, V. Efremov, S. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. Hooch Antink, S. Park, K. S. Lee, S. P. Cho, J. S. Yoo, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1038/s41563-019-0571-5 .
S. Yang and H. Lee, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, D. Y. Chung, Y. J. Tak, J. Kim, H. Han, J. S. Yu, A. Soon, Y. E. Sung and H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Chen, Z. Y. Zhou, F. J. Vidal-Iglesias, J. Solla-Gullon, J. M. Feliu and S. G. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12930–12933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bulushev, M. Zacharska, A. S. Lisitsyn, O. Y. Podyacheva, F. S. Hage, Q. M. Ramasse, U. Bangert and L. G. Bulusheva, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3442–3451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. W. Roh, S. K. Sahoo, S. Yang, J. Bae, J. W. Han and H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701476 CrossRef .
T. Wu, J. Fan, Q. Li, P. Shi, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1701799 CrossRef .
R. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, C. Yu, M. T. Sun, J. F. Liu and G. B. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604571 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fu, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13842–13848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. E. Kim and H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 104–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. F. Kamarudin, S. K. Kamarudin, M. S. Masdar and W. R. W. Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9438–9453 CrossRef CAS .
A. von Weber, E. T. Baxter, S. Proch, M. D. Kane, M. Rosenfelder, H. S. White and S. L. Anderson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17601–17610 RSC .
M. Neurock, M. Janikb and A. Wieckowskic, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 140, 363–378 RSC .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Yang, P. Gao and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14184–14188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Di Zhao
	Di Zhao is currently a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Yadong Li at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University in 2011 and her PhD degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in 2017, Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials and their applications in energy storage and conversion.

Chen Chen
	Chen Chen received his BS degree from the Department of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology in 2006, and his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 2011 under the direction of Prof. Yadong Li. After postdoctoral work at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory with Prof. Peidong Yang, he joined the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University as an associate professor in 2015. His research interests are focused on nanomaterials and catalysis.

Yadong Li
	Yadong Li received his BS degree from the Department of Chemistry, Anhui Normal University in 1986 and his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China in 1998, with Prof. Yitai Qian. He joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University in 1999 as a full professor. His research interests are focused on the synthesis, assembly, structure, and application exploration of nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Number of publications per year from 2005 to 2019 based on Web of Science database. Search: single near/2 (atom or atomic) near/2 catal* and electrocatal* or electrochem*, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of the topics covered in this review.	 

 	Fig. 3  Preparation methods for ASCs: bottom-up strategy and top-down strategy.	 

 	Fig. 4  Some examples for designing strategies in wet-chemistry method. (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure for Au-SA/Def-TiO2 with O vacancies as anchoring sites. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the simultaneous self-reduction-stabilization synthesis procedure for Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty with Ti vacancies as anchoring sites. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure for Pt-ISAS@NaY via in situ separation and confinement of Pt precursor in β-cage. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of preparation process of Pt1δ+/TiO2 with 2D layer space as confinement sites. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Synthesis route of the pfSAC-Fe catalyst with N in COF as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Structure of [Pd]mpg-C3N4 with N in C3N4 as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Synthesis process of Co–N5/HNPCSs with N in N-doped carbon as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis for Pt/HSC with S in S-doped carbon as coordination sites. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Several examples for electrochemical deposition strategy. (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical exfoliation process of MXene and simultaneous immobilization of single Pt atoms. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Pt/np-Co0.85Se synthesized by electrochemical deposition strategy with Pt as counter electrode with Co-vacancy-rich np-Co0.85Se. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of A-CoPtNC. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Other strategies. (a) Schematic illustration of h-Pt1-CuSxvia a novel ion-exchange method. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (b) SANi–PtNWs catalyst prepared by a partial electrochemical dealloying approach. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Pt1/MC catalyst synthesized by iced-photochemical reduction method. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Illustration for the synthesis of single atom Pt on GDY (Pt-GDY1 and Pt-GDY2). Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples for ALD method. (a) The schematic illustration of the Pt1/OLC catalyst prepared via ALD. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic illustration of the Pt ALD mechanism on NGNs for ALDPt/NGNs catalysts. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Synthesis of Pd1/graphene catalyst via a process of anchor sites creation and selection and Pd ALD. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the morphological and structural evolution at different stages of the GR reaction between Ag NP and HAuCl4 aqueous solution. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the deposition of top Au atoms on Pd clusters by the GR method. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2011, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Four strategies to construct specific structures of MOF precursors according to the residing positions of target metal atoms. (a) The formation of Co SAs/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Co residing in their nodes. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) The formation process of Ru SAs/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Ru residing in their ligands. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The formation process of Fe-ISAs/CN (top) and Ru3/CN (bottom) via high-temperature pyrolysis designed MOF precursors with Fe or Ru residing in their cavities. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Preparation of (Fe,Co)/N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis a designed MOF precursor with Co residing in their nodes and Fe residing in their cavities. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Two strategies to improve active sites and mass transfer: (a and b) developing and utilizing new types of MOFs and (c and d) using hard and soft templates. (a) Synthesis of CoFe@C via high-temperature pyrolysis of Co,Fe co-doped MET-6 MOF. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the fabrication of FeSA–N–C via high-temperature pyrolysis of Fe20-PCN-222. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) A schematic synthesis process of concave-shaped TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C with coating, preheating, etching silica off, absorbing TPI and carbonization. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) The synthetic route for hollow Fe-SAs/NPS-HC with PZS and bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)sulfone as P, S, N sources and soft templates. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Pyrolysis of irregular metal containing complexes without (a) and with templates (b–d). (a) The synthesis of Co-ISAS/p-CN nanospheres. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Co-SAS/HOPNC with F127 and silica opal as dual-template. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Schematic Illustration of the synthesis of SA-Fe/CN with α-FeOOH as hard templates and Fe source. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of 0.2Pt/m-Al2O3–H2 with P123 as soft templates. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  High-temperature atomic migration and trapping from NPs to single atoms. (a) Scheme of the transformation of Pd NPs to single atoms Pd. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Scheme of the HT-SAs synthesis and dispersion process with high-temperature shockwaves method (grey, C; cyan, metal precursor; red, metallic atoms). Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Scheme of the formation isolated single-atom Cu on N-doped carbon. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  High-temperature atomic migration and trapping from bulk metal to single atoms. (a) Schematic of the preparation of Cu-SAs/N–C and its proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Reaction mechanism for the synthesis of Pt SAs/DG. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  STEM and STM characterization. (a) AC HAADF-STEM image of isolated Fe atoms (labelled 1, 2, and 3) in a few-layer graphene sheet. (b) EELS of the N K-edge and Fe L-edge acquired from atoms 1–3 in (a). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) AC HAADF-STEM image of Pt single atoms immobilized in Mo2TiC2Tx and the corresponding simulated image. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Low-temperature STM image of FeN4/GN-2.7. (e) Simulated STM image for (d). The grey, blue, and light blue balls in (d) and (e) represent C, N, and Fe atoms, respectively. (f) dI/dV spectra acquired along the white line in the inset image. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  FT-EXAFS studies of atomic metal sites catalysts. (a) FT magnitudes of the K-edge EXAFS of atomic transition metals embedded in N-doped holey graphene frameworks (M-NHGFs) and the reference samples. (b) The EXAFS analysis of Ni-NHGF in k space. (c) The EXAFS analysis of Ni-NHGF in R space. The inset shows the structure model of a NiN4C4 moiety. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) The formation process of Co–N4 and Co–N2. (e) The FT-EXAFS analysis of Co–Nx species. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) The FT-EXAFS analysis of Fe–Nx species. Reproduced with permission.231 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  WT-EXAFS studies of atomic metal sites catalysts. (a) Wavelet transforms for the k3-weighted Ni K-edge EXAFS signals of bulk Ni, NiO and Ni-NHGF. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Wavelet transforms for the k3-weighted Co K-edge EXAFS signals of Co-G and Co-NG. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  Oxidation state and characteristic peak analysis of XANES. (a) Ni K-edge XANES spectra of A-Ni-NG, A-Ni-NSG and NiPc. (b) The second derivative spectra obtained from (a). Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Pt L3-edge XANES spectra and (d) corresponding linear fitting curve of h-Pt1–CuSx and reference materials. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (e) Fe K-edge XANES spectra. (f) S K-edge XANES spectra and (g) corresponding linear fitting curve of Fe-ISA/SNC and reference materials. (h) Molecular structure of the FeN4S2 active site in Fe-ISA/SNC. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Theoretical simulation of XANES. (a–c) Comparison between the experimental Ni K-edge XANES spectrum of Ni-NHGF and the theoretical spectra calculated with the depicted structures based on a porphyrin-based NiN4C12 (a), pyridinic-N-based NiN4C8 (b) and NiN4C4 moieties (c). (d) Comparison between the experimental XANES spectra (black dotted lines) for Ni–NHGFs and the best-fit theoretical spectra (solid red lines). Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) The XANES spectra of Cu–APC and Cu foil, and the corresponding calculation of XANES spectra of varying numbers of Cu atoms. (f) Structure of Cu atom pair anchored on Pd10Te3 nanowire. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  
Operando XAS studies of Co1/PCN under HER condition. (a) Operando XANES spectrum at Co K-edge. (b) First derivative curves for Co K-edge XANES. (c) The fitted average oxidation states of Co from XANES. (d) The k3-weighted Fourier transform (FT) EXAFS analysis of Co in R space. (e) First-shell fitting of EXAFS spectra, and (f) the corresponding Re(k3χ(k)) oscillations. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  APT characterization. (a) The schematic of the fabrication procedure of APT specimen tips. (b) The cross-section SEM image of sandwich sample after FIB cutting. (c) SEM image of the final APT specimen tip. (d) Reconstructed APT tomography. (e) a 2D contour plot of C atomic concentration. (f) The corresponding reconstruction for a region of 40 × 40 × 80 nm surrounding a CNT. (g) Side and top view of CNT planes. Atom labels, Au in yellow, Fe in green, C in grey, and O in red in (d)–(g); scale bars, 500 nm in (b), 200 nm in (c), 20 nm in (d)–(f), and 2 nm in (g). Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

Pt/C	—	commercial	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼55	31	0.27 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV	
26
	2016
ALD50Pt/NGNs	2.1 wt% (ICP-AES)	ALD	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼50	29	10.1 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV	
26
	2016
PtSA-NT-NF	1.76 wt% (ICP-OES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	pH 7.2 (PBS)	24	30	0.07 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV	
106
	2017
Pt1/MC	2.6 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼30	26	10.0 A mgPt−1; η = 65 mV	
113
	2017
Pt1@Fe–N–C	2.1 wt% Pt (ICP-OES and XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	60	42	—	
96
	2018
OER	0.1 M KOH	310	62
Pt SASs/AG	0.44 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	12	29.33	22.4 A mgPt−1; η = 50 mV	
65
	2019
Pt SAs/DG	2.1 wt%	High-temperature pyrolysis	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	23	25	26.2 A mgPt−1; η = 50	
226
	2019
Pt@PCM	0.53 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	105	65.3	∼0.4 A mgPt−1; η = 200 mV	
244
	2018
1.0 M KOH	139	73.6
Pt1/OLC	0.27 wt% (ICP-AES)	ALD	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼38	36	7.4 A mgPt−1; η = 38 mV	
129
	2019
Pt-GDY1 (C1-Pt-Cl4)	4.65 mg cm−2 (ICP-AES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼30	49	7.26 A mgPt−1; 23640 A gPt−1; η = 100 mV	
116
	2018
Pt-GDY2 (C2-Pt-Cl2)	∼70	38
Pt1/hNCNC	2.92 wt% (UV-vis)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	15	24	7.6 A mgPt−1; η = 20 mV	
85
	2019
Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA	1.2 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	30	30	8.3 A mgPt−1; η = 77 mV	
108
	2018
Pt–MoS2	1.7 wt% (ICP-OES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.1 M H2SO4	∼130	96	—	
70
	2015
Pt/np-Co0.85Se	∼1.03 wt% (ICP-OES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	pH = 7.0 (PBS)	55	35	1.32 A mgPt−1; η = 100 mV	
27
	2019
Pd/Cu–Pt NRs	Cu: 5 atom% (ICP-AES); Pt: 1.5 atom% (STEM-EDX)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	22.8	25	3.0 A mgPd+Pt−1; η = 50 mV	
245
	2017
A-CoPt-NC	
	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	27	31	224 A mgPt−1; 45 A mgPt−1; η = 70 mV	
50
	2019
1 M KOH	50	48
SANi–PtNWs	6 at% (ICP-AES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	1 M KOH	70	60.3	∼11.8 A mgPt−1; η = 70 mV	
112
	2019
RuSAs@PN	0.33 wt% (ICP-AES)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	24	38	—	
102
	2018
Co-Substituted Ru	6 at% (EDX)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	1 M KOH	13	29	—	
246
	2018
Mo1N1C2	1.32 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	154	86	—	
208
	2017
1 M KOH	132	90
Mo0/GDY	7.5 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	48	33	15.10 A mgMo−1; η = 200 mV	
117
	2019
W1N1C3	1.21 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	HER	0.1 M KOH	85	53	—	
150
	2018
Fe/GD	Fe: 0.68 wt%; 0.278 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	66	37.8	—	
115
	2018
Ni/GD	88	45.8
Fe–N4 SAs/NPC	1.96 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	HER	1 M KOH	202	123	—	
148
	2018
OER	1 M KOH	43	95	—
np-Ni/graphene	4–8 at% (EDS)	Wet-chemistry method	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	∼180	45	—	
80
	2015
Co-NG	0.57 at% (XPS and ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	147	82	—	
197
	2015
Co1/PCN	∼0.3 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method	HER	1 M KOH	89	52	—	
98
	2018
0.5 M H2SO4	151	—
Co-SAS/HOPNC	0.49 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	137	52	—	
196
	2018
aNi@G5775	1.24 wt% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	70	31	—	
200
	2018
aNi@G585	OER	1 M KOH	270	47
Ni–NHGF	∼0.05 at% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	OER	1 M KOH	331	63	—	
103
	2018
Co–NHGF	402	80
Fe–NHGF	488	164

sAu/NiFe LDH	0.4 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	OER	1 M KOH	237	36	—	
105
	2018
Ru1–Pt3Cu	Ru: 8.2 at%; Pt: 68.7 at% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	OER	0.1 M HClO4	220	—	6.62 A mgRu−1; 0.78 A mgRu+Pt−1; η = 280 mV	
247
	2019
W-Ni(OH)2	5.5 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	OER	1 M KOH	237	33	—	
248
	2019
Ru/CoFe-LDHs	0.45 wt% (ICP)	Wet-chemistry method	OER	1 M KOH	198	39	—	
95
	2019
Ru–N–C	1.0 wt% (ICP-OES)	Wet-chemistry method	OER	0.5 M H2SO4	267	52.6	3.571 A mgRu−1; η = 300 mV	
249
	2019
Co–C3N4/CNT	∼0.2% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	OER	1 M KOH	380	68.4	—	
193
	2017
Co-N,B-CSs	0.52 at% (XPS)	High temperature pyrolysis	OER	0.1 M KOH	430	—	—	
194
	2018
Co–Fe–N–C	—	High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method	OER	1 M KOH (10 ppm Fe(III))	309	37	—	
176
	2019

 	Fig. 21  ADF STEM images of ALDPt/NGNs samples with (a) 50 and (b) 100 ALD cycles. Scale bars, 10 nm. (c) The HER polarization curves for ALDPt50/NGNs, ALDPt100/NGNs, NGNs and Pt/C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. The inset shows the enlarged curves at the onset potential region of the HER for the different catalysts. (d) Mass activity at 0.05 VRHE of the ALDPt50/NGNs, ALDPt100/NGNs, and Pt/C catalysts. (e) Durability measurement of the ALD50Pt/NGNs recorded initially and after 1000 cyclic voltammetry sweeps between +0.4 and −0.15 VRHE. (f) Mass activity at 0.05 VRHE of the ALDPt/NGNs and Pt/C catalysts for the HER before and after durability test. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic atom model of Ru1–Pt3Cu. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of Ru1–Pt3Cu and reference electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution. (c) Chronopotentiometric curve obtained with Ru1–Pt3Cu of and commercial RuO2 at 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) LSV curves and (e) Tafel plots for Ni–NHGF, Co–NHGF, Fe–NHGF and with RuO2/C catalyst evaluated in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) LSV curves and corresponding Tafel slopes (g) of the Co–N–C at different kinds of KOH (with different concentration of Fe3+). (h) Proposed model for the formation of Co–Fe double-atom catalyst. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ru/CoFe-LDHs, CoFe-LDHs, carbon paper and the commercial RuO2 catalyst. Proposed 4e− mechanism of OER on CoFe-LDHs (c) and Ru/CoFe-LDHs (d) with DFT+U calculation. Gibbs free-energy diagram for the 4e− mechanism on (e) CoFe-LDHs and (f) Ru/CoFe-LDHs. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

ORR toward H2O or OH−	Acidic media	Direct 4e− pathway	O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → H2O
Acidic media	2e− pathway + 2e− pathway	O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O
Alkaline media	Direct 4e− pathway	O2 + H2O + 4e− → 4OH−
Alkaline media	2e− pathway + 2e− pathway	O2 + H2O + 2e− → OOH− + OH−
OOH− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−
ORR toward H2O2	Acidic media	2e− pathway	O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
Alkaline media	2e− pathway	O2 + H2O + 2e− → OOH− + OH−
O2* → O* + O*	(3.2.1)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(3.2.2)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*	(3.2.3)
O2* + H+ + e− → OOH*	(3.2.4)
OOH* → O* + OH*	(3.2.5)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(3.2.6)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O*	(3.2.7)
O2* → HOOH*	(3.2.8)
HOOH* → OH* + OH*	(3.2.9)
OH* + H+ + e– → H2O*	(3.2.10)

 	Fig. 24  (a) ORR pathways on the pristine Pt/C: O2 prefers to adsorb on the Pt surface in a side-on configuration and then reduces to H2O. (b) ORR Pathways on the carbon-coated Pt: O2 absorbs on the Pt surface in an end-on configuration and then produces H2O and H2O2 as end products. (1) Dissociative, (2) associative, and (3) peroxo pathways. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Theoretically calculated ORR volcano plot for the two-electron (blue) and four-electron (red) pathways, with the limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGHO* (lower horizontal axis) and ΔGHOO* (upper horizontal axis). Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

Noble metal–N–C ASCs
Pt1–N/BP	0.4 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method + high-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.76	—	
288
	2017
0.1 M KOH	—	0.87	—
Ru–N/G-750	1.7 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	0.89	0.75	—	
289
	2017
Pt1.1/BPdefect	1.1 wt% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	0.1 M HClO4	—	∼0.85	—	
81
	2019
Ir-SAC	0.2 wt% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	0.97	0.864	9.76 at 0.85 V	
169
	2019


Fe–N–C ASCs
(CM + PANI)–Fe–C	0.3 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.8	—	
190
	2017
ISA Fe/CN	2.16 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	0.986	0.9	37.83 at 0.85 V	
149
	2017
Fe-ZIF50nm	0.45 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.85	—	
290
	2017
Fe/SNC	0.20 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.77	∼25 at 0.73 V	
183
	2017
FeBNC	0.084 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.968	0.838	—	
174
	2017
CNT@Fe–N–PC	0.3 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	1.01	0.82	—	
185
	2018
FeSA–N–C	1.76 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	1	0.891	23.27 at 0.85 V	
153
	2018
Fe–N4 SAs/NPC	1.96 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	0.972	0.885	—	
148
	2018
Fe-ISA/SNC	0.947 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.896	100.7 at 0.85 V	
186
	2018
Fe SAs–N/C20	0.20 wt% (ICP-MS)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	—	0.915	—	
28
	2018
FeCl1N4/CNS	1.5 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.921	41.11 at 0.85 V	
178
	2018
SA-Fe/NG	0.6 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.5 M H2SO4	0.9	0.8	15.6 at 0.75 V	
187
	2018
0.1 M KOH	—	0.88	52.4 at 0.8 V
Fe2-Z8-C	3 wt%	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	0.902	0.805	—	
291
	2018
FeSAs/NPS-HC	1.54 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	—	0.912	71.9 at 0.85 V	
161
	2018
0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.791	18.8 at 0.85 V
Fe–N/C	3.8 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	1.04	0.895	—	
157
	2018
Fe–N–C HNSs	1.4 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	1.046	0.87	—	
189
	2018
SA-Fe-HPC	0.80 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M H2SO4	
	0.81	—	
188
	2018
0.1 M KOH	0.89
FeSA-G	7.7 ± 1.3 wt% Fe (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	0.950	0.804	—	
184
	2019
Fe–N–C	2.78 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.823	—	
160
	2019
1.5Fe-ZIF	1.5 at% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	0.98	0.88	—	
292
	2019
Fe–Nx–C	0.81 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	1.05	0.91	14.7	
162
	2019
Fe–NC SAC	1.21 wt% (TGA)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.98	0.9	—	
293
	2019
C-FeZIF-1.44-950	1 wt% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	0.99	0.864	—	
151
	2019
0.1 M HClO4	0.91	0.78

pfSAC-Fe	0.94 wt% (ICP-AES)	Wet-chemistry method	0.1 M KOH	1.01	0.91	25.86 at 0.85 V	
29
	2019
Fe2–N–C	0.38 wt% (ICP-MS) for Fe2–N–C	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	
	0.78	2.89 at 0.8 V for Fe2–N–C	
48
	2019
Fe1–N–C	0.715
Fe3–N–C	0.762


Co–N–C ASCs
Co SAs/N–C	4 wt%	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	0.982	0.881 V	21.5 at 0.8 V	
40
	2016
ISAS-Co/HNCS	2.2 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.773	—	
54
	2017
Co0.05N_pCNT	0.4 (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	1	0.87	—	
172
	2017
Co-N,B-CSs	0.52 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.89	0.83	—	
194
	2018
20Co-NC-1100	—	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.5 M H2SO4	0.93	0.80	—	
166
	2018
Co-ISAS/p-CN	0.42 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.838	5.1 at 0.83 V	
45
	2018
CoNC700	0.73 at% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	∼0.96	∼0.8	—	
294
	2018
0.1 M HClO4	∼0.89	∼0.73
Co–N–C@F127	6.2 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.5 M H2SO4	0.93 V	0.84	—	
165
	2018
CoN4/NG	—	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.98	0.87	23.4 at 0.85 V	
264
	2018
Co-SAS/HOPNC	0.49 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.892	5.42 at 0.9 V	
196
	2018
Co/NMCLT900	4.66% (ICP-MS)	Wet-chemistry method	0.1 M KOH	1.03	0.897	46.8 at 0.85 V	
114
	2019
SCoNC	∼15.3 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	—	0.91	—	
171
	2019


Other non-precious metal–N–C ASCs
Cu–N@C-60	8.5 wt% (TG)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	∼0.8	—	
202
	2016
Cu–N–C	20.9 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.869	11.84 at 0.85 V	
201
	2018
Cu-SAs/N–C	0.54% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.99	0.895	7.5 at 0.9 V	
227
	2018
0.1 M HClO4	0.83	∼0.75
Zn–N–C	5.64 wt% (ICP-MS); 9.33 wt% (EDX)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.746	—	
205
	2019
0.1 M KOH	—	0.873	—
ZnNC	4.03 wt% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.857	7.9 at 0.85 V	
204
	2019
20Mn-NC-second	3.03 wt% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method	0.5 M H2SO4	—	0.8	—	
167
	2018
Mn/C–NO	0.23 at% (XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	—	0.86	—	
170
	2018
MnNPC-900	0.39 wt% (ICP-OES)	High-temperature pyrolysis	0.1 M KOH	0.97	0.84	—	
207
	2019
Cr/N/C-950	1.9 wt% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.761	10 at 0. 75 V	
168
	2019


Mix metal–N–C ASCs
(Fe,Co)/N–C	Fe: 0.93 wt%; Co: 1.17 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M HClO4	1.06	0.863	2.842 at 0.9 V	
146
	2017
(Fe,Co)/CNT	Fe: 1.21%; Co: 1.13% (ICP)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	1.15	0.954	17.51 at 0.9 V	
152
	2018
CoFe@C	Fe: 0.37 wt%; Co: 1 0.5 wt% (ICP-AES)	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M KOH	0.98	0.89	—	
51
	2019
FeCoNx/C	—	High-temperature pyrolysis: MOF	0.1 M HClO4	1.02	0.86	—	
295
	2019
Pt1@Fe–N–C	2.1 wt% Pt (ICP-OES and XPS)	High-temperature pyrolysis + wet-chemistry method	0.5 M H2SO4	0.93	0.8	—	
96
	2018
A-CoPt-NC	Co: ∼1.72 wt%; Pt: ∼0.16 wt% (ICP-AES and EDS)	Wet-chemistry method	0.1 M KOH	—	0.96	—	
107
	2018
0.1 M HClO4	—	∼0.75	—

 	Fig. 25  (a) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1/BP, Pt1–N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (b) The tolerance of Pt1–N/BP to CO and methanol in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Long-term operation stability of Pt1–N/BP in 0.1 M HClO4. (d) The proposed reaction pathways for complete ORR on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Atomistic structures of the ORR active site (a) FeN4–C10, (b) FeN4–C12, and (c) FeN4–C8. (d) Calculated free energy evolution diagrams for the O2 reduction through an OOH dissociation pathway on above three different active sites under an electrode potential of 0.69 V in acidic medium. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Some strategies to engineer electrocatalyst to improve activities. (a) Precisely controlled sizes of the Fe-ZIF catalysts from 20 to 1000 nm; polarization plots for Fe-ZIF-derived catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and Pt/C catalysts in 0.1 M HClO4; calculated H2O2 yield for Fe-ZIF catalysts as a function of particle size. Reproduced with permission.290 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the strategy for tuning kinetic activity of a single Fe–N4 site by incorporation of thiophene like S (C–S–C) and oxidized S (C–SOx) on with electron-donating and electron-withdrawing properties of a carbon plane, respectively. The inset is their corresponding catalytic activity. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration of the triple-phase boundary (TPB) active sites in three Fe–N–C catalyst-based electrodes of TPI@Z8(SiO2)-650-C, TPI@Z8-650-C, Z8/TPI; polarization curves of the three electrodes in the half-cell of O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (0.1 M HClO4) for Pt/C; polarization and power density curves under 2.5 bar H2–O2. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic representation of the strategy for tuning the density of FeN4 active sites from low, high contents and then becoming clusters and the relationship between the content and catalytic activity. Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  An example of double metal–N–C ASCs. (a) Magnified HAADF-STEM of (Fe,Co)/N–C with Fe–Co dual sites d. Inset: Proposed architectures of Fe–Co dual sites. (b) Corresponding intensity profiles obtained on the red circles in panel (a). (c) Polarization curves of (Fe,Co)/N–C, CoSAs/N-C, Fe SAs/NC, and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Inset: Eonset of different catalysts. (d) E1/2 and Jk for different catalysts. (e) DFT calculated energies of intermediates and transition states in mechanism of ORR for (Fe,Co)/N–C. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Electrochemical measurement of the selective 2e− – ORR to H2O2 for h-Pt1CuSx electrocatalysts in 0.1 M O2-saturated HClO4 electrolyte. (a) Structural model of the hollow structure of h-Pt1CuSx electrocatalysts and their corresponding atomic structure. (b) RRDE measurement. (c) H2O2 selectivity. (d) The electrochemical device used for the electrochemical synthesis of H2O2. (e) The amount of generated H2O2 along with reaction time. The inset is the chronoamperometry curve of the cell. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) LSV curves in a RRDE setup at +1.2 VRHE. (b) Corresponding H2O2 selectivity and the number of electrons (n) at +0.1 VRHE. (c) Thermodynamic relations (volcano) lines for 2e− – ORR (green solid line) and 4e− – ORR (black solid line) based on their binding free energies of the HO* intermediate (GHO). Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Illustration of the formation of PtAu bimetallic NPs via a facile colloidal method. (b) Pt mass-normalized anodic sweeps (right) and peek currents (left) obtained from PtAu NP catalysts in 0.1 M of both HClO4 and HCOOH. (c) The plotted FT-EXAFS spectra obtained from Pt and Au L3-edge absorption spectra of PtAu NPs. (d) Calculated adsorption energies for the different CO adsorption sites. Predominant FAOR reaction pathways on few-atom (e) and single-atom Pt surfaces (f). Spheres: Au, yellow; C, black; H, white; O, red, Pt, blue. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 32  Illustration of the selectivity for FAOR, EOR and MOR on single-atomic sites and ensemble sites with different reaction pathways based on the reported results. Spheres: active metal atom, yellow; supporting metal atoms, red.	 

 	Fig. 33  Electrocatalyst development strategies, which aim to increase the selectivity, activity and stability of ASCs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
