Two-dimensional semiconductor transition metal based chalcogenide based heterostructures for water splitting applications  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9DT01581G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9DT01581G
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12772-12802Two-dimensional semiconductor transition metal based chalcogenide based heterostructures for water splitting applications

        
          
            C. K. 
            Sumesh
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Sebastian C. 
            Peter
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Physical Sciences, P. D. Patel Institute of Applied Sciences, Charotar University of Science and Technology (CHARUSAT), Changa-388421, Gujarat, India. E-mail: cksumesh.cv@charusat.ac.in;   Tel: +0919480827672
bNew Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru 560064, India. E-mail: sebastiancp@jncasr.ac.in; sebastiancp@gmail.com
Received 
      14th April 2019
    , Accepted 24th July 2019First published on 24th July 2019AbstractRecent research and development is focused in an intensive manner to increase the efficiency of solar energy conversion into electrical energy via photovoltaics and photo-electrochemical reactions. Electrocatalytic and photocatalytic water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen is a promising and emerging technology. Heterogeneous nanostructures based on semiconductor materials have attracted much attention to be used as catalysts, co-catalysts, photocatalysts and photoabsorbers. Development of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) semiconductors with two dimensional (2D) layered structures and peculiar physical and chemical properties are playing a pivotal role in the heterogeneous photocatalytic hydrogen evolution (PHE) reaction. The energy band gap tuning with the thickness of the layers and heterojunction interface formation have given an opportunity to design and develop combinations of both photocatalysts and co-catalysts using semiconductor TMDCs. This contribution summarizes the recent investigations on the 2D semiconductor TMDC (MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) based heterogeneous nanostructures as efficient materials for photocatalytic water splitting applications to produce hydrogen. The literature survey clearly shows that more than 80% of the researchers in this field have worked on MoS2-based heterogeneous nanocomposites, as it is the 2nd most studied material after graphene. It is also evident that among the materials used so far for the PC HER activity, MoS2-based heterogeneous nanocomposites are on top with the highest hydrogen evolution rate and stability. Since the physical and chemical properties of the members are identical, the future research and development would focus on the manipulation of the rest of the TMDC members to achieve the future needs of clean and sustainable energy production.
1. Introduction
Human kind is going to face an energy crisis in the near future, as the available sources of non-renewable energy are getting depleted day-by-day against the human population race. The consumption of petrochemical fuels has increased the emission of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, sulfur oxides, and nitrogen oxides from transportation, households, industries and other sources, leading to extreme environmental problems. Hence, to overcome this situation and to provide a cleaner environment for future generations, it is aimed to limit the use of fossil fuel and promote renewable sources. The major alternative energy sources are wind, hydropower and geothermal, which are clean and abundant compared to petroleum based fuels. However, the technological limitation hinders the use of these sources for widespread applications. Conversion of the sun's energy into electricity is emerging as the major alternative to the conventional sources like hydro and thermal production of electricity across the world. However, the physical factors like day, time, geographical position and season are major limitations. Moreover, the storage of the converted electricity is facing challenges to meet global energy demands. Among the supplementary sources to those that currently exist, hydrogen has been identified as a major form of energy yet to be explored. The potential of using hydrogen is high because it is pollution free, available in various sustainable sources such as water, possesses high energy yield and can easily be stored. The high energy efficiency of hydrogen is ascribed to its higher energy output per weight compared to other fuels, and it produces only water as the product. Hence, hydrogen is regarded as a highly environmentally friendly and promising alternative energy source of the future.1–6
At the same time, there are many practical difficulties for the use of hydrogen as a fuel for commercial applications. Some of them are the existing production mechanisms, cost, and the underdeveloped technology to use hydrogen as a fuel. In order to overcome such difficulties, there is a high demand for conducting theoretical and experimental research. Using the naturally available resources of water and sunlight, experimental investigations are progressing for the production of hydrogen through photocatalytic (PC) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. The basic mechanism involved will be discussed in the following section.1,2,7,8 One of the major hurdles is the development of semiconductor-based photocatalysts with light absorption in the visible region. The recent past has witnessed the promotion of electrocatalyst performance and the rational design of catalysts using various strategies such as the creation of hydrogen active sites, determining the hydrogen atom adsorption and desorption kinetics on the catalyst's surface and designing a suitable electrode structure.9–19 Zheng et al. summarized the recent developments in heterogeneous photocatalysts for solar-driven Z-scheme overall water splitting.20 In a recent report, Kim et al. reviewed the photocatalytic production of H2 and other perspectives of the 2D nanosheet-based hybrids. The exfoliated nanosheets at an atomic scale thickness with a large surface area to volume ratio and strong chemical reaction enhance the electronic coupling at the interface between 2D layers and other hybridized nanospecies.14 A comprehensive overview of the recent progress in the 2D metallic transition metal dichalcogenides (MTMDCs) was presented by Yahuan et al. The unique physical structure and excellent electrical conductivity of MTMDCs have become the focus of intense research for applications in nanoelectronics, energy storage and HER.17 Haque et al. presented a concise overview of the properties, synthesis methods and applications of two-dimensional transition metal oxides and chalcogenide-based photocatalysts.3 Su et al. highlighted the role of interfaces in two-dimensional photocatalysts for water splitting, generally for all 2D materials.4 Yang et al. presented a review focused on recent developments in using MoS2 as the electrocatalyst for the HER.1 Velický et al. reviewed the fundamental properties of 2D materials in the context of electrochemistry and condensed matter physics in a broader way.2 Rahmanian et al. presented a specific review based on TMDC/TiO2 heterojunction photocatalysts for both hydrogen production and environmental remediation.5 Eftekhari has also presented a focused review on tungsten dichalcogenides for its material chemistry applications.8 In a recent report, Peng et al. summarized a general review on the roles of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides as co-catalysts in PC hydrogen evolution and environmental remediation.9
Li et al. discussed the theoretical perspective of two-dimensional materials for PC based water splitting.10 2D transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheet-based composites for PC and electrocatalytic HERs have been reviewed by Lu et al.11 However, no comprehensive review for PC-based hydrogen evolution using 2D semiconductors has been centered specifically on the 2D semiconductor (MoS2, WS2, WSe2, and MoSe2) based heterostructures for both PC and PEC water splitting. Timely updates are very essential in the case of TMDCs for use in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution (PHE), as the demand for suitable photocatalysts is growing fast.
Therefore, in this review, we present the latest achievements in the PHE using MoS2-, WS2-, WSe2-, and MoSe2-based heterojunctions in both PC and PEC water splitting. Keeping these four semiconductors in focus, the choice and selection of semiconductor photocatalysts for PHE, the role of TMDCs in tuning the optical band gap of hybrid heterostructures, and the challenges associated with 2D TMDC semiconductors as photocatalysts are addressed. We do not attempt to cover the full body of work related to fundamental TMDCs as catalysts; instead, we focus only on the recent developments on MoS2-, WS2-, WSe2- and MoSe2-based heterostructures for PC and PEC water splitting.
As per the data shown in the bar diagram (Fig. 1), the noble metal-free TMDC semiconductor-based heterostructure photocatalyst, namely WS2MoS2/CdS, has given the highest H2 production rate of 209.79 mM g−1 h−1.21 Therefore, a focused review of 2D semiconductor (MoS2, WS2, WSe2, and MoSe2) based heterostructures on PC and PEC water splitting is expected to be a comprehensive approach.
 Fig. 1  Latest update in the H2 production rate studied by different authors (reference details are given inside the text). 
2. General water splitting mechanisms
Basic techniques for the production of hydrogen are categorized into PC,10 PEC,22 and photovoltaic–photoelectrochemical (PV–PEC)23 systems, as shown in Fig. 2. PHE using a suitable photocatalyst is one of the cheapest, simplest and scalable methods for water splitting, as the catalyst in the form of powder can be dispersed in the working solution under light illumination. Detailed mechanism of PC water splitting for hydrogen evolution is discussed in the next section. PEC water splitting is another promising method, in which solar energy is used for water splitting to produce hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2). Here, the catalyst is fixed and the production of H2 and O2 takes place at different electrodes, resulting in high purity H2, which is an essential requirement for fuel cells. In the third system, viz., the PV–PEC hybrid system, the production of H2 is based on the coupling of photovoltaic solar cells with a water electrolysis system.
 Fig. 2  Methods of H2 production via PC-based, PEC-based and PV–PEC based water splitting system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
Solar water splitting is the process in which solar energy and water are utilized to produce hydrogen along with oxygen as a by-product.22 PC-based water splitting is advantageous because of low cost, high efficiency and flexible design of reactors.12,22–25 The generation of hydrogen also has the additional advantage of hydrogenation of CO2 into commercial products such as methanol, acetic acid or methane. Therefore, solar energy-driven production of hydrogen by PC water splitting is one of the most appealing research areas to explore. Generally, splitting of water into H2 and O2 is a thermodynamically uphill reaction consisting of two half reactions, namely hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), through multiple electron transfer processes.26–29 These reactions are possible under ambient conditions with the loading of an appropriate visible-light-responsive photocatalyst with a sufficient potential to achieve overall water splitting.30–33 Briefly, the photocatalytic process can be explained in the following two steps. Initially, the oxidation of water takes place to form oxygen, called as photooxidation. Then, the reduction of the generated protons takes place to form hydrogen, which is called as photoreduction (Fig. 3).12
 Fig. 3  Schematic energy diagrams and illustration of PC based water splitting for HER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The PEC cell is a two-electrode system consisting of a photoanode, which must be a semiconductor, and a counter electrode, as shown in Fig. 4. When photons of suitable frequency fall on the photoanode, electrons and holes are generated at the semiconductor–liquid interface. The space-charge layer formed at the semiconductor–liquid junction separates the carriers apart. The photogenerated electrons are transferred to the counter electrode through the outer circuit and reduce water to H2 (HER). The holes move towards the semiconductor surface to oxidize water to form O2 (OER). This is true if the photoelectrode is an n-type semiconductor, but a reverse process may take place if the photoelectrode is a p-type semiconductor. The efficiency of the HER depends on the selection of suitable semiconductors with a band gap matching the light absorption wavelength to have maximum solar conversion efficiency, stability in aqueous environment and matching of band-edge energies to the energy required for the H2 and O2 evolution reactions.
 Fig. 4  Various PEC water splitting mechanisms: (Type I) single light absorber; (Type II) heterojunction photoelectrode; (Type III) wired PEC tandem cell; (Type IV) wireless PEC tandem cell; (type V) PV–PEC tandem cell; (type VI) PV–electrolyser cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2017 from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 4 demonstrates different PEC mechanisms. Type I is a fundamental semiconducting light absorber-based PEC water splitting. Type II is the heterojunction photoelectrode PEC device. Type III and IV are PEC based series-connected photocathode and photoanode, respectively, in a tandem configuration. Type V denotes a device configuration for a coupled PV cell and a semiconductor photoelectrode-based unbiased PEC water splitting method and type VI is a shielded PV–electrolyser cell without a photoelectrode.22
As already discussed, the water splitting mechanism using solar radiation is possible only if the incident photon energy matches with the band gap of the photocatalyst and the absorbed energy excites electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, thereby creating holes in the valence band.26 The ultrafast transport of photo-excited holes and electrons to the catalyst and co-catalyst surfaces mediate oxidation and reduction of adsorbed water molecules to produce molecular oxygen and hydrogen. The process of PC water splitting and hydrogen production efficiency depends on the photocatalysts’ properties such as light harvesting, surface adsorption capacity, and charge utilization, transport and separation. To satisfy all these parameters, the design of photocatalysts is critical and needs more attention.34–36 Hence, the frontier research is focused on designing noble metal-free earth-abundant element-based semiconductors in pristine as well as in composite forms to harness the visible region of the solar spectrum. Other areas of interests are stability, durability and compatible cost.10–12,22,23,25,26
2.1 Choices and selection of semiconductor photocatalysts
As discussed in the introduction for the overall water splitting reaction, the redox potentials for both reduction and oxidation processes decide the selection criteria of semiconductor materials for PC process. Ideally, the band gap of the semiconductor catalyst should match with the oxidation and reduction potentials of water.10,26,36 In addition, the band positions of the catalyst should have a bare minimum potential difference of 1.23 eV, with the bottom of the conduction band being more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE) and the valence band edge being at a higher positive potential than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V).26,37–39Fig. 5 shows the comparison between the bandgaps of various semiconductors and the redox potential of water. The lower edge of the conduction band (green color) and the upper edge of the valence band (red color) of various semiconductors are presented along with the bandgap in electron volts. The energy scale is indicated in electron volts using the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) and the vacuum level as references. If these conditions are satisfied, one can select the catalyst for the PC hydrogen evolution reaction (PHE) via water splitting. However, many of the semiconductors and composites may meet this band gap criteria, but band gap alignment with the redox potential of water becomes a hurdle for the economic use of semiconductors as catalysts. Once the catalysts are introduced into the reactor system in the presence of a suitable light source, they produce electron and hole pairs through photon absorption, followed by the transport of these photogenerated carriers in the semiconductor particles. To promote water splitting, the photo-excited electron reacts with water, causing the H+ reduction reaction to produce H2 and the holes react with water to form O2 through the oxidation reaction. The overall water splitting process and the efficiency of the PC reaction depend on the amount of the excited electrons at the water/catalyst interface that are capable of reacting with water. Therefore, the recombination of the excitons needs to be minimized for obtaining efficient conversion efficiencies.10–12,22,23,25,26
 Fig. 5  Conduction and valence band for a range of semiconductors on a potential scale (V) versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Challenges in conventional semiconductor photocatalysts and the scope of 2D TMDCs
Till now, among the photocatalysts, other than noble metals, metal oxide semiconductors were primarily experimented for hydrogen evolution via water splitting using visible light. However, in most of the cases, semiconductors offer partial reactions (either reduction or oxidation) due to faster recombination of excitons. The other challenge is the inability of the semiconductors to be active for the entire wavelength range of the solar spectrum.10,24,40–42 Charge exciton recombination reduces the attack of water molecules and emits photons. Therefore, measures are needed to separate the e−/h+ pairs and to fasten transport to the interface. This destabilizing process is generally termed as a bulk recombination process followed via multiple steps such as inter-band gap states, direct e−/h+ recombination, recombination at crystal surface states, and the capture of electrons at the conduction band and holes in the valence band.26
Another major challenge in modern water splitting experiments is achieving complete water splitting without using any electron sacrificial agents. Most of the research till today demonstrated that it is difficult to achieve overall water splitting without any scavengers. Therefore, it is important to focus on a rational chemical synthesis for tuning the material properties to control the reaction kinetics on the catalyst surface. The role of sacrificial agents is to scavenge the holes and increase the survival time of excited electrons to prevent photocorrosion. Therefore, by inhibiting the recombination of excited charge carriers, hydrogen production efficiency enhances considerably. Kumaravel et al. demonstrated the role of sacrificial reagents on the activity of various catalysts used for photocatalytic hydrogen production. This study gives detail insights on the selection and photochemical reactions of various sacrificial reagents and their degradation products during H2 production.43 Zhang and co-workers reported a novel method for overall water splitting by light-excited graphitic carbon nitride with various redox cocatalysts without the use of sacrificial agents.44 Shi et al. have demonstrated the synthesis of interstitial P-doped, sulfur rich CdS catalyst without using any electron sacrificial agents. The interstitial P-doping helped maintain the impurity level of S vacancies closer to the Fermi level and become an effective electron trap. This is an indirect method to increase the lifetime of the excited electrons before recombination, resulting in an enhanced photocatalytic water splitting activity.45
Thus, the selection of semiconductors as catalysts for the PC water splitting reaction is very selective in achieving an overall water splitting in the visible energy spectrum. Majority of the photocatalysts studied so far are metal oxide-based (ZnO,46,47 TiO2,48 WO3,49 SnO2,50 Ta2O5,51 CeO2,52 CuO,53 ZrO2, Fe2O3,54etc.) semiconductors, metal chalcogenides (ZnS,55 CdS,56etc.) and their composites (SrTiO3,57 TiO2/C3N4,58 TiO2–ZnO,59,60 Pt/TiO2-xNx,61 Ni-Cd0.1Zn0.9S62etc.). However, most of them have band gaps in the range of ultraviolet (UV) light. As more than 50% of the solar energy received on the earth's surface lies in the visible region (400 nm < λ < 800 nm), the band gap (3.1–1.6 eV) of the semiconductors needs to be tuned, so that an enhanced production of hydrogen on the commercial scale can be achieved. Another important issue to be addressed in the case of nanoparticles with atomic radius below Bohr magneton is the resulting blue shift in the band gap of a semiconductor with a decrease in visible light absorption.11 Therefore, to achieve the target of visible light-driven PC overall water splitting, one needs to conduct focused research in manipulating material properties to tune the band gap. The current research is focused on the design of heterogeneous nanocomposites to engineer the band gap to harness maximum solar power. 2D semiconductor TMDCs with unmatched material properties may give a ray of hope to achieve the same.63–65 2D TMDC semiconductors with ultrathin layers (few-to-monolayer) have a large surface area and more surface atoms. This effectively reduces the distance of charge transfer and accelerates water splitting. The monolayer nature further assists the photogenerated carriers to reach the active sites and reduce recombination. The quantum confinement nature at a few-to-monolayer range of TMDCs and the large anisotropic behavior of electronic structures can enhance the reduction of the oxidation and reduction potential of photocatalysts.66,67 It is well reported that the significant up-shift of the indirect band gap energy to direct band gap energy at the atomic scale thickness is because of the strong quantum confinement effect. It is also true that due to the weak interlayer interaction and binding energy between the layers, the 2D TMDCs exhibit unique anisotropic optical and electronic properties. Thus, reducing the thickness up to few-to-monolayer results in the blue shift in the absorption features and shifts the band gap towards the visible light range. This is an important feature to be explored for water splitting and energy applications.68–70 However, the observed higher exciton binding energy at the monolayer thickness leads to strong Coulomb interactions in monolayer TMDCs,71 resulting in strong interactions of electron–hole pairs, which may reduce the PC activity. Hence, suitable heterogeneous nanocomposites need to be developed for enhanced PC water splitting activities. In the category of hybrid photocatalysts, a 2D/2D semiconductor interface is found to be an efficient combination as it is viable to harness the visible light spectrum, promotes the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and accelerates the charge carrier transport between the semiconductors to reduce the recombination of excitons.10 Recently, researchers have been thinking beyond graphene and focusing on two dimensional (2D) layered transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) semiconductors as suitable photocatalysts because of their excellent tuning properties in the few-to-monolayer structures.11,41,42 The micro-mechanical exfoliation process of peeling across the out-of-plane direction up to atomic scale is a new technological development in the production of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures.72–75 The layered nature of the TMDCs is capable of exfoliating up to atomic scale because of the weak van der Waals forces between the layers.73–75 Therefore, to explore the inherent properties of TMDCs and to optimize the material properties for the preparation of efficient electrocatalysts using quantum computational chemistry, surface electrochemistry and advanced characterization tools, the research in 2D TMDC nanomaterials has significantly accelerated for the development of high performance photoelectro catalysts in energy conversion as well as storage applications.
2.3 Brief about 2D semiconducting dichalcogenide semiconductors
As discussed earlier, 2D TMDCs show superior electronic and optical properties and the thickness can be tuned to realize advance device preparations.76,77 The band gap engineering from indirect to direct and capturing the major portion of the visible light spectrum distinguish them from the counterpart graphene and make them the best candidates for solar driven applications.78–80 Among the search for earth abundant and low cost materials, some members of the TMDC group are unique.80 Among the large pool of 2D layered materials, the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) family consists of about 60 compounds of the general formula MX2, where X is a chalcogen (S, Se, or Te) and M could be W, Mo, Re, Sn, or Pb; these compounds are structurally and chemically well defined, as shown in Fig. 6.81–83 Electrically, however, they cover a wide spectrum of properties from an insulator-like HfS2 through semiconductors like WS2, MoSe2, and MoS2, semimetals like WTe2 and TcS2 to true metals like VSe2 and NbS2.84,85 Studies show that these materials exhibit a variety of properties due to weak inter layer van der Waals forces holding these layers together.86,87
 Fig. 6  The family of 3d, 4d and 5d group (2D single-layer H and/or T) transition metal compounds with MX2 structure. The resulting structures (T or H) can be semi-metal (+), metal (*), or semiconductor (**) in nature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The layered structure allows to achieve few-to-monolayer exfoliation up to the atomic scale.83,87–90 Most of the TMDC semiconductors such as WS2, MoSe2, and MoS2 form hexagonal layered structures. The repeating 2-D unit is a block formed by a plane of M atoms with chalcogen (X) intersecting them (Fig. 7a). The interactions between the atoms within the blocks are mainly covalent, and the block-to-block interactions are van der Waals (vdW) in nature being 1 to 2 orders of magnitude weaker than those within a block.90 These weak interactions permit an easy cleavage of layers along the inter layer gap (vdW gap). It can be done easily using a scotch tape attached to a crystal to form a perfect dangling bond-free surface, as shown in Fig. 7b.91 The cleavage plane is a perfectly packed hexagonal structure and is called the basal plane or a van der Waals surface. The monolayer nanosheets of MX2 (M = Mo and W; X = S and Se) consist of an M atom lying between two hexagonal planes of X atoms, forming the X–M–X sheet. Each M atom bonded with six neighboring X atoms through covalent bonds assumes a 2H prototype structure. The MX2 in the few-to-monolayer structure consists of X–M–X sheets with each M atom lying between two hexagonal planes of X atoms in the 2H prototype structure.
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structures of the 1T and 2H structures of the MX2 family (X = yellow sphere). The metal is in octahedral coordination in the 1T structure, and trigonal prismatic coordination in the two layers per unit cell 2H crystal structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) 2D layers of MoS2 and WSe2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The layers are cleaved across the c-axis to convert to X–M–X layers using adequate techniques. The exfoliated monolayer still exists in the 2H prototype structure with a change in the space group to Pm292 This results in the transition of an indirect band gap (bulk WS2 = 1.29 eV) to a direct band gap (monolayer WS2 = 2.21 eV), as shown in Fig. 8, due to the lack of inversion symmetry.91
 Fig. 8  Theoretically calculated energy band structures of bilayer MoS2, WS2, and WSe2. The radiative recombination pathways (K → K, K → Γ, and Λ → Γ) are shown via dashed arrows for photoexcited electron–hole pairs. The conduction band minimum and valence band maximum of band formation are shown in orange. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The tailoring of band gap energy is a thickness dependent phenomenon, and by controlling the layer thickness, new electronic states can be created. This, in turn, is a great achievement in device technology for desirable properties, such as gate tunable conductivity, tuning of photoresponse, valley-selective optical excitation, for fabricating desirable devices, including photodetectors, solar cells, electrochemical sensors, and flexible devices.93–96
As a result, they are also proved to be good candidates for optoelectronic applications.97–101 Owing to the crystal inversion symmetry, the valley degree of freedom and spin orbit coupling, one can tune the valley degrees of freedom of carriers referred as ‘Valleytronics’ along with the manipulation of spins as information carries called ‘Spintronics’.102–104 One of the important properties of 2D layered semiconductors is that the illumination with light generates excitons due to the special confinement and reduced dielectric screening in few-to-monolayer structures.105–107 Excitons are typically pairs of bound electrons and holes generated during photo-excitation. Recombination of these electron–hole pair results in photon emission, and the related optical phenomena have significant applications in optoelectronics.108,109 However, in some cases, exciton dissociation, recombination, interfacial energy transfer and low conductivity cause low electron transfer and poor catalytic properties, leading to lower responsivities.110–113 These can be overcome by exploiting the attractive properties of atomic scale layers with van der Waals forces (vdWs), which are highly sensitive to external factors, such as doping, alloying, and chemical and physical adsorption of other molecules, providing a great platform for tuning material properties towards multifunctional devices with desired functions and opportunities to work with a wide range of applications.113–116 This development cannot be achieved by a single material without modifications. Therefore, there is an exciting opportunity for tuning material properties of 2D layered semiconductor TMDCs towards desired functions.99,117,118 Therefore, 2D TMDCs are an exciting area of research since the material properties can be tuned to achieve the desired functions for novel applications.118–123
3. 2D TMDC based heterogenous nanostructures
As we mentioned in the earlier section, TMDC nanosheets at the atomic scale possess very large effective surface area, quantum confinement effect and direct band gap energy, which effectively affect the photon capturing and applications in electronics and optoelectronics.124,125 Constructing heterojunctions with a properly selected semiconductor can tune the device properties in the desired manner. 2D-one-dimensional (1D),126 2D–2D,127,128 and 2D-three-dimensional (3D) heterostructures129,130 have been studied by researchers to explore the fundamental and novel device applications.82,131 Due to the novel synergetic properties of the heterogeneous nanostructures, they exhibit promising applications in LEDs,132,133 solar cells,134–136 electrochemical sensors,137,138 biosensors,139,140 photocatalysts,141–144 and supercapacitor energy storage devices.142,145–155 With the rapid progress in rational synthesis, analysis and applications in nanoscience and technology, hybrid nanostructures with well controlled compositions, shape and size play crucial roles in future novel devices.97,112
In order to achieve high quality device performance, experimental efforts and effective theoretical modeling approaches to tune band gaps, defects, vacancies, and other physical properties of 2D nanomaterials are very important.84,88,90 Device fabrication methods for heterogeneous nanostructures include mechanical methods,95,120 chemical vapor deposition (CVD) (Fig. 9),135 epitaxial growth,156 and chemical methods,157 and many other emerging methods.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis protocol of lateral heterostructures of atomic layer TMDCs with 1D interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al. synthesized various types of 2D TMDC heterostructures, including a MoS2 monolayer, MoS2–WS2 vertical heterostructure, WS2–MoS2–WS2 lateral heterostructure and Mo1–xWxS2–WS2 vertical heterostructure, using temperature-dependant CVD.158 Generally, this method of synthesis allows a large-area device preparation of atomic layer TMDCs for its applications in photovoltaics and photodetectors to light-emitting diodes and laser diodes. Micromechanical cleavage along the out-of-plane direction and transfer by the stacking method enables the fabrication of a variety of vdW heterostructures.159,160 Few-to-monolayer arrangement and the weak vdW interactions (Fig. 10) between the layers lead to changes in the crystal structure, which will form a periodic superlattice structure.161
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation showing the synthesis of rGO/MoS2 composite paper. (b) Digital image showing large-area composite paper. (c–e) SEM and TEM images of the prepared composite structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Multiple layers having materials with minor lattice mismatch by overlapping the layers are also able to achieve multifunctional optoelectronic systems with superior performance by forming vdW heterojunctions.157,162 2D layered semiconductor TMDCs can be combined with organic or inorganic molecules to form hybrid vdW heterostructures that can exhibit novel properties.161,163,163–165 An ultrafast charge transfer exciton and spin flipping at organic-transition-metal dichalcogenide interfaces (ZnPc-MoS2) were proposed by Kafle et al. (Fig. 11).166
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration and energy level diagram of the MoS2–ZnPc interface. Electronic processes including (i) optical excitation; (ii) charge transfer (CT); and (iii) back electron transfer (BET) are indicated in the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Synthesis of ZnO/WS2 core/shell nanowire structures with fast response time by electrons and holes sinking from a ZnO nanowire into a WS2 shell was proposed by Butanovs et al. (Fig. 12).166–168 Field electron emission (FE) behavior via the rational design of a hetero-architecture was discussed by Devan et al. for a large-area array of 2D MoS2-coated@one-dimensional (1D) brookite (β) TiO2 nanorods synthesized on a Si substrate.169 Based on the abovementioned optoelectronic properties of the TMDC-based heterogeneous nanostructures, it is expected that there is full scope of applications in the field of PC applications.
 Fig. 12  Schematics of ZnO/WS2 core/shell nanowire-based photodetector with f photoresponse measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The design of such visible light driven photocatalysts is extremely essential to have a low cost and highly efficient PC activity.170 Nanosheets of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 along with prominent metal oxide photocatalyst heterostructure systems can increase the degree of charge carrier separation, which effectively reduces the recombination of charge carriers and promotes the enhanced PC reduction activity,139,170–178 as discussed earlier. Due to the unique crystal structure and anisotropic properties of the TMDCs, they can act as visible light sensitizers. The quantum size effect of the layered semiconductors favors the interparticle electron transfer by a shift in the energy level of the conduction band and valence band edge in the hybrid system.179
3.1 Role of TMDCs in tuning the optical band gap of hybrid heterostructures
As discussed above, for an efficient charge separation and improved HER, appropriate band alignment and tuning of band gap is essential. This role can be taken up by TMDC semiconductor co-catalysts. Formation of desired heterojunctions with visible-light-active materials plays a dual role by enhancing the absorption of light and the effective separation of photogenerated carriers. The construction of heterostructures between two semiconductors using TMDCs as one of the semiconductors is a successful strategy to achieve the same. Semiconducting 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), such as MoS2, WS2, WSe2, and MoSe2 in the few-to-monolayer forms possess direct band gap energy and can be easily synthesized by various latest techniques.89,96 The band gap tailoring in TMDCs is highly dependent on the thickness since the exfoliation of layers up to atomic layer thickness endows TMDCs with novel electronic properties. This is helpful in selecting a suitable semiconductor catalyst to enable the heterojunction to tune the band gap of the combined system to harness maximum range of solar spectrum. UV-Vis absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy is the easiest tool to analyze the band gap tuning in semiconductors. Mukherjee et al. demonstrated size-dependant optical band gap tailoring in MoS2 nanocrystals (Fig. 13)88 by optical absorption analysis. The optical band gap was tuned and a considerable blue shift in the absorption edge with a decrease in the size up to 4 nm was shown, as predicted by the theory,103,104 where the band gap transition takes place from indirect to direct with a decrease in size (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 13  (a) UV/vis absorption spectra of MoS2 NCs of different size. (b) Variation of absorption peak energy as a function of average nanocrystal size. The energy zero is taken as the Fermi level. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 14  HSE06 calculated band structures of MX2/TiO2(110) (M = Mo and W; X = S and Se) composites along high symmetry lines of the Brillouin zone. The red, blue, and green dots represent the energy bands of TiO2, MX2, and MX2–TiO2 hybrids, respectively. The band gaps of MX2 sheets in MX2/TiO2(110) heterojunctions are illustrated with a black line with an arrow, and the values are also displayed in black numbers. The energy zero is taken as the Fermi level. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Theoretical investigations done by Niu et al. on the electronic properties of the composite system of monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide MX2 (M = Mo and W; X = S and Se) and TiO2 (110) using hybrid density functional theory calculations are shown in Fig. 14.113 It was predicted that due to the formation of interface with TiO2, the band gaps of monolayer MX2 sheets were reduced to 1.225, 1.720, 1.323 and 1.562 eV for MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, respectively. It was concluded that the interface strains induced due to the heterojunction formation with TiO2 might be the reason. The suggested theoretical predictions are extremely helpful to formulate TMDC-based hybrid systems in the PC based HER using sunlight.

Fig. 15 discusses about the optical tuning of 1L-MoS2/ZnO heterostructures. The thickness-dependant indirect to direct transition of band gap energy are attractive to make heterostructures with wide band gap materials to tune the band gap of the composite structure to harness maximum of solar energy.171
 Fig. 15  (a–f) Schematic of the sample structure and the band alignment describing the transfer of electrons from 1L-MoS2 to ZnO TF under 514 nm wavelength laser excitation with PL and Raman spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 16(a) and (b) explain the bandgap engineering on the heterostructures ZnO/CdS/CZTS and CdS/TiO2 experimentally by Liu et al.35 and by Li et al.,34 respectively. It has been observed in both the cases that the heterostructure formation shifts the absorption edge towards the visible-light region in comparison with their parent semiconductors. Here, the tuning of the optical energy gap was possible by varying the loading of one of the semiconductor nanostructures to be used as the co-catalyst. Hence, it can be concluded that heterostructure formation with 2D layered semiconductors as co-catalysts for the PC-based HER facilitates the tuning of the band gap of the heterostructure system towards the higher wavelength region of visible light. This in turn opens up a great opportunity in selecting suitable semiconductors to make heterojunctions for improving the efficiency of the PHE reaction. In the ongoing discussion, the formation of heterojunctions and the role of MoS2, WS2, WSe2, and MoSe2 in achieving enhanced PHE efficiency is reviewed.
 Fig. 16  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of as-grown TiO2 nanorod arrays and CdS@TiO2 heterostructures with different CdS loadings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry, (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of ZnO NR arrays, ZnO/CdS core/sheath NR arrays and ZnO/CdS/CZTS heterostructure NR arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Mechanism of WS2, MoSe2, MoS2, and WS2 based heterogeneous photocatalysis
The pristine form of layered semiconductor TMDCs (WS2, MoSe2, MoS2,WS2) generally exhibit poor PC HER. However, a few-to-monolayer nanosheets with very large active area are HER active and the quantum confinement nature thermodynamically favors the water splitting process. Cadmium sulfide is one of the most studied narrow band gap (Eg = 2.4 eV) semiconductor with appropriate valence band and conduction band edges for the PC-based HER (Fig. 17a).176 However, the efficiency of hydrogen production is very low due to bulk recombination and surface recombination.180–192Fig. 17b144 explains the PC hydrogen evolution of different heterogeneous catalyst systems. The intimate contact between the two semiconductors forms a heterojunction barrier at the interface. The valence band electrons of a semiconductor catalyst (e.g., CdS) are excited to the conduction band by creating holes in the valence band. These photogenerated carriers may recombine as quickly as they are generated, resulting in poor PC activity for pure semiconductors. However, once the junction is created with the help of a co-catalyst (e.g., MoS2), the junction potential will immediately separate the excited electrons and holes before they recombine, as shown in Fig. 17c.193
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the charge separation and enhanced HER of CdS-Au/MoS2 CSHNSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration for vdW heterostructures as the photocatalysis for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Formation of a p–n junction when MoS2 contacts with CdS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) The rate of H2 evolution on CdS loaded with different cocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
From the time of generation, the excited electrons on the conduction band of the catalyst (CdS) transport to the co-catalyst (MoS2) and support the production of hydrogen. On the other hand, the holes accumulate at the valence band co-catalyst and react with the sacrificial agents. Hence, the addition of a co-catalyst not only enhances the hydrogen evolution efficiency, but also resists the photocorrosion of the main catalyst. One can clearly notice from Fig. 17d that for the MoS2/CdS system, the PC hydrogen efficiency is very high compared to those of other metal interfaces, indicating the importance of the formation of pn junction.184
4.1 MoS2 based heterogeneous nanocomposites for PHE
Kumar et al. reported the use of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet-decorated CdS nanorods as a photocatalyst for the HER using sunlight as the source, as shown in Fig. 18(a–d). A high production rate of 174 mM g−1 h−1 with 6 wt% catalyst loading was observed (Fig. 18d). The improved production rate could be due to the atomic scale thickness of MoS2 with very large active surface area.180 To overcome the exciton scavenger effect in CdS, Yin et al. reported MoS2/CdS nanosheets-on-nanorod hybrid heterostructure for highly efficient PC H2 generation under visible light irradiation.181
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic presentation of proposed PC H2 production mechanism for BM/CdS and UM/CdS nanocomposites (b) PL spectra of CdS and its composites (c) Photoelectrochemical measurements of CdS and its composite materials (d) comparison of H2 production rate of synthesized photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photoluminescence (PL) analysis is a good tool to understand the electronic transition behavior of the semiconductor by recording the emission spectra using light of a characteristic wavelength. The same can be used for the semiconductor photocatalysts to study the recombination of carriers during PC. The higher the intensity of the PL peaks, the faster could be the electron–hole recombination, resulting in a poor hydrogen emission rate. Of course, as shown in Fig. 18b and c, pure CdS shows the highest PL intensity and the hydrogen emission rate is only about 12 mM g−1 h−1, whereas with a loading of MoS2 with CdS, it increased to 174 mM g−1 h−1.180 Similar result was observed in the case of the WS2/CdS system, where pure CdS showed the hydrogen emission rate of only 0.015 mM g−1 h−1, while that for the combined system was about 14.1 mM g−1 h−1.139
Similar results were reported by other investigators,180–187 suggesting an increased separation of carriers taking place when the incorporation of a co-catalyst forms a heterojunction interface. The photocurrent intensity measured from the photo-electrochemical examination (transient photocurrent measurements) conducted by Kumar et al.180 and other groups181–192,194 demonstrated a high photocurrent response for the MoS2/CdS heterostructure. This is clearly possible when more number of electrons are available for conduction in the system with lesser recombination rate. These in turn support higher oxidation and more emission of hydrogen. Thus, the addition of MoS2/WS2/MoSe2/WSe2 as a co-catalyst in the system minimizes the photocorrosion and increases the efficiency of the system. An optimum loading of 10 wt% MoS2 as a co-catalyst in the CdS nanosheets-on-nanorods exhibited the highest H2 generation rate of about 49.80 mM g−1 h−1 in the literature,182 (Fig. 19(a and c)). Zhang and co-workers worked on the same system of CdS@MoS2 composites with the production rate of about 17.203 mM g−1 h−1 for an optimal loading of 5 wt% CdS@MoS2-5% composite.183 The intimate contacts between the nanocomposites with a larger contact surface area between the unsaturated active S atoms in MoS2 is believed to be the reason for the improved PC H2 production.
 Fig. 19  (a–d) Comparison of H2 evolution rates and photoluminescence spectra of MoS2/CdS nanosheets-on-nanorods and a physical mixture (MoS2, CdS) with schematic illustration of charge transfer in MoS2/CdS nanosheets-on-nanorods and HER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In a similar experiment, hydrothermally synthesized CdS/MoS2 heterostructure micro-boxes were evaluated by Liu et al. MoS2 as a co-catalyst with 33 wt% loading demonstrated a hydrogen evolution rate of about 1.36 mM g−1 h−1 during PC-based HER under visible light.190 As the unsaturated sulfur (S*) atoms on the exposed edges increase, the activity of TMDCs for hydrogen evolution reactions also increases. Among the family of TMDCs, MoS2 has been explored the maximum, next to graphene. As far as the heterogeneous system is concerned, the CdS/MoS2 heterostructure was studied the maximum.
As a typical case study, to understand the various factors affecting the efficiency of heterogeneous catalyst system, the CdS/MoS2 heterostructure system was studied in the recent past.180–192 Though the basic electronic properties of both the materials are the same, depending upon the synthesis mechanisms, the morphology of the semiconductor catalyst changes, thereby changing the hydrogen evolution rate.181–185
The heterostructure of the p-MoS2/n-rGO photocatalyst prepared by a hydrothermal route for HER in the wavelength range from the ultraviolet light through the near-infrared light was reported by Meng et al.195 Direct sunlight with an average intensity of 901 W m−2 for 2 hours was used to test the activity and a hydrogen generation rate of about 0.160 mM g−1 h−1 was obtained. The p–n junction formed in this catalyst created a space-charge region near the junction and increased the exciton generation, thus suppressing charge recombination. Recent studies showed that the performance of TMDCs can be enhanced by incorporating graphene because of its high charge transport ability, good conductivity and similar layered 2D structure.119 Yuan et al. reported a robust visible light-active g-C3N4/RGO/MoS2 photocatalyst with the highest hydrogen evolution activity of about 0.317 mM g−1 h−1 when operated for 12 hours. The layers of MoS2 with crystallite edges in the nanocomposite act as H2-active regions and accept electrons from the electron-rich RGO. Layers of graphene act as a bridge to promote charge transfer between g-C3N4 and MoS2, resulting in a higher rate of hydrogen production.196 Chava et al. demonstrated the combination of gold-supported 1D CdS coated by 2D nanosheets of MoS2 as a unique nanoarchitecture with a hydrogen evolution rate of about 7 mM g−1 h−1.
The resultant one dimensional CdS-Au/MoS2 hierarchical core/shell heteronanostructure is shown in Fig. 20a.176 The role of MoS2 in the system as a catalyst and robust generator for charge carriers was well explained with the help of optical absorption and PL spectra, as shown in Fig. 20(b and c).
 Fig. 20  (a) H2 evolution reaction over CdS-Au/MoS2 core/shell heteronanostructures (b) optical absorption spectra and (c) photoluminescence spectra of CdS NRs and CdS-Au/MoS2 CSHNSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In a similar study, Yuan et al. described the synthesis and application of 2D–2D MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites for HER. For an optimum dosage of 0.50 wt% 2D–2D MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposite as the photocatalyst, the highest hydrogen evolution rate of about 2.145 mM g−1 h−1 was observed, which is about 36.4 times higher than that of pristine TiO2.197 Hence, the incorporation of 2D layers of TMDC-based semiconductors bridges the conduction between other photoactive semiconductors to form highly active heterogeneous nanostructures with excellent PC performances for enhanced hydrogen evolution under visible light. The ability of MoS2 to act as a photosensitizer in the reaction and as the co-catalyst is ascribed to the free energy of atomic hydrogen bonding to the MoS2 being close to zero, according to the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, which is comparable with that of Pt.198 Sandwiching of multiphase (semiconducting 2H, metallic 1T) MoS2 nanosheets is an interesting novel hetero-interface to be explored. The covalent functionalization with electron-rich metallic 1T phases and semiconducting 2H phases are expected to show different electronic structures. Unlike 2H phases, the electronic states of 1T phases of MoS2 are mainly partially filled Mo 4d and S 3p states and become more active to pair up the unpaired electronic states.199,200 In this direction, Peng et al. demonstrated PC-based HER activity by forming heterojunction 1T MoS2 and 2H MoS2 interfaces. The in-plane heterojunctions formed between IT-2H phases of MoS2 could produce an appreciably higher rate of hydrogen production of about 1.5 mM g−1 h−1 under optimum conditions.201 The overall water splitting and hydrogen evolution efficiency strongly depend on the use of co-catalysts along with the reductive and/or oxidative catalysts. Generally, the efficiency of the PC water splitting system depends on the performance of the activity, selectivity and stability of co-catalysts used in the system. The use of a co-catalyst facilitates harnessing of visible light, supports the increase in the lifetime of the excitons and speeds up the separation. Hou et al. reported that graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN), a polymeric melon semiconductor with a layered structure analogous to graphite, has been proved to be a suitable candidate for the PC system. In a typical experiment, they prepared thin-layered MoS2 on a mesoporous g-CN (mpg-CN) surface to form organic–inorganic layered heterojunctions. Visible light driven HER activity conducted with an optimum loading of 0.5 wt% MoS2/mpg-CN showed a hydrogen evolution rate of about 20.6 mM g−1 h−1.202 Organic photosensitizers (e.g., Ru(II), Ir(III), and Pt(II) complexes) are considered to be analogous to photosynthetic pigments and their properties can be tuned up to the molecular level; these are being studied for excellent PC-based HER experiments.
In a typical experiment, Yuan et al. developed a hybrid system consisting of MoS2/reduced graphene oxide (MoS2/RGO) catalyst, Zn(II)-5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-N-methylpyridyl)porphyrin ([ZnTMPyP]4+) photosensitizer, and triethanolamine (TEOA) as a sacrificial electron donor for PC H2 production under visible-light irradiation. Under optimized experimental conditions, they have shown a hydrogen evolution rate of about 2.560 mM g−1 h−1.203 Gayatri et al. successfully synthesized a p–n junction based on the MoS2/CeO2 nanocomposite for PC H2 production under visible light irradiation. With the optimized experimental set up and an effective loading of 2 wt% MoS2/CeO2 heterojunction nanocomposite, the hydrogen evolution rate of about 50.844 mM g−1 h−1, which is 57 times more than that of pristine CeO2, was demonstrated.204 Ma et al. prepared hydrothermally synthesized crystalline MoS2@TiO2 monohybrids using (NH2-MIL-125(Ti)) a metal–organic framework (MOF) as a precursor. At an optimal catalytic loading with 14.6 wt% MoS2, the visible light-irradiated HER produced hydrogen at a rate of about 10.046 mM g−1 h−1.205 A ternary nanocomposite system, MoS2–CdS–TiO2 (MoS2-CT), was proposed by Du et al. With 3 wt% MoS2-CT, it was shown to achieve a hydrogen evolution rate of about 4.146 mM g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation. Along with MoS2, the porous nature of TiO2 also provides a large surface area and hydrogen active sites for the reduction reaction. The band position of MoS2 lies in between CdS and TiO2, promoting efficient charge separation, leading to reduced recombination of photogenerated excitons. Thus, the ternary nanocomposite system is an appealing strategy for designing new and efficient visible to near infrared active photocatalysts for water splitting.206 Recently, Yuan et al. demonstrated the as-prepared CuInS2/TiO2/MoS2 ternary nanocomposite for its PC-based HER activity in the UV-near IR range. With an optimum loading of 0.6 mM g−1 CuInS2 and 0.5 wt% MoS2, the nanocomposite showed the highest H2 evolution rate of 1.034 mM g−1 h−1.207 In another typical experiment, the 2D–2D MoS2/Cu-ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst at 6 wt% MoS2 loading produced a H2 evolution rate of 5.463 mM g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation, as reported by Yuan et al.208
4.2 WS2 based heterogeneous nanocomposites for PHE
WS2 and MoS2 have similar crystal structures and chemical properties. Although WS2 has been reported as the active catalyst for PC-based HER, detailed studies have not been conducted similar to the later one. Zong et al. demonstrated a CdS/WS2 system for its possible HER activities. It has been shown that with an optimal WS2 (0.001 g)/CdS (0.1 g) loading ratio, the HER rate of about 0.420 mM g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation was achieved.209 The heterojunction formed between CdS/WS2 and the barrier interface promoted the enhanced H2 evolution efficiency compared to pristine CdS. Chen et al. also demonstrated a CdS/WS2 hybrid photocatalyst system, in which single-layer WS2 nanosheets were grown on the Cd-rich (0001) surface of wurtzite CdS nanocrystals.
The HER activity was tested under visible light irradiation for 4 h and improved activity of 1.984 mM g−1 h−1 was observed. The stability test of the catalyst was performed for about 16 hours and 70% of catalytic activity retention was observed.189
Akple et al. studied the g-C3N4/WS2 heterojunction, with its highest H2 production rate being 0.101 mM g−1 h−1 for an optimal loading of 0.01 wt% WS2 compared to that of Pt-C3N4.210 In a recent study, Xu et al. prepared WS2/CdS nanorod (NR) hybrids by mixing the WS2 nanosheets with CdS nanorods in different mass ratios, as shown in Fig. 21.18
 Fig. 21  (a) Illustration for the preparation of 1–2 layered 2H-WS2 and its application as a co-catalyst for PC hydrogen evolution. (b) Energy level of CdS and exfoliated 2H-WS2. (c) Transient photocurrent response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Few-to-monolayer 2H-WS2 nanosheets with CdS hybrids have shown that the hydrogen evolution rate under simulated sunlight was about 17.73 mM g−1 h−1, which is 26-fold higher than that obtained with pristine and bare CdS NRs under the same conditions. The stability test performed for the catalyst for about 24 hours proved the efficient reuse of the WS2/CdS nanorod catalyst.211 It is clear from the observations that the use of WS2 with atomic scale thickness enhances the effective surface area and the unsaturated sulfur at the surface promotes the efficient H2 evolution rate. Zhang et al. also demonstrated an appreciably larger hydrogen evolution rate of about 14.1 mM g−1 h−1 with CdS/WS2 for 10 wt% WS2 loading under visible light irradiation, which is claimed to be 8 times larger than that of pure CdS.139 A remarkable development in the ternary nanocomposites, such as CdS/WS2–MoS2, as photocatalysts has been reported by Reddy et al. An excellent hydrogen evolution of 209.79 mM g−1 h−1 was achieved under simulated sunlight irradiation in 5 hours. The observed hydrogen evolution rate was 83 times higher than that using bare CdS nanorods. The stability of the PC activity of the nanostructure was tested for up to 60 h.212 The first-principles calculations of the 2D layered GeS/WX2 (X = O, S, Se, Te) heterojunction and the electronic structure-related properties were studied for the possibility of improved hydrogen evolution activities by Ju et al.213 Generally, sulfide-based semiconductors (CdS, ZnS, SnS, PbS etc.) are wide band gap semiconductors, and are used for various photodetector and PC applications. However, the use of these semiconductors in pure form suffers from a high recombination rate, photocorrosion, and low effectiveness in the visible range for PC hydrogen evolution. Recently, Zhong et al. used ZnS nanoparticles with WS2 nanosheets (NSs) to form ZnS/WS2 (ZWS) heterostructures for HER under visible light. An optimal loading of 0.5 wt% WS2 in the ZWS system showed an activity rate of about 0.308 mM g−1 h−1, which is found to be three times higher than that of pure ZnS. The stability of the catalyst was also tested and the activity was retained for about 50 hours.214 In a typical experiment, Gupta et al. demonstrated PC properties of ternary sulphoselenides of tungsten (WSxSe2−x) with a hydrogen evolution rate of about 2.339 mM g−1 h−1.215 As shown in Fig. 22, the hybrid CdS/WS2 with an ultrathin sheet structure facilitates the hydrogen evolution rate of about 14.1 mM g−1 h−1.139 The intimate contact between CdS and WS2 created a nanoheterojunction and suppressed the charge recombination during the photocatalysis process, thereby increasing the efficiency.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram for PC H2 evolution by CdS/WS2 under visible light irradiation (b) photoluminescence spectra of 2D CdS and CdS/WS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4.3 MoSe2 based heterogeneous nanocomposites for PHE
Molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2) is another prominent member in the TMDCs family with similar physical and structural properties to that of MoS2 and WS2. MoSe2 is known to have excellent catalytic activity because of its band edges and active sites, which are favorable for hydrogen adsorption, high electron conductivity, layer-dependant tunability of band positions, and direct band gap in few-to-monolayer structures.215–217 Despite all the properties, based on the context, MoSe2 for its PS based HER is less investigated. In one of the recent studies, Kou et al. demonstrated MoSe2 nanosheet (NT) modified TiO2 nanowires (NWs) for application in HER. It was found that under visible light irradiation, an efficient hydrogen production rate of about 0.468 mM g−1 h−1 was achieved, which was much higher than that using pure TiO2 (0.0055 mM g−1 h−1) and MoSe2 (0.070 mM g−1 h−1).218
The intimate contact between MoSe2 and TiO2 forms a heterostructure, with MoSe2 being at a higher positive conduction band edge than TiO2. Thus, during illumination, MoSe2 is excited to pump electrons to the conduction band, leaving holes in the valence band. However, as the conduction band edge of TiO2 is below MoSe2, electrons prefer to be transferred to TiO2, creating effective charge separation. The transported carriers on top of the composite surface trigger the water splitting reaction and thus promote hydrogen evolution.218 Tahir et al. demonstrated the role of MoSe2 incorporation on a nanostructured WO3-CNT composite for the PC-based HER. It was noticed that the addition of 4 wt% MoSe2 into the WO3-CNT composite produced a higher surface area and pore volume compared with their pristine counterparts. Moreover, 4 wt% MoSe2 loaded WO3-CNT showed higher hydrogen evolution with a rate of about 0.1 mM g−1 h−1, which is of course larger than that of pure MoSe2 and WO3-CNT composite. Furthermore, the role of rational synthesis, tuning of morphology and the synergetic effect of a composite material for the enhanced production of hydrogen via PC reaction mechanism has been explained.219 Wang et al. presented the Er3+:YAlO3/Ta2O5/rGO/MoSe2 nanocomposite for its visible light driven PC hydrogen evolution with a rate of about 0.190 mM g−1 h−1 with 0.75 wt% MoSe2/rGO.220
4.4 WSe2 based heterogeneous nanocomposites for PHE
Tungsten diselenide (WSe2) is also an important layered semiconductor and was studied extensively for its electro-optical applications in the last decades. Owing to the anisotropic properties and unique crystal structure compared to other TMDCs members, WSe2 is an attractive target material for effective and efficient photo-electrochemical HER.221 Yu et al. reported the enhanced PC activities of WSe2/RGO composite. It has been demonstrated that, graphene modification enhances the potentials of WSe2 to use it as photocatalyst.222 Lin et al. developed a new class of photocatalysts using WSe2 as the co-catalyst. In a typical experiment, they demonstrated the preparation of a floating sheet with WSe2 and nanodiamond-embedded Cu2O (NEC) photocatalyst. The suspended nature of the catalyst automatically supported the absorption of maximum solar irradiation and helped in an easy re-use of the catalysts. Through the floating NEC/WSe2/Carbon Foam (CF) structure, they achieved a HER rate of about 64.85 mM g−1 h−1, which is 13.2 times that of the conventional powder dispersed system.223
4.5 Comparative summary of various heterogeneous nanocomposites based on TMDCs used for PC based HER

Table 1 summarizes the comparison between selected heterogeneous composites used for the PC based HER. The PHE using a semiconductor as a catalyst with a suitable co-catalyst was explained by all investigators. The role of a co-catalyst, whether it is a semiconductor or metal or semi-metal is to enhance the PHE activity compared to the pure semiconductor. As already discussed, due to the addition of co-catalysts into the system, the band gap of the semiconductor catalyst gets tuned to the visible region and enhances the efficiency of H2 evolution rate. Song et al.224 used 8 wt% NiCoP as a co-catalyst along with a CdS photocatalyst, showing an activity rate of about 28.4 mM g−1 h−1, which is claimed to be 361 times that of the 1 wt% Pt/CdS (78.7 mM g−1 h−1) under the same water splitting condition. Hence, the addition of NiCoP as the co-catalyst attracts photoexited carriers, reduces recombination and thus prohibits photocorrosion of CdS. However, on using 2D layered TMDC semiconductors as a co-catalyst (MoS2), there is a drastic increase in the PHE efficiency to approximately 209.79 mM g−1 h−1,212 which is the highest reported value so far. Thus, the high surface area of 2D layers plays a multi facet role in the visible light-mediated H2 production mechanism.
Table 1 Comparative summary of various heterogeneous nanocomposites based on TMDCs used for PC based HER




Photocatalyst
Light source
H2 production rate, mM g−1 h−1
Synthesis and morphology of the catalyst
Ref.




CdS/WS2–MoS2 ((6 wt%) of WS2–MoS2) lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
150 W xenon-arc lamp
209.79
Hydrothermal method; nanocomposite

212



MoS2/CdS (6.0 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Solar light
174
Hydrothermal method; MoS2 nanosheets-decorated CdS nanorods

180



MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
60.28
Solvothermal method; nanorod morphology

181



MoS2/CdS (10 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
49.8
Solvothermal method; MoS2 nanosheets grown on single-crystalline CdS nanorod.

182



MoS2/CdS 5 wt% CdS@MoS2-5% (5 wt% CdS@MoS2-5%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
17.2
Hydrothermal method; sheet-like subunits that form relatively loose flowers

183



MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
5.4
Chemical synthesis; nanoparticles

184



MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
5.33
Chemical synthesis; crystalline

185



MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
4.06
Hydrothermal process; cauliflower-like morphology

186



SL-MoS2/CdS (2.0 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
2.59
Chemical synthesis; SL-MoS2/CdS composite

187



MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
1.914
Solvothermal/exfoliation method to prepare CdS nanowires decorated with ultrathin-layer MoS2 nanosheets

188



MoS2/CdS (0.01 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
1.47
Wet-chemical method; single-layer MS2 nanosheets selectively grew on the Cd-rich (0001) surface of wurtzite CdS nanocrystals.

189



MoS2/CdS (33 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
1.36
Solvothermal method; CdS/MoS2 heterostructures with a unique microbox morphology

190



MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.775
Sequential two-step hydrothermal growth; core–shell structured MoS2/CdS

191



MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.49
Hydrothermal; 1D CdS@MoS2 core–shell nanowires

192



CdS/WS2 (WS2 10 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
14.1
Sonochemical; nanosheets

139



ZnS/WS2 (WS2 NSs 0.5 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.124
Sonochemical and solvothermal; nanosheet

214



MoSe2/TiO2-0.3 with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.468
Solvothermal; nanosheet

218



ZnO/CdSe (1:0.2) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
4.79
Light-assisted growth method; CdSe NPs and ZnO sheets

232



Ni(1%):TiO2, 0.08 mol% Ni with as the sacrificial agent
450 W Hg lamp
3.39
Photochemical synthesis; aggregated small particles near 50 nm

233



NiCoP/CdS (8 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
5 W pure white light-emitting diode (LED)
28.4
Hydrothermal method; nanoparticles

224



CdS/NiS/RGO (1 wt% RGO and 5 mol% NiS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light
14.96
Hydrothermal method; CdS/NiS nanoparticles are dispersed on the surface of RGO nanosheets

234



CdS-Aux-ZnO (CdS-2 wt% Au-ZnO) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.102
Chemical method; microstructure of Aux and ZnO seeds-modified CdS hybrids

235



TiO2-NiSx (NiSx-3 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.982
Hydrothermal method; microrod-like structure

236



NiS/CdS (Ni/Cd feed molar ratio of 0.8) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
0.937
Chemical method; β-NiS modified CdS nanowires

237



WO3/g-C3N4composites with triethanol-amine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (500 W)
0.4
Chemical method; micro/nano-structures

194



CdS/CdSe (27.5 wt% CdSe) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
5.125
Chemical method; nanorods

238



NiS/g-C3N4 (NiS-20/g-C3N4) with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)/sunlight
16.4/28.3
Photochemical deposition method; nanosheets

239



VS2/g-C3N4(0.1 wt% VS2) with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent
The AM 1.5 solar simulator (100 mW cm−2)
0.0874
Hydrothermal method; porous structure

240



CuWO4 with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent
Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)
2.79
Laser ablation in liquid (LAL); nanoparticles

241





In most of the cases discussed above, it is reported that the combination of deionized water or double distilled water with a sacrificial agent in a micro reactor does not have consistency in terms of H2 production efficiency. The repugnance in the result is attributed to the following reasons: types of sacrificial agents, physico-chemical reaction kinetics on the catalyst surface, chemical stability of the catalyst, reactor design, light absorption capability of the catalyst, inert gas purging flow rate, irradiating light source, and gas sampling and analysis conditions. Along with the catalyst properties, the nature of the sacrificial agent used also plays a significant role in controlling the H2 production efficiency.43,225 The following properties of the sacrificial agents could strongly affect the rate of H2 production: the length of the carbon chain, the number of hydroxyl groups, dehydrogenation/decarbonylation characteristics, polarity and electron donating ability, adsorption capability on the photocatalyst surface, the formation of by-products, and the selectivity for the reaction with photo-generated holes.43,226,227 For more details regarding the role of sacrificial agents, readers can refer various published articles.43,225,228–231
5. PEC water splitting based on MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 heterostructures
Li and coworkers demonstrated the MoS2–TiO2 composite photocatalysts for enhanced PC activity and the use of layered MoS2 acting as a co-catalyst to assist enhanced charge separation and efficient H2 generation compared to TiO2, as shown in Fig. 23. The layered nature and high carrier mobility of the MoS2 nanosheet along with gold nanorods improved the PEC current density up to 52%. Moreover, the nanohybrid heterojunction by combining one-dimensional arrays and two-dimensional nanosheets can increase the trapping of light and enhance the efficiency.242
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of energy band structure and electron–hole separation of (MoS2–TiO2)/Au nanocomposites in (a) PEC cell and (b) PC hydrogen generation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2017 Scientific Reports. 
Shen et al. have demonstrated the shape tuned MoS2–TiO2 hybrid nanostructures and performed the visible-light driven PC hydrogen evolution reaction with an enhanced hydrogen evolution rate of 16.7 mM g−1 h−1. Using TiO2 1D nanowires with 2D nanosheets of MoS2, the morphology of MoS2 was transformed into a 1D structure and a MoS2–TiO2 hybrid nanostructure was formed. The porous nature of TiO2 combined with the heterostructure effectively increased the active sites and consequently increased the adsorption of reactant molecules on to the hybrid structure.243 Xiang et al. also prepared a hybrid TiO2NPs/MoS2/graphene (MG) structure for its use in PC H2 production. Here, the use of hybrids of few-to-monolayer MoS2 nanosheets and graphene sheets as cocatalysts act as PC reaction centers with a larger number of active adsorption sites and improved interfacial charge transfer.244
In a recent study, Lee et al. prepared efficient photocathodes using only 2D layered TMDCs. Fig. 24 shows the schematics of the typical preparation of rGO/TMD-based hybrid films. The synergic effect between the multi-TMDC layers and heterojunction formation led to efficient charge separation, lower recombination, higher conductivity and excellent photo-response. This multi-component film-based photo-cathodes showed the highest PC efficiency with a 67% increase in the current density under light illumination.245
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the two types of RGO/TMD based hybrid films. (b) Charge transfer processes and the (c) measurement system inside a PEC cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
The formation of local p–n MoS2/N-doped graphene nanojunctions and effective charge separation was tested towards the PEC production of hydrogen by Carraro et al., which was seven times more efficient with respect to bare MoS2 nanoparticles.246 Jang et al. discussed about the preparation of a zinc telluride photocathode modified with carbon and molybdenum sulfide for solar-driven hydrogen production. Here, MoS2 acting as a co-catalyst with carbon improved the PEC performance to about 11%.247 The multiple roles of MoS2 acting as a co-catalyst to increase the absorption of visible light, inhibiting the photocorrosion of CdS and enhancing charge separation by forming heterojunction between MoS2 and CdS was presented by Liu et al.193 Metallic MoS2 with silicon heterostructure can act as an excellent photocathode for solar-driven hydrogen production. In a typical study, Ding et al. prepared such heterostructures and explored metallic 1T polymorphs of layered metal chalcogenides for PEC solar energy conversion. Here, the MoS2 nanosheets acted as a low resistance path for the charge transfer at semiconductor/catalyst and catalyst/electrolyte interfaces to achieve the highest current density of about 17.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE.248 Liu et al. demonstrated the use of a 3D mesoporous black TiO2 (MBT)/MoS2/MBT nanosheet sandwich-like photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution and dye degradation under visible-light irradiation. Band gap tailoring of TiO2 with the addition of MoS2 in the system has enhanced the absorption of visible light, and the formation of heterostructure facilitated the separation and transfer of photogenerated carriers.249 Hybridization of monolayers of TMDCs and their heterostructures result in devices with novel properties.250 The type II heterojunction formation between monolayers of MoS2 and WS2 can transfer the photoexcitons across the junction within 50 fs under illumination.162 This is a unique behavior that can be exploited in photovoltaics and PC applications, where efficient charge separation is a key factor deciding the performance of devices. Thus, the photogenerated charge carriers can be transported to the respective layers immediately after formation by quenching the recombination. Thus, coupling the monolayers of semiconductor TMDCs and heterostructures lead to interesting device structures in PEC systems for water oxidation and reduction for H2 and O2 evolution.64 A novel integrated Ag-embedded MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction ternary composite electrode was prepared by Pan et al. for efficient PEC water splitting. A combined effect of surface plasmon resonance (SPR), formation of a Schottky barrier, p–n junction-assisted rapid charge carrier separation and delayed recombination of electron–hole pairs resulted in an enhanced photon-to-current conversion efficiency in this study.251Fig. 25 demonstrates the schematic operation of an Ag-embedded MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction ternary composite electrode.251
 Fig. 25  Operation of Ag-embedded MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction ternary composite electrode: (a) before and (c) after contact with each other and (b) formation of the MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Zeng et al. prepared a heterostructure based on an Au-WS2/p-Si interface as a photocathode for PEC. Here, the deposition of WS2 films protects Si from photocorrosion and the junction barrier enhances the carrier separation. It could achieve 16 times higher photocurrent density compared to bare Si photocathode.252 A CdS/WS2/ITO composite was prepared by Zirak et al., and they demonstrated that the heterojunction formed between CdS and WS2 facilitates the pathway for photo-excited carriers and efficient carrier separation, facilitating higher current density compared to pristine compounds.253 Huang et al. successfully synthesized MoSe2 with n + p-Si photocathodes, achieving a high current density of about 29.3 mA cm−2 under illumination. The interface formed between MoSe2 and Si provided small charge transfer resistance between semiconductors, improving the current density. The stability of the system was tested up to 120 hours as MoSe2 protects Si from photocorrosion.254 Yu et al. introduced a novel space-confined self-assembled (SCSA) solution-processed thin film deposition method for the large area synthesis of a thin film for its use in PEC hydrogen production. The bare WSe2 film without any additives showed remarkably stable photocurrent, and further functionalization with Pt led to photocurrents over 1.0 mA cm−2 under standard illumination conditions.255Table 2 summarizes the selected photoanodes and their merits for comparison.
Table 2 PCE comparison of various photocathode with their merits




Photocathode
H2 production rate (mM g−1 h−1)
Photon-to-current efficiency (%)
Current density under light (mA cm−2)
Ref.




(MoS2–TiO2)/Au
0.19
52
0.026

242



MoS2 nanosheet/TiO2 nanowire
16.7
—
0.07

243



TiO2/MoS2/graphene composite
0.165
—
—

244



Multi-component (1T MoS2/(2H MoS2 + 2H WS2 + rGO)/ITO) films
—
67
0.094

245



N-Doped graphene/MoS2 nanohybrids
—
7
—

246



MoS2/C/ZnTe/ZnO
—
11
—

247



MoS2/CdS films
0.523
30
28

193



1T-MoS2/Si heterostructures
—
—
17.6

248



3D mesoporous black TiO2 (MBT)/MoS2/MBT
0.56
—
—

249



BiVO4–Ag−MoS2
—
51
2.72

250



Au-WS2/p-Si
—
—
0.37

252



CdS/WS2/ITO
—
—
0.35

253



MoSe2 with n + p-Si photocathodes
—
—
29.3

254



2D WSe2 thin film
—
—
1

27





6. Conclusions and perspectives
The junction barrier formed between 2D layered semiconductors with other 2D TMDCs, metals, semimetals, metal oxides, etc., gives exciting opportunities in water splitting HERs as the TMDC semiconductor plays a multifacet role in deciding the efficiency of PHE mechanism. Thus, the efficient role of TMDC semiconductors as co-catalysts in the PC and PEC hydrogen evolution can be summarized as follows:
(i) 2D layered TMDC structures having very large active surface areas are helpful in hosting the catalyst nanoparticles to keep the catalyst immobile, facilitate short charge transport time and distance, and avoid agglomeration and re-stacking. This maintains the activity and stability of the catalyst to achieve improved rates of PC hydrogen evolution.
(ii) The band gap energy of layered TMDC nanosheets is tunable with thickness; suitable catalyst semiconductors can be selected to achieve maximum efficiency for PHE.
(iii) Chalcogen atoms (unsaturated) and edge sites serve as energetic and active sites for enhanced PC HER rate.
(iv) The incorporation of TMDC layers with wide band semiconductors can tune the band gap of the hybridized structure to harness the visible region of the solar spectrum.
6.1 Perspective on challenges associated with 2D TMDC semiconductors as photocatalysts
The recent past has witnessed an enormous effort towards research on graphene, followed by layered TMDCs, especially MoS2, because of its unique features. Considering the applications in the PC water splitting and HER, the research is still in its infancy. The potential of few-to-monolayer semiconductor TMDCs is already identified in this field; however, the use of these materials is limited to lab scale experiments.255,256 As discussed earlier, the pure forms of these semiconductors are not suitable for the efficient conversion of water into hydrogen because of the band alignment. However, the sandwiched structure is always promising for enhanced applications in harnessing the visible region of the solar spectrum.255–257
Challenges placed in front of 2D TMDCs for the PC application are the large-scale production, processing and identification of large-area single layers of these materials. The synthesis of high quality few-to-monolayer nanosheets of TMDCs still remains cumbersome. Though an increasing number of feasible synthesis routes are coming up for the 2D materials, difficulty still exists with regard to forming interfaces with suitable photocatalysts with matching gaps for efficient energy conversion.104,258–261 Defect engineering, morphology tuning, formation of pores and creation of active surface could not be controlled using the existing synthesis mechanisms. The performance of the heterogeneous structures we have reviewed so far showed that there is considerable variation in the production rate of hydrogen in similar experimental environments. This indicates that there are other intrinsic issues and unknown factors that affect the mechanism, which are yet to be uncovered. In order to tune the material properties at the atomic scale and to have optimized experimental conditions, cutting-edge in situ analysis need to be performed. Further, for use in commercial applications, large-scale synthesis protocols must be developed and tested. The stability of the catalyst is also a major concern as far as the photocatalyst applications are concerned. From the advanced microscopic analysis related to material properties and the use of advanced calculation methods, a theoretical design of novel heterostructures needs to be proposed to exploit the large range of semiconductor nanomaterials. Though the constituent elements of TMDCs are earth abundant and low cost, some of the elements create health hazards and environmental safety-related issues.34,35,261–264 Since the potential of 2D TMDCs is the frontier of research, there is limited attention paid to the toxicity and other environmental risks regarding the synthesis and applications.
6.2 Perspective on the efficiency of the water-splitting methods when using the 2D TMDCs
PC water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen using sunlight has attracted tremendous focus on the research and development in the recent past. For the commercial large-scale hydrogen production, a visible light sensitive material capable of splitting water into H2 and O2 in the powder form is sufficient to have a sustainable production of hydrogen. Among the pool of materials studied so far, two-dimensional (2D) layered semiconducting materials are very fascinating in terms of electronic and electrochemical properties to make hybrid junctions with conventional semiconductors to have improved efficiency of PC reactions. Though the research of TMDC-based hybrid heterogeneous PC water splitting is in its infancy, the present review tried to exemplify its potentials by collecting the literature within the past 2–3 years. The development in this short duration clearly shows the future horizons in TMDC-based heterogeneous nanocomposites for overall water splitting applications to produce hydrogen and oxygen. The literature survey clearly shows that more than 80% of the researchers have worked on MoS2-based heterogeneous nanocomposites as it is the most material after graphene. It is also evident that among the materials used so far for the PC HER activity, the MoS2-based heterogeneous nanocomposite is on top with the highest hydrogen evolution rate and stability. The other potential candidates of the TMDC family, such as WS2, WSe2 and MoSe2 are explored in diverse fields of spintronics, opto-electronics, and vdW heterostructures; however, less attention is being paid to the water splitting HER activities. Being naturally abundant, low cost and toxic, tungsten dichalcogenide is a good substitute for molybdenum-based dichalcogenides with its robust properties. Since the physical and chemical properties of the members are identical, future research and development would focus on the manipulation of the rest of the TMDC members to achieve the future needs of clean and sustainable energy production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
C. K. S. thanks the visiting faculty fellowship of JNCASR and support of CHARUSAT. Financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Sheikh Saqr Laboratory and Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
L. Yang, P. Liu, J. Li and B. Xiang, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 285 CrossRef .
M. Velický and P. S. Toth, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 8, 68–103 CrossRef .
F. Haque, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 23 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Su, Q. Shao, Z. Qin, Z. Guo and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2253–2276 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rahmanian, R. Malekfar and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 24, 18–31 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Jing and M. Ni, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 597–598 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18299–18325 RSC .
W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang and X. Fan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 4611–4626 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y.-L. Li, B. Sa and R. Ahuja, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 545–559 RSC .
Q. Lu, Y. Yu, Q. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faraji, M. Yousefi, S. Yousefzadeh, M. Zirak, N. Naseri, T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and A. Z. Moshfegh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 59–95 RSC .
S.-C. Kim, Md. S. Islam and S.-J. Hwang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800092 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, X. Xiong, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1972–2010 RSC .
Y. Tian, F. P. García de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, G. Favraud, M. Bonifazi, J. Li, M. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, Md. G. Kibria, S. Hoogland, D. Sinton, E. H. Sargent and A. Fratalocchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701165 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huan, J. Shi, G. Zhao, X. Yan and Y. Zhang, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1980333 CrossRef .
D. Xu, P. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang, T. E. Mallouk and X. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2810–2818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joe, H. Yang, C. Bae and H. Shin, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 149 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, C. Lic and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
D. A. Reddy, H. Park, R. Ma, D. P. Kumar, M. Lim and T. K. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1563–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
R. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
V. Preethi and S. Kanmani, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 561–575 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 RSC .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Liao, C.-W. Huang and J. C. S. Wu, Catalysts, 2012, 2, 490–516 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2738–2739 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gupta, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 71, 585–601 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, H. Dong and A.-M. Ren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11111–11119 RSC .
H. Pan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 584–601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. W. G. Hoffmann, H. Shen, C. Fabrega, J. D. Prades, T. Andreu, F. Hernandez-Ramirez and S. Mathur, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20472–20476 RSC .
X. Liu, C. Wang, J. Xu, X. Liu, R. Zou, L. Ouyang, X. Xu, X. Chen and H. Xing, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1139–1145 RSC .
R. D. Tentu and S. Basu, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 5, 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, C. Jiang and V. A. L. Roy, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 38–58 RSC .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Colón, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 48–59 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Lee, H. S. Jung and Y. T. Kang, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 163–177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. S. Thind and A. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 63, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
V. Kumaravel, D. M. Imam, A. Badreldin, K. R. Chava, Y. J. Do, M. Kang and A. Abdel-Wahab, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 1–35 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062–3066 RSC .
R. Shi, H.-F. Ye, F. Liang, Z. Wang, K. Li, Y. Weng, Z. Lin, W.-F. Fu, C.-M. Che and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705941 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Momeni, Indian J. Chem., 2016, 6 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y.-Z. Zhou, D.-Y. Wu, X.-H. Liu, R. Zhang, H. Liu, C.-K. Dong, J. Yang, S. A. Kulinich and X.-W. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9057–9063 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Long, D. Liu, D. Yang, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Go, P. S. Shinde, C. H. Doh and W. J. Lee, Mater. Des., 2016, 90, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Gao, Z. Wu, W. Han, Y. Wang, W. Fu, X. Li and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Momeni, M. Mirhosseini, M. Chavoshi and A. Hakimizade, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 3941–3947 CrossRef CAS .
F. Galindo-Hernández and R. Gómez, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 217, 383–388 CrossRef .
J. Bandara, C. P. K. Udawatta and C. S. K. Rajapakse, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 857–861 RSC .
W. Liu, J. S. Dennis and S. A. Scott, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 16597–16609 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Lee, S. Anandan, S. J. Masten and J. J. Wu, Renewable Energy, 2016, 89, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, Y.-L. T. Ngo, L. Sui, E. J. Kim, D. K. Dang, J. S. Chung and S. H. Hur, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 13912–13919 RSC .
W. Chen, H. Liu, X. Li, S. Liu, L. Gao, L. Mao, Z. Fan, W. Shangguan, W. Fang and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, H. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang and S. F. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Xie, K.-Y. Su, X.-Y. Peng, R.-J. Wu, M. Chavali and W.-C. Chang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 70, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pérez-Larios, R. Lopez, A. Hernández-Gordillo, F. Tzompantzi, R. Gómez and L. M. Torres-Guerra, Fuel, 2012, 100, 139–143 CrossRef .
W.-C. Lin, W.-D. Yang, I.-L. Huang, T.-S. Wu and Z.-J. Chung, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2192–2196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Jing and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7051–7057 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahmad, S. K. Kamarudin, L. J. Minggu and M. Kassim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Pesci, M. S. Sokolikova, C. Grotta, P. C. Sherrell, F. Reale, K. Sharda, N. Ni, P. Palczynski and C. Mattevi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4990–4998 CrossRef CAS .
C. Villevieille, X.-J. Wang, F. Krumeich, R. Nesper and P. Novák, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 636–644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
Z. X. Gan, L. Z. Liu, H. Y. Wu, Y. L. Hao, Y. Shan, X. L. Wu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233113 CrossRef .
M. Samadi, N. Sarikhani, M. Zirak, H. Zhang, H.-L. Zhang and A. Z. Moshfegh, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 90–204 RSC .
B. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9218 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, S. Tang, J. Gu and X. Cao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 99153–99163 RSC .
G. Ben-Melech Stan and M. Caspary Toroker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5401–5410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao and B. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14221–14229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhou, V. Ostwal and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4787–4792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 8229–8244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong and I. Kuljanishvili, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2017, 35, 030803 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, R. Wang and K. Liu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011301 Search PubMed .
A. Sharma, H. Yan, L. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Liu and Y. Lu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1164–1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Duong, S. J. Yun and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11803–11830 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ataca, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Rasmussen and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13169–13183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuc and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2603–2614 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 130, 1–39 CrossRef .
L. C. Flatten, Z. He, D. M. Coles, A. A. P. Trichet, A. W. Powell, R. A. Taylor, J. H. Warner and J. M. Smith, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, R. Maiti, A. Midya, S. Das and S. K. Ray, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 760–768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kapatel, C. Mania and C. K. Sumesh, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 7184–7189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, R. M. Ribeiro, M. Toh, A. Carvalho, C. Kloc, A. H. Castro Neto and G. Eda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5627–5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Li, Y. Li and C. Tang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li and H. Zhu, J. Materiomics, 2015, 1, 33–44 CrossRef .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani and P. O'Brien, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 411–478 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1102–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, Y. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Chu, T. Lei, J. Pu, L. Dai, C. Wu, Y. Cheng, T. Zhai, L. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700231 CrossRef .
X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 Search PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
G. Plechinger, P. Nagler, A. Arora, R. Schmidt, A. Chernikov, A. G. del Águila, P. C. M. Christianen, R. Bratschitsch, C. Schüller and T. Korn, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Plechinger, P. Nagler, A. Arora, A. Granados del Águila, M. V. Ballottin, T. Frank, P. Steinleitner, M. Gmitra, J. Fabian, P. C. M. Christianen, R. Bratschitsch, C. Schüller and T. Korn, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7899–7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng and X. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2629–2642 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shang, X. Shen, C. Cong, N. Peimyoo, B. Cao, M. Eginligil and T. Yu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 647–655 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Nguyen and V. H. Nguyen, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 043001 Search PubMed .
G. Plechinger, P. Nagler, J. Kraus, N. Paradiso, C. Strunk, C. Schüller and T. Korn, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
E. Courtade, M. Semina, M. Manca, M. M. Glazov, C. Robert, F. Cadiz, G. Wang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, M. Pierre, W. Escoffier, E. L. Ivchenko, P. Renucci, X. Marie, T. Amand and B. Urbaszek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 96, 085302 CrossRef .
A. Chernikov, A. M. van der Zande, H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, A. Velauthapillai, J. Hone and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 126802 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dery and Y. Song, Phys. Rev. B, 2015, 92, 125431 CrossRef .
H. Wang, H. Yuan, S. Sae Hong, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664–2680 RSC .
Z. Sun, A. Martinez and F. Wang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 227–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lee, J.-H. Shin, G.-H. Lee and C.-H. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 1–18 CAS .
M. Niu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5954–5960 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han and Y. H. Hu, Energy Sci. Eng., 2016, 4, 285–304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Shi, M.-H. Chiu and L.-J. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 293–305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
B. Peng, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. Kong, H.-W. Lee, H. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1894–1905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. A. Lu, M. Houssa, I. P. Radu and G. Pourtois, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7725–7734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Cook, M. Gong, Y. Gong, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12728–12733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Aretouli, D. Tsoutsou, P. Tsipas, J. Marquez-Velasco, S. Aminalragia Giamini, N. Kelaidis, V. Psycharis and A. Dimoulas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23222–23229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tsoutsou, K. E. Aretouli, P. Tsipas, J. Marquez-Velasco, E. Xenogiannopoulou, N. Kelaidis, S. Aminalragia Giamini and A. Dimoulas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1836–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. Zhong, Y. Wang, X. Xu, T. Wang, L. Wu and Y. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34243–34255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Gunning, T. Dankwort, M. Falmbigl, U. Ross, G. Mitchson, D. M. Hamann, A. Lotnyk, L. Kienle and D. C. Johnson, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8292–8298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, K. Makino, P. Fons, A. V. Kolobov and J. Tominaga, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23918–23925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Liu, G. Clark, T. Fryett, S. Wu, J. Zheng, F. Hatami, X. Xu and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 200–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fang, Q. Shang, L. Zhao, R. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Yang, X. Sui, X. Qiu, X. Liu, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1655–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lai, C.-L. Yan, L.-Q. Gao and W.-B. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7656–7663 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Zhang, C.-H. Lin, Y.-W. Tseng, K.-H. Huang and Y.-H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, G. Yang, H. Li, D. Du and Y. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 230–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, G. P. Neupane, K. P. Dhakal, J. Lee, S. J. Yun, G. H. Han and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka, Y. Du and T. Majima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20458–20466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barua, H. S. Dutta, S. Gogoi, R. Devi and R. Khan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3824–3849 RSC .
W. Li, Z. Lin and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18290–18298 RSC .
R. Frisenda, E. Navarro-Moratalla, P. Gant, D. Perez De Lara, P. Jarillo-Herrero, R. V. Gorbachev and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 53–68 RSC .
J. Liao, B. Sa, J. Zhou, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17594–17599 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kumar, N. Choudhary, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 482–495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu and M. Zäch, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600221 CrossRef .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
J.-S. Li, Y. Wang, C.-H. Liu, S.-L. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-H. Dai, Y.-F. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Q. Gong, X. Song, K. Feng, K. Nie, F. Zhao, Y. Wang, M. Zeng, J. Zhong and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11337–11343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Wang, K. Xia, W. Lei, X. Liu and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 616–622 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Huo, P. Wan and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15020–15023 RSC .
T. An, Y. Wang, J. Tang, W. Wei, X. Cui, A. M. Alenizi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13439–13443 RSC .
F. Wang, P. He, Y. Li, T. A. Shifa, Y. Deng, K. Liu, Q. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, L. Sun and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605802 CrossRef .
H. G. Ji, Y.-C. Lin, K. Nagashio, M. Maruyama, P. Solís-Fernández, A. Sukma Aji, V. Panchal, S. Okada, K. Suenaga and H. Ago, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lee, T. Schiros, E. J. G. Santos, B. Kim, K. G. Yager, S. J. Kang, S. Lee, J. Yu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, E. Kaxiras, C. Nuckolls and P. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2812–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, L. Wang, X. Ji and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30821–30831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, L. Dai, P. Yu, X. Tong, W. Song, G. Zhang and Z. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4324–4365 RSC .
X. D. Li, S. Yu, S. Q. Wu, Y. H. Wen, S. Zhou and Z. Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15347–15353 CrossRef CAS .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Gu, K. Ding, D. Fan, X. Hu, Y.-W. Tseng, Y.-H. Lee, V. Menon and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3176–3181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ceballos, M. Z. Bellus, H.-Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12717–12724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velez, D. Ciudad, J. Island, M. Buscema, O. Txoperena, S. Parui, G. A. Steele, F. Casanova, H. S. J. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and L. E. Hueso, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15442–15449 RSC .
T. R. Kafle, B. Kattel, S. D. Lane, T. Wang, H. Zhao and W.-L. Chan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10184–10192 CrossRef CAS .
E. Butanovs, A. Kuzmin, J. Butikova, S. Vlassov and B. Polyakov, J. Cryst. Growth, 2017, 459, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
E. Butanovs, S. Vlassov, A. Kuzmin, S. Piskunov, J. Butikova and B. Polyakov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13869–13876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Devan, V. P. Thakare, V. V. Antad, P. R. Chikate, R. T. Khare, M. A. More, R. S. Dhayal, S. I. Patil, Y.-R. Ma and L. Schmidt-Mende, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2925–2934 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Lin, H. Medina, T.-Y. Su, S.-H. Lee, C.-W. Chen, Y.-Z. Chen, A. Manikandan, Y.-C. Shih, J.-H. Yang, J.-H. Chen, B.-W. Wu, K.-W. Chu, F.-C. Chuang, J.-M. Shieh, C.-H. Shen and Y.-L. Chueh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9645–9652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kim, S. Roy, J. Lee, B. G. Kim, H. Kim, J.-H. Park, S. J. Yun, G. H. Han, J.-Y. Leem and J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28809–28815 CrossRef CAS .
B. Polyakov, A. Kuzmin, K. Smits, J. Zideluns, E. Butanovs, J. Butikova, S. Vlassov, S. Piskunov and Y. F. Zhukovskii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21451–21459 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tenne, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lan, C. Li, S. Wang, Y. Yin, H. Guo, N. Liu and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 67520–67524 RSC .
W. Zhou, Z. Yin, Y. Du, X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 9, 140–147 CrossRef .
R. K. Chava, J. Y. Do and M. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6445–6457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Yu, Y. Tan, H. Fu, Q. Zhang, W. Cong, C. Song, H. Yin and Z. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 13136–13144 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Liang, G. Zhang, J. Li, H. Liu and Z. Shen, Vacuum, 2016, 123, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ho, J. C. Yu, J. Lin, J. Yu and P. Li, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5865–5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Kumar, S. Hong, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18551–18558 RSC .
X.-L. Yin, G.-Y. He, B. Sun, W.-J. Jiang, D.-J. Xue, A.-D. Xia, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 319–329 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Yin, L.-L. Li, W.-J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15258–15266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Yang, H. Gao, R. Cao, J. Huang and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23635–23646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963–1968 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu and X. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 642–648 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, M. Li, T. Wang, S. Ouyang, P. Li, L. Liu and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402279 CrossRef .
J. He, L. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Chen, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X.-J. Wu, L. Yin, B. Li, X. Hong, Z. Fan, B. Chen, C. Xue and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 54, 1210–1214 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Niu, W. Gu, X. Cai, B. Mao, D. Li and W. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wu, C. Tian, Y. Jiao, Q. Yan, G. Yang and H. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 955–963 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, S. Liu, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and Z.-R. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 298–304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y.-X. Yu and W.-D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12949–12957 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, J. Shi, Y. Hu and L. Guo, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 164002 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meng, J. Li, S. K. Cushing, M. Zhi and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10286–10289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Yuan, Y. Yang, Z. Li, D. Chen, S. Wu, G. Fang, W. Bai, M. Ding, L.-X. Yang, D.-P. Cao, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1400–1407 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Yuan, Z.-J. Ye, H.-W. Lu, B. Hu, Y.-H. Li, D.-Q. Chen, J.-S. Zhong, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Goswami, R. Kappera, C. de C. C. e Silva, D. Kaplan, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 45–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang and D. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3743–3748 CrossRef CAS .
R. Peng, L. Liang, Z. D. Hood, A. Boulesbaa, A. Puretzky, A. V. Ievlev, J. Come, O. S. Ovchinnikova, H. Wang, C. Ma, M. Chi, B. G. Sumpter and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6723–6729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3621–3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Yuan, D. Chen, J. Zhong, L.-X. Yang, J.-J. Wang, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24452–24462 CrossRef CAS .
G. Swain, S. Sultana, B. Naik and K. Parida, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3745–3753 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, P.-Y. Guan, Q.-Y. Li, M. Zhang and S.-Q. Zang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26794–26800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, H. Wang, M. Yang, F. Zhang, H. Wu, X. Cheng, S. Yuan, B. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Wang and H. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9307–9315 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Yuan, G. Fang, D. Chen, Y. Huang, L.-X. Yang, D.-P. Cao, J. Wang, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5652–5659 RSC .
Y.-J. Yuan, D. Chen, J. Zhong, L.-X. Yang, J. Wang, M.-J. Liu, W.-G. Tu, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15771–15779 RSC .
X. Zong, J. Han, G. Ma, H. Yan, G. Wu and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12202–12208 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Akple, J. Low, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, J. Yu and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, P. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang, T. E. Mallouk and X. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2810–2818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Reddy, H. Park, R. Ma, D. P. Kumar, M. Lim and T. K. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1563–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ju, Y. Dai, W. Wei, M. Li and B. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, Y. Shao, B. Huang, X. Hao and Y. Wu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 12451–12458 RSC .
U. Gupta and D. S. Narang, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2017, 40, 329–333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Wang, C. Li and L. He, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 17088 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J.-C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kou, X. Guo, X. Xu and J. Yang, Catal. Commun., 2018, 106, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Tahir, G. Nabi, T. Iqbal, M. Sagir and M. Rafique, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 6686–6690 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. Ma, C. Wang, S. Li, J. Qiao, H. Zhang, G. Li, J. Wang and Y. Song, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 260, 375–385 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, B. Zheng, X. Wang, F. Qi, J. He, W. Zhang and Y. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Li, Z. Zheng, L. Li, L. Yu, C. Wang and G. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600510 CrossRef .
L. Song and S. Zhang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 61, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .

          N.-T. Nguyen, D.-D. Zheng, S.-S. Chen, C.-T. Chang, C.-M. Ma, N.-C. Nguyen, H.-T. Nguyen, S.-S. Hsiao and S.-Y. Kang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol.,  2018, 18, 3563–3570 Search PubMed .
Y. Sakata, Y. Miyoshi, T. Maeda, K. Ishikiriyama, Y. Yamazaki, H. Imamura, Y. Ham, T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota, A. Yamakata and K. Domen, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Sampaio, J. W. L. Oliveira, C. I. L. Sombrio, D. L. Baptista, S. R. Teixeira, S. A. C. Carabineiro, C. G. Silva and J. L. Faria, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3479–3483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beltram, I. Romero-Ocaña, J. Josè Delgado Jaen, T. Montini and P. Fornasiero, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lakshmana Reddy, S. Emin, M. Valant and M. V. Shankar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6627–6636 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. López-Tenllado, J. Hidalgo-Carrillo, V. Montes, A. Marinas, F. J. Urbano, J. M. Marinas, L. Ilieva, T. Tabakova and F. Reid, Catal. Today, 2017, 280, 58–64 CrossRef .
X. Wang, C. Zhou, W. Wang, B. Du, J. Cai, G. Feng and R. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 747, 826–833 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Montoya and E. G. Gillan, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 2947–2955 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Wu, B. Liu, X. Liu, C. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Huang and L. Pan, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, B. Han, X. Liu, W. Chen, M. Peng, G. Guan, H. Deng and Z. Lin, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 754, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, G. Cheng, J. Xiong, J. Zhu, Y. Gan, M. Zhang, Z. Li and S. Dou, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 32, 45–56 CrossRef .
S. Guan, X. Fu, Y. Zhang and Z. Peng, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 1574–1585 RSC .
R. Bera, A. Dutta, S. Kundu, V. Polshettiwar and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12158–12167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, H. Zhang, G. Cui, Y. Dong, G. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Wu and N. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 284–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, Y. Shao, S. Ding, J. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Qu, X. Zhong, X. Chen, W. F. Ip, N. Wang, B. Xu, X. Shi, X. Wang and H. Pan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, W. Li and G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Li, J.-H. Wang, Z.-J. Luo, K. Chen, Z.-Q. Cheng, L. Ma, S.-J. Ding, L. Zhou and Q.-Q. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7178 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shen, Z. Yan, L. Yang, P. Du, J. Zhang and B. Xiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15447–15449 RSC .
H. J. Lee, B. J. Lee, D. Kang, Y. J. Jang, J. S. Lee and H. S. Shin, FlatChem, 2017, 4, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carraro, L. Calvillo, M. Cattelan, M. Favaro, M. Righetto, S. Nappini, I. Píš, V. Celorrio, D. J. Fermín, A. Martucci, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25685–25692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, J. Lee, J. Lee and J. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7748–7755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Xing, H. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Wu, X. Yu and W. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1118–1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cunningham, K. M. McCreary, A. T. Hanbicki, M. Currie, B. T. Jonker and L. M. Hayden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5819–5826 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, C. Zhang, Y. Xiong, Q. Mi, D. Li, L. Zou, Q. Huang, Z. Zou and H. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6378–6387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, Y. Liu, S. Lin, W. Qarony, L. Tao, Y. Chai, X. Zhang, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zirak, M. Zhao, O. Moradlou, M. Samadi, N. Sarikhani, Q. Wang, H.-L. Zhang and A. Z. Moshfegh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, J. Mao, R. Fan, Z. Yin, X. Wu, J. Jie, Z. Kang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 013902 CrossRef .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6091–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, K. Choi, B. Lee, Y. Kim and B. H. Hong, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 63–84 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Um, Y. Lee, S. Lim, S. Park, H. Lee and H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33955–33962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, D. Huang, Y. Fu, M. Wen, X. Jiang, X. Lv, M. Li, L. Gao, S. Liu, M. Wang, C. Zhao and Y. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4689–4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li, X. Zou, X. Lian, D. Wang, L. Sun, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Petoukhoff, M. B. M. Krishna, D. Voiry, I. Bozkurt, S. Deckoff-Jones, M. Chhowalla, D. M. O'Carroll and K. M. Dani, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9899–9908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, G. Han and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5943–5955 RSC .
Y.-H. Tan, K. Yu, J.-Z. Li, H. Fu and Z.-Q. Zhu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 064305 CrossRef .
A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 128, 85–101 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Latest update in the H2 production rate studied by different authors (reference details are given inside the text).	 

 	Fig. 2  Methods of H2 production via PC-based, PEC-based and PV–PEC based water splitting system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic energy diagrams and illustration of PC based water splitting for HER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Various PEC water splitting mechanisms: (Type I) single light absorber; (Type II) heterojunction photoelectrode; (Type III) wired PEC tandem cell; (Type IV) wireless PEC tandem cell; (type V) PV–PEC tandem cell; (type VI) PV–electrolyser cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2017 from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Conduction and valence band for a range of semiconductors on a potential scale (V) versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  The family of 3d, 4d and 5d group (2D single-layer H and/or T) transition metal compounds with MX2 structure. The resulting structures (T or H) can be semi-metal (+), metal (*), or semiconductor (**) in nature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structures of the 1T and 2H structures of the MX2 family (X = yellow sphere). The metal is in octahedral coordination in the 1T structure, and trigonal prismatic coordination in the two layers per unit cell 2H crystal structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) 2D layers of MoS2 and WSe2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Theoretically calculated energy band structures of bilayer MoS2, WS2, and WSe2. The radiative recombination pathways (K → K, K → Γ, and Λ → Γ) are shown via dashed arrows for photoexcited electron–hole pairs. The conduction band minimum and valence band maximum of band formation are shown in orange. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis protocol of lateral heterostructures of atomic layer TMDCs with 1D interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation showing the synthesis of rGO/MoS2 composite paper. (b) Digital image showing large-area composite paper. (c–e) SEM and TEM images of the prepared composite structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration and energy level diagram of the MoS2–ZnPc interface. Electronic processes including (i) optical excitation; (ii) charge transfer (CT); and (iii) back electron transfer (BET) are indicated in the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematics of ZnO/WS2 core/shell nanowire-based photodetector with f photoresponse measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) UV/vis absorption spectra of MoS2 NCs of different size. (b) Variation of absorption peak energy as a function of average nanocrystal size. The energy zero is taken as the Fermi level. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  HSE06 calculated band structures of MX2/TiO2(110) (M = Mo and W; X = S and Se) composites along high symmetry lines of the Brillouin zone. The red, blue, and green dots represent the energy bands of TiO2, MX2, and MX2–TiO2 hybrids, respectively. The band gaps of MX2 sheets in MX2/TiO2(110) heterojunctions are illustrated with a black line with an arrow, and the values are also displayed in black numbers. The energy zero is taken as the Fermi level. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a–f) Schematic of the sample structure and the band alignment describing the transfer of electrons from 1L-MoS2 to ZnO TF under 514 nm wavelength laser excitation with PL and Raman spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of as-grown TiO2 nanorod arrays and CdS@TiO2 heterostructures with different CdS loadings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry, (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of ZnO NR arrays, ZnO/CdS core/sheath NR arrays and ZnO/CdS/CZTS heterostructure NR arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the charge separation and enhanced HER of CdS-Au/MoS2 CSHNSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration for vdW heterostructures as the photocatalysis for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Formation of a p–n junction when MoS2 contacts with CdS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) The rate of H2 evolution on CdS loaded with different cocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic presentation of proposed PC H2 production mechanism for BM/CdS and UM/CdS nanocomposites (b) PL spectra of CdS and its composites (c) Photoelectrochemical measurements of CdS and its composite materials (d) comparison of H2 production rate of synthesized photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a–d) Comparison of H2 evolution rates and photoluminescence spectra of MoS2/CdS nanosheets-on-nanorods and a physical mixture (MoS2, CdS) with schematic illustration of charge transfer in MoS2/CdS nanosheets-on-nanorods and HER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) H2 evolution reaction over CdS-Au/MoS2 core/shell heteronanostructures (b) optical absorption spectra and (c) photoluminescence spectra of CdS NRs and CdS-Au/MoS2 CSHNSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Illustration for the preparation of 1–2 layered 2H-WS2 and its application as a co-catalyst for PC hydrogen evolution. (b) Energy level of CdS and exfoliated 2H-WS2. (c) Transient photocurrent response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram for PC H2 evolution by CdS/WS2 under visible light irradiation (b) photoluminescence spectra of 2D CdS and CdS/WS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

CdS/WS2–MoS2 ((6 wt%) of WS2–MoS2) lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	150 W xenon-arc lamp	209.79	Hydrothermal method; nanocomposite	
212

MoS2/CdS (6.0 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Solar light	174	Hydrothermal method; MoS2 nanosheets-decorated CdS nanorods	
180

MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	60.28	Solvothermal method; nanorod morphology	
181

MoS2/CdS (10 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	49.8	Solvothermal method; MoS2 nanosheets grown on single-crystalline CdS nanorod.	
182

MoS2/CdS 5 wt% CdS@MoS2-5% (5 wt% CdS@MoS2-5%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	17.2	Hydrothermal method; sheet-like subunits that form relatively loose flowers	
183

MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	5.4	Chemical synthesis; nanoparticles	
184

MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	5.33	Chemical synthesis; crystalline	
185

MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	4.06	Hydrothermal process; cauliflower-like morphology	
186

SL-MoS2/CdS (2.0 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	2.59	Chemical synthesis; SL-MoS2/CdS composite	
187

MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	1.914	Solvothermal/exfoliation method to prepare CdS nanowires decorated with ultrathin-layer MoS2 nanosheets	
188

MoS2/CdS (0.01 wt% MoS2/CdS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	1.47	Wet-chemical method; single-layer MS2 nanosheets selectively grew on the Cd-rich (0001) surface of wurtzite CdS nanocrystals.	
189

MoS2/CdS (33 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	1.36	Solvothermal method; CdS/MoS2 heterostructures with a unique microbox morphology	
190

MoS2/CdS (0.2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.775	Sequential two-step hydrothermal growth; core–shell structured MoS2/CdS	
191

MoS2/CdS (2 wt% MoS2) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.49	Hydrothermal; 1D CdS@MoS2 core–shell nanowires	
192

CdS/WS2 (WS2 10 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	14.1	Sonochemical; nanosheets	
139

ZnS/WS2 (WS2 NSs 0.5 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.124	Sonochemical and solvothermal; nanosheet	
214

MoSe2/TiO2-0.3 with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.468	Solvothermal; nanosheet	
218

ZnO/CdSe (1:0.2) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	4.79	Light-assisted growth method; CdSe NPs and ZnO sheets	
232

Ni(1%):TiO2, 0.08 mol% Ni with as the sacrificial agent	450 W Hg lamp	3.39	Photochemical synthesis; aggregated small particles near 50 nm	
233

NiCoP/CdS (8 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	5 W pure white light-emitting diode (LED)	28.4	Hydrothermal method; nanoparticles	
224

CdS/NiS/RGO (1 wt% RGO and 5 mol% NiS) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light	14.96	Hydrothermal method; CdS/NiS nanoparticles are dispersed on the surface of RGO nanosheets	
234

CdS-Aux-ZnO (CdS-2 wt% Au-ZnO) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.102	Chemical method; microstructure of Aux and ZnO seeds-modified CdS hybrids	
235

TiO2-NiSx (NiSx-3 wt%) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.982	Hydrothermal method; microrod-like structure	
236

NiS/CdS (Ni/Cd feed molar ratio of 0.8) with lactic acid solution as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	0.937	Chemical method; β-NiS modified CdS nanowires	
237

WO3/g-C3N4composites with triethanol-amine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (500 W)	0.4	Chemical method; micro/nano-structures	
194

CdS/CdSe (27.5 wt% CdSe) with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	5.125	Chemical method; nanorods	
238

NiS/g-C3N4 (NiS-20/g-C3N4) with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)/sunlight	16.4/28.3	Photochemical deposition method; nanosheets	
239

VS2/g-C3N4(0.1 wt% VS2) with triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent	The AM 1.5 solar simulator (100 mW cm−2)	0.0874	Hydrothermal method; porous structure	
240

CuWO4 with Na2S and Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent	Visible light, Xe lamp (300 W)	2.79	Laser ablation in liquid (LAL); nanoparticles	
241


 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of energy band structure and electron–hole separation of (MoS2–TiO2)/Au nanocomposites in (a) PEC cell and (b) PC hydrogen generation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2017 Scientific Reports.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the two types of RGO/TMD based hybrid films. (b) Charge transfer processes and the (c) measurement system inside a PEC cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Operation of Ag-embedded MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction ternary composite electrode: (a) before and (c) after contact with each other and (b) formation of the MoS2/BiVO4 p–n heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

(MoS2–TiO2)/Au	0.19	52	0.026	
242

MoS2 nanosheet/TiO2 nanowire	16.7	—	0.07	
243

TiO2/MoS2/graphene composite	0.165	—	—	
244

Multi-component (1T MoS2/(2H MoS2 + 2H WS2 + rGO)/ITO) films	—	67	0.094	
245

N-Doped graphene/MoS2 nanohybrids	—	7	—	
246

MoS2/C/ZnTe/ZnO	—	11	—	
247

MoS2/CdS films	0.523	30	28	
193

1T-MoS2/Si heterostructures	—	—	17.6	
248

3D mesoporous black TiO2 (MBT)/MoS2/MBT	0.56	—	—	
249

BiVO4–Ag−MoS2	—	51	2.72	
250

Au-WS2/p-Si	—	—	0.37	
252

CdS/WS2/ITO	—	—	0.35	
253

MoSe2 with n + p-Si photocathodes	—	—	29.3	
254

2D WSe2 thin film	—	—	1	
27


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
