3D nanostructured conductive polymer hydrogels for high-performance electrochemical devices  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE40997J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40997J
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856-2870Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms3D nanostructured conductive polymer hydrogels for high-performance electrochemical devices
Yu Zhao†
a, 
Borui Liu†
a, 
Lijia Pan

*b and 
Guihua Yu

*a
aMaterials Science and Engineering Program and Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: ghyu@austin.utexas.edu
bSchool of Electronic Science and Engineering, National Laboratory of Microstructures (Nanjing), Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. E-mail: ljpan@nju.edu.cn
Received 
24th March 2013
, Accepted 14th May 2013First published on 12th August 2013AbstractConducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs) represent a unique class of materials that synergize the advantageous features of hydrogels and organic conductors and have been used in many applications such as bioelectronics and energy storage devices. This perspective provides a brief overview of current research activities in the field of three-dimensional (3D) nanostructured CPHs for high-performance electrochemical devices. The synthesis methods of conventional conductive polymers (CPs) and hydrogels are outlined with emphasis on newly developed methods for the preparation of 3D nanostructured CPs and CPHs. Following this discussion is an outline of the applications of 3D CPH nanostructures with particular focus on those applications in which nanostructured CPHs are clearly advantageous over their conventional counterparts. Other potential applications of nanostructured CPHs are also discussed in this perspective along with the main challenges and future research directions for this new class of conductive hydrogels.Yu ZhaoYu Zhao received his B.S. degree in 2003 and Ph.D. degree in 2008 from the University of Science and Technology of China. His Ph.D. research project focused on the design, synthesis and applications of functional nanomaterials. After his postdoctoral research in Hong Kong and Japan, he joined Prof. Guihua Yu's group in 2013 in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Texas at Austin. His research interest focuses on post Li-ion batteries and energy storage/conversion devices at the micro/nano scale.Borui LiuBorui Liu is a Materials Science and Engineering graduate student at the University of Texas at Austin. He did his undergraduate study of minerals and metallurgical engineering at Central South University, and in fall 2012 he began graduate studies in the Department of Mechanical Engineering with Prof. Guihua Yu at the University of Texas at Austin, focusing on nanomaterials for novel energy storage systems, such as next-generation Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors.Lijia PanLijia Pan is an Associate Professor at the School of Electronic Engineering, Nanjing University. He received his B.S. degree in polymer science from South China University of Technology, obtained his Ph.D. in polymer physics from University of Science and Technology of China in 2003, did three years postdoctoral research in the Physics Department of Nanjing University, and was a visiting scholar at Stanford University. He received the award of New Century Excellent Talents in University from Chinese Ministry of Education in 2009. His current research focuses on developing smart materials and devices from polymer micro/nanostructures.Guihua YuGuihua Yu is an Assistant Professor at The University of Texas at Austin. He received his B.S. degree with highest honor in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China, earned his Ph.D. in chemistry at Harvard University in 2009, and did three years postdoctoral research in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University. His research is focused on rational design, synthesis, and fundamental investigation of nanostructured material systems for advanced energy storage and conversion technologies.

Broader context
Conducting polymer hydrogels represent a unique class of materials that synergize the advantageous features of hydrogels and organic conductors. They show both electrical and optical properties similar to those of metals and inorganic semiconductors, in addition to other attractive properties associated with conventional polymers, such as ease of synthesis and flexibility in processing. Nowadays, functionalized conducting polymer nanomaterials have received increasing attention in nanoscience and nanotechnology because of their large surface area, excellent interface between the electronic transporting phase and the ionic transporting phase, between biological and synthetic systems, as well as between soft and hard materials. The conducting-polymer-hydrogel nanostructures, especially with three-dimensional geometries and hierarchical ordering, could facilitate the design of next-generation electronic/biochemical systems that require morphological or structural control. These systems are envisioned to be highly useful for a broad range of applications such as supercapacitors, lithium batteries, biofuel cells, bioelectronics, biosensors and medical electrodes.

1 Introduction
Tremendous effort has been directed toward research into nanostructured electronic materials owing to the fact that such materials present new and superb properties at the nanoscale.1–3 Particularly, three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures have become a rapidly growing field of research, which received considerable attention in the fields of electronics, photonics, phononics and biomedical devices.4–6 Possessing a high level of hydration with 3D micro/nano structures, hydrogels are polymeric networks of crosslinked polymer chains, bearing similarities to natural tissues.7 Hydrogel is consistent with Flory's definition of a gel that gel is a two-component, colloidal dispersion with a continuous structure with macroscopic dimensions.8 The continuous structure is permanent on the time scale of the experiment and is solid-like in its rheological behaviour. Owing to the intrinsic 3D network micro/nano structures of hydrogels, conducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs) are emerging as a unique material platform for electrochemical devices.9–11
Conducting polymers (CPs) are a class of functional polymers that have a delocalized π-system backbone along the polymeric chains. The highly conjugated polymer chain can be assigned reversible chemical, electrochemical and physical properties controlled by a doping/de-doping process. As a subclass of CPs, CPHs represent a unique class of polymeric materials that synergize the advantageous features of hydrogels and organic conductors.12–16 Particularly, nanostructured CPHs possess the characteristics of nanomaterials (e.g. large surface area, size, and especially the 3D continuous conducting framework), which further increase the merit of CPs in designing and making novel devices.17–19
CPHs have shown great potential in electrochemical devices, because they provide significantly improved electrode interfaces, between the electronic transporting phase and the ionic transporting phase, between biological and synthetic systems, as well as between soft and hard materials.20,21 In addition, CPHs also provide excellent processability. CPHs can be easily cast into thin films and any desired shapes at its gelation. CPHs can also be ink-jet printed or screen printed into micropatterns.10,22 The representative applications of CPHs are illustrated in Fig. 1. One important application of CPHs is patternable bioelectrodes. The facile micropatterning of CPHs enables easy assembly of biodevices, and provides biocompatible, highly flexible electrodes. CPHs can be micropatterned via ink-jet printing or spray coating, showing excellent processability and scalability, and offering great promise for biomedical devices, such as implanted electronics and in vitro devices for culturing cells. Another important application has been found in the biosensors which integrate biological sensing elements like enzymes, antibodies, nucleic acids, cells, etc. with an electronic transducer equipped with an electronic amplifier.23,24 Biosensors represent a technologically important approach to real-time, on-site, simultaneous detection of biomolecules or chemicals. They provide speedy interactive information about the desired sample and are found to have applications from clinical diagnostics to environmental monitoring, and from bioprocess monitoring to agricultural product processing, etc. The other promising application of porous CPH-based electrodes is energy storage devices, including supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, and biofuel cells.25 Basically, all electrochemical systems involve ionic and electronic transport processes at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte solution. A larger interfacial area can lead to more efficient electrochemical processes. The nanostructured CPHs should maximize every volume element of the electrode material at the molecular level to be in contact with the electrolyte solution, resulting in an extremely high effective surface area. Furthermore, the relatively short diffusion path favours molecular and ionic transport and the continuous conductive path within the CPH network facilitates fast charge transport, which is critically important in building high power density electrochemical capacitors.
 Fig. 1  Representative applications of the hydrogels. (A) Bioelectrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) Biosensors. Adapted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (C) Energy storage devices. (D) Drug delivery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright © 2006 Wiley-VCH. (E) Neural electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright © 2004 Wiley-VCH. (F) Tissue engineering. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. (G) Separation membranes. (H) Conductive adhesives. 
Besides, the change in the oxidation state of the material provokes physical and chemical changes in the CP network as well as the changes in the total charge and the volume. The change of volume or release of substances upon the application of an external signal allows the use of CPHs as an electrochemically controlled device for the liberation of various molecules.26,29–32 Neural prosthetic electrodes coated with a hybrid conducting polymer-bioactive hydrogel, which provides a mechanical buffer between the hard electrode and the soft tissue, extends the electrodes' surface closer to the viable neurons while the hydrogel scaffold limits protein adsorption to the electrode and creates a permissive environment for cell immobilization, thus allowing more efficient communication by increasing the effective interfacial surface area.27 CPHs have exciting potential as scaffolds for tissue engineering, typically applied in regenerative medicine applications.28 In particular, the electrical properties of CPs have been shown to enhance nerve and muscle cell growth and regeneration,33–36 making the hydrogels particularly suitable candidates as scaffolds for tissue engineering because of their hydrated nature, biocompatibility, and tissue-like mechanical properties. Owing to spatial constraints, swelling/shrinking of the hydrogel results in closing/opening of the pores. Such responsive systems can be used in the configuration of separation membranes.37
In this perspective, the background on hydrogels and inherently conductive polymers as well as the material rationale for the co-joining of hydrogels with electroactive polymers is addressed. The synthesis approaches and the electrochemical application of CPHs are discussed in detail. This perspective then addresses the key applications of these materials, particularly for electrochemical devices such as micropatterned electrodes, biosensors and energy storage devices.
2 Synthetic hydrogels
2.1 Conventional methods for nanostructured CPs
Conventional methods to synthesize nanostructured CPs have been extensively carried out by template-directed growth with the emphasis on the utilization of a hard or soft template as the growth director of the CPs. Fig. 2 summarizes some general methods to produce nanostructured CPs.
 Fig. 2  Conventional methods for the synthesis of nanostructured CPs. 
For template-directed growth, hard templates, such as anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) membranes,38–41 polycarbonate (PC) membranes,42,43 block copolymers,44 porous silicate,45 mesoporous zeolites,46 carbon nanotubes,47 pre-existing nanostructured materials,48–50 and electro-spun polymer fibres,51 are usually used as the growth director of the CPs. These membranes contain cylindrical or spherical pores across the membrane with a wide range of pore diameters down to 10 nm and with pore densities approaching 109 pores per cm2.52 To date, the most widely used template to prepare CP nanostructures is the AAO or PC/PT (particle track-etched) membrane, from which various kinds of 1D polypyrrole (PPy),38,40 poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),39,41 poly(3-methylthiophene) (PMT),42 and polythiophene (PTH)43 nanostructures have been achieved. Ultrahigh density arrays of PPy nanorods can be fabricated by electropolymerization within a porous diblock copolymer template.44 Pre-existing nanostructured materials are another commonly used template or seed to orchestrate the growth of conducting polymer nanofibers/wires/tubes. For example, V2O5 nanofibers have been used to generate nanofibers/nanotubes of Polyaniline (PAni), PPy, and PTH and their derivatives by introducing small amounts of V2O5 nanofibers into the polymerization of the monomers that make up the CPs.48–50 MnO2 nanowires have also been used as a template to produce PAni nanotubes.53 Nanofibres formed by electrospinning are the other popular template for the synthesis of 1D nanostructured CPs. Electro-spun degradable poly(L-lactide) nanofibers have been used as the templates for the production of polymer, metal, and hybrid nano- and mesotubes.54,55 PPy-coated nanofibers have also been prepared by electrospinning via an in situ polymerization onto polyacrylonitrile and polystyrene nanofibers.56
The advantages of the hard-template method rely on its universality and controllable dimensions. A hard-template is a general tool to fabricate nanostructured CPs. The only prerequisite in this method is to load the pores with the precursor materials. The corresponding methods have been developed including negative pressure, liquid phase injection, vapour phase deposition, or simply submerging the template into a solution of the monomer. The dimensions of the nanostructures are well controlled by the dimensions of the pores or channels of the template. For these reasons, the hard-template method is the most commonly used and the most efficient approach for preparing well-controlled and highly oriented CPs nanostructures. On the other hand, disadvantages of the hard-template method mainly arise from the scalability and harsh post-synthetic conditions. The quantity of the nanostructures produced by this method is limited by the size of the template, which therefore limits its applications in large-scale nanostructure production. Also, post-processing is necessary to remove the template, and the post-processing often destroys/disorders the formed nanostructures to some extent.
Another general approach for the generation of nanostructured CPs is to use soft meso-structured templates such as surfactant micelles, colloidal particles, and structure-directing molecules, etc. The most well-known soft template is surfactant micelles. Theoretical and experimental investigations have shown that the equilibrium size and shape of surfactant aggregates are controlled by the volume and length of the surfactant tail within the hydrophobic core of the aggregate and the effective area occupied by each surfactant's head group at the surface of the aggregate. The typical aggregate morphology of the self-assembled surfactant molecules in a solution is spherical, cylindrical, or a flat bi-layer structure, depending on the parameters such as the concentration and the structure of the surfactant molecules. The self-assembly of surfactant molecules in a bulk solution offers the possibility to serve as soft-templates for nanostructured CPs. For instance, nanostructured CPs with controlled morphologies have been synthesized on flat surfaces by using surfactant micelles as the soft-template, on which many structures such as wire-, ribbon-, and sphere-like CPs have been achieved. Another type of soft template used to prepare nanostructured CPs can be found in colloidal particles, either made from non-conductive or conductive polymers. In the former case, the self-assembled non-conductive colloidal particles produce a porous membrane, in which 3D CP porous structures can be formed via the polymerization of the CP monomers. For example, macro-porous CPs, such as PPy, PAni, and PHT, can be formed with colloidal particle arrays as soft-templates.47,51,57 In the latter case, CP dispersions composed of colloidal particles can be directly self-assembled into typical nanostructures consisting of an inner core of CPs and an outer layer of adsorbed stabilizer. Moreover, PAni colloids have been prepared by the enzymatic polymerization of aniline in the dispersed media,58 and by enzymatic polymerization using chitosan and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) as steric stabilizers.59 Other structure-directing molecules such as DNA have also been explored as a template to synthesize nanostructured CPs. For example, PAni nanowires have been synthesized on thermally oxidized Si surfaces using DNA as a template;60 PPy nanowires have been directly assembled on DNA by chemical polymerization;61 and chiral nanostructured PPy and PEDOT have also been reported on the DNA template via electrochemical polymerization.62
The above mentioned strategies towards nanostructured CPs have been extensively studied. The electronic properties of CPs generally improve with increasing surface area.20 Moreover, many electrochemical applications such as electrochemical energy storage devices and electrochemical biosensors often demand high surface area CPs. A big challenge facing these strategies is the integration of the nanostructured CPs into a 3D arrangement, which would benefit not only the facilitated electron and mass transport pathways but also have a higher effective surface area. Depending on the hydration of the CPs, the local viscosity is often lowered and attractive Coulombic interactions are reduced, thereby increasing segmental mobility and electron diffusion in addition to the increase of the permeability of water-soluble ions and molecules. Therefore, 3D nanostructured conductive polymer hydrogels (CPHs) offer the possibility to synergize the advantageous features of hydrogels and CPs.
2.2 Conventional methods of CPH synthesis
Typically, CPHs are synthesized by polymerizing conductive polymer monomers onto existing nanostructured non-conducting hydrogels which basically serve as templates. Alternatively, CPs can be copolymerized with nonconducting polymers to form a composite hydrogel. CPs polymerized within the confined area of a nanostructured hydrogel can provide control over the resulting structure and morphology of CPHs. Note that these methods result in a composite hydrogel of CPs and nonconducting polymers. The electronic properties, as well as other physicochemical properties, are strongly dependent on the structure of the polymer backbone and the concentration of the dopant ion in addition to the concentration and structure of the CP within the hydrogel matrix. Several conventional routes have been proposed for fabricating CPHs that incorporate both CPs and hydrogels. The CPHs fabricated via those routes are a combination of two separate phases created by each component. The categories of CPHs can be defined by their fabrication route which is summarized in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Conventional methods for the synthesis of CPHs. 
The first route (route 1 in Fig. 3) is the most common method for the preparation of CPHs. Typically, an absorbent hydrogel is first prepared and dried on a substrate, and then re-swoln in a CP monomer solution. The CP is polymerized via application of electrical charges or by exposure to a chemical oxidant. CP–pHEMA [Poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)],63,64 CP–alginate,65 PEDOT–PAA (polyacrylic acid),66 PEDOT–PAMPS [poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid)]67 and CP–PAAM (polyacrylamide)31 have successfully been synthesized with comparable electrical properties and improved mechanical properties as well as biological compatibility compared with the CP alone. However, the surface area of CPHs fabricated via this method is usually low. Another route to fabricate CPHs is to use a micro or nanostructured template (route 2 in Fig. 3), which can significantly increase the surface area of the CP. The hydrogel is firstly filled into a micro/nano structured template followed by the removal of the template. Then CP monomers polymerize within the confined area of the hydrogel to form CPHs. This method can provide control over the structure and morphology. PEDOT and PPy nanofibrils with a diameter of 100–600 nm have been electrodeposited onto a gold neural probe coated with electrospun polymer nanofibres as a template.26,31,65,68 However, the scalability remains a big challenge due to the limited template size. The other synthetic route is the fabrication of CP–hydrogels from mixed precursors (route 3 in Fig. 3). In this method, the reactive monomers, which may be a combination of both hydrogel precursors and CP precursors, are placed in the same vessel where CPHs can be formed either simultaneously or in a two-step process, either via chemical oxidative polymerization or electrochemical polymerization. Chemical oxidative polymerization does not require a substrate and can proceed when the hydrogel is immersed within a suitable solution containing the initializing oxidant. Electrochemical polymerization requires that the hydrogels be applied to a metallic or semiconducting electrode to which a suitable potential may be impressed relative to a reference electrode with the ensuing current supported by a counter electrode. In both cases the bath solution may also contain additional free monomer that is equilibrated with the electroactive monomer trapped within the hydrogel. Following this route, PPy-based CPHs can be prepared from the mixture of a hydrogel precursor of 2-hydroxyethylmethacryate (HEMA) monomer and pyrrole precursors. The HEMA monomer can be UV polymerized at low temperature and can be readily copolymerized with other acrylate, methacrylate and acrylamide monomers. For example, the co-polymerization of poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (PEGMA) and N-[tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl]-acrylamide (HMMA) yields hydrogels of varying physical and chemical properties.69
As an emergent class, CPHs seek to creatively combine the inherent properties of constituent materials to give rise to technologically relevant properties for devices and systems. They share in common the potential for molecular engineering through copolymerization, crosslinking and/or grafting to control the structures and properties. They also share the fact that their syntheses are difficult to control and that the methods and conditions of synthesis can greatly influence the final material properties such as trace impurities, conformation, nano-structure and gross morphology.25 Further development of the synthetic methods is scientifically and technologically important to synthesize CPHs that exhibit facile processability, tuneable electronic properties, and high electrochemical activity.
2.3 Newly developed methods for CPH synthesis
For hydrogels prepared via conventional methods, a nonconducting hydrogel matrix often results in the deterioration of the electrical properties, and excessive metal ions may reduce the biocompatibility of hydrogels. Moreover, there have not yet been any reports in regard to CPHs that can be facilely micropatterned, which is important for fabricating large-scale arrays of hydrogel-based electronic devices.
We recently reported a facile and efficient method to directly form a PAni network using phytic acid as the gelator and dopant.10 The gelation mechanism of the PAni hydrogel is illustrated in Fig. 4A. The formation of a mesh-like hydrogel network is due to the crosslinking effect that each phytic acid molecule can interact with more than one PAni chain. The gelation of the PAni hydrogel is of high efficiency, typically within several minutes (Fig. 4B). Actually, the PAni hydrogel can be formed in a broad range of molar ratios of aniline monomer to phytic acid, and with other oxidative initiators such as ammonium cerous sulphate and hydrogen peroxide with a trace iron trichloride catalyst, demonstrating the wide tolerance and universality of this method. Furthermore, a biphasic reaction can also be applied to prepare a PAni hydrogel with similar structure. The ionic conductivity of the wet PAni hydrogel, of which the ionic conductivity shows metallic behaviour between 20 and 80 K and semiconductor behaviour between 80 and 300 K, reaches as high as 0.11 S cm−1 at 298 K, the highest reported value for conducting polymer hydrogels of which the conductivity are typically in the range of 0.1–10 mS cm−1.70,71
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustrations of the 3D hierarchical microstructure of the gelated PAni hydrogel where phytic acid plays the role of dopant and crosslinker. (B) A photograph of the PAni hydrogel inside a glass vial. (C) SEM image of a piece of dehydrated hydrogel. (D) A higher magnification SEM image showing the interconnected network of dendritic PAni nanofibers. (E) A TEM image showing the continuous nanostructured network of the dehydrated PAni hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
The surface morphology of the dehydrated PAni hydrogel is foam-like nanostructures which are constructed with coral-like dendritic nanofibers with uniform diameters of 60–100 nm (Fig. 4C and D). The foam-like nanostructures are highly porous with hierarchical porosity on multiple length scales, from nanometer to micron size pores as shown in Fig. 4D and E. Such 3D interconnected porous structures can be more effective than wires and particles for electrochemical device applications due to the large open channels on the micron-scale and nanometer-scale pores within the structures. The nanoscale interconnected conducting matrix and porosity offer greater effective surface areas than bulk materials and facilitate the transport of electrons and ions.72,73 Due to the rigidity of the PAni main chains and interconnected porous structure, the framework is stable and is maintained after a change in its water content or a dedoping process against ammonia solution.
The key in the synthesis of the above-mentioned PAni hydrogel is the phytic acid, which function as both the dopant and crosslinker in the gelation, microstructure formation, and surface property modification of the PAni hydrogel. Phytic acid crosslinked the PAni by protonating the nitrogens on the imine groups on the PAni chains. Superior to other dopants, each phytic acid molecule can interact with more than one PAni chain, thus forming a highly crosslinked structure. The phytic acid renders the PAni hydrogel hydrophilic because there is an excess of phosphorous groups, resulting in a high level of hydration. The contact angle of the phytic acid doped PAni is ∼24° while the contact angles for sulphuric acid doped PAni and phosphoric acid doped PAni are observed to be 69° and 54°, respectively. The molecular structure of phytic acid crosslinked PAni favours the formation of dendritic nanofibers and the interconnected microstructures of the PAni hydrogel because each phytic acid molecule is able to interact with several PAni chains to result in branched microstructures.
The key features of this method include: (i) the framework of the as-prepared CPHs is free of insulating polymers, which are generally used as the matrices in the previously reported CPHs. The insulating-polymer-backbone-free CPHs offer unique electrical and electrochemical properties; (ii) a highly porous 3D nanostructure can be readily achieved on a large-scale and with long-term structural stability. Such 3D interconnected porous structures are advantageous over low-dimensional wires and particles for sensing and electrochemical device applications due to large open channels on the micron-scale and meso-scale pores within the structures; (iii) no external ingredients, such as surfactants or templates, are required, which results in a much simpler synthetic procedure. The process of the spontaneous formation of conducting polymer nanostructures without any external templates is a fascinatingly simple one synthetically; and (iv) the as-prepared PAni hydrogel possesses excellent processability for ink-jet printing or spray coating. From the perspective of device integration, various desired micropatterns to make functional electrodes and construct electrochemical devices such as biosensor arrays and supercapacitor arrays are of significant importance. While significant challenges still remain in understanding and extending this approach, developing such a technique is highly desirable due to the fact that this process may have important consequences for the entire class of precipitation polymerizations.
3 Applications in electrochemical devices
The electrochemical processes at the interface between an electrode and an electrolyte solution require a large area at the interface to improve the capability during these processes. This is a direct motivating factor for the fabrication of high surface-area electrodes with structural elements down to the nanometer scale. 3D nanostructured CPHs are generally permeable to small molecules, allowing every volume element of the electrode material at the molecular level to be in contact with the electrolyte solution, resulting in a greatly enlarged effective surface area.9 3D nanostructured CPHs are competitive to be used as electrode materials for this purpose due to the excellent interface between the electronic transporting phase (electrode) and the ionic transporting phase (electrolyte), between biological and synthetic systems, as well as between soft and hard materials.20 As a result, CPHs have demonstrated great potential for a broad range of applications from energy storage and conversion devices such as supercapacitors and biofuel cells, to bioelectronics and medical electrodes.
3.1 CPH micropatterns for electrochemical device fabrication
The synthetic chemistry of CPHs is expected to be further developed to offer scalability in its processing. From the perspective of the fabrication process, highly scalable approaches, e.g. facile solution-based process and printing techniques to make functional electrodes and construct electrochemical devices such as biosensor arrays and supercapacitors are important. Particularly, CPH micropatterns can be formed by ink-jet printing or spray coating through stencil masks, which is important for device fabrication, because ink-jet printing has the advantages of high precision, fine patterns, and suitability for large area patterning. However, when printing polymers, ink-jet printing is often hampered by the limited solubility and high viscosity of polymer solutions. A strategy to overcome this problem is to sequentially deposit two distinct solutions composed of the conductive monomer/dopant/crosslinker and oxidative initiator onto the substrate.
An example of the fabrication of CPH micropatterns can be found in the phytic acid crosslinked PAni hydrogels. A solution containing the oxidative initiator was first printed on to the substrate followed by printing the solution containing the phytic acid and the aniline monomer. A patterned PAni hydrogel was formed where the two kinds of solutions are able to interact. Fig. 5A shows a high-resolution micropattern on glossy photo paper using an ink-jet printer. The viscosity of the precursor solutions is suitable for ink-jet printing and allows direct deposition without the need for additives. An array of microdots with diameters of ∼18 μm of PAni hydrogel printed with a 9 μm nozzle was demonstrated. Besides ink-jet printing, spray coating is another effective deposition method that is able to produce patterns using shadow masks with low cost; however, it is more difficult to obtain as good a pattern resolution as ink-jet printing. For phytic acid crosslinked PAni hydrogels, micropatterns of millimeter size shown in Fig. 5B can be produced by spray coating using the same precursor solutions spraying alternatively multiple times through poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) soft stencil masks. The film thickness can be well-controlled by the number of spray cycles. Such a stencil lithography technique provides a unique high-throughput shadow mask method allowing parallel resistless patterning of PAni hydrogel onto a range of substrates depending on the size required. The PAni hydrogels resulting from the two described approaches would lead to highly conductive, large-area patterned microelectrodes with 3D porous nanostructures, which are potentially useful for supercapacitors, sensors, conductive matrices in lithium batteries and other bioelectrodes.
 Fig. 5  Micropatterning of PAni hydrogel by ink-jet printing (A) and spray coating (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Another example of micropatterned CPHs can be found in the electropolymerization of PEDOT on a hydrogel, agarose, to provide a fully organic, moist, and flexible electrode.22 The PEDOT–agarose electrodes are prepared via two electrochemical processes: electropolymerization of PEDOT into the hydrogel and electrochemical-actuation-assisted peeling (Fig. 6). The melted agarose solution was poured over a Pt microelectrode fabricated on a glass plate. After gelation of the agarose, electropolymerization is conducted on the gel-covered electrode in the aqueous monomer solution. The successive volume change of the PEDOT induced by redox cycles is effective for nondestructive peeling of the soft gel film from the master electrode. A typical application of this micropatterned PEDOT–agarose electrode is found in the cultivation of the contractile myotubes. The present strategy for preparing micropatterned CPHs electrodes can be applied to other kinds of hydrogels, and is a good supplement to existing printing methods which require the drying of fluid inks and thus cannot be used for printing on a moist gel substrate.
 Fig. 6  (A–C) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of a conducting polymer–hydrogel electrode: (A) the melted agarose solution is poured onto a Pt microelectrode substrate; (B) PEDOT is electropolymerized into the gel and then (C) electrochemically actuated several times for peeling. (D) Photograph of a PEDOT microelectrode array on a gel sheet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 CPHs as biosensors
Since the initial development of glucose enzyme electrodes by Clark and Lyons in 1962, increasing efforts have been put forward into glucose enzyme biosensors owing to the promising applications in medical diagnosis, diabetes management, bioprocess monitoring, the beverage industry, and environmental monitoring.74–76 The most popular and possibly the most reliable types of biosensors reported in the literature and utilized commercially are those employing redox enzymes coupled with amperometric detection. Several CPs such as PPy, PAni, poly(indole) and polyphenol have been employed in the construction of enzyme sensors. The most widely used CPs have been films of polypyrrole and its derivatives attributing to the ease with which these films can be grown from aqueous solutions and the high degree of selectivity due to the inherent size exclusion properties of polypyrrole films. Recently, Heller and Inganäs proposed that redox hydrogels and CPHs can combine the advantages of both soft materials and organic conductors to be excellent biosensor electrode materials.24,77 When combined with nanotechnology, the 3D nanostructured CPHs are even more promising in the construction of such biosensors owing to the large surface area, short charge diffusion pathway, and improved bio-compatibility. The porous structure enables the CPHs to be permeable to water-soluble biochemicals and chemicals, thus facilitates the solvation and diffusion of these molecules. The 3D continuous conducting matrix of the hydrogel favours efficient charge collection, thus leads to excellent electronic properties which facilitate rapid electron transfer. The improved bio-compatibility of hydrogels promotes the immobilization of biomolecules and preserves their bio-activity. In addition, the scalable synthesis and fabrication of the CPHs enables low cost patterning technologies such as ink-jet printing and spray coating.
Glucose biosensors account for about 85% of the entire biosensor market.76 Such a huge market size makes diabetes a model disease for developing new biosensing concepts. As a proof-of-concept, 3D hierarchically porous PAni hydrogels have been fabricated as enzyme glucose sensors. The working mechanism of the sensor is based on the redox properties of the glucose oxidase (GOx) where the enzymatic reaction of GOx and glucose is monitored via electrochemical measurement of the GOx–PAni hydrogel electrode.23 It was observed that the current change of the PAni hydrogel was linearly correlated to the amount of glucose added into the buffer solution in the concentration range of 0.1–2.6 mM with a correlation coefficient as high as 0.9998 (Fig. 7). Upon increasing the concentration of glucose, the observed current as measured by the PAni hydrogel electrode rapidly increased with a response time as short as ∼0.3 s and with an average sensing time of ∼1.1 s, which rivals the performance of the fastest reported response time of glucose sensors made with a single PAni nanojunction (∼0.2 s),78 and superior to that based on PAni nanotube arrays (∼3 s).79 The sensitivity of the PAni hydrogel glucose sensor was up to 16.7 μA mM−1, and the sensitivity per unit area is 85.4 μA mM−1 cm−2, which are higher than the reported glucose sensors based on other PAni nanostructures, PPy, carbon nanotubes, and single walled carbon nanotubes.78,80–82 The exceptionally fast response and high sensitivity are again attributed to the relatively short diffusion path that is due to the open channels of the hierarchical nanostructure and the continuously conductive framework of the PAni hydrogel.
 Fig. 7  PAni hydrogel as a high-performance 3D nanostructured electrode for glucose enzyme sensors. (A) Amperometric response of the GOx–PAni hydrogel-based enzymatic biosensor to successive addition of glucose in PBS (0.1 M, pH 5.5). Inset shows a magnification of the seventh addition of glucose. (B) The corresponding calibration plot showing a nearly linear amperometric response vs. glucose concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Generally, monitoring the electrochemical oxidization of H2O2 is a highly sensitive method to build CPH-based peroxide biosensors. Since the CPs or CPHs do not have the catalytic activity necessary for electrochemical oxidization of the H2O2 at the detection potential used in such sensors,83 expensive H2O2 Pt catalyst electrodes were used. Developing a conducting matrix that combines GOx immobilization and the catalytic materials such as PtNPs for the electro-oxidation of H2O2 are necessary for using inexpensive carbon or metal electrodes.83–85 Fig. 8A shows a schematic representation of a glucose sensor based on the 3D heterostructure of a PtNP–PAni hydrogel, in which the PAni hydrogel acts as a matrix for the immobilization of the GOx enzyme and homogeneous loading of PtNPs (Fig. 8B). Since the precursor solution had good wettability on the platinum surface, a very thin film of the PAni hydrogel could be coated homogeneously onto the platinum electrode, which is then immersed in an aqueous solution of H2PtCl6 followed by the addition of formic acid as a reducing agent to produce Pt NPs with a uniform size distribution (Fig. 8C).
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic representation of the 3D heterostructure of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel (left) and the reaction mechanism of the glucose sensor based on the PtNP–PAni hydrogel heterostructure (right). (B) SEM image of the PtNP-loaded PAni hydrogel. (C) TEM image indicating the high density of the PtNPs homogeneously loaded onto the PAni hydrogel matrix. Inset shows the statistical distribution of the PtNP sizes. (D) HR-TEM image of the PtNPs on the PAni hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The typical current–time response of the electrode with successive addition of glucose is presented in Fig. 9A. The current increased immediately with increase in the glucose concentration, and it quickly reached a steady-state. The average response time of this sensor is as short as 3 s. The steady-state current of the enzyme sensor shows high linearity to the glucose concentration (Fig. 9B). The sensitivity reaches 96.1 μA mM−1 cm−2, which is higher than previous values for sensor electrodes based on composites of Pt and PAni, PPy, or multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Compared with these materials, the performance of the Pt–PAni hydrogel glucose sensor is superior because of the fast response time and high sensitivity. The fast response of this sensor is attributed to the 3D porous nanostructures that facilitated diffusion of the glucose and H2O2. The high sensitivity results from the 3D porous hydrogel matrix which allows for the immobilization of the enzyme and preserved the high activity of the enzyme and the catalytic effects of the PtNPs for the oxidation of H2O2. The Michaelis–Menten constant86 is estimated to be 0.572, which is much lower than those previously reported for PAni glucose sensors.87,88 By using the PtNP-embedded PAni hydrogel, the Pt electrode was no longer a necessary substrate for the glucose sensor. The PtNP–PAni hydrogel sensor also showed excellent performance with inexpensive glassy carbon (GC) electrodes even without using the supporting Pt electrode. The electrocatalytic activity of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel sensor to oxidize H2O2 was increased up to three orders of magnitude as compared with the GC + PAni electrode. The material cost (amount of Pt used) in future commercialization could be greatly reduced by using a Pt–PAni hydrogel and other inexpensive substrates such as carbon/metal sheets/wire. The PtNP–PAni hydrogel glucose sensor also showed selectivity towards other electroactive molecular species. Under a concentration close to human physiological environment, the sensor showed almost no response to ascorbic acid (AA) or glutathione (GSH), and negligible response to L-cysteine (Cys).
 Fig. 9  (A) Amperometric response of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel electrode after successive addition of glucose in 0.1 M PBS (pH = 5.6) at an applied potential of 0.56 V. (B) The calibration curve for glucose concentrations from 1 μM to 80 mM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
By efficiently reducing the diffusion length of the molecules and improving the charge transfer, the glucose sensors composed of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel heterostructure exhibited unprecedented performance with ultra-high sensitivity, fast response, and a very low detection limit. The high-performance hydrogel-based heterostructure glucose sensors, combined with a low-cost, scalable micro-fabrication technique (such as ink-jet or screen printing), shows great potential for use in applications related to medical diagnosis, diabetes management, bioprocess monitoring, the beverage industry, and environmental monitoring.
3.3 CPHs for electrochemical capacitors
Electrochemical capacitors with high power densities are projected as future power sources for high-power applications such as electric vehicles, utility load-leveling, heavy-load starting assists for diesel locomotives, military and medical applications and also low-power applications such as camera-flash equipment, lasers, pulsed-light generators, and as back-up power for computer memory. Basically, all electrochemical systems involve ionic and electronic transport processes at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte solution. A larger interfacial area can lead to more efficient electrochemical processes. For pseudocapacitive electrode materials such as CPs, the pseudocapacitance stems from the faradic reactions (the doping and undoping processes) that occur near the surface of active electrode materials. The 3D nanostructured CPHs can provide a relatively short diffusion path for electrolyte ions to access the electroactive surface of CPs thus improving the electrochemical use of active materials.89
For example, the 3D nanostructured PAni hydrogel showed great potential for high-performance electrochemical capacitors as demonstrated in Fig. 10. The electrical resistance is as low as ∼3.2 Ω from in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, which is rather small in consideration of the PAni mass amount (2 mg cm−2 in dehydrated form). The nearly vertical shape of the obtained impedance curve at lower frequencies (Fig. 10A) indicates an ideal capacitive behaviour of the electrodes. The corresponding charge transfer resistance is also remarkably small (<0.1 Ω) suggesting favourable ion transport within the 3D continuous nanostructured framework. The redox reaction inside the 3D nanostructured hydrogel is also very fast since the typical PAni redox peaks can be clearly seen at high scan rates (Fig. 10B). Galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements (Fig. 10C) further demonstrated the rate-capability of this hydrogel. The corresponding specific capacitance values vs. scan rates from discharge curves based on the total mass of active PAni hydrogel materials (dry weight) yielded a specific capacitance of ∼480 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 (Fig. 10D). In addition, the PAni hydrogel based electrodes yielded excellent rate performance with only ∼7% capacitance loss when the current density was increased by a factor of 10 (e.g., ∼450 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 decreased to ∼420 F g−1 at 5 A g−1) indicating an exceptional rate capability for high power performance. This is in sharp contrast to previously reported PAni-based electrodes, where a typical 25–40% capacitance loss was seen at high power.90–93 The high rate performance can be attributed to the facile electronic and ionic transport stemming from the hierarchically conductive network discussed above. In addition, PAni hydrogel-based electrodes also exhibited good cycling stability, which is another key requirement in the operation of supercapacitors. Conducting polymers-based supercapacitors often suffer from limited cyclability due to the swelling and shrinking of electroactive polymers during their charging and discharging processes.89 The cycling performance of the 3D nanostructured hydrogel electrodes showed capacitance retention as high as ∼91% over 5000 cycles and ∼83% retention over 10000 cycles at a high current density of 5 A g−1, which is superior to the PAni-based supercapacitors typical 60∼85% retention for over 1000 cycles.90,92 The superior cycling performance achieved in the hydrogel electrode system confirms the unique advantages of the highly porous interconnected nanostructures in the CPHs that can accommodate the swelling and shrinking of the polymer network during intensive cycling processes.
 Fig. 10  PAni hydrogel as high-performance 3D nanostructured electrodes for supercapacitors. (A) Impedance curve of a PAni hydrogel-based supercapacitor electrode. (B) Cyclic voltammogram curves of the PAni hydrogel electrode at different scan rates (10–200 mV s−1). (C) Galvanostatic discharge profiles at various current densities (0.5–5 A g−1). (D) Summary plot of specific capacitance values vs. current density for PAni hydrogel-based electrodes. (Inset) Cycling test showing ∼83% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles at high current rate of 5 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Another example can be found in the hydrogel of PEDOT–PSS which is ionically crosslinked into a nanometer-scale conducting network.9 PEDOT–PSS thin film electrodes were prepared by casting its dispersion onto a gold electrode and then equilibrating with MgSO4 solution for ionic crosslinking. This material, nonetheless, has some disadvantages with regard to its application in supercapacitors: The maximum energy density of the material is small due to the high molecular mass of the PEDOT–PSS units; high water content increases the weight of the supercapacitors; and the mechanical strength of the material is poor. However, when another electroactive conducting polymer, PPy, was grown electrochemically on the PEDOT–PSS electrode, the resulting polymer composite PEDOT–PSS–PPy possesses less water content and has much better mechanical properties as a free standing film. This polymer composite can be further dehydrated by partially drying the dispersion before crosslinking while maintaining similar mechanical and electrochemical properties to those of PEDOT–PSS–PPy. It can be seen from Fig. 11 that for both the PEDOT–PSS and PEDOT–PSS–PPy electrodes, the power densities are over 10 kW kg−1 without a substantial decrease in the extractable energy of the supercapacitors. For the PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel, the energy density is much higher than that of the PEDOT–PSS hydrogel due to the lower molecular weight of the PPy monomer units compared to that of the PEDOT–PSS, which allows the storage of a higher amount of charge per unit weight of the material. Reinforcement of the conducting network in the swollen polymer on electropolymerization of PPy may also contribute to the higher energy density in PEDOT–PSS–PPy supercapacitors. The Ragone plots show a slightly better performance of the partially dehydrated PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel than PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel as an electrode material. In contrast to the hydrogel electrodes, the energy densities of pure PPy-coated electrodes and the unswelled PEDOT–PSS–PPy electrodes decrease sharply on increasing the power density. From another point of view, it is observed that the swollen electrodes can deliver the stored energy at power densities more than 25 times higher than at which any meaningful amount of energy could be obtained from the unswollen electrodes. This highlights the importance of the nanostructures of the hydrogel material.
 Fig. 11  Ragone plots for supercapacitors with different electrodes: (a) partially-dried PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel; (b) PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel; (c) pure PPy; (d) unswollen PEDOT–PSS–PPy; (e) PEDOT–PSS hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright © 1999 Wiley-VCH. 
To optimize the electrochemical performance of CPH based supercapacitors, different synthesis routes should be developed to realize the morphology and porosity control of CPHs. The supercapacitor performance may be optimized further by the proper choice of an electrolyte, by use of more energy efficient redox compounds, substituting or complementing the CPHs, and by better design of the cell. It should be noted that the excellent performance of the above supercapacitors further emphasizes the novelty of using 3D nanostructured CPH electrodes with high effective surface area, and nanometer scale continuous conductive framework that extends into a large volume. The large free volume available in the material can also be used for functionalization of the electrode with incorporation of compounds with special properties that may find use in sensors, electrocatalytic electrodes, electro-membranes and so on.
3.4 Potential of CPHs in Li-ion batteries
Owing to their unique features: a 3D hierarchical porous conducting framework with excellent electronic and electrochemical properties, CPHs enable promising applications in lithium-ion battery technology. For instance, CPHs can be used to address the challenges faced by next-generation high-capacity alloy-based anodes, such as silicon, germanium.94–97
Take Si as an example. Although Si has the highest specific capacity ∼4200 mA h g−1 as an anode material, Si faces significant challenges due to its ∼300% volume expansion upon Li insertion, leading to quick capacity fading due to the fracture and loss of electrical contact, and an unstable solid–electrolyte-interphase (SEI) growth on the Si surface.98–104 Recent works on electrodes made from Si nanoparticle slurries as a potentially manufacturing-compatible route suggest that some polymer binders, such as polyacrylic acid (PAA), carboxy-methyl cellulose (CMC) poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-suorenone-co-methylbenzoic acid) (PFFOMB) and alginate, can effectively enhance the cycle life.105–111 The improved cycle life using these binders was attributed to the high polymer modulus values and the binding between the functional groups on the polymers with the surface oxide on the Si particles. The hydrophilic functional groups on the CPH matrices should have a similar binding effect with the Si particles. Furthermore, the matrices of CPHs are electrically conductive rather than the commonly used polymer binders which are electric insulators. Si nanoparticles can be simply mixed into the precursor solution during polymerization. Crosslinking molecules with hydrophilic functional groups can potentially bind with the SiO2 on the Si particle surfaces via hydrogen bonding.
The Si–CPH hybrid anode can be prepared via a scalable solution phase synthesis and result in in situ polymerization of conformal conductive polymer coatings on the SiNP surfaces. The preliminary studies along this direction have yielded some promising results. Notably, there are several key features for these unique Si–CPH electrode systems. First, the porous hydrogel matrix has empty space to allow for the large volume expansion of the SiNPs during lithium insertion. Second, the highly conductive and continuous 3D CPH framework, as well as the conformal conductive coating surrounding each SiNP, helps provide a good electrical connection to the particles. Third, the CPHs exhibit superior characteristics over other 3D nanostructures such as metals and carbon.112–115 The CPH acts as a functional coating, conductive binder and surface modification material, which reduces the weight fraction of the binder and conducting filler of a battery and improves the SEI interface between electrode and electrolyte. However, other 3D nanostructures, acting simply as conductive additives, are of high cost for manufacturing and difficult for scalable fabrication.
Another potential application of the CPHs may be found in the so-called aqueous cathode Li-ion batteries either in the passive-cathode mode or in the flowing-cathode mode.116–119 In 2011, a fresh concept of constructing a Li-redox battery system with Li metal (or possibly Na) as the anode and an aqueous solution as the cathode has been proposed.116 The basic set-up of the prototype battery systems is composed of an anode compartment with Li-metal inserting in an organic electrolyte as the anode; a cathode compartment with aqueous solution of a redox-couple playing the role as both the cathode and catholyte; and a thin Li-ion conducting ceramic as a separator in between. By combining Li-metal with a circulating aqueous cathode, the battery incorporates the advantages of a higher energy density compared to Li-ion batteries and a quick cathodic response as well as an independent operation on power and energy capacity from conventional redox-flow batteries.120 An important element for such a battery system is the aqueous cathode. In the conventional configuration, a metal foil or mesh usually serves as the current collector. Despite the key benefit of the orders of magnitude higher diffusion coefficiency of Li+ in aqueous solution than that in solids, the diffusion-distance (on the millimetre scale) between the electro-active species in the aqueous cathode and the current collector is too long to obtain a high efficiency. Increasing the solubility of those electroactive redox couples in the aqueous phase is another issue that needs to be addressed.
3D nanostructured CPHs may give peculiar scope to these concerns. Because the 3D nanostructured porous CPHs provide an ideal material platform for the accommodation of the electroactive species; the micro/mesoscale pores tolerate the formation of less soluble species thus the weight fraction of electroactive species can increase; and the 3D conductive frameworks provide a shorter diffusion distance for the ions, which makes the electrochemical process more efficient. Certainly, for practical application of the CPHs, there are still many challenges remaining in material selection and fabrication. The CPHs themselves must be stable in the applied potential window; the compatibility of the CPHs and the electroactive species needs to be fine-tuned to guarantee that there is no side reaction between the CPHs and the electroactive species; the electric conductivity needs to be further improved to meet the requirement of rapid charge/discharge; and the fabrication method is expected to be further developed to provide the scalability, micro/nanoscale porosity, and processability. Fortunately, the knowledge and the hands-on experience that have been gained in the development of CPHs would be applicable here for further application of CPHs in post Li-ion batteries.
3.5 Other applications
CPHs have found many other applications besides the applications in supercapacitors, bio/chemical sensors and potential application in Li-ion batteries. One example can be found in the fabrication of electrochemically controlled drug delivery devices. Martin and co-workers reported precisely controlled drug release using CP nanotubes.26 The fabrication process involves electrospinning of a biodegradable polymer, into which a drug has been incorporated, followed by electrochemical deposition of a conducting-polymer around the drug-loaded, electrospun biodegradable polymers. The relatively large surface area and hierarchical porosity can help to lessen the passive loss of loaded drug molecules by diffusion or anion exchange with the bathing environment, increase the drug loading levels wherein the equilibrium payload is governed by the density of redox active sites on the CPH component, and increase the diffusion coefficients of the released drug through the hierarchically porous structure, resulting in enhanced release kinetics. The conducting-polymer nanotubes significantly decrease the impedance and increase the charge capacity of the recording electrode sites on microfabricated neural prosthetic devices. The drugs can be released from the nanotubes in a desired fashion by electrical stimulation of the nanotubes; this process presumably proceeds by a local dilation of the tube that then promotes mass transport. A semi-interpenetrating network of polyacrylamide (PAM) and PAni has also been fabricated for electrochemical release devices.121 The composite is an electroactive material that keeps the swelling capability of hydrogels due to the form in which PAni chains grow inside the pores. This fact allows the use of the composite as an electrochemically controlled device for the liberation of voluminous molecules due to the available empty space inside the composite that allows storage of the molecules. Another example can be found in nerve regeneration.122 The CPHs consisting of oligo(polyethylene glycol) fumarate (OPF) and PPy were applied in nerve regeneration. In vitro studies using PC12 cells showed OPF–PPy hydrogel has no cytotoxicity and PC12 cells showed good cell attachment and an increase in the percent of neurite bearing cells on OPF–PPy hydrogel, representing a promising candidate for future applications in nerve regeneration. A microporous hybrid CP gel of poly(glycidyl acrylate)–PPy finds its application in the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC).123 Using this CP gel as polymer host, a gel-electrolyte with high conductivity of 12.83 mS cm−1 was prepared. Benefiting from the introduction of CP gel, which shows low charge-transfer resistance and high electrocatalytic activity for the triiodide–iodide redox reaction, the cell shows a light-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency of 5.03% under AM 1.5 illumination.
Other applications can be found in artificial muscle-type devices and removal of harmful free radicals from the environment. The change in volume of CPs upon oxidation and protonation state variation has been exploited for the development of actuators to create artificial muscle-type devices, in which two layers of a CP are placed in a triple layer arrangement separated by a non-conductive material.124,125 When current is applied across the two CP films, one of the films is oxidized and the other is reduced. The oxidized film experiences an inflow of dopant ions and an associated expansion, whereas the reduced film expels ions and shrinks.124,126 The total effect results in a mechanical force that bends the polymer. These types of devices have potential as actuators for many biomedical applications, such as micropumps and valves for labs-on-a-chip.127,128 Furthermore, the ability of CPs to scavenge harmful free radicals from the environment has recently been explored as an additional benefit of these materials in biological applications.129 In particular, CPs such as PAni and PPy in their neutral form exhibit the ability to react effectively with free radicals, which results from their ability to be easily oxidized and therefore does not necessitate electrical stimulation. This important role leads to biomedical applications as free radical scavengers where tissues experience high oxidative stress.
4 Conclusion and future perspective
CPHs represent a unique vista for combining the responsive properties of both materials within an aqueous milieu. The combination of hydrogels and inherently conducting polymers allows both materials to retain their unique responsive properties. This perspective has described the synchronization of various remarkable characteristics of 3D nanostructured CPHs such as excellent conductivity, biocompatibility, processability, mechanical flexibility. The CPHs represent a promising class of polymeric materials suitable for a range of electrochemical devices such as supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, biosensors, drug delivery devices, and nerve regeneration. Moreover, the CPHs or CP gels also show great potential for in vivo biocompatibility in implantable biosensors, and as gel-electrolytes in dye-sensitized solar cells or lithium-ion batteries. The ease of CPH patterning by printing or spraying techniques hold great promise for CPHs as key functional components for both printable bioelectronic sensors and highly scalable energy storage devices. All these characteristics suggest that CPHs will likely lead to even more exciting future discoveries and intriguing hydrogel-based electronics and power devices. Currently, the major challenges of 3D CPHs is to develop methods for effective structural control such as configurations and conformations, porosity, water content, morphology, assembly, crystalline, and ordering; component control such as copolymer hydrogel, doping–dedoping, and organic–inorganic composites; mechanical property control to obtain mechanically tougher, stronger, and highly elongated CPHs; and physical property control to develop highly conductive, electroactive and biocompatible CPHs.
A large number of reports are available related to CPHs. It should be noted that their backbone usually is still electric insulating and they often require a combination of different approaches to achieve desirable nanostructures. A major challenge relies on searching for simple and efficient synthetic methods to scale-up the preparation of CPHs with high electrical conductivity and deliberate control of the morphologies and sizes, and especially with 3D nanostructures either porous or oriented arrays. Future advances will require great effort and continued innovation that will be best afforded by interdisciplinary research across chemistry, physics, biology, and nanotechnology.
AcknowledgementsG. Y. acknowledges the financial support of start-up grants from Cockrell School of Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin. L. P. acknowledges funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61076017, 61229401) and NCET.
Notes and referencesA. S. Edelstein and R. C. Cammarata, Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Institute of Physics, Philadelphia, PA,  1996 Search PubMed .H. S. Nalwa, Handbook of Nanostructured Materials and Nanotechnology, Acdemic Press, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .V. M. Shalaev and M. Moskovits, Nanostructured Materials: Clusters, Composites, and Thin Films, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1997 Search PubMed .R. K. Joshi and J. J. Schneider, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5285–5312 RSC .R. K. O'Reilly, C. J. Hawker and K. L. Wooley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1068–1083 RSC .D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long, J. C. Lytle, A. E. Fischer, C. P. Rhodes, T. M. McEvoy, M. E. Bourga and A. M. Lubers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226–252 RSC .J. Kopeček, Nature, 2002, 417, 388–391 CrossRef .P. J. Flory, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1974, 57, 7–18 RSC .S. Ghosh and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1214–1218 CrossRef CAS .L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C.-K. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhai, B. Liu, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Wang, B. Li, R. Zhang and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3540–3546 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2591–2611 CrossRef CAS .K. Lee, S. Cho, S. H. Park, A. J. Heeger, C.-W. Lee and S.-H. Lee, Nature, 2006, 441, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, J. X. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 135–145 CrossRef CAS .G. G. Wallace, S. E. Moulton and G. M. Clark, Science, 2009, 324, 185–186 CrossRef CAS .K. Gilmore, A. J. Hodgson, B. Luan, C. J. Small and G. G. Wallace, Polym. Gels Networks, 1994, 2, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .H. D. Tran, D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1487–1499 CrossRef CAS .L. Xia, Z. Wei and M. Wan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 341, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Green, S. Baek, L. A. Poole-Warren and P. J. Martens, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2010, 11, 014107 CrossRef .A. J. Hodgson, K. Gilmore, C. Small and G. G. Wallace, Supramol. Sci., 1994, 1, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .S. Sekine, Y. Ido, T. Miyake, K. Nagamine and M. Nishizawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13174–13175 CrossRef CAS .C. Dhand, M. SDas, M. Datta and B. D. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2811–2821 CrossRef CAS .P. Åsberg and O. Inganäs, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 19, 199–207 CrossRef .A. Guiseppi-Elie, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2701–2716 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Abidian, D. H. Kim and D. C. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 405–409 CrossRef CAS .D.-H. Kim, M. Abidian and D. C. Martin, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2004, 71, 577–585 Search PubMed .A. Phadke, C. Zhang, B. Arman, C.-C. Hsu, R. A. Mashelkar, A. K. Lele, M. J. Tauber, G. Arya and S. Varghese, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4383–4388 CrossRef CAS .M. Hepel, L. Dentrone and E. Seymour, Polymers, Solutions, Blends, and Interface, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam,  1992 Search PubMed .S. Sershen and J. West, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2002, 54, 1225–1235 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Kim, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace and R. John, Polymer, 2000, 41, 1783–1790 CrossRef CAS .T. E. Campbell, A. J. Hodgson and G. G. Wallace, Electroanalysis, 1999, 11, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .D.-H. Kim, S. M. Richardson-Burns, J. L. Hendricks, C. Sequera and D. C. Martin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, D. Wang, T. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Cao, H. Yang and Y. Y. Duan, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 4143–4151 CrossRef CAS .D. Mawad, E. Stewart, D. L. Officer, T. Romeo, P. Wagner, K. Wagner and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Moulton, M. J. Higgins, R. M. I. Kapsa and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2003–2014 CrossRef CAS .I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3446–3462 CrossRef CAS .Y. Berdichevsky and Y.-H. Lo, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 122–125 CrossRef CAS .M. G. Han and S. H. Foulger, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3092–3094 RSC .J. Jang and J. H. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2004, 882–883 RSC .R. Xiao, S. I. Cho, R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4483–4489 CrossRef CAS .Z. Cai and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 4138–4139 CrossRef CAS .R. V. Parthasarathy and C. R. Martin, Nature, 1994, 369, 298–301 CrossRef CAS .J. I. Lee, S. Y. Cho, S.-M. Park, J. K. Kim, J. K. Kim, J.-W. Yu, Y. C. Kim and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2315–2320 CrossRef CAS .C.-G. Wu and T. Bein, Science, 1994, 264, 1757–1759 CAS .J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson, E. W. Sheppard, S. B. McCullen, J. B. Higgins and J. L. Schlenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834 CrossRef CAS .L. Cao, H. Z. Chen, H. B. Zhou, L. Zhu, J. Z. Sun, X. B. Zhang, J. M. Xu and M. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Zhang, A. G. MacDiarmid and S. K. Manohar, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5328–5330 RSC .X. Y. Zhang and S. K. Manohar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12714–12715 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Zhang and S. K. Manohar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14156–14157 CrossRef CAS .H. Dong, S. Prasad, V. Nyame and W. E. Jones Jr, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 371–373 CrossRef CAS .A. Despic and V. P. Parkhutik, Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, Plenum Press, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .L. J. Pan, L. Pu, Y. Shi, S. Y. Song, Z. Xu, R. Zhang and Y. D. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .M. Bognitzki, H. Q. Hou, M. Ishaque, T. Frese, M. Hellwig, C. Schwarte, A. Schaper, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 637–640 CrossRef CAS .M. Bognitzki, W. Czado, T. Frese, A. Schaper, M. Hellwig, M. Steinhart, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 70–72 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Macdiarmid, W. E. HJone, I. D. Norris, J. Gao, A. T. Johnson, N. J. Pinto, J. Hone, B. Han, F. K. Ko, H. Okuzaki and M. Llaguno, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .M. Goren, Z. G. Qi and R. B. Lennox, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS .R. Cruz-Silva, C. Ruiz-Flores, L. Arizmendi, J. Romero-Garcia, E. Arias-Martin, I. Moggio, F. F. Castillon and M. H. Farias, Polymer, 2006, 47, 1563 CrossRef CAS .R. Cruz-Silva, L. Arizmendi, M. Del-Angel and J. Romero-Garcia, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8–12 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ma, J. Zhang, G. Zhang and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7097–7101 CrossRef CAS .L. Dong, T. Hollis, S. Fishwick, B. A. Connolly, N. G. Wright, B. R. Horrocks and A. Houlton, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 822–828 CrossRef CAS .H. Goto, N. Nomura and K. J. Akagi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 4298–4302 CrossRef CAS .S. Brahim, D. Narinesingh and A. Guiseppi-Elie, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2002, 17, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .G. Justin and A. Guiseppi-Elie, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2539–2549 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Abidian and D. C. Martin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 573–585 CrossRef CAS .T. Dai, X. Qing, Y. Lu and Y. Xia, Polymer, 2009, 50, 5236–5241 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Siddhanta and R. Gangopadhyay, Polymer, 2005, 46, 2993–3000 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Abidian and D. C. Martin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 1273–1283 CrossRef CAS .S. Brahim, D. Narinesingh and A. Guiseppi-Elie, Biomacromolecules, 2003, 4, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia and H. Zhu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9388–9393 RSC .L. Chen, B. Kim, M. Nishino, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1232–1236 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 227–281 Search PubMed .L.-Q. Mai, F. Yang, Y.-L. Zhao, X. Xu, L. Xu and Y.-Z. Luo, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 381 CrossRef .A. Heller and B. Feldman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 963–973 CrossRef CAS .A. Heller and B. Feldman, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2482–2505 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 814–825 CrossRef CAS .A. Heller, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 664–672 CrossRef CAS .E. S. Forzani, H. Zhang, L. A. Nagahara, I. Amlani, R. Tsui and N. Tao, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1785–1788 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, S. Liu, P. Wu and C. Cai, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 1638–1645 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Uang and T. C. Chou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 19, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .A. Salimi, R. G. Compton and R. Hallaj, Anal. Biochem., 2004, 333, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .Q. A. Gao, Y. Y. Guo, W. Y. Zhang, H. L. Qi and C. X. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 153, 219–225 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Zhou, H. Chen, S. L. Luo, J. H. Chen, W. Z. Wei and Y. F. Kuang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 20, 1305–1311 CrossRef CAS .J. Wu and L. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4354–4362 CAS .S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Small, 2009, 5, 1869–1876 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Kamin and G. S. Wilson, Anal. Chem., 1980, 52, 1198–1205 CrossRef CAS .Z. Matharu, G. Sumana, S. K. Arya, S. P. Singh, V. Gupta and B. D. Malhotra, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 13188–13192 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhong, R. Yuan, Y. Chai, W. Li, X. Zhong and Y. Zhang, Talanta, 2011, 85, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .A. Rudge, J. Davey, I. Raistrick, S. Gottesfeld and J. P. Ferraris, J. Power Sources, 1994, 47, 89–107 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, J. Wang, Q. Chu, Z. Wang, F. Zhang and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Ryu, K. M. Kim, N. G. Park, Y. J. Park and S. H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2002, 103, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yan, Q. Cheng, G. Wang and C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7835–7840 CrossRef CAS .F. Xu, G. Zheng, D. Wu, Y. Liang, Z. Li and R. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 3270–3275 RSC .L. Y. Beaulieu, K. W. Eberman, R. L. Turner, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A137–A140 CrossRef CAS .T. D. Hatchard and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A838–A842 CrossRef CAS .R. Deshpande, Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5081–5088 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Verbrugge and Y.-T. Cheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A927–A937 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu, G. Zheng, N. Liu, T. J. Carney, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Park, J. H. Kim, H. Kim and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .W. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Verbrugge and Y. T. Cheng, ECS Trans., 2008, 16, 127–139 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, X. Liu, H. Li, T. Zhai and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5079–5081 RSC .A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Bridel, T. Azaïs, M. Morcrette, J. M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 1229–1241 CrossRef .I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 333, 75–79 CrossRef .G. Liu, S. Xun, N. Vukmirovic, X. Song, P. Olalde-Velasco, H. Zheng, V. S. Battaglia, L. Wang and W. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4679–4683 CrossRef CAS .D. Mazouzi, B. Lestriez, L. Roué and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A215–A218 CrossRef CAS .H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10151–10154 CrossRef CAS .A. Magasinski, B. Zdyrko, I. Kovalenko, B. Hertzberg, R. Burtovyy, C. Huebner, T. F. Fuller, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3004–3010 CAS .Y. Liu, K. Huang, I. Fan, Q. Zhang, F. Sun, T. Gao, L. Yang and J. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 766–771 CrossRef CAS .X. Xin, X. Zhou, F. Wang, X. Yao, X. Xu, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7724–7730 RSC .J. Wang, N. Du, Z. Song, H. Wu, H. Zhang and D. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10113–10117 RSC .Y. Lu, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5756–5759 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1087–1090 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, L. Wang and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1896 CrossRef .Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 770–779 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Lira and S. I. C. d. Torresi, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Runge, M. Dadsetan, J. Baltrusaitis, T. Ruesink, L. Lu, A. J. Windebank and M. J. Yaszemski, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 2845–2853 CrossRef CAS .Z. Tang, J. Wu, Q. Li, Z. Lan, L. Fan, J. Lin and M. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4883–4888 CrossRef CAS .T. F. Otero and J. M. Sansinena, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1997, 42, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .T. F. Otero and M. T. Cortés, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 96, 152–156 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Gandhi, P. Murray, G. M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, Synth. Met., 1995, 73, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .E. Smela and N. Gadegaard, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 953–957 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Low, S. Seetharaman, K. Q. He and M. J. Madou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 67, 149–160 CrossRef CAS .M. Gizdavic-Nikolaidis, J. Travas-Sjdic, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Cooney and P. A. Kilmartin, Synth. Met., 2004, 140, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Yu Zhao	Yu Zhao received his B.S. degree in 2003 and Ph.D. degree in 2008 from the University of Science and Technology of China. His Ph.D. research project focused on the design, synthesis and applications of functional nanomaterials. After his postdoctoral research in Hong Kong and Japan, he joined Prof. Guihua Yu's group in 2013 in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Texas at Austin. His research interest focuses on post Li-ion batteries and energy storage/conversion devices at the micro/nano scale.
Borui Liu	Borui Liu is a Materials Science and Engineering graduate student at the University of Texas at Austin. He did his undergraduate study of minerals and metallurgical engineering at Central South University, and in fall 2012 he began graduate studies in the Department of Mechanical Engineering with Prof. Guihua Yu at the University of Texas at Austin, focusing on nanomaterials for novel energy storage systems, such as next-generation Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors.
Lijia Pan	Lijia Pan is an Associate Professor at the School of Electronic Engineering, Nanjing University. He received his B.S. degree in polymer science from South China University of Technology, obtained his Ph.D. in polymer physics from University of Science and Technology of China in 2003, did three years postdoctoral research in the Physics Department of Nanjing University, and was a visiting scholar at Stanford University. He received the award of New Century Excellent Talents in University from Chinese Ministry of Education in 2009. His current research focuses on developing smart materials and devices from polymer micro/nanostructures.
Guihua Yu	Guihua Yu is an Assistant Professor at The University of Texas at Austin. He received his B.S. degree with highest honor in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China, earned his Ph.D. in chemistry at Harvard University in 2009, and did three years postdoctoral research in Chemical Engineering at Stanford University. His research is focused on rational design, synthesis, and fundamental investigation of nanostructured material systems for advanced energy storage and conversion technologies.

Broader context
Conducting polymer hydrogels represent a unique class of materials that synergize the advantageous features of hydrogels and organic conductors. They show both electrical and optical properties similar to those of metals and inorganic semiconductors, in addition to other attractive properties associated with conventional polymers, such as ease of synthesis and flexibility in processing. Nowadays, functionalized conducting polymer nanomaterials have received increasing attention in nanoscience and nanotechnology because of their large surface area, excellent interface between the electronic transporting phase and the ionic transporting phase, between biological and synthetic systems, as well as between soft and hard materials. The conducting-polymer-hydrogel nanostructures, especially with three-dimensional geometries and hierarchical ordering, could facilitate the design of next-generation electronic/biochemical systems that require morphological or structural control. These systems are envisioned to be highly useful for a broad range of applications such as supercapacitors, lithium batteries, biofuel cells, bioelectronics, biosensors and medical electrodes.


 	Fig. 1  Representative applications of the hydrogels. (A) Bioelectrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) Biosensors. Adapted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. (C) Energy storage devices. (D) Drug delivery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright © 2006 Wiley-VCH. (E) Neural electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright © 2004 Wiley-VCH. (F) Tissue engineering. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. (G) Separation membranes. (H) Conductive adhesives.	 

 	Fig. 2  Conventional methods for the synthesis of nanostructured CPs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conventional methods for the synthesis of CPHs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustrations of the 3D hierarchical microstructure of the gelated PAni hydrogel where phytic acid plays the role of dopant and crosslinker. (B) A photograph of the PAni hydrogel inside a glass vial. (C) SEM image of a piece of dehydrated hydrogel. (D) A higher magnification SEM image showing the interconnected network of dendritic PAni nanofibers. (E) A TEM image showing the continuous nanostructured network of the dehydrated PAni hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 5  Micropatterning of PAni hydrogel by ink-jet printing (A) and spray coating (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A–C) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of a conducting polymer–hydrogel electrode: (A) the melted agarose solution is poured onto a Pt microelectrode substrate; (B) PEDOT is electropolymerized into the gel and then (C) electrochemically actuated several times for peeling. (D) Photograph of a PEDOT microelectrode array on a gel sheet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  PAni hydrogel as a high-performance 3D nanostructured electrode for glucose enzyme sensors. (A) Amperometric response of the GOx–PAni hydrogel-based enzymatic biosensor to successive addition of glucose in PBS (0.1 M, pH 5.5). Inset shows a magnification of the seventh addition of glucose. (B) The corresponding calibration plot showing a nearly linear amperometric response vs. glucose concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic representation of the 3D heterostructure of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel (left) and the reaction mechanism of the glucose sensor based on the PtNP–PAni hydrogel heterostructure (right). (B) SEM image of the PtNP-loaded PAni hydrogel. (C) TEM image indicating the high density of the PtNPs homogeneously loaded onto the PAni hydrogel matrix. Inset shows the statistical distribution of the PtNP sizes. (D) HR-TEM image of the PtNPs on the PAni hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Amperometric response of the PtNP–PAni hydrogel electrode after successive addition of glucose in 0.1 M PBS (pH = 5.6) at an applied potential of 0.56 V. (B) The calibration curve for glucose concentrations from 1 μM to 80 mM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  PAni hydrogel as high-performance 3D nanostructured electrodes for supercapacitors. (A) Impedance curve of a PAni hydrogel-based supercapacitor electrode. (B) Cyclic voltammogram curves of the PAni hydrogel electrode at different scan rates (10–200 mV s−1). (C) Galvanostatic discharge profiles at various current densities (0.5–5 A g−1). (D) Summary plot of specific capacitance values vs. current density for PAni hydrogel-based electrodes. (Inset) Cycling test showing ∼83% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles at high current rate of 5 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright © 2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 11  Ragone plots for supercapacitors with different electrodes: (a) partially-dried PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel; (b) PEDOT–PSS–PPy hydrogel; (c) pure PPy; (d) unswollen PEDOT–PSS–PPy; (e) PEDOT–PSS hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright © 1999 Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
