Improvement of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using a reduced-graphene-oxide-modified titania layer and soluble copper phthaloc ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP04538G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04538G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 2388-2395Improvement of the photovoltaic parameters of perovskite solar cells using a reduced-graphene-oxide-modified titania layer and soluble copper phthalocyanine as a hole transporter†

        
          
            Esmaiel 
            Nouri
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Reza 
            Mohammadi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zong-Xiang 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vassilios 
            Dracopoulos
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Panagiotis 
            Lianos
          
        
      *d
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Azadi Str., Tehran, Iran. E-mail: mohammadi@sharif.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, South University of Science and Technology of China, ShenZhen, GuangDong 518055, P. R. China
cFORTH/ICE-HT, P.O. Box 1414, 26504 Patras, Greece
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece. E-mail: lianos@upatras.gr
Received 
      6th July 2017
    , Accepted 19th December 2017First published on 20th December 2017AbstractFunctional perovskite solar cells can be made by using a simple, inexpensive and stable soluble tetra-n-butyl-substituted copper phthalocyanine (CuBuPc) as a hole transporter. In the present study, TiO2/reduced graphene oxide (T/RGO) hybrids were synthesized via an in situ solvothermal process and used as electron acceptor/transport mediators in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells based on soluble CuBuPc as a hole transporter and on graphene oxide (GO) as a buffer layer. The impact of the RGO content on the optoelectronic properties of T/RGO hybrids and on the solar cell performance was studied, suggesting improved electron transport characteristics and photovoltaic parameters. An enhanced electron lifetime and recombination resistance led to an increase in the short circuit current density, open circuit voltage and fill factor. The device based on a T/RGO mesoporous layer with an optimal RGO content of 0.2 wt% showed 22% higher photoconversion efficiency and higher stability compared with pristine TiO2-based devices.
Introduction
Organometal halide perovskites have attracted very high interest as light harvesters for thin-film solar cells because of their excellent optoelectronic properties. Thus, they are characterized by large electron–hole diffusion lengths exceeding one micrometer1 and an effective light absorption coefficient at room temperature exceeding 104 cm−1. In addition, they demonstrate a purely exponential trend of the Urbach tail, suggesting no optically detectable deep states; an Urbach energy close to the values of single crystalline GaAs (a high quality direct-band gap semiconductor);2 tunable band gaps by chemical management;3 high charge carrier mobility4 and charge accumulation in high density of states.5 Following the seminal work by Miyasaka,6 the efficiency achieved with perovskite solar cells (PSCs) evolved rapidly, at the same time establishing a layer device structure composed of FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/methyl ammonium lead halide perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au as the standard PSC configuration.7,8
In the last few years, various strategies have been adopted to improve the performance of PSCs, such as tuning their chemical composition, controlling the kinetics of crystallization and interfacial engineering.9–11 Most of these efforts involve inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite layers (CH3NH3PbX3, X = I, Br and Cl). Another concept for improving the performance of PSC devices is materials composition and architecture of the mesoporous scaffold (i.e., m-TiO2), even though, it has attracted less attention. Some attempts have been made to tailor the chemical composition and/or morphology of the TiO2 mesoporous layer in order to accelerate electron flow and to decelerate charge recombination. For example, Nd-doped TiO2,12 Al-doped TiO213 and yttrium-substituted nanocrystalline TiO214 have been reported for chemical composition improvement. Furthermore, TiO2 nanorods,15 highly porous titania nanostructures,16 TiO2 nanotube arrays,17 dendritic anatase-TiO2 nanowires18 and rutile-TiO2 nanorods19 are some examples of the various phases and morphologies focusing on the titania mesoporous structure itself. In the present work, we have chosen to introduce graphene into titania and thus create electron transport “highways”, which would allow for fast electron transport and would discourage electron–hole recombination.
Graphene has recently attracted considerable interest as an excellent electrical conductor; therefore, several studies have focused on the synthesis and application of TiO2–reduced graphene oxide (T/RGO) hybrids for the purpose of accelerating electron transport.20–22 The use of graphene-embedded TiO2 was also reported in mesoscopic PSCs. An ultrathin layer of graphene quantum dots was applied between perovskite and TiO2 layers by Zhu et al.23 They highlighted that graphene quantum dots can act as superfast electron tunnels. Furthermore, Wang et al.24 utilized a T/RGO nanocomposite as the electron collection layer in mesoscopic PSCs and reported a remarkable photovoltaic performance with high power conversion efficiency due to reduction in the formation of an interfacial energy barrier. More recently, Han et al.25 introduced RGO sheets into a TiO2 mesoporous layer using an ex situ method (i.e., addition of an RGO–ethanol solution to separately prepared TiO2 slurry). They reported a reduced interfacial resistance and improved charge collection efficiency. However, in a comparative study on ex situ and in situ methods of T/RGO preparation,20 we have observed that an in situ prepared sample has higher specific surface area, a more narrowed band gap, a higher degree of RGO reduction and finally exhibits better photovoltaic performance than that prepared via an ex situ method. Therefore, we use here an in situ prepared T/RGO hybrid as an electron acceptor/transport mediator in mesoscopic PSCs. The optical and photovoltaic properties of the T/RGO hybrid were studied as a function of RGO content. Moreover, a GO thin film was applied on the top of the perovskite layer as an insulating buffer skeleton through which the hole-transporting material (HTM) was infiltrated.
Soluble n-butyl substituted copper phthalocyanine (CuBuPc) is presently employed as an HTM. This material was introduced in previous publications.26,27 It is one of the simplest monomolecular hole transporters, which in combination with a GO buffer layer gave a satisfactory performance and can be one of the candidates for standard spiro-OMeTAD substitution. The data of the present work also support CuBuPc as an efficient alternative HTM.
Results and discussion
The structural and optical characterization data of T/RGO hybrids have been previously investigated,20 suggesting band gap narrowing, higher visible light absorption and larger specific surface area when compared with pristine TiO2. A structural survey by XRD and FESEM/EDX analysis of the T/RGO mesoscopic layer and of the perovskite film on the top is presented in the ESI,† Fig. S1 and S2. Thus XRD analysis detected the presence of an anatase-TiO2 phase with the strongest peak at 2θ = 25.31° formed in the T/RGO layer on the FTO substrate. Moreover, the XRD pattern of the perovskite film revealed a well-defined crystalline material with narrow and strong diffraction peaks at 14.24° (1 1 0), 20.16° (1 1 2), 28.59° (2 2 0), 31.81° (3 1 0), 40.67° (2 2 4), and 43.24° (3 3 0). EDX spectra were obtained by analyzing radiation at different positions on the same organo-lead halide perovskite film deposited on mesoporous T/RGO-FTO. The results have shown a perovskite compound with a high chlorine percentage.

Fig. 1(a and b) shows the FESEM top-view images of mesoscopic films on an FTO electrode substrate, which were deposited by using TiO2 and T/RGO, respectively. Due to the presence of RGO sheets, the T/RGO film is composed of a porous structure with larger pores than those of the pure TiO2 film. Such a porous structure allows deeper perovskite solution penetration into the mesoscopic T/RGO scaffold and a more efficient electron transfer mechanism. Fig. 1c shows GO on the top of the perovskite film. GO forms a thin layer, however, providing coverage of the underlying perovskite. Such coverage is necessary to discourage Au (from the top metal electrode) from coming into direct contact with the perovskite layer and create unwanted shunt paths. Finally, Fig. 1d displays the cross-sectional SEM image of the integral device. Thus, a 300 nm-thick perovskite film was formed on and within the T/RGO mesoporous layer, which was also about 300 nm thick. CuBuPc with a thickness of about 80 nm was spin-coated on the top of the GO film. A 90 nm-thick Au layer was finally thermally evaporated on CuBuPc as a metal cathode.
 Fig. 1  FESEM top-view images of (a) pure TiO2 and (b) T/RGO films on an FTO substrate; (c) GO buffer layer on the top of a perovskite film; and (d) cross-sectional view of the subsequent layers of a complete mesoscopic PSC device. The scale bar is 1 μm in (a and b), 100 nm in the insets of (a and b), 2 μm in (c) and 200 nm in (d). 
A schematic illustration of the PSC device studied in this work is given in Fig. 2 together with the corresponding energy levels. It is noteworthy that the T/RGO interface represents an electronic contact between a wide band gap semiconductor (TiO2) and a narrow band gap semiconductor (RGO). Such an interface can provide deep depletion of the charge carriers with substantial band bending. This will effectively reduce the accumulation of charge carriers at the T/RGO interface and effectively lock the possibility of back injection, leading to a unidirectional charge flow in the T/RGO mesoporous layer. However, the charge accumulation trend and interfacial charge recombination kinetics are discussed in more detail in the next paragraphs. Electrons and holes are generated when the incident photons are absorbed by the photoactive perovskite film. Then, electrons are transferred to the T/RGO layer and then to the (transparent) FTO electrode, while holes are collected by the GO infiltrated CuBuPc. A T/RGO ETL and a GO/CuBuPc HTL are necessary at the interface between the perovskite film and the charge-extracting electrodes. They can reduce the energy barrier level between the perovskite film and electrode materials and suppress interfacial charge recombination. In addition, the output VOC is defined by the active charge transport layers, since it is a function of the energy level difference between the LUMO and HOMO levels of the ETL and HTL, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the PSC structure employed in the present work and (b) energy level diagram showing charge flow. Energy levels have been obtained from ref. 26 and 28. 
Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) measurements of mesoscopic PSC devices based on various charge transport layers were carried out under AM1.5 illumination with both forward and reverse scans and the obtained plots are presented in Fig. 3a. In addition, Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of various types of devices extracted from the J–V curves under forward scan. The results indicate that the introduction of RGO into TiO2 mesoscopic PSCs resulted in better cell performance, which culminated for 0.2 wt% RGO and decreased for higher contents of RGO. The highest recorded efficiency was 15.9%, which was achieved in the presence of 0.2 wt% RGO. The presence of the optimal RGO content resulted in an increase of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) from 1.03 V to 1.07 V, the short-circuit current density (JSC) from 19.9 mA cm−2 to 21.0 mA cm−2 and the fill factor (FF) from 0.64 to 0.71. It is noteworthy that embedding of RGO sheets in the TiO2 matrix can improve JSC and VOC without sacrificing the FF, leading to an enhancement of the overall photoconversion efficiency (η) by about 22%, compared with pristine titania-based PSCs. In addition, the T/0.8RGO based device demonstrated a higher hysteresis effect compared to the control cell, which may be attributed to ionic charge storage in the RGO sheets. Fortunately, for lower levels of RGO content such obstacles have not appeared so that the T/0.1RGO and T/0.2RGO based PSC devices showed a negligible hysteresis effect. It must be underlined at this point that all the above data were obtained under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage curves with forward scan (FS) and reverse scan (RS), and (b) incident photon-to-current efficiency of mesoscopic PSCs made of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoporous layers with various RGO contents. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of different mesoscopic PSC devices extracted from their J–V curves




Mesoscopic layers

V
OC (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)




Pure TiO2
1.03
19.9
0.64
13.1


T/0.05 RGO
1.05
20.1
0.64
13.5


T/0.1 RGO
1.06
20.4
0.65
14.0


T/0.2 RGO
1.07
21.0
0.71
15.9


T/0.4 RGO
1.02
18.5
0.71
13.4


T/0.8 RGO
0.98
17.2
0.72
12.1





Fig. 3b presents IPCE spectra of mesoscopic PSCs with pure TiO2 and various T/RGO mesoporous layers. The results successfully displayed a similar trend of the observed photocurrent in J–V measurements. In other words, the maximal photon-to-electron conversion efficiency was achieved by the use of a T/RGO mesoporous scaffold containing 0.2 wt% RGO and it was decreased with further increase in RGO content. Obviously, the solar energy harvesting by the perovskite absorber layer is obscured at higher contents of RGO.
In order to appreciate the impact of RGO content on solar energy harvesting of the perovskite absorber layer, the optical transmittance and absorbance of T/RGO mesoscopic layers were measured as a function of RGO content. As shown in Fig. 4, transmittance decreased with increasing RGO content, and declined with further increase in RGO content greater than 0.2 wt%. Moreover, it is observed from Fig. 5a that the absorbance spectrum of pristine TiO2 underwent an enhancement of visible light absorption due to the incorporation of graphene. In accordance with Fig. 4 and 5a, we also observed optical transmittance and absorption losses in the mesoscopic layer of PSCs with high contents of RGO (not shown). It is then concluded that by blurring the mesoscopic layer, a lower intensity of light can reach the perovskite absorber layer and its light harvesting effect is reduced, resulting in a decrease of cell performance.
 Fig. 4  Transmittance of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoscopic layers on an FTO substrate as a function of RGO content. 
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis absorption and (b) photoluminescence spectra of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoscopic layers with 0.2 and 0.8 wt% RGO contents on an FTO substrate. Photoluminescence was recorded under excitation at 370 nm. 
The above data indicate that an optimal limited RGO content allows for higher mesoporous titania porosity and better perovskite penetration, and therefore better electron collection capacity without extensive transparency decrease. However, this is not the only RGO functionality. Most important is that its presence imparts better electron transport capacity to the ETL. This is, for example, suggested by the following experiment. The presently made titania films emitted substantial photoluminescence. As shown in Fig. 5b, under excitation at λexc. = 370 nm, a characteristic luminescence peak can be recorded. In Fig. 5, measurements were made by using a single-layer mesoporous titania film deposited on an FTO substrate, without any other device components. In the presence of pristine titania, the film emitted photoluminescence. However, when RGO was introduced into titania, the photoluminescence intensity was extensively reduced. Interestingly, at a higher RGO content luminescence quenching was more limited. This indicates that the presence of RGO substantially affects the electronic properties of titania in addition to the optical effect, i.e. the decrease of transparency. It is thus concluded that the presence of RGO facilitates electron transport and results in hampering electron–hole recombination. Emission of light by titania can, of course, occur only by electron-hole recombination through exciton emission.

Fig. 6 shows the EIS Nyquist plots of the analyzed mesoscopic PSCs. The results were obtained under dark and illumination conditions by applying a bias voltage of VOC. The EIS spectra were fitted using a transmission line (TL) (Fig. S3 in the ESI†), as previously used for solid-state dye-sensitized cells utilizing spiro-OMeTAD.29 The first remarkable result is that similar impedance patterns were obtained for both pure TiO2 and composite T/RGO electrodes. The Nyquist plots under dark conditions (Fig. 6a) exhibit only one semicircle attributed to the charge transfer resistance (Rt) at the interface between charge transfer layers and the perovskite film. The PSC device with a T/0.2RGO mesoporous layer had lower Rt resistance, i.e. a smaller semicircle, than the control device with pure TiO2. The smaller Rt implies a faster charge extraction from the interfaces of the perovskite film. This result confirms the conclusions drawn from the above photoluminescence measurements, as shown in Fig. 5b. The Nyquist plots under illumination conditions (Fig. 6b) are characterized by a major arc at intermediate and low frequencies plus additional minor features at high frequencies. The high-frequency part of the spectra contains information on transport resistance (Rt) and series resistance (Rs) elements, as well as dielectric contributions.30 The low frequency arc is attributed to the recombination resistance (Rr) in the photoactive layer.31 By fitting the Nyquist plot with an equivalent TL, the T/0.2RGO based device shows a smaller value of Rt (diameter of the semicircle in the high frequency region) and a wider semicircle in the low frequency region (i.e., higher interfacial recombination resistance). The more efficient electron transport process from the perovskite photo-active layer and the more efficient suppression of charge recombination in the case of RGO based PSC devices resulted in a long electron lifetime and better device performance, compared with the pure TiO2-based device.
 Fig. 6  EIS Nyquist plots at a bias voltage of VOC under (a) dark and (b) AM 1.5G illumination conditions for mesoscopic PSCs made with pure TiO2 and T/0.2RGO mesoporous layers as electron transport mediators. 
A high density of states of charge accumulation has previously been observed in a perovskite light harvester material.5 To optimize the photovoltaic performance of mesoscopic PSCs, the accumulated photogenerated charges must dissociate into free electrons and holes. The main factor controlling this phenomenon is interfacial charge recombination. One possible way to suppress charge recombination is exhausting the accumulated electrons from the perovskite into the mesoporous layer, which is mainly composed of a large density of grain boundary defects as obstacles to effective electron transport. Thus, embedding RGO sheets with long direct electrical pathways and without grain boundaries into a mesoporous matrix may make electron transport easier and, therefore, the accumulated electrons may be rapidly exhausted. Consequently, this results in an increase in cell efficiency. Fig. 7 shows a decrease in the chemical capacitance (Cμ) of simulated TL in the presence of RGO, especially for measurements under illumination conditions, which maps a decrease of charge accumulation and density of states (DOS) in a lead-halide perovskite layer.5 It seems then that RGO sheets allow photo-induced electrons to be efficiently transported along their length through the mesoscopic TiO2 scaffold and also act as depletion channels to efficiently extract photo-induced electrons from the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 7  Capacitance versus RGO content under dark and AM 1.5G illumination conditions in mesoscopic PSCs made of pure TiO2 and T/RGO electron transport mediators. The capacitances for all cells were extracted by fitting the EIS curves to simulated TL (shown in Fig. S3 in the ESI†) and were normalized to the electrode volume. 
The normalized efficiencies of devices made with pure TiO2 and T/0.2RGO mesoporous layers acquired during ageing tests are depicted in Fig. 8 and Fig. S6 (ESI†). The devices were kept in a dry box in the dark and their photovoltaic performances were measured at different time intervals in ambient air at room temperature. The ambient humidity ranged between 28–and 32%. A comparison of the performances of the two devices indicated that the photoconversion efficiency of the pure TiO2-based PSC underwent more rapid deterioration in a few days. An RGO-containing mesoporous layer significantly delays the photoinduced degradation, thereby retaining about 66% of the initial photoconversion efficiency after 20 days of device operation, while in the pristine device only about 45% remained. Oxygen-induced defects apparently deteriorate both configurations, but it is more serious in pure TiO2. The superior operational stability of the T/0.2RGO mesoporous layer may be attributed to the reduction of oxygen-induced defects in the TiO2 matrix by RGO-passivation. In other words, the RGO sheets passivate bulk and surface defects of the anatase-TiO2 lattice, leading to the removal of deep electronic traps, alleviation of defects at the perovskite–T/RGO interface and enhancement of electron extraction. These functionalities are associated with the observed beneficial effects of lower DOS in the perovskite layer (as shown in Fig. 7) and reduced carrier recombination compared to pure TiO2 (as shown in Fig. 6).
 Fig. 8  Normalized efficiency as a function of ageing time for mesoscopic PSC devices based on (1) pure TiO2 and (2) T/0.2RGO mesoporous layers as electron transport mediators. 
Conclusions
An in situ prepared T/RGO nanocomposite was used as an electron acceptor/transport mediator in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. The photovoltaic performance of T/RGO-based devices was promising. JSC, VOC and FF values were improved by introduction of RGO and resulted in an enhancement of the photoconversion efficiency from 13.1 to 15.9% and increase of device stability with 0.2 wt% RGO content under ambient conditions. With further increase in RGO content, JSC and η were decreased due to the lower transmittance of the T/RGO mesoporous layer. At low contents of RGO, the cell-efficiency improvement was mainly attributed to the role of RGO as a suppressor of the electron–hole recombination by facilitating electron transport in the titania matrix. In addition, the presence of RGO induces higher porosity in the titania layer, allowing better perovskite penetration.
Experimental procedures
Materials
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, unless otherwise specified, and they were used as received. SnO2:F transparent conductive electrodes (FTO, resistance 7 Ω square−1) were purchased from Solaronix (TCO22-7).
GO and T/RGO synthesis
Full details of GO synthesis and preparation methods of T/RGO nanocomposites have been reported in our previous work.20 Briefly, GO was synthesized based on the Hummers and Offeman method,32 involving two steps: pre-oxidation of graphite flakes and exfoliation of graphene oxide. In the first step, K2S2O8 and P2O5 were utilized as oxidizing agents of graphite flakes in concentrated H2SO4 at 80 °C. In the second step, the above oxidized graphite powder underwent progressive oxidation and exfoliation using KMnO4 and NaNO3 in a cooled H2SO4 bath. Deionized water was added to the mixture in order to increase the oxidation degree of the GO product. Residual oxidizing agents were dissolved with 30% H2O2. The gross product was treated with 10% HCl solution in ethanol and deionized water to eliminate the residual metal ions. The yellow-brown GO dispersion was then subjected to dialysis to completely remove metal ions and acids. Finally, it was dehydrated in an air oven to yield the GO powder. An FESEM image of produced GO sheets is presented in Fig. S4a in the ESI.† In the next step, we prepared five various concentrations of GO powder in a solution of deionized water and glacial acetic acid. 10, 20, 40, 80 and 160 mg of GO were dispersed in a solution of 24 mL of deionized water and 8 mL of glacial acetic acid. The resultant homogeneously exfoliated suspensions were used as a graphene source to synthesize T/RGO nanocomposite nanoparticles via an in situ solvothermal procedure as follows. 5 mL of titanium tetraisopropoxide was dissolved in 26 mL of 1-octanol at room temperature. Then 2 mL of the abovementioned GO solutions was added dropwise to the former solution under vigorous stirring in an ice bath. After stirring for 6 h under reflux for peptization, the mixture was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave with a capacity of 47 mL and kept at 180 °C for 8 h, and then cooled naturally to room temperature. The obtained product consisted of a viscous lower fluid and a clear supernatant, which was decanted, while the viscous residue was diluted with 25 mL of ethanol and the aggregates were dispersed by ultrasound for 1 min. The solution was then allowed to rest to form grey precipitates, which were rinsed three times by decanting using ethanol. The final TiO2/RGO hybrids were dried at ambient temperature. FESEM and TEM images of the TiO2/RGO nanocomposite sample are shown in Fig. S4b and S5 in the ESI.† Here we investigated five different GO/titania mass ratios: TiO2–0.05 wt% RGO (T/0.05 RGO), TiO2–0.1 wt% RGO (T/0.1 RGO), TiO2–0.2 wt% RGO (T/0.2 RGO), TiO2–0.4 wt% RGO (T/0.4 RGO) and TiO2–0.8 wt% RGO (T/0.8 RGO). Pure TiO2 nanoparticles were also synthesized under the same conditions, except that the GO aqueous solution was replaced by the same volume of pure deionized water as a reference.
Paste preparation
1 mL of glacial acetic acid was added dropwise to 2 g of the nanoparticles (pure TiO2 or T/RGO composite) under grinding in a mortar grinder for about 20 min. After getting a sticky paste, 2 mL of distilled water and 32 mL of ethanol were added gradually and successively under grinding. The whole mixture was then transferred to a beaker. After 10 min stirring, 6.5 g of α-terpineol was added and sonicated for 10 min. Finally, 2 g of a stock solution of ethyl cellulose in ethanol (111 mg mL−1) as a polymeric binder was added to increase its viscosity and optimize its rheology.
Perovskite solar cell device construction
FTO-coated glass substrates were cut into pieces of dimensions 1 cm × 3 cm. One third of the conductive layer was etched using zinc powder and hydrochloric acid. Etched FTO glasses were then washed with mild detergent, rinsed several times with distilled water and subsequently with ethanol and acetone in an ultrasonic bath, and finally dried under an air stream. A compact thin layer of TiO2 was then deposited on this patterned and cleaned FTO electrode by aerosol spray pyrolysis using a solution of 0.2 M diisopropoxytitanium bis(acetylacetonate) in ethanol. After spraying, the samples were heated for 1 h at 500 °C. Subsequently, a mesoporous layer was deposited by spin coating for 60 s at 4000 rpm, using the above prepared pure TiO2 or composite T/RGO paste. After spin coating, the layers were dried for 20 min at 100 °C and calcined for 60 min at 350 °C. The samples were then treated with 0.04 M TiCl4 aqueous solution by dipping for 30 min at 70 °C, followed by copiously rinsing and annealing at 350 °C. The active perovskite layer was deposited on the prepared mesoscopic films via the following procedure. A precursor solution was made by mixing 253 mg of PbCl2 and 507 mg of PbI2 with 270 mg of methyl ammonium iodide in 1.5 mL of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). The solution was kept under stirring for about 2 h at about 80 °C and then deposited by two consecutive spin-coating steps: first 1000 rpm for 10 s, and then 6000 rpm for 30 s. During the second step, 1 mL of chlorobenzene, as an anti-solvent, was gently dropped onto the spinning substrate. The layer was then heated at 90 °C for about 45 min, which made the sample's color turn from yellow to black. Based on our previous experience,27 GO can improve the performance of CuBuPc as an HTM in PSCs. Herein, before applying CuBuPc, we deposited a porous skeleton of GO as a buffer layer directly on top of the perovskite layer (as shown in Fig. 1c). This layer was formed by spin coating 100 μL of a dispersion of GO sheets in isopropanol (5 mg mL−1) at 2000 rpm for 60 s. The HTL solution was prepared by dissolving 40 mg of CuBuPc in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. CuBuPc was the same material used in our previous publications,26,27 where its synthesis details are presented. The HTL solution was deposited by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 60 s. It should be noted that all procedures were carried out under ambient conditions of 28–32% relative humidity. The last step in preparing the solid state solar cell was the deposition of 90 nm thick gold electrodes by thermal evaporation under vacuum. The unit devices had an active size of 15 mm2 (10 mm × 1.5 mm) as defined by the size of the gold electrodes.
Characterization and measurements
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with a PHILIPS-PW1800 diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The size and morphology of TiO2 nanoparticles on the RGO sheets were analyzed using a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM/HRTEM, JEOL, JEM-2100, Japan) operating at 200 kV. Device configuration and morphological characterization of the produced materials and mesoscopic layers were carried out using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, MIRA3 TESCAN, Czech Republic) with a field emission gun equipped with an EDX system. The transmittance and absorbance properties of the mesoporous layers were recorded using an AVASPEC-2048-TEC (Avantes, Netherlands). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the samples were recorded with a Cary Eclipse Fluorescence spectrometer. The photovoltaic characteristics of the PSCs were studied using a Zahner Cimps solar simulator (Zahner, Kronach, Germany) set at 100 mW cm−2 and under ambient conditions, illuminated through a mask of aperture size 1 × 6 mm2. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the cells was obtained using a setup with a Jarrel-Ash monochromator, a 100 W halogen lamp and a calibrated photodiode (Thorlabs). Electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS) characterization was carried out on mesoscopic PSCs with a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT128N, Autolab B.V., Netherlands) under both dark and AM 1.5G illumination conditions in the 1 Hz–3 MHz frequency range.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. R. Mohammadi and E. Nouri are thankful for the financial support from the Sharif University of Technology (SUT) through research grant no. G940309, and especially the financial support from the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) through a research grant.
Notes and references
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Wolf, J. Holovsky, S. J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F. J. Haug, J. H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Motta, F. E. Mellouhi and S. Sanvito, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, I. M. Sero, V. G. Pedro, F. F. Santiago, E. J. J. Perez, N. G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. C. Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, Z. Lin, Y. Hao, K. Zeng, Q. H. Xu and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7943 CAS .
D. H. Kim, G. S. Han, W. M. Seong, J. W. Lee, B. J. Kim, N. G. Park, K. S. Hong, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pathak, A. Abate, P. Ruckdeschel, B. Roose, K. C. Gödel, Y. Vaynzof, A. Santhala, S. I. Watanabe, D. J. Hollman, N. Noel, A. Sepe, U. Wiesner, R. Friend, H. J. Snaith and U. Steiner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6046 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, A. L. Domanski, A. K. Chandiran, R. Berger, H. J. Butt, M. I. Dar, T. Moehl, N. Tetreault, P. Gao, S. Ahmad, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1508 RSC .
A. Fakharuddin, F. D. Giacomo, I. Ahmed, Q. Wali, T. M. Brown and R. Jose, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 61 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rapsomanikis, D. Karageorgopoulos, P. Lianos and E. Stathatos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 151, 36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Lia, W. Xu, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, S. Zhang, A. Cao and L. H. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 728 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, F. Huang, D. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3264 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nouri, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 38 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, M. Li, K. Guo, Y. Zhu, Z. Hu, X. Liu, B. Chen and X. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 174 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Tsai, P. H. Fei and W. C. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 356 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. A. Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. M. Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicolas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Han, Y. H. Song, Y. U. Jin, J. W. Lee, N. G. Park, B. K. Kang, J. K. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Yoon and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23521 CAS .
E. Nouri, Y. L. Wang, Q. Chen, J. J. Xu, V. Dracopoulos, L. Sygellou, Z. X. Xu, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 1417 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nouri, Y. L. Wang, Q. Chen, J. J. Xu, G. Paterakis, V. Dracopoulos, Z. X. Xu, D. Tasis, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 233, 36 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nouri, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1630 RSC .
F. F. Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 558 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 847 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, F. F. Santiago, I. M. Sero, G. G. Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CAS .
W. Hummers and R. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04538gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  FESEM top-view images of (a) pure TiO2 and (b) T/RGO films on an FTO substrate; (c) GO buffer layer on the top of a perovskite film; and (d) cross-sectional view of the subsequent layers of a complete mesoscopic PSC device. The scale bar is 1 μm in (a and b), 100 nm in the insets of (a and b), 2 μm in (c) and 200 nm in (d).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the PSC structure employed in the present work and (b) energy level diagram showing charge flow. Energy levels have been obtained from ref. 26 and 28.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage curves with forward scan (FS) and reverse scan (RS), and (b) incident photon-to-current efficiency of mesoscopic PSCs made of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoporous layers with various RGO contents.	 

Pure TiO2	1.03	19.9	0.64	13.1
T/0.05 RGO	1.05	20.1	0.64	13.5
T/0.1 RGO	1.06	20.4	0.65	14.0
T/0.2 RGO	1.07	21.0	0.71	15.9
T/0.4 RGO	1.02	18.5	0.71	13.4
T/0.8 RGO	0.98	17.2	0.72	12.1

 	Fig. 4  Transmittance of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoscopic layers on an FTO substrate as a function of RGO content.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis absorption and (b) photoluminescence spectra of pure TiO2 and T/RGO mesoscopic layers with 0.2 and 0.8 wt% RGO contents on an FTO substrate. Photoluminescence was recorded under excitation at 370 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  EIS Nyquist plots at a bias voltage of VOC under (a) dark and (b) AM 1.5G illumination conditions for mesoscopic PSCs made with pure TiO2 and T/0.2RGO mesoporous layers as electron transport mediators.	 

 	Fig. 7  Capacitance versus RGO content under dark and AM 1.5G illumination conditions in mesoscopic PSCs made of pure TiO2 and T/RGO electron transport mediators. The capacitances for all cells were extracted by fitting the EIS curves to simulated TL (shown in Fig. S3 in the ESI†) and were normalized to the electrode volume.	 

 	Fig. 8  Normalized efficiency as a function of ageing time for mesoscopic PSC devices based on (1) pure TiO2 and (2) T/0.2RGO mesoporous layers as electron transport mediators.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04538g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
