Gradual modification of ITO particle's crystal structure and optical properties by pulsed UV laser irradiation in a free liquid jet   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7DT00010C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7DT00010C
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6039-6048Gradual modification of ITO particle's crystal structure and optical properties by pulsed UV laser irradiation in a free liquid jet†

        
          
            Marcus 
            Lau
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Straube
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            A. Vikas 
            Aggarwal
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ulrich 
            Hagemann
          
        
      bf, 
      
        
          
            Bernardo 
            de Oliveira Viestel
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nils 
            Hartmann
          
        
      bdf, 
      
        
          
            Torsten 
            Textor
          
        
      bg, 
      
        
          
            Harald 
            Lutz
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jochen S. 
            Gutmann
          
        
      bcd and 

        
          
            Stephan 
            Barcikowski
          
        
      *ab
aTechnical Chemistry I, Department of Chemistry, University of Duisburg-Essen, Universitaetsstraße 7, 45141 Essen, Germany. E-mail: stephan.barcikowski@uni-due.de
bCenter for Nanointegration Duisburg-Essen (CENIDE), University of Duisburg-Essen, Carl-Benz-Str. 199, 47057 Duisburg, Germany
cDeutsches Textilforschungszentrum Nord-West gGmbH (DTNW), Adlerstr. 1, 47798 Krefeld, Germany
dPhysical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Duisburg-Essen, Universitaetsstraße 5, 45141 Essen, Germany
eCHT R. BEITLICH GmbH, Bismarckstr. 102, 72072 Tübingen, Germany. E-mail: harald.lutz@cht.com
fInterdisciplinary Center for Analytics on the Nanoscale (ICAN), University of Duisburg-Essen, Carl-Benz-Str. 199, 47057 Duisburg, Germany
gReutlingen University—Textile Chemistry, Faculty of Textiles & Design, Alteburgstraße 150, 72762 Reutlingen, Germany
Received 
      2nd January 2017
    , Accepted 26th March 2017First published on 28th March 2017AbstractIndium tin oxide (ITO) particle coatings are known for high transparency in the visible, good conductive properties and near-infrared absorption. These properties depend on ITO particle's stoichiometric composition, defects and size. Here we present a method to gradually change ITO particle's optical properties by a simple and controlled laser irradiation process. The defined irradiation process and controlled energy dose input allows one to engineer the absorption and transmission of coatings made from these particles. We investigate the role of the surrounding solvent, influence of laser fluence and the specific energy dose targeting modification of the ITO particle's morphology and chemistry by stepwise laser irradiation in a free liquid jet. TEM, SEM, EDX, XPS, XRD and Raman are used to elucidate the structural, morphological and chemical changes of the laser-induced ITO particles. On the basis of these results the observed modification of the optical properties is tentatively attributed to chemical changes, e.g. laser-induced defects or partial reduction.
Introduction
Indium tin oxide (ITO) is widely used to produce transparent and conductive coatings on substrates as transparent electrodes, e.g., for displays or solar cells. It has the formula In2O3:Sn, has a wide bandgap of 3.5 to 4.3 eV, is transparent in the visible range, shows high reflectance in the infrared, is chemically inert and is electrically conductive.1 To achieve the highest conductivity, about 90 wt% of the n-type semiconductor has to be indium oxide.2 ITO is a preferred material for a lot of industrial applications due to its superior optical and conductive properties even though indium is a rare and therefore expensive metal. A variety of methods are used for fabrication of ITO. Most commonly ITO thin films are prepared by direct-current magnetron sputtering from ITO target materials.3,4 Also electron beam evaporation,5 reactive thermal deposition6 and sol–gel processes2,7,8 are established to synthesize ITO thin films. Furthermore, new precursors are under investigation.9 Besides these methods, pulsed laser deposition from ITO targets in the gas phase to deposit thin ITO films is an established method.10–13
Omata et al. reported that the amount of oxygen deficiency in the ITO system plays a role for the conduction electron density and can be related to the lattice parameter a.14 Furthermore it is known that the colour of the ITO particles ranges from yellow over green to bluish, depending on particle's stoichiometric composition. Bühler et al., for instance, achieved the transformation from yellow appearing ITO particles to bluish by a micro wave-assisted synthesis in ionic liquids.15
Even though recent investigations focus on alternative materials that can be employed as transparent electrodes,16 including non-metallic materials,17,18 ITO is widely and commonly used due to its unique properties and therefore of particular interest for applications. Katagiri et al. reported that the plasmon resonance of ITO nanoparticles can be modified and NIR-shielding is improved with increasing Sn concentration.19 Fang et al. demonstrated that similar effects can be obtained from ITO/Au/ITO sandwich structures.20 Kanahera et al. showed that the plasmon resonance of ITO nanoparticles can be modified by variation of the Sn concentration,21 demonstrating the correlation of the optical properties with particle's composition. Another possibility to modify the optical properties of ITO is employing dopants22 or additives.23
Here, an alternative route to modify ITO particle's optical properties by pulsed laser irradiation in liquids is studied.
A study of Usui et al. demonstrated that nanosecond UV laser irradiation with 355 nm in water results in fragmentation of the ITO particles and in an increased transmission in the UV/Vis range of laser-treated colloidal solutions and a decreased NIR transmission of coatings derived from the laser-treated particle solutions.24 In this study we focus on the influence of the solvent, laser fluence and the number of irradiation cycles during nanosecond UV laser irradiation to obtain improved NIR absorption properties. This particle design of ITO particle coatings aims at energy applications, e.g., for transparent coatings reducing heat flux in the NIR region.
Thus, this article gives insight into three different process limiting parameters for laser irradiation of suspended ITO particles irradiated with a UV laser aiming at an increase of NIR absorption without additional dopants. Here, the impact of energy density, dispersant and processing time is described and discussed.
Experimental
The process chain for fabrication of the particle-based foil surface coatings and their subsequent optical characterization comprises the preparation of a dispersion with commercially available ITO particles, pulsed laser irradiation of these dispersions, concentration of the dispersions prior to the application, spin-coating on PET foils and the characterisation of optical properties. The different experimental steps are therefore divided into the sections: laser irradiation of particles, surface coating, and reflection and transmission measurements, respectively.
Pulsed laser irradiation of particles
Nano-sized ITO particles (FOX Chemicals) were suspended in deionized water (Millipore, <0.0543 μS), ethanol (technical grade, Caldic Deutschland Chemie, 97 vol% EtOH, ∼1 vol% MEK, ∼2 vol% H2O) and their mixtures. Mass concentration of the particles was set to 0.1 wt%. 1 wt% (0.001 wt% absolute) TODS [(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]acetic acid (Merck)) referred to the particle mass was added. 300 mL of the ITO particle dispersions were irradiated with 355 nm (3rd harmonic of an Nd:YAG laser (AVIA, Coherent)) with 85 kHz repetition rate, 270 μJ pulse energy and 40 ns pulse length in a self-developed free liquid jet reactor,25–27 respectively. The applied laser fluence was calculated by knowing the distance of the liquid jet to the lens. The advantages and possibilities of controlling the fluence and specific energy input utilizing this liquid flow reactor design have been reported previously for different model materials.25–27 Focusing of the 3.5 mm raw beam was carried out with a fused silica plano convex lens, focal length 100 mm (Thorlabs) or a fused silica cylindrical lens, focal length 100 mm (Thorlabs). The convex lens focuses the laser beam in all cross-sectional directions equally, and thus generates a circular spot and the cylindrical lens focuses the laser beam only in one axis (here vertically). For the circular laser spot higher energy densities are reached while the elliptical spot allows irradiation of the complete front of the liquid jet in the horizontal direction as illustrated in Fig. 1 (neglecting diffraction of the laser light at the curved surface of the liquid jet).
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the free liquid jet (containing the particles for controlled laser processing) passing the laser beam focused by a spherical lens (left) and by a cylindrical lens (right) resulting in different laser spots on the liquid jet's surface. 
Surface coatings
Subsequent to pulsed laser treatment the ITO particles were concentrated in the dispersant by centrifugation (2 h, 5000 rpm). The supernatant has been removed until a final particle concentration of about 10 wt% was achieved. Prior to spin-coating of the dispersions, 20 wt% (referred to ITO particle's mass) (2 wt% absolute) pre-hydrolyzed 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTS) (98%, ABCR) has been added and the dispersions were treated in an ultrasonic bath for several minutes. The organosilane acts as a binder as described by Dahoudi et al.28 and Goebbert et al.29 and 2 ml of the resulting sols were applied to circular PET foils (8 cm diameter) by using a custom-made spin coating apparatus (60 s, 1000 rpm). Samples were post-treated by UV-irradiation for 10 min to cross-link the binder (UV lamp SC-UV400 F R7s, Silberberger). The coating was dried at 130 °C for 20 minutes after deposition of three layers, evaporating the residual solvent and curing the particle coating. In addition to the reflection and transmission measurements selected coatings were analyzed by SEM (Hitachi, S3400N). The coatings had a thickness of around 1 μm after drying.
Reflection and transmission measurements
Transmission and reflection measurements were conducted with a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer on coated PET-foils employing integration spheres. Depending on the spectral range IR (25000 nm–2000 nm) or tungsten (2000 nm–357.1 nm) radiation source, KBr (25000 nm–2000 nm) or quartz (2000 nm–357.1 nm) beam splitter, DLaTGs- (25000 nm–1000 nm), Si- (1111.1 nm–454.5 nm) or GaP-detector (555.6 nm–357.1 nm) and gold (25000 nm–1000 nm) or PTFE (1111.1 nm–357.1 nm) integration sphere were used for the measurements.
XRD analysis
X-ray diffraction measurements were carried out with a Cu Kα X-ray source at 40 kV with 40 mA on a Bruker D8 Advance. The dispersed and laser irradiated particles were removed from the solvent by removing the clear supernatant after sedimentation of the particles within 14 days of storage. For the XRD analysis the sediment particles were dried prior to analysis. Around 10 mg of dried powder was used for each XRD analysis on a silicon wafer.
The crystallite size of the particles was determined from the XRD pattern by using the Debye–Scherrer equation:  with L as the crystallite size, λ as the wavelength of the X-ray source (0.154 nm), FWHM as the full width at half maximum of the peak, b as instrumental peak broadening (0.044°) and θ as the angle of the peak maximum at 30.52°, 35.39°, 50.94° and 60.56° 2θ.
High resolution transmission electron microscopy
The high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) were obtained with a probe-side Cs-corrected JEOL JEM 2200FS with an Oxford X-MAX 100 detector at 200 kV acceleration voltage. Overview images were obtained in conventional bright-field (BF) TEM mode while the high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM mode was used for the high-resolution micrographs.
XPS analysis
XPS analysis was performed with a VersaProbe II system from Ulvac-Phi using both, monochromatic Al-Kα radiation at hν = 1486.8 eV as well as non-monochromatic Mg Kα radiation at hν = 1253.6 eV. For the measurements all particulate samples were analyzed at room temperature at an emission angle of 45°. Particles were placed on double-sided Scotch tape, measured with dual beam charge neutralization and referenced to the Cu 2p signal at 932.67 eV of Ar+ cleaned thin copper foil on the same piece of tape. Measurements were carried out prior to and after mild Ar+ sputtering at 500 eV for 1–2 min. The detected peaks were fitted using the software CasaXPS. In the XPS data, the error of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the In 3d5/2 peak represents the standard deviation of five Monte Carlo simulations fitting the asymmetric peak using CasaXPS.
Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy measurements are carried out in backscattering geometry using an InVia Raman microspectrometer from Renishaw at a wavelength of 532 nm. A microscope objective (N-Plan EPi 100×, Leica) with a numerical aperture of NA = 0.85 yields a spot diameter of ≈1 μm. The laser power, exposure time and cycle number were set to 0.4 mW, 2 s and 40 cycles, respectively. The spectral resolution was ≈1.5 cm−1, using a 2400 lines per mm grating centered at 600 cm−1. For comparison, the intensity of the displayed spectra is scaled setting the background in the <100 cm−1 region to zero and the intensity of the T2g peak at 109 cm−1 to one. Subsequently, individual spectra are shifted vertically.
Results and discussion
The ITO particle suspensions were exposed to defined UV laser irradiation. Within the experiments different parameters such as the influence of the solvent, the applied laser fluence and the number of irradiation cycles were investigated. This allows for a detailed insight into the laser irradiation process and the influence of laser-treated particles on the optical properties, as described in the following.
Influence of the solvent
Variation of the solvent composition from pure water to pure ethanol in 10 vol% steps revealed that the solvent has a crucial impact on generated particle's optical properties. Fig. 2 depicts the change of absorption (a), reflection (b) and transmission (c) properties of the coatings fabricated from the particle suspensions that were laser irradiated in different mixtures of water and ethanol. The strongest change of absorption and transmission is observed when particles are laser-treated in pure ethanol. Thereby an increase of nearly 30% in absorption properties (or decrease in transmission, as reflection in the NIR changes not significantly) can be observed. In Fig. 2(d) the change of absorption, reflection and transmission at 1600 nm (∼peak maximum) are shown for the two solvents water and ethanol and their mixtures, respectively. This illustrates the impact of the solvent and that the optical absorption properties of the particle coatings on PET foils change, rather than their reflection. The spectra of all particle coatings before and after laser irradiation prepared in the different solvents and their mixtures are shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the ITO particle coatings made of ITO particles laser-irradiated in different solvent mixtures of water and ethanol for 10 cycles of UV laser irradiation in liquid flow at around 60 mJ cm−2 using the spherical lens; (d) difference of absorption, reflection and transmission at 1600 nm for the different solvent mixtures, respectively. 
It is important to note that the same change in the optical appearance of particle suspensions irradiated in pure water initially occurs as well, but as can be seen in Fig. S2 in the ESI† this change is not stable. The aqueous dispersion's colour changes back from bluish to yellowish green after a storage time of about 160 hours. On the contrary, ethanol based dispersions prevent this change back to the original colour thus resulting in stable particle properties. The particle suspensions used for the coatings investigated here were all stored for about 330 hours prior to further processing.
Influence of the laser fluence
Not only the solvent has a crucial role to play in achieving a significant and stable change of the optical properties of ITO particles in the NIR regime but also the laser energy density, namely the pulse fluence, plays an important role. Fig. 3 shows a photograph of ethanolic dispersions with the reactant particles (left) and laser irradiated particles treated with different fluences in the liquid jet reactor. It is obvious that a strong change of the optical appearance occurs when the particle dispersions are laser irradiated.
 Fig. 3  Photograph of the ITO suspensions “reactant” irradiated for 10 cycles in the liquid jet reactor with different energy densities using a spherical lens (fluence values shown as the inset for each suspension). 
The change from the yellow to bluish appearance can be correlated to the improved NIR-absorption properties of the particle-based coatings. Note that similar observations were made for laser irradiation of the particles in the different solvent mixtures, whereas the strongest and stable change from the yellow to bluish appearance was made in pure ethanol. Such effects as chemical reduction in the alcoholic environment and oxidative effects in the aqueous environment have been reported previously.30,31,32

Fig. 4(a) shows the XRD pattern of the ITO particles (taken from the reactant) and Fig. 4(b) the determined crystallite size of the laser irradiated particles treated with different fluences. No additional peaks or significant shifts in the peak position are observed after laser irradiation indicating that ITO's crystal structure is maintained as illustrated in Fig. 4(c). When increasing the fluence up to about 73 mJ cm−2 a continuously increasing crystallite size (after 10 cycles) is determined. For a laser fluence of about 330 mJ cm−2 a less significant increase in crystallite size is observed, as can be seen in Fig. 4(b), which correlates with the changes in optical properties shown in Fig. 5. A fusion based melting process of particles has been reported33 whereas the fluence threshold for melting strongly depends on particle's cross section.34 But possible chemical conversions during pulsed laser melting and the dependency on the laser fluence have been reported earlier.32,35,36
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD pattern of the used ITO particles and (b) determined crystallite size of ITO laser-treated particles irradiated in pure ethanol with different fluences for 10 cycles using a spherical lens and (c) stacked XRD pattern of the particle materials irradiated with the different fluences. 
 Fig. 5  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the coatings made of ITO particles laser-irradiated for 50 cycles in the liquid jet reactor with a cylindrical lens in pure ethanol with different fluences; (d) relative absorption, transmission and reflection at 1600 nm for the different applied laser irradiation fluences. 
This means that there is obviously an optimal fluence regime (∼70 mJ cm−2) for nanosecond pulsed laser melting and for increasing the NIR-absorption properties (≥18 mJ cm−2) of particle-based coatings.
The decrease of absorption (or increase in the change of transmission) at even higher laser fluence (332 mJ cm−2) is in good agreement with findings for the onset laser fluence of laser fragmentation. Experiments with zinc oxide particle suspensions demonstrated that increasing laser fluence results in melting first followed by a fragmentation regime. At sufficient laser energy density an optical breakdown of the surrounding liquid occurs, making the process less efficient25 explaining why the efficiency for laser modification of the particle properties is fluence-limited. Fig. 5(b) depicts the reflection spectrum up to 5000 nm demonstrating that in the short-wavelength and mid-wavelength infrared regime reflection of the coatings made of the ITO particles can be increased as well by laser irradiation of the dispersed particles.
Influence of irradiation cycles
The sequential irradiation in the free liquid jet reactor allows us to study the evolution of particle properties at a defined laser energy dose.25,26 Here we used a cylindrical lens focusing the laser beam in the vertical direction only, and thus allowing us to illuminate the whole front of the 1.3 mm liquid jet with the elliptical formed laser spot. The laser fluence was set to about 60 mJ cm−2 and 300 mL dispersions were irradiated for 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 cycles, respectively. Fig. 6 shows a photograph of the particles dried after laser irradiation in pure ethanol. The gradual change from greenish to blue during the increase of irradiation cycle (equivalent to energy input) is obvious. This also means that the particle properties are preserved even after drying and exposure to air for several months.
 Fig. 6  Photograph of dried ITO particles laser-treated in pure ethanol at 60 mJ cm−2 for different numbers of cycles (from left to right 0, 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 cycles, respectively) using the cylindrical lens, stored in air for several months. 
The change of optical appearance correlates with the change of the absorption properties in the NIR regime. Fig. 7 shows the absorption, reflection and transmission spectra (a)–(c) as well as the corresponding values at 1600 nm (d) for the coatings made of laser-modified ITO particles treated up to 20 cycles. Comparing the reactants (educts) from Fig. 5 and 7 reveals a difference in the NIR-regime. We believe that this difference is related to an additional dispersion and drying step that the reactant particles shown in Fig. 7 underwent.
 Fig. 7  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the ITO particle-based coatings laser-irradiated in ethanol for up to 20 cycles with the cylindrical lens at around 60 mJ cm−2 and (d) relative intensity of transmission, reflection and absorption in dependence on the cycles. 
The specific energy input was determined by measuring the laser power behind the free liquid jet of pure solvent and of the particle containing dispersion. Particle's uptake of laser power was about 5.5 W at around 63 mJ cm−2. Multiplying the power input with the irradiation time (∼310 s for 300 mL, time each cycle takes) and dividing this by the particle's mass (300 mg, 0.1 wt%) gives an energy input of around 5683 J g−1 per irradiation cycle. This important scaling parameter25,27 allows the transfer of this process easily to other laser sources (considering the same laser wavelength and fluence as this determines the mechanism how particles are processed).
The number of pulses per particle and cycle (NP) is given by the flow velocity (vl) of the liquid jet, the repetition rate of the laser (Rr) and the height of the laser spot (h) parallel to the flow direction of the free liquid jet by the following correlation NP = vl−1 × Rr × h. For optimal irradiation parameters with the cylindrical lens at around 73 mJ cm−2 the laser spot height was calculated to be around 480 μm. This gives around 177 pulses per particle and cycle with the flow velocity of around 23 cm s−1 and 85 kHz repetition rate of the laser.
SEM, TEM and HAADF-TEM micrographs shown in Fig. 8 and 9 illustrate the change of particle's morphology caused by the laser treatment. Formation of sub-micrometer spheres can be observed indicating a melting of ITO particles caused by the laser irradiation process. The fact that the reactant particles (Fig. 9 left) and product particles (Fig. 9 right) are crystalline is confirmed by the HAADF STEM images. Nevertheless, we believe that the morphology of the formed sub-micrometer spheres is not only responsible for changes in the optical parameters since melting in pure water occurs as well (see Fig. S3†). Hence, the liquid matrix plays a role during the laser melting. In Fig. S3† an SEM image of ITO particles before and after laser irradiation for 20 cycles at around 60 mJ cm−2 in pure water using a cylindrical lens and storage for several months is shown.
 Fig. 8  SEM and TEM images of the ITO particles before (left) and after (right) laser irradiation with 60 mJ cm−2 in ethanol after 20 cycles using the cylindrical lens. 
 Fig. 9  Bright-field TEM and HAADF-STEM images of ITO particles before (left) and after (right) pulsed UV laser irradiation at around 60 mJ cm−2 for 20 cycles in the liquid jet reactor using the cylindrical lens in pure ethanol. 
The red arrows show that sub-micrometer spheres are present in water also after long time storage. The general particle morphology is very similar to the one obtained in ethanol. But the optical properties change over time when the particles are stored in water. This is a strong indication that our observed effects of the optical properties obtained from the particle-based coatings are not morphology-correlated. Furthermore, Usui et al.24 reported an improved NIR absorption for laser fragmentation experiments in pure water, thus supporting this finding. In addition, Filice et al. recently proved that laser irradiation of TiO2 caused defects and partially reduction, improving catalytic hydrogen evolution reaction.40 Hence, the observed changes of the particle's morphology appear not to be the key parameter responsible for improved NIR absorption. Instead a change of particle's composition, as suggested by Usui et al. as well, could be the reason for the observed optical changes. Furthermore the results indicate that the solvent chemistry plays a major role in causing the change of optical properties. Comparing the change in crystallite size shown in Fig. 4(b) and the absorption/transmission at 1600 nm shown in Fig. 5(d) indicates that the changes in optical properties already occur significantly at low fluences whereas the change in crystallite size becomes more distinctive with increasing fluence up to ∼80 mJ cm−2. Thus particle's chemistry is crucial for the manipulation of absorption in the NIR regime rather than size.
XPS measurements were carried out for the reactants as well as for laser-treated samples at different numbers of cycles. All samples revealed no contaminations besides a small amount of carbon in the range of 2–4 at%. Fig. 10(a) shows the normalized In 3d5/2 spectra of the reactant and the laser-treated, dried powders. With every cycle of laser irradiation the indium signal becomes broader. This increase in asymmetry is attributed to an increase in conductivity of the indium.37 To quantify this the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak was determined by fitting the signal using an asymmetric peak (Fig. 10b). The FWHM increases strongly within the first 10 cycles while there is only a slight change comparing the results for 10 or 20 cycles. The change of FWHM in the binding energy peak is in good agreement with the change of optical properties in the NIR (see Fig. 7d and S4†). The elemental composition measured by the surface-sensitive XPS shown in Fig. 10(c) (probing the complete material consisting of a reactant–product mixture) and by EDX (probing single product sub-micrometer particles) shown in Fig. S5† indicate that the ITO particle's composition and electronic state (see Raman peaks in Fig. S6†) of the sub-micrometer spheres formed by laser-melting is at least partially changed by laser irradiation.
 Fig. 10  (a) In 3d5/2 signal of the reactant and laser-treated powders irradiated with around 60 mJ cm−2 and the cylindrical lens, the inset shows the enlarged view of the high-energy of the peak to better show the increase in asymmetry. (b) Full width at half maximum of the In 3d5/2 peak in dependence on the number of laser passes. (c) Elemental composition determined from XPS of the reactant and laser-treated powders with around 60 mJ cm−2 and the cylindrical lens. 
Taking the recovery of the optical properties in pure water into account (Fig. S2†) it can be stated that the achieved increase of plasmon absorption and the improved NIR-shielding caused by UV laser irradiation is not correlated with the particle size but could be originated from changes in chemical composition: the organic solvent, or derivatives synthesized during the laser irradiation process might act as a capping agent yielding a passivation of the oxygen reduced sub-micrometer particles. This is in good agreement with the findings of Usui et al. who used the organic LAD ligand for this24 and alcoholate surface adsorbates have been observed by XPS after PLAL of Pd38 confirming the interplay of the generated particles with the organic solvents. We believe that these effects also play here a role in surfactant-free solvents as well in preserving the optical particle properties in ethanol rather than in water.
An increase in crystallite size is observed, probably due to the formation of crystalline spherical ITO particles as known for the laser-induced melting.32,39 The fluence thresholds for causing a change in material composition can be different compared to the thresholds for laser-induced melting but experimentally occur (partially) along with the melting process at the example of Fe3O432 and TiO2.40 The observed chemical reduction of the ITO spheres’ composition in organic solvent becomes more distinctive with increasing fluence.
We cannot clearly identify the reason for the change of the optical properties observed. But the experimental data indicate that a change of the particle's composition (including oxygen vacancies) could be the reason for the observed changes. Even though the XPS measurement (probing the surface of the whole particle fraction) does not show a significant change we find a change in the chemical composition of the formed sub-micrometer spheres from EDX analysis probing single particles only (see Fig. S5†).
Nevertheless, this can be considered as a facile method for optical and morphological modification of ITO and other particles.
Conclusions
Our investigation on ITO particles and the particle-based coatings on PET foils show that it is possible to tune the optical properties of the ITO particles. This addresses the demand of a controlled, stepwise and adjustable particle engineering. The pulsed laser irradiation process in a free liquid jet with controlled energy dose results in improved absorption properties in the NIR wavelength regime what can be of interest if transparency is required at visible wavelengths, but unwanted in the NIR regime. We believe that this change of optical properties does not originate from the particle melting process but due to a partial chemical reduction during laser treatment of the particles. This conclusion is supported by the fact that laser melting occurs in water as well as in ethanol, while a stable change in optical properties can only be observed for treatment in ethanol. Therefore not the particle's morphology change from nano-sized to sub-micrometer spheres should be responsible for the changed optical properties but the treatment in a slightly reductive environment. Optical modification of the ITO particles also occurs in pure water, which is in good agreement with Usui et al.,24 but the effect was not stable over time. Therefore we believe that pulsed laser-induced change in particle composition (partial chemical reduction or defect introduction) could be responsible for the optical changes rather than a size-correlated effect (e.g., particle fragmentation or melting).
Interestingly the change of particle properties is preserved even after extraction from the ethanol dispersion media and drying proving at least certain stability, i.e. against oxygen. Thus, pulsed laser irradiation of ITO particles in liquid flow can be considered as a promising method for product refinement in a continuous downstream process to improve or generally change the properties of ITO. This easily scalable method with a defined energy dose input allows a controlled engineering of optical properties by the number of irradiation cycles equivalent to a specific energy dose input at a constant laser fluence.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Federal Ministry of Education and Research for financial support within the BMBF Project 03X0133E. We also thank Christian Callhoff and Luisa Neumann from Low & Bonar GmbH for the fruitful cooperation, along with Tanja Jaich and Stefan Orwaski from CHT R. Beitlich GmbH for their supportive engagement.
Notes and references
I. Hamberg and C. G. Granqvist, J. Appl. Phys., 1986, 60, 123 CrossRef .
M. J. Alam and D. C. Cameron, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 377–378, 455 CrossRef CAS .
R. Latz, K. Michael and M. Scherer, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 30, 149 CrossRef .
S. Bhagwat and R. P. Howson, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1999, 111, 163 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Rauf, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 4057 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thilakan, S. Kalainathan, J. Kumar and P. Ramasamy, J. Electron. Mater., 1995, 24, 719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Djaoued, V. Hong Phong, S. Badilescu, P. V. Ashrit, F. E. Girouard and V.-V. Truong, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 293, 108 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Stoica, T. A. Stoica, V. Vanca, E. Lakatos and M. Zaharescu, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 348, 273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Veith, C. Bubel and M. Zimmer, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 6028 RSC .
J. P. Zheng and H. S. Kwok, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 3pp CrossRef .
J. P. Zheng and H. S. Kwok, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 232, 99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. S. Horwitz, A. Piqué, C. M. Gilmore and D. B. Chrisey, Appl. Phys. A, 1999, 69, 447 CrossRef .
H. Izumi, T. Ishihara, H. Yoshioka and M. Motoyama, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 32 CrossRef CAS .
T. Omata, M. Kita, H. Okada, S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, N. Ono and H. Ikawa, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 503, 22 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bühler, D. Thölmann and C. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2224 CrossRef .
C. Guo, S. Yin, P. Zhang, M. Yan, K. Adachi, T. Chonan and T. Sato, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8227 RSC .
H. Takeda and K. Adachi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 4059 CAS .
X. Chen, N. Yu, L. Zhang, Z. Wand and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 96888 RSC .
K. Katagiri, R. Takabatake and K. Inumaru, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10240–10245 Search PubMed .
X. Fang, C. L. Mak, J. Dai, K. Li, H. Ye and C. W. Leung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15743 Search PubMed .
M. Kanahera, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Wen, G. Campet and J. Portier, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1992, 14, 115 CrossRef .
E. L. Hanson, J. Guo, N. Koch, J. Schwartz and S. L. Bernasek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usui, T. Sasaki and N. Koshizaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lau and S. Barcikowski, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 348, 22 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lau, A. Ziefuss, T. Komossa and S. Barcikowski, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29311 RSC .

          M. Lau, MatWerk, Springer,  2016, ISBN 978-3-658-14171-4 Search PubMed .
A. N. Dahoudi, H. Bisht, C. Göbbert, T. Krajewski and M. A. Aegerter, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 392, 299 CrossRef .
C. Goebbert, R. Nonninger, M. A. Aegerter and H. Schmidt, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 351, 79 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yeh, Y. Yang, Y. Lee, H. Lee, Y. Yeh and C. Yeh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6851 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Semaltianos, S. Logothetidis, N. Frangis, I. Tsiaoussis, W. Pierre, G. Dearden and K. G. Watkins, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 496, 113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishikawa, N. Koshizaki and A. Pyatenko, Electon. Commun. Jpn., 2016, 99, 1066 Search PubMed .
T. Tsuji, T. Yahata, M. Yasutomo, K. Igawa, M. Tsuji, Y. Ishikawa and N. Koshizaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3099 RSC .
A. Pyatenko, H. Wang, N. Koshizaki and T. Tsuji, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 596 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishikawa, Y. Shimizu, T. Sasaki and N. Koshizaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 161110 CrossRef .
Y. Ishikawa, Q. Feng and N. Koshizaki, Appl. Phys. A, 2010, 99, 797 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Kytin, V. A. Kulbachinskii, O. V. Reukova, Y. M. Galperin, T. H. Johansen, S. Diplas and A. G. Ulyashin, Appl. Phys. A, 2014, 114, 957 CrossRef CAS .
N. Semaltianos, P. Petkov, S. Scholz and L. Guetaz, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 402, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, M. Miyauchi, Y. Ishikawa, A. Pyatenko, N. Koshizaki, Y. Li, L. Li, X. Li, Y. Bando and D. Goldberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Filice, G. Compagnini, R. Fiorenza, S. Scirè, L. D'Urso, M. E. Fragalà, P. Russo, E. Fazio and S. Scalese, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 489, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt00010cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the free liquid jet (containing the particles for controlled laser processing) passing the laser beam focused by a spherical lens (left) and by a cylindrical lens (right) resulting in different laser spots on the liquid jet's surface.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the ITO particle coatings made of ITO particles laser-irradiated in different solvent mixtures of water and ethanol for 10 cycles of UV laser irradiation in liquid flow at around 60 mJ cm−2 using the spherical lens; (d) difference of absorption, reflection and transmission at 1600 nm for the different solvent mixtures, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photograph of the ITO suspensions “reactant” irradiated for 10 cycles in the liquid jet reactor with different energy densities using a spherical lens (fluence values shown as the inset for each suspension).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD pattern of the used ITO particles and (b) determined crystallite size of ITO laser-treated particles irradiated in pure ethanol with different fluences for 10 cycles using a spherical lens and (c) stacked XRD pattern of the particle materials irradiated with the different fluences.	 

 	Fig. 5  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the coatings made of ITO particles laser-irradiated for 50 cycles in the liquid jet reactor with a cylindrical lens in pure ethanol with different fluences; (d) relative absorption, transmission and reflection at 1600 nm for the different applied laser irradiation fluences.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photograph of dried ITO particles laser-treated in pure ethanol at 60 mJ cm−2 for different numbers of cycles (from left to right 0, 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 cycles, respectively) using the cylindrical lens, stored in air for several months.	 

 	Fig. 7  Change of (a) absorption, (b) reflection and (c) transmission spectra of the ITO particle-based coatings laser-irradiated in ethanol for up to 20 cycles with the cylindrical lens at around 60 mJ cm−2 and (d) relative intensity of transmission, reflection and absorption in dependence on the cycles.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM and TEM images of the ITO particles before (left) and after (right) laser irradiation with 60 mJ cm−2 in ethanol after 20 cycles using the cylindrical lens.	 

 	Fig. 9  Bright-field TEM and HAADF-STEM images of ITO particles before (left) and after (right) pulsed UV laser irradiation at around 60 mJ cm−2 for 20 cycles in the liquid jet reactor using the cylindrical lens in pure ethanol.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) In 3d5/2 signal of the reactant and laser-treated powders irradiated with around 60 mJ cm−2 and the cylindrical lens, the inset shows the enlarged view of the high-energy of the peak to better show the increase in asymmetry. (b) Full width at half maximum of the In 3d5/2 peak in dependence on the number of laser passes. (c) Elemental composition determined from XPS of the reactant and laser-treated powders with around 60 mJ cm−2 and the cylindrical lens.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt00010c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
