Highly stable and flexible silver nanowire–graphene hybrid transparent conducting electrodes for emerging optoelectronic devices   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR02320F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR02320F
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7750-7755Highly stable and flexible silver nanowire–graphene hybrid transparent conducting electrodes for emerging optoelectronic devices†Donghwa Lee‡a, Hyungjin Lee‡a, Yumi Ahna, Youngjun Jeonga, Dae-Young Leeb and Youngu Lee*aaDepartment of Energy Systems Engineering, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), 50-1 Sang-Ri, Hyeonpung-Myeon, Dalseong-Gun, Daegu, 711-873, Korea. E-mail: youngulee@dgist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-53-785-6414;   Tel: +82-53-785-6409bDisplay Research Center, Samsung Display, #95 Samsung 2-ro, Giheung-gu, Yongin-City, Gyeonggi-Do 446-711, KoreaReceived 7th May 2013, Accepted 21st June 2013First published on 26th June 2013AbstractA new AgNW–graphene hybrid transparent conducting electrode (TCE) was prepared by dry-transferring a chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown monolayer graphene onto a pristine AgNW TCE. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE exhibited excellent optical and electrical properties as well as mechanical flexibility. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed highly enhanced thermal oxidation and chemical stabilities because of the superior gas-barrier property of the graphene protection layer. Furthermore, the organic solar cells with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed excellent photovoltaic performance as well as superior long-term stability under ambient conditions.Transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs) based on indium tin oxide (ITO) have been widely used as an essential element of various optoelectronic devices, including liquid crystal display (LCD) panels, organic light-emitting diode (OLED) panels, touch screen panels (TSPs), and solar cells.1–5 Vacuum-deposited ITO possesses good physical properties such as high optical transmittance and low sheet resistance as a TCE for various optoelectronic devices.6,7 However, it has several drawbacks such as brittleness, low optical transmittance in near-infrared (NIR), high refractive index, and high processing temperature.8–10 Furthermore, the price of ITO has been highly volatile recently, due to scarcity of indium resources and the increased consumption of the material. Therefore, cheap, flexible, and solution-processed TCEs are required for emerging optoelectronic devices such as flexible solar cells and displays. However, solution-processed TCEs based on carbon nanotubes and conducting polymers have not been competitive with the optical and electrical properties achieved by ITO.11–14 Recently, solution-processed silver nanowire (AgNW) TCEs showed the superior optical and electrical performance comparable to ITO.15–18 In addition, the AgNW TCEs on plastic substrates exhibited excellent mechanical flexibility.19–27 However, they still have issues regarding long-term stability and electrical connection, which make them difficult for practical use. For instance, the AgNWs are easily oxidized when they are exposed to air and water, leading to a sharp increase of sheet resistance and haziness of the AgNW TCE.28 Therefore, it is necessary to suppress the oxidation of the AgNWs in order to enhance the long-term stability of the AgNW TCE. Furthermore, it is crucial to make a reliable electrical connection between the AgNW TCE and nano-sized conductive probes or balls for electric signal transmission and electric power supply in practical optoelectronic devices. However, the electrical connection between the AgNW TCE and nano-sized conductive probes or balls is very poor because the AgNW TCE has a large hollow-space area in the percolation network, which results in open circuit faults in the devices. Recently, polymer matrices such as polyvinyl alcohol, polyacrylates, and glass-fabric reinforced resins have been used as protection layers for the AgNW TCE in order to achieve high thermal and chemical stabilities.25–27 However, the polymer based protection layers are electrically insulating and very thick, leading to inefficient electrical connection capability and deteriorated electrical properties of the AgNW TCE. Therefore, there is still a need for developing a new protection layer for the AgNW TCE, which is ultrathin, gas-impermeable, conductive, and flexible, allowing enhanced long-term stability and electrical connection capability without loss of optical and electrical properties of the AgNW TCE for practical optoelectronic devices.Graphene, two-dimensional graphite structure, has shown extraordinary optical, electrical, and mechanical properties.29–36 Additionally, it is well-known that the graphene is impermeable to all gases. The graphene has been used as a protection layer with excellent performance by preventing the oxidation of metals such as copper or nickel.37 Recently, we proposed a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as a protection layer for the AgNW TCE because rGO is electrically conductive and gas-impermeable. The rGO coated AgNW TCE exhibited excellent optical and electrical properties as well as high thermal oxidation and chemical stabilities.38 However, it showed an insufficient electrical connection with nano-sized conductive probes or balls because the rGO protection layer is electrically less conductive and not uniform.In this study, we fabricated a highly stable and flexible AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE by dry-transferring a chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown monolayer graphene onto a AgNW TCE for optoelectronic devices. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE exhibited excellent optical and electrical properties, comparable to conventional ITO. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed highly enhanced electrical connection capability and mechanical flexibility. It was also observed that the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE exhibited highly enhanced long-term and chemical stabilities because of the outstanding gas-barrier property of the graphene protection layer on the AgNW TCE. Furthermore, the organic solar cells with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed excellent photovoltaic performance as well as superior long-term stability under ambient conditions. We anticipate that the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE can be used as an alternative to conventional ITO for emerging optoelectronic devices such as flexible solar cells, displays, and touch panels.In order to fabricate the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), we developed a modified dry-transfer process for the CVD-grown monolayer onto a AgNW TCE because the conventional graphene transfer process results in mechanical damages in the AgNW TCE and weak adhesion between the AgNW TCE and CVD-grown monolayer graphene. Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE on a glass substrate. SEM images of the (b) AgNW and (c) AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. (d) A photograph of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers on a glass substrate. First, a monolayer graphene (Rs ∼ 300 Ω sq−1) was synthesized using a CVD process of the gas mixture of CH4 and H2 on a Cu foil at 1000 °C under vacuum conditions. After graphene growth on the Cu foil, a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) solution (10 wt% in chlorobenzene) was drop-coated onto the graphene sheet on the copper foil and then annealed at 140 °C and dried in air for 2 h. The copper foil was etched away using an ammonium persulfate etchant (0.1 M in deionized water) for 5 h to obtain a PMMA–graphene film. Then, a AgNW (average diameter and length of 20–40 nm and 10–20 μm, respectively) ink was spin-coated on a pre-cleaned substrate such as a glass or plastic at 600 rpm. The PMMA–graphene film was placed onto the non-dried AgNW TCE. It was then annealed at 120 °C in air for 5 min and pressed under 5 MPa to achieve strong adhesion between the AgNW TCE and CVD-grown monolayer graphene. Finally, the PMMA layer was removed in a chloroform bath for 20 min to obtain a AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE. By repeating this process on the same AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, AgNW–graphene multilayer hybrid TCEs could be prepared successfully. As shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c), SEM images of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs clearly show that the percolation network of the AgNW TCE is fully covered with the CVD-grown monolayer graphene. Since the AgNW TCE has inherently high surface roughness, some wrinkles and defects of the CVD-grown monolayer graphene are created during the dry-transfer process. The surface roughness of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs was determined by an atomic force microscope (AFM). The root-mean-square roughness values of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs were 8.43 and 7.82 nm, respectively (Fig. S1†).To investigate optical and electrical properties of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, we measured the optical transmittance and sheet resistance of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. Fig. 2(a) shows the optical transmittance and sheet resistance of AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs as a function of the number of transferred graphene layers onto the AgNW TCE. Generally, a conventional four-point probe method cannot measure the sheet resistance of the AgNW TCE correctly if the sharp tip of the probe touches down a hollow space of the AgNW percolation network. Thus, we utilized a non-contact sheet resistance measurement method to precisely obtain the sheet resistance of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. Both AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs exhibited superior optical transparency and electrical conductivity. The optical transmittance and sheet resistance of the AgNW TCE were 95.3% at 550 nm and 29.4 ± 0.5 Ω sq−1 while those of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE were 92.8% at 550 nm and 34.4 ± 1.5 Ω sq−1. Furthermore, the optical transmittance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE was reduced by ∼2.5% for an additional transfer. It is well-known that a CVD-grown monolayer graphene absorbs about 2.3% of visible light.39,40 This result clearly verifies that the CVD-grown monolayer graphene was successfully transferred onto the AgNW TCE through the dry-transfer process. The sheet resistance of AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE was very similar to that of the pristine AgNW TCE, indicating that the sheet resistance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE can be mainly determined by electrical properties of the AgNW TCE because the AgNW TCE is much more electrically conductive than the CVD-grown monolayer graphene (Rs ∼ 300 Ω sq−1). It was also found that the sheet resistance of AgNW–graphene multilayer hybrid TCE slightly increased because of mechanically generated defects of the underlying AgNW TCE during the dry-transfer process. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE was also investigated by Raman spectroscopy. The Raman spectra were taken directly from the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the Raman spectra of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different graphene layers exhibited typical 2D and G bands of the CVD-grown monolayer graphene around ∼2685 cm−1 and ∼1586 cm−1, respectively. This result clearly confirms that the CVD-grown monolayer graphene was successfully transferred onto the AgNW TCE. As the graphene layers got transferred one after another, the intensities of G and 2D band peaks increased together while the ratio of G and 2D band intensities remained unchanged, indicating that the hexagonal lattices of upper and lower layers are randomly oriented. The D band was also observed around ∼1380 cm−1 because some defects such as wrinkles, nipples, folds, or cracks were formed during the dry-transfer process.29–34 Fig. 2  (a) Optical transmittance spectra and sheet resistances of ITO, AgNW, and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers. (b) Raman spectra of CVD-grown graphene and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers. We performed the electrical connection test of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs using a four-point probe sheet resistance measurement system (Fig. S2†). As for the AgNW TCE, the physical contact between AgNWs and conductive probes was very poor, resulting in an open circuit fault, because it has a large hollow-space area in the percolation network. This means that the electrical connection between AgNW TCE and conductive probes is extremely ineffective. On the other hand, as for the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, a hollow space in the percolation network of the AgNW TCE was fully covered with the highly conductive CVD-grown graphene layer, resulting in a reliable physical contact with conductive probes. In addition, the CVD-grown graphene layer could provide an excellent electron transport pathway between the AgNWs and conductive probes.41 As a result, the electrical connection between the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE and conductive probes could be greatly improved, leading to a reliable electrical signal transmission and electric power supply in the devices. This enhanced electrical connection capability strengthens the merit of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE of being a promising alternative to conventional ITO for practical optoelectronic devices.In addition to excellent transparency and electrical connection capability, the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE possesses superior mechanical flexibility which is essential for emerging optoelectronic devices such as flexible displays and solar cells. To investigate the mechanical flexibility of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, the AgNW–graphene–PEN TCE was prepared onto a polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate using the spin-coating of the AgNW ink and the dry-transfer of the CVD-grown monolayer graphene (Fig. S3†).Fig. 3(a) compares the mechanical flexibility of the AgNW–graphene–PEN and ITO–PEN TCEs as a function of wrapping cycles. In this test, a piece of the AgNW–graphene–PEN or ITO–PEN TCEs is rolled around a bending radius of 30 mm, subsequently unrolled at a speed of 30 mm s−1, and the sheet resistance of each TCE is compared to its initial value. Within the first few cycles of this process, the ITO–PEN TCE begins to crack, resulting in a sharp increase in sheet resistance (Fig. S4†). Since ITO is an inorganic material, it is inherently brittle and cracks when exposed to a minimal amount of strain.42 On the other hand, the sheet resistance of the AgNW–graphene–PEN TCE remains unchanged after more than 10000 wrapping cycles, verifying that the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE possesses an excellent mechanical flexibility. Fig. 3  (a) The mechanical flexibility test of ITO–PEN and AgNW–graphene–PEN TCEs. (b) Sheet resistance change of AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs during the long-term stability test at 70 °C and 70% RH for 8 days. The inset shows the optical transmittance change during the long-term stability test. SEM images of (c) AgNW and (d) AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs after the long-term stability test. To evaluate the gas-barrier effect of the graphene protection layer on the thermal oxidation stability of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs were exposed to high temperature (70 °C) and high humidity (70% RH) conditions for 8 days. Fig. 3(b) shows the changes in optical transmittance and sheet resistance of both samples during the thermal oxidation stability test. As shown in the Fig. 3(b) inset, the optical transmittance of both samples remains unchanged. However, the sheet resistance of the AgNW TCE increased to more than 300% after 8 days. It is well-known that the AgNW is easily oxidized when it is exposed to air. When the AgNWs are oxidized, the electrical resistivity and junction resistance of the AgNWs would increase because of the formation of silver oxides on the surface of the AgNWs.43 However, the sheet resistance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE slightly increased less than 15% even after 8 days. This striking difference in change of sheet resistance between the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs clearly verifies that the graphene protection layer acts as an excellent gas-barrier layer for the underlying AgNW TCE because it is impermeable to oxygen molecules. As shown in Fig. 3(c), for the AgNW TCE, silver oxides were formed on the surface of the AgNWs, which is attributed to the increased sheet resistance. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 3(d), the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE did not have silver oxides because gas and moisture cannot permeate the graphene layer due to excellent property as gas and moisture barriers. As a result, the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed little change of sheet resistance compared to the AgNW TCE. These results clearly indicate that the CVD-grown graphene layer could protect the underlying AgNW from oxidation, and then long-term stability of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE could be greatly improved. We also performed the chemical stability test on the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs (Fig. S5†). The sheet resistance of both samples was measured after they were dipped into a deionized water, acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), or acidic PEDOT:PSS solution for 10 min. The sheet resistance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE slightly increased, indicating that the CVD-grown graphene layer acted as an excellent protection layer even in the extreme environment. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed excellent resistance against acidic corrosion by the PEDOT:PSS solution, confirming that the CVD-grown graphene layer provides chemical inertness against acidic conditions for the AgNWs. In contrast, the sheet resistance of the AgNW TCEs increased significantly when they were dipped into the water and organic solvents. Especially, in the acidic PEDOT:PSS solution, the sheet resistance of the AgNW TCE increased more than 100% because some AgNWs were corroded by the acidic solution (Fig. S6†).To evaluate the performance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE as an electrode for organic solar cells, the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs were used as cathode layers in inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs). Firstly, the AgNW TCE for the cathode layer was prepared onto a glass substrate by spin-coating the AgNW ink. As for the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, the CVD-grown monolayer graphene was dry-transferred onto the AgNW TCE. Then, the inverted bulk heterojunction OSCs were fabricated on the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with 150 nm of ZnO, 100 nm of a P3HT and PC60BM blend with a 1:1 weight ratio, 10 nm of MoO3, and Ag anode.Fig. 4(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inverted bulk heterojunction OSCs with the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs under AM 1.5 G illumination. In the case of the device with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.61 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.94 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 54.4% were observed, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.30%. In the control device with the AgNW TCE, the PCE is 3.28% with a Voc of 0.62 V, a Jsc of 9.19 mA cm−2, and a FF of 57.8%. As for the device with ITO TCE, the PCE is 3.16% with a Voc of 0.62 V, a Jsc of 8.56 mA cm−2, and a FF of 59.7%. These results clearly confirm that the OSCs with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE performed as well as those with the AgNW and ITO TCEs. It is noteworthy that the OSCs with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE exhibited a higher Jsc than the control devices even though the optical transmittance of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE is lower than that of the AgNW TCE because of the additional light absorption by the graphene protection layer. Since the ZnO layer has a relatively low electron carrier mobility, the effective electron collection between the AgNW and ZnO layers is very limited. However, as for the OSCs with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE, the highly conductive graphene protection layer might provide the additional electron transport pathway and transport more electrons to AgNWs, leading to the efficient electron collection at the interface between the AgNW and ZnO layers. This result is also evidenced by a decreased series resistance from 11.64 Ω cm2 to 9.95 Ω cm2 in the OSCs with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE. We also observed that the devices with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed superior stability over the control devices as shown in Fig. 4(b). The stability of both devices was investigated as a function of exposure time under ambient conditions without encapsulation. The OSCs with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE could retain more than 61% of its initial PCE even though they were exposed to ambient conditions without encapsulation for 480 h. However, the PCE of the control devices dropped to 50% of its initial value in less than 320 h due to a sharp decrease in Jsc. This result clearly reveals that the graphene protection layer could increase the long-term stability of the OSCs based on the AgNW TCE by minimizing the degradation of the interface between the AgNW and ZnO layers.44 These results mean that the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE could enhance the PCE as well as the long-term stability of organic solar cells. Fig. 4  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells with ITO, AgNW, and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. (b) Device performance of inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells with AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs as a function of exposure time under ambient conditions without encapsulation. In summary, we fabricated a highly stable and flexible AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE by dry-transferring a CVD-grown monolayer graphene onto a AgNW TCE. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE exhibited excellent optical and electrical properties as well as mechanical flexibility. The AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed highly enhanced electrical connection with conductive probes, thermal oxidation and chemical stabilities because the CVD-grown graphene layer acted as both the efficient electron transport pathway and the gas-barrier layer simultaneously. Furthermore, the organic solar cells with the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE showed excellent photovoltaic performance as well as superior long-term stability under ambient conditions. We anticipate that the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE can be used as an alternative to ITO for emerging optoelectronic devices such as flexible solar cells and displays.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the DGIST R&D Program of Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology of Korea (13-BD-0403). This research was also supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (2012R1A1A1040811). We gratefully acknowledge Cambrios Technologies Corporation for AgNW ink.Notes and referencesS. Chen, L. Deng, J. Xie, L. Peng, L. Xie, Q. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5227–5239 CrossRef CAS .M. Layani, M. Gruchko, O. Milo, I. Balberg, D. Azulay and S. Maqdassi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3537–3542 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1529–1598 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Granqvist and A. Hultåker, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .H. Han, D. Adams, J. W. Mayer and T. L. Alford, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 0837051–0837058 Search PubMed .A. Kumar and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS .A. Klöppel, B. Meyer and J. Trube, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 392, 311–314 CrossRef .K. Baek, K. Jang, Y. J. Lee, K. Ryu, W. Choi, D. Kim and J. Yi, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 531, 349–353 CrossRef .Z. Spitalsky, D. Tasis, K. Papagelis and C. Galiotis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 357–401 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Arnold, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 713–718 CrossRef CAS .F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061–4067 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yu, L. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4453–4457 CrossRef CAS .D. S. Leem, A. Edwards, M. Faist, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. de Mello, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4371–4375 CrossRef CAS .T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, J. Jiu and K. Suganuma, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 281 CrossRef .S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, Z. Yu, W. Hu, C.-H. Chang, Q. Chen and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5563–5567 CrossRef CAS .J.-W. Lim, D.-Y. Cho, J. Kim, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 348–354 CrossRef CAS .J. Lee, P. Lee, H. Lee, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6408–6414 RSC .P. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3326–3332 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Choi, H. W. Kang, H. J. Sung and S. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 977–983 RSC .Z. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 664–668 CrossRef CAS .J. Jin, J. Lee, S. Jeong, S. C. Yang, J.-H. Ko, H.-G. Im, S.-W. Baek, J.-Y. Lee and B.-S. Bae, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 91, 1529–1598 Search PubMed .W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS .R. Zhu, C.-H. Chung, K. C. Cha, W. Yang, Y. B. Zheng, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, P. S. Weiss, G. Li and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9877–9882 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .R. X. He, P. Lin, Z. K. Liu, H. W. Zhu, X. Z. Zhao, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4359–4363 CrossRef CAS .I. N. Kholmanov, C. W. Magnuson, A. E. Aliev, H. Li, B. Zhang, J. W. Suk, L. L. Zhang, E. Peng, S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Piner, G. Shvets and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, H. Bi, S. Sun, Y. Tang, W. Zhao, T. Lin, D. Wan, F. Huang, X. Zhou, X. Xie and M. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1408–1413 CAS .S. Chen, W. Cai, R. D. Piner, J. W. Suk, Y. Wu, Y. Ren, J. Kang and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3519–3525 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6410–6414 CAS .A. B. Kuzmenko, E. van Heumen, F. Carbone and D. van der Marel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 117401–117404 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .C. Jeong, P. Nair, M. Khan, M. Lundstrom and M. A. Alam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5020–5025 CrossRef CAS .E.-H. Kim, C.-W. Yang and J.-W. Park, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 043511–043518 CrossRef .J. L. Elechiguerra, L. Larios-Lopez, C. Liu, D. Garcia-Gutierrez, A. Camacho-Bragado and M. J. Yacaman, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6042–6052 CrossRef CAS .N. Grossiard, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432–456 CrossRef .Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed electrical connection, mechanical flexibility, and chemical stability tests of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr02320f‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCE on a glass substrate. SEM images of the (b) AgNW and (c) AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. (d) A photograph of the AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers on a glass substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical transmittance spectra and sheet resistances of ITO, AgNW, and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers. (b) Raman spectra of CVD-grown graphene and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs with different numbers of transferred graphene layers.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The mechanical flexibility test of ITO–PEN and AgNW–graphene–PEN TCEs. (b) Sheet resistance change of AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs during the long-term stability test at 70 °C and 70% RH for 8 days. The inset shows the optical transmittance change during the long-term stability test. SEM images of (c) AgNW and (d) AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs after the long-term stability test.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells with ITO, AgNW, and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs. (b) Device performance of inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cells with AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs as a function of exposure time under ambient conditions without encapsulation.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed electrical connection, mechanical flexibility, and chemical stability tests of the AgNW and AgNW–graphene hybrid TCEs are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr02320f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
