Design and engineering of graphene nanostructures as independent solar-driven photocatalysts for emerging applications in the field of energy and envi ...  - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1ME00179E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1ME00179E
(Review Article)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2022, 7, 213-238Design and engineering of graphene nanostructures as independent solar-driven photocatalysts for emerging applications in the field of energy and environment

        
          
            Samriti†
a, 
      
        
          
            Manisha†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhangsen 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shuhui 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jai 
            Prakash
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, Hamirpur-177005, India. E-mail: jaip@nith.ac.in
bInstitut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS)-Centre Énergie Matériaux et Télécommunications, Varennes, Quebec J3X 1P7, Canada. E-mail: shuhui@emt.inrs.ca
Received 
      30th November 2021
    , Accepted 26th January 2022First published on 27th January 2022AbstractThere is a growing interest in graphene-based solar-driven photocatalysis to resolve the energy and environmental issues because of their cost-effective synthesis and unique properties. Graphene and its derivatives have extensively been used as support for boosting the efficiency of wide band-gap semiconductor photocatalysts. However, recent studies show that these graphene-based nanomaterials can also serve as independent solar-driven photocatalysts to replace metal/metal-oxide-based solids for emerging applications. This paper deals with the importance of chemical doping in tailoring their optoelectronic/photocatalytic properties to make them excellent standalone metal-free photocatalysts. Heteroatom doping/co-doping induced structural and band-gap engineering of graphene/derivatives with an emphasis on the basic thermodynamic requirements for photocatalytic reactions have been discussed. Thereafter, applications of doped graphene nanomaterials as sole photocatalysts are described in the emerging field of energy and environment (i.e., water splitting, pollutant degradation, and CO2 reduction), highlighting the latest development. Finally, various challenges in developing graphene-based sole photocatalysts and future perspectives are summarized.Shuhui SunShuhui Sun is a Full Professor at the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Center for Energy, Materials, and Telecommunications, Canada, and a member of the Royal Society of Canada's College of New Scholars. His research focuses on functional nanomaterials for energy conversion/storage and environmental applications, such as PEM fuel cells (low-Pt and Pt-free catalysts), Li-/Na-/Zn-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, CO2 reduction, and water splitting for hydrogen production. He is the Vice President of the International Academy of Electrochemical Energy Science (IAOEES), and the Executive Editor-in-chief of Electrochemical Energy Reviews.Jai PrakashDr. Jai Prakash is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India. He worked as an ‘INSPIRE Faculty’ at IIT Kanpur, India. His Ph.D. studies were carried out at and sponsored by IUAC, New Delhi, and awarded by CCS University, India. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Aix-Marseille University (France), Universite Libre de Bruselles (Belgium), University of the Free State (South Africa) and INRS-EMT, Quebec (Canada). His research is focused on functional nanomaterials (e.g., noble metals, metal-oxide semiconductors, graphene, polymers) for applications, such as SERS detection and photocatalysis degradation of organic pollutants, LEDs, and solar cells.

Design, System, Application
The development of semiconductor nanostructured materials as excellent standalone metal-free photocatalysts with promising and tunable optical properties for various applications has always been a topic of novel research. The present article deals with the design and engineering of graphene nanostructures as independent solar-driven photocatalysts for various emerging applications in the field of energy and environment. Although it has been extensively researched, doping engineering of graphene nanomaterials as independent solar-driven photocatalysts with special emphasis on making standalone metal-free photocatalyst has rarely been reviewed. The design and doping engineering of such nanostructures have gained special attention because doping-induced structural/optoelectronic changes, defects, and band gap modification are the key parameters to tune the electrical and optical properties that enhance the surface charge transfer properties important for an excellent photocatalyst. This results in effective photogenerated charge separation and light absorption, which are really important for potential applications of graphene nanostructures for energy, environmental and other important applications.

1. Introduction
The development of modern technology provides a comfortable life, but also has some side effects in the form of environmental pollution and energy shortage. Due to the increased environmental pollution, i.e., air/water contaminations and the requirement of energy in the modern world, there is a need to develop environmentally friendly materials with fascinating properties for semiconductor photocatalysis.1–6 Semiconductor photocatalysis is being extensively studied for energy and environmental applications using semiconductor photocatalyst nanomaterials because of their unique ability in the utilization of sunlight.7 These nanomaterials accelerate light-driven chemical reactions with enhanced tunable functionalities under ultraviolet (UV), visible and infrared (IR) radiations, which are the main constituents of sunlight. So far, diverse semiconductor photocatalyst nanomaterials have been investigated, including TiO2 and ZnO as the most used photocatalysts.8–10 Most of them have wide band-gaps and are incapable of utilizing the solar spectrum in an efficient way. Considerable modifications are required to enhance the photocatalytic activities of such metal oxide semiconductors.11–14 In most of the cases, such metal-containing semiconductor photocatalysts show higher photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation.1,15,16 These issues provide a reason and open scope to study new environmentally friendly nanomaterials to solve the challenging issues in the field of energy and the environment.17–19
Studying carbon-based photocatalyst nanomaterials could be a promising alternative to resolve such issues because these are cost-effective, abundant in nature, and also environmentally friendly materials.20–23 This could be realized by the use of various carbonaceous nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and graphene-based materials, which have mainly been coupled with semiconductor photocatalysts to produce highly efficient composite photocatalysts.24,25 These materials act as electron reservoirs to accept photogenerated electrons from semiconductor photocatalysts for fast charge transfer and for preventing recombination with photogenerated holes. Furthermore, they enhanced the adsorptive properties of the coupled photocatalyst, playing a major role in boosting the photocatalytic activity.26 Interestingly, graphene has gained special attention over other carbonaceous materials because of its unique and tunable electronic band structure, along with other properties, such as large surface area and high electrical conductivity for electron transport, providing a promising role in photocatalysis.27,28 Graphene and its derivatives, such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), have been investigated extensively as excellent support for enhancing the photocatalytic activities of wide band-gap and other semiconductor photocatalysts.29–31 As depicted in Fig. 1(a), under the solar-light irradiation, electrons are excited from the valence band (VB) of TiO2 to the conduction band (CB). This creates holes that are left behind, which migrate to the graphene because of its high conducting/charge transfer properties. This reduces the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. Similarly, in the case of visible light active semiconductors/metals (i.e., noble metal nanoparticles, g-C3N4), the photogenerated electrons move to the graphene and further engage in the reduction process for different applications, as shown in Fig. 1(a and b).15,32
 Fig. 1  Schematics for the photocatalytic actions of graphene and derivatives for various energy and environmental applications. (a and b) Graphene as a support for enhancing the photocatalytic activities of semiconductor photocatalysts. Here, these graphene nanostructures serve as a transport medium for fast charge transfer of the photogenerated electron and prevent recombination with photogenerated holes. Copyright15,32 (c) graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as metal-free photocatalysts to remove aqueous dye pollution when exposed to light. Copyright33 (d) a schematic illustration showing the mechanism of the photocatalytic H2 evolution of p-type doped graphene as a sole photocatalysts under sunlight. (e) A schematic mechanism of the photocatalytic activity of n-type doped graphene as a sole photocatalyst under sunlight Copyright.41,44 
However, recent studies have shown that these materials can also serve as a promising standalone and independent visible light-active photocatalyst for various applications in energy and environment as shown in Fig. 1(c).22,23,33 Due to the unique electronic band structure of graphene, it allows ballistic conduction in the micrometer range, i.e., electrons can travel at remarkably high mobility, and it acts as ideal electron acceptors during the photocatalytic process.23 It slows down the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs by increasing the charge transfer rate of electrons, exhibiting its potential of becoming a highly available and sustainable sole photocatalyst, while remaining efficient metal-free photocatalysts. The pristine graphene is not promising for such applications due to its zero-band-gap. However, chemical doping with heteroatoms facilitates the tuning of its band-gap by tailoring the electronic properties to unlock many potential features that may benefit photocatalysis. Its oxygen derivatives, i.e., GO, rGO with tunable band-gap, are promising as sole photocatalytic materials owing to the active oxygen groups present, but with relatively poor performance,23,34–38 which could be further enhanced by chemical doping.23,27,36,39,40 This shows their potential to replace traditional expensive metallic and semiconductor-based photocatalysts and open a platform to design and study efficient metal-free photocatalysts, as shown in Fig. 1(c–e).23,27,41–43
There are several recent reviews focused on the photocatalytic activities of graphene nanostructures and their nanocomposites with semiconductor photocatalysts.45–50 These reviews mainly deal with nanocomposites of graphene nanostructures with metal oxide semiconductors boosting the photocatalytic activities of semiconductors by enhancing the adsorptive properties and accelerating the charge transfer for the coupled photocatalyst system. These reviews are either focused on particular graphene nanostructure-metal oxide composites, their synthesis or on particular applications. For example, a review by Jamjoum et al.48 focused on the synthesis of GO/metal oxide nanocomposites, their characterization and the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. Similarly, Vasseghian et al.47 reviewed graphene-based materials for metronidazole degradation, whereas Kausor et al.45 reviewed GO-based semiconductor photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dye in waste water. A review by Mondal et al.49 details the fabrication of rGO/semiconductor nanocomposites for solar-driven multifunctional applications. None of these recent reviews demonstrate the applicability of graphene nanostructures (either graphene or GO or rGO) or their modifications as independent solar-driven photocatalysts to replace metal/metal-oxide-based solids for multifunctional photocatalysis applications. This review deals with the importance of chemical doping in graphene and its derivatives to provide ample opportunity to tune their optoelectronic and photocatalytic properties, making standalone (sole) metal-free photocatalyst in various fields of energy and environment. Firstly, we discuss the characteristics and structures of graphene, GO and rGO nanostructures that are promising for photocatalytic applications. Thereafter, we discuss the engineering of the optoelectronic properties of these graphene nanostructures through chemical doping via the use of heteroatoms as an effective strategy to boost their photocatalytic activity, making them photocatalysts. In the next section, applications of these graphene nanomaterials as standalone photocatalysts in various fields of energy and environment have been highlighted, followed by various challenges and future prospects in the field.
2. Structures of graphene/derivatives and photocatalytic response
Graphene was discovered as a wonder material by Prof. Andre Geim and his colleague in 2004,38 and they were awarded the Nobel prize in 2010 for their research work.51 Graphene and its derivatives, i.e., GO and rGO, have found many applications in various fields because of its attractive properties, such as its transparency, thinness, strength, and highly conductive property. The study of their lattice structures and electronic band structure is necessary to understand the transformation from graphene to GO, and further to rGO, as well as the higher photoexcitation response, respectively. Fig. 2(a) shows the lattice structures and corresponding energy band diagrams of graphene, GO and rGO.52 Graphene has a hexagonal-type single-layered and two-dimensional (2D) sheet-like structure, where each carbon atom is tightly bonded to neighboring carbon atoms. The hybrid orbitals used in overlapping are s, px, and py orbitals, forming the covalent bonds that result in sp2-hybridization. There is a free electron that lies in the pz orbital of each carbon atom, which is perpendicular to the px and py orbitals that forms the π-bond, contributing to the delocalization of electrons.53 It has a large theoretical surface area, high carrier mobility, current carrying capacity (109A cm−2) and thermal conductivity (4000 Wm−1 k−1).54 GO is the oxide form of graphene with a few or single-layer system. GO is highly oxygenated with the presence of many oxygen-containing functional groups, like hydroxyl, epoxide, carboxyl, ether, and carbonyl groups, on its basal planes and edges. GO is less conducting in nature as compared to graphene due to the structural disorder imposed by the sp3 C–O bonds, and behaves as a semiconducting material with a band gap of 2.4–4.3 eV.52,55 This is because of the introduction of oxygen-containing functional groups in the carbon network, leading to the disturbance in sp2-bonding by damaging its conductive π-network. rGO is the reduced form of GO that is processed by chemical, thermal, or other methods to reduce the oxygen content in GO,56,57 causing changes in the structure, mechanical strength, stability, dispersibility, and reactivity of GO. GO and rGO present different structural and chemical properties due to their electronic structure and chemical compositions, resulting in different mechanical strengths, electrical conductivities, hydrophilic behaviors, and water dispersibilities. The removal of oxygen-containing functional groups in the GO structure and the restoration of sp2 bonding networks in rGO are responsible for these modifications. When compared to GO, rGO has a higher surface area due to the reduction, as well as higher electrical conductivity, carrier mobility, and an adjustable band-gap,58,59 as shown in Fig. 2(b and c),52 where the photoinduced activities can be tailored by controlling the defects and oxygen groups.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of graphene, GO, and rGO lattice structures and their corresponding energy band diagrams. Representation of electrical transitions in (b) GO and (c) rGO.52 (d) Graphene's three-dimensional band structure. In the Brillouin zone, the π* and π band dispersions of virgin graphene are shown on the left. In a pristine undoped graphene, its antibonding π* orbitals (which makes up its conduction band) and bonding π orbitals (which makes up its valence band) degenerate and touch at the Brillouin zone corners, making graphene a zero-bandgap material. The position of the Fermi level determines the nature of the doping and the transport carrier. Right: a closer look at the Dirac point's linear energy bands and the Fermi level's position as a function of doping. By the addition of foreign atoms, its former lattice symmetry is broken, which results in the formation of a gap between the π and π* bands.23 Copyright.60,61 
GO is more promising with the ability to tailor its functionality, such as conductivity, surface area, and optical properties, that make it a promising material for the fabrication of high-performance nanodevices, energy storage materials, sensing and biomedical applications.62–64 The various functional groups contribute to the layer separation by providing a hydrophilic nature and greater interfacial interaction with polar groups, which enhances the mechanical and electrical properties.65,66 Recent studies on the chemical doping of graphene and GO have shown promising results from a photocatalysis point of view for a wide range of applications.7,35–37,65 In particular, the chemical doping of graphene provides tunable electronic properties that are promising for its photocatalytic applications, as shown in Fig. 2(d). The antibonding π* orbitals (i.e., CB) and bonding π orbitals (i.e., VB) in the graphene structure degenerate and touch at the Brillouin zone corners, which make it a zero bandgap nanomaterial.22,23,26 The delocalized π electrons are responsible for its excellent conductivity that could possibly be influenced by the presence of any other heteroatoms or defects on the graphene lattice. Introducing foreign functionalities in the graphene structure can provide n- or p-type semiconductor properties,67 as shown in Fig. 2(d). It opens up the possibility of tailoring the electrical properties of graphene through doping the heteroatom or any other foreign impurities to make it a potential candidate for photocatalysis.22,35 For example, the introduction of oxygen leads to the formation of GO, which is a semiconductor with a band-gap of 2.20 eV.23 Due to the existence of a band gap, these nanostructures are used as photocatalysts under visible light irradiation depending on the appropriately oxidized level (in case of GO or rGO).68 In particular, the band-gap in GO was found to be tunable by varying the oxidation level making it potential as a photocatalyst without further doping of any heteroatoms.22,69 It has been reported that if it is fully oxidized, it acts as an insulator. On the other hand, it acts as a semiconductor when partially oxidized and can be potentially used as a photocatalyst.22,37,70 Furthermore, the chemical doping of GO has proven to be an effective and simple method for tailoring its band-gap, optoelectronic, and catalytic properties. Because the chemical doping of GO results in doped graphene or rGO with outstanding adjustable characteristics, the study of the chemical doping and functionalization of GO is critical for enhanced functional photocatalytic applications.71
3. Doping engineering in graphene nanomaterials for photocatalysis applications
As discussed above, graphene, GO and rGO have great potential to be used as visible light active photocatalysts with opportunities to tailor their electronic band structures for outstanding functional properties.35,70,75 These nanomaterials are also the best support to enhance the photocatalytic activities of other semiconductors due to their excellent mechanical, electrical and charge transport properties.7,21,22,37,44,70,76–78 Even though graphene does show zero band-gaps and a lack of photocatalytic activity, it is a versatile material that allows for modifying its properties through various methods. In this regard, chemical doping is one of the most promising and feasible methods to tailor the photocatalytic activity of graphene.76,77,79–83 Chemical doping allows for the breaking of its lattice symmetry and opening a band-gap, which produces a semiconducting material with excellent properties.80,81 Furthermore, depending upon the dopant, i.e., electron-rich or deficient, it behaves with n- or p-type conductivity.84,85 However, most of the time, it also depends on the synthesis method.5,86 In electrocatalytic or photocatalytic reactions, the development of active areas via asymmetric spin and charge distributions during heteroatom doping in the graphene network can greatly boost the catalytic activity.44,78 Chemical doping can be done via additional functionalization and substitutional doping. In the former case, graphene materials tend to be n- or p-type based on the electron withdrawal or donation tendency of the added functionalized group through surface charge transfer. Whereas, in the latter case, it depends on the nature of the dopant (e.g., electron rich or deficient), substituting the carbon atom in the graphene lattice. Substitutional doping introduces additional states generated from the free charge carrier from the dopants within the density of states. Additionally, the Fermi level of graphene shifts from the minimum Dirac point to a finite density of state and increases with increasing dopant concentration, which subsequently serve to promote its electrical conductivity.23 These resulting graphene materials with improved transport and conducting properties (due to doping in graphene) enhance the photocatalytic activity of graphene-based materials.23
3.1 n-Type doping in graphene nanomaterials
Doping in graphene/derivatives with dopants (like N, S, and O) makes electron-rich (i.e., n-type) semiconductors, producing a large electronegativity difference between the C and dopants. For example, N-doping produces polarization in the C atom of the graphene network due to the higher electronegativity of N (3.04) as compared to C (2.55), expanding the potential of the graphene nanomaterials for photocatalytic applications.87,88 N-Doping in graphene or derivatives has been mostly studied for improved photocatalytic activities. N is an excellent dopant choice because of its compatible atomic size and strong bond formation with the C atom. Graphene behaves as the backbone for the N dopant incorporation into the network. Meanwhile, oxygen-containing functional groups supply the active sites for N atoms to attack in GO, changing the configuration into a graphene-like structure, i.e., rGO. This results in the increased charge carrier density due to the involvement of the p-electrons of N with the π-system of graphene.89
N-Doping introduces three typical bonding configurations, i.e., quaternary N (or graphitic N), pyridinic N, and pyrrolic N, within the carbon lattice, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The pyridinic N configuration is formed when the doped N atom bonds with two C atoms, contributing one p-electron to the π-system at the edges or defects of graphene or the GO nanostructures. The pyrrolic N configuration is formed by contributing two p-electrons to the π-system at the edges of the sheet armchair configurations. The NH is positioned at the edge because the loose bonds are present at the edges and form a pentagon (pyrrole). The formation of quaternary or graphitic N is achieved by substituting the C atom in a hexagonal ring of the graphene network. The pyridinic- and quaternary-N are sp2 hybridized, and the pyrrolic-N is sp3 hybridized.90–92 A similar N-doping configuration is achieved in the GO lattice structure,93 as shown in Fig. 3(a). Yeh et al.94 synthesized N-doped GO with all three N configurations composed of high percentages of pyridine-like and pyrrolic-like N atoms, indicating the presence of N atoms at the edges of the GO sheet. Due to the presence of the O and N atoms, doped GO showed both n- and p-type conductivities. The CB and VB of the N-doped GO with a band-gap of 2.2 eV exhibited photocatalytic water-splitting under visible-light irradiation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Structure of N-doped GO showing various configurations of doped N in N-GO. Copyright.72 (b) CB minimum values for GO, N- and B-doped GO, which are favorable for photocatalytic reactions. Copyright.27 (c) Schematic showing the structure of N and S co-doped GO sheets. Copyright.73 (d) Structure of N and B co-doped GO sheets. Copyright.74 
Doping creates a band-gap in the lattice structure of graphene, and also creates abundant energy levels into the band structure of graphene derivatives. These energy levels are electron donors in nature formed between the CB and VB. These energy levels are used to trap the charge carriers and reduce their recombination rate. In addition, they further transfer them towards the surface for various reactions to occur on the surface of the graphene/GO lattice. Similarly, S gives n-type doping in the graphene/GO lattice. The S atom is larger than the C atom, which leads to interstitial doping in the lattice and broadens the interlayer spacing. This improves the conductivity, which is promising for a variety of applications, including catalysis, storage, and batteries.95,96 It is also seen that S doping affects the morphology of the graphene/GO materials and decreases the band-gap, making them efficient visible light active photocatalyst.97,98 The P atom, with its low electronegativity, similarly improves the surface area, porosity and conducting properties when doped in graphene/GO. This is beneficial for boosting the photocatalytic activities attributed to the increased defect site production due to the large size difference between the P and C atoms.99–101 For example, Latorre-Sánchez et al. reported that P doping in the graphene network opened up the band-gap from 0 eV to 2.85 eV, making it a promising material for photocatalytic activity.102
3.2 p-Type doping in graphene nanomaterials
In p-type doping, boron (B) is the most studied heteroatom in the graphene network for various applications. B is an electron-deficient element, and doping with B is supposed to enhance a p-type conducting behavior of the host materials with a great potential for application in various fields, such as nanoelectronics, sensing, data storage energy generation, photocatalysts, and biomedical fields.21 Due to the comparable size of the B and C atoms, substitutional doping takes place in the lattice structure of graphene/GO. Hence, B can easily be doped in the graphene/GO lattice structure by easy and efficient chemical methods. When the B atom is doped in the graphene/GO lattice, the configurations of the B atoms are BC3 and BC2O. Doping B is energetically acceptable because the B–C bond formation energy is smaller as compared to that of N-doping. Various CB minimum values are given for GO, N and B-doped GO, which are favorable for photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 3b).21,27,100 Because of the similarities between the B and C atoms, B atoms in the C lattice are sp2-hybridized for in-plane doping, allowing the planar structure of graphene to be preserved. Doping of B generates a charge imbalance in the graphene matrix, which turns out to be negatively charged. This is beneficial for p-type conduction because B contains one valence electron less than the neighboring C. B (2s2 2p1), a neighboring element to C (2s2 2p2) with only one less valence electron, is a good candidate for graphene doping.21,100 The B-doping in graphene/GO adds additional holes to the VB, resulting in increased conductivity and carrier concentration in B-doped graphene/GO.89
In the case of B-doped GO, some defects are introduced and the oxygen functional groups can be present in or on the surface of the B-doped rGO.21 It has been reported that substitutional B atom lowers the electron density in the graphene layer and suppresses O2 chemisorption.103 When the doping process is carried out in GO with p-type dopants such as B, the formation of additional energy levels between CB and VB occurs and these additional bands are electron-acceptors in nature.21,100
3.3 Co-doping in graphene nanomaterials
There are only a few reports available in the literature that investigate the effect of heteroatom co-doping in graphene-based nanomaterials for different applications. Co-doping can be of either n-type only or of both n- and p-type, as shown in Fig. 3(c and d).73,100,104 In particular, the doping of N and B in the graphene network causes a disruption of the ideal sp2 hybridization of the C atoms, and significantly changes the electronic properties and chemical reactivity.105–107 In N and B co-doping, N confers an electron-rich property (i.e., n-type semiconductor) and B confers an electron-deficient property (i.e., p-type semiconductor), which is useful for tuning the properties of graphene-based nanomaterials for various potential applications. Therefore, B and N can be considered as excellent dopants for graphene nanomaterials due to their fast transfer of electrons and holes into carbon-based materials, and because of their ability to change the electronic and transport properties.108 So, the co-doping of graphene nanomaterials with both p- and n-type dopants is fascinating because the co-doped materials show different electrochemical properties as compared to the singly doped materials. Interestingly, Umrao et al.108 reported that B, N-co-doping in graphitic carbon showed excellent oxygen reduction reactions due to the synergistic effect of both dopants. As discussed above, the sizes of B and N are comparable to that of the C atoms, enabling substitutional doping to take place. Due to the incorporation of dual dopants in the graphene network and substitutional doping, defects are also formed in the lattice structure, which reduces the oxygen content. It also reduces the sp3-carbon defect sites in GO in the form of pyrrolic N, quaternary (graphitic) N, pyridinic N and BC3, and BC2O, restoring the sp2-carbon network, as shown in Fig. 3(d).74 The heteroatom co-doping process in GO increases the structural defects, in addition to different synthesis methods.109
Similarly, n-type and n-type co-doping has also been reported in these materials using N- and S- or P-doping. In this case, these dopants make it into electron-rich n-type semiconductors.110 Wang et al.111 studied N, S co-doping in graphene and demonstrated that co-dopants were at the defect sites in the graphene sheets, and improved the electrical and optical properties by synergic effect for photocatalytic properties (Fig. 3c). Chen et al.112 also showed that N, S co-doping presented higher specific area, high conductivity and optical properties as compared to single doping due to the combined effect of both N and S doping. On the other hand, N, P co-doping has been shown to incorporate more disruption in the structure of the graphene network because of the larger size of P, as compared to that of the C atom. Cheng et al.113 reported that N and P co-doping generated a large number of active sites, making it an efficient catalyst due to the synergetic effect of both dopants. Therefore, co-doping has been found to improve the electrical, optical, structural and conducting properties of graphene and its derivatives,73 which could improve the photocatalytic activity of the graphene-based nanomaterials.
4. Thermodynamic requirements for photocatalytic processes in graphene nanomaterials
Photocatalysis is the process in which a light source interacts with the surface of the material. During this process, two simultaneous reactions occur, oxidation and reduction from photogenerated holes and electrons, respectively. There are several challenging issues in the field of energy and environment as discussed in section 1, which can be resolved by using suitable photocatalyst nanomaterials. When the basic thermodynamic parameters of heterogeneous photocatalysis are met, such as a suitable wavelength of incident light and matched CB and VB levels of photocatalysts with redox potentials, then the heterogeneous photocatalysis process takes place. It means that under sufficient light irradiation, the electrons from VB jump to its CB, leaving a positive hole. However, this happens only when the energies of the incident photons match the energy of the semiconductor's band-gap. Another condition is that the energies of VB/CB must be larger than the corresponding potentials of the reduction/oxidation reactions.1,5Fig. 4(a) shows the basic thermodynamic requirements for the three main types of photocatalytic reactions, such as water splitting, pollutant degradation, and CO2 reduction. As indicated in Fig. 4(a-A) for water splitting (H2 production), the CB should have a more negative value of potential than E (H+/H2), and VB should have a more positive value of potential than E (H2O/O2). If only these conditions are fulfilled, then the water splitting or H2 production process can take place. Fig. 4(a-B) represents the pollutant degradation, which requires the generation of ROS (reactive oxygen species). These ROS could then be generated from the reduction and oxidation reactions driven by the photo-excited electrons (CB) and holes (VB). The generation of hydroxyl radicals (ROS) from the hole is an oxidative process that cannot occur in all semiconductors because this process requires a very high oxidation potential of about (2.69 V vs. NHE at pH = 0). The third process is the CO2 reduction as shown in Fig. 4(a-C), in which CB and VB must have more negative and positive values of potential than those of CO2 reductions and H2O oxidation reactions, respectively. It can be concluded that the potentials of both reduction/oxidation reactions must lie within the energy gap of the semiconductor to perform each reaction.114,115
 Fig. 4  (a) Thermodynamic requirements for (A) photocatalytic water splitting, (B) degradation of pollutants, and (C) CO2 reduction over a given semiconductor. OER: oxygen evolution reaction, HER: hydrogen evolution reaction, WOR: water oxidation to radicals of hydroxyl (˙OH), ORR: oxygen reduction reaction, and CRR: CO2 reduction reaction. (b) Schematic representation of the band structures of some of the typical semiconductors used as photocatalysts in various applications. Copyright.114 (c) Band structure of GO with different degrees of oxygenation. Site levels of the VB maximum and CB minimum. The dot lines are the standard water redox potentials. The reference potential is the vacuum level.115 Copyright.116 
Various metal-based semiconductor materials are used as photocatalysts. Fig. 4(b) shows the band structures of several typical semiconductors used for various photocatalysis reactions in several applications. Honda et al.117 discovered the photocatalytic H2 generation from water splitting in 1972, using an electrochemical cell employing a TiO2 semiconductor and platinum for the photoanode and cathode, respectively. In this case, the major requirement of the photocatalysts is a bandgap in the range of 1.6 to 2.2 eV and higher electrical conductivity to reduce the recombination of photo-induced electrons and holes. Graphene can be used as a sole photocatalyst by modifying its band-gap. As already discussed, graphene has zero band-gap and is made up entirely with sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. In GO, the C atoms are in partial sp3 hybridized character because of some carbon bonded to oxygen groups. As a result, GO is an electrical hybrid of the conducting states of sp2 hybridized carbons and a greater energy gap (2.4–4.3 eV), which act as electron transport obstacles. Hence, by altering the sp3/sp2 carbon proportion and modifying the oxidation or reduction technique, GO can be turned into an insulating, semiconducting, or semi-metallic material. Due to oxidation, the π network in graphene is damaged, allowing the gap to open and the energy gap to expand. The improvement of the photocatalytic activity is considered to be aided by residual oxygen groups. The chemical bonding of the oxygen functional groups in GO can add localized states within the band-gap of the semiconductor, causing band-gap narrowing. GO and doped GO show good properties to act as photocatalysts. Their band-gap energies mainly depend upon the number of oxygenated spots (Fig. 4(c)). As discussed in section 3, when the doping process is carried out in the graphene/GO lattice, it forms donor and acceptor levels between VB and CB of the graphene nanomaterials. Doping also improves various optoelectronic properties that are beneficial for photocatalytic applications. Doping can help tune the redox potentials of VB and CB of graphene/GO and hence, the band-gap, facilitating the photocatalytic reactions under visible light.118
5. Emerging applications of doped graphene nanomaterials as sole photocatalysts in energy and environmental fields
There has been a growing interest in using graphene nanomaterials for resolving the energy and environmental issues in the past years because of their ease of synthesis and unique properties. These nanomaterials have extensively been used as support materials for enhancing the photocatalytic activities of semiconductor photocatalyst nanomaterials. However, as discussed above, graphene-based nanomaterials also show the potential to be used as independent solar light active photocatalysts and can replace other photocatalysts. Here, the role of graphene nanomaterials and the importance of chemical doping of graphene nanomaterials have been discussed in view of tailoring their optoelectronic/photocatalytic properties, making them standalone metal-free photocatalysts for various energy and environmental applications as discussed below.
5.1 Photocatalytic H2 production
The photocatalytic H2 production using solar light radiation is one of the most favorable paths to control energy and environment-related problems. The conversion of solar energy into chemical energy in the form of H2 has become a challenge, but is also an attractive opportunity for the development of society. Fig. 4(a-A) shows the general mechanism of H2 production in semiconductor materials. Irradiation of light allows energy to fall, which is equivalent to or more than the photocatalyst's band-gap energy. After that, electron excitation occurs from the VB to CB, leaving holes in VB. As discussed in the above section, the main condition for water splitting is that the top of the VB and bottom of CB must be more positive and negative than the redox potential of H2 production, respectively. As a result, the total reaction requires a minimum photon energy of 1.23 eV. However, there are two drawbacks for implementing this technique in practice. First, the photon energy (hv) must be greater than the photocatalyst's band-gap energy. Second, the reactants must have a redox potential between the bottom of the CB and the top of the VB. The first constraint specifies that the band gap should be small enough to maximize solar light usage (although many photocatalysts have a wide band-gap in the ultraviolet region).44 The second limitation is the inverse of the first, implying that the bottom of the CB band must be more negative and the top of the VB must be more positive. This implies that the band-gap should be larger. This will lead to a deficiency in light absorption. GO and rGO are the semiconductor materials that can fulfill both conditions and show efficient water splitting.118
Yeh et al.68 synthesized GO with an interlayer spacing of 0.42 nm by using the modified Hummers method and studied the photocatalytic H2 production. They reported that under UV or visible light, the GO produced efficient H2 from methanol and pure water. It was also reported that during the photocatalytic reaction, some oxygen functional groups were reduced, which in turn, decreased the band-gap energy and increased the conductivity. However, these types of structural changes could not affect the production of stable H2 over the GO. As discussed in section 3, p and n-type doping or co-doping further improves the properties of GO and makes it an efficient photocatalyst. Similarly, Wu et al.41 reported the photocatalytic H2 production from the B-doped graphene. The band-gap of bare graphene is not sufficient to show the photocatalytic H2 production reaction. B doping in graphene tunes its bandgap, and makes it a visible light active photocatalyst of H2 production. It was concluded that the rate of H2 production and its stability were directly related to the B content and the value of the band-gap energy.
Yeh et al.37 described N-doped GO quantum dots (NGO-QDs) as a sole photocatalyst for the H2 production process under visible-light illumination. Fig. 5(a and b) shows the TEM images of NGO-QDs, and the particle size of NGO-QDs was 8.1 ± 1.8 nm with an interlayer spacing of 0.213 nm. The packing order of the single-crystalline graphene layers was found to be AB order, as shown in Fig. 5(c and d). The bright spots in zone 1 are attributed to the benzene ring centers. It shows a graphene layer formed by regular benzene hexagons, whereas zone 2 corresponds to the two graphene-layer planes stacked in the graphitic AB order. Fig. 5(e) shows the SAED spectra, which exhibited diffraction spots similar to those of graphite along the [0001] direction. Fig. 5(f) represents the product evolution over the GO-QD catalyst with time, which shows that pure GO generated only H2 but no O2. Fig. 5(g) shows the performance of NGO-QDs, and then only O2 evolution was observed. These results show that the p- and n-domains were the main reason for the evolution of H2 and O2, respectively. At the interface of NGO-QDs and GO QDs, significant band bending was present under visible-light irradiation, as shown in Fig. 5(h). In NGO-QDs, electron injection for H2 evolution and hole injection for O2 creation are handled by p-type and n-type domains, respectively. As a consequence, visible light irradiation on the dispersion of NGO-QDs in pure water could efficiently create H2 and O2 with a molar ratio of 2:1, while maintaining good operational stability.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of nitrogen-doped GO quantum dots. The size of the quantum dots was found to be 8.1 ± 1.8 nm with an interlayer spacing of 0.213 nm. (c and d) Magnified zones of the TEM image indicating the AB order of the GO layers. (e) The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the nitrogen-doped GO quantum dots. (f and g) The product evolution over the GO quantum dots catalyst with time for H2 and O2 production. (h) The photocatalytic mechanism of H2 and O2 production in N-doped and undoped GO quantum dots, along with the corresponding energy diagram. Copyright.37 
Putri et al.27 synthesized N-, B co-doped rGOs by the pyrolysis of GO by varying the pyrolysis temperature, such as 600–800 °C for N-doped rGO and 800–1000 °C for B-doped rGO. The pyrolysis temperature was varied in order to tune the dopant loading. It was seen that N-doped rGO at 600 °C and B-doped rGO at 1000 °C showed 8.26 N at% and 3.59 B at% dopant loading. This dopant loading also affects the photocatalytic activity, such as H2 production. Fig. 6(a and b) show the UV spectra of N and B co-doped GO with varying pyrolysis temperature. The absorption edge shifted with varying pyrolysis temperature (i.e., the dopant amount). After the pyrolysis and doping process, the size of these nanostructures decreased, and doping induced the nucleation of the sp2 domains within the sp3 matrix. This smaller size led to a wide band-gap. Therefore, the co-doped-rGOs exhibited only UV light photocatalytic activity. As shown in Fig. 6(c), no apparent deactivation was seen after four consecutive cycles, indicating the high stability of the B-rGO prepared at 1000 °C that was attributed to the chemical composition responsible for the photo-reactivity and the active sites. Similarly, Latorre-Sánchez et al.102 synthesized P-doped GO by pyrolysis of alginate and studied the photocatalytic H2 production. It was found that P-doped GO exhibited higher photocatalytic H2 production activity as compared to the pure GO. This was attributed to the P doping induced enhanced photocatalytic properties.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) UV spectra of N- and B-doped rGOs samples. Insets of (a) and (b) contain a high magnification of the range between 200 and 300 nm. (c) Hourly evolution of H2 production (indicates stability tests of the B-rGO sample). Copyright.27 
Gliniak et al.98 studied the photocatalytic H2 production of S-doped GO QDs. Fig. 7(a) shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution (HR-TEM) images of S-GO QDs with a particle size of approximately 3 to 10 nm and good crystallinity. It was estimated that the CB minimum and VB maximum levels were suitable for the water splitting reaction due to the S doping in the GO QDs, resulting in a band-gap energy of 2.19 eV for the S-doped GO QDs, along with the values of the CB minimum and VB maximum at approximately −0.82 eV and 1.52 eV, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 7(c–e). These results are in good agreement with the feasibility of the H2 production reaction, as shown in Fig. 7(f), that the energy band gap for water reduction and oxidation should lie between the CBM and VBM of S-GO QDs. Fig. 7(b) shows the time course of the photocatalytic H2 production shown with the highest rate as observed for 80% EtOH compared to that in in H2O. Very recently, Xiang et al.119 studied the photocatalytic H2 production and degradation of RhB dye under visible light. The porous P-doped graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and B-doped graphene nanomaterials were used for that purpose. It was concluded that p-type doping in graphitic structures has a great impact on the redox potential for photocatalysts. Sometimes, the formation of the p–n heterojunction also leads to enhancement in photocatalytic H2 production. For example, Xu et al.120 studied the visible light photocatalytic H2 production from polymer nanoplates and partial-rGO. The enhancement in H2 production was due to the inner electrical field formed in the p–n heterojunction. This restricts the electron hole pair recombination rate, and enhances the rate of H2 production under visible light.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM and high resolution-TEM images of S-GO QDs. (b) Time courses of H2 production under solar light irradiation for S-GO QDs photocatalysts (2.5 mg mL−1) in pure water or 80% (v/v) ethanol aqueous solution at pH 8. Electronic structure of S-GO QDs. (c) Plots of (αE)2 against the photon energy. (d and e) Cathodic and anodic scans of the CB minimum and VB maximum values at 100 mV s−1. (f) Energy level diagram of the S-GO QDs and GO QDs in comparison with the potentials for water reduction and oxidation. Copyright.98 
In recent years, H2 production has become a main area of research, and a variety of materials have been used showing greater efficiencies. Out of the various nanomaterials, graphene and its derivatives-based nanomaterials have shown promising potential in this field. Chemical doping has been found as a simple technique for modifying the properties of the nanomaterials. Some important results of photocatalytic H2 production using doped/undoped graphene nanomaterials as the sole photocatalysts are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Various doped/undoped graphene nanostructures used as the sole photocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 production are listed, including photoreaction conditions, light sources, yield (H2 production) and experimental results




S. No.
Sole photocatalyst
Light source
Photoreaction conditions
Yield (μmol)
Experimental results
Ref.




1.
Pt/GO
400 W hg lamp
At 25 °C under UV (400 nm) and visible light
17000
Quantum efficiencies were 2.7% and 0.010% under UV and visible-light irradiations

68



2.
P-Doped GO
300 W Xe lamp
Under UV light and visible light
12
Photocatalytic activity of doped GO is higher than that of GO

102



3.
N-Doped GO
400 W Xe lamp
Under visible light
5000
The H2 evolution rate was 2 times higher than that for O2

37



4.
B-Doped r-GO
500 W Xe lamp
Under visible light
65
Doping enhances the photocatalytic activity

37



5.
S-Doped GQDs
500 W Xe lamp
At 35 °C under UV l and visible light
568
Highest H2 generation efficiencies were 18166 μmol h−1 g−1 in water and 30519 μmol h−1 g−1 in an 80% EtOH aqueous environment

121



6.
B-Doped graphene
300 W Xe lamp
Under visible light
219.3
High H2 production rate after 60 h reaction, indicates the excellent stability

41



7.
Graphene
300 W Xe lamp
Under visible light
33.75
Much higher photocatalytic H2 production rate

120





5.2 Photocatalytic degradation of pollutants
Organic pollutants, such as dyes, pesticides, industrial and pharmaceuticals wastes, are directly released into the environment at a trace concentration. The drinking water treatment plants are mainly not designed to eliminate such dyes and clean the environment. The presence of even very small amounts of dyes in water can cause serious environmental and health problems in the society. These dyes can restrict the growth of aquatic bacteria in water. Therefore, some techniques were developed to cure this problem, such as filtration, ozonation, and adsorption on activated carbon. Some metal-based photocatalysts were also used to photodegrade the harmful dyes and waste.122 However, these metal-based photocatalysts can also contaminate the treated water by leaching metals. To avoid such kinds of issue, various metal-free materials (e.g., carbon materials-graphene, GO, rGO) have been recently used as efficient photocatalytic material.123
As discussed above, graphene has zero band-gap energy and cannot be used as an efficient photocatalyst. However, when it is modified by doping heteroatoms, it shows great potential for such applications. Its derivatives (such as GO and rGO) are one of the most promising nanomaterials for photocatalytic dye degradation. Photocatalysis has received great attention since the discovery of water splitting over TiO2 electrodes by Fujishima and Honda in 1972.117 There are some issues with the currently used photocatalysts, such as low quantum yield and low utilization of visible light. Fortunately, the modified graphene and its derivatives provide a facile strategy to enhance their visible light absorption and stabilities. As also discussed above, modified graphene nanomaterials under the influence of light radiation generate e−/h+ pairs in CB and VB, which move to the surface and on reacting with atmospheric O2 and adsorbed H2O generate ROS. These ROS (such as hydroxide and superoxide radicals) are very crucial for the photocatalytic degradation of dyes. These photo-generated e−/h+ pairs recombine at a very fast rate, preventing the production of ROS and photocatalytic activity is thus decreased. To overcome these issues, doping is one of the simplest methods that creates charge imbalance and also traps the electrons, reducing the recombination rate of e−/h+ pairs and producing more ROS available for photocatalytic degradation. Roushani et al.124 reported the synthesis of GQDs and studied the visible light active photodegradation of cationic dye new fuchsin (NF). They studied the effect of various parameters on the photodegradation activity of NF. GQDs with functional groups like carboxylic and epoxide on their surfaces reduced the e−/h+ pair recombination rate. At low pH, undissociated carboxylic (–COOH) and epoxide groups were present. On increasing the pH, these functionalities became ionized (pH > 4.0).
Also, at very high pH, decrease in degradation was observed attributed to the change in the specific surface charge at high ionic strengths. Hence, the optimized pH range was found to be from 4.0–6.0. The photodegradation rate of dye was directly related to the dose of the catalyst because of the increase in the surface-active sites. The optimized dose concentration was found to be 10 μl, at which point, higher degradation of NF was observed. They also performed the recyclability test, and it was found that GQDs could be used for at least 5 cycles under optimum conditions; after that, a decrease in activity was observed. Similarly, Yu et al.125 reported that GO could efficiently photocatalytically degrade the highly toxic Cr(VI) to Cr(III) under sunlight. This experiment revealed the greater stability of produced GO materials in wastewater treatment after many cycles of reactions. It was concluded that GO is a simple and promising new photocatalyst toward Cr(VI) reduction. Krishnamoorthy et al.22 synthesized GO by using modified Hummers method, and studied its photocatalytic activity against resazurin (RZ) into resorufin. It was observed that bare GO showed excellent photocatalytic activity under UV light. In another study, it was reported that the addition of some electron scavengers (ES), such as peroxomonosulfate, peroxodisulfate and hydrogen peroxide, improved the photocatalytic activity of GO. This was attributed to the production of more free radicals.126 GO nanosheets showed visible light active photodegradation of dye molecules. As the oxidation rate increases, more functional groups containing CO were formed at the surface. Due to which the characteristic transition peak of CO i.e., n–π* showed a red shift making it visible light active nanomaterial.127 Some studies show that these GO-based nanomaterials exhibit good antibacterial and SERS activities, in addition to the excellent photocatalytic activity.128,129
rGO also exhibits excellent photodegradation activity against dye molecules due to its higher charge carrier density and low recombination rate of charge carriers. The backbone made up of the sp2 carbon structure in rGO improves the electron transport process, which further helps in the separation of charge carriers and shows improved photodegradation results.33,130 Siong et al.131 prepared rGO at different reaction times and studied the photodegradation activity. It was observed that 160 °C was the optimum temperature to produce rGO with high surface area that showed excellent photocatalytic activity attributed to the good restoration of the sp2 hybridization leading to higher adsorption (87.39%) and photodegradation rate (98.57%). Similarly, Tai et al.132 produced partial rGO from GO with a decreased band-gap from 3.5–4.5 eV to 3.1–4.0 eV in addition to the restoration of the sp2 hybridized character, leading to the low recombination rate and higher photodegradation of methanol. The pseudo first order rate constant was found to be 0.0025 min−1 for the photodegradation process using partial rGO, which also showed higher stability up to three consecutive cycles.
Singh et al.133 studied the photodegradation activity of dyes (MB and MO) using B-doped GO. Fig. 8(a and b) show the TEM image of GO and B-doped GO, indicating the 2D structure with wrinkles after B doping. HR-TEM images (Fig. 8c and d) demonstrate that B-doped GO islands are formed isolated by disordered regions with an interplanar spacing of 0.33 nm, which was attributed to the graphene (002) plane. The UV spectrum shown in Fig. 8(e) shows the presence of an absorption peak at ∼232 nm (π→π* of C–C bonds) and another peak at ∼303 nm (n→π* of C–O bonds). In the case of B-doping, the peak (π→π* of C–C bonds) showed a red shift (268 nm), indicating the restoration of the electronic conjugation with reduction. B-Doping increased the density of states near the Fermi levels and reduced GO to rGO. The UV spectra showed the shifting of the n→π* transition to a lower value with doping. The band-gap energy was calculated by the Tauc plot of GO and B-GO, and estimated as 2.8 eV and 3.00 eV, respectively. Complete degradation of MB and MO was observed in 50 and 120 min, respectively, and attributed to more adsorption due to more disordered regions in B-GO as compared to GO. The difference in their degradation activity was due to the donor acceptor nature of MB and MO. MB is an electron donor dye, which properly reacts with the holes of VB that are produced in large quantity because of the p-type behavior of GO, as shown in Fig. 8(f). On the other hand, MO is an electron acceptor dye and mainly reacts with the electrons of CB, which leads to the change in their degradation activity.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of GO. (b) TEM image of B-GO, including the EDS spectrum of B-GO and (c and d) high-resolution TEM images of B-GO, including SAED patterns of B-GO. (e) UV-visible absorption spectra of GO and B-GO. (f) Photodegradation of MB dye. Copyright.21 
Xing et al.134 synthesized a highly dispersed B-doped GO. No morphological change was observed after doping in the GO nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 9(a and b). Nanoribbons (B-GNRs) and nanosheets (B-GR) were formed after B-doping and vacuum activation, as shown in Fig. 9(c). The HRTEM image (Fig. 9(d)) showed the high crystallinity of the doped GO with both ZZ-edges and AC-edges, resulting in efficient materials with highly reactive sites, metallic and semiconductor-like properties. Furthermore, the PL spectra (Fig. 9(e)) supported their semiconductor-like behavior with improved photocatalytic properties. With the doping of B and exposure of the ZZ and AC-edges, the B-GNRs possessed tunable bandgaps and p-type transport properties. Fig. 9(f) shows the photocatalytic degradation spectra of Rh B under UV light irradiation. From the spectra, it is clear that the B-doped GNRs showed the highest photodegradation activity. Fig. 9(g) shows the mechanism behind its high photodegradation rate. Doping with B shifts the Fermi level to be higher in the B-GNRs than the CB of the B-GR sheets. Thus, the electrons are transferred from the B-GNRs to B-GR, where they come into contact with O2 to generate ROS and further degrade the dye molecules. Wang et al.135 reported the high photocatalysis and photostability of the N-doped GO, where it was found that interaction of the N atom with the surface oxygen groups stabilized them, resulting in the higher adsorption rate in order to improve the photodegradation ability. The N-doped GO exhibited a rate of up to 100% photodegradation in 110 min. After repeating three cycles, the N-doped GO still showed a photodegradation rate of 80%. The composite formation with the polymer also provided improvement in the photodegradation rate of graphene. Vieira et al.123 synthesized a composite membrane of N-doped GO in the poly(vinylidene fluoride) matrix and studied the degradation of the organic pollutants. They observed a pollutant mass removal rate of up to 2.05–2.73 mg m−2 h−1.
 Fig. 9  (a–c) TEM images of GO, GR, and B-GNRs. (d) High-resolution TEM images for B-GNRs. (e and f) Photoluminescence spectra of different samples. Measurement at room temperature under the excitation light at 280 nm, and B-GR-H means the boron doped graphene prepared by a hydrothermal method. The photodegradation of RhB (5 mg L−1) under the UV light irradiation. (g) The proposed photocatalysis mechanism of GR and B-GNRs.71,134 
In addition to photodegradation, adsorption of the pollutant molecules has been reported in graphene and its derivatives to enhance these materials. They can further be enhanced by doping, which is good for photocatalytic degradation. Graphene and its derivatives also act as highly efficient adsorbants for pollutants (dye molecules). Graphene-based materials are porous and have high surface area. Thus, they show excellent dye adsorbing properties. Some researchers have shown that doping also enhances the adsorption capacity of graphene-based materials. Doping-modified graphene and derivatives have high adsorption rates, and large adsorption capacities towards dyes are still in great demand.136–138
The photocatalytic destruction of organic contaminants by graphene-based nanomaterials has recently been investigated. It is also worth noting that solitary photocatalysts made of doped graphene have shown increased photocatalytic characteristics and high-performance photocatalytic activities. Doping graphene and its derivatives with non-metal ions results in increased solar light absorption that extends up to longer wavelengths in the visible light radiation range. In addition, due to the doping, numerous structural and surface alterations are induced, which show good outcomes in reducing the recombination rate of charge carriers, charge imbalance, and others. Moreover, great progress has been reported in the design and development of doped graphene nanomaterials in the last few years. However, still more devoted efforts are required to enhance their efficiencies as sole photocatalysts.139 Some important results of the photodegradation of organic pollutants using graphene nanomaterials as the sole photocatalysts are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Various doped/undoped graphene nanostructures used as the sole photocatalysts for photocatalytic dye degradation are listed, including photoreaction conditions, light sources, target dye molecules and experimental results




S. No.
Sole photocatalyst
Light source
Photoreaction condition
Target molecule
Experimental results
Ref.




1.
B-Doped GO
175 W metal halide lamp
Under UV light
MB and MO
50% enhancement in photodegradation of MB and MO

133



2.
Graphene
300 W Xe lamp
Under visible light irradiation
New Fuchsin dye
94.76% decolorization of the dye molecule

124



3.
B-Doped graphene
500 W Xe lamp
Under UV light irradiation
Rhodamine B
Excellent photodegradation of RhB dye

140



4.
rGO
500 W xenon lamp
Under sunlight or visible light
Cr(VI)
Photodegradation around 57.5 ± 5.8% of Cr(VI) in 30 min. Performance/comparable or superior to P25

125



5.
GO and rGO
95 W UV lamp
Under UV light irradiation
MB
2.5 times higher than that of pure GO

33



6.
GO
—
Under UV light irradiation
MO
91% photodegradation efficiency of MO dye

126



7.
N-Doped GO
Xenon lamp
Under UV light irradiation
MO
Complete photodegradation within 300 min

135



8.
GO
Sun
Under sunlight
MB
60% photodegradation efficiency

127



9.
rGO
95 W UV lamp
Under UV light irradiation
MB
Excellent photocatalytic activity

131



10.
GO
4 W UV lamp
Under UV light irradiation
Volatile organic compound (methanol)
Excellent photodegradation and photostability

132





5.3 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
Over the past decades, anthropogenic activities that continuously release CO2 from the consumption of fossil fuels have sharply elevated the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere by over 400 parts per million (ppm).141 The natural process of photosynthesis on earth can no longer meet the requirement to achieve carbon neutrality.142 In consequence, the over-emitted CO2 greatly contributes to the issue of environmental disasters, such as global warming.143 The CO2 emission and the considerable fossil fuel consumption are big concerns of the sustainable development of human society. The CO2 reduction reactions that can transform CO2 into value-added carbon compounds could provide a possible solution to these problems. Not only can CO2 reduction contribute to the consumption of over-emitted CO2, but also produce fuel chemicals, such as CO, CH4, and CH3OH.10,144 By using clean solar energy as the drive power, photocatalytic CO2 reduction is regarded as artificial photosynthesis, which holds great potential in the battle of achieving carbon neutrality. However, as promising as it sounds, photocatalytic CO2 reduction is very challenging. In the CO2 reduction reactions, the reduction of CO2 to CO2˙− by a single electron is extremely unfavorable because it needs to overcome large reorganizational energy between the molecule of linear CO2 and the bent radical anion of CO2˙− (eqn (1)).145 Fortunately, the proton-assisted steps of multi-electron reduction are much more feasible than the single-electron reduction of CO2 to CO2˙−, as shown in eqn (2)–(6) (in aqueous solution at pH 7 vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)).146 In typical aqueous media, the bottom of CB should be more negative than the redox potential of CO2 reductions, while the top of VB should be more positive than the redox potential of water oxidation, demanding the smallest Eg to be 1.06 eV for photocatalysts. Another challenge is that the redox potential of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (eqn (7)) lies within those of the CO2 reductions. HER is much easier to proceed than the CO2 reduction reactions, making it a competitive reaction during the CO2 reduction progress. Besides, the recombination of the photo-generated electrons and holes would further slow down the catalytic efficiency of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction.147 The goal of photocatalytic CO2 reduction is to discover the photocatalysts that can absorb a wide range of the solar spectrum, while being highly efficient towards the CO2 activation and conversion. CO2 + e− → CO2˙− E = −1.90 V(1) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCO2H E = −0.61 V(2) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O E = −0.53 V(3) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O E = −0.48 V(4) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O E = −0.38 V(5) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O E = −0.24 V(6) 2H+ + 2e− → H2 E = −0.42 V(7)Many research studies are focusing on employing graphene derivatives as a co-catalyst in photocatalytic CO2 reduction because of the high surface area and conductivity of the graphene derivatives.148,149 For example, the reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-supported quinacridone (QA/rGO) was reported to be efficient in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO and CH4.150 The rGO-supported C3N4 nanoflake and quantum dot hybrid materials could reduce CO2 into HCHO under visible light irradiation.151 Other than being the substrate, GO could also serve as the electron mediator to connect CsPbBr3 and α-Fe2O3 to form an all-solid-state Z-scheme system to photocatalytically reduce CO2 to CO.152 The hybridization of the metal complex molecule and graphene materials was also confirmed to be effective to promote the photocatalytic performance of CO2 reduction. Ma et al. linked Co quaterpyridine complexes to carboxylic acid groups functionalized graphene surfaces.153 This nanostructure exhibited 97% CO product selectivity with exceptional stability of over 200 hours under visible-light irradiation in acetonitrile solutions.
Apart from being the co-catalyst, Zhang et al. functionalized the edges of GQDs with –OH and –NH2 functional groups. They found out that these sole graphene derivatives had excellent electrochemical activity towards CO2 reduction to CH4.154 When it comes to photocatalysis, using graphene-derivative nanomaterials as a standalone metal-free photocatalyst for CO2 reduction also has great potential. Hsu et al. applied a modified Hummer's method to synthesize GOs (GO-1 and GO-3) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.69 Graphene flakes were fabricated through this modified Hummer method (Fig. 10a). Topographic images from atomic force microscopy (AFM) confirmed that the GOs were in the form of isolated few-layer sheets with lateral dimensions of several μm and a thickness of 1 to 3 nm (Fig. 10b). Besides, GO-3 exhibited a methanol formation rate of 3.2 × 10−3 μmol per surface cat−1 h−1, which is six times higher than that of pure TiO2.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM and TEM images (inset images) of GO sheets: (A) GO-1, and (B) GO-3. (b) Atomic force microscopy images of GO sheets: (A) GO-1, and (B) GO-3. (c) Photocatalytic methanol formation (RMeOH) on different graphene oxide samples (GO-1, GO-2, GO-3) and TiO2, using a simulated solar-light source. Copyright.69 
Benefiting from the bandgap engineering of graphene, Yan et al. employed functionalization strategies to tailor the bandgap structures of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) for CO2 reduction under visible light.155 GQDs were synthesized through a one-step acid cutting method by using anthracite coal as the precursor. Then, the authors conjugated GQDs with o-phenylenediamine (OPD), 2,3-diaminonaphthalene (DNPT23), 1,8-diaminonaphthalene (DNPT18), and 1,1′-bi(2-naphthalene) (BNPTL) by the formation of CN bonds under solvothermal conditions. The functionalized GQDs exhibited various bandgap values (2.40, 2.05, 1.95, 1.91, and 1.88 eV for the original GQD, GQD-OPD, GQD-DNPT23, GQD-DNPT18, and GQD-BNPTL, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(a)), which extended the light absorption in the visible light range. Inspired by this result, the authors further grafted GQDs with electron-donating functionalities, such as p-anisidine (Anln-OCH3), 4 (trifluoromethoxy)aniline (Anln-OCF3), and 4-(trichloro methoxy) aniline (Anln-OCCl3) by the formation of N–CO amide bond in solvothermal conditions. The electron-donating functionalities also narrowed the bandgap of GQDs (Fig. 11b). The functionalized GQDs exhibited photocatalytic activities towards both H2 production (Fig. 11c and d) and CO2 reduction. GQD-BNPTL provided the best performance for methanol formation with a yield rate of 0.695 μmol h−1 gcat−1, which is about three times higher than that of the original GQD (Fig. 11e and f).
 Fig. 11  Energy level diagram and structure of (a) coal GQD, GQD-OPD, GQD-DNPT23, GQD-DNPT18, and GQD-BNPTL, and (b) coal GQD, GQD-Anln-OCH3, GQD-Anln-OCF3, and GQD-Anln-OCCl3. (c) Redox potentials, conduction, and valence bands of GQD. (d) Time courses of H2 evolution. (e) Time courses of CO2 reduction under 420–800 nm irradiation. (f) Photocatalysis of CO2 reduction on GQDs. Copyright.155 
Kuang et al. investigated the performance of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO on the sole GO activated by simulated sunlight (SS) and UV (GOSS and GOUV), respectively.156 Compared to the pristine GO, both GOSS and GOUV revealed enhanced CO yield (Fig. 12b and c). The authors found out that the irradiation prevented GO from CO poisoning and created defects restoring the large π-conjugated network in the catalyst (confirmed by XPS and Raman spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 12a and d). The transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy and electron spin resonance (ESR) proved that the increased defect density and π-conjugation of GOSS and GOUV improved the photoelectron yield and prolonged the lifetime of the charge carriers (Fig. 12e–g). Besides, the better CO production performance of GOSS than that of GOUV implied the more favourable activation for GO by simulated sunlight.
 Fig. 12  (a) XPS C 1s spectra of GO, GOSS, and GOUV. (b) CO production overtime on GO, GOSS, and GOUV under simulated sunlight irradiation. (c) Cycling curves of the GOSS samples. (d) Raman spectra. (e) Femtosecond transient absorption (TA) dynamics of pure Milli-Q water, GO, GOSS, and GOUV in Milli-Q water. (f) ESR signals of TEMPO. (g) The trend of ESR signal intensity with irradiation time. Copyright.156 
The structural engineering of GO (morphology and thickness), functionalization of GO to tail the band-gap, and activation of graphene by irradiation all show a positive effect on the performance of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Some important results of photocatalytic CO2 reduction by using graphene nanomaterials as sole photocatalysts are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Various undoped/doped graphene nanostructures as sole photocatalysts for photocatalytic CO2 reduction are listed, including photoreaction conditions, light sources, rate of CO2 production and experimental results




S. No.
Sole photocatalysts
Light source
Photoreaction conditions
Rate of CO2 production
Experimental results
Ref.




1.
GO
300 W halogen lamp
Under sunlight or visible light at 25 °C
Methanol conversion rate up to 0.172 μmol g cat−1 h−1
Methanol conversion rate of the modified GO was six-fold higher than that of the pure TiO2

69



2.
GQDs
300 W Xe lamp
Under visible light
Rate of 0.695 μmol h−1 g cat−1
Improved CO2 reduction rate

155



3.
GO
500 W Xe lamp
Under UV light and visible light
Rate was 1.23 μmol g cat−1 h−1
Enhanced efficiency of photocatalytic reduction of CO2

156





6. Summary and outlook
In the past decade, great research work has been carried out in the synthesis of graphene-based nanostructures, i.e., graphene, GO, rGO, for emerging applications in the field of energy and environment. These materials show several fascinating properties, such as excellent charge transfer, high electron conductivity, large surface area, tunable band-gap, and high adsorptive capability, along with the opportunity to tailor their properties, thus stimulating intense interest in graphene nanomaterials in the field of photocatalysis. As a result of the continuous breakthrough made in the field of graphene-related research, these materials have emerged as novel metal-free and sole photocatalyst nanomaterials. Moreover, taking advantage of the ease of modifications of these nanomaterials, band-gap tailoring and higher electrical conductivity, along with excellent surface functionality could be achieved by chemical doping to prevent the undesirable recombination of photo-induced electrons and holes, which facilitate the photocatalysis reactions for many applications. The heteroatom doping/co-doping provides a more efficient visible light sole photocatalyst with the desired/tunable redox potentials that make them thermodynamically favorable for various photocatalysis reactions, i.e., H2 production, dye degradation and CO2 reduction.
However, the study of graphene nanomaterials as a sole visible light photocatalyst has still not been explored much. Understanding the fundamental catalytic mechanism of graphene-based sole photocatalyst photocatalysis is conducive to the rational design of high-performance graphene nanostructured photocatalysts. There are many challenging issues in this subject –
(i) One of the main issues is the proper choice of the dopants. p-Type or n-type or co-doping with either p- or n- type only or both should be properly determined for maximum photocatalytic activities.86,157
(ii) The other main issue is the precise control over the doping elements for the optimization of the dopant concentration and uniform distribution.86 Additionally, control over the surface defects and morphology is important, which alternatively affects the charge transfer process.158,159
(iii) Co-doping of graphene nanostructures could also be investigated. The co-doping mechanisms or multi-element doping with metals and non-metals are still not very clear, which could be explored for multifunctional applications in several other fields. Such doping in a controlled manner can improve the surface functionality with enhanced charge transfer and charge separation for better photocatalytic activities.25 To explore these modified doped graphene nanostructures in the field of photocatalysis, more research on doping engineering is needed to provide standalone metal-free visible light active photocatalyst materials.
(iv) Various approaches to modify the band gap or tailor the optical properties of graphene-based nanostructures to achieve the highest photocatalytic performance. Various synthesis and doping techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition, ion beam implantation, and hydrothermal, should be employed by varying the experimental parameters during the synthesis process to optimize the doping concentrations and morphologies of the graphene nanostructures.139,160–162 The fabrication should be focused on the development of low cost, environmentally friendly methodologies to produce stable and recyclable nanomaterials, which could be used on the industrial scale with high-performance photocatalytic activity.49 The coupling of graphene nanostructures with plasmonic nanomaterials163,164 and other functional nanomaterials could be another promising way to harness solar light for efficient photocatalytic activities and other energy applications.139,165
In summary, graphene nanostructures could be a promising solar-driven photocatalyst due to their tunable characteristics and ease of modifications through simple heteroatom doping. These nanomaterials have the potential to compete with metal or semiconductor-based photocatalysts. Finally, exploring graphene-based metal free sole photocatalyst nanomaterials can also be promising for antibacterial/antiviral photocatalytic activities for indoor and outdoor applications to combat with pandemic like COVID-19.16 It can bring new insight into the use of these nanomaterials in other emerging fields of energy and environment, including biomedical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The author (J. P.) thanks the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, for the prestigious INSPIRE Faculty award [INSPIRE/04/2015/002452(IFA15-MS-57)], along with a research grant. Manisha and Samriti also acknowledge the National Institute of Technology Hamirpur for providing funding for their P.G. and Ph.D. research work, respectively.
References
J. Prakash, S. Sun, H. C. Swart and R. K. Gupta, Noble metals-TiO2 nanocomposites: from fundamental mechanisms to photocatalysis, surface enhanced Raman scattering and antibacterial applications, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 11, 82–135 CrossRef .
J. Prakash, J. Pivin and H. Swart, Noble metal nanoparticles embedding into polymeric materials: from fundamentals to applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 226, 187–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prakash, P. Kumar, R. Harris, C. Swart, J. Neethling and A. J. van Vuuren, 
            et al., Synthesis, characterization and multifunctional properties of plasmonic Ag–TiO2 nanocomposites, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 355707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Prakash, A. Singh, G. Sathiyan, R. Ranjan, A. Singh and A. Garg, 
            et al., Progress in tailoring perovskite based solar cells through compositional engineering: Materials properties, photovoltaic performance and critical issues, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 440–486 CrossRef .
T. Gupta, J. Cho and J. Prakash, Hydrothermal synthesis of TiO2 nanorods: formation chemistry, growth mechanism, and tailoring of surface properties for photocatalytic activities, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 20, 100428 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, J. Kherb, J. Prakash and R. Kaushal, A novel and facile green synthesis of SiO2 nanoparticles for removal of toxic water pollutants, Appl. Nanosci., 2021, 1–13 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, Y. Zhao, H. Wang and C. He, Synthesis of novel yttrium-doped graphene oxide nanocomposite for dye removal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7897–7903 RSC .
N. Singh, J. Prakash, M. Misra, A. Sharma and R. K. Gupta, Dual functional Ta-doped electrospun TiO2 nanofibers with enhanced photocatalysis and SERS detection for organic compounds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28495–28507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prakash, V. Kumar, L. Erasmus, M. Duvenhage, G. Sathiyan and S. Bellucci, 
            et al., Phosphor polymer nanocomposite: ZnO: Tb3+ embedded polystyrene nanocomposite thin films for solid-state lighting applications, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 977–988 CrossRef .
Z. S. Chen, G. X. Zhang, J. Prakash, Y. Zheng and S. H. Sun, Rational Design of Novel Catalysts with Atomic Layer Deposition for the Reduction of Carbon Dioxide, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900889 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Patel, A. K. Chawla, R. Chandra, J. Prakash, P. K. Kulriya and J. C. Pivin, 
            et al., Structural phase transformation in ZnS nanocrystalline thin films by swift heavy ion irradiation, Solid State Commun., 2010, 150, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS .
Samriti, Prateek, M. C. Joshi, R. K. Gupta and J. Prakash, Hydrothermal synthesis and Ta doping of TiO2 nanorods: Effect of soaking time and doping on optical and charge transfer properties for enhanced SERS activity, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2022, 278, 125642 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, G. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Prakash, Y. Zheng and S. Sun, Multi-metallic catalysts for the electroreduction of carbon dioxide: Recent advances and perspectives, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 155, 111922 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, M. Chandra Mathpal, J. Prakash, B. C. Viljoen, W. D. Roos and H. C. Swart, Band gap tailoring of cauliflower-shaped CuO nanostructures by Zn doping for antibacterial applications, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 832, 154968 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, J. Prakash and R. K. Gupta, Design and engineering of high-performance photocatalytic systems based on metal oxide–graphene–noble metal nanocomposites, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2017, 2, 422–439 RSC .
J. Prakash, J. Cho and Y. K. Mishra, Photocatalytic TiO2 nanomaterials as potential antimicrobial and antiviral agents: Scope against blocking the SARS-COV-2 spread, Micro Nano Eng., 2022, 14, 100100 CrossRef CAS .
N. Komba, G. Zhang, Q. Wei, X. Yang, J. Prakash and R. Chenitz, 
            et al., Iron (II) phthalocyanine/N-doped graphene: A highly efficient non-precious metal catalyst for oxygen reduction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 18103–18114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, G. Zhang, M. Wu, J. Prakash and S. Sun, Rational design of multifunctional air electrodes for rechargeable Zn–Air batteries: Recent progress and future perspectives, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 253–286 CrossRef .
J. Prakash, Fundamentals and applications of recyclable SERS substrates, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2019, 38, 201–242 Search PubMed .
X. Duan, S. Indrawirawan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Effects of nitrogen-, boron-, and phosphorus-doping or codoping on metal-free graphene catalysis, Catal. Today, 2015, 249, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, S. Kaushal, P. Singh and J. Sharma, Boron doped graphene oxide with enhanced photocatalytic activity for organic pollutants, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 364, 130–139 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, R. Mohan and S.-J. Kim, Graphene oxide as a photocatalytic material, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 244101 CrossRef .
L. K. Putri, W.-J. Ong, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, Heteroatom doped graphene in photocatalysis: a review, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, Y. Zhang and S.-J. Park, Recent Advances in Carbonaceous Photocatalysts with Enhanced Photocatalytic Performances: A Mini Review, Materials, 2019, 12, 1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bramhaiah, R. Bhuyan, S. Mandal, S. Kar, R. Prabhu and N. S. John, 
            et al., Molecular, Aromatic, and Amorphous Domains of N-Carbon Dots: Leading toward the Competitive Photoluminescence and Photocatalytic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4299–4309 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Putri, W.-J. Ong, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, Heteroatom doped graphene in photocatalysis: a review, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Putri, B.-J. Ng, W.-J. Ong, H. W. Lee, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, Heteroatom nitrogen-and boron-doping as a facile strategy to improve photocatalytic activity of standalone reduced graphene oxide in hydrogen evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4558–4569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, G. Zhang, J. Prakash, Z. Chen, M. Gauthier and S. Sun, Chemical vapour deposition of graphene: Layer control, the transfer process, characterisation, and related applications, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2019, 38, 149–199 Search PubMed .
J. G. Radich, A. L. Krenselewski, J. Zhu and P. V. Kamat, Is graphene a stable platform for photocatalysis? Mineralization of reduced graphene oxide with UV-irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4662–4668 CrossRef .
F. Khan, M. S. Khan, S. Kamal, M. Arshad, S. I. Ahmad and S. A. Nami, Recent advances in graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide based nanocomposites for the photodegradation of dyes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15940–15955 RSC .
S. Morales-Torres, L. M. Pastrana-Martinez, J. L. Figueiredo, J. L. Faria and A. M. J. E. S. Silva, Design of graphene-based TiO 2 photocatalysts—a review, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2012, 19, 3676–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Two-dimensional layered composite photocatalysts, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
V. L. E. Siong, X. H. Tai, K. M. Lee, J. C. Juan and C. W. Lai, Unveiling the enhanced photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic properties of reduced graphene oxide for photodegradation of methylene blue dye, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 37905–37915 RSC .
T.-F. Yeh, F.-F. Chan, C.-T. Hsieh and H. Teng, Graphite oxide with different oxygenated levels for hydrogen and oxygen production from water under illumination: the band positions of graphite oxide, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22587–22597 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Hsu, I. Shown, H.-Y. Wei, Y.-C. Chang, H.-Y. Du and Y.-G. Lin, 
            et al., Graphene oxide as a promising photocatalyst for CO 2 to methanol conversion, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 262–268 RSC .
J. Singh, H. Kaur, K. M. Batoo, S. Kumar, M. Rawat and S. A. Farooq, 
            et al., Facile Synthesis of High Lateral Graphene Oxide Sheets for Visible Light-driven Photocatalytic Degradation of Industrial Dyes towards Water Treatment Applications, Research Square, 2020 DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-127571/v1  , preprint.
T. F. Yeh, C. Y. Teng, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Nitrogen-doped graphene oxide quantum dots as photocatalysts for overall water-splitting under visible light Illumination, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Randviir, D. A. Brownson and C. E. Banks, A decade of graphene research: production, applications and outlook, Mater. Today Chem., 2014, 17, 426–432 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balasubramaniam, N. Singh, P. Kar, A. Tyagi, J. Prakash and R. K. Gupta, Engineering of transition metal dichalcogenide-based 2D nanomaterials through doping for environmental applications, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 804–827 RSC .
V. Kumar, J. Prakash, J. P. Singh, K. H. Chae, C. Swart and O. Ntwaeaborwa, 
            et al., Role of silver doping on the defects related photoluminescence and antibacterial behaviour of zinc oxide nanoparticles, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 159, 191–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Han, W. Younas, Y. Zhu, X. Ma and C. Cao, P-Type Boron-Doped Monolayer Graphene with Tunable Bandgap for Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution under Visible-Light Irradiation, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5145–5153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Z. Han, W. Younas, Y. Zhu, X. Ma and C. Cao, P-Type Boron-Doped Monolayer Graphene with Tunable Bandgap for Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution under Visible-Light Irradiation, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5145–5153 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, Nitrogen-Doped Graphene for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1125–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, Nitrogen-Doped Graphene for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1125–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Al Kausor and D. Chakrabortty, Graphene oxide based semiconductor photocatalysts for degradation of organic dye in waste water: A review on fabrication, performance enhancement and challenges, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 129, 108630 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. D. Januário, T. B. Vidovix, N. C. L. Beluci, R. M. Paixão, L. H. B. R. Silva and N. C. Homem, 
            et al., Advanced graphene oxide-based membranes as a potential alternative for dyes removal: A review, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 789, 147957 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Vasseghian, E.-N. Dragoi, F. Almomani and V. T. Le, Graphene-based materials for metronidazole degradation: A comprehensive review, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. A. Jamjoum, K. Umar, R. Adnan, M. R. Razali and M. N. Mohamad Ibrahim, Synthesis, Characterization, and Photocatalytic Activities of Graphene Oxide/metal Oxides Nanocomposites: A Review, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 752276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mondal, A. Prabhakaran, S. Gupta and V. R. Subramanian, Boosting Photocatalytic Activity Using Reduced Graphene Oxide (RGO)/Semiconductor Nanocomposites: Issues and Future Scope, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 8734–8743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Wu, 2D Graphene-TiO2 Composite and Its Photocatalytic Application in Water Pollutants, Front. Energy Res., 2021, 8, 612512 CrossRef .
E. Gerstner, Nobel prize 2010: Andre geim & konstantin novoselov, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 836 Search PubMed .
P. Sehrawat, S. Islam, P. Mishra and S. Ahmad, Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) based wideband optical sensor and the role of Temperature, Defect States and Quantum Efficiency, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–13 Search PubMed .
S. K. Tiwari, S. Sahoo, N. Wang and A. Huczko, Graphene research and their outputs: Status and prospect, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2020, 5, 10–29 Search PubMed .
M. Sang, J. Shin, K. Kim and K. J. Yu, Electronic and thermal properties of graphene and recent advances in graphene based electronics applications, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 374 Search PubMed .
P. Sehrawat, S. Islam, P. Mishra and S. Ahmad, Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) based wideband optical sensor and the role of Temperature, Defect States and Quantum Efficiency, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–13 Search PubMed .
J. Feng, Y. Ye, M. Xiao, G. Wu and Y. Ke, Synthetic routes of the reduced graphene oxide, Chem. Pap., 2020, 74, 3767–3783 Search PubMed .

          M. Zainuddin, N. N. Raikhan, N. Othman and W. Abdullah, Synthesis of reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO) using different treatments of Graphene Oxide (GO), IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, IOP Publishing,  2018, p. 012046 Search PubMed .
A. T. Smith, A. M. LaChance, S. Zeng, B. Liu and L. Sun, Synthesis, properties, and applications of graphene oxide/reduced graphene oxide and their nanocomposites, Nano Materials Science, 2019, 1, 31–47 Search PubMed .
V. Schmiedova, J. Pospisil, A. Kovalenko, P. Ashcheulov, L. Fekete and T. Cubon, 
            et al., Physical properties investigation of reduced graphene oxide thin films prepared by material inkjet printing, J. Nanomater., 2017, 2017, 3501903 Search PubMed .
P. Avouris, Graphene: Electronic and Photonic Properties and Devices, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, B. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Graphene-Based Materials for Hydrogen Generation from Light-Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Dideikin and A. Y. Vul, Graphene oxide and derivatives: the place in graphene family, Front. Phys., 2019, 6, 149 CrossRef .
P. Ranjan, S. Agrawal, A. Sinha, T. R. Rao, J. Balakrishnan and A. D. Thakur, A low-cost non-explosive synthesis of graphene oxide for scalable applications, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D. Mathivanan, K. S. Devi, G. Sathiyan, A. Tyagi, V. da Silva and B. Janegitz, 
            et al., Novel polypyrrole-graphene oxide-gold nanocomposite for high performance hydrogen peroxide sensing application, Sens. Actuators, A, 2021, 328, 112769 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kumar, N. M. Bardhan, S. Tongay, J. Wu, A. M. Belcher and J. C. Grossman, Scalable enhancement of graphene oxide properties by thermally driven phase transformation, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 151–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Precise tuning of surface composition and electron-transfer properties of graphene oxide films through electroreduction, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4748–4753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, M. Wan, Q. Liu, X. Xiong, F. Yu and Y. Huang, Heteroatom-doped carbon materials: synthesis, mechanism, and application for sodium-ion batteries, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800323 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yeh, J. M. Syu, C. Cheng, T. H. Chang and H. Teng, Graphite oxide as a photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Hsu, I. Shown, H. Y. Wei, Y. C. Chang, H. Y. Du and Y. G. Lin, 
            et al., Graphene oxide as a promising photocatalyst for CO2 to methanol conversion, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 262–268 RSC .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Graphene oxide as a chemically tunable platform for optical applications, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xing, F. Shen, B. Qiu and J. Zhang, Highly-dispersed Boron-doped Graphene Nanosheets Loaded with TiO2 Nanoparticles for Enhancing CO2 Photoreduction, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Noh and J. B. Baek, Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Characteristics and Applications, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2282–2293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ai, Z. Luo, J. Jiang, J. Zhu, Z. Du and Z. Fan, 
            et al., Nitrogen and sulfur codoped graphene: multifunctional electrode materials for high-performance Li-ion batteries and oxygen reduction reaction, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6186–6192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yuge, S. Bandow, M. Yudasaka, K. Toyama, S. Iijima and T. Manako, Boron-and nitrogen-doped single-walled carbon nanohorns with graphite-like thin sheets prepared by CO2 laser ablation method, Carbon, 2017, 111, 675–680 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yeh, J. M. Syu, C. Cheng, T. H. Chang and H. Teng, Graphite oxide as a photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albero, D. Mateo and H. García, Graphene-based materials as efficient photocatalysts for water splitting, Molecules, 2019, 24, 906 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bie, H. Yu, B. Cheng, W. Ho, J. Fan and J. Yu, Design, fabrication, and mechanism of nitrogen-doped graphene-based photocatalyst, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lavorato, A. Primo, R. Molinari and H. Garcia, N-Doped Graphene Derived from Biomass as a Visible-Light Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Generation from Water/Methanol Mixtures, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 187–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Maouche, Y. Zhou, J. Peng, S. Wang, X. Sun and N. Rahman, 
            et al., A 3D nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic pollutant degradation and hydrogen evolution, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 12423–12431 RSC .
S. Ullah, A. Hussain, W. Syed, M. A. Saqlain, I. Ahmad and O. Leenaerts, 
            et al., Band-gap tuning of graphene by Be doping and Be, B co-doping: a DFT study, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 55762–55773 RSC .
P. Rani and V. Jindal, Designing band gap of graphene by B and N dopant atoms, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 802–812 RSC .
M. Alattas and U. Schwingenschlögl, Band gap control in bilayer graphene by co-doping with bn pairs, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Uchiyama, H. Goto, H. Akiyoshi, R. Eguchi, T. Nishikawa and H. Osada, 
            et al., Difference in gating and doping effects on the band gap in bilayer graphene, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Pathak, V. Kumar, J. Prakash, L. Purohit, H. Swart and R. Kroon, Fabrication and characterization of nitrogen doped p-ZnO on n-Si heterojunctions, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 247, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, M. C. Mathpal, J. Prakash, B. C. Viljoen, W. Roos and H. Swart, Band gap tailoring of cauliflower-shaped CuO nanostructures by Zn doping for antibacterial applications, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 832, 154968 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Lin, Y. Ksari, J. Prakash, L. Giovanelli, J.-C. Valmalette and J.-M. Themlin, Nitrogen-doping processes of graphene by a versatile plasma-based method, Carbon, 2014, 73, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barrejón, A. Primo, M. J. Gómez-Escalonilla, J. L. G. Fierro, H. García and F. Langa, Covalent functionalization of N-doped graphene by N-alkylation, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16916–16919 RSC .
H. Tao, C. Yan, A. W. Robertson, Y. Gao, J. Ding and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., N-Doping of graphene oxide at low temperature for the oxygen reduction reaction, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 873–876 RSC .
S. Kaushal, M. Kaur, N. Kaur, V. Kumari and P. P. Singh, Heteroatom-doped graphene as sensing materials: A mini review, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 28608–28629 RSC .
H. Tao, C. Yan, A. W. Robertson, Y. Gao, J. Ding and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., N-Doping of graphene oxide at low temperature for the oxygen reduction reaction, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 873–876 RSC .
X. Fu, S. Xu, Y. Luo, A. Li and H. Yang, Simultaneous Photoreduction and Nitrogen Doping of Graphene Oxide for Supercapacitors by Direct Laser Writing, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2019, 35, 879–883 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yokwana, S. C. Ray, M. Khenfouch, A. T. Kuvarega, B. B. Mamba and S. D. Mhlanga, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of nitrogen doped graphene oxide from graphite flakes and powders: A comparison of their surface chemistry, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 5470–5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, N. Tang, T. Tang, Y. Liu, Q. Feng and W. Zhong, 
            et al., Photochemical doping of graphene oxide with nitrogen for photoluminescence enhancement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 123108 CrossRef .
T. F. Yeh, C. Y. Teng, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Nitrogen-doped graphene oxide quantum dots as photocatalysts for overall water-splitting under visible light Illumination, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-w. Zhang, J.-m. Lu, L. Yang, M.-x. Hu, Z.-h. Huang and R.-t. Lu, 
            et al., N, S co-doped porous carbon nanospheres with a high cycling stability for sodium ion batteries, New Carbon Mater., 2017, 32, 517–526 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Xu, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and X. Xu, 
            et al., Sulfur-doped porous reduced graphene oxide hollow nanosphere frameworks as metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction and as supercapacitor electrode materials, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13740–13747 RSC .
E. Kharatzadeh, S. R. Masharian and R. Yousefi, The effects of S-doping concentration on the photocatalytic performance of SnSe/S-GO nanocomposites, Adv. Powder Technol., 2021, 32, 346–357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gliniak, J. H. Lin, Y. T. Chen, C. R. Li, E. Jokar and C. H. Chang, 
            et al., Sulfur-Doped Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots as Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Generation in the Aqueous Phase, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3260–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, J. Lee, Y. Jeon and Y. Piao, Phosphorus-doped graphene nanosheets anchored with cerium oxide nanocrystals as effective sulfur hosts for high performance lithium–sulfur batteries, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13758–13766 RSC .
M. Kaur, M. K. Ubhi, J. K. Grewal and V. K. Sharma, Boron-and phosphorous-doped graphene nanosheets and quantum dots as sensors and catalysts in environmental applications: a review, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 1–18 Search PubMed .
W. Lei, Y.-P. Deng, G. Li, Z. P. Cano, X. Wang and D. Luo, 
            et al., Two-dimensional phosphorus-doped carbon nanosheets with tunable porosity for oxygen reactions in zinc-air batteries, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2464–2472 CrossRef CAS .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo and H. García, P-doped graphene obtained by pyrolysis of modified alginate as a photocatalyst for hydrogen generation from water–methanol mixtures, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11813–11816 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yuan, W. Xing, Y. Hu, X. Mu, J. Wang and Q. Tai, 
            et al., Boron/phosphorus doping for retarding the oxidation of reduced graphene oxide, Carbon, 2016, 101, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brindha and T. Sivakumar, Visible active N, S co-doped TiO2/graphene photocatalysts for the degradation of hazardous dyes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 340, 146–156 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Dejpasand, S. Sharifi, E. Saievar-Iranizad, A. Yazdani and K. Rahimi, Boron-and nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots with enhanced supercapacitance, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 42, 103103 CrossRef .
C. Kaykılarlı, D. Uzunsoy, E. D. Ş. Parmak, M. F. Fellah and Ö. Ç. Çakır, Boron and nitrogen doping in graphene: an experimental and density functional theory (DFT) study, Nano Express, 2020, 1, 010027 CrossRef .
L. Panchakarla, K. Subrahmanyam, S. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. Krishnamurthy and U. Waghmare, 
            et al., Synthesis, structure, and properties of boron-and nitrogen-doped graphene, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
S. Umrao, T. K. Gupta, S. Kumar, V. K. Singh, M. K. Sultania and J. H. Jung, 
            et al., Microwave-assisted synthesis of boron and nitrogen co-doped reduced graphene oxide for the protection of electromagnetic radiation in Ku-band, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19831–19842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, S. Li, B. Ren, L. Zhang, L. Dong and L. Tan, Plasma-induced synthesis of boron and nitrogen co-doped reduced graphene oxide for super-capacitors, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9632–9642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaushal, M. Kaur, N. Kaur, V. Kumari and P. P. Singh, Heteroatom-doped graphene as sensing materials: A mini review, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 28608–28629 RSC .
T. Wang, L.-X. Wang, D.-L. Wu, W. Xia and D.-Z. Jia, Interaction between nitrogen and sulfur in co-doped graphene and synergetic effect in supercapacitor, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Chen, L. Ma, J. Ren, X. Luo, B. Liu and X. Zhou, Sandwich-type nitrogen and sulfur codoped graphene-backboned porous carbon coated separator for high performance lithium-sulfur batteries, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 191 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cheng, Y. Li, C. Maouche, B. Li, Y. Zhou and S. Wang, 
            et al., Green synthesis of N, P-co doped porous reduced graphene oxide as an active metal-free electrocatalyst toward oxygen reduction reaction, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 883, 115058 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Graphene in photocatalysis: a review, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, X. Jiang, J. Zhao and S. Zhang, Graphene oxide: A promising nanomaterial for energy and environmental applications, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 488–515 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, J. Nisar, B. Pathak, J. Zhao and R. Ahuja, Graphene oxide as a chemically tunable 2-D material for visible-light photocatalyst applications, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nat. Chem., 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
M. Rafique, R. Mubashar, M. Irshad, S. Gillani, M. B. Tahir and N. Khalid, 
            et al., A comprehensive study on methods and materials for Photocatalytic water splitting and hydrogen production as a renewable energy resource, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2020, 30, 3837–3861 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, Q. Ji, C. Xu, Y. Guo, Y. Liu and D. Sun, 
            et al., Accelerated photocatalytic degradation of iohexol over Co3O4/g-C3N4/Bi2O2CO3 of pn/nn dual heterojunction under simulated sunlight by persulfate, Appl.
Catal., A, 2021, 285, 119847 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, T. Lu, X. Liu and X. Wang, An Efficient p–n Heterojunction Photocatalyst Constructed from a Coordination Polymer Nanoplate and a Partically Reduced Graphene Oxide for Visible-Light Hydrogen Production, Chem. - Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14638–14647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gliniak, J. H. Lin, Y. T. Chen, C. R. Li, E. Jokar and C. H. Chang, 
            et al., Sulfur-Doped Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots as Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Generation in the Aqueous Phase, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3260–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raliya, C. Avery, S. Chakrabarti and P. Biswas, Photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange dye by pristine titanium dioxide, zinc oxide, and graphene oxide nanostructures and their composites under visible light irradiation, Appl. Nanosci., 2017, 7, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
O. Vieira, R. S. Ribeiro, M. Pedrosa, A. R. L. Ribeiro and A. M. Silva, Nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide–PVDF nanocomposite membrane for persulfate activation and degradation of water organic micropollutants, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roushani, M. Mavaei and H. R. Rajabi, Graphene quantum dots as novel and green nano-materials for the visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of cationic dye, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 409, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, J. Shang and Y. Kuang, Efficient photocatalytic reduction of chromium (VI) using photoreduced graphene oxide as photocatalyst under visible light irradiation, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 91, 17–27 CrossRef .
K. Govindan, A. Suresh, T. Sakthivel, K. Murugesan, R. Mohan and V. Gunasekaran, 
            et al., Effect of peroxomonosulfate, peroxodisulfate and hydrogen peroxide on graphene oxide photocatalytic performances in methyl orange dye degradation, Chemosphere, 2019, 237, 124479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar and A. Kumar, Chemically derived luminescent graphene oxide nanosheets and its sunlight driven photocatalytic activity against methylene blue dye, Opt. Mater., 2016, 62, 320–327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, N. K. Bajaj, A. Bhardwaj, P. Singh, P. Kumar and J. Sharma, Study of photocatalytic and antibacterial activities of graphene oxide nanosheets, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2018, 1, 759–765 CrossRef CAS .
G. Olar, L. Cotet, L. Baia, A. Mihis and M. Baia, SERS-active substrates based on graphene oxide or reduced graphene oxide and silver nanoparticles, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 45, 4096–4099 CAS .
C. P. P. Wong, C. W. Lai, K. M. Lee and S. B. A. Hamid, Advanced chemical reduction of reduced graphene oxide and its photocatalytic activity in degrading reactive black 5, Materials, 2015, 8, 7118–7128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. E. Siong, K. M. Lee, J. C. Juan, C. W. Lai, X. H. Tai and C. S. Khe, Removal of methylene blue dye by solvothermally reduced graphene oxide: a metal-free adsorption and photodegradation method, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 37686–37695 RSC .
X. H. Tai, S. W. Chook, C. W. Lai, K. M. Lee, T. C. K. Yang and S. Chong, 
            et al., Effective photoreduction of graphene oxide for photodegradation of volatile organic compounds, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 18076–18086 RSC .
M. Singh, S. Kaushal, P. Singh and J. Sharma, Boron doped graphene oxide with enhanced photocatalytic activity for organic pollutants, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 364, 130–139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xing, W. Fang, X. Yang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Highly-dispersed boron-doped graphene nanoribbons with enhanced conductibility and photocatalysis, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6637–6640 RSC .
F. Wang, Preparation of N-Doped Graphene and Its Performance in Degradation of Methyl Orange, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 93, 2263–2268 CrossRef .
M. Li, Y. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zheng, A. Zhang and T. Chen, 
            et al., One-step
generation of S and N co-doped reduced graphene oxide for high-efficiency adsorption towards methylene blue, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 37757–37765 RSC .
S.-T. Yang, S. Chen, Y. Chang, A. Cao, Y. Liu and H. Wang, Removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution by graphene oxide, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 359, 24–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, T. Jiao, Q. Zhang, W. Guo, Q. Peng and X. Yan, Preparation of graphene oxide-based hydrogels as efficient dye adsorbents for wastewater treatment, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ikram, A. Raza, M. Imran, A. Ul-Hamid, A. Shahbaz and S. Ali, Hydrothermal Synthesis of Silver Decorated Reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO) Nanoflakes with Effective Photocatalytic Activity for Wastewater Treatment, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 95 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xing, W. Fang, X. Yang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Highly-dispersed boron-doped graphene nanoribbons with enhanced conductibility and photocatalysis, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6637–6640 RSC .
W. Gao, S. Liang, R. Wang, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhang and Q. Zheng, 
            et al., Industrial carbon dioxide capture and utilization: state of the art and future challenges, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8584–8686 RSC .
C. Terrer, R. P. Phillips, B. A. Hungate, J. Rosende, J. Pett-Ridge and M. E. Craig, 
            et al., A trade-off between plant and soil carbon storage under elevated CO2, Nature, 2021, 591, 599–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Siegelman, E. J. Kim and J. R. Long, Porous materials for carbon dioxide separations, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1060–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, R. Yao, Y. Han, Q. Ge and J. Sun, Towards the development of the emerging process of CO2 heterogenous hydrogenation into high-value unsaturated heavy hydrocarbons, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10764–10805 RSC .
T. Kong, Y. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Photocatalytic CO2 conversion: What can we learn from conventional COx hydrogenation?, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6579–6591 RSC .
Z. Chen, G. Zhang, L. Du, Y. Zheng, L. Sun and S. Sun, Nanostructured Cobalt-Based Electrocatalysts for CO2 Reduction: Recent Progress, Challenges, and Perspectives, Small, 2020, 16, e2004158 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiao, K. Zheng, L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, Fundamentals and challenges of ultrathin 2D photocatalysts in boosting CO2 photoreduction, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6592–6604 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Tan, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, In-situ growth of few-layer graphene on ZnO with intimate interfacial contact for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 411, 128501 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bie, B. Zhu, F. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Yu, In Situ Grown Monolayer N-Doped Graphene on CdS Hollow Spheres with Seamless Contact for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902868 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Guo, X. Yu, F. Zhang, B. Yu and H. Zhang, 
            et al., Photocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide over Quinacridone Nanoparticles Supported on Reduced Graphene Oxide, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 9636–9643 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rakibuddin and H. Kim, Reduced graphene oxide supported C3N4 nanoflakes and quantum dots as metal-free catalysts for visible light assisted CO2 reduction, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 10, 448–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Mu, W. Zhang, G. X. Dong, K. Su, M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Ultrathin and Small-Size Graphene Oxide as an Electron Mediator for Perovskite-Based Z-Scheme System to Significantly Enhance Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Small, 2020, 16, e2002140 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ma, M. Blanco, L. Calvillo, L. Chen, G. Chen and T. C. Lau, 
            et al., Hybridization of Molecular and Graphene Materials for CO2 Photocatalytic Reduction with Selectivity Control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8414–8425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, W. Li, K. Huang, H. Guo, Z. Li and Y. Fang, 
            et al., Regulation of functional groups on graphene quantum dots directs selective CO2 to CH4 conversion, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, J. Chen, N. Li, J. Tian, K. Li and J. Jiang, 
            et al., Systematic Bandgap Engineering of Graphene Quantum Dots and Applications for Photocatalytic Water Splitting and CO2 Reduction, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3523–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuang, J. Shang and T. Zhu, Photoactivated Graphene Oxide to Enhance Photocatalytic Reduction of CO2, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 3580–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharyya, F. Ehrat, P. Urban, R. Teves, R. Wyrwich and M. Döblinger, 
            et al., Effect of nitrogen atom positioning on the trade-off between emissive and photocatalytic properties of carbon dots, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1401 CrossRef PubMed .

          X. Tong, G. Zhang, J. Prakash and S. Sun, 3D Graphene and Its Nanocomposites: From Synthesis to Multifunctional Applications, in Graphene Functionalization Strategies: From Synthesis to Applications, ed. A. Khan, M. Jawaid, B. Neppolian and A. M. Asiri, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2019, pp. 363–88 Search PubMed .
J. P. Singh, C. L. Chen, C. L. Dong, J. Prakash, D. Kabiraj and D. Kanjilal, 
            et al., Role of surface and subsurface defects in MgO thin film: XANES and magnetic investigations, Superlattices Microstruct., 2015, 77, 313–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prakash, A. Tripathi, S. A. Khan, J. C. Pivin, F. Singh and J. Tripathi, 
            et al., Ion beam induced interface mixing of Ni on PTFE bilayer system studied by quadrupole mass analysis and electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis, Vacuum, 2010, 84, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prakash, A. Tripathi, S. Gautam, K. H. Chae, J. Song and V. Rigato, 
            et al., Phenomenological understanding of dewetting and embedding of noble metal nanoparticles in thin films induced by ion irradiation, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 147, 920–924 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bakiyaraj, B. Gunasekaran, J. Prakash, M. Kalidasan, K. Asokan and R. Dhanasekaran, 
            et al., Improvement of opto-electro-structural properties of nanocrystalline CdS thin films induced by Au9+ ion irradiation, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 626, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, M. C. Mathpal, J. Prakash, S. Hamad, S. V. Rao and B. C. Viljoen, 
            et al., Study of Tunable Plasmonic, Photoluminscence, and Nonlinear Optical Behavior of Ag Nanoclusters Embedded in a Glass Matrix for Multifunctional Applications, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1800768 CrossRef .
P. Kumar, M. Chandra Mathpal, G. Jagannath, J. Prakash, J.-R. Maze and W. D. Roos, 
            et al., Optical limiting applications of resonating plasmonic Au nanoparticles in a dielectric glass medium, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 345709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mehta, A. Mishra, S. Basu, N. P. Shetti, K. R. Reddy and T. A. Saleh, 
            et al., Band gap tuning and surface modification of carbon dots for sustainable environmental remediation and photocatalytic hydrogen production – A review, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 250, 109486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Shuhui Sun	Shuhui Sun is a Full Professor at the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Center for Energy, Materials, and Telecommunications, Canada, and a member of the Royal Society of Canada's College of New Scholars. His research focuses on functional nanomaterials for energy conversion/storage and environmental applications, such as PEM fuel cells (low-Pt and Pt-free catalysts), Li-/Na-/Zn-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, CO2 reduction, and water splitting for hydrogen production. He is the Vice President of the International Academy of Electrochemical Energy Science (IAOEES), and the Executive Editor-in-chief of Electrochemical Energy Reviews.
Jai Prakash	Dr. Jai Prakash is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India. He worked as an ‘INSPIRE Faculty’ at IIT Kanpur, India. His Ph.D. studies were carried out at and sponsored by IUAC, New Delhi, and awarded by CCS University, India. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Aix-Marseille University (France), Universite Libre de Bruselles (Belgium), University of the Free State (South Africa) and INRS-EMT, Quebec (Canada). His research is focused on functional nanomaterials (e.g., noble metals, metal-oxide semiconductors, graphene, polymers) for applications, such as SERS detection and photocatalysis degradation of organic pollutants, LEDs, and solar cells.

Design, System, Application
The development of semiconductor nanostructured materials as excellent standalone metal-free photocatalysts with promising and tunable optical properties for various applications has always been a topic of novel research. The present article deals with the design and engineering of graphene nanostructures as independent solar-driven photocatalysts for various emerging applications in the field of energy and environment. Although it has been extensively researched, doping engineering of graphene nanomaterials as independent solar-driven photocatalysts with special emphasis on making standalone metal-free photocatalyst has rarely been reviewed. The design and doping engineering of such nanostructures have gained special attention because doping-induced structural/optoelectronic changes, defects, and band gap modification are the key parameters to tune the electrical and optical properties that enhance the surface charge transfer properties important for an excellent photocatalyst. This results in effective photogenerated charge separation and light absorption, which are really important for potential applications of graphene nanostructures for energy, environmental and other important applications.


 	Fig. 1  Schematics for the photocatalytic actions of graphene and derivatives for various energy and environmental applications. (a and b) Graphene as a support for enhancing the photocatalytic activities of semiconductor photocatalysts. Here, these graphene nanostructures serve as a transport medium for fast charge transfer of the photogenerated electron and prevent recombination with photogenerated holes. Copyright15,32 (c) graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as metal-free photocatalysts to remove aqueous dye pollution when exposed to light. Copyright33 (d) a schematic illustration showing the mechanism of the photocatalytic H2 evolution of p-type doped graphene as a sole photocatalysts under sunlight. (e) A schematic mechanism of the photocatalytic activity of n-type doped graphene as a sole photocatalyst under sunlight Copyright.41,44	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of graphene, GO, and rGO lattice structures and their corresponding energy band diagrams. Representation of electrical transitions in (b) GO and (c) rGO.52 (d) Graphene's three-dimensional band structure. In the Brillouin zone, the π* and π band dispersions of virgin graphene are shown on the left. In a pristine undoped graphene, its antibonding π* orbitals (which makes up its conduction band) and bonding π orbitals (which makes up its valence band) degenerate and touch at the Brillouin zone corners, making graphene a zero-bandgap material. The position of the Fermi level determines the nature of the doping and the transport carrier. Right: a closer look at the Dirac point's linear energy bands and the Fermi level's position as a function of doping. By the addition of foreign atoms, its former lattice symmetry is broken, which results in the formation of a gap between the π and π* bands.23 Copyright.60,61	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structure of N-doped GO showing various configurations of doped N in N-GO. Copyright.72 (b) CB minimum values for GO, N- and B-doped GO, which are favorable for photocatalytic reactions. Copyright.27 (c) Schematic showing the structure of N and S co-doped GO sheets. Copyright.73 (d) Structure of N and B co-doped GO sheets. Copyright.74	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Thermodynamic requirements for (A) photocatalytic water splitting, (B) degradation of pollutants, and (C) CO2 reduction over a given semiconductor. OER: oxygen evolution reaction, HER: hydrogen evolution reaction, WOR: water oxidation to radicals of hydroxyl (˙OH), ORR: oxygen reduction reaction, and CRR: CO2 reduction reaction. (b) Schematic representation of the band structures of some of the typical semiconductors used as photocatalysts in various applications. Copyright.114 (c) Band structure of GO with different degrees of oxygenation. Site levels of the VB maximum and CB minimum. The dot lines are the standard water redox potentials. The reference potential is the vacuum level.115 Copyright.116	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of nitrogen-doped GO quantum dots. The size of the quantum dots was found to be 8.1 ± 1.8 nm with an interlayer spacing of 0.213 nm. (c and d) Magnified zones of the TEM image indicating the AB order of the GO layers. (e) The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the nitrogen-doped GO quantum dots. (f and g) The product evolution over the GO quantum dots catalyst with time for H2 and O2 production. (h) The photocatalytic mechanism of H2 and O2 production in N-doped and undoped GO quantum dots, along with the corresponding energy diagram. Copyright.37	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) UV spectra of N- and B-doped rGOs samples. Insets of (a) and (b) contain a high magnification of the range between 200 and 300 nm. (c) Hourly evolution of H2 production (indicates stability tests of the B-rGO sample). Copyright.27	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM and high resolution-TEM images of S-GO QDs. (b) Time courses of H2 production under solar light irradiation for S-GO QDs photocatalysts (2.5 mg mL−1) in pure water or 80% (v/v) ethanol aqueous solution at pH 8. Electronic structure of S-GO QDs. (c) Plots of (αE)2 against the photon energy. (d and e) Cathodic and anodic scans of the CB minimum and VB maximum values at 100 mV s−1. (f) Energy level diagram of the S-GO QDs and GO QDs in comparison with the potentials for water reduction and oxidation. Copyright.98	 

1.	Pt/GO	400 W hg lamp	At 25 °C under UV (400 nm) and visible light	17000	Quantum efficiencies were 2.7% and 0.010% under UV and visible-light irradiations	
68

2.	P-Doped GO	300 W Xe lamp	Under UV light and visible light	12	Photocatalytic activity of doped GO is higher than that of GO	
102

3.	N-Doped GO	400 W Xe lamp	Under visible light	5000	The H2 evolution rate was 2 times higher than that for O2	
37

4.	B-Doped r-GO	500 W Xe lamp	Under visible light	65	Doping enhances the photocatalytic activity	
37

5.	S-Doped GQDs	500 W Xe lamp	At 35 °C under UV l and visible light	568	Highest H2 generation efficiencies were 18166 μmol h−1 g−1 in water and 30519 μmol h−1 g−1 in an 80% EtOH aqueous environment	
121

6.	B-Doped graphene	300 W Xe lamp	Under visible light	219.3	High H2 production rate after 60 h reaction, indicates the excellent stability	
41

7.	Graphene	300 W Xe lamp	Under visible light	33.75	Much higher photocatalytic H2 production rate	
120


 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of GO. (b) TEM image of B-GO, including the EDS spectrum of B-GO and (c and d) high-resolution TEM images of B-GO, including SAED patterns of B-GO. (e) UV-visible absorption spectra of GO and B-GO. (f) Photodegradation of MB dye. Copyright.21	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–c) TEM images of GO, GR, and B-GNRs. (d) High-resolution TEM images for B-GNRs. (e and f) Photoluminescence spectra of different samples. Measurement at room temperature under the excitation light at 280 nm, and B-GR-H means the boron doped graphene prepared by a hydrothermal method. The photodegradation of RhB (5 mg L−1) under the UV light irradiation. (g) The proposed photocatalysis mechanism of GR and B-GNRs.71,134	 

1.	B-Doped GO	175 W metal halide lamp	Under UV light	MB and MO	50% enhancement in photodegradation of MB and MO	
133

2.	Graphene	300 W Xe lamp	Under visible light irradiation	New Fuchsin dye	94.76% decolorization of the dye molecule	
124

3.	B-Doped graphene	500 W Xe lamp	Under UV light irradiation	Rhodamine B	Excellent photodegradation of RhB dye	
140

4.	rGO	500 W xenon lamp	Under sunlight or visible light	Cr(VI)	Photodegradation around 57.5 ± 5.8% of Cr(VI) in 30 min. Performance/comparable or superior to P25	
125

5.	GO and rGO	95 W UV lamp	Under UV light irradiation	MB	2.5 times higher than that of pure GO	
33

6.	GO	—	Under UV light irradiation	MO	91% photodegradation efficiency of MO dye	
126

7.	N-Doped GO	Xenon lamp	Under UV light irradiation	MO	Complete photodegradation within 300 min	
135

8.	GO	Sun	Under sunlight	MB	60% photodegradation efficiency	
127

9.	rGO	95 W UV lamp	Under UV light irradiation	MB	Excellent photocatalytic activity	
131

10.	GO	4 W UV lamp	Under UV light irradiation	Volatile organic compound (methanol)	Excellent photodegradation and photostability	
132

CO2 + e− → CO2˙− E = −1.90 V	(1)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCO2H E = −0.61 V	(2)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O E = −0.53 V	(3)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O E = −0.48 V	(4)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O E = −0.38 V	(5)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O E = −0.24 V	(6)
2H+ + 2e− → H2 E = −0.42 V	(7)

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM and TEM images (inset images) of GO sheets: (A) GO-1, and (B) GO-3. (b) Atomic force microscopy images of GO sheets: (A) GO-1, and (B) GO-3. (c) Photocatalytic methanol formation (RMeOH) on different graphene oxide samples (GO-1, GO-2, GO-3) and TiO2, using a simulated solar-light source. Copyright.69	 

 	Fig. 11  Energy level diagram and structure of (a) coal GQD, GQD-OPD, GQD-DNPT23, GQD-DNPT18, and GQD-BNPTL, and (b) coal GQD, GQD-Anln-OCH3, GQD-Anln-OCF3, and GQD-Anln-OCCl3. (c) Redox potentials, conduction, and valence bands of GQD. (d) Time courses of H2 evolution. (e) Time courses of CO2 reduction under 420–800 nm irradiation. (f) Photocatalysis of CO2 reduction on GQDs. Copyright.155	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) XPS C 1s spectra of GO, GOSS, and GOUV. (b) CO production overtime on GO, GOSS, and GOUV under simulated sunlight irradiation. (c) Cycling curves of the GOSS samples. (d) Raman spectra. (e) Femtosecond transient absorption (TA) dynamics of pure Milli-Q water, GO, GOSS, and GOUV in Milli-Q water. (f) ESR signals of TEMPO. (g) The trend of ESR signal intensity with irradiation time. Copyright.156	 

1.	GO	300 W halogen lamp	Under sunlight or visible light at 25 °C	Methanol conversion rate up to 0.172 μmol g cat−1 h−1	Methanol conversion rate of the modified GO was six-fold higher than that of the pure TiO2	
69

2.	GQDs	300 W Xe lamp	Under visible light	Rate of 0.695 μmol h−1 g cat−1	Improved CO2 reduction rate	
155

3.	GO	500 W Xe lamp	Under UV light and visible light	Rate was 1.23 μmol g cat−1 h−1	Enhanced efficiency of photocatalytic reduction of CO2	
156

Footnote
† Contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
