Amorphous/crystalline heterophase electrocatalysts: synthesis, applications and perspectives  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CC00225J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CC00225J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 5661-5676Amorphous/crystalline heterophase electrocatalysts: synthesis, applications and perspectives

        
          
            Zhichao 
            Gong
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jingjing 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gonglan 
            Ye
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Huilong 
            Fei
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory for Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Advanced Catalytic Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: glye@hnu.edu.cn; hlfei@hnu.edu.cn
Received 
      16th January 2023
    , Accepted 17th April 2023First published on 18th April 2023AbstractPhase engineering is arising as an effective strategy to regulate the properties, functions and applications of nanomaterials. In particular, amorphous/crystalline (a/c) heterophase nanostructures with enriched active sites, unsaturated coordination structures and abundant phase boundaries have exhibited some intriguing properties in various catalytic applications. This review briefly summarizes the recent advances on the synthetic strategies (e.g., wet-chemical synthesis, thermal annealing, electrochemical strategy, ultrafast heating method and other strategies) and electrocatalytic applications (e.g., water splitting, oxygen reduction reaction, carbon dioxide reduction reaction, nitrogen reduction reaction and organic electrooxidation reaction) of a/c heterophase catalysts. Finally, some challenges and personal perspectives for the a/c heterophase electrocatalysts are provided.
Zhichao Gong
Zhichao Gong is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. He received his BS degree at the College of Environment and Safety Engineering from North University of China in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis and design of nanocarbon-supported metastable catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion.
Jingjing Liu
Jingjing Liu is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. She received her MS degree at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Central South University in 2019. Her research focuses on the design of functional nanocarbon materials for the oxygen reduction reaction in metal–air batteries and hydrogen peroxide production.
Gonglan Ye
Gonglan Ye is currently an associate professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. She received her BS degree (2010) in Materials Chemistry from China University of Geoscience (Wuhan) and PhD degree (2016) in Materials Science and Nanoengineering from Rice University. Before she joined Hunan University, she had worked as a senior packaging engineer at Intel in Chandler, Arizona (2017–2019). Her scientific interest focuses on the controllable synthesis of two dimensional (2D) materials for energy storage and conversion.
Huilong Fei
Huilong Fei is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. He received his BS degree in materials chemistry from China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) in 2011, and his PhD degree in chemistry from Rice University in 2015. He was previously a postdoc researcher in the University of California, Los Angeles, before joining Hunan University in 2018. His current research interests focus on the controllable synthesis and rational design of nanocarbon-supported single atom catalysts for energy and environmental applications.
1. Introduction
The development of efficient and sustainable technologies to convert clean energy (e.g., solar energy, wind energy and hydropower energy) is of great significance to solve two major challenges of energy crisis and environmental pollution.1–7 Electrochemical energy conversion technology is environmentally friendly and economically attractive for the renewable energy harvesting and efficient energy utilization via utilizing green, cheap and renewable electricity.8–13 To date, a wide range of electrochemistry technologies, such as water splitting, fuel cell, carbon dioxide conversion and nitrogen fixation, have drawn extensive attention in the production of cheap and clean fuels and basic chemicals.14–16 To achieve efficient electrochemical conversion technologies, electrocatalysts as essential components play a critical role in devices, which can decrease the kinetic barrier at electrode/electrolyte interface and thus improve the conversion efficiency.11,17,18 Aiming to increase the number of active sites and enhance the intrinsic activity of each active site, tremendous achievements have been achieved in the structure engineering of nanomaterials to acquire highly active, selective, stable and low-cost electrocatalysts, including morphology designing, defect/strain engineering, size/facet tuning and compositing.19–22
Complementary to the aforementioned conventional strategies, phase engineering has emerged as an effective and promising strategy to tune the physicochemical properties and applications of nanomaterials by rationally adjusting their distinct atomic arrangements.23–25 In addition to the crystalline phases, amorphous phases that possess long-range atomic disordering structures with unsaturated coordination sites and high intrinsic activities have attracted increasing interest in electrocatalysis, but suffer from their poor electrical conductivity and insufficient stability.26–29 To this end, designing novel nanomaterials combining the advantages of high conductivity of crystalline phases and high activity of amorphous phases is highly desirable to solve the above problems. The amorphous/crystalline (a/c) heterophase nanostructures consisting of both crystalline and amorphous components have been believed to be the novel nanomaterial, which can optimize the electronic structure and thus show unique catalytic activity and stability due to the presence of abundant heterophase boundaries.30–33 In comparison, amorphous/amorphous and crystalline/crystalline heterophases are either limited with low electrical conductivity, limited stability or poor intrinsic activity. For instance, Zhang's group have developed a series of a/c heterophase nanosheets, showing excellent catalytic performance.34–36 Although a number of a/c heterophase catalysts have been explored in the past few years, there are still lacks of systematic summary and comprehensive understanding of synthetic strategies, phase-dependent properties and electrocatalytic applications.
In this review, we will provide an overview on the recent advances in a/c heterophase nanomaterials for electrochemical energy conversion processes, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. We will first summarize diverse synthetic strategies employed for the preparation of a/c heterophase nanomaterials, including wet-chemical synthesis, thermal annealing, electrochemical strategy, ultrafast heating method and others, with particular focus on the formation mechanisms of a/c heterophase. Then, their phase-dependent properties and applications in electrochemical energy conversion will be briefly summarized. Finally, we will discuss the challenges and provide some personal perspectives for future directions in this emerging field.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of synthetic strategies and electrocatalytic applications of a/c heterophase catalysts. 
2. Synthetic strategies
Facile and controlled synthesis of a/c heterophase nanomaterials is the foundation for their electrocatalytic application. The preparation of a/c heterophase is challenging due to the thermodynamically unstable characteristic, and the key prerequisite is to stabilize the long-range disordered atomic structures and abundant phase boundaries during the synthetic processes.30 Up to now, many approaches have been developed to construct a/c heterophase. These synthetic strategies could be summarized as wet-chemical synthesis, thermal annealing, electrochemical strategy, ultrafast heating method and other strategies. In this section, we will provide an overview of some advances on the synthetic strategies toward a/c heterophase nanomaterials.
2.1 Wet-chemical synthesis
The wet-chemical synthesis that involves the synthetic process in solution phase remains one of the most widely employed strategies to obtain a/c heterophase nanomaterials, which features some advantages of facile fabrication and high-yield production, showing feasibility for commercialization.30 Generally, the wet-chemical synthesis could be concluded as one-pot chemical reduction, solvothermal method, ion exchange, template-assisted method, galvanic replacement reaction and so on. During these synthetic processes, the reducing agents, solvents, synthetic temperatures, reaction time, ionic types and templates are pivotal to stabilize the long-range disordered atomic structures in metastable a/c heterophase.
Zhang's group have developed a series of a/c heterophase nanosheets by finely tuning the experimental conditions of one-pot chemical reduction.34–36 For instance, the crystallinities of Pd nanosheets could be simply tuned by altering the reaction temperatures, and increased with the temperatures.35 In detail, a class of a/c heterophase Pd nanosheets with similar thickness of 1.0 nm were prepared at different temperatures of 48, 52, 60, 80 and 100 °C, respectively. High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images revealed that the percentages of the crystalline areas were estimated to be about 11, 19, 65, 83 and 96%, respectively, by measuring the areas of the amorphous and crystalline domains (Fig. 2(a)–(e)). Besides, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to confirm the crystallinities of a/c Pd nanosheets, which indicated that the intensities of diffraction peaks of catalysts increased with the reaction temperatures. The regulated method could also be used to synthesize alloy nanosheets with different crystallinities.34,36 In another work, Xu et al. realized the synthesis of ultrathin Ni-ZIF/Ni-B nanosheets with abundant a/c heterophase boundaries by a room-temperature boronization strategy.37 By finely adjusting the boronization time, samples with different crystallinities could be achieved, as illustrated in Fig. 2(f). Moreover, TEM demonstrated the locally disordered lattice structures and a/c phase boundaries, and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) revealed that the distance of Ni–B was nonuniform and the peak of Ni–B was broadened due to the presence of the amorphous structure. The solvothermal synthesis occurs at high temperature and pressure, which is favorable for the formation of dual phases with different kinetics.38,39 Therefore, the solvothermal method was adopted to prepare a/c MoO2 nanosheet, and ethylene glycol was used as the reducing agent, resulting in the formation of MoO2 nanosheets and their growth at the interface of ethylene glycol and water.40 The synthetic temperatures played a vital role in controlling the crystallinities as the formed MoO2 primary crystal nucleus diffused slower at a lower temperature, which was beneficial for the amorphization process. Accordingly, MnO2 nanosheets with a/c heterophase could be obtained at temperature of 180 °C. In addition, Wang et al. found that the amounts of reducing agent (phosphorus) had a significant influence on the formation of metal phosphides with different crystallinities through adjusting the metal ion reduction rate and the phosphide nucleation rate during the solvothermal reaction.41 Excessive amounts of phosphorus led to a faster nucleation rate, and thus Ni2P with low crystallinity was formed.
 Fig. 2  (a)–(e) HAADF-STEM images of a/c Pd nanosheets prepared at different temperatures of (a) 48, (b) 52, (c) 60, (d) 80 and (e) 100 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ni-ZIF/Ni-B nanosheets with different crystallinities by changing the boronization time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (g) Synthetic process of Ru atoms supported on a/c FeCoNi LDH hollow nanoboxes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
The ion exchange is also an effective way for the formation of a/c heterophase nanostructures. For example, Yan and co-workers have fabricated a series of a/c heterophase cobalt–vanadium–iron (oxy) hydroxide nanosheets via a cation-exchange method.42 The crystallinity of nanosheets could be regulated by the doping amounts of Fe cations, and the introduction of more Fe cations led to more amorphous regions, as certified by TEM, XRD and XAFS. Combined experimental and theoretical investigations further revealed that the cation-exchange process facilitated the formation of a/c heterophase with defective lattice and unsaturated coordination, which was considered as the origin of excellent OER activity. Similarly, Hu et al. synthesized a/c FeCoNi LDH hollow nanoboxes via a simple Ni and Fe cations exchange with ZIF-67 nanocubes, and the Ru single atom could be further formed in a/c heterostructure by cation exchange (Fig. 2(g)).43 The atomic and electronic structure of Ru SAs/AC-FeCoNi were investigated by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and XAFS, revealing the slight shifts by –0.1, 0.4 and 0.2 eV in the binding energies of Fe 2p, Co 2p and Ni 2p, respectively, and the spatial charge redistribution after introducing Ru. In another work, Chen and co-workers reported the synthesis of amorphous NiMoS4 and crystalline NiS2 heterophase with hollow nanosphere structure (H-NiMoS4/NiS2) via anion exchange reaction with the hollow Ni(OH)2.44 The formed mechanism of a/c heterophase was attributed to be the anion exchange process between OH− and MoS42−, which would lead to the formation of NiMoS4 nanoparticles and thus facilitate the epitaxial growth. Moreover, the strong Ni–S hybridization in crystalline NiS2 was helpful for improving the conductivity of H-NiMoS4/NiS2, thus accelerating the charge transfer at the a/c interface. Yin et al. synthesized binary (Pd–P) crystalline@amorphous (c@a) heterophase (c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P) nanoplates consisting of crystalline cores and amorphous shells by using Cu3−xP nanoplates as templates.45 The Pd ions replaced Cu ions of Cu3−xP to form the Pd–P nanoplate with a unique c@a core–shell nanostructure. In addition, Fang et al. proposed a fast surface-guided strategy to prepare amorphous mixed-MnO2 nanosheets by galvanic replacement reaction that could take place between Fe2+ and Ni–MnO2 due to the difference of standard redox potentials.46 XPS showed a higher Ni3+/Ni2+ peak intensity ratio for ammo@MnO2 compared to the original Ni–MnO2. XAFS further indicated the higher average oxidation state, lower coordination structure and larger Debye–Waller factor of Mn. These abundant defects in ammo@MnO2 could enhance the electron conductivity and thus leading to efficient charge transport. Detailed experimental results indicated that the ultrathin Ni–MnO2 nanosheets not only offered a large surface area to promote the formation process of amorphous phases but also possessed the fast charge transport rate, resulting in the enhanced catalytic activity.
2.2 Thermal annealing
The thermal annealing method, including thermal reduction, oxidation, phosphorization treatment and so on, is a common method to synthesize a/c heterophase nanomaterials. During the thermal annealing with appropriate cooling rates, the materials go through the atomic diffusion and rearrangement to form amorphous phase.24 Due to the thermodynamically metastable characteristic of amorphous materials, a/c heterophase nanomaterials can also be achieved by partially transforming amorphous structure into crystalline structures with certain heat input.21,27 Furthermore, this method is simple and scalable, which could be performed across different laboratories, and is technically mature for commercialization.
The a/c heterophase could be achieved by partial amorphization based on the thermal annealing method. For example, Han et al. presented a unique fluorination method that could induce the partial amorphization on metal–metalloid Co2B surface and thus generated the enriched a/c interface of F-doped Co2B (F-Co2B).47 Before the synthesis, F-Co2B was selected based on computational predictions, and molecular dynamics simulations indicated that the F dopants preferred on the surface. As displayed in Fig. 3(a), Co2B with surface doped F decomposed at high temperature of 600 °C, thus generating partially amorphized areas. During this synthetic process, NH4F, an amorphization agent, played a pivotal role in amorphization, and the partial amorphization could be achieved with appropriate amounts of NH4F and thus form in-plane a/c phase boundaries, as verified by TEM (Fig. 3(b)). The a/c boundaries possessed a thickness of about 1 nm. Moreover, fast Fourier-transform and inverse fast Fourier-transform patterns showed the broad diffraction ring and distorted lattice structure due to the existence of high-density a/c phase boundaries. Specifically, X-ray absorption near edge-structure (XANES) spectra displayed the similar edge features of Co2B and F-Co2B, meanwhile the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra showed that F-Co2B had higher peak intensity of the Co–O/B and Co–Co interaction compared to Co2B due to its disordered structure and a/c phase interfaces. Besides, the charge transfer in F-Co2B could take place at the a/c interfaces, which could be facilitated by the presence of the crystalline phase.
 Fig. 3  (a) Construction procedure and (b) TEM image of F-doped Co2B with a/c interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Synthetic procedure of a/c-RuO2via thermal oxidation treatment. (d) HAADF-STEM and (e) HRTEM images of a/c-RuO2. (f) Filtered image of area marked in (e). (g) EXAFS spectra of different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
Besides, the thermal oxidation treatment was also adopted to create a/c heterophase. As shown in Fig. 3(c), a/c-RuO2 was fabricated from Ru–alginate hydrogel by the oxidation treatment at 450 °C for 3 h.48 HAADF-STEM images revealed the existence of plentiful a/c heterophases and twinned structures, along with the inconsecutive lattice fringes with the existence of defects (Fig. 3(d)–(f)). Besides, EXAFS spectrum in Fig. 3(g) displayed that both a/c-RuO2 and crystalline commercial RuO2 showed two prominent peaks at around 1.51 and 3.18 Å that could be attributed to Ru–O and Ru–Ru bonds, respectively, while a/c-RuO2 manifested a decreased distance of Ru–O bond and an increased distance of Ru–Ru bond compared to commercial RuO2 due to its long-range disordered structure. Furthermore, the fitting results of EXAFS spectrum illustrated that the coordination number of Ru–O in a/c-RuO2 was 5.6, lower than that (6.0) in commercial RuO2, indicating the unsaturated coordination structures in a/c-RuO2 with a/c heterophase. Combined phase interfaces, defects and unsaturated coordination structures endowed a/c-RuO2 with enriched active sites and thus improved catalytic activity. Moreover, the phase could be altered by varying thermal oxidation time and temperatures. In another work, the phosphating temperature was regard as an effective mean to obtain nanostructures with different crystallinities.49 In brief, c-Ni2P4O12/a-NiMoOx/NF with a/c nanostructure could be prepared by phosphatizing at 400 °C for 2 h under argon atmosphere, as contrasted with c-NiMoO4/NF prepared by annealing at 600 °C for 2 h under argon atmosphere.
2.3 Electrochemical strategy
Typically, electrochemical strategy mainly includes the electrochemical deposition and electrochemical self-reconstruction, showing many advantages of simple preparation, the mild reaction conditions, good controllability and potential commercialization capability.50–52 The a/c materials could be generated by controlling the electrodeposition potential and time, which would affect the crystal nucleus formation and growth, as well as the diffusion rate into electrode surface.51,53
Lv et al. developed a core–shell nanostructure (NiFe-60/Co3O4@NF) consisting of oxygen vacancies-Co3O4 core and a/c NiFe-LDH shell that formed through the electrodeposition method at a constant potential of −1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl for 60 s (Fig. 4(a)).52 As displayed in Fig. 4(b) and (c), the nanowire core was c-Co3O4, the nanosheet shell was a/c NiFe-LDH, and the obvious phase boundaries could be observed. The electrodeposition potential had a crucial effect in altering the crystallinity of product. The more negative electrodeposition potential led to the faster diffusion rate into electrode surface and the formation rate of new species, which was faster than the rate of crystal nucleus growth, thereby generating a/c heterophase nanostructure with coordinatively unsaturated sites due to the short reaction period of a few minutes. Moreover, the existence of Co3O4 played a key role in the microscopic structure of a/c NiFe-LDH. Consequently, the amorphous region undertook the tensile stress while the crystalline region generated the compressive stress, resulting in the lattice expansion and lattice shrinkage, respectively, as confirmed by Raman, XRD and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM). Combined XPS and density functional theory (DFT) calculations further revealed that an electron transfer process at the interface occurred between the Co species in Co3O4 and the Fe species in NiFe-LDH.
 Fig. 4  (a) Preparation of NiFe-60/Co3O4@NF via the electrodeposition method. (b) and (c) TEM images of NiFe-60/Co3O4@NF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (d) Synthetic procedure and HAADF-STEM image of Ir atoms anchored on free-standing a/c heterophase catalyst. Scale bar: 2 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
The electrochemical self-reconstruction is another simple approach to construct the a/c heterophase nanostructure, which is generally achieved by the electrochemical OER reconstruction into amorphous metal oxyhydroxide on the crystal surface. For example, Jiang et al. utilized an electrochemical self-reconstruction strategy to fabricate a free-standing nanomaterial consisting of crystalline NiFeP and amorphous Ni(Fe) (oxy)hydroxides, simultaneously realizing isolated iridium atoms anchored on amorphous oxyhydroxides that were considered as the genuine active sites toward the OER, as shown in Fig. 4(d).54 In detail, the electrochemical self-reconstruction process was performed with potentials ranging from 1.0 to 1.6 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 by 50 CV cycles in 1.0 M KOH. It was worth noting that the degree of amorphization could be regulated by changing the numbers of CV cycles and the ranges of applied potentials.
2.4 Ultrafast heating method
The ultrafast heating method is facile, efficient and cost-effective, including the microwave thermal shock, laser ablation and so on, and it has the potential for the large-scale production of a/c heterophase nanomaterials and has attracted tremendous attention, showing great potentials for commercialization.55–57 Benefiting from the fast heating and cooling rates of the ultrafast heating method, the metastable a/c heterophase nanostructures beyond thermodynamic equilibrium limitations could be produced.27,58
Recently, we designed a graphene-encapsulated a/c heterophase NiFe alloy (a/c-NiFe-G) by a rapid (2 s) microwave thermal shock method with a microwave power of 1000 W, as presented in Fig. 5(a).27 The crystallinity could be influenced by the microwave power and reaction time. The generated metastable a/c heterophase could be ascribed to the features of the fast heating and cooling rates and the differences in cooling rates of alloy core and graphene shell. For comparison, c-NiFe-G with crystalline phase was prepared after annealing a/c-NiFe-G at 600 °C. HRTEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) images confirmed the characteristic of a/c heterophase in a/c-NiFe-G (Fig. 5(b)–(d)). Furthermore, XRD result in Fig. 5(e) showed that a/c-NiFe-G had lower diffraction peak intensities of NiFe alloy compared with c-NiFe-G, indicating its feature of poor crystallinity. EXAFS measurement was used to further analyze their atomic and electronic structures with different phases. The Ni K-edge spectra of both a/c-NiFe-G and c-NiFe-G exhibited two primary peaks of Ni–O and Ni–Fe/Ni bonds at about 1.47 and 2.53 Å, respectively (Fig. 5(f)). It could be clearly seen the intensities of two peaks of a/c-NiFe-G were much weaker than those of c-NiFe-G owing to its structural distortion. The fitting results of Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra quantitatively determined that the coordination number of Ni–Fe/Ni bond in a/c-NiFe-G was 1, much lower than that (6) in c-NiFe-G. Similar results were obtained in Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra, further demonstrating the coordinatively unsaturated structure of metal atoms in a/c-NiFe-G (Fig. 5(g)). This facile and ultrafast catalyst synthesis strategy provided a new pathway to construct metastable a/c heterophase nanomaterials and exhibited great potentials for commercialization.
 Fig. 5  (a) Preparation of a/c-NiFe-G by the microwave thermal shock. (b) HRTEM image of a/c-NiFe-G. (c) and (d) The corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns of the amorphous and crystalline domains marked in (b). (e) XRD patterns of a/c-NiFe-G and c-NiFe-G. (f) Ni K-edge and (g) Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra of samples in R space. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (h) Synthetic process of NiO-LAL via laser ablation in liquid. (i) and (j) TEM images of NiO-LAL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2022 Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Synthetic procedure and (l) HRTEM image of NixFe1−x-AHNAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The laser ablation is another effective method to prepare a/c heterophase nanomaterial under nonequilibrium circumstance. The laser parameters, target types and ablation time play a vital role in the degree of amorphization.57 For example, Yang and co-workers adopted a one-step laser ablation in liquid to construct an a/c heterophase NiO (Fig. 5(h)), as demonstrated by TEM and SAED patterns, showing the diffused rings and abundant phase boundaries (Fig. 5(i) and (j)).59 The used laser beam produced from an equipment had a wavelength of 532 nm, pulse width of 10 ns and operating frequency of 10 Hz. For comparison, the crystalline counterpart was synthesized by annealing a/c heterophase NiO at 400 °C in air.
2.5 Other strategies
In addition to the above synthetic strategies, other strategies, such as magnetic-field-assisted chemical deposition method, CO2-assisted synthesis and so on, have also been developed for the preparation of a/c heterophase nanomaterials.60–62
For instance, Yang and co-workers designed a hierarchical nanoarray (NixFe1−x-AHNAs) consisting of amorphous NiFe oxyhydroxide shell and crystalline NiFe alloy nanowire core by a facile magnetic-field-assisted chemical deposition strategy (Fig. 5(k)).60 The ferromagnetic NixFe1−x nanoparticles would be uniformly aligned in the direction of the magnetic field on the nickel foam substrate to grow into nanowire arrays with diameters of 70–130 nm. As shown in Fig. 5(l), the generated amorphous NiFe oxyhydroxide layer on the crystalline NiFe alloy possessed an ultrathin structure of about 2 nm due to the nanoscale confinement effect, and the ample crystalline domains and amorphous domains could be observed. Furthermore, XPS indicated that the existence of strong peaks of Ni2+/3+ and Fe3+ originated from the formation of a/c heterophase interfaces and efficient charge transfer at interfaces. The under-coordinated sites, enriched a/c boundaries and efficient electron transfer between phase interfaces were favorable for catalytic activity. This synthetic strategy offered a novel avenue to construct a/c heterophase nanowire arrays for high-current-density gas-involving electrocatalytic reactions. In addition, CO2-assisted synthesis was employed to fabricate an a/c heterostructure NiFe-based MOF (a/c-NiFe-MOF).62 In detail, CO2 was charged into the mixed solution up to the high pressure of 7.5 MPa at 35 °C for 3 h, and then a/c-NiFe-MOF was obtained. For comparison, a-NiFe-MOF was obtained by changing the reaction time to 1 h, and c-NiFe-MOF was obtained at higher reaction temperature and time without CO2 charged. The participation of CO2 played important role in forming a/c heterostructure as the solubilized CO2 in organic solvent firstly adsorbed Ni2+/Fe2+ and disturbed the coordination with organic ligand, thus inducing the formation of amorphous structure. Furthermore, XPS revealed the lower oxidation state of Ni in a/c-NiFe-MOF compared to c-NiFe-MOF due to the charge transfer at the a/c phase interfaces.
3. Electrocatalytic applications
Developing high-performance electrocatalysts is essential for the efficient energy conversion.63 The a/c heterophase nanostructures with enriched active sites, unsaturated coordination structures and abundant phase boundaries have endowed nanomaterials with unique properties for various electrocatalytic applications, such as water splitting, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) and organic electrooxidation reaction. In this section, we will introduce the progress of the a/c heterophase nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.
3.1 Water splitting
Water splitting includes two half-cell reactions with cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which suffers from the sluggish kinetics barriers, especially the four-electron coupled OER.24,64 Moreover, HER is vital to produce clean hydrogen energy for the alleviation of energy crisis and environmental pollution.65,66 Pt-based materials remain the most active HER catalysts, but are hindered by their high cost. Therefore, considerable efforts have been devoted to developing high-performance and cost-efficient catalysts. Transition metal selenides and phosphides have been regarded as the highly potential electrocatalysts due to their fascinating physicochemical properties.67 Shen et al. reported a crystalline CoSe2/amorphous CoP heterojunction (CoSe2/a-CoP) for the HER.67 The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves in Fig. 6(a) exhibited the overpotential (η) of 65 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which was close to Pt/C and lower than CoSe2 (173 mV) and CoSe2/c-CoP (127 mV) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte, manifesting that the strong electronic coupling at the a/c interfaces was vital for enhancing the HER activity. Moreover, CoSe2/a-CoP had the smallest Tafel slope of 54 mV dec−1, suggesting the fast catalytic kinetics. Notably, CoSe2/a-CoP also exhibited the excellent activity with η of 151 and 185 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M PBS, respectively. The obtained electrochemical double-layer capacitance (Cdl) of CoSe2/a-CoP was 86 mF cm−2 that was 2.3 times higher than that (37 mF cm−2) of CoSe2/c-CoP, indicating the existence of more exposed active sites at the a/c heterostructure interfaces. XPS and XAFS suggested the increased valence state of Co, the decreased valence state of Se and the shorter Se–Co bond length, indicating strong charge transfer between the CoSe2 and CoP interfaces. DFT calculations further revealed that the a/c heterophase could lead to a further downshift of the d-band center and weaken the H adsorption, thereby promoting catalytic performance. In another work, c-Ni-ZIF/a-NiB heterostructure with high-density a/c phase boundaries was prepared, showing an η of 67 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which was smaller than c-Ni-ZIF (218 mV) and a-NiB (195 mV) in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte.37 Besides, the long-term stability of c-Ni-ZIF/a-NiB exhibited a negligible decay after 36 h at 10 mA cm−2. The excellent performance originated from the intrinsically high activity of a/c heterostructure. DFT calculations further indicated that c-Ni-ZIF/a-NiB with a/c boundary possessed the adsorption free energy of H* closer to zero, indicating its higher catalytic HER activity, consistent with the experimental result.
 Fig. 6  (a) HER polarization curves of samples in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (b) LSV curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of electrocatalysts toward OER in 1.0 M KOH. (d) Schematic structural models and comparison of a/c-NiFe-G and c-NiFe-G. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration and (f) LSV curves of the a/c CrOx-Ni3N‖a/c CrOx–Ni3N electrolyzer for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (g) Polarization curves and (h) stability curves of catalysts for overall water splitting in 1.0 M PBS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. 
OER is a four electron-transfer process, which leads to the high kinetic barriers and limits its overall water splitting energy efficiency. Accordingly, designing highly active catalysts toward OER is increasingly pivotal for high-efficiency water splitting. For instance, Gong et al. developed a graphene-encapsulated a/c heterophase NiFe alloy (a/c-NiFe-G) catalyst that exhibited an η of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2, a Tafel slope of 36.5 mV dec−1 and durability of 136 h in 1.0 M KOH solution, which surpassed its crystalline counterpart (c-NiFe-G), as displayed in Fig. 6(b) and (c).27 The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy showed that a/c-NiFe-G possessed a charge transfer resistance of 2.4 Ω, lower than that (5.2 Ω) of c-NiFe-G, indicating the fast charge transfer rate. Moreover, the turnover frequency (TOF) value of a/c-NiFe-G could reach 0.87 s−1 at 300 mV overpotential, which was 24 times higher than that (0.036 s−1) of c-NiFe-G, suggesting the highly intrinsic activity due to the presence of ample a/c heterophase structures. The outstanding activity and stability of a/c-NiFe-G could be attributed to the enriched active sites, unsaturated coordination structures, abundant a/c heterophase boundaries and the confinement effect of graphene coatings (Fig. 6(d)). XPS and XAFS indicated the higher average oxidation states of Ni and Fe due to the charge transfer at the phase interfaces. DFT calculations further revealed that the ample a/c heterostructures could modulate the electronic structure and thus alter the adsorption energy of the rate-determining step for improving the catalytic activity.
Recently, bifunctional a/c catalysts have also been developed for high-performance water splitting. Yang et al. fabricated an a/c CrOx–Ni3N heterostructure based on the oxygen vacancies and interface engineering for the alkaline water splitting.68 As a result, the constructed a/c CrOx–Ni3N‖a/c CrOx–Ni3N electrolyzer needed a voltage of 1.53 V to afford 10 mA cm−2, which was much lower than 1.73 V of the c-Ni3N‖c-Ni3N electrolyzer (Fig. 6(e) and (f)). This electrolyzer also exhibited high faradaic efficiency (FE) of 98.6 and 97.1% for the HER and OER, respectively. Impressively, the a/c CrOx–Ni3N‖a/c CrOx–Ni3N electrolyzer could be continuously electrolyzed at 50 mA cm−2 for 500 h. The outstanding activity and stability could be attributed to the plentiful active sites and improved intrinsic activity owing to the existence of a/c heterophase interfaces. The charge transfer from amorphous CrOx to crystalline Ni3N was confirmed by the weak Cr–N and Ni–O bonds based on the XPS results. Furthermore, DFT calculations revealed that the electron transferred from amorphous CrOx to crystalline Ni3N at the a/c interfaces, and the optimized Gibbs free energy in a/c CrOx–Ni3N heterostructure was favorable for the water dissociation. Developing highly active, stable and cheap electrocatalysts for neutral water splitting at large current density is very vital for large-scale industrialization. For example, Wang et al. synthesized an amorphous Mo-doped NiS0.5Se0.5 nanosheets/crystalline NiS0.5Se0.5 nanorods (Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5) for neutral water splitting.69 Remarkably, the assembled Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5‖Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5 electrolyzer using Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5 as both cathode and anode required only voltages of 1.52, 1.98 V to achieve 10, 1000 mA cm−2, respectively, in 1.0 M PBS electrolyte, which were superior to those of Cr–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5‖Cr–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5 and commercial Pt/C‖IrO2 (Fig. 6(g)), suggesting the more excellent activity of a/c heterophase compared to its crystalline counterpart. Besides, the excellent stability of electrolyzer was also verified by continuously running for 300 h at 10 mA cm−2 and the slight degradation after 20000 CV cycles (Fig. 6(h)). The superior performance could be ascribed to the nanorods structure, abundant a/c phase boundaries, enriched unsaturated sites, the altered electronic structure and the reduced of binding energy of hydrogen and oxygen intermediates, as confirmed by various characterization methods and DFT calculations. In addition, positron annihilation spectroscopy and electron spin resonance confirmed the higher density of defects due to the presence of the amorphous structure. This catalyst design strategy provided a unique way for the practical application and commercialization of a/c heterophase nanomaterials toward neutral water splitting.
3.2 Oxygen reduction reaction
ORR plays a critical role in the efficient energy conversion for fuel cells and metal–air batteries.70–72 Pt-based materials are considered the most efficient catalysts for the ORR. For instance, He et al. reported a series of a/c Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt core–shell nanocubes with different Pt shell layers, showing excellent catalytic ORR performance in 0.1 M HClO4.73 As displayed in Fig. 7(a) and (b), Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt2L with two Pt atomic layers showed the higher half-wave potential (E1/2) and the bigger mass activity (MA) of 1.29 A mg−1Pt at 0.9 V versus RHE than those of Pd@Pt2L and Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt6L, indicating the key role of amorphous structure and appropriate Pt atomic layers in the enhancement of activity. Pd@a–PdP@Pt2L also showed the lowest Tafel slope of 61.5 mV dec−1, suggesting the significantly enhanced catalytic kinetics toward the ORR due to the strong Pt–P interaction. Besides, the strong interaction between a–Pd–P interlayer and Pt shell could adjust the electronic structure of Pt, thus leading to a downward shift of the d-band center and a weak adsorption strength of catalytic intermediates, which was beneficial to the enhanced ORR activity, as verified by DFT calculations and XPS results. Besides, the differences in the binding energy for the P 2p and Pd 3d demonstrated the strong electron transfer from Pt to P. In addition, given that accelerated durability test is very vital to evaluate the stability of catalyst, Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt2L could undergo 50000 CV cycles ranging from 0.05 V to 1.1 V versus RHE without obvious degradation (Fig. 7(c)). Benefiting from the a/c core–shell nanostructure, Pd atoms in the core and Pt atoms in the shell could be stabilized in the system, resulting in the superior durability. With the remarkable activity and durability, Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt2L as the cathodic catalyst was promising for the proton exchange membrane fuel cell.
 Fig. 7  (a) LSV curves and (b) mass and specific activities of catalysts for ORR in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) LSV curves of Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt2L before and after various CV cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (d) LSV curves of different catalysts toward ORR in 0.1 M KOH. (e) Schematic illustration and (f) the discharge polarization curves and corresponding power density plots of ZAB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM image and (inset) schematic illustration of the hemicapsule Cu@SnO2 nanostructures. (h) and (i) Schematic illustrations of the (h) yolk–shell and (i) core–shell Cu@SnO2 nanostructure (j) Partial current densities of Cu@SnO2 with different nanostructures for CO2RR in 0.1 M KHCO3. (k) Faradaic efficiencies of Cu@SnO2 with hemicapsule nanostructures at various potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. 
Pt-based catalysts have showed the excellent performance but are limited by the scarcity and high cost. Consequently, it is urgent to develop efficient and low-cost ORR catalysts. Fan et al. developed a metal-free catalyst with porous hierarchical structure consisting of crystalline graphene nanoribbons/amorphous carbon doped by pyridinic N–B pairs (BN-C-1).70 HRTEM and SAED patterns showed the coexistence of amorphous and crystalline phases. Fig. 7(d) manifested that BN-C-1 exhibited more positive onset potential of 0.876 V versus RHE, half-wave potential of 0.812 V versus RHE and larger diffusion-limiting current density of 5.88 mA cm−2 than those of N–C in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, which were superior to most of metal-free carbon-based ORR catalysts. The low-cost and high-efficiency BN-C-1 exhibited great application potentials. Thus, the rechargeable zinc–air battery (ZAB) with BN-C-1 as the cathode was fabricated (Fig. 7(e)), exhibiting a peak power density of 94 mW cm−2, higher than that (61 mW cm−2) of Pt/C-based ZAB (Fig. 7(f)).
3.3 Carbon dioxide reduction reaction
Electrochemical CO2 reduction to value-added chemicals (e.g., carbon monoxide, formic acid, methane, methanol and ethanol) is of great significance for carbon neutralization.74 The wide distributions of products and competitive HER are challenging for CO2RR, so realizing high selectivity toward one specific product is critically important.19 Currently, Cu-based materials have been widely adopted as efficient CO2RR electrocatalysts.75 For example, Yin et al. fabricated a class of amorphous SnO2-encapsulated crystalline Cu heterostructures, including the hemicapsule, yolk–shell and core–shell nanostructures, as displayed in Fig. 7(g)–(i).75 HAADF-STEM, XRD and XPS characterizations further revealed that the core was crystalline Cu and the shell was amorphous SnO2. Among them, the hemicapsule Cu@SnO2 nanostructure exhibited the highest partial current density in a wide potential range toward the electrocatalytic CO2RR (Fig. 7(j)). Specifically, the hemicapsule Cu@SnO2 nanostructure exhibited excellent selectivity for producing formate and CO with high faradaic efficiency above 90% in a wide potential range from −1.05 to −1.55 V versus RHE in 0.1 M KHCO3 solution (Fig. 7(k)). Impressively, the high CO2RR selectivity maintained after stability test at −1.05 V versus RHE for 12 h. The outstanding activity, selectivity and durability of the hemicapsule Cu@SnO2 nanostructure could be ascribed to the following reasons. First, the unique hemicapsule structure allowed the accessibility of electrolyte with Cu cores and exposed more active sites. In contrast, the Cu cores were completely coated by SnO2 shells without the accessibility of electrolyte in the core–shell Cu@SnO2 nanostructure, and the Cu yolks were isolated from SnO2 shells without the a/c interfacial effect in the yolk–shell Cu@SnO2 nanostructure, both leading to the poor CO2RR activity and selectivity. Second, DFT calculations revealed that the plentiful a/c interfaces between SnO2 and Cu could suppress the HER and promote the formation of *OCHO and *COOH intermediates, which were the pivotal intermediates to produce formate and CO, resulting in the enhanced selectivity.
Given that Bi-based materials are favourable for the adsorption of *OCHO intermediate toward the CO2RR, a metal Bi catalyst with a/c heterophase (Bi-D) was reported.74 Impressively, Bi-D displayed a higher partial current density of 10 mA cm−2 at –1.0 V versus RHE and a higher formate selectivity of 93.9% at −0.9 V versus RHE in 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte relative to crystalline commercial Bi powder (Bi-C), which could be attributed to the abundant defects and unsaturated coordinated active sites in a/c heterophase. Considering the limitation of mass transfer, a flow cell configuration with Bi-D and commercial Ir/C as cathode and anode was assembled, achieving the high CO2RR current density of 100 mA cm−2 at about –0.9 V versus RHE and high formate selectivity of 94.6% at −0.8 V versus RHE in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. Besides, the rechargeable Zn–CO2 battery was fabricated, which showed a peak power density of 1.16 mW cm−2 and durability of 22 h, indicating the potential applications in energy devices.
3.4 Nitrogen reduction reaction
Ammonia (NH3) is an important building block for the production of crucial chemicals.76 The electrochemical N2 reduction under ambient condition has been considered as a promising way for NH3 synthesis, compared to the currently used Haber–Bosch process at high temperature and high pressure.76,77 Yang et al. prepared a core–shell structure catalyst (Rh–Se NCs/C) consisting of crystalline Rh core and amorphous RhSex shell for the electrocatalytic NRR in 0.1 M HCl.76 Remarkably, Rh–Se NCs/C exhibited the high NH3 yield of 175.6 ± 23.6 mg h−1 g−1Rh and Faraday efficiency of 13.3 ± 0.4%, which were 16 and 15 times as high as those of the crystalline Rh NCs/C, respectively (Fig. 8(a) and (b)). Besides, no by-product hydrazine was detected, showing the high selectivity toward NH3. The NH3 yields of Rh–Se NCs/C at different reaction temperatures were also evaluated, which gradually increased with the reaction temperatures and could reach 279.0 ± 13.6 mg h−1 g−1Rh at −0.1 V versus RHE (Fig. 8(c)). The improved NRR performance of Rh–Se NCs/C could be ascribed to the enhanced N2 adsorption and the suppression of HER. Furthermore, XPS revealed that Rh–Se NCs/C with a/c heterophase possessed a slight shift toward the higher binding energy of Rh0 3d relative to the crystalline Rh NCs/C, confirming the vast electron transfer from Rh to Se at the a/c phase interfaces. DFT calculations further revealed that the strain effect of a/c interface with core–shell structure induced a key redox inversion and thus led to the low valence states of Rh and Se, which was favorable for minimizing N2 reduction barriers, corroborating the experimental results.
 Fig. 8  (a) NH3 yields and (b) faradaic efficiencies of Rh–Se NCs/C and Rh NCs/C at different potentials in 0.1 M HCl. (c) NH3 yields of Rh–Se NCs/C and Rh NCs/C at different reaction temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) Polarization curves of NiO–NiPi toward UOR and OER in 1 M KOH with and without 0.5 M urea. (e) Schematic illustration of the urea electrolyzer. (f) LSV curves of urea and water electrolysis in 1 M KOH with and without 0.5 M urea. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (g) LSV curves of catalysts toward HzOR in electrolyte of alkaline seawater and 0.1 M N2H4. (h) Schematic illustration and (i) LSV curves of hydrazine-assisted seawater splitting system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2022 Elsevier. 
Furthermore, the non-precious metal-based core–shell structures with a/c heterophase have been investigated. For example, a series of core–shell nanospindles consisting of crystalline Fe2O3 core and a/c TiO2 shell (α-Fe2O3@mTiO2) were prepared by thermally annealing crystalline Fe2O3@amorphous TiO2 core–shell structure at different temperatures.78 The percentages of the amorphous areas for α-Fe2O3@mTiO2-300, α-Fe2O3@mTiO2-400 and α-Fe2O3@mTiO2-500 were estimated to be about 36, 23 and 14%, respectively, by measuring the areas of the amorphous and crystalline domains in the HRTEM images, which revealed that the crystallinity increased with the reaction temperature. Moreover, the as-prepared α-Fe2O3@mTiO2-400 catalyst was tested using a H-cell in 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte, exhibiting excellent NRR performance with a NH3 yield of 27.2 mg h−1 g−1cat., Faraday efficiency of 13.3% and durability of cycling for 5 times at −0.5 V versus RHE. In addition, 15N isotopic labeling experiment confirmed that the N source of NH3 was produced from N2.
3.5 Organic electrooxidation reaction
The organic electrooxidation reaction (such as ethanol, urea, hydrazine, glucose, etc.) with favorable thermodynamics at the anode is of greatly significant for the development of highly efficient hydrogen generation and organic electrosynthesis or pollutant degradation.79–81 Therefore, tremendous research efforts have been attempted to develop high-performance catalysts toward organic electrooxidation reaction. For instance, a ternary c@a core–shell heterostructured nanoplates (c-Pd–Ni–P@a-Pd–Ni–P) was synthesized and displayed remarkable ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) performance with a mass activity of 3.05 A mg−1Pd calculated by the oxidation peak current density, which was about 4.5 times as high as that (0.68 A mg−1Pd) of commercial Pd/C.45 The enhanced catalytic performance of c-Pd–Ni–P@a-Pd–Ni–P could be attributed to the coexistence of amorphous and crystalline structures, which was beneficial to give rise to unsaturated coordination Pd sites and thus regulated electronic band structure. To further improve the catalytic activity and selectivity toward the EOR, a 2D Pd–Au nanosheet catalyst (Pd–Au HNS) with plentiful amorphous Pd/crystalline Au interphase was developed.82 XRD and HAADF-STEM indicated the atomic-scale a/c phase interphase of Pd–Au HNS. EXAFS spectra suggested that the Pd–Pd bond of Pd–Au HNS was 2.81 Å, larger than that (2.76 Å) of Pd NS, while XPS confirmed the electronic interaction between the amorphous Pd and crystalline Au of Pd–Au HNS. In detail, the obvious positive shift in binding energy of the Pd 3d for Pd–Au HNS could be observed compared to that of Pd NS, suggesting the strong electron transfer from amorphous Pd to crystalline Au at the a/c interphase. Benefiting from the plentiful a/c interphases, the selectivity and mass activity of EOR to C1 pathway for Pd–Au HNS could reach 33.2% and 9.1 A mg−1Pd, which were 10.4 and 9.3 times as high as those of commercial Pd/C, respectively. DFT calculations further verified that the introduction of crystalline Au enhanced the activity of amorphous Pd as the electron pump to completely achieve the ethanol oxidation process.
Urea oxidation reaction (UOR) has received widespread attention due to its low thermodynamic equilibrium potential of 0.37 V versus RHE, which is much lower than that (1.23 V versus RHE) of OER.83,84 Inspired by this, Xu et al. constructed the nickle oxide/phosphate nanostructures with abundant a/c phase interfaces (NiO–NiPi) for urea electrolysis, exhibiting the potentials of 1.349 and 1.5 V to deliver current densities of 10 and 500 mA cm−2, respectively, in 1 M KOH + 0.5 M urea (Fig. 8(d)).53 The superior UOR performance originated from the enriched a/c heterophase boundaries, which were beneficial to adsorb the electron-donating amino group and electron-withdrawing carbonyl group in urea oxidation process, thus promoting UOR performance. Besides, the abundant a/c phase interfaces could promote the charge transfer process and improve the density of catalytically active sites. Furthermore, the assembled urea electrolyzer using NiO–NiPi and NiP/NiO–NiPi as anode and cathode could afford a current density of 100 mA cm−2 with a low voltage of 1.585 V, which was much lower than that (1.876 V) of water electrolyzer (Fig. 8(e) and (f)). Impressively, the voltage at 250 mA cm−2 of the urea electrolyzer could reduce by 0.532 V compared to commercial RuO2‖Pt/C urea electrolyzer. The stability at large current density is very crucial for practical application. As a result, the NiO–NiPi‖NiP/NiO–NiPi urea electrolyzer could operate stably for 10 h at high current density of 500 mA cm−2, showing the potential of urea electrolysis for hydrogen production. In another work, Jin et al. synthesized an a/c heterophase nanoarrays (Ni–TPA@NiSe/NF) consisting of crystalline NiSe nanorod cores and amorphous nickel–terephthalic acid (Ni–TPA) nanosheet shells, demonstrated by XRD, HAADF-STEM and SAED patterns.85 Furthermore, the highly conductive crystalline NiSe nanorods could facilitate the axial charge transfer at the a/c heterophase interfaces, which could expose more active sites and alter the electronic structure of Ni. As expected, Ni–TPA@NiSe/NF exhibited a potential of 1.37 V to reach 100 mA cm−2 for UOR in electrolyte of 1 M KOH + 0.5 M urea. Combined in situ electrochemical Raman spectroscopy and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry revealed that the formed NiOOH species were considered as the genuine active sites toward UOR and the product of nitrogen was originated from the intramolecular N–N coupling of urea molecule.
Recently, hydrazine oxidation reaction (HzOR) with a much low thermodynamic equilibrium potential of −0.33 V versus RHE is promising for the coupling with hydrogen production and the treatment of hydrazine-containing wastewater.86,87 A low-crystalline Rh metallene with an a/c heterophase (l-Rh metallene) has been developed for hydrazine-assisted seawater electrolysis.86 HRTEM and SAED patterns indicated the amorphous and a/c heterophase structure, and the charge transfer was confirmed by the XPS results. Benefiting from the high-density phase boundaries, enriched active sites and distinctive electronic structure, l-Rh metallene manifested superior HzOR performance with an ultralow potential of −2 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 in the electrolyte containing 1.0 M KOH seawater and 0.1 M N2H4, which is much lower than that (22 mV) of its crystalline counterpart c-Rh metallene, as shown in Fig. 8(g). Besides, l-Rh metallene showed an ultrasmall Tafel slope of 19.8 mV dec−1, suggesting the extremely fast catalytic kinetics toward the HzOR. Impressively, a hydrazine-assisted seawater electrolyzer using l-Rh metallene as both anode and cathode was fabricated (Fig. 8(h)), achieving 10 and 100 mA cm−2 at voltages of merely 36 and 169 mV, respectively, which were significantly lower to those of the traditional water electrolyzer (Fig. 8(i)). Notably, the electrolyzer could operate at 100 mA cm−2 for 50 h, suggesting its outstanding durability under the harsh conditions. The hydrazine-assisted electrolyzer with excellent performance exhibited great application potentials for energy-saving hydrogen generation.
4. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, the a/c heterophase nanomaterials that could combine the advantages of amorphous phases and crystalline phases have exhibited unique properties (e.g., abundant a/c heterophase boundaries, enriched active sites, unsaturated coordination structures, altered electronic structure, etc.), thereby showing the excellent activity, selectivity and stability in a variety of promising applications compared with their amorphous and crystalline counterparts. Herein, we have reviewed the recent advances on various synthetic strategies and electrocatalytic applications of a/c heterophase nanomaterials, as summarized in Table 1. Despite the fact that some progress on a/c heterophase nanomaterials has been made in the past few years, the development of a/c heterophase nanomaterials is still at the initial stage and numerous challenges and opportunities still remain regarding the controlled and scale-up synthesis, catalyst design, in-depth understanding of the active sites and phase-performance relationship, as well as the exploration of new applications, as depicted in Fig. 9.
Table 1 Summary of the synthetic strategies and electrocatalytic applications of a/c heterophase nanomaterials




Catalysts
Synthetic strategies
Applications
Electrolytes
Performances
Ref.




Pd@a-Pd–P@Pt2L
One-pot chemical reduction
ORR
0.1 M HClO4
MA: 1.29 A mg−1Pt@0.9 V

73



Cu@SnO2
One-pot chemical reduction
CO2RR
0.1 M KHCO3
FE: 95.3%@−1.45 V

75



Rh–Se NCs/C
One-pot chemical reduction
NRR
0.1 M HCl
Yield: 175.6 mg h−1 g−1Rh@−0.1 V

76



FE: 13.3%@−0.05 V


l-Rh metallene
One-pot chemical reduction
HzOR
1.0 M KOH + seawater + 0.1 M N2H4
Potential (E): −2 mV@10 mA cm−2

86



Overpotential (η): 328 mV@10 mA cm−2


Ni–ZIF/Ni–B
Solvothermal method
HER, OER
1.0 M KOH
HER: η = 67 mV@10 mA cm−2

37



OER: η = 234 mV@10 mA cm−2


Ni2P-L
Solvothermal method
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 300 mV@10 mA cm−2

41



Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5
Solvothermal method
HER, OER
1.0 M PBS
HER: η = 209 mV@1000 mA cm−2

69



OER: η = 514 mV@1000 mA cm−2


Bi-D
Solvothermal method
CO2RR
0.5 M KHCO3
FE: 93.9%@−0.9 V

74



Ni-TPA@NiSe/NF
Solvothermal method
UOR
1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M urea

E: 1.37 V@100 mA cm−2

85



CoV-Fe0.28
Ion exchange
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 215 mV@10 mA cm−2

42



AC-FeCoNi
Ion exchange
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 279 mV@ 10 mA cm−2

43



c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P
Template-assisted method
EOR
1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M C2H5OH
MA: 3.05 A mg−1Pd

45



ammo@MnO2
Galvanic replacement
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 232 mV@10 mA cm−2

46



Pd−Au HNS
Galvanic replacement
EOR
1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M C2H5OH
MA: 9.1 A mg−1Pd

82



F-Co2B
Thermal reduction
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 320 mV@10 mA cm−2

47



BN-C-1
Thermal reduction
ORR
0.1 M KOH

E
1/2:0.812 V

70



α-Fe2O3@mTiO2
Thermal reduction
NRR
0.1 M Na2SO4
Yield: 27.2 mg h−1 g−1cat.@−0.5 V

78



FE: 13.3%@−0.5 V


a/c-RuO2
Thermal oxidation
OER
0.1 M HClO4

η: 205 mV@10 mA cm−2

48



CoSe2/a-CoP
Thermal phosphorization
HER
0.5 M H2SO4

η: 65 mV@10 mA cm−2

67



c-Ni2P4O12/a-NiMoOx/NF
Thermal phosphorization
HER, OER
1.0 M KOH
HER: η = 78 mV@10 mA cm−2

49



OER: η = 250 mV@20 mA cm−2


NiFe-60/Co3O4
Electrodeposition
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 190 mV@10 mA cm−2

50



NiO–NiPi
Electrodeposition
UOR
1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M urea

E: 1.444 V@250 mA cm−2

53



np-Ir/NiFeO
Electrochemical self-reconstruction
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 197 mV@10 mA cm−2

54



a/c-NiFe-G
Microwave thermal shock
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 250 mV @ 10 mA cm−2

27



NixFe1−x-AHNAs
Magnetic-field-assisted chemical deposition
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 258 mV@1000 mA cm−2

60



a/c-NiFe-MOF
CO2-assisted synthesis
OER
1.0 M KOH

η: 236 mV@10 mA cm−2

62





 Fig. 9  Challenges and perspectives of a/c heterophase catalysts. 
(1) Controlled and scale-up synthesis. The identification and understanding of the formation mechanisms of a/c heterophase is of great significance for developing facile, controlled and scale-up synthetic strategies. With the rapid development of advanced characterization technologies, the underlying formation process of a/c heterophase can be probed by employing cutting-edge characterization methods, such as in situ XRD, in situ TEM, in situ synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy, etc. On the basis of the understanding of the formation mechanisms of a/c heterophase, more efficient synthetic strategies can be developed in addition to those currently reported. Recently, the ultrafast heating methods (e.g., microwave thermal shock, Joule heating) with rapid quenching have displayed the great potential for the facile, high-efficiency, controlled and scale-up synthesis of thermodynamically metastable materials, as demonstrated in the preparation of high-entropy alloys and single-atom catalysts. It is believed that such ultrafast heating synthetic methods will also provide a novel avenue for future large-scale applications of metastable a/c heterophase nanomaterials, which will accelerate the progress of commercialization.
(2) Catalysts design. First, most of the reported a/c heterophase nanomaterials possess randomly distributed phase areas, which may result in the poor repeatability and controllability and the ambiguous relationship of the phase-performance. Accordingly, it is urgent to design the well-defined a/c heterophase nanostructures, and the periodically ordered a/c heterophase nanostructures may be a future direction. Second, multiscale design strategies should be developed, which could combine the a/c heterophase engineering with other conventional strategies, such as morphology designing, defect/strain engineering, size/facet tuning, compositing, etc. to obtain more efficient nanomaterials for various applications. Finally, the high-throughput calculation with powerful computing capability is promising for catalyst design as it could screen and predict the possible structure, which is very vital to design stable a/c heterophase. Notably, the development of high-throughput calculation will accelerate the material discovery rate and guide the design of metastable a/c heterophase catalysts.
(3) In-depth understanding of active sites and phase–performance relationship. The a/c heterophase nanomaterials have exhibited excellent properties in various electrocatalytic applications. However, the understanding on active sites identification, active species evolution, a/c heterophase transformation during the catalytic process are still vague. Therefore, numerous advanced in situ characterization methods, including in situ XRD, in situ TEM, in situ Fourier transform infrared, in situ synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy and so on, should be used to detect the dynamic transformation of catalytic active sites, thus revealing the underlying reaction mechanism and determining the relationship of a/c heterophase and performance. In addition, DFT calculations could also be employed to uncover the activity origins and elucidate the phase-performance correlation at the theoretical level.
(4) Exploration of new applications. Although many achievements of a/c heterophase nanomaterials have been made in various electrocatalytic applications, there is still vast space to explore. Further, the applications of a/c heterophase nanomaterials could be extended to many other catalytic processes and other fields, such as biosensing, environmental protection, etc. Besides, the rapid development of artificial intelligence provides a possibility to predict the potential applications of a/c heterophase nanomaterials, which can in turn guide the design of materials.
In the future, more continued efforts should be devoted to achieving the controlled and scale-up synthesis, rational design and understanding of the active sites of a/c heterophase nanomaterials, as well as gaining in-depth insights in phase-performance relationship and phase-dependent application for this emerging field, which will boost the development of a/c heterophase nanomaterials with high activity, selectivity and stability for applications in a wide range of catalytic reactions and beyond.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
H. Fei acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 92163116) and Major Program of the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (grant no. 2021JC0006). G. Ye acknowledges support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 22209043).
Notes and references
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, C. Das, C. Walter, C. Göbel, V. Gutkin, D. Schmeiβer and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 103–109 CrossRef .
F. Song, W. Li, J. Yang, G. Han, T. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Rao, P. Liao, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, T. Zhang, D. Zhou, P. Sun, Z. Lu, H. Bian, J. Dang, H. Gao, Y. Qian, W. Li, N. Jiang, H. Dummer, J. G. Shaw, S. Chen, G. Chen, Y. Sun and Y. Rao, ACS Mater. Lett., 2022, 4, 967–977 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yang, Y. Y. Wang, X. L. Tong and N. J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102261 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ahmad, T. G. Ulusoy Ghobadi, E. Ozbay and F. Karadas, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 9341–9344 RSC .
H. R. Kwon, H. Park, S. E. Jun, S. Choi and H. W. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7874–7889 RSC .
H. Xie, Z. Zhao, T. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Lan, W. Jiang, L. Zhu, Y. Wang, D. Yang and Z. Shao, Nature, 2022, 612, 673–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Papanikolaou, G. Centi, S. Perathoner and P. Lanzafame, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 2861–2876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, V. Gutkin and M. Driess, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8018–8021 RSC .
G. B. Thiyagarajan, R. S. Mukkavilli, D. Graf, T. Fischer, M. Wilhelm, S. Christiansen, S. Mathur and R. Kumar, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 3310–3313 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
S. Tang, Z. Zhang, J. Xiang, X. Yang, X. Shen and F. Song, Front. Chem., 2022, 10, 1073175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Singh and A. Indra, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 16, 100239 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Liang, T. Li, L. Yue, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, M. S. Hamdy, Y. Sun and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2259–2278 RSC .
T. Umeda, T. Kurome, A. Sakatmoto, K. Kubo, T. Mizuta, S. U. Son and S. Kume, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 8053–8056 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Xie, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2777–2787 RSC .
W. H. Lee, Y. J. Ko, J. Y. Kim, B. K. Min, Y. J. Hwang and H. S. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12687–12697 RSC .
S. Zhao, Y. Yang and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202110186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Zhou, W. Zhai, S. Lu, J. Liang, Z. He, H. Long, T. Xiong, H. Sun, Q. He, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ray, S. Sultana, L. Paramanik and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19196–19245 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, Z. Fan, Q. He, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 243–256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ge, Z. Shi, C. Tan, Y. Chen, H. Cheng, Q. He and H. Zhang, Chem, 2020, 6, 1237–1253 CAS .
Y. Zhang, F. Gao, D. Wang, Z. Li, X. Wang, C. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. Du, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2023, 475, 214916 CrossRef CAS .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, N. R. Sahraie, A. Bergmann, C. Das, M. Tallarida, D. Schmeisser, P. Strasser and M. Driess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17530–17536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, R. Chen, H. Yang, H. Tao, H. Wang, J. Gao, W. Liu, S. Liu, S. Hung and B. Liu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4278–4285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Gong, R. Liu, H. S. Gong, G. L. Ye, J. J. Liu, J. C. Dong, J. W. Liao, M. M. Yan, J. B. Liu, K. Huang, L. L. Xing, J. F. Liang, Y. M. He and H. L. Fei, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 12284–12292 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, G. Wu, J. Du, J. Pi, M. Yan and X. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2021, 58, 223–237 RSC .
Y. He, L. Liu, C. Zhu, S. Guo, P. Golani, B. Koo, P. Tang, Z. Zhao, M. Xu, C. Zhu, P. Yu, X. Zhou, C. Gao, X. Wang, Z. Shi, L. Zheng, J. Yang, B. Shin, J. Arbiol, H. Duan, Y. Du, M. Heggen, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, W. Guo, Q. J. Wang, Z. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 212–221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Ge, Z. He, Q. Yun, G. Liu, S. Lu, L. Zhai, B. Huang and H. Zhang, Nano Res., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s12274-021-4007-6 .
G. Y. Shi, T. Tano, D. A. Tryk, M. Yamaguchi, A. Iiyama, M. Uchida, K. Iida, C. Arata, S. Watanabe and K. Kakinuma, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 14209–14219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Jia, W. Zhang, G. Jia, H. Xie, W. Ye, G. Zhu and P. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 6132–6135 RSC .
G. Wu, X. Han, J. Cai, P. Yin, P. Cui, X. Zheng, H. Li, C. Chen, G. Wang and X. Hong, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 4200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, P. Yin, Y. Chen, H. Cheng, J. Liu, B. Chen, C. Tan, P. F. Yin, H. X. Zheng, Q. Q. Li, S. Chen, W. Xu, X. Wang, G. Wu, R. Sun, X. H. Shan, X. Hong and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, H. Cheng, X. Liu, Q. Yun, Y. Chen, B. Li, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, Q. Lu, J. Huang, Y. Huang, Y. Zong, Y. Yang, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803234 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, N. Yang, X. Liu, Q. Yun, M. H. Goh, B. Chen, X. Qi, Q. Lu, X. Chen, W. Liu, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 955–961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Fei, G. Cai, Y. Ha, J. Liu, H. Jia, J. Zhang, M. Liu and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, S. Li, Y. Qian, W. Zhu, H. Yuan, P. Jiang, R. Guo and L. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11280–11306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Qin, J. Liu, H. Zhao, Z. Sun, G. Chen, D. Y. Wu, Y. Su, S. Ding and C. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107056 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, H. E. Wang, J. Cao, W. Cai and J. Sui, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10723–10726 RSC .
C. Wang, L. Chai, X. Cui, Z. X. Zhou and S. L. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 21443–21452 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, J. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Tan, K. N. Dinh, L. Yang, H. Ren, W. Huang, W. Fang, J. Yao, X. Hao, J. Xu, C. Liu, L. Song, B. Liu and Q. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, G. Luo, L. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, F. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Li, T. Yao, C. Xiong, B. Yang, Z. Yu and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002816 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Huang, J. J. Yuan, Y. C. Lu, Y. T. Zhao, X. Y. Qian, H. Xu, G. Y. He and H. Q. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 135231 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin, M. Zhou, J. Chen, C. Tan, G. Liu, Q. Ma, Q. Yun, X. Zhang, H. Cheng, Q. Lu, B. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Huang, D. Hu, J. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Luo, Z. Liu, Y. Ge, X. Wu, X. Du and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fang, D. Han, W. Xu, Y. Shen, Y. Lu, P. Cao, S. Han, W. Xu, D. Zhu, W. Liu and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001059 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, H. Choi, S. Mhin, Y. Hong, K. M. Kim, J. Kwon, G. Ali, K. Y. Chung, M. Je, H. N. Umh, D. Lim, K. Davey, S. Qiao, U. Paik and T. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2443–2454 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. Jang, H. Liu, M. G. Kim, D. Yang, S. Liu, X. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18821–18829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Hu, S. Niu, S. Li, Y. Du and P. Xu, Small, 2022, 18, e2105972 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lv, L. Wang, R. Li, K. Zhang, D. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Li, X. Huang and G. Wang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 14338–14351 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Kale, R. A. Borse, A. Gomaa Abdelkader Mohamed and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101313 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Li, W. Yang, X. Feng and B. Wang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 8857–8864 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, T. Guo, J. Xia, B. Zhao, G. Su, H. Wang, M. Huang and A. Toghan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 130514 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, M. Peng, Y. Yu, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, Y. Da, X. Han, Y. Chen, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100302 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, M. Yan, H. Gong, H. Fei and S. Wang, Int. J. Extreme Manuf., 2022, 4, 032003 CrossRef .
S. X. Liang, L. C. Zhang, S. Reichenberger and S. Barcikowski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 11121–11154 RSC .
H. Gong, Z. Wei, Z. Gong, J. Liu, G. Ye, M. Yan, J. Dong, C. Allen, J. Liu, K. Huang, R. Liu, G. He, S. Zhao and H. Fei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2106886 CrossRef .
L. K. Cai, B. Yan, Q. Xue, J. L. Li, P. Liu, X. Q. Qi and G. W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18939–18949 RSC .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
K. Bu, Q. Hu, X. Qi, D. Wang, S. Guo, H. Luo, T. Lin, X. Guo, Q. Zeng, Y. Ding, F. Huang, W. Yang, H. K. Mao and X. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Ma, H. Yang, Q. Tian, Q. Xu and B. Han, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 6833–6836 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
B. Singh, A. Yadav and A. Indra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3843–3868 RSC .
J. Liu, D. Wang, K. Huang, J. Dong, J. Liao, S. Dai, X. Tang, M. Yan, H. Gong, J. Liu, Z. Gong, R. Liu, C. Cui, G. Ye, X. Zou and H. Fei, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18125–18134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Gong, J. Liu, J. Dong, J. Liao, H. Liu, H. Huang, J. Liu, M. Yan, K. Huang, H. Gong, J. Zhu, C. Cui, G. Ye and H. Fei, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2103533 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shen, Z. Wang, Z. Lin, K. Song, Q. Zhang, F. Meng, L. Gu and W. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2110631 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, M. Zhao, J. Yuan, J. Luo, J. Zhang, Z. Lu, D. Chen, X. Fu, L. Wang and C. Liu, Small, 2022, 18, e2106554 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, Z. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202215256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fan, Q. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Sun, J. Wu, L. Wang and J. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2107040 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Gong, C. Allen, W. Ge, H. Gong, J. Liao, J. Liu, K. Huang, M. Yan, R. Liu, G. He, J. Dong, G. Ye and H. Fei, Chem Catal., 2021, 1, 1291–1307 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Gong, M. Yan, G. He, H. Gong, G. Ye and H. Fei, Small, 2022, 18, e2103824 CrossRef PubMed .
T. He, W. Wang, X. Yang, F. Shi, Z. Ye, Y. Zheng, F. Li, J. Wu, Y. Yin and M. Jin, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7348–7356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Huang, Y. Lei, J. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zhao, M. Liu, L. Zhan, S. Tang, X. Zhang, F. Luo and X. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 3621–3624 RSC .
P. F. Yin, J. Fu, Q. Yun, B. Chen, G. Liu, L. Li, Z. Huang, Y. Ge and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2201114 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, B. Huang, S. Bai, Y. Feng, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2001267 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, S. Ning, J. Lan, M. Peng, H. Duan, A. Pan and Y. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2004055 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Qiu, Y. X. Luo, R. P. Liang and J. D. Qiu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10226–10229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, C. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Zou, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, Z. Xiao, Z. Wei, S. Du, C. Chen, B. Zhou, J. Ma and S. Wang, Chem, 2020, 6, 2974–2993 CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wang, B. Wu, J. Shi, Y. Li, L. Xu, C. Xie, W. Zhou, Y. C. Huang, T. Wang, S. Du, M. Song, D. Wang, C. Chen, J. Zheng, J. Liu, C. L. Dong, Y. Zou, J. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2105320 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Wang and Z.-S. Wu, Chem, 2022, 8, 2594–2629 CAS .
F. Lv, W. Y. Zhang, M. Z. Sun, F. X. Lin, T. Wu, P. Zhou, W. X. Yang, P. Gao, B. L. Huang and S. J. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100187 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, L. Xu, X. Zhu, Y. C. Huang, W. Zhou, D. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Du, Q. Li, C. Xie, L. Tao, C. L. Dong, J. Liu, Y. Wang, R. Chen, H. Su, C. Chen, Y. Zou, Y. Li, Q. Liu and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7297–7307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Geng, Y. Zheng, S.-Q. Li, H. Su, X. Zhao, J. Hu, H.-B. Shu, M. Jaroniec, P. Chen, Q.-H. Liu and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 904–912 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, R. Ji, H. Wan, J. He, P. Gu, H. Lin, Q. Xu and J. Lu, ACS Catal., 2022, 13, 837–847 CrossRef .
K. Deng, Q. Mao, W. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 310, 121338 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. R. Lu, M. Wang, D. Chen, L. Cai, T. S. Chan, P. Liu, A. Pan and Y. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 35, 2207850 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Zhichao Gong
	Zhichao Gong is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. He received his BS degree at the College of Environment and Safety Engineering from North University of China in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis and design of nanocarbon-supported metastable catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion.

Jingjing Liu
	Jingjing Liu is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. She received her MS degree at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Central South University in 2019. Her research focuses on the design of functional nanocarbon materials for the oxygen reduction reaction in metal–air batteries and hydrogen peroxide production.

Gonglan Ye
	Gonglan Ye is currently an associate professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. She received her BS degree (2010) in Materials Chemistry from China University of Geoscience (Wuhan) and PhD degree (2016) in Materials Science and Nanoengineering from Rice University. Before she joined Hunan University, she had worked as a senior packaging engineer at Intel in Chandler, Arizona (2017–2019). Her scientific interest focuses on the controllable synthesis of two dimensional (2D) materials for energy storage and conversion.

Huilong Fei
	Huilong Fei is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. He received his BS degree in materials chemistry from China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) in 2011, and his PhD degree in chemistry from Rice University in 2015. He was previously a postdoc researcher in the University of California, Los Angeles, before joining Hunan University in 2018. His current research interests focus on the controllable synthesis and rational design of nanocarbon-supported single atom catalysts for energy and environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of synthetic strategies and electrocatalytic applications of a/c heterophase catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a)–(e) HAADF-STEM images of a/c Pd nanosheets prepared at different temperatures of (a) 48, (b) 52, (c) 60, (d) 80 and (e) 100 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ni-ZIF/Ni-B nanosheets with different crystallinities by changing the boronization time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (g) Synthetic process of Ru atoms supported on a/c FeCoNi LDH hollow nanoboxes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Construction procedure and (b) TEM image of F-doped Co2B with a/c interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Synthetic procedure of a/c-RuO2via thermal oxidation treatment. (d) HAADF-STEM and (e) HRTEM images of a/c-RuO2. (f) Filtered image of area marked in (e). (g) EXAFS spectra of different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Preparation of NiFe-60/Co3O4@NF via the electrodeposition method. (b) and (c) TEM images of NiFe-60/Co3O4@NF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (d) Synthetic procedure and HAADF-STEM image of Ir atoms anchored on free-standing a/c heterophase catalyst. Scale bar: 2 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Preparation of a/c-NiFe-G by the microwave thermal shock. (b) HRTEM image of a/c-NiFe-G. (c) and (d) The corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns of the amorphous and crystalline domains marked in (b). (e) XRD patterns of a/c-NiFe-G and c-NiFe-G. (f) Ni K-edge and (g) Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra of samples in R space. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (h) Synthetic process of NiO-LAL via laser ablation in liquid. (i) and (j) TEM images of NiO-LAL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2022 Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Synthetic procedure and (l) HRTEM image of NixFe1−x-AHNAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) HER polarization curves of samples in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (b) LSV curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of electrocatalysts toward OER in 1.0 M KOH. (d) Schematic structural models and comparison of a/c-NiFe-G and c-NiFe-G. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration and (f) LSV curves of the a/c CrOx-Ni3N‖a/c CrOx–Ni3N electrolyzer for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (g) Polarization curves and (h) stability curves of catalysts for overall water splitting in 1.0 M PBS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) LSV curves and (b) mass and specific activities of catalysts for ORR in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) LSV curves of Pd@a–Pd–P@Pt2L before and after various CV cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (d) LSV curves of different catalysts toward ORR in 0.1 M KOH. (e) Schematic illustration and (f) the discharge polarization curves and corresponding power density plots of ZAB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM image and (inset) schematic illustration of the hemicapsule Cu@SnO2 nanostructures. (h) and (i) Schematic illustrations of the (h) yolk–shell and (i) core–shell Cu@SnO2 nanostructure (j) Partial current densities of Cu@SnO2 with different nanostructures for CO2RR in 0.1 M KHCO3. (k) Faradaic efficiencies of Cu@SnO2 with hemicapsule nanostructures at various potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) NH3 yields and (b) faradaic efficiencies of Rh–Se NCs/C and Rh NCs/C at different potentials in 0.1 M HCl. (c) NH3 yields of Rh–Se NCs/C and Rh NCs/C at different reaction temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) Polarization curves of NiO–NiPi toward UOR and OER in 1 M KOH with and without 0.5 M urea. (e) Schematic illustration of the urea electrolyzer. (f) LSV curves of urea and water electrolysis in 1 M KOH with and without 0.5 M urea. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (g) LSV curves of catalysts toward HzOR in electrolyte of alkaline seawater and 0.1 M N2H4. (h) Schematic illustration and (i) LSV curves of hydrazine-assisted seawater splitting system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.	 

Pd@a-Pd–P@Pt2L	One-pot chemical reduction	ORR	0.1 M HClO4	MA: 1.29 A mg−1Pt@0.9 V	
73

Cu@SnO2	One-pot chemical reduction	CO2RR	0.1 M KHCO3	FE: 95.3%@−1.45 V	
75

Rh–Se NCs/C	One-pot chemical reduction	NRR	0.1 M HCl	Yield: 175.6 mg h−1 g−1Rh@−0.1 V	
76

FE: 13.3%@−0.05 V
l-Rh metallene	One-pot chemical reduction	HzOR	1.0 M KOH + seawater + 0.1 M N2H4	Potential (E): −2 mV@10 mA cm−2	
86

Overpotential (η): 328 mV@10 mA cm−2
Ni–ZIF/Ni–B	Solvothermal method	HER, OER	1.0 M KOH	HER: η = 67 mV@10 mA cm−2	
37

OER: η = 234 mV@10 mA cm−2
Ni2P-L	Solvothermal method	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 300 mV@10 mA cm−2	
41

Am–Mo–NiS0.5Se0.5	Solvothermal method	HER, OER	1.0 M PBS	HER: η = 209 mV@1000 mA cm−2	
69

OER: η = 514 mV@1000 mA cm−2
Bi-D	Solvothermal method	CO2RR	0.5 M KHCO3	FE: 93.9%@−0.9 V	
74

Ni-TPA@NiSe/NF	Solvothermal method	UOR	1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M urea	
E: 1.37 V@100 mA cm−2	
85

CoV-Fe0.28	Ion exchange	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 215 mV@10 mA cm−2	
42

AC-FeCoNi	Ion exchange	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 279 mV@ 10 mA cm−2	
43

c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P	Template-assisted method	EOR	1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M C2H5OH	MA: 3.05 A mg−1Pd	
45

ammo@MnO2	Galvanic replacement	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 232 mV@10 mA cm−2	
46

Pd−Au HNS	Galvanic replacement	EOR	1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M C2H5OH	MA: 9.1 A mg−1Pd	
82

F-Co2B	Thermal reduction	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 320 mV@10 mA cm−2	
47

BN-C-1	Thermal reduction	ORR	0.1 M KOH	
E
1/2:0.812 V	
70

α-Fe2O3@mTiO2	Thermal reduction	NRR	0.1 M Na2SO4	Yield: 27.2 mg h−1 g−1cat.@−0.5 V	
78

FE: 13.3%@−0.5 V
a/c-RuO2	Thermal oxidation	OER	0.1 M HClO4	
η: 205 mV@10 mA cm−2	
48

CoSe2/a-CoP	Thermal phosphorization	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	
η: 65 mV@10 mA cm−2	
67

c-Ni2P4O12/a-NiMoOx/NF	Thermal phosphorization	HER, OER	1.0 M KOH	HER: η = 78 mV@10 mA cm−2	
49

OER: η = 250 mV@20 mA cm−2
NiFe-60/Co3O4	Electrodeposition	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 190 mV@10 mA cm−2	
50

NiO–NiPi	Electrodeposition	UOR	1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M urea	
E: 1.444 V@250 mA cm−2	
53

np-Ir/NiFeO	Electrochemical self-reconstruction	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 197 mV@10 mA cm−2	
54

a/c-NiFe-G	Microwave thermal shock	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 250 mV @ 10 mA cm−2	
27

NixFe1−x-AHNAs	Magnetic-field-assisted chemical deposition	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 258 mV@1000 mA cm−2	
60

a/c-NiFe-MOF	CO2-assisted synthesis	OER	1.0 M KOH	
η: 236 mV@10 mA cm−2	
62


 	Fig. 9  Challenges and perspectives of a/c heterophase catalysts.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
