Exploring the application of metastable wurtzite nanocrystals in pure-sulfide Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 solar cells by forming nearly micron-sized large grains   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA05813A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05813A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23185-23193Exploring the application of metastable wurtzite nanocrystals in pure-sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells by forming nearly micron-sized large grains†

        
          
            Xu 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fangzhou 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jialiang 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chang 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fangyang 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kaiwen 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            John A. 
            Stride
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojing 
            Hao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Martin A. 
            Green
          
        
      a
aSchool of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: xj.hao@unsw.edu.au
bSchool of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      28th July 2015
    , Accepted 2nd October 2015First published on 5th October 2015AbstractAn innovative approach to overcome the main challenge of solution-based pure-sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film solar cells by sulfurizing quaternary Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals into nearly micron-sized large grains in a few minutes is presented. We developed an efficient phase-transition-driven grain growth strategy to explore the application of metastable wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nano-materials in the photovoltaic field. The obtained Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film has a typical bilayer microstructure containing large grains on the top and fine grains at the bottom. Clear variations of phase, morphology, and component redistribution of the Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film were identified after the sulfurization process, which is critical to get a dense large-grained Cu2ZnSnS4 layer from quaternary nanocrystals. By tuning the composition of the wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals, annealing conditions, and sodium-containing compound, laboratory-scale photovoltaic cells with 4.83% efficiency were demonstrated without anti-reflection coatings. These results suggest the potential application of metastable wurtzite nanocrystals in pure-sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells. This unique approach may also open up new opportunities to other optoelectronic devices, such as CuIn(S,Se)2, Cu2(In,Ga)Se4, CdTe, and Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 solar cells.
Introduction
Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) and Cu2ZnSnSxSe4−x (CZTSSe) with their high absorption coefficient (∼104 cm−1), direct band gap (1.0–1.5 eV), and non or low toxicity and naturally earth highly abundant elements are generally acknowledged as a promising alternative to high performance Cu2(In,Ga)Se4 (CIGS) and CdTe thin film solar cells.1,2 Compared with low-toxic and low-cost CZTSSe materials, CZTS materials are nontoxic and lower in cost. In addition, CZTS has a band gap of about 1.5 eV, which is optimum for a single junction solar cell and also a promising middle cell in a Si based 3-cell stack.3 CZTS and CZTSSe absorber films can be fabricated by traditional vacuum-based technologies, such as sputtering and evaporation.4,5 However, these high-vacuum deposition techniques generally require complex equipment and consequently are neither low-cost nor versatile to be implemented on a large scale.6 In comparison with vacuum-based technologies, solution-processing methods, especially nanocrystal inks, allow for the preparation of thin film semiconductors at low temperatures and at high production rates and yields.7 In addition, nanocrystals provide a nearly unprecedented level of control in designing CZTS precursor materials prior to all aspects of film deposition, enabling reduced density of impurity phases and defects present in the final film, and modification of intrinsic properties of CZTS by incorporating extrinsic dopants into the solution.1 Therefore, solution synthesized CZTS nanoparticles have received considerable attention as absorber materials for sustainable photovoltaic application. To date, CZTSSe solar cells based on selenization treatment of kesterite CZTS nanocrystal precursor thin films have reached power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of nearly 10%, relatively close to the hero value of 12.7% achieved by using highly toxic and explosive hydrazine as the solvent.1,8,9 Nevertheless, pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells based on the sulfurization treatment of kesterite CZTS nanocrystal precursor thin films have not demonstrated particularly successful device performances yet.1,10–12
One crucial reason for achieving high performance CZTSSe solar cells via selenizing kesterite CZTS nanocrystals is that the selenization treatment contributes to the significant grain growth from nano-size to micron-size though a fine grain layer still exists at the bottom of the CZTSSe absorber in many cases.1,8 In contrast, pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells based on sulfurizing kesterite CZTS nanocrystals encountered great difficulties in achieving nearly micron-sized large grains anywhere near those achieved by selenization.1,10,11 Previous experiments with polycrystalline CIGS thin film solar cells indicate that only absorber films with nearly micron-sized grains can have a chance of yielding high performance solar cells.1 Recently, metastable wurtzite CZTS nano-materials have been widely reported and the corresponding formation mechanism has also been proposed.11,14–18 Importantly, metastable wurtzite CZTS nanoparticles can only be synthesized through a solution-based CZTS nanoparticles route.1 Although fast grain growth was observed in the arrays of pre-aligned wurtzite CZTS nanorods,12 no studies have reported the annealing conditions and materials composition in view of fabricating pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells. In fact, the reported average grain size is still less than 250 nm and no associated device has been obtained.12 For photovoltaic devices, where the nanocrystals are sintered to form a continuous thin film, it is quite difficult for nano-sized CZTS and CZTSSe materials (even if the grain size reaches 100–200 nm) to achieve a reasonable efficiency. This is mainly due to the large concentration of interfaces within the nanocrystal absorber films, the extensive trapping of carriers, and a generally shallow space-charge region.13 On the other hand, despite the strong understanding of the nanocrystal synthesis, the efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells made from wurtzite nanocrystals (4.3%) is less than those of the ones made from kesterite nanocrystals (9.0%) by using the same precursor ratios (Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.05).15 The reason for this difference is still unclear due to little understanding of wurtzite nanocrystal properties, especially metal ratios, which is important for fabricating efficient photovoltaic devices.
In this work, an innovative approach to overcome difficulties encountered in obtaining pure sulfide large grains by sulfurizing quaternary CZTS nanocrystals is presented. An efficient phase-transition-driven grain growth strategy was developed to fabricate CZTS absorbers with typically micron-sized large grains via only a sulfurization process in a few minutes. Material characterization revealed that clear variations of phase, morphology, and component distribution within the CZTS films occur upon sulfurization. Further analysis suggested that the sulfur atmosphere, sodium fluoride layer, and metal ratios of wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals all impact the quality of final absorbers. No dense micron-sized grains were observed after thermal processing without using a sulfur atmosphere or sodium fluoride layer. Self-regulation of the Cu/Sn ratio (approaching 2) was also found in the synthesis of CZTS films. Compared to the precursors with metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1, the precursor with metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.375 and Zn/Sn = 1.05 was better to make efficient solar cells. Finally, the laboratory-scale pure-sulfide CZTS device made from wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals with an efficiency of 4.83% was achieved without an anti-reflection coating layer.
Experimental
Materials and methods
Copper(I) acetate (CuOAc, 97%), zinc(II) acetate (Zn(OAc)2, 99.99%), tin(II) acetate (Sn(OAc)2, 99.99%), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90% tech), 1-dodecanethiol (1-DDT, 98%), tert-dodecylmercaptan (t-DDT, 98.5%), trioctylamine (TOA, 98%), and sulfur powder (S, 99.99%) were purchased from Aldrich. All chemicals were used as received without any further purification.
Synthesis of wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals
In a representative synthesis, 1.375 mmol CuOAc, 1.05 mmol Zn(OAc)2, 1 mmol Sn(OAc)2 and 5.25 mmol TOPO (Cu/Sn = 1.375, Zn/Sn = 1.05), were added into a 15 ml mixture of TOA and ODE (v/v = 1/5) in a 50 ml three-neck flask and evacuated at room temperature for a few minutes. This solution was then heated to 140 °C and held at 140 °C for 10 min under a N2 atmosphere, where a mixture of 1 ml 1-DDT and 3 ml t-DDT was injected into the flask. After injection, the reaction was allowed to proceed at 250 °C for 1 h with continuous stirring. Subsequently, the heating mantle was removed and the reaction vessel was allowed to cool to 80 °C. Anhydrous ethanol was added swiftly to quench the reaction. The nanocrystals were then washed 2–3 times by using 2-propanol and centrifuged to yield a dark brown centrifuged product. The final nanocrystals were re-dispersed in a suitable solvent, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), to form inks for the further experiment.
Synthesis of kesterite CZTS nanocrystals
In order to confirm the role of wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals in the formation of micron-sized large grains, kesterite CZTS nanocrystals were synthesized by using the modified procedure from ref. 14. In a representative synthesis, 1.76 mmol CuOAc, 1.1 mmol Zn(OAc)2, 1 mmol Sn(OAc)2 and 5.25 mmol TOPO (Cu/Sn = 1.76, Zn/Sn = 1.05) were added into a 15 ml mixture of TOA and ODE (v/v = 1/5) in a 50 ml three-neck flask and evacuated at room temperature for a few minutes. This solution was then heated to 140 °C and held at 140 °C for 10 min under a N2 atmosphere, where a yellow ODE-S solution was injected into the flask. After injection, the reaction was allowed to proceed at 250 °C for 1 h with continuous stirring. Other procedures were kept the same.
Preparation of CZTS thin films
The precursor inks were spin-coated on a molybdenum (Mo) coated soda lime glass (SLG) substrate followed by annealing at 250 °C for 5 min on a hot plate in air. This coating step was repeated several times to get the desired thickness of CZTS precursor thin films. The precursor films were then coated with 25 nm sodium fluoride (NaF) by sputtering before annealing at 580 °C in a sulfur atmosphere (evaporation of solid sulfur pellets) for 5 min.
Fabrication of CZTS thin film solar cells
A 60 nm CdS buffer layer was deposited on the prepared CZTS absorber/Mo/SLG at 80 °C for 10 min by using chemical bath deposition (CBD) with details shown elsewhere.15 A transparent conductor was then sputtered on top of the CdS with the structure of 100 nm i-ZnO followed by 200 nm ITO. The final devices were scribed into small areas of about 0.05 cm2, with a small dap of silver paint as contact.
Characterization
The PANalytical's Empyrean thin film Xpert materials research diffraction system was used to perform X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement at a voltage of 45 kV and a current of 40 mA with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 15.4 Å). An inVia Renishaw spectrometer coupled with a microscope was used to conduct Raman measurement at 514 nm at room temperature. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken in a FEI Nova NanoSEM system with a Bruker Silicon Drift Energy Dispersive X-ray microanalysis system for the elemental analysis. A FEI Tecnai G2 equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) detector was applied for the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. The XPS measurements were carried out to obtain depth profiling data by using an ESCALAB250Xi (Thermo Scientific, UK) under ultra-high vacuum (better than 2 × 10−9 mbar). The X-ray source was monochromated Al alpha (1486.68 eV) with a binding energy scale calibrated using the Au4f7 (83.96 eV) of a gold standard in electrical contact with the sample. Depth profiling data were achieved by sputtering the CZTS absorber with 3 keV Ar+ ions over an etching area of 2.5 mm × 2.5 mm. The device performance was characterized by light current–voltage (I–V) measurements under AM1.5 (1000 W m−2) irradiation and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (QEX10 spectral response system from PV measurements, Inc.).
Results and discussion
Metastable wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals
Guided by the reasoning that spherical nanocrystals could assemble with higher packing density and therefore can more easily be converted into continuous films with larger grains and less voids, we modified the binding ligands used in the already reported nanorods and nanoplates14,16–18 in order to obtain wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals with nearly spherical morphologies (Fig. SI1†). As a result, in a representative experiment, wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals were synthesized by injecting the 1-DDT/t-DDT mixture into a TOA/ODE solution containing CuOAc, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, and TOPO at 140 °C and then maintaining at 250 °C for 1 h. Early studies suggested that TOA and TOPO may work as the dominant binding ligands to control the nanocrystal growth and its stability.18–21 On the other hand, both 1-DDT and t-DDT (the sulfur source) allow good control of the reaction rate, facilitating the formation of the wurtzite phase.22
CZTS thin films before and after sulfurization

Fig. 1a shows the XRD patterns of the as-deposited CZTS nanocrystal precursor thin films. All of the reflections can be attributed to the (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (112) and (021) planes of the hexagonal structure and match well with those of the previously reported CZTS wurtzite structure.19–22 There is no diffraction peak at around 33°, which would correspond to the (200) plane of kesterite CZTS, suggesting the successful synthesis of the pure wurtzite phase.23Fig. 1b shows the XRD pattern of CZTS absorber layers after sulfurization treatment. All of the reflections can be attributed to the (110), (112), (103), (200), (202), (211), (105), (220), (312), (303) and (224) planes of kesterite CZTS (JCPDS no. 26-0575). No peaks of wurtzite CZTS are present in Fig. 1b, indicating that a complete phase transition occurs during the sulfurization annealing process, transforming the wurtzite CZTS precursor films into kesterite CZTS. Fig. 1c shows the Raman spectrum (with 514 nm excitation wavelength) of the as-deposited CZTS nanocrystal precursor thin films. The strong Raman peak at 333 cm−1 (Raman A mode) is close to the values reported for wurtzite CZTS materials.20,22 Upon sulfurization treatment, this strongest peak (Raman A mode) shifts from 333 cm−1 to 337 cm−1 (see Fig. 1d), implying the phase transition from wurtzite to kesterite CZTS materials as well.22 Raman A mode is associated with the breathing mode of sulfur atoms around metal ions in the CZTS crystal structure. Therefore, the difference is caused by the different arrangements of atoms and different space groups of wurtzite and kesterite.23 In fact, different from the atoms of ordering arrangement within the kesterite CZTS crystal, the metal cations within the wurtzite CZTS crystal structure are randomly distributed in the fixed framework formed by sulfur anions.18 In Fig. 1d, the other three shoulder peaks at 287, 353 and 373 cm−1 are notable, which match well with those of the bulk kesterite CZTS materials.18,24,25 We also performed Raman measurements with 325 nm excitation wavelength to check the likely presence of the ZnS secondary phase. Fig. 1e and d show the Raman spectra with 325 nm excitation wavelength of the as-deposited wurtzite CZTS films before sulfurization and kesterite CZTS films after sulfurization, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1e and f, the ZnS Raman peaks were not detected. As the penetration depth of the 325 nm laser in CZTS films is only few tens of nanometres, we can conclude that there is no detectable ZnS secondary phase in the surface region of the CZTS absorber layer. Moreover, upon annealing, an appreciable sharpening of the Raman and XRD peaks is observed, consistent with the expected decrease in disorder and the increase in grain size. There are no additional detectable peaks in XRD and Raman spectra indicating secondary and ternary phases in the synthesized CZTS.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns (a and b) of the as-deposited wurtzite CZTS films before sulfurization and kesterite CZTS films after sulfurization; Raman spectra with 514 nm excitation (c and d) and Raman spectra with 325 nm excitation (e and f) of the as-deposited wurtzite CZTS films before sulfurization and kesterite CZTS films after sulfurization. 

Fig. 2a shows a typical top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS precursor thin film. As shown in Fig. 2a, a reasonable smooth and compact surface can be obtained using the soft-baking process. Fig. 2b shows a typical cross-sectional SEM image of the as-cleaved CZTS precursor thin film showing that the thickness of the precursor film is about 1 μm. It is also notable that the precursor thin film is made up of uniformly distributed small nanoparticles. The EDS result shows that the metal stoichiometry ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn), Cu/Sn and Zn/Sn in the precursor thin film are 0.68, 1.46, and 1.13, respectively. These metal composition ratios are very close to the initial amounts of the metal salts used in the synthesis step. Fig. 2c shows a typical top-view SEM image of the sulfurized CZTS absorber. The absorber layer on the Mo-coated substrate has a densely continuous structure consisting of clearly large grains up to the micro-size level. No noticeable pin holes on the absorber surface are observed. As shown in the cross-sectional SEM image of the as-cleaved sulfurized CZTS absorber layer (Fig. 2d), the absorber crystallized from the wurtzite CZTS nanocrystal precursor thin film exhibits a typical bi-layer structure of large grains on the top and fine grains at the bottom. The thickness of top large grains and bottom fine grains is around 600 nm and 550 nm, respectively. A thick MoS2 layer of about 500 nm is also observed. In addition, the large grains, seen from the top-view SEM image (Fig. 2c), do not appear through the whole absorber layer. Compared with the precursor thin film, the surface of the absorber layer is much rougher. The impacts of the rough surface, thick MoS2 layer and fine-grained layer on the cell performance are detailed in the following discussion. Notably the SEM images demonstrate the successful morphology change from nano-sized CZTS crystals into nearly micron-sized CZTS grains by sulfurization treatment only. For the CZTSSe material system where selenization treatment of kesterite CZTS nanocrystals is used, the grain growth from kesterite CZTS nanocrystals to CZTSSe large grains is usually regarded as a key indication of the formation of a high quality absorber layer though a fine grain layer exists.1,8,26 It is therefore deduced that the good crystallization of the CZTS absorber is achieved by using sulfurization treatment alone. The metal stoichiometry ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn), Cu/Sn and Zn/Sn in the final absorber layer are 0.80, 1.97, and 1.46, respectively. Sn loss occurs during the sulfurization process, evidenced by the Zn/Sn ratio increasing from 1.13 in the precursor thin film to 1.46 in the final sulfurized absorber.
 Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images (a and c) and cross-sectional SEM images (b and d) of the as-deposited and sulfurized wurtzite CZTS films. 

Fig. 3a and b show the bright and HAADF STEM images of completed CZTS devices, respectively. The absorber layer consists of two regions, a large-grained top layer and a small-grained bottom layer in agreement with the SEM images. Most large grains grow laterally across the whole top layer, suggesting that the short annealing time is sufficient to enable the growth of nanocrystals into large grains. In contrast, the average grain size within the fine grain layer is less than 100 nm. Some tiny isolated voids can be observed through the whole fine grain layer. To date, the exact reason for this double-layered structure is still unclear. It could be due to the residual carbon left after the thermal decomposition of ligands, the difference in the temperature versus time profile at the top and bottom of the film, the penetration rate of vapour into the film (vapour penetrates into the top layer faster), the rate of Sn loss (faster Sn loss from the top region), and/or the segregation of metal cations into the top surface or back contact during the annealing process.7,27Fig. 3c–e show the EDS scans taken along the lines in Fig. 3b (with scan line 1 showing the local lateral compositional profile in the large-grain top layer; scan line 2 showing the local lateral compositional profile in the fine grain bottom layer; and scan line 3 showing the compositional depth profile). According to the analysis of scan line 1, the element compositions of Cu, Zn, and Sn in the CZTS large grain layer are quite homogeneous laterally, which can contribute to the reduction of efficiency losses due to band gap and potential fluctuations.28 The average signal intensity of Cu is nearly twice that of Sn, and the average signal intensity of Zn is close to that of Sn. However, scan 2 reveals that the Zn element in the fine grain layer encounters intense fluctuation. While the average signal of Cu is still twice that of Sn, the signal intensity of Zn is higher than that of Sn (even close to the intensity of Cu) in some regions. Scan 3 shows the composition gradient through the CZTS absorber layer. While the amounts of Cu and Sn in the large grains are slightly higher than those in the fine grains, the amount of Zn in the large grains is lower. This large fluctuation of elements in the fine grains could be due to the voids shown in the TEM images (resulting from the Sn loss through the escape of SnSx) and/or the locally inhomogeneous composition except for the area near the back contact (resulting from the detrimental reaction between Mo and CZTS).29 The composition depth profile of the final sulfurized CZTS thin film by XPS (Fig. SI3†) confirms the analysis results obtained from EDS characterization. It is noted that although Cu is slightly rich on the surface of the absorber, there is no detectable Cu-based secondary phase or ternary phase based on the results of XRD and Raman tests.
 Fig. 3  (a) Bright field TEM image of the CZTS device; (b) HAADF STEM image of the CZTS device; (c–e) EDS scans taken along the corresponding scans in (b). 

Fig. 4 shows the HAADF STEM image and corresponding EDS mapping of element Cd, In, Cu, Zn, and Sn of the pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells. Cu is slightly rich in the large grains than in the fine grains. Notably, a significant amount of Cu is detected in the MoS2 layer. In contrast, Zn is slightly richer in the fine grains than in large grains, especially in the vicinity area of the molybdenum (Mo) layer. It has been reported that there is a solid-state reaction between CZTS and the Mo back contact.28 This aggressive reaction can give rise to the formation of MoS2 and secondary phases, such as ZnS, at the CZTS/Mo interface during thermal processing.29 Similar experimental results were also reported in other literature studies.4,30 It is also worth noting that a similar phenomenon was observed for the sulfurization process used in this work as reported in the selenization process.31
 Fig. 4  HAADF STEM image and corresponding EDS mapping images of the CZTS device (scale bar: 500 nm). 
Factors impacting the forming of micron-sized large grains
Although some literature studies already revealed that it is difficult for kesterite CZTS nanocrystals to achieve nearly micron-sized large grains by sulfurization only, especially the dense grains for pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells,1,10,11 kesterite CZTS nanocrystals were still synthesized here in order to confirm the role of metastable wurtzite nanocrystals in the formation of micron-sized large grains. By only replacing the mixture of 1-DDT and t-DDT with a yellow ODE-S solution as the sulfur source, the other possible contributing factors, such as ligand, can be ruled out. It was found that no distinct morphology variation of kesterite nanocrystals occurs upon sulfurization (Fig. SI2†). As for sulfurizing stable kesterite CZTS nanocrystals, the normal driving force for grain growth is a reduction in total energy associated with the high surface area of nanocrystals.32 But, this seems to be not enough and encounters difficulties in obtaining pure-sulfide CZTS large grains.1,11,33,34 When wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals which are not stable in the bulk for solar cell grade CZTS absorbers is used,12 in addition to the driving force from the aforementioned reduction in total energy, there is another driving force resulting from the difference in free energy between the stable kesterite CZTS phase and the metastable wurtzite CZTS phase. Therefore, the use of wurtzite instead of kesterite CZTS nanocrystals is most likely to be the major reasons for the formation of large grains.

Fig. 5a shows a typical top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals annealed under a pure N2 atmosphere. In comparison with the CZTS films with nearly micron-sized large grains obtained under a S atmosphere, small grains in the range of 90–250 nm were observed. This grain size agreed well with the values reported in the literature where a pure Ar or N2 atmosphere was chosen to sinter the wurtzite precursor thin films.12,35 In addition, CZTS absorbers from annealing wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals under a pure N2 atmosphere have not yielded any working solar cells yet. Therefore, sufficient sulfur pressure can facilitate the growth of crystal size, especially near the surface where the large grains form.31
 Fig. 5  (a) Top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals annealed under a N2 atmosphere without using S pellets; (b) top-view SEM image of a CZTS film after sulfurization without Na doping; (c) top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals after sulfurization (the metal ratios in precursor solution is Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1). 

Fig. 5b shows a typical top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals annealed under a sulfur atmosphere without using a NaF layer. Discontinuous micron-sized CZTS grains grow on the surface of the CZTS nanocrystal film, indicating the important role of sodium. It is well known that Na diffusion from sodium lime glass (SLG) or Na-containing compounds into CZTS or CIGS films enhances grain growth.36–39 Several hypotheses explaining enhanced grain growth have been proposed.40–42,43 Because the sulfurization time is only 5 minutes in this work, we mainly attribute the enhanced grain growth (the formation of dense micron-sized grains) during sulfurization to the Na from the NaF layer though sodium diffusion from SLG is possible as well.
To investigate the effect of the composition of wurtzite nanocrystals on the properties of the CZTS absorber, the metal ratios in the precursor solution were tuned while keeping other experimental parameters unchanged. Fig. 5c shows a typical top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from sulfurizing wurtzite nanocrystals (the metal ratios in precursor solution are Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1). The surface has a densely continuous structure consisting of clearly micron-sized large grains. The EDS result shows that the metal stoichiometry ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn), Cu/Sn and Zn/Sn in the final thin film are 0.82, 1.91, and 1.33, respectively. Sn loss also occurs during the sulfurization process for this precursor recipe. Very recently, the self-regulation phenomenon of the Cu/Sn ratio was reported in the synthesis of CZTS films by using Cu–Zn–Sn alloy precursors.43 The Cu/Sn ratio in CZTS is self-regulated and approaches 2, regardless of the initial composition of the precursor films.43 While Cu and Zn loss from the alloy thin film can be negligible, excess Sn evaporates in the form of SnS if precursor films are initially Sn rich.43 According to our experimental results, similar rules may exist in the system of wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals as well. The self-regulation of the Cu/Sn ratio in either kesterite or wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals has not been reported prior to this work. The corresponding impact of the precursor's composition on the performance of solar cells is detailed in the following discussion.
Pure-sulfide CZTS photovoltaic device
By using the obtained CZTS thin films, solar cell performance was evaluated on complete devices with a typical structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass (without an MgF2 antireflection coating layer). The experimental details of depositions of CdS, ZnO, and ITO layers can be found in our previous work.15Fig. 6a shows the photovoltaic response of a typical CZTS device with the metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.375 and Zn/Sn = 1.05 in the precursor solution, demonstrating an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 524.8 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.43 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 52.79%, and a PCE of 4.83% under AM1.5 illumination. To the best of our knowledge, both the PCE and Voc values are the highest reported values for pure-sulfide CZTS thin film solar cells from sulfurizing quaternary CZTS nanocrystals. Fig. 6b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectral response of the same device. The band gap of the final CZTS absorber estimated from the EQE data is about 1.5 eV (Fig. SI4†), which is similar to those values reported in the literature estimated by using the same method.25,34 Referring to the curve in the visible range, the EQE (Fig. 6b) decays in the long wavelength region (above 600 nm) indicating the low collection rate of the carriers generated far away from the junction in the absorber. This low collection rate could be caused by a short diffusion length and/or narrow depletion region.27 As aforementioned, tuning the composition of precursors has little effect on the surface morphology of the final films, whereas the corresponding devices exhibit very different efficiencies and composition distributions. Fig. 7a shows the photovoltaic response of a typical CZTS device with the metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1 in precursor solution having an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 308.4 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.16 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 35.64%, and a PCE of only 1.01% under AM1.5 illumination. Compared with the relatively Cu-poorer recipe of Cu/Sn = 1.375 and Zn/Sn = 1.05, all electrical properties decrease with the increase in Cu content. Fig. 7b shows the bright field TEM images of the CZTS film with a relatively Cu-rich recipe, presenting the typical bi-layer structure. Fig. 7c–f show the HAADF STEM image and the corresponding EDS mapping of element Cu, Zn, and Sn in the square area of the CZTS solar cells. In the bottom fine grain layer, both Cu and Zn still exist whereas Sn could hardly be detected. Therefore, initial metal ratios of the wurtzite CZTS materials significantly influence the absorber's element redistribution upon sulfurization, especially for the fine grain layer. It is well known that the precursor solution of Cu/Sn = 1.7–1.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.1–1.2 is widely adopted for the synthesis of kesterite CZTS nanocrystals for high performance CZTSSe solar cells.8 However, in this work, for solar cells made by using wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals, the precursor with metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.375 and Zn/Sn = 1.05 was more suitable than that with Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1. These two different metal ratios correspond to different types of CZTS nanocrystals (wurtzite vs. kesterite). The possible reason may come from the fact that different nanocrystals would undergo different reactions and changes during the sulfurization annealing process.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photovoltaic performance of a CZTS solar cell with the typical bi-layer structure; (b) external quantum efficiency spectral response of the same device. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Photovoltaic performance of a CZTS solar cell by using the precursor salts with Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1; (b) bright field TEM image of the CZTS device; (c) HAADF STEM image of the CZTS device; (d–f) corresponding EDS mapping images of the square frame area shown in (c) (scale bar: 500 nm). 
Although the device reported in this work has the highest Voc for pure-sulfide CZTS solar cells fabricated from quaternary CZTS nanocrystals, it is still lower than the Voc (661 mV) of the hero CZTS solar cells fabricated by using the co-evaporation method.4 According to the SEM and TEM images, the surface morphology of our fabricated CZTS absorber is still rough. It has been found that predominant carrier recombination would occur at the interface between the CdS buffer layer and the CZTS absorber.30 The rough surface morphology of the CZTS film would lead to the enlargement of interface areas between the CdS and CZTS, significantly limiting both the Voc and the FF of solar cells.30 Moreover, those small voids in the fine grain layer may block current transportation, leading to low FF and Jsc of solar cells. On the other hand, the Jsc of our device is relatively lower than the reported hero value (19.5 mA cm−2), which may be caused by the high series resistance resulting from the thick MoS2 layer (about 500 nm).44,45 Therefore, one of the main challenges for achieving high efficiency in future devices would be obtaining a smoother CdS/CZTS interface without any significant voids passing through the CZTS film as well as a thinner MoS2 layer. In addition, the numerous surface states in the fine grain layer are generally believed to be detrimental to device performance due to the potential opportunity for recombination at grain boundaries and/or decreased carrier mobility.1,27 However, recently, a few publications claimed that the fine grains do not affect the device performance in their experiments.26 Therefore further study is required to understand the formation mechanism and effect of fine grains.
Conclusions
In summary, this study explored the application of metastable wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 materials in the photovoltaic field by developing an efficient phase-transition-driven grain growth strategy to overcome the grain size limitation for sulfurizing the quaternary CZTS nanocrystals in a short time. The XRD, Raman, SEM, and TEM results demonstrated that the as-deposited CZTS films experienced obvious phase-transition, morphology variation, and component redistribution after sulfurization, which are all important to the formation of micron-sized grains. It is shown that the metastable phase, sulfur atmosphere, Na-containing compound, and precursor composition all play very important roles in determining the film quality. Self-regulation of the Cu/Sn ratio was found in the system of sulfurizing wurtzite CZTS nanocrystals. By analyzing different precursor recipes and corresponding solar cells, we found that the precursor with metal ratios of Cu/Sn = 1.375 and Zn/Sn = 1.05 was more suitable than that with Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1 for efficient solar cells. Finally, laboratory-scale photovoltaic cells with 4.83% efficiency were demonstrated without anti-reflection coatings. While the thus-prepared CZTS devices require further optimization, this work serves a first step in realizing and fully understanding the grain growth required for the sulfurizaiton of quaternary CZTS nanocrystals. This concept may be also extended to and applied in other binary, ternary or quaternary nano-materials, such as metastable CuIn(S,Se)2, Cu2(In,Ga)Se4, CdTe, and Cu2ZnGe(S,Se)4 nanocrystals in commercial PV modules.
Acknowledgements
This program has been supported by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) and Australian Research Council (ARC). Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Electron Microscope Unit, University of New South Wales (UNSW).
Notes and references
H. Zhou, H. Hsu, H. Duan, B. Bob, W. Yang, T. Song, C. Hsu and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2822 CAS .
Y. Cao, M. Denny, J. Caspar, W. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. Ionkin, L. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. Rosenfeld, K. Choudhury and W. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Green, in SPIE OPTO, International Society for Optics and Photonics, San Francisco, California,  2014, 89810L-89810L-89816 Search PubMed .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. Bojarczuk, J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 72 CAS .
G. Zoppi, I. Forbes, R. Miles, P. Dale, J. Scragg and L. Peter, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 315 CAS .
C. Hsu, H. Duan, W. Yang, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301287 Search PubMed .
A. Carrete, A. Shavel, X. Fontané, J. Montserrat, J. Fan, M. Ibáñez, E. Saucedo, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Miskin, W. Yang, C. Hages, N. Carter, C. Joglekar, E. Stach and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 645 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, M. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 Search PubMed .

          M. Lu, Y. Cao, J. Caspar, I. Malajovich, D. Radu and H. Rosenfeld, 37th IEEE PVS Conf.,  2011, p. 000402 Search PubMed .
Q. Tian, X. Xu, L. Han, M. Tang, R. Zou, Z. Chen, M. Yu, J. Yang and J. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3847 RSC .
R. Mainz, A. Singh, S. Levcenko, M. Klaus, C. Genzel, K. Ryan and T. Unold, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, M. Panthani, C. Steinhagen, T. Harvey, C. Stolle and B. Korgel, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 189, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, X. Su and J. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, K. Sun, Z. Han, H. Cui, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li, X. Hao, Y. Liu and M. Green, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 500 CAS .
W. Yang, C. Miskin, C. Hages, E. Hanley, C. Handwerker, E. Stach and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3530 CrossRef CAS .
R. Crisp, M. Panthani, W. Rance, J. Duenow, P. Parilla, R. Callahan, M. Dabney, J. Berry, D. Talapin and J. Luther, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kruszynska, H. Borchert, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Rümmeli, B. Büchner, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3141 RSC .
A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir and K. Ryan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. Lim, M. Bosman, E. Ye, S. Chen, Q. Xu and M. Han, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, A. Lui, K. Lam, L. Xi and Y. Lam, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, W. Zhou, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Z. Hou, J. Jiao, Z. Zhou, Z. Du and S. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26507 CAS .
K. Wang, B. Shin, K. Reuter, T. Todorov, D. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 051912 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Wang, J. Xu, X. Liu, R. Zou, L. Ouyang, X. Xu, X. Chen and H. Xing, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1139 RSC .
W. Wu, Y. Cao, J. Caspar, Q. Guo, L. Johnson, I. Malajovich, H. Rosenfeld and K. Choudhury, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3777 RSC .
H. Xin, J. Katahara, I. Braly and H. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301823 Search PubMed .
K. Roelofs, Q. Guo, S. Subramoney and J. Caspar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13464 CAS .
J. Scragg, J. Wätjen, M. Edoff, T. Ericson, T. Kubart and C. Platzer-Björkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiang, S. Ikeda, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301381 Search PubMed .
R. Mainz, B. Walker, S. Schmidt, O. Zander, A. Weber, H. Rodriguez-Alvarez, J. Just, M. Klaus, R. Agrawal and T. Unold, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18281 RSC .
B. Chernomordik, A. Beland, D. Deng, L. Francis and E. Aydil, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3191 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lu, Y. Cao, J. Caspar, I. Malajovich, D. Radu and H. Rosenfeld, 37th IEEE PVS Conf.,  2011, p. 000402 Search PubMed .
E. Gu, C. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Su, K. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Li and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 1932 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, W. Liu and D. Talapin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4038 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnson, S. Baryshev, E. Thimsen, M. Manno, X. Zhang, I. Veryovkin, C. Leighton and E. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 26, 3191 Search PubMed .
K. Granath, M. Bodegård and L. Stolt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 279 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rudmann, G. Bilger, M. Kaelin, F. Haug, H. Zogg and A. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 37, 431 Search PubMed .
W. Hlaing Oo, J. Johnson, A. Bhatia, E. Lund, M. Nowell and M. Scarpulla, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 2214 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, D. Cahen and H. Schock, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 31 CrossRef CAS .
D. Niles, K. Ramanathan, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, B. Tielsch and J. Fulghum, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1997, 15, 3044 CAS .
A. Rockett, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 362, 330 CrossRef CAS ; M. Johnson, C. Wrasman, X. Zhang, M. Manno, C. Leighton and E. Aydil, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2507 CrossRef .
M. Johnson, C. Wrasman, X. Zhang, M. Manno, C. Leighton and E. Aydil, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, O. Gunawan, T. Todorov, B. Shin, S. J. Chey, N. Bojarczuk, D. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143508 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, J. Jiang, P. Yang, C. Peng, Z. Huang, S. Zuo, L. Yang and J. Chu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 125, 20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM images of wurtzite nanocrystals, XRD patterns and SEM images of the thin film made from kesterite CZTS nanocrystals, composition depth profile of the CZTS absorber layer after sulfurization, and pattern of the estimated band gap. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta05813aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns (a and b) of the as-deposited wurtzite CZTS films before sulfurization and kesterite CZTS films after sulfurization; Raman spectra with 514 nm excitation (c and d) and Raman spectra with 325 nm excitation (e and f) of the as-deposited wurtzite CZTS films before sulfurization and kesterite CZTS films after sulfurization.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images (a and c) and cross-sectional SEM images (b and d) of the as-deposited and sulfurized wurtzite CZTS films.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Bright field TEM image of the CZTS device; (b) HAADF STEM image of the CZTS device; (c–e) EDS scans taken along the corresponding scans in (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  HAADF STEM image and corresponding EDS mapping images of the CZTS device (scale bar: 500 nm).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals annealed under a N2 atmosphere without using S pellets; (b) top-view SEM image of a CZTS film after sulfurization without Na doping; (c) top-view SEM image of the as-deposited CZTS films made from wurtzite nanocrystals after sulfurization (the metal ratios in precursor solution is Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photovoltaic performance of a CZTS solar cell with the typical bi-layer structure; (b) external quantum efficiency spectral response of the same device.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photovoltaic performance of a CZTS solar cell by using the precursor salts with Cu/Sn = 1.76 and Zn/Sn = 1.1; (b) bright field TEM image of the CZTS device; (c) HAADF STEM image of the CZTS device; (d–f) corresponding EDS mapping images of the square frame area shown in (c) (scale bar: 500 nm).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM images of wurtzite nanocrystals, XRD patterns and SEM images of the thin film made from kesterite CZTS nanocrystals, composition depth profile of the CZTS absorber layer after sulfurization, and pattern of the estimated band gap. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta05813a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
