Use of an NIR-light-responsive CO nanodonor to improve the EPR effect in photothermal cancer treatment   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CC07873D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CC07873D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13403-13406Use of an NIR-light-responsive CO nanodonor to improve the EPR effect in photothermal cancer treatment†

        
          
            Chongchong 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yanqing 
            Li‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xianqing 
            Shi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiahong 
            Zhou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Zhou
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Shaohua 
            Wei
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Centre of Biomedical Functional Materials, Key Laboratory of Applied Photochemistry, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing (210023), China. E-mail: zhoulin@njnu.edu.cn; shwei@njnu.edu.cn
Received 
      2nd October 2018
    , Accepted 1st November 2018First published on 2nd November 2018AbstractThe carbon monoxide (CO)-carrying palladium nanosheet (PdNS-CO) was exploited as a photothermally triggered donor of CO. Irradiating material containing PdNS-CO with 808 nm-wavelength light caused a rapid heating of the material, triggering a release of CO. The enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect was found to be improved by such released CO and resulted in an increase in the accumulation of PdNS-CO at tumors and hence promoted its use in photothermal therapy (PTT) using a low laser power density.
CO was previously viewed as a silent killer because of its strong affinity for haemoglobin and the resulting inhibition of oxygen delivery. Nevertheless, several decades of studies have indicated that endogenous CO is a ubiquitous second messenger involved in a wide range of physiological and pathological responses, such as inflammation, proliferation, and apoptosis.1,2 In addition, CO plays a critical role in vascular leakage. This understanding has led to an improvement in the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect and hence a promotion of the ability to accumulate nanomedicines in solid tumours.3
A wide range of CO-releasing molecules (CORMs) have been developed to deliver CO into the cell.4 Light-triggered liberation of CO from a photochemically active CORM (photoCORM) is an alternative activation strategy that allows for a precise spatial and temporal control over the CO release.5 However, with rare exceptions,6,7 most reported photoCORMs have been indicated to be triggered by UV or visible light, which transmit poorly through biological fluids and tissues. Therefore, the design of new photoCORMs that can release CO efficiently upon being exposed to near infrared (NIR) light is being pursued, but realizing this approach remains a major challenge.
PdNS, prepared by CO-confined growth method, has been widely used as an NIR photothermal therapy (PTT) agent due to its good biocompatibility and high photothermal conversion efficiency.8–13 However, little research has been focused on the contribution of the CO-induced EPR effect to improving PTT treatment. The use of CO is critical to the successful synthesis of ultrathin Pd nanosheets due to CO growth confinement effect.14,15 And a high-pressure reaction method was used in our current work. Therefore, there was abundant CO adsorption on the surfaces of the PdNS to form PdNS-CO. CO is a stable and inert molecule that reacts only with transition metals.6 And when irradiated with NIR light, the effective light-heat conversion ability of PdNS-CO can heat up the material and cause such an interaction to be unstable. Hence, such irradiation offers exciting opportunities to exploit PdNS-CO as a CORM triggered by light and heat, and this possibility remains to be explored. Thus, in the current work, the CO donor function and the increased EPR effect of the CO released from PdNS-CO were studied to improve its PTT tumour suppression effect.
As shown in Fig. 1, ultrathin PdNS-CO, with an average diameter of 65 nm, was obtained by reducing Pd(II) acetylacetonate using CO as both a reducing and surface-confining agent. In addition, the prepared PdNS-CO exhibited good dispersion stability in aqueous solution. CO has been reported to be molecularly bonded to the basal (111) planes of PdNS through the carbon atom.11 And an X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of PdNS-CO showed an obvious (111) plane peak.
 Fig. 1  (A and B) TEM images of the produced PdNS-CO. Inset panel of (A): XRD pattern of the PdNS-CO; inset panel of (B): diameter distribution of the PdNS-CO. 
PdNS-CO can absorb NIR light and convert it to thermal energy because of its strong absorption in the NIR region (Fig. S1, ESI†). The photothermal conversion efficiency (η) of the prepared PdNS-CO was calculated to be 40.1%. As shown in Fig. 2A and B, the temperature of an aqueous PdNS-CO solution ([PdNS-CO] = 14 ppm) sharply increased from 28.3 to 65.3 °C after 12 minutes of irradiation with an 808 nm-wavelength 0.5 W laser. In contrast, only a slight increase in temperature was measured for the saline solution under the same irradiation condition. And the extent of the increase in temperature depended on the concentration of the PdNS-CO and on the power density of the light (Fig. S2, ESI†). In addition, the prepared PdNS-CO also showed good photothermal stability, allowing it to be recycled (Fig. 2C).
 Fig. 2  Photothermal properties of PdNS-CO exposed to NIR light. (A) Thermal images of saline and PdNS-CO aqueous solutions after irradiation of PdNS-CO with an 808 nm-wavelength laser. (B) Photothermal heating curves based on the NIR thermal imaging data. (C) Photothermal cycling test of PdNS-CO exposed to NIR light 4 times. 
The above results showed that the prepared PdNS-CO formed basal (111) planes, which provide vast areas for CO adsorption. To verify this, a Fourier transform-infrared (FTIR) spectrum of the prepared PdNS-CO was acquired. These FTIR studies indicated that CO was adsorbed on the surface of the PdNS-CO using both bridge and linear configurations, and indicated that CO was liberated upon exposure of the PdNS-CO to 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation (Fig. S3, ESI†). The most important criteria for designing a CORM were indicated in previous reports to be the ability to control the release of CO from the CORM, the chemical stability of the CORM when stored, and for in vivo applications having low toxicity.6
First, the photothermally triggered release of CO from PdNS-CO was detected using a CO probe with Pd2+-sensitive fluorescence. The usually nonfluorescent CO probe is converted to a green fluorescent product with CO in the presence of Pd2+ (Fig. 3B).16 As shown in Fig. 3C, after PdNS-CO was irradiated with an 808-nm-wavelength laser, the fluorescence intensity of the CO probe gradually increased, indicating that CO was released from the PdNS-CO. In contrast, there was only a slight increase in the fluorescence intensity without NIR light irradiation (Fig. 3D). These results verified that the photothermal effect can trigger release of CO from PdNS-CO (Fig. 3A).
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic presentation of the binding of CO to PdNS and the photothermally triggered release of CO. (B) Measurement mechanism of the CO detection probe. (C) Fluorescence spectra of the CO probe in an aqueous solution of PdNS-CO irradiated for various durations by an 808 nm-wavelength laser. (D) Fluorescence intensity increase (Ft − F0) at a wavelength of 490 nm of a CO probe for various groups after five minutes of an 808-nm-wavelength laser (1 W) treatment. 
Secondly, the chemical stability of PdNS-CO when stored was studied. The capability of freshly prepared PdNS-CO to release CO upon being exposed to a 1 W 808 nm-wavelength laser was satisfactory according to the measured CO signal shown in Fig. 3D. This capability was lower for PdNS-CO stored in ethanol at 4 °C for one month, attributed to a poor stability of the PdNS-CO bond in these conditions, but again satisfactory for PdNS-CO stored in a CO-saturated solution for one month.
Thirdly, the cytotoxicity in dark conditions, light-triggered photothermally induced anticancer activity, and in vitro CO-release capability of PdNS-CO were studied. No obvious cytotoxicity was detected for PdNS-CO-treated non-small cell lung cancer (A549) cells without light irradiation even at a PdNS-CO dose as high as 100 μg mL−1 (Fig. S4, ESI†). After 808 nm-wavelength laser (0.25 W, 12 min) irradiation (Fig. 4C), almost 90% of the cells were killed, indicating the superior PTT-induced anticancer activity of the PdNS-CO.
 Fig. 4  (A) Fluorescence intensities of the CO probe in vitro for various durations of irradiation with the 808-nm-wavelength laser (0.25 W). (B) In vitro photothermally triggered release of CO from PdNS-CO (bar = 25 μm). (C) NIR light-induced cell toxicity of PdNS-CO. (Data are expressed as means ± SD; ***P < 0.001 drugs versus control) (808 nm-wavelength, 0.25 W, 12 min). 
The in vitro CO-release capability of PdNS-CO triggered by NIR light and the resulting induced photothermal process were studied using the above-described CO probe. As shown in Fig. 4A and B, an obvious increase in green fluorescence intensity was detected in PdNS-CO-treated cells after they were exposed to the 808 nm-wavelength laser (0.25 W) irradiation, indicating the CO-release capability of PdNS-CO in vitro. Increasing the duration of irradiation yielded a corresponding increase in the fluorescence intensity of the CO probe. CO can penetrate cell membranes freely. Therefore, we proposed that the PdNS-CO, which we found in our current work to accumulate in tumour tissue (inside tumour cells or in tumour extracellular matrix) by the EPR effect, can effectively release CO after being irradiated with NIR light. The released CO could improve the EPR effect and hence improve PTT treatment.
The biocompatibility of PdNS-CO is very important for its safe use as both a PTT agent and photoCORM. As shown in Fig. 5A, none of the 14-day treatments yielded an obvious loss of body weight in the xenograft tumour-bearing female BALB/c mice. In addition, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of the normal tissue sections of heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney and brain indicated that no apparent pathological changes in the mice resulted from any of the treatments (Fig. S6A, ESI†). These preliminary data verified the high biocompatibility of PdNS-CO. Moreover, the group of mice treated with PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength laser showed obvious suppression of tumour activity during the 14-day treatment compared to the group of mice treated with the control saline solution. In contrast, no tumour suppression effect was obtained for the groups of mice that were treated with only PdNS-CO or with only the 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation (Fig. 5B).
 Fig. 5  (A) Mouse body weight as a function of duration of treatment with a control, PdNS-CO, 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation, and PdNS-CO + 808-nm-wavelength laser irradiation. (B) Relative tumour-volume as a function of duration of treatment with the four above-described conditions (***P < 0.001 PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation groups vs. other groups). 
We also stained tumour sections with H&E. Only a small portion of these stained sections appeared purple blue (nuclei stained by hematoxylin) for the mice treated with PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength laser, much less than that observed for the other groups of mice. This result indicated that the majority of cancer cells were dead in the mice treated with PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength laser (Fig. S6B, ESI†).
We proposed that the CO photothermally released from PdNS-CO could further improve the EPR effect and promote its accumulation in tumour tissue. In other words, we expected the CO-induced EPR effect to increase the efficiency of the PTT treatment using PdNS-CO. To verify this hypothesis, we investigated the effects of EPR on the in vivo photothermal conversion of light to heat, the permeability of CO through blood vessels, and the accumulation of PdNS-CO in tumours.
As shown in Fig. 6A and B, the temperature of the tumour position increased by about 20 °C post tail-vein injection of PdNS-CO (10 mg kg−1) and 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation (3 min, 0.25 W, 6 h post injection). The greatest increase in temperature measured in the tumour was higher than 50 °C, and such an increase should provide a satisfactory PTT effect. In contrast, only a slight temperature increase was detected in the tumour tissue of saline-treated mice. This result suggested that one might be able to photothermally release CO from PdNS-CO in vivo.
 Fig. 6  (A) In vivo NIR-light-triggered photothermal effect of tumour-bearing mice post tail-vein injection of saline and PdNS-CO aqueous solutions ([PdNS-CO] = 10 mg kg−1, 808 nm-wavelength laser, 0.25 W). (B) Increase in the temperature of the tumour sites as a function of irradiation time. (C) Enhanced blood vascular permeability in skin revealed using the classic Evans blue assay. (D) Enhanced tumour tissue EPR effect revealed using the Evans blue assay. (E and F) Quantification of the extravasation of Evans blue from the (E) skin and (F) tumour (*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, drug-treated groups vs. control group; #P < 0.05, ###P < 0.001, PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength-laser-treated group vs. other groups). 
The EPR effect is a unique pathophysiological phenomenon of solid tumours that promotes the selective accumulation of a nanomedicine in the tumour. And CO has been reported to enhance the EPR effect by increasing the permeability of blood vessels.3 Such enhanced blood vascular permeability and EPR effect has been detected using the classic Evans blue method in skin and tumour models.17,18
Skin is rich in blood vessels and, therefore, it could be used as an ideal model to visually evaluate vascular permeability.3 As shown in Fig. 6C and E, an 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation for a short period of time (3 min, 0.25 W) combined with a hypodermic injection of a trace dose of PdNS-CO (3.5 ppm) greatly increased the vascular permeability in normal dorsal mouse skin. In contrast, the use of PdNS (for which CO had already been removed by a 1 W 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation for 30 min before injection) with an 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation, single 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation, saline treatment or PdNS-CO treatment (without 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation) did not yield any obvious enhancement, suggesting that a photothermally triggered release of CO is necessary for it to enhance vascular permeability. (Note that in the skin Evans blue assay, the higher the vascular permeability, the darker the blue colour at the skin injection site.) Moreover, PdNS-CO (tail vein injection, 10 mg kg−1) + 808 nm-wavelength laser (0.25 W, 8 min) treatment greatly enhanced accumulation of Evans blue in tumour tissue, which further showed that the CO released from PdNS-CO effectively enhanced vascular permeability and, thereby, improved the EPR effect (Fig. 6D and F). (Note that in the tumour Evans blue assay, the higher the EPR effect, the darker the blue colour at the tumour tissue.) In addition, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) spectrometry was used to determine the relative amount of the Pd element in the tumours. For the PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength treatment group, the relative amount of Pd found was 0.65 mg g−1. In contrast, for the PdNS-CO treatment group (without 808 nm-wavelength light irradiation), the relative amount of Pd found was significantly less, in fact lower than the limit of detection (0.5 mg g−1) of our instrument (Table S1, ESI†). These results indicated that the increased accumulation of PdNS-CO in the tumour primarily resulted from the CO-enhanced EPR effect.
In conclusion, PdNS-CO was exploited here as an NIR photothermally triggered CORM for use as a CO donor to enhance the EPR effect, and thereby, improve its tumour suppression activity by PTT. Unlike that for traditional photoCORMs, the wavelength of light triggering the PdNS-CO reaction was found to be located at the NIR region (808 nm wavelength), which displays an ideal tissue penetration depth for disease treatment in vivo. CO is increasingly being accepted as a cytoprotective and homeostatic molecule with important signalling capabilities in physiological and pathophysiological situations. In addition, an increasing number of reports have indicated that CO is also closely tied to important physiological processes, including anti-inflammation, enzyme regeneration promotion, immunity activation, and others.2,4 Thus, the multifunctional PdNS-CO (photoCORM and PTT agent) also has great potential for use as a nanomedicine in the field of anti-inflammation, enzyme regeneration promotion and immunity activation.
This research was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21571105 and 21671105). The project BK20161554 was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China. The work was also supported by the Priority Academic Program Development of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China, and the Foundation of Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Centre of Biomedical Functional Materials of China (161090H001).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
L. D. Prockop and R. I. Chichkova, J. Neurol. Sci., 2007, 262, 122–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu and R. Wang, Pharmacol. Rev., 2005, 57, 585–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, H. Qin, H. Nakamura, K. Tsukigawa, T. Shin and H. Maeda, Cancer Sci., 2012, 103, 535–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Motterlini and L. E. Otterbein, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2010, 9, 728–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Rimmer, A. E. Pierri and P. C. Ford, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1509–1519 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palao, T. Slanina, L. Muchová, T. Šolomek, L. Vítek and P. Klán, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 126–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pierri, P. J. Huang, J. V. Garcia, J. G. Stanfill, M. Chui, G. Wu, N. Zheng and P. C. Ford, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2072–2075 RSC .
S. Shi, Y. Huang, X. Chen, J. Weng and N. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14369–14375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, J. Li, D. Sun, Q. Li, J. Ma, X. Chen, X. Zhu and N. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706310 CrossRef .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, S. Chen, C. He, S. Mo, X. Wang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1234–1248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Tang, J. Yang, Y. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15946–15949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Chen, S. Shi, M. Chen, S. Tang, S. Mo, J. Wei and N. Zheng, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 1753–1758 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Li, Y. Huang, J. Wei, D. Sun and N. Zheng, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 2448–2455 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 6, 28–32 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Feng, D. Liu, Q. Zhai and G. Feng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 625–630 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Beatty, H. Puerta-Guardo, S. S. Killingbeck, D. R. Glasner, K. Hopkins and E. Harris, Sci. Transl. Med., 2015, 7, 304ra141 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Udaka, Y. Takeuchi and H. Z. Movat, Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1970, 133, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Containing details on experimental procedures, spectra property, photothermal property, photothermal conversion efficiency calculation, histological analysis, dark toxicity, ICP-MS original data. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc07873d‡ C. C. Wang and Y. Q. Li contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A and B) TEM images of the produced PdNS-CO. Inset panel of (A): XRD pattern of the PdNS-CO; inset panel of (B): diameter distribution of the PdNS-CO.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photothermal properties of PdNS-CO exposed to NIR light. (A) Thermal images of saline and PdNS-CO aqueous solutions after irradiation of PdNS-CO with an 808 nm-wavelength laser. (B) Photothermal heating curves based on the NIR thermal imaging data. (C) Photothermal cycling test of PdNS-CO exposed to NIR light 4 times.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic presentation of the binding of CO to PdNS and the photothermally triggered release of CO. (B) Measurement mechanism of the CO detection probe. (C) Fluorescence spectra of the CO probe in an aqueous solution of PdNS-CO irradiated for various durations by an 808 nm-wavelength laser. (D) Fluorescence intensity increase (Ft − F0) at a wavelength of 490 nm of a CO probe for various groups after five minutes of an 808-nm-wavelength laser (1 W) treatment.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Fluorescence intensities of the CO probe in vitro for various durations of irradiation with the 808-nm-wavelength laser (0.25 W). (B) In vitro photothermally triggered release of CO from PdNS-CO (bar = 25 μm). (C) NIR light-induced cell toxicity of PdNS-CO. (Data are expressed as means ± SD; ***P < 0.001 drugs versus control) (808 nm-wavelength, 0.25 W, 12 min).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Mouse body weight as a function of duration of treatment with a control, PdNS-CO, 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation, and PdNS-CO + 808-nm-wavelength laser irradiation. (B) Relative tumour-volume as a function of duration of treatment with the four above-described conditions (***P < 0.001 PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength laser irradiation groups vs. other groups).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) In vivo NIR-light-triggered photothermal effect of tumour-bearing mice post tail-vein injection of saline and PdNS-CO aqueous solutions ([PdNS-CO] = 10 mg kg−1, 808 nm-wavelength laser, 0.25 W). (B) Increase in the temperature of the tumour sites as a function of irradiation time. (C) Enhanced blood vascular permeability in skin revealed using the classic Evans blue assay. (D) Enhanced tumour tissue EPR effect revealed using the Evans blue assay. (E and F) Quantification of the extravasation of Evans blue from the (E) skin and (F) tumour (*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, drug-treated groups vs. control group; #P < 0.05, ###P < 0.001, PdNS-CO + 808 nm-wavelength-laser-treated group vs. other groups).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Containing details on experimental procedures, spectra property, photothermal property, photothermal conversion efficiency calculation, histological analysis, dark toxicity, ICP-MS original data. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc07873d
‡ C. C. Wang and Y. Q. Li contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
