Organic redox polymers as electrochemical energy materials  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC00981A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC00981A
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 4650-4679Organic redox polymers as electrochemical energy materials

        
          
            Hiroyuki 
            Nishide
          
          
        
      
Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. E-mail: nishide@waseda.jp
Received 
      15th March 2022
    , Accepted 12th May 2022First published on 18th May 2022AbstractRedox polymers reversibly release electrons (undergo oxidation) and gain electrons (undergo reduction). The chemical design of organic-based redox polymers is very interesting from the perspectives of studying their unique electrochemical capabilities and their use in a variety of charge-storage-device and redox-catalyst applications. This review begins by introducing the rapid electron-exchange reactions of organic redox molecules and the bistability of their oxidised and reduced forms, followed by a discussion on efficient and reversible charge propagation and storage in redox polymers containing backbones that are densely populated with redox-active sites. Employing redox polymers in rechargeable charge-storage devices, as hydrogen carriers, and for the electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide, hydrogen, and oxygen from water is then discussed, including more-recent examples that include flexible and high-power batteries, electrode-active biomaterials, and solar-driven catalytic films. The advantages of redox polymers are also noted in terms of non-biohazardous organic materials that are derived from relatively-abundant resources, as well as their functions in environmentally-friendly applications. This review provides basic insight into the characteristics of redox polymers, and is expected to stimulate their development as sustainable materials for use in energy-related technologies.Hiroyuki NishideHiroyuki Nishide is a Research Professor in the Research Institute for Science and Engineering and served as a Full Professor in the Department of Applied Chemistry (1987–2018), Waseda University, Tokyo. He received his Ph.D. in 1975 and was a Research Fellow at the Free University Berlin. He is a past president of the Society of Polymer Science, Japan, and of the Federation of Asian Polymer Societies. His interests include the syntheses and applications of functional polymers, with a recent focus on organic polymers for rechargeable and (photo)electrochemical devices.
1. Introduction
More than a half century ago, Cassidy1 and Manecke2 studied organic polymers with incorporated reversible redox sites and referred to them as “oxidation–reduction polymers” or “redox polymers”. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) defines redox polymers as polymers that reversibly undergo oxidation (electron-releasing) and reduction (electron-gaining) processes.3 By electrochemically studying a series of quinone/hydroquinone polymers, Manecke reported the potentials of electron-transfer systems and redox resins for use as regenerative redox reagents.2 While expectations appeared to fade over the next three decades, organic redox polymers have recently become popular as a new class of electroactive material. Redox-polymer properties that are chemically designable, including redox potentials, capacities, electrical conductivities, and optical properties, have led to attractive materials for both structure–reactivity relationship studies and electrochromic-device, rechargeable-battery, biosensor, drug-delivery, actuator, separation-membrane, and redox-catalyst applications.4–6
A wide variety of inorganic complexes, including oligoethyleneaminato-Co and tris(bipyridinato)-Ru (and organometallic ferrocenes) have been incorporated as redox sites in polymeric structures;7 however, practical development was often retarded due to sluggish redox processes at bulk sites and poor stabilities under acidic and/or basic conditions, as examples, in addition to the detrimental effects of heavy-metal-ion components on the environment.
Some organic redox molecules undergo both very rapid and reversible self-electron-exchange reactions in electrolytes and heterogeneous electron-exchange reactions at interfaces, including current collectors. The oxidised and reduced forms of these redox molecules are often chemically stable and robust, thereby providing redox couples. Their extended analogues, namely organic redox polymers, consist of densely populated redox-active sites on each repeating unit along their polymer backbones, to yield unique chain reactions involving fast and electrochemically reversible redox or chains of geared redox cycles toward a current collector, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Charge propagation begins with very rapid heterogenous electron transfer at the current collector with the attached polymeric redox moiety. The electron is then rapidly transported to a neighbouring redox site on the polymer, and then to the next neighbouring site (etc.), with successive electron-exchange reactions occurring in the presence of an electrolyte. Charge storage in the polymer is ascribable to charge-transport by electron self-exchange between highly populated redox sites throughout the entire polymer layer. Devices that employ organic redox polymers are considered to display unique electronic and electrical performance; they are also sustainable and exhibit reasonable cycle lives.
 Fig. 1  (a) Scheme depicting rapid and reversible redox reactions among densely populated redox sites along a polymer backbone. (b) Example of a reversible redox reaction involving the one-electron reduction of the oxidised form (Ox) of a cationic redox molecule with removal of the counter anion (−) to produce the reduced form (Rd) of the charge-neutral redox molecule. (c) Key factors that dominate the reactivity of a pendant redox site using the reduction reaction in (b) as an example. (d) Schematic for a chain of geared redox cycles that efficiently transport electrons. 
Electrical equipment, such as mobile phones and portable computers, robots, and electric vehicles (EVs), requires transportable and rechargeable power sources, with conventional power devices, represented by Li-ion batteries and silicon solar cells, regarded as “green energy” technologies for our energy-demanding society.8–12 However, great risks are inherent in the electric- and electrode-active inorganic materials fabricated for use in these devices, from the perspectives of resource scarcity, uncoupling strategic rare-metals dependence, energy-consuming production processes, problems associated with recycling, and their ignitable, toxic, and biohazardous natures.13–16 Organic or Earth-abundant components have inherent advantages that overcome the abovementioned risks.
Among transportable energy devices, ubiquitous small and thin devices that supply and store energy, such as intelligent cards, tags, and handy foldable, rollup, and wearable pieces, are in high demand for daily use and advanced systems. The active components in these devices require light-weight and plastic moldability for seamless integration and compatibility with other components and circuits, which has facilitated recent research into smart devices fabricated with organic redox-active polymers.17–24 In addition to lightweightness, flexibility, and even stretchability, some such energy devices needed for active telecommunications applications are also required to provide a highly rated, but intermittent, supply of electrical power and/or quick charging, even at limited energy densities. One approach toward ultrafast rechargeable devices with constant output voltages is provided by redox chemistry or charge transport and storage on the soft platform of a redox polymer by chemically tailoring the morphology of the polymer and by judiciously selecting the coexisting electrolyte and tuning the affinity of the polymer for the electrolyte.25–27 Such approaches are currently being explored in parallel with the development of quick-charging, inorganic-based EV transportation batteries;28 some of these current ubiquitous and sustainable redox-polymer-based devices are presented in this review.
This review also briefly discusses issues from the perspective of green chemistry. As non-toxic, less-limited, and renewable resources with potentially cost-effective device fabrication processes and comparative ease of disposal, redox polymers are positioned as promising alternatives to conventional inorganic materials.
The characteristic capability of a rechargeable device is implemented through the highly efficient transport, storage, and separation of charges (i.e., electrons and ions) in the redox polymer. The last two sections of this review discuss very recent redox-polymer challenges and opportunities associated with extending the charge transport and storage performance to protons or hydrogens by means of (1) hydrogen transport and storage in organic polymers, and (2) charge separation and injection at the water interface using organic redox-polymer films.
Proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells are promising regenerative electrical power sources for residential and transportation applications; they convert energy the most cleanly, using hydrogen and aerobic oxygen, with water as the only byproduct.29,30 A compact and safe hydrogen supply and storage system that replaces high-pressure cylinders and cryogenic inorganic adsorbents, is crucial for the practical, disparate, and small-scale use of fuel cells. An organic redox polymer for hydrogen transport and storage clearly needs to be identified as a green means of supplying and storing on-site hydrogen.31
The electrochemical redox production of hydrogen peroxide, hydrogen, and oxygen are sustainable chemistry pinnacles, and significant effort has focused on producing: (1) hydrogen peroxide by the reduction of oxygen in water; and (2) hydrogen and oxygen by the reduction and oxidation of water.32,33 While (photo)(electro)chemical redox catalysis methods have been extensively developed using metals, metal oxides, and carbon materials,34–38 those using redox processes at the polymer film interface with water are now emerging, driven by organic-polymer molecular engineering, from the perspectives of both redox potential and the hydrophilic, large surface area of the reaction interface with water, in addition to the benefits of chemical robustness in acidic/alkaline water and byproducts that do not require separation.39 This review also discusses these current organic-polymer materials according to their unique redox performance. While output performances are different for the rechargeable batteries, the hydrogen carrier, and the redox catalysis, this review discusses them from the same perspective of studying efficient charge-transport, -storage, and -separation on the soft platform of chemically designable redox polymers.
2. Charge transport and storage in redox polymers
The reduction of the oxidised form (Ox) of a redox molecule proceeds in the presence of an electrolyte to give the corresponding anion (Fig. 1b). The oxidative reaction of the reduced form operates in the opposite manner to regenerate the original oxidised form. The Ox and Rd forms of redox molecules are expected to be chemically stable and robust, or electrochemically “bistable”. Both bistable and kinetically active properties are established through small differences in Gibbs free energies and small activation energies between the Ox and Rd forms, which enables rapid and reversible redox reactions to occur between them. Many types of organic redox couples are bistable; their redox reactions in electrochemical equilibria often obey the Nernst equation and occur rapidly under approximately the same reduction and oxidation potentials (with small peaks separating the reductive and oxidative waves) in the presence of the electrolyte.40 Triarylamines, nitroxides, viologens, quinones, and imides are representative organic redox molecules. Fig. 2 presents a scale of reaction couples that undergo reversible redox processes in the wide −2 to +1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) potential range.
 Fig. 2  Typical redox couples involving organic molecules together with their corresponding redox potentials. A cationic redox molecule is reduced on the left-side of the axis accompanied by the removal of an appropriate number of counter anion for charge compensation. A neutral molecule is reduced to the corresponding anionic molecule on the right-side with the acquisition of an appropriate number of counter cations. The theoretical redox or energy capacity for each system (per full redox, mA h g−1) is also noted for each reaction. 
2.1 Organic molecules as redox couples
The aminium radical cations of p-substituted triphenylamines are one-electron reduced to their corresponding triphenylamines, and are reversibly oxidised under acidic conditions at a very positive potential (0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl for the p-methyl substituted system, upper left, Fig. 2). Triarylamines and their cations are characterised as bulky, propeller-shaped molecules with redox-centred nitrogen cores; both are isolated as crystals with long lifetimes, even in air.41 The deep-blue radical cations are often used in wet-type electrochromic devices5 that exhibit rapid and highly retentive colour changes. In the solid state, triarylamines exhibit excellent hole-transporting capabilities or are p-type organic semiconductors due to their abilities to reversibly form radical cations (holes) during the redox reaction; they are practically used in optoelectronic devices, such as organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells, and organic field-effect transistors, due to their good thermal and morphological stabilities.42
The oxoammonium cation of 2,2,6,6-teramethylpiperidinyloxyl (TEMPO) is one-electron reduced to form the neutral TEMPO radical, which is one-electron oxidised to regenerate the original cationic molecule (third system, upper left, Fig. 2). The redox potential of this couple is also very positive at 0.7–0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (or 3.6–3.7 V vs. Li/Li+) or at a significantly deep potential of −5.4 eV,43 which indicates that the TEMPO cation is a very strong oxidant and is used, for example, to oxidise the hydroxy groups of cellulose to give nanocelluloses in a metal-free manner.44 This redox reaction was determined to be the fastest, with a rate constant for self-electron exchange (kex) of 109 M−1 s−1 and for heterogeneous electron exchange (ko) of 0.1 cm s−1.43,45 Both TEMPO and its cationic salt were isolated as molecular crystals,46 which is indicative of chemical robustness under ambient conditions and the bistability of the redox couple (stability of the fully charged state in a battery application); it also reveals a very high molecular-level energy storage capacity (theoretical value of 171 mA h g−1, Fig. 2) in the material. Nitroxide radicals and their polymers have also been studied as solid-state electron-responsive materials in organic-memory and magnetic-device applications.47–49
Viologen is another representative bistable redox couple (left bottom, Fig. 2). 1,1′-Disubstituted-4,4′-bipyridinium salts, or viologen dications, are rapidly and reversibly one-electron reduced at −0.69 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)50 to form robust, intense blue-violet viologen radical cations that are tremendously cyclable. The reversible colour change is characterised by good optical contrast and high coloration efficiency; hence, viologens are practically used as active components in most electrochromic displays, smart windows, and rear-view mirrors on the market.51,52
Quinone/quinone-dianion and hydroquinone redox couples are shown on the right side of Fig. 2. o-Quinones are more aromatic in their reduced forms than their p-quinone counterparts, which not only improves reaction reversibility but also significantly shifts the redox potential of the o-quinone/o-dianion couple by +0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, upper-right side, Fig. 2), and have been studied as a cathode material in combination with other redox couples.53–55p-Benzoquinone is the most compact two-electron carbonyl-based redox molecule; however, it often forms a hydrogen-bonded dimer with its reduced and protonated form (p-hydroquinone), which separates from the reversible redox system. Anthraquinone is a fused-ring compound devoid of protons on the quinone ring; hence, it functions as a robust redox catalyst even in industrial processes. The reduction reaction proceeds through a two-step process at about −0.95 and −1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which are potentials that are affected by protonation or the pH of the aqueous electrolyte.56
Aromatic imides are known to be air-stable n-type organic semiconductors with high electron-transporting capabilities that are attributable to their electron-accepting conjugated structures. In the presence of an electrolyte, pyromellitic diimide undergoes reversible two-electron reduction at −0.68 and −1.38 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (middle, Fig. 2), which are negative but appropriately within the electrochemical window of water. The reduced dienolate form is stabilised by conjugation, resulting in fast redox kinetics.57 The redox potential becomes less negative and reversibility is improved as aromatic conjugation is improved in moving from the pyromellitic diimide to the naphthalenetetracarboxylic diimide (hereinafter referred to as naphthalene diimide) and the perylenetetracarboxylic diimide.24 These imides are endowed with the merits of good compatibility during reductions with a variety of counter cations.
Dibenzothiophenesulfone is two-electron redox active at the most negative potential of −1.8 V (bottom, Fig. 2) in an organic solvent, with high kinetic activity (ko = 10−1 cm s−1, which is significantly faster than that of anthraquinone), to give the sulfonate dianion derivative. Its redox activity is ascribable to the electron-withdrawing sulfone group and its resonance structure.58
Polymers with π-conjugated backbones, such as polythiophenes, exhibit electronic functionality and electrical conduction after oxidative doping, for which delocalised π-electrons (or holes) formed by the p-type doping process are responsible. From another perspective, this system can be regarded to involve a reversible redox reaction (localised) on several monomer units as the holes are rapidly and reversibly generated through (electrochemical) doping in the presence of the electrolyte. For example, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doping (bottom left, Fig. 2) requires four (or more than four) thiophene units in the conjugated backbone to stabilise or store one hole or positive charge (at a doping level of ∼25%), which is compensated for by one counter anion;59 this corresponds to the oxidation and reversible reduction to the original PEDOT, in which the redox capacity remains low and the potential range is broadened to 0.2–0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), depending on the doping or redox level per polymer chain.
Molecular redox units are selected from the list by considering thermodynamic potentials, kinetic activities, redox capacities, and chemical stabilities for the required device conditions. The redox molecules are tested in electrochemical devices within the potential windows of the used electrolyte; for example, between 1.0 and −1.0 V, and 1.8 and −2.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for aqueous HClO4 and (C2H5)4NClO4 in propylene carbonate, respectively.60 In addition, a warning needs to be added here: redox reactions on the cathodic side (<−0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl) are capable of reducing oxygen, which often contaminates electrolytes.
Some aromatic carbonyl and carboxylate compounds are insoluble in appropriate electrolytes, and deliver their redox activities and very high energy capacities in the solid state. Typical examples include crystals or solid powders of lithium rhodizoniate and terephthalate, which are being investigated as promising organic cathode-active materials when paired with Li ions (or Na and other ions) in carbon or Li-metal anodes.61–64 Reversible redox reactions take place through valence changes associated with lithiation or through alkaline cationic bonding of their phenolic hydroxy and aromatic carboxylic groups. These systems deliver high redox capacities (>300 mA h g−1), owing to their compact molecular structures and multiple-electron redox chemistries. Yao et al. reported that, among organic molecules, aromatic carbonyl and carboxylate compounds are presently the most promising candidates as competitors of inorganic electrode materials, based on their specific energy capacities.65,66 However, in an analogous fashion to the redox chemistry of inorganic metal–oxide electrode-active materials (or to the Li-ion intercalation mechanism), Li-ion de-insertion/insertion from/into these organic crystals and the slow chemical reaction that bonds Li significantly restrict their kinetic or power-rate performance in electrode applications. The output voltages of these organic compounds are also low, at ∼2 V (vs. Li/Li+), which is ascribable to their negative redox potentials. In addition, low cycling stability is often observed during their redox reactions due to the dissolution of small molecules into electrolytes that have not been extensively chemically modified. The use of these carbonyl compounds in organic-based cathode applications has been well summarised in previous reviews.13,23,63,65–68
2.2 Extensions to polymeric redox molecules
Extending small redox-active molecules into polymers is the most effective way of achieving fast and reversible redox reactions in many kinds of electrolytes with cyclability, despite redox capacity being partially sacrificed by the introduction of a polymer scaffold. Many redox molecules have been extended into polymeric analogues, with redox sites located in the pendant side chains of the polymers or in the polymer backbones;69,70 relevant examples are shown in Fig. 3. These polymers often adhere well to current collectors and conducting additives, resulting in low interfacial electrical resistance. They can be fabricated into thin and mechanically tough films that are formable and mouldable into the shape of any device configuration, which are inherent advantages; they are also non-hazardous.
 Fig. 3  Representative and recently reported redox polymers. 
In addition to the abovementioned plastic properties, polymer extension firstly results in the immobilisation of redox sites in the polymer phase or the electrode-active layer from the electrolyte solution in a wet-type device. Dissolution or elution of the redox-active fragment into the electrolyte solution results in charge carrier shuttling between the charge-storing and discharged phase, which extinguishes the stored charge, resulting in fatal self-discharge. The redox units are immobilised through the formation of very high molecular weight polymers and/or through the slight cross-linking of the polymer backbone.
The following polymer design is recommended for immobilisation. First, the repeating unit that contains the redox site has a compact structure, and a bulky connecting component sacrifices the redox or energy capacity of the polymer. Second, the polymer exhibits solvophilicity or good solvation with the electrolyte leading to an insoluble but appropriately swollen state that ensures counterion mobility in the polymer. Third, both the polymer backbone and the linker between the backbone and the redox moiety need to be flexible to facilitate electron exchange and charge propagation in the redox polymer. In addition, the chemical and physical properties of the polymer backbone play significant roles in the redox reaction and charge-transport process, with redox polymers often showing very different and appreciable electrochemical behaviour in fabricated devices compared to that of their small-molecule counterparts.
2.3 Charge transport and storage in the polymer
Redox polymers are solvated with electrolytes, plasticised, and then coated onto current collectors. Redox sites are densely packed in the plasticised polymer layers with very high or several molar concentrations that are significantly higher than the solubility limits of the corresponding organic molecules in solution.26,71,72In situ spectroscopies and chronoamperometry have revealed that the redox sites in such polymers maintain high electron exchange and transfer reactivities, even in the plasticised or quasi-solid state.72Fig. 1a shows fast electron transport or charge propagation within a finite distance of a redox polymer layer toward a current collector when an anodic potential is applied. The process begins with rapid electron extraction into the current collector from the reduced form of the redox polymer with fast heterogeneous electron transfer. The reduced form (Rd) of a pendant redox site releases an electron at the interface. The Rd is itself converted into the oxidised form (Ox), and then gains an electron from a neighbouring Rd site, and then the next, and so on, through successive electron-exchange reactions. All of the sites in the polymer are finally converted into the Ox form or fully charged state when the polymer is used as a cathode. The application of a cathodic potential results in reverse electron flow to eventually give the fully reduced polymer or discharged state.
Efficient electron exchange is the result of a high reaction collision frequency, which is associated with the highly populated redox sites or short distances (several Ångströms) between sites. The rapid reaction was found to obey the electron-hopping model associated with Marcus–Hush theory and redox-site segmental motion.73 The latter is dominated by the physical Brownian mobility of redox sites that is related to the flexibility of the polymer backbone and its pendant linkers, as illustrated in Fig. 1a and c.
Total charge diffusion, including electron and counter-ion transport was analysed by chronoamperometry after the application of a pulse potential. For example, polymer 1 exhibited an (apparent) charge diffusion constant of between 10−8 and 10−9 cm2 s−1,72 or a charge-diffusion front beyond 1 μm for 1 s; this charge diffusivity is not high compared with the conduction-carrier mobility of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for (semi)conducting conjugated polymers used in “dry-type” (photo)electronic devices, but it is sufficiently rapid for “wet-type” electrochemical devices, such as a battery that is expected to quickly charge for a few seconds.
Electron transfer is accompanied by counter-ion charge compensation; i.e., local movements of ions surrounding the redox sites and/or ion transport throughout the redox polymer layer. Lutkenhaus et al. suggested that the uptake and release, or doping and de-doping, of counter ions often dominate charge transfer in a redox polymer in equilibrium with the electrolyte solution using real-time analyses and an electrochemical quartz microbalance.74,75 Electrochemical impedance analysis at the half-charged state of polymer 5 sandwiched with micro-comb electrodes revealed that the local counter-ion movements dominate the first charge-transport step to provide an electrical conductivity of 0.01 mS cm−1;76 this conductivity is sufficient for charge transport through several-micron-thick layers of the neat polymer in the presence of the electrolyte.
The concentration gradient of electrons and charges is the driving force for charge transport and storage (Fig. 4).77 Self-exchange reactions occur very rapidly, as illustrated in the right upper scheme in Fig. 4; here, the concentration term of the redox-site chemical potential is shown along the vertical axis. Redox sites are accumulated along the polymer chain to afford a steep concentration gradient. Electron self-exchange remains rapid despite immobilisation on the polymer. Injected electrons hop through the redox sites toward regions with unoccupied sites or lower charge concentrations when a negative potential is applied, which finally leads to redox sites that are fully charged with electrons or fully-charged states, as illustrated in the lower left scheme of Fig. 4. Redox sites are highly condensed in the quasi-solid state in a redox polymer plasticised with a small quantity of electrolyte; however, the polymer still maintains high reactivity comparable to that in homogeneous solution. The charge-concentration gradient is the driving force for charge propagation, and almost all redox sites are fully charged in the bulk rubbery polymer in the same manner as those of a redox molecule in homogeneous solution.
 Fig. 4  Charge- and hydrogen-transport and -storage driven by concentration gradients. 
This charge transport/storage concept is successfully extended to proton and hydrogen transport/storage in organic redox polymers in section 4, as illustrated on the right side in Fig. 4.
3. Redox-polymer-based organic batteries
3.1 Aqueous organic batteries and recharge mechanism
The author's group demonstrated the first example of an all-organic-based rechargeable device or organic battery using aqueous electrolytes in this journal in 201078 (Fig. 5), using a combination of the dicationic viologen polymer (9 in Fig. 3) as the anode-active material and the hydrophilic TEMPO polymer (4 in Fig. 3) as the cathode-active material, and a simple, aqueous NaCl solution (entry 1 in Table 1, and Fig. 5). Use of the aqueous NaCl electrolyte overcomes safety concerns associated with acids or bases and flammable or ignition-triggered organic electrolytes in energy-storage devices; the aqueous electrolyte also maximises the power performance of the all-organic battery, with an ionic conductivity of the order of 102−3 S cm2 mol−1. The charging process corresponds to the one-electron reduction of the viologen dication at the anode (left bottom equation in Fig. 2 and 5a) and to the oxidation of TEMPO at the cathode, which is accompanied with counter anion migration (X in Fig. 5a; here Cl−) from the anode to the cathode for charge compensation (the anion-type “rocking chair” mechanism). Discharging occurs in the opposite direction.
 Fig. 5  Charge–discharge performance of a cell assembled using polyviologen as the anode and a TEMPO polymer as the cathode in aqueous NaCl as the electrolyte at a 60 C rate. (a) Schematic of the test cell with the two electrodes. (b) Relative capacities of the polymers as functions of charge/discharge cycle. (●): 9 anode/4 cathode, (○): Zn/4, (□): Zn/2. Inset: Charging/discharging curve. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2010. 
Table 1 Representative and recently reported all-organic redox-polymer-based batteries




Entry
[Anode]
[Cathode]
[Electrolyte]
Output
Specific
C rate; Coulomb
Ref.


Polymer/redox unit
Polymer/redox unit
Cation/anion solvent
Voltage (V)
capacity (mA h g−1)
eff; cyclability; retention




1

9/viologen

4/TEMPO
Na+/Cl− H2O
1.2
110
60 C; 95%; 2000 cycl; 78%

78



2

10/viologen

4/TEMPO
Na+/Cl− H2O
1.1, 1.5
165
60 C; 85%; 5000 cycl; 90%

80



3

24/naphthalene diimide

20/o-quinone
Li+/H+ H2SO4
0.95
85
120 C; 90%; 1000 cycl; 80%

82



4

23/naphthalene diimide

17/thiophene
Na+/Cl− H2O
<1.0
21
10 C; 25%

83



5

27/anthraquinone

4/TEMPO
Na+/Cl− H2O
1.1
80
10 C; ∼100%; 1000 cycl; 78%

112



6

25/perylene diimide

21/o-quinone
Na+/SO42− H2O
1.0
53
10 C; 98%; 800 cycl; 85%

108



7

23/naphthalene diimide

15/triphenylamine
Li+/TFSI− H2O
<2.1
105 (cathode)
4.6 C; 98%; 700 cycl; 85%

84



8

31/thiophene sulfone

1/TEMPO
(C2H5)4N+/ClO4− CH3CN
2.6
208 (anode)
120 C; 80%; >100 cycl;

58



9

28/anthraquinone

16/aniline
Na+/ClO4− NCC2H4CN
1.6
200
8 C; 68%; >50 cycl; ∼80%

90



10

23/naphthalene diimide

15/triphenylamine
EMIm+/TFSI− ionic liq
1.5
93
20 C; 5000 cycl; ∼75%

89



11

30/tetracyanoxylene

13/thianthrene
Li+/TFSI− DOL-DME
1.35
105
1 C; 250 cycl; 67%

88



12

30/tetracyanoxylene

1/TEMPO
BMIm+/TFSI− PEO deriv
1.1
24
1 C; 1000 cycl; 77%

116



13

11/viologen

3/TEMPO
GEIm+/TFSI− ionic liq polymer
1.1, 1.6
80
1 C; >95%; 25 cycl; 78%

119



14

12/viologen

8/TEMPO
(C4H9)4N+/CF3SO3− PC
1.1, 1.6
38
1 C; ∼90%; 5 cycl; 85%

111



15

18/galvinoxyl

5/TEMPO
(C4H9)4N+/ClO4− CH3CN
0.7
32
10 C; 81%; 250 cycl; 75%

85





Redox polymers 4 and 9 were coated as ∼1 μm thick films on a current collector plate, such as glassy carbon or indium tin oxide (ITO), and then soaked in the aqueous electrolyte solution to provide the two-electrode cell. Charging and discharging were examined at cut-off voltages of between 1.0 and −1.4 V (inset, Fig. 5b). A remarkably flat plateau was observed at 1.25 V during both charging and discharging, which coincides with the difference in the redox potentials of the two polymers (1.28 V, determined from 0.68 V vs. Ag/AgCl for the TEMPO of 4 and −0.60 V for the first reduction of the viologen dication of 9). The charge and discharge capacities of the system are almost identical, at 110 mA h g(polymer)−1 (Coulomb efficiency; i.e., discharge capacity vs. charge capacity, of ∼95%). This capacity is also consistent with the quantity of redox polymer coated on the current collector or the theoretical capacity of the redox polymer (114 mA h g−1; current efficiency of almost 100%). The charge/discharge curves also show that the cell functioned even when operated at a very high current density or C-rate (60 C) (which corresponds to full charging/discharging within 1 min; entry 1 in Table 1). The surprisingly high current-density or energy-power performance is the most important feature of the cell, which enables tremendously fast charging or the ability to supply a power burst with a large discharging current density without any substantial loss of output voltage, in contrast to conventional batteries. This outcome is ascribable to both the rapid redox reactions of the polymers and the high ionic conductivity of the aqueous salt solution.79
Retention or relative capacity (i.e., the obtained discharge capacity vs. the initial discharge capacity of the cell) was maintained at ∼80% after 2000 cycles without any significant deterioration observed (Fig. 5b). Capacity was observed to abruptly decrease in a control experiment in which a semi-organic test cell composed of the TEMPO polymer and a Zn anode (also: Fig. 5b), which is attributable to Zn(OH)2 precipitation; the all-organic combination avoided such degradation.
Polyacrylamide-based 4, with a molecular weight of 106, is water-insoluble but water-swellable, with a swelling ratio of 1.4 in an aqueous electrolyte. Temperature elevation was not detected in electrode 4, even during rapid charging and discharging. This surprisingly high current and long cyclability are attributable to rapid and reversible redox reactions of the polymer with the aqueous electrolyte, the chemically robust redox sites, a lack of significant structural change in the solvated or gelated polymer during redox processes, and the amorphous electrode structure. In addition, the polyacrylamide backbone provides appropriate hydrophilicity for rapid and reversible redox chemistry.
To improve the anodic performance of the polyviologen dication 9, the poly(tripyridiniomesitylene trication) 10 was formed through in situ polymerisation on a current collector as an insoluble but very swellable redox polymer layer in an aqueous electrolyte.80 Polymer 10 exhibited redox potentials of −0.48 and −0.86 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for two-step reduction to the corresponding neutral polyviologen, and a cell composed of anode 10 and cathode 6 exhibited output voltage plateaus of 1.14 and 1.52 V, which are in good agreement with the differences in the potentials of the two polymers. The crosslinked but hydrophilic viologen polymer 10 was suitable for both kinetically very active redox reactions with large charge diffusion coefficients of almost 10−9 cm2 s−1 using an aqueous NaCl electrolyte, leading, for example, to very fast full-charging in half a minute, and excellent charge/discharge performance over more than 5000 cycles (entry 2 in Table 1). The TEMPO polymer 1 was also extended along the networked but well-solvated design of, for example, polyester-based 6 (Fig. 3) by in situ, click-type polymerisation, which can be applied to any kind of substrate.81
Recently, Marcilla et al. successfully optimised both the redox polymer structure and the electrolyte composition of an aqueous all-organic battery82 by improving polymer hydrophilicity through the design of a diethylenedioxide/naphthalene-diimide copolymer (24 in Fig. 3) for the anode and an o-cathechol-ethynylacrylamide/acrylamide-sulfonate copolymer (20 in Fig. 3) for the cathode. The polycathechol and the polyimide in the Li+/H+ hybrid electrolyte function as n-type redox sites (right side of Fig. 2) for the cathode and anode, respectively, through a non-rocking-chair mechanism, to give a well-balanced specific capacity, redox potentials and rates, durability, and compatibility with cationic species (entry 3 in Table 1). Maximum energy and power densities of 80 mW h g−1 and 350 W g−1, respectively, were reported.
Another example that highlights hydrophilic redox-polymer design was reported by Nelson et al.,83 who used polythiophene-bearing oligoethyleneoxide side chains (17 in Fig. 2) and the naphthalene diimide copolymer of 23 bearing zwitterionic side chains and bithiophene units. Oxidation and reduction were very fast for their genuine layers, even with micron-thick layers, which is attributable to both counter-ion mobility assisted by the hydrophilic side chains and the π-conjugated backbone. These polymers were reversibly charged with broad potential slopes in the 0–0.4 V range, and broad two steps at −0.4 and −0.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) due to redox sites on the conjugated main chains. The cell using the polymer as both cathode and anode in NaCl solution displayed a sloping voltage output of between 0.4 and 1.1 V (entry 4 in Table 1); however, a very low specific capacity was observed due redox reactions in the conjugated polymer and the introduced side chains. Charge retention declined after 1 h, which was ascribed to the reduction of the oxygen contaminant in the electrolyte, which almost quantitatively forms hydrogen peroxide with the stored and partially delocalised electrons in the bithiophene–imide moiety of the anodic polymer.
Higher output voltages for all-organic-polymer-based batteries are highly important, even when aqueous electrolytes are used, for which the electrochemically stable window is theoretically limited to 1.23 V due to hydrogen/oxygen-evolution reactions (despite some allowance for a general operating window of up to 2 V due to overpotentials associated with water splitting). A novel aqueous “water-in-salt” electrolyte with a tremendously high concentration of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) was employed as the electrolyte by Wang et al.84 While the redox reaction of poly(triphenylamine) 15 as a cathode material often suffers from water oxidation in commonly used aqueous solutions, this side reaction was avoided in the 21 M aqueous LiTFSI electrolyte since no free water was present. A combination of the polymer cathode and naphthalene diimide polymer 23 as the anode delivered a sloped output voltage to <2.1 V with a specific capacity of 105 mA h g−1 (96% of the theoretical value) at a 4.6 C rate, of which 85% was retained after 700 cycles (entry 7, Table 1). The aqueous water-in-salt electrolyte provides safer and more cost-effective options for all-polymer-based batteries.
3.2 Organic batteries that use organic electrolytes
An all-organic battery was first demonstrated using a combination of a galvinoxyl polymer (a slightly crosslinked poly(galvinoxyl styrene); 18 in Fig. 3) as the anode-active material, a photo-crosslinked poly(TEMPO-substituted norbornene) (5 in Fig. 3) as the cathode-active material and an acetonitrile solution of alkylammonium perchlorate as the electrolyte salt, with a small quantity of alkylammonium hydroxide (entry 15 in Table 1).85 Since redox processes in organic batteries do not require Li ions, various combinations of cations and anions can be used as counter and conducting ions. The cell exhibited an output voltage plateau of 0.7 V that coincided with the difference in the redox potentials of the two polymers (see Fig. 2), and could be operated at a very high rate of 360 C. A thin device sandwiched with ITO plates was transparent and turned bluish during charging owing to the formation of galvinoxyl anions, which also served as an indicator of the degree of device charging.
Marcella et al. recently introduced a conjugated microporous redox polymer for achieving high current density and capacity per electrode area. An anthraquinone-based conjugated 3D polymer (29 in Fig. 3) delivered a specific capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 5 C when used as the cathode with LiTFSI in dimethoxyethane/dioxolane, which is ascribable to its ultrahigh specific surface area, high redox rate, and counter-ion mobility.86 They also successfully polymerised the microporous polymer in situ in the presence of a mixture of graphene oxide and single-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to provide a conducting-additive-free, binder-free, self-standing, and paper-like electrode.87 The inherent microporosity of the redox polymer facilitated charge transport in the carbon composite on the molecular level to yield a significantly high areal capacity of 6.3 mA h cm−2.
Some redox polymer couples have been examined with the aim of moving the output voltage toward 3 V. For instance, Schubert et al. coupled poly[vinyl-bis(dicyanomethylene)anthracene] and poly(vinylthianthrene) (30 and 13 in Fig. 3, with redox potentials of −0.2 and 1.2 V, respectively) as the anode and cathode, respectively. The cell composed of LiClO4 in ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) as the electrolyte exhibited an output voltage plateau of 1.35 V and a reasonable capacity (entry 11 in Table 1).88
Anode-active organic polymers were further investigated in all-organic batteries with the aim of delivering output voltages higher than 2 V and high energy densities. The author's group noted that dibenzothiophenesulfone is redox active at a very negative potential of −1.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is ascribable to the electron-withdrawing sulfone group (bottom right, Fig. 2).58 An organic cell was fabricated with poly(vinyldibenzothiophenesulfone) 31, poly(TEMPO methacrylate) 1, and a solution of (C2H5)4NClO4 in acetonitrile, as the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, respectively; this cell yielded a maximum output voltage plateau of 2.6 V, and the active component of the anode exhibited a very high energy density of >500 mW h g−1 (entry 8 in Table 1). Further molecularly-designed organic redox polymers with higher energy densities are anticipated based on these examples.
Ionic liquids are non-flammable and characterised by their electrochemical stabilities with wide potential windows (between −2 and 2.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)) and can be used as salt-free electrolytes. The ionic liquid composed of the ethylmethylimidazolium (EMIm+) cation and the TFSI anion is suitable for the organic-redox chemistry of poly(naphthalene imide) 23 and the phenylamine polymer 15 as the anode and cathode, respectively.89 The cell delivered an averaged output voltage of 1.5 V with excellent rate performance and long-term cycling stability (entry 10 in Table 1).
In pursuit of safer cell configurations, solid-state electrolytes have also been examined for use in all-organic batteries. Succinonitrile-containing NaClO4 exists as a plastic solid phase at room temperature and exhibits a high ionic conductivity of 10−3 S cm−1 and a wide electrochemical window of >3 V. Cao et al. used this solid electrolyte in combination with anthraquinone polymer 28 and polyaniline derivative 16 as the anode and cathode, respectively.90 Na ions were efficiently irrigated into the quinone polymer from the plasticised electrolyte. Cell charging/discharging in the all-solid state provided a sloping voltage output with a midpoint of 1.6 V, and reasonable rate and cyclability (entry 9 in Table 1). Na ions are naturally abundant, and such solid-state electrolytes may provide additional advantages.
Redox-polymer-based organic batteries were overviewed and comprehensively listed in recent reviews.16,23,24,91
3.3 Resource availability: from petrochemicals using simple routes or from renewable resources
The rapidly growing and huge demand for Li-ion batteries, especially for the projected EV market, raises inevitable questions surrounding the availability of electrode-material resources. Elements associated with this issue mainly include Co, Ni, Cu, and Li, whose supplies do not appear to be limited by their total reserves on Earth, but rather on their geographical locations that are often geopolitically unstable.92 Current mining and refining processes may also soon conflict with proposed ethical regulations. On the other hand, organic-redox compounds and polymers composed of Earth-abundant elements have been prepared in pursuit of sustainable materials for use in battery electrodes, which has been forecast and discussed from the perspectives of battery chemistry and technology.13,16,21,23,28,93 However, the practical availability of such redox polymers also depends on chemical costs and hazards (i.e., starting materials and building blocks, the length of the synthetic route, the reaction conditions, solvents used, by-products, and purification), and specific requirements based on the above expectations have not yet been clearly defined. Recently, Maniam et al. evaluated the “greenness” of synthetic protocols used to prepare electrode-active organic redox molecules, based on the 12 principles of green chemistry, but mainly atom economy, reaction conditions, derivative reactions, and catalysis.94 Such a delineation is expected to be one of the first steps used to provide a multidimensional picture of the environmental impacts of organic-based electrode materials and inform practical battery research. Here, case-by-case comments are briefly provided on the most-studied and best-performing redox polymers simply for further reference.
Poly(TEMPO methacrylate) 1 is commercially available.95 A facile way of preparing 1 involves simple polymerisation of the tetramethylpiperidine methacrylate precursor and subsequent treatment with an oxidising agent,96 while precise anionic polymerisation of the radical-bearing methacrylate yields polymers with high, controlled molecular weights.97 Using polymer 1 as an example, it is first noted that many redox polymers are inexpensively prepared and are less-toxic organic materials. Scheme 1 shows the route used to produce 1. TEMPO is prepared from acetone as the starting material; its dehydration (aldol condensation) in liquid ammonia forms a dimer, and spontaneous amination and ring formation in ammonia is a one-batch process despite the involvement of multiple chemical reactions. Subsequent reduction with hydrazine gives tetramethylpiperidine, with is esterified with methacrylic acid. Polymerisation of the methacrylate ester with a peroxide initiator gives precursor of 1, and subsequent treatment with hydrogen peroxide yields redox polymer 1. Simple chemical structures and easy synthesis and polymerisation routes are recommended when researching practical redox polymers for incorporation in batteries as major components; these materials also need to compete with inexpensive and conventional electrode materials.
 Scheme 1  Route used to produce poly(TEMPO methacrylate). 
TEMPO and its derivatives are widely used as biomolecular spin labels and radical scavengers in the biomedical field.98 Hindered polyamines with very similar structures to the precursor of 1 are produced in ton quantities as antioxidants and photostabilisers for commodity plastics and fibres because their redox capabilities enable them to reductively remove oxygen and peroxide radicals.99 TEMPO polymer 1 has been examined in toxicity tests to guarantee it as a non-hazardous material.
Viologens are readily synthesised from pyridine as the starting material, as shown in Scheme 2. Pyridine is a conventional solvent and has been provided industrially for many years as a by-product of petroleum cracking or by fractional distillation of coal tar. Pyridine is reacted with sodium in liquid ammonia and then exposed to moist air to afford 4,4′-bipyridine. Bipyridium dications (i.e., viologens) are produced by the facile reactions of bipyridine and excess alkyl halide50 with methyl chloride to give the commercially available dichloride salt of methyl viologen as an example.100
 Scheme 2  Route used to produce dimethyl viologen dichloride and poly(viologen bromide). 
Viologen is polymerised through the condensation of bipyridine with an α,ω-alkene dihalide to give the corresponding polyviologen; for example, the reaction with decamethylene dibromide gives 9. Viologen is often polymerised in situ to immobilise it on a current collector surface and to facilitate redox or colour-change reactions in electrochromic applications. In addition to their use as classical blue dyes, viologens are also known for their herbicidal activities; for example, methyl viologen has been widely sold as a weedkiller and has also been studied as a redox-enzyme activator. These properties are suppressed in polymeric viologens; hence, polyviologens are categorised as less-toxic materials.51,52
Anthraquinone is a representative redox molecule that is practically used as an oxidation catalyst; it is produced by oxidizing anthracene, a major petrochemical material. A variety of substituted anthraquinones are commercially available as inexpensive key reagents.100 Anthraquinones are converted into polymers through well-established synthetic routes, by representing with 31.101 Polyimides are often studied as anode-active materials that are applicable as both organic and aqueous electrolytes. Polyimides are produced in high quantities through straightforward one-step reactions and are one of the most common engineering plastics derivatives.
The abovementioned examples reveal that redox polymers can be prepared using resource-abundant and relatively cost-effective reagents in reasonably high yields without serious by-products using petrochemically-derived materials. Resource and cost concerns are therefore unlikely to restrict the supply of these redox polymers. In the long term, organic redox polymers are potentially available from renewable natural resources or biomass that promise inexpensive and sustainable energy-storage materials.102–104 A variety of phenol-containing moieties, especially catechols or o-quinones, are often contained in natural materials, such as melanin, which is composed of o-quinones in the form of polymeric dihydroxyindole, and plays redox roles in both flora and fauna.
Lignin is the second-most abundant organic material on Earth, and is even more abundant than many inorganic materials; it is ultra-cost-effective as it is available from agro-forestry waste. Degraded oligomeric lignin, lignin sulfonate, and Kraft lignin, are problematic by-products of the pulp and paper industry, although chemical up-grading depolymerised lignin has been extensively investigated.105 While porous carbons and carbon fibres derived from lignin have been studied as anode materials and conductive electrode additives as alternatives to fossil fuel and other-derived carbons,106 lignin itself is electrode-inactive and electrically insulating; however, some oligomeric lignins show redox capabilities that are ascribed to their o-quinone groups (21 in Fig. 3). For instance, reversible-charge storage has been demonstrated by compositing lignin sulfonate with polypyrrole.107 Lignin sulfonate was also composited with PEDOT; the sulfonate groups of the lignin interact as counter ions for the doped PEDOT to form a conducting, molecular-level composite, which redox reacts reversibly with its hydroquinone form at 0.45 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) aided by the conducting PEDOT. Mecerreyes et al. fabricated a cell using a lignin composite as the cathode, a hydrophilic block copolymer of perylene diimide 25 and oligoethyleneoxide as the anode, and acidic aqueous Na2SO4 solution as the electrolyte, to give a sloping output voltage with a 1.0 V midpoint at a high 10 C rate (entry 6 in Table 1). The high reaction rate is ascribable to the hydrophilic lignin composite in the aqueous electrolyte.108
Strømme et al. revealed that composites of nanocellulose and polypyrrole are redox-active materials, in which the nanofibrillated cellulose scaffold provides a high surface area for the redox process and also endows the composite with paper-like mechanical properties.109 The use of this renewable biopolymer is expected to lead to low-cost redox polymers that are safer and operate in water. Ample room exists for further developing and improving charge density and kinetic performance by searching through the library of redox-active biopolymers.
Polyacrylamide, the backbone of redox polymer 4, is widely used as a biocompatible polymer. Biodegradable polylactide was additionally grafted onto the polyacrylamide TEMPO polymer (7 in Fig. 3);110 studies, including cytotoxicity and cell adhesion testing involving spreading on sheet of redox-active polymer 7, revealed low immunogenicity and good biocompatibility. This system is expected to be studied further as an electrical-stimulus-responsive biomaterial and in tissue-engineering applications.
Recently, Lutkenhaus et al. incorporated TEMPO and viologen in a peptide backbone as redox sites for an organic battery, which strongly addresses the needs of greenness and sustainability in the future circular economy.111L-Glutamate-based polypeptides 8 and 12 bearing TEMPO and viologen, respectively, were synthesised. These polymers exhibited secondary structures, including α-helical conformations, and reasonable charge storage was achieved by the device in which they were used as the cathode and anode, respectively, with the propylene carbonate (PC) solution of (C4H9)4N/CF3SO4 as the electrolyte (entry 14 in Table 1). These peptides are composed of amide linkages in their backbones and ester side-chain linkages that are completely hydrolysed when heated with acid, to yield the starting L-glutamic acid, TEMPO, viologen, and alkyl linker derivatives. Cell viability and degradation-product studies revealed that these polypeptides are non-toxic. Lutkenhaus et al. predict that redox-active and charge-storage polymers capable of being decomposed and reconstructed on demand will be designed for sustainable and recyclable organic batteries.
3.4 Toward flexible, high-power, and bio-conformable batteries
Sandwiching a thin separator film containing an appropriate electrolyte between a pair of redox polymers with different redox potentials provides a flexible all-organic battery, as illustrated in Fig. 6. The electrolyte-containing separator film can be replaced with a (quasi) solid-state polymer electrolyte. In addition to the inherent merits of organic polymers, such as lightweightness, flexibility, moldability, and wet-fabrication processability, redox polymers have the following advantages as electrode-active materials:
(1) surprisingly high power-rate performance, which is attributable to the high kinetic activities of redox polymers plasticised with electrolytes (in combination with an appropriate conductive additive, as mentioned later);
(2) charging and discharging voltages that are tuneable by selecting redox couples according to their redox potentials (as well as electrolytes);
(3) plateauing or constant output voltages, in contrast to the fluctuating voltages delivered by capacitors; hence, the redox-polymer-based rechargeable devices are categorised as batteries;
(4) reasonable capacities of 100–150 mA h g−1 ascribable to the compact molecular structure of each redox site;
(5) an amorphous state of the electrode material, which suppresses its large deformations and heat generated during the charging/discharging process, leading to high cyclability, in contrast to that of the electrodes in conventional Li-ion batteries; and
(6) good adhesion to current collectors, such as aluminium foil, and conducting additives, such as carbons, resulting in low interfacial electrical resistance.
 Fig. 6  All-organic, flexible paper-like battery fabricated using a pair of redox polymers and an electrolyte-containing thin-film separator. 
Hydrophilic poly(TEMPO acrylamide) (4 in Fig. 3) forms a dense hydrogel with 5 wt% of a single-walled CNT.112 The CNT forms a 3D current-collecting network with an electrical conductivity of ∼500 S cm−1; the network was filled with the redox polymer solvated with aqueous NaCl. The redox polymer also acts as an elastic binder and the hydrogel is mechanically tough (strain resistance of up to 20%). The hydrogel was used as a cathode in conjunction with poly(anthraquinone-substituted ethyleneimine) 27. The device displayed reversible charge/discharge characteristics at an approximately flat voltage of 1.1 V (which corresponds to the difference in the potentials of the two polymers), with a capacity of 80 mA h g−1 at a rate of 10 C (entry 5 in Table 1). The device does not require any metal-foil substrate as current collector because the CNT network is sufficiently electrically conductive. The metal-foil-free, bendable device has a significantly lower total battery volume and is easier to fabricate compared to other similar devices.
An ultrathin and stretchable redox polymer nanosheet was reported by the author's group as a rechargeable device that was also conformable to the skin surface (Fig. 7).113 The rechargeable nanosheet was fabricated by sandwiching a biodegradable and porous poly(lactate) separator film containing aqueous saline solution with 5 wt% CNT-containing layers of poly(TEMPO acrylamide) 4 (as the cathode) and poly(anthraquinone-substituted polyethyleneimine) 27 (as the anode), which was simply laminated using styrene–butadiene rubber seals, to give a large-area nanosheet that was less than 1 μm thick (in total) and remains the thinnest rechargeable battery reported to date. The added CNT formed an electrically conducting network in the redox polymer to significantly reduce sheet or planar resistance in the thin but large area device that does not need any current-collecting metal foil. The sheet was stretchable to over 700% in length and exhibited a Young's modulus of 10 Pa; it was sufficiently sticky through van der Waals interactions associated with the thin rubber seal to be adhesive to human skin and to enable peeling from the skin. The sheet device provided a moderately large current density of 0.4 mA cm−2 that satisfies the requirements of radio-wave emissions and a flashing light. Conventional batteries that are referred to as being “thin” are too thick (>1 mm) and lack flexibility, which is ascribable to the intrinsic brittleness of conventional electrodes. Harsh, flammable, and toxic components limit their direct use in skin and interior-body applications. The rechargeable organic devices described above may lead to new power sources for use in the medical field, even potentially for in vivo applications.
 Fig. 7  A completely organic polymer- and aqueous-saline-electrolyte-based rechargeable nanosheet battery. (a) Configuration of the polymer-based nanosheet, (b) photographic images of the cathode in normal/stretched states and the nanosheet device directly attached onto a finger, and (c) schematic of the skin-conformable battery. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2019. 
Processability is one of the main advantages of an all-organic battery, which facilitates fabrication using high-throughput techniques, such as inkjet or screen printing and roll-to-roll processes, which enables customisable and cost-efficient production. The team at NEC Co., DIC Co., and Sumitomo Fine Chemicals, together with that of the author, tested the screen printability of a coatable composite ink composed of TEMPO polymer 1 and vapour-phase-grown carbon fibres with the aim of providing a layer of a redox-polymer-based cathode on aluminium foil, which was intended to be incorporated in the continuous manufacturing flow process of a conventional Li-ion battery in the NEDO (New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization, Japan) project between April 2005 and March 2010.25,96,114,115
A printable ionic-liquid-based electrolyte was recently developed by Schubert et al. for use in all-organic batteries.116 An ionic liquid, such as butylmethylimidazolium (BMIm+) TFSI, was mixed with a methacrylate monomer, a crosslinker, and fumed silica, and the viscous paste was printed on the organic polymer electrode and solidified through UV-curing, to provide a mechanically-tough coating with a sufficient ionic conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 without any additional salt. The device was configured using this ionic-liquid-based gel polymer as both the electrolyte and separator for a poly[vinyl-bis(dicyanomethylene)anthracene] 30 anode and TEMPO polymer 1 cathode system. While the limited electrode capacity suggested that the redox polymers have insufficient affinities for the gel-state electrolyte, the all-solid all-organic device was charged/discharged with an average output voltage of 1.0 V with excellent cyclability (entry 12, Table 1). The methacrylate-monomer/UV-cure composition of the ionic liquid was subsequently tuned to improve the performance using a couple consisting of poly(naphthalene diimide) 23 and TEMPO polymer 1, which delivered an averaged output voltage of 1.2 V.117 Interactions at the gel-electrolyte/redox-polymer interface were key to facilitating efficient counter-ion access to the redox sites of the polymers.
Recently, Evonik Creavis GmbH advertised a fully printable polymer-based rechargeable device composed of a TEMPO polymer and an ionic liquid gel as a non-volatile and safe electrolyte.118
Polyethyleneoxide (PEO) is a typical flexible polyether and is used as the matrix for Li-salt–polymer electrolytes. An ionic liquid polyether or imidazolium/TFSI-substituted PEO, poly(viologen triethyleneoxide) 11, and TEMPO-bearing polyether 3 were synthesised as the solid-state polymer electrolyte, anode, and cathode, respectively.119 A 2 μm thick, paper-like, solid-state device was fabricated through stacking them, and functioned through an anion-type rocking chair mechanism (as shown Fig. 5); it was reversibly charged/discharged with output voltage plateaus observed at 1.1 and 1.6 V, even at a high 5 C rate, without the addition of any solvent or plasticiser (entry 13, Table 1). The free-moulding capability of the device, which is ascribable to the intrinsic plasticity of the polyether derivative, enabled a free-form, 3D-printable battery to be fabricated. Such flexible all-solid, all-polymer batteries may be used as power sources fabricated within the conventional housings of electric equipment, such as the straps and bands of smart watches.119,120
4. Hydrogen-carrying redox polymers
4.1 Reversible hydrogen-fixing in redox polymers
Polymers of aromatic ketone derivatives, such as anthraquinone polymers, are reversibly reduced and have been used as anode-active materials in organic-based rechargeable devices, as discussed in the previous section. Fluorenone is an aromatic ketone; it is two-electron reduced to its dianion, storing two negative charges per fluorenone unit (bottom right, Fig. 2) in a water-free organic electrolyte. The author's group reported poly(vinylfluorenone) (32 in Fig. 3), which exhibited reversible redox waves at −1.3 and −1.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) with a negative-charge-storage capacity of 240 mA h g−1 (∼90% of the theoretical value, with a Coulomb efficiency >80%) in a butyl alcohol/acetonitrile solution of (C4H9)4NBF4, even at a rapid 20 C charging rate,121 suggestive of efficient propagation and storage of negative charge in and throughout the redox polymer. However, the addition of a drop of water to this polymer/electrolyte immediately resulted in quantitative conversion of the charge-storing fluorenone dianion to the corresponding fluorenol in the polymer (or hydrogen fixation in the redox polymer from water) with a formula-based hydrogen density of 1.0 wt% (fluorenol is the alcohol derivative of fluorenone, in which two hydrogen atoms are held through O–H and C–H chemical bonds per unit).
This electrolytic hydrogenation or hydrogen fixation involving the fluorenone polymer is more exactly demonstrated using the corresponding hydrogel of crosslinked fluorenone/fluorenol polymers (Fig. 8c) containing a small amount of CNTs, an Ir catalyst, and moulded into a bendable sheet (Fig. 8a).122 Aqua(2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dionato)(pentamethylcyclopentadienyl)iridium(III) is known to efficiently release hydrogen from fluorenol to give fluorenone.123 The fluorenone polymer sheet fixes hydrogen using water as the hydrogen source, or it extracts protons from water by electrolytic hydrogenation at an applied voltage of −1.5 V at room temperature. When warmed at 80 °C, the fluorenol polymer hydrogel sheet containing a small amount of Ir catalyst evolves an amount of pure hydrogen gas almost equal to the theoretical hydrogen density in the polymer (i.e., ∼30 mL of pure hydrogen gas at room temperature per gram of polymer) (see Fig. 8b). This hydrogen fixing and releasing process was repeated over 50 cycles without significant deterioration in the hydrogen-evolution capacity.122
 Fig. 8  Hydrogen fixation and release by the fluorenone/fluorenol polymer gel. (a) A sheet of fluorenol and fluorenone (reddish) hydrogel on the 5 g scale. (b) The fluorenol sheet sealed in a gas-barrier bag, and after releasing hydrogen. (c) Chemical structure of the fluorenone polymer and schematic showing the hydrogen-fix and -release cycle. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Springer Nature 2016. 
The polyfluorenone hydrogel sheet contains ∼30% water in equilibrium with moisture in the air. The gel contains fluorenone units at a very high concentration (∼1 M), which is beyond the limiting solubility of monomeric fluorenone in water (∼0.2 mM). Despite being immobilised in the polymer or amorphous gel, the fluorenone/fluorenol unit is still highly reactive toward protons or hydrogen. The proton-exchange rate constant for the fluorenol and fluorenone dianion was determined to be 103−4 M−1 s−1 by NMR spectroscopy.122 Proton- or hydrogen-exchange reactions among highly populated fluorenol/fluorenone units are very efficient; protons or hydrogen are transported throughout the polymer driven by the concentration gradient, and the unit is fully hydrogenated or dehydrogenated in the polymer (Fig. 4: right side for proton transport and hydrogen storage). The entire bulk of the ∼1 μm thick polymer quantitatively hydrogenates and rapidly releases hydrogen.
Fluorenol evolves hydrogen at a higher rate than other secondary alcohols and organic compounds.122,123 In terms of the enthalpy difference between the chemically stable fluorenol and fluorenone, the standard reaction enthalpy (ΔHo) in going from the hydrogenated fluorenol to the dehydrogenated fluorenone was calculated to be −55 kJ mol−1 based on their standard formation enthalpies,124 which is much lower than those of other organic compounds studied for such dehydrogenation reactions; for example ΔHo = −205 kJ mol−1 for methylcyclohexane/toluene125 (a typical organic hydride mentioned later). The X-ray crystallographic structures of fluorenol and fluorenone show that the hydroxy group and hydrogen atom bound to the cyclopentane carbon are deviated slightly from the planar fluorene skeleton, in contrast to the totally planar aromatic fluorenone structure, which supports the favourable elimination of these two hydrogens to form fluorenone.122 In the same manner as the charge/discharge redox couples discussed in previous sections for reversible and rapid charge storage, the fluorenone/fluorenol hydrogenation/dehydrogenation redox couple is kinetically active and “bistable”, thereby reversibly storing hydrogen through its hydrogen-fixing cycle.
The dehydrogenation of fluorenol (and probably the hydrogenation of fluorenone) proceeds more readily than other compounds in the presence of an appropriate catalyst. Ir catalyst ligands were modified to enable both fluorenone hydrogenation using ambient hydrogen gas and dehydrogenation under milder conditions, as observed for the Ir complex with the dimethylamino-substituted bipyridine ligand, for instance.126 The Ir catalyst facilitated almost 100% reversible hydrogenation under mild conditions: the fluorenone sites of the polymer were hydrogenated under 1 atm of hydrogen at room temperature for 1 h, while hydrogen was released from fluorenol sites at 95 °C over 4 h (entry 1 in Table 2).
Table 2 Reversible hydrogen fixation in organic compounds through covalent bonding. elect red: electrolytic reduction at the potential vs. Ag/AgCl, Ir cat: aqua (2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dionato)(pentamethylcyclopentadienyl)iridium(III)




Entry
Hydrogen-releasing and -fixing molecules
State
Hydrogen density (wt%)
Hydrogen-fixing
Hydrogen-releasing
Ref.




1



Polymer
1.0
Elect red (−1.5 V) + H+ or Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 25 °C, 1 h
Ir cat, 95 °C, 4 h

121



2



Polymer
2.6
Elect red (−0.4 V) + H+ or Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 60 °C, 1 d
Ir cat, 120 °C, 5 h

128



3



Polymer
2.2
Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 60 °C, 1 d
Ir cat, 120 °C, <2 h

129



4



Polymer
2.8
Ir cat, H2 3 atm, 80 °C, 1 d
Ir cat, 180 °C, 1 h

135



5



Liquid
6.1
H2 >10 atm, >200 °C
Pt cat, ∼300 °C

132 and 133


6
NH3 ⇌ 1/2N2 + 3/2H2
Gas
17
Fe3O4 cat, equilibrium at H2 ∼300 atm, ∼500 °C

132 and 133


7
Porous carbon/physical adsorption
Powder
<4
H2 >10 atm, <−196 °C
Ambient

31 and 139




More compact structural designs are recommended for enhancing the hydrogen density of reversible hydrogenation redox sites. For instance, two-thirds fragment of fluorenone/fluorenol, i.e., benzocyclopentanone/-nol (another chemical name, indanone/indanol) has a hydrogen density of 1.5 wt%. Nitrogen heterocycles are generally cycloalkanes in which carbons are partially substituted with nitrogen atom(s). They release hydrogen more readily compared to the corresponding cycloalkanes, which is ascribable to the relatively small enthalpy differences between their hydrogenated and dehydrogenated forms.127 Quinoxaline (benzopyradine, a naphthalene substituted with two nitrogen atoms) is hydrogenated with hydrogen gas in the presence of an Ir catalyst under relatively mild conditions to form tetrahydroquinoxaline, which is dehydrogenated by releasing two equivalents of hydrogen (entry 2 in Table 2). This tetrahydro-/quinoxaline system is another example of a “bistable” redox couple.
Oyaizu et al. synthesised poly(vinyltetrahydroquinoxaline),128 which was robust in air; its gel with γ-butyrolactone and a small amount of an Ir catalyst evolved two equivalents of pure hydrogen per quinoxaline unit when heated at 120 °C for 5 h, which corresponds to a polymer hydrogen density of 2.6 wt%. The hydrogen-released gel (poly(vinylquinoxaline, 33 in Fig. 3) was hydrogenated under 1 atm of hydrogen at 60 °C within 1 d to return the original poly(tetrahydroquinoxaline) gel; the hydrogen releasing and fixing redox cycle of the polymer is presented in Table 2, entry 2. Further redox couple design facilitated reversible hydrogenation. The electron-donating 2,3-dimethyl substituents in poly(vinyl-2,3-dimethyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoxaline) stabilise the dehydrogenated state. The polymer gel quickly releases two equivalents of hydrogen gas (within 2 h) under the same mild conditions (entry 3, Table 2).129,130 Tetrahydro-/quinaldine (hydrogen density: 2.7 wt%) was introduced into poly(acrylic acid); its Ir-catalyst-containing hydrogel evolved hydrogen gas at a rate of 160 mL g(polymer)−1 by warming at 80 °C for 3 h.131
In addition to aromatic compounds, many organic liquids have been investigated for their abilities to reversibly hydrogenate.125,132,133 Among them, aliphatic secondary alcohols are relatively easily dehydrogenated due to smaller enthalpy changes associated with dehydrogenation than those of other organic liquids (despite exhibiting larger changes than those of the aromatic compounds described above).134 2-Propanol slowly releases one equivalent of hydrogen (hydrogen density: 3.4 wt%) during its conversion into acetone, which is itself hydrogenated using high-pressure hydrogen gas. Certain Ir catalysts lower the activation energy for reversible propanol/acetone hydrogenation, thereby facilitating the milder reaction conditions. However, acetone and propanol are volatile and flammable, and their vapours are hard to separate from the evolved hydrogen gas. The dehydrogenation temperature is also limited to the boiling point of acetone (56 °C). Compact polymeric analogues, such as poly(3-butene-2-ol) and poly(vinyl methyl ketone) (entry 4, Table 2), were synthesised135 and gels with Ir-catalyst-containing ethylene glycol were prepared. The former gel released hydrogen gas (hydrogen density: 2.8 wt%) at 180 °C over 1 h, while the later was hydrogenated under 3 atm of hydrogen at 80 °C over 1 d, with dehydrogenative/hydrogenative redox cyclability.
Hydrogen evolution from alcohols and nitrogen heterocycles was reported using phosphine- and carbonyl-ligated Ru and Fe complexes (as examples) with the aim of replacing Ir catalysts with more accessible metal-based catalysts.136,137 The hydrogen density stored in such an organic redox polymer was improved by incorporating redox units with more compact structures, with poly(allyl alcohol) as an example; this organic redox polymer has a hydrogen-storage density of 3.4 wt%, which corresponds to almost 400 mL of pure hydrogen per g(polymer).31
4.2 Hydrogen-storage materials and hydrogen-carrying polymers
Liquid organic hydrogen carriers, also known as “organic hydrides” have been examined on the industrial scale using existing petrochemical infrastructure.131–133 They fix hydrogen through chemical bonding, thereby featuring high stabilities with high hydrogen-storage densities (2–6 wt%). Cycloalkane dehydrogenation (i.e., the methylcyclohexane/toluene couple with a hydrogen density of 6.1 wt%; entry 5, Table 2) provides a typical example. Ammonia, which is produced on a huge scale from hydrogen and nitrogen using the Haber–Bosch process, and is now also being developed as a hydrogen carrier (entry 6, Table 2) is another example. However, these compounds are mostly hydrogenated/dehydrogenated at high pressures (>10 atm) and high temperatures (>300 °C) using processes that consume large amounts of energy. They also require vessels or sealed tanks that are subjected to high pressures and/or temperatures and difficulties are often encountered when separating the evolved hydrogen gas from the carrier-molecule vapour. Furthermore, these organic compounds and ammonia are mostly liquids or are liquified, suffer from safety and toxicity issues, and their use is legally restricted. In addition, such organic liquids and ammonia are not suitable as hydrogen-storage materials in small-scale applications, or for transporting hydrogen from the site of manufacture to disparate hydrogen-use locations where they are stored for further energy uses in residential areas because of inherent safety risks, including toxicity, flammability, and volatility.
Mg, Li, and Al form metal hydrides in which hydrogen represents a significant gravimetric portion of the material.138 Some of these metal hydrides have been evaluated as hydrogen-storage materials in high-pressure tanks. However, hydrogen evolution from these hydrides requires significantly high temperatures and pressures for the hydrogenation equilibrium; in addition, the chemical instabilities of these metal hydrides may limit their practical use.
Porous materials, such as activated carbon and metal–organic frameworks, store hydrogen through physical adsorption on their surfaces (entry 7, Table 2).31,139 While weak interactions between hydrogen and the material facilitate good reversible hydrogen storage and release, they also lead to low hydrogen density under ambient conditions or the need for significantly high pressures and/or cryogenic conditions to store sufficient hydrogen. Porous organic polymers have also been studied as hydrogen-storage materials; however, they exhibit hydrogen-storage capabilities of up to only 2 wt% at 77 K and 1 MPa of hydrogen.
Conventional storage and transportation methods for gaseous hydrogen involves the use of cryogenic or high-pressure tanks. However, the use of cryogenic tanks is restricted because it requires deep cooling, which uses a large amount of energy for liquefaction and thermal insulation to prevent continuous hydrogen boil-off. Liquid hydrogen storage is not advantageous for relatively small-scale, disparate, and on-site hydrogen use.
Even moderately compressed hydrogen requires relatively high-weight tank walls to increase hydrogen density (the state-of-the-art tank in a commercial fuel-cell automobile has a gravimetric hydrogen storage density of 5.7 wt% per total weight of the tank140). Such tanks are accompanied by inherently inferior portability, and safety risks, including explosions through collisions, hydrogen permeation, and embrittlement of the tank walls. Proton-exchange-membrane-type fuel cells are the most promising clean alternative energy-converting devices for replacing fossil-fuel-based power generators;29,30 however, a high-pressure tank presents an unsolved issue for practical fuel-cell vehicles.
Very recently, Miyatake et al. equipped a proton-exchange-membrane fuel cell with a hydrogen-storable polymer (the fluorenol polymer sheet in Fig. 8), thereby providing a “rechargeable fuel cell”. The hydrogen-storable polymer sheet was mounted onto the catalyst layer at the anode side of the cell (Fig. 9). After supplying hydrogen to the cell and pre-heating it to ensure hydrogen storage in the polymer sheet, cell operation led to continuously-generated electrical power, with a current density of 5 mA cm−2 recorded in response to a supply of air or oxygen to the cathode side of the cell, with a hydrogen utilisation rate of ∼80%.141 The hydrogen-storage medium inside the fuel cell does not require a pressurised hydrogen tank.
 Fig. 9  Operational flowchart for a rechargeable fuel cell assembled with a hydrogen-storable polymer (HSP) sheet. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Springer Nature 2020. 
Hydrogen storing and carrying materials that are highly safe, have high gravimetric and/or volumetric densities, are easy to handle, and lose low amounts of energy during hydrogen storage/transportation/release are essential for hydrogen-based sustainable energy systems. Some redox polymers fix and store hydrogen through chemical-bond formation without any vessel needed to store hydrogen. These redox polymers are an easy-to-handle and portable hydrogen-carrying material for use in home/on-site or pocketable hydrogen-supply systems, as examples.
5. (Photo)electrochemical H2O2, H2, and O2 production from water using polymer films
Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) from the oxygen in water, and hydrogen and oxygen from the reduction and oxidation of water (water-splitting), respectively, are among the most challenging green-chemistry subjects, and have been extensively studied and developed using metals, (semiconducting) metal oxides, and carbon materials.32–38 Processes that use redox chemistry at the polymer-film/water interface are now attracting attention.39 In addition to the inherent merits of non-toxicity, unlimited resources, and chemical stability under acidic/alkaline conditions, organic polymers also exhibit the following advantages: (i) tuneable redox potentials that can be adjusted to the target reaction through molecular design, (ii) efficient charge mobility and separation in the polymer layer and at the polymer/water interface, respectively, (iii) reasonable conductivity suitable for electrical connection, (iv) hydrophilic or swellable properties at the reaction front with water, (v) photoresponsiveness for photoelectrochemical catalysis, and (vi) tough and large-area 2D film-forming processability appropriate for the reaction, facile product (hydrogen and oxygen gas) separation, and device configuration.
5.1 Oxygen reduction for the production of H2O2
H2O2 is a common and metal-free oxidant used in pulp-bleaching, wastewater-treatment, and key chemical-manufacturing applications; it has also been studied as a promising green fuel to replace hydrogen.32,142 H2O2 is produced industrially by the anthraquinone method, which involves multiple heavily-environmentally-burdensome steps, including the use of high-pressure hydrogen gas, aromatic solvents, and precious-metal catalysts143 that limit H2O2-production sites to locations where hydrogen gas and operational energy are easily obtained, such as regions that are close to refineries. Moreover, to support its wide range of applications, the produced H2O2 is transported as a highly concentrated aqueous solution that contains a stabiliser. It should be noted that concentrated H2O2 solutions (≥5%) are typically regarded harmful substances, while low-concentration (0.1–5%), stabiliser-free H2O2 solutions are required for most applications. Hence, environmentally-friendly methods for producing H2O2 are highly anticipated and being investigated.
The reduction potential for the conversion of oxygen into H2O2 is much more positive (E° = 0.695 V vs. SHE) or deeper than that for water reduction (0 V at pH 0) (potentials are often reported relative to SHE in this section to normalise the influence of the pH of the aqueous solution). Hence oxygen reduction proceeds favourably ahead of water reduction in oxygen-containing aqueous solutions when a negative potential is applied, irrespective of H2O2-formation selectivity. Electrochemical oxygen reduction provides a comprehensive route for the on-site generation of H2O2, which has been further progressed using more efficient catalysts and by electrochemical reactor engineering.34,144 However, costs associated with electricity and electrolyser maintenance are still significant; therefore, H2O2 production in a more facile and sustainable manner is increasingly required for small-scale, on-site production.
Jensen et al. suggested that conducting polymers with redox properties, such as PEDOT (36 in Fig. 10),145 can be exploited as electrocatalytic organic materials that reduce oxygen in aqueous solutions. Głowacki et al. reported that PEDOT film prepared in situ on a glassy carbon substrate continuously generated high concentrations of H2O2 from oxygen-saturated aqueous solutions when a potential of less than −0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) was applied.146 The quantitatively-determined H2O2 concentration revealed the electrocatalytic reduction selectivity or Faraday efficiency was close to 100%. The redox mechanism is discussed below. Neutral PEDOT is oxidised by oxygen, resulting in the formation of its doped form, with the reacted oxygen forming a chemisorbed intermediate on the PEDOT that favours two-electron reduction and becomes reduced to H2O2. The oxidised or doped PEDOT, in turn, is electrochemically re-reduced to the original neutral PEDOT to commence another cycle. Electrochemical analysis revealed that the reaction follows a two-electron-transfer mechanism, and the smaller Tafel slope147 of 41 mV dec−1 compared to those of glassy carbon and Pt supports the idea that PEDOT is involved in the catalytic electrochemical pathway as the redox polymer. An H2O2 concentration of almost 0.1 M was produced at a cathodic current density of 1 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 10  Chemical structures of π-conjugated and redox-active polymers. 
Poly(3-alkylthiophene)s form another family of representative conjugated polymers. The author's group studied the electrocatalytic-redox activities of polythiophenes, such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT; 35 in Fig. 10) for oxygen reduction to give H2O2.148 P3HT was doped with a small amount of (C4H9)4N/TFSI salt, in which TFSI is the counter anion that facilitates the partial oxidation or doping of P3HT. As a ∼50 nm thick, thin film on a glassy carbon substrate, it featured a porous, nanostructured surface (Fig. 11b) and high electrical conductivity. The electrochemical responses of the films were studied in aqueous alkaline solutions in the dark. Even though there was no current produced under Ar, the films, especially doped P3HT, showed cathodic or reduction currents in air (see the negative currents (J) between −0.3 and −0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in Fig. 11a). (The reduction current density of a cathode attributable to the oxygen-reduction reaction largely depends on the amount of oxygen dissolved in water and is therefore usually at the sub-mA cm−2 level under air.) Quantifying the H2O2 produced after long-term chronoamperometric experiments confirmed that H2O2 is produced by the successful reduction of oxygen with a high Faraday efficiency of 96%. The P3HT film was shown to act as an electrocatalyst for the reduction of oxygen to produce H2O2, with a very small overpotential149 (<50 mV vs. Eeq, see Fig. 11a). The doped P3HT film exhibited a steeper current trace or a small Tafel slope, which is ascribable to a favourable catalytic redox cycle on the film. (Previous spectroscopic and simulation results suggested that the thiophene or aromatic residues of the polymers acts as catalytic sites.150) More catalytic-site exposure to the water interface, which is ascribable to its amorphous and porous film structure and low reaction resistance due to the high conductivity of the P3HT film, contribute to the superior catalytic-redox activity.
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical catalytic activities of the doped P3HT film toward oxygen reduction. (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the P3HT film in the dark (dotted trace) and when irradiated with light (solid trace) at pH 12; the blue traces correspond to the P3HT film, while the red traces correspond to the doped P3HT film, and the dotted and solid black traces correspond to the glassy carbon substrate in the absence and presence of oxygen, respectively. The Eeq for oxygen reduction to H2O2 was calculated to be −0.12 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) under these experimental conditions. At a higher pH than the pKa of H2O2 (i.e., 11.6) oxygen reduction obeys the following equation to form HO2−: O2 + H2O + 2e− ⇄ HO2− + OH−. HO2− is regarded as an H2O2 equivalent and instantaneously forms H2O2 in neutral water. (b) Surface SEM image of the doped P3HT film. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2021. 

Fig. 12a shows an energy-level diagram for the abovementioned reductive reaction. An electron is injected through the polymer film to the oxygen in the aqueous solution when a cathodic bias is applied to the substrate (left side, Fig. 12a), which reductively forms H2O2. A more redox-active polymer is associated with a smaller bias potential (vs. the reaction equilibrium potential (Eeq)), which promotes oxygen reduction.
 Fig. 12  Energy level diagrams for the polymer-film cathode and oxygen reduction in (a) the dark and (b) when irradiated with light. 
Photochemical H2O2 production from oxygen and water is a simpler and greener process when completely solar-driven because it has no additional energy demands. Inorganic semiconductors, such as modified TiO2, N-doped carbons, and graphic carbon nitride, have historically been researched as catalysts for the photochemical production of H2O2.35,151,152 While they are less active toward subsequent H2O2 decomposition, the photocatalytic activities of these catalysts are not high and some require the use of a sacrificial agent, such as an alcohol.
Organic polymer particles, as light-driven photochemical catalysts that produce H2O2, have been anticipated. Shiraishi et al. condensation-polymerised resorcinol (or m-catechol) with formaldehyde (39 in Fig. 10) to form a reddish-orange powder with particles ∼1 μm in diameter.153 Its efficient visible-light absorption is ascribable to the π-stacking of benzenoid-quinoid donor–acceptor couples. When suspended in oxygen-saturated water and irradiated with light (1 sun), the powder delivered a very high H2O2 production rate even in the absence of any sacrificial reagent. Recently, Shiraishi et al. also doped a resorcinol polymer with P3HT to facilitate charge separation in its particles and photocatalytic oxygen reduction to H2O2.154 A solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency of 1.0% was reported, which is the highest among those previously reported for powder catalysts, including inorganic semiconductors. The high activity was attributed to the efficient consumption of photo-formed holes in the counter water-oxidation reaction at the powder surface.
Catechol is known to be chemically active toward oxygen reduction, to yield H2O2 through conversion into o-benzoquinone (Scheme 3).155 Głowacki et al. recently studied lignin as a photosensitive biopolymer that contains hydroquinone/quinone redox moieties.156 Lignin sulfonate solution and lignin thin films behave as photocatalysts in the presence of sacrificial reagents when illuminated to reduce oxygen to H2O2; however, the lignin itself is concurrently photochemically oxidised and degraded, which was suggested as a way of converting mass-produced lignin to a value-added product.
 Scheme 3  Oxygen reduction with catechol to give H2O2. 
Polymer-film-based cathodes for the photoelectrochemical reduction of oxygen to H2O2 have also been investigated with the aim of improving reduction rates in the absence of additional sacrificial agents, but in the presence of a small bias potential (or no bias potential), in combination with a counter anode for water oxidation. Głowacki et al. extensively investigated the photo(electro)catalytic activities of catechol/quinone-derivative polymers for the reduction of oxygen to H2O2, assuming that the phenol/carbonyl groups are the critical catalytic sites.157 Eumelanin is the oxidatively-coupled polymer of 5,6-dihydroxyindole (40 in Fig. 10) and is a model of melanin, a biopigment ubiquitous in plants and animals. The electrical conductivity of a black eumelanin film deposited on an fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate is ascribable to hole hopping via the semiquinone units in the polymer. A eumelanin-film cathode in an oxygen-saturated acidic solution was wired to the Pt anode in the counter-reaction chamber separated by a Nafion membrane. Two-electron oxygen reduction to H2O2, with a Faraday efficiency of ∼90% was observed, although the reduction current density was not large, at approximately −2 and −10 μA cm−2 in the dark and when illuminated, respectively. Głowacki et al. used a film fabricated from an organic light-absorbing π-conjugated molecule (a carbonyl-substituted acene derived from biscoumarin) to photoelectrocatalytically reduce oxygen to H2O2.158 Although the H2O2-production rate was enhanced, the cell still required a significant bias voltage and consumed a large amount of electricity.
In addition to their electrical conductivities ascribable to high charge mobilities, poly(3-alkylthiophene)s exhibit excellent optical properties, including high visible-light absorptivities. The author's group elucidated the photoelectrocatalytic capabilities of polythiophene films when illuminated.148 P3HT films are deep brown in colour and are very efficient visible-light absorbers with very high absorption coefficients (>104 M−1cm−1) and absorption maxima and edges at ∼510 and 650 nm, respectively, that are ascribable to the developed π-conjugation backbone. The HOMO and LUMO levels, and the bandgap were determined to be −4.7, −2.8, and 1.9 eV, respectively. The P3HT film demonstrated photoelectrocatalytic activity when irradiated with light; i.e., it showed a significant positive shift in the onset potential beyond Eeq and a superior reduction current (see Fig. 11a).
The photo(electro)catalytic process in an organic π-conjugated-polymer cathode can be viewed as follows (Fig. 12b): (i) light absorption generates an exciton (a coulombically bound hole/electron pair from the HOMO: represented as e* in Fig. 12b). (ii) Excitons diffuse in the polymer film (some reach the interface) and the separated electrons are injected into water (to reduce oxygen molecules). The oxygen in solution accepts an exited electron only when the LUMO level of the polymer is shallower than the reduction potential of oxygen. (iii) The majority of organic polymers are p-type or hole-transporting materials; therefore, holes remaining in the polymer efficiently migrate toward the cathodic (left) direction, are electrically extracted at the substrate with the cathodic bias potential, and supplied for use in the counter-anodic reaction through an external circuit. The LUMO level of P3HT (−1.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl) is significantly shallower than the reduction potential of oxygen (−0.12 V); hence, the reduction of oxygen through electron injection is very favourable, regardless of the catalytic or redox activity of the P3HT film surface (Fig. 12b). A significantly reduced reaction onset potential, which is often beyond the equilibrium potential, is achieved at a more positive position, as shown in Fig. 11a.
The abovementioned studies clarified both the electrocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic abilities of P3HT films toward oxygen reduction to form H2O2. When irradiated with light, a P3HT film with superior light-absorbing properties and an appropriate film thickness, which is also related to the exciton diffusion length, enhances the performance of the electrocatalyst to give a high H2O2 production rate of 3.9 g (H2O2) g(photocat)−1 h−1 (at a bias of only 0.08 V from Eeq).
The effects of the interfacial contact area with water and the hydrophilicity of the P3HT film on photoelectrocatalytic activity were recently discussed by Głowacki et al.,159 who prepared 3D and micron-scale islands of P3HT on an alkylsilane-modified ITO substrate by phase-separation templating, and also treated the film with plasma to engender the surface with aqueous wettability. The photochemical reduction of oxygen to H2O2 on the film when illuminated was examined in aqueous H2SO4 by connecting a Pt-anode-containing counter compartment for water oxidation. The reaction obeyed two-electron oxygen reduction and selectively formed H2O2 with a Faraday efficiency of >90%. Unfortunately, the reduction current density remained at ∼10 μA cm−2, even when pure oxygen was supplied, and the plasma-treated hydrophilic film was degraded or became delaminated from the substrate after 10 h.
Li et al. reported the production of a record-high H2O2 concentration of 110 mM after photoelectrocatalytically reducing oxygen with a polyterthiophene (37 in Fig. 10) film for 11 h using an oxygen-saturated solution at pH 13.160 They electropolymerised terthiophene on a carbon-paper substrate to give the polymer film, which exhibited a visible absorption edge, bandgap, and HOMO level of 640 nm, 2.0, and −5.13 eV, respectively, and appeared to have a nanoporous structure on the carbon paper; the selectivity of its two-electron oxygen reduction reaction to form oxygen peroxide approached 100% when illuminated. The photovoltage was insufficient for unbiased H2O2 production; therefore, the photocathode was wired to a NiFeOx/BiVO4 water-oxidation photocatalyst (as the photoanode), and a Nafion membrane was used as the separator. Parallel irradiation of both the cathode and anode with light enabled bias-free H2O2 production with an accumulated concentration of 90 mM. The polythiophene film exhibited similar two-electron oxygen reduction in the dark, with a small overpotential of 30 mV, although the current density was low. The polyterthiophene film was concluded to behave as both an electrocatalyst and a photocathode, driven by the applied electrical potential and light, respectively, with its electrochemical redox capability responsible for the observed highly selective production of H2O2.
The author's group aimed to provide polythiophene with sufficient photovoltage to drive an anodic counter reaction in the absence of any bias application, with the concurrent cathodic H2O2 production.161 Electron-withdrawing phenylene groups were introduced into the polythiophene backbone to tune its HOMO level. A deep-brown copolymeric phenylene/thiophene film (38 in Fig. 10) that exhibited a visible absorption edge at 570 nm was prepared on a substrate through in situ polymerisation; its HOMO level was determined to be −5.5 eV, which is 0.3 V lower than that of the thiophene homopolymer, and was achieved by introducing electron-withdrawing phenylene units in the light-harvesting thiophene polymer. This HOMO level is deeper than the water-oxidation potential at high pH. When illuminated, the film produced H2O2 with a high rate of >40 g(H2O2) g(photocat)−1 h−1 and a Faraday efficiency of 96% at the given potential of 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). Durability testing during illumination revealed that the film was robust toward H2O2 production for more than one week, with a turnover number in excess of 105.
The abovementioned copolymer film exhibited an onset potential for oxygen reduction of 0.62 V (vs. Ag/AgCl; 1.53 V vs. RHE at pH 12) when irradiated with light, which is beyond the thermodynamic water-oxidation potential of 1.23 V (vs. RHE), and is sufficient to concurrently promote water oxidation on the anode without any additional bias (Fig. 13a), resulting in an overall one-photon-per-electron reaction. The copolymer film is suitable for combining with the traditional MnOx water-oxidation catalyst as the counter anode in the dark, and a two-component cell was explored for the light-driven production of H2O2 at zero applied bias. The amount of H2O2 produced coincided with the amount of electrical charge that flowed between the electrodes at 0 V bias, leading to a Faraday efficiency of >95% and an outstanding H2O2-production rate of 11 g(H2O2) g(photocat)−1 h−1, even without any applied voltage.
 Fig. 13  (a) Energy diagram for the combination of a photocathode composed of PTT copolymer 38 and a MnOx anode on a single plate, and (b) photocatalytic H2O2 production on a single transparent, electrically conducting thin plate sandwiched between the polymer layer (for oxygen reduction when illuminated) and MnOx (for water oxidation). Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2021. 
The two-compartment setup is limited by energy losses associated with the resistances of the electrolyte and external circuit. Hence, a simpler and more-direct combination was investigated, in which MnOx was coated on one face of an electrically conductive thin plate, and the copolymer film was then formed on the opposite face of the same plate (Fig. 13b). This setup exhibited excellent photocatalytic redox performance under 1 sun, with an outstanding H2O2 production rate of 14 g(H2O2) g(photocat)−1 h−1 or 0.20 mg(H2O2) cm(plate)−2 h−1, which was maintained for over one week. Transparent and electrically-conducting plastic plates sandwiched by copolymer films and MnOx were five-layer stacked, soaked in water, and then tested for the production of more-concentrated H2O2 when illuminated; 3% H2O2 solution was produced using this practical setup.
The electrochemical or photochemical reduction of oxygen in water to produce H2O2 over electro- or photochemically catalytic polymer films can provide aqueous H2O2 solutions with practical concentrations. Since the required reactants are only oxygen and water, H2O2 can be produced on-site in any decentralised location, which is expected to lead to breakthroughs in H2O2 usage; for example, the oxidising power of H2O2 facilitates the facile sterilisation and cleaning of biological contaminants, including viruses.
5.2 Water reduction to produce hydrogen
Hydrogen is produced by electrochemical water-splitting (water electrolysis). Cathode catalysts for the reduction of water have been comprehensively developed using efficient, cheap and abundant compounds with high conductivities, high surface areas, and chemical stabilities under acid/alkaline conditions.162,163
Hydrogen production through photocatalytic water-splitting has also been extensively investigated using inorganic metal–oxide semiconductor particles. Solar-driven reactions are being developed, with approaches that include semiconducting inorganic bandgap engineering, the incorporation of cocatalysts, and the use of nanostructured particles.35,36 A recent practical research project involved a 100 m2 field test using an array of panel reactors of immobilised photocatalyst particles. Al-Doped SrTiO3 particles (0.5 μm) modified with selectively-deposited co-catalysts were used as photocatalysts (i.e., Rh/Cr2O3 and CoCOOH for the hydrogen- and oxygen-evolution reactions, respectively), and immobilised in the mesoporous channels of silica particles on a frosted-glass plate.164,165 The oxyhydrogen bubbles produced from a 100 μm thick water layer on the photocatalyst plate under sunlight yielded a solar-to-hydrogen energy-conversion efficiency of 0.76%. While a polyimide membrane was used to separate the hydrogen from the oxygen produced in the gas mixture, the separation process and its efficiency remain problematic.
Pure organic π-conjugated polymers have been studied as alternatives to inorganic semiconducting photocatalysts.166–168 The benefits of these polymers over their inorganic counterparts include tuneable photoresponsivities, robustness in acidic and alkaline water, and a lack of toxicity. Previous studies that used polymer particles169–171 provided the following insight into such polymers as film-based photocathodes in water-reduction/hydrogen-production applications. (i) A π-conjugated polymer that efficiently absorbs visible light, forms excitons, and facilitates exciton/hole diffusion needs to be selected. (ii) Electron injection to protons proceeds at the polymer surface at a rate that depends on the energy (potential) gap between the LUMO of the polymer and the proton/water reduction potential and/or (catalytic) interactions with protons at specific sites of the polymer. (iii) An appropriately deep HOMO level is desirable to provide a satisfactory photovoltage and a significantly low bias voltage for water-splitting. (iv) The polymer film must have a large interfacial area for both water reduction and hole-extraction by the substrate.
Feng et al. prepared thiophene-based polyethnylene (41 in Fig. 10) with a deep HOMO level of −5.23 eV and a narrow bandgap of 2.17 eV, which is ascribable to superior delocalised conjugation resulting from the thiophene unit.172 The polymer formed on a Cu foam substrate delivered a photoreduction current of 0.37 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V (vs. RHE), a hydrogen evolution rate of 4.5 μmol h−1 cm−2, and a Faraday efficiency of >95%.
Polythiophene and its analogues inherently satisfy conditions (i)–(iii) above, and are being examined as photocathode films for the reduction of water.173,174 The author's group carefully and successfully prepared robust films of unsubstituted and solvent-insoluble polyterthiophene 37 in an in situ manner on a glassy carbon or FTO substrate without any trace-metal contamination.175 The film absorbed to 640 nm in the visible region, with HOMO and LUMO levels of −5.43 and −3.27 eV, respectively, and was characterised as having a uniquely well-filled 50 nm thick crystalline-grain morphology. Triplet excitons with extended lifetimes and diffusion lengths are formed when illuminated, which presumably enables them to reach the film/water interface. The polymer photocathode immersed in an alkaline solution exhibited a high reduction current density of >0.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE) when illuminated (Fig. 14a). The amount of evolved hydrogen gas provided a gravimetric photoelectrocatalytic conversion rate of 1.02 mol(H2) h−1 g−1, with a Faraday efficiency of >95%, which is higher than those of previously reported photocatalysts. The polymer film was robust and usable in long-term reduction reactions, which is ascribable to the chemical stability of the unsubstituted and solvent-insoluble polythiophene, as well as the strong adhesion of the in situ-polymerised film that does not separate from the conducting substrate.
 Fig. 14  (a) Chronoamperometry of the polyterthiophene (37) film at 0 V (vs. RHE), 1 sun light on and off activity, (b) a bias-free cell with a photo-irradiated polyterthiphene film cathode wired to a MnOx anode, and (c) time-course (red line) for hydrogen evolution on the 37 film. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier 2021. 
The film exhibited a very high open-circuit potential of 1.38 V (vs. RHE) when illuminated, exceeding the theoretical potential of 1.23 V; this photovoltage was sufficient to drive water electrolysis to completion using solar radiation in a one-photon-per-electron process. A simple two-compartment cell setup composed of the polyterthiphene photocathode (under light) and a MnOx catalyst anode (in the dark) delivered a hydrogen evolution rate of 3.2 mmol h−1 g−1 with no applied bias, and excellent durability (Fig. 14b and c).
There is significant room for improving the performance of polymer-film-based photocathodes that deliver reduction currents of more than 10 mA cm−2. This needs to be examined in practical devices for water-splitting applications. For example, from a scientific viewpoint, the reductive reaction mechanism at the water front has not yet been experimentally analysed, and remains an open question; whether it involves simple electron injection into a proton or water, driven by the energy gap (LUMO level sufficient to drive reductive reactions at the water interface), or a kinetic but chemical pathway via a catalytic chemical site, is unclear. Electrochemical kinetics and equilibrium studies in the dark that enable key parameters to be measured, such as the electrode potential and the Tafel slope, need to be carried out to provide a deeper understanding of the working process of the photocathode. In any case, hydrogen evolution over a film that is separate from the counter evolution of oxygen is a crucial advantage for such hydrogen production systems.
5.3 Water oxidation to produce oxygen gas
The cathodic, reductive reactions described above are compensated by the water-oxidation reaction at the counter anode. Electrocatalysts also play key roles in anodic water-oxidation reactions that evolve oxygen, and have been extensively researched in water-electrolysis processes. Whereas cathodic water- and oxygen-reduction processes that produce hydrogen and H2O2, respectively, are only two-electron reactions, anodic water oxidation follows a four-electron/proton-coupled mechanism (Fig. 15) and is more sluggish, with a higher overpotential needed to overcome the kinetic reaction barrier (overpotential η: η(anode) ≫ η(cathode)).38 RuO2 and IrO2 exhibit excellent activities toward water oxidation; however, both are composed of precious metals and are chemically unstable during anodic operation, with their peroxidised forms degraded. Research has been devoted to the development of electrocatalysts composed of inexpensive and abundant transition-metal oxides with appropriate activities, such as MnOx. Attention is also being paid to carbon materials, such as nanostructured carbons, graphene, and nanotubes, and their doping with additional N and O. (It should be noted that such carbons may be unstable and become oxidised to carbon dioxide at >0.9 V (vs. RHE).)
 Fig. 15  (left) J–V curves for the hydrogen-evolution reaction at a cathode, and (right) the oxygen-evolution reaction at an anode; η is the overpotential for the cathode and anode at the same current density. 
Some of the π-conjugated, n-type polymers developed for photovoltaic cells have been examined as (photo)electrochemical anodes that evolve oxygen;176 however, they were unstable when exposed to water and inactive for water oxidation without the assistance of a metal–oxide electrocatalyst. Organic polymers, as electrocatalytic anodes, have been exploited on very limited occasions, presumably due to their poor chemical stabilities under critical oxidative conditions. The first study into an organic molecular electrocatalyst was reported by exploiting the redox cycle of a flavin derivative.177 Electrolysis of the ethylflavinium cation in aqueous acetonitrile with an O-doped carbon anode led to the evolution of oxygen, albeit with poor activity, with an overpotential of >1 V and a Faraday efficiency of 30%. The flavinium cation was presumably further oxidised and reacted with water to form its hydroxylated derivative, which was converted with water back to the original cation through contact with the O dopant in the carbon, to evolve oxygen.
He et al. reported that polypyrrole doped with phytic acid (or inositol hexaphosphoric acid) formed on carbon cloth is an efficient water-oxidation electrocatalyst.178 A large current density of 110 mA cm−2 (apparent for the cloth) was exhibited in alkaline solution, with an overpotential of 570 mV and a small Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1. The phytic acid dopant in the polypyrrole was presumed to provide active sites. The doped polypyrrole was found to be very hydrophilic and enabled a fast charge-transporting network during the water oxidation. He et al. also summarised new directions for molecular/polymer-based electrocatalysts formed on large-surface-area carbon substrates.
Polyimides are thermostable and tough engineering plastics; the polyimide film reported by Li et al. is a durable organic anode that efficiently oxidises water with the evolution of oxygen.179 They prepared 200 nm thick poly(phenylene pyromellitic diimide) (43 in Fig. 10) with a rough surface by polymerising the precursor in situ on carbon cloth. The polyimide anode was durable, functioned over a wide pH range, and provided a large current density of 33 mA cm−2 at pH 13. Despite an overpotential of 510 mV, the small Tafel slope of 75 mV dec−1 and almost 100% Faraday efficiency implied favourable reaction kinetics for water oxidation, which is ascribable to the combination of the carbon cloth (as an effective current collector) and the imide groups (as potential catalysis sites). In addition, the polyimide/carbon cloth was demonstrated to be a flexible and mechanically-tough electrode.
The same Li group prepared a polythiophene (34) film on O-doped carbon cloth by electropolymerising thiophene.180 The polythiophene/carbon-cloth anode exhibited sufficient water-oxidation activity to evolve oxygen (oxygen bubbles in Fig. 16) over a wide pH range. The 26 nm thick polythiophene layer was tough and adhered strongly to the carbon (TEM image after use is shown in Fig. 16k). A current density of 24 mA cm−2 was observed at 1.7 V (vs. RHE) and pH 13, which is twice that of the benchmark IrO2 catalyst (Fig. 16a). The remarkably low overpotential, small Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1, and S 2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 16b) suggested that redox catalysis involving thiophene is very efficient, and presumably includes redox reactions between sulfur and sulfone groups that are strongly coupled to the O-doped carbon surface.
 Fig. 16  (a) Water oxidation performance or anodic current density of the polythiophene (PTh)/O-doped carbon cloth (o-CC) (blue), its activated form/o-CC (red), and benchmark IrO2 (yellow), (b) S 2p XPS spectrum of the PTh/o-CC anode and the carbon cloth, (e) photographic image of the anode during the oxygen-evolution process, and (k) TEM image of the used PTh/o-CC anode. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. 
Chen et al. wrapped a carbon nanotube in a conjugated 2D thiophene polymer connected to pyrene (extension of 42 in Fig. 10), which performed as an electrochemical water-oxidation catalyst to evolve oxygen in alkaline solution with a low overpotential of 390 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 100 mV dec−1.181 Jena et al. prepared a covalent organic framework (COF) of thiadiazole conjugated with triphenylbenzene (44 in Fig. 10) on a glassy carbon substrate, which displayed superior electrocatalytic oxygen-evolution activity, with a 10 mA cm−2 current density at an overpotential of 320 mV in alkaline solution.182 The low Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1 and a Faraday efficiency of 98% are attributable to a four-electron oxidation pathway. The π-conjugated network and porous structure facilitated fast charge- and reactant-transport processes, with an activity per catalyst mass of 286 mA mg−1 observed.
Previous research used carbon substrates, such as carbon cloth, as scaffolds for active polymer formation; however, the discovery of other effective substrates for further study is welcomed. Based on the conjugated/redox polymers designed for photocathode films, solar-driven oxygen evolution from water remains an important challenge for (photo)electrochemical anode films. The benchmark semiconductor catalyst for photochemical water-oxidation under UV irradiation is TiO2;183 photoexcited TiO2 is characterised by significantly long hole lifetimes for the oxidation of water. Many conjugated polymers involve holes through doping and tuneable HOMO levels; films of such conjugated, but chemically robust, polymers may be photoelectrochemical water-oxidation catalyst candidates.
6. Short summary and perspectives
This review discussed redox polymers and their unique characteristics as a new class of functional organic material for use in green-energy-related devices. Redox polymers can replace some current inorganic materials that are extensively used in these devices, from the viewpoints of organic polymer sustainability, which is a significant asset, as well as inherent lightweightness, plastic moldability, film formability, flexibility, and biocompatibility. While the rechargeable batteries, hydrogen carriers, and redox catalysts described in this review show different output performances, efficient charge transport (as a primary function) unites them, which is attributable to charge storage and separation on the soft redox polymer platform.
Unresolved issues remain, and further redox-polymer design is required for sustainable and environmentally-friendly functional materials. Important issues include: (i) fashioning unique purely organic-based materials with ultimate conductivities; (ii) mechanisms and limitations of electrical conduction in redox polymers in the absence of an electrolyte or in the genuine solid state; (iii) moving from 2D- to 3D-designed electrochemical structures that overcome the limited redox densities of the film forms; (iv) capabilities of redox-active π-conjugated polymers (they need to serve as redox-catalytic, electrically-conducting, and/or photoresponsive sites); (v) organic-polymer properties that are distinct from those of conventional inorganic electrode materials to ensure versatility (they also need to be matched with electrolyte species and separator-free, solid devices); and (vi) a green battery based on unlimited resources, which is also non-toxic, safe, and can be easily disposed, is expected to partially replace extensively used Li-ion batteries.
This review discussed the successive, geared redox reactions of the highly populated redox sites in organic-polymer films that facilitate efficient charge transport, storage, and separation, and consequently progress research into new organic-based energy storage and conversion devices. The author's group reported a gelated supramolecule bearing pendant TEMPO groups linked with flexible alkyl side chains, which delivered a charge-diffusion coefficient of 10−6 cm s−1 that is comparable to that of the homogeneous solution.184 A very large current density of 1 mA cm−2 was observed for a 50 μm thick specimen of this purely organic gel in a quasi-solid state. Redox-active supramolecular polymers function as electrically conducting materials unaided by metal or carbon additives, with a conduction concept that is totally different from that of metallic conduction or mobile-π-electron-based conduction in organic semiconductors. Electrical conduction and very efficient charge transport are the result of a long sequence of rapid chemical reactions, which is expected to stimulate the search for currently unknown electrical and ionic functions of soft organic matter, including biological systems.
There is a distinct difference between “wet-type” and “dry-type” applications, even when the same redox polymer is used. Redox-reaction-triggered charge transport and storage require the support of the electrolyte in the wet-type “electrochemical” functions that are mainly discussed in this review, as represented by rechargeable organic batteries. In contrast, charge transport in dry-type redox polymers, which are used in diodes, transistors, and photovoltaic cells, is driven by electric fields, with the redox polymer expected to act as an electrical (semi)conductor; the charge-conducting mechanism in solvent-free, solid-state redox polymers has been discussed in recent reviews and papers.185–188 Moreover, many of the redox polymers function in both wet and dry states; for instance, redox polymers containing small amounts of electrolyte or counter-ion-doped redox polymers display both practical charge conduction and redox capabilities, even in the solvent-free solid state. The catalytic actions of redox polymer films at the water interface, discussed in section 5, are fulfilled by contributions of both functions.
Redox polymers have been studied and used as films or thin layers on current-collecting substrates, as discussed in sections 3 and 5. Redox-polymer-based hydrogen carriers have been moulded into film or sheet forms. Accordingly, charge propagation in a redox polymer remains rate-determining in its device and catalysis applications, although it is relatively rapid compared to those of other redox-active materials. The redox or energy capacities of film-formed polymers remain low due to their limited thicknesses, otherwise a significantly enlarged film with a huge area is required. One approach to resolving this limitation involves extending 2D micro- or nano-structured polymer film into 3D ones. In fact, inorganic redox materials are practically used by assembling their particles into micron-thick structures with large interface areas. The example described in section 3 shows that a redox polymer nano-composited with CNT overcomes issues of fast charge propagation and thickness for reasonable redox capacities. Conjugated, electrically-conducting polymers bearing pendant redox-active groups present other approaches. For instance, Sjödin et al. studied PEDOT-bearing quinones and TEMPO with the aim of adjusting the rates and capacities of redox polymers devoid of conducting additives.189 Furthermore, a quick avenue for improving device performance involves laminating multiple redox-polymer layers of a catalytically active, charge-separating/transporting, and light-harvesting film stacked on a substrate, as an example.
COFs are a new class of extended crystalline organic materials, which are featured with tuneable pore sizes and high surface areas, and some of COFs have been extensively studied as promising materials for capacitors and metal-ion batteries.190–192 Thomas et al. discussed molecular tailoring of COFs for electrochemical applications including electrocatalysis.190 While the redox polymers are mainly composed of linear polymers, amorphous and highly processable, a 2D- and 3D-covalently extension of the redox-active and charge-transportable polymer backbone, by being exampled with 29, 39 and 44, will be a challenge toward a precisely designed redox-active architecture.
The catalytic activities of redox polymer films for oxygen reduction, and water reduction and oxidation applications are of increasing interest but remain in their infancies. Firstly, their performance needs to be improved; current densities on the mA cm−2 order (on a flat substrate) are required in order to examine them as practical catalysts.193 These polymers need to be further designed and tuned to improve the film-water interface and film configuration. The transit structure and reactivity of water, such as hydrogen bonding, clusters, and the acidity of the water molecule, have been reported to be affected by the surface of the organic polymer,194,195 which may even influence the chemical reactivities of water molecules and/or the array of hydrated ionic species at the film-water interface or in an electrical double layer. Electrically conducting hydrogels composed of fibrous assemblies of conjugated polymers, as electrically-conducting networks, and hydrophilic polymers as scaffolds and reactant pathways, have been developed for sensors and biomedical devices;196 applying conducting hydrogels as catalysts for water redox reactions is expected to be very interesting. Research into rechargeable fuel cells was introduced in section 4. A redox-polymer-based, hydrogen-carrying sheet was successfully incorporated in the anode of a fuel cell of a hydrogen supplier. Combining the hydrogen-carrying sheet with a redox-catalytic polymer film for the evolution of hydrogen is worth investigating. Moreover, the evolution of pure hydrogen on films separated from counter oxygen evolution is a crucial advantage of such films for the further development of hydrogen production systems.
Tackling the performance limitations of current batteries is of great interest,197 with the characteristics of an organic-polymer-based battery, such as high-power supply or quick charging capability, providing attractive opportunities. Mediation through the addition of small amounts of kinetically active redox polymers, such as TEMPO and thianthrene polymers, into conventional electrode materials, such as LiCoO2 and LiFeO4, led to a hybrid capable of rapid full-charging (in a few minutes) without an overvoltage.198 The performance of this hybrid is ascribable to the alignment of cascade-like charge transport with the redox potentials of the electrode materials, and is expected to provide a new way of achieving a quick-charging Li-ion battery that operates above 4 V, highlighting the molecular designability of organic redox polymers.
Thin and plastic batteries are printable and highly adhesive on counterparts of any type or form, leading to facile combinations with other printable tags, organic light-emitting electrochemical cells, and organic solar cells, such as a charge-storable solar cell.199,200 Conformability to skin and biocompatibility provide harmless possibilities for health-monitoring and in vivo electric-power-source applications, with one example provided in section 3. Structural designability and mechanical toughness are other important assets. Polymer batteries can be moulded into shapes that can be incorporated as energy sources in the housings of products. Such research into organic batteries is expected to create innovative battery configurations and associated applications. Organic redox-polymer electrodes are not sensitive to the choice of electrolyte counter ion, and they function with resource-abundant ions, such as Na (instead of Li). The development of new polymer electrolytes that can be fitted onto redox polymer layers and promote efficient counter-ion access to redox sites, or irrigate electrolyte components into the polymers, and that also function as cathode/anode separators, is desirable, leading to simply configured and all-solid batteries. Redox polymers are expected to trigger novel battery chemistry.
Green chemistry principles are becoming increasingly mandated. Developing batteries and energy-related materials from renewable sources, with the aim of replacing even a very small portion of current energy-storage devices that are extensively used, especially Li-ion batteries, is an important objective. In addition to being eco-efficient themselves, both the present petrochemical-based starting materials and battery-manufacturing processes need to be reassessed. Spent battery recycling is unavoidable and problematic, and is being challenged by green chemistry principles.201–203 Organic redox-polymer-based batteries and energy devices can be ubiquitously used and, at the end of their product lifetimes, can be disposed by incineration without the production of toxic waste (toxic gas and ash); hence, they are more sustainable than conventional batteries. Easy disposal is crucial to the total environmental assessment, especially if such devices are not properly recycled.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from Grand-in-Aid for Scientific Research No. 21H02018 from MEXT, Japan, is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references

          H. G. Cassidy and K. A. Kun, Oxidation-reduction polymers (redox polymers), Interscience, New York,  1965 Search PubMed .
G. Manecke, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1968, 4/5, 26–64 Search PubMed .
K. Horie, M. Barón, R. B. Fox, J. He, M. Hess, J. Kahovec, T. Kitayama, P. Kubisa, E. Maréchal, W. Mormann, R. F. T. Stepto, D. Tabak, J. Vohlídal, E. S. Wilks and W. J. Work, Pure Appl. Chem., 2004, 76, 889–906 CrossRef CAS .
N. Casado, G. Hernández, H. Sardon and D. Mecerreyes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 52, 107–135 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Reynolds, B. C. Thompson and T. A. Skotheim, Conjugated polymers, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2019 Search PubMed .

          N. Casado and D. Mecerreyes, Redox polymers for energy and nanomedicine, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2021 Search PubMed .
E. Tsuchida and H. Nishide, Adv. Polym. Sci., 1977, 24, 1–87 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Meyers, Encyclopedia of sustainability science and technology, Springer, New York,  2012 Search PubMed .

          T. B. Reddy, Linden's handbook of batteries, Mcgraw-hill, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .
U. S. Energy Information Administration, International energy outlook, 2021, Oct 6, 2021. https://www.ela.gov/outlooks/ieo/.

          https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2019/press-release/
        .
A. Yoshino, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2022, 95, 195–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishide, K. Koshika and K. Oyaizu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 1961–1970 CAS .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, F. Dolhem and J. Gaubicher, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 70–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide and T. Suga, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2005, 14, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6397–6409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Haupler, T. Janoschka and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9438–9484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu and J. Chen, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 127–142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, Y. Yao, J. Chen and U. S. Schubert, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2107–2109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, J. Gaubicher, S. Renault, L. Dubois, Y. Liang and Y. Yao, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 146490–146557 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Goujon, N. Casado, N. Patil, R. Marcilla and D. Mecerreyes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2021, 122, 101449 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 222–227 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chap. 19 of Conjugated polymers, ed. J. R. Reynolds, B. C. Thompson and T. A. Skotheim, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. Yang, K. Liut, I. A. Shkrob and C. Liao, MRS Commun., 2019, 9, 1151–1167 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Gannett, L. Melecio-Zambrano, M. J. Theibault, B. M. Peterson, B. P. Fors and H. D. Abruna, Mater. Rep. Energy, 2021, 1, 100008 Search PubMed .
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. V. Abad, P. Balcombe, P. E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah and K. R. Ward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
J. Miyake, T. Watanabe, H. Shintani, Y. Sugawara, M. Uchida and K. Miyatake, ACS Mater. Au, 2021, 1, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kato and H. Nishide, Polym. J., 2018, 50, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .

          R. L. Myers, The 100 most important chemical compounds: a reference guide, ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. C. Armstrong, C. Wolfram, K. P. de Jong, R. Gross, N. S. Lewis, B. Boardman, A. J. Ragauskas, K. Ehrhardt-Martinez, G. Crabtree and M. V. Ramana, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. C. Perry, D. Pangotra, L. Vieira, L. I. Csepei, V. Sieber, C. P. Leon, L. Wang and F. C. Walsh, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 442–458 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, Y. Liu, X. Hu and X. Zhang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1466–1494 RSC .

          J. Ma, Photo- and electro-catalytic processes, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2022 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
N. Suen, S. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
K. Oka, B. Winther-Jensen and H. Nishide, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003724 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
T. Michinobu, J. Inui and H. Nishide, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 2165–2168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yen and G. Liou, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 89, 250–287 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chap. 71 of Encyclopedia of radicals in chemistry, biology and materials, ed. C. Chatgilialoglu and A. Studer, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. Isogai, T. Saito and H. Fukuzumi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 71–75 RSC .
T. Suga, Y. J. Pu, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 2203–2204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yonekuta, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 866–8669 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fukuzaki and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 996–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yonekuta, K. Susuki, K. Oyaizu, K. Honda and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14128–14129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, K. Zhang, Y. Yamauchi, K. Oyaizu and Z. Jia, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 803–829 RSC .

          P. M. S. Monk, The viologens, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  1998 Search PubMed .
K. W. Shah, S. X. Wang, D. X. Y. Soo and J. Xu, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, C. Zheng, L. Wang, C. Lu, B. Zhang, Y. Chen, M. Li, G. Zhai and X. Zhuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23337–23360 RSC .
Y. Wu, R. Zeng, J. Nan, D. Shu, Y. Qiu and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700278 CrossRef .
N. Patil and R. Marcilla, RSC Polym. Chem. Ser., 2021, 34, 245–287 CAS .
K. Pirnat, N. Casado, L. Porcarelli, N. Ballard and D. Mecerreyes, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 8155–8166 CrossRef CAS .
R. Emanuelsson, M. Sterby, M. Strømme and M. Sjödin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4828–4834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oyaizu, A. Hatemata, W. Choi and H. Nishide, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5404–5410 RSC .
K. Oka, R. Kato, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805858 CrossRef .

          A. Elschner, S. Kirchmeyer, W. Lovenich, U. Merker and K. Reuter, PEDOT Principles and applications of an intrinsically conductive polymer, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida,  2011 Search PubMed .

          D. T. Sawyer, A. Sobkowiak and J. L. Roberts, Electrochemistry for chemists, John Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribiere, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, G. Liang and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12528–12532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Haupler, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402034 CrossRef .
A. Jouhara, N. Dupre, A. C. Gaillot, D. Guyomard, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang and Y. Yao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1690–1706 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, A. E. Lakraychi, Z. Chen, Y. Liang and Y. Yao, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3287–3306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, R. Zeng, J. Nan, D. Shu, Y. Qiu and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700278 CrossRef .
Z. Song, RSC Polym. Chem. Ser., 2021, 34, 198–244 CAS .
Y. Shi, M. J. Monteiro and Z. Jia, RSC Polym. Chem. Ser., 2021, 34, 27–92 CAS .
K.-A. Hasen and J. P. Blinco, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1479–1516 RSC .
K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2339–2344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, Y. Ando, H. Konishi and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14459–14461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, R. Ichinoi, R. Mizukami, T. Serikawa, Y. Sasaki, J. Lutkenhaus, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1049–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, F. Li, A. D. Easley and J. L. Lutkenhaus, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, A. D. Easley, S. Wang, P. Flouda and J. L. Lutkenhaus, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100414 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karlsson, T. Suga and H. Nishide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10692–10698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oka and H. Nishide, RSC Polym. Chem. Ser., 2021, 34, 137–165 CAS .
K. Koshika, N. Chikushi, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1573–1575 RSC .
K. Koshika, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2009, 45, 836–838 RSC .
N. Sano, W. Tomita, S. Hara, C. M. Min, J. S. Lee, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1355–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ibe, R. B. Frings, A. Lachowicz, S. Kyo and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3475–3477 RSC .
N. Patil, A. Mavrandonakis, C. Jerome, C. Detrembleur, N. Casado, D. Mercerreyes, J. Palma and R. Marcilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 505–514 RSC .
D. Moia, A. Giovannitti, A. A. Szumska, I. P. Maria, E. Rezasoltani, M. Sachs, M. Schnurr, P. R. F. Barnes, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1349–1357 RSC .
X. Dong, H. Yu, Y. Ma, J. L. Bao, D. G. Truhlar, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2560–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627–1630 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molina, N. Patil, E. Ventosa, M. Liras, J. Palma and R. Marcilla, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908074 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molina, N. Patil, E. Ventosa, M. Liras, J. Palma and R. Marcilla, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2945–2953 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wild, M. Strumpf, B. Häupler, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601415 CrossRef .
J. Qin, Q. Lan, N. Liu, F. Men, X. Wang, Z. Song and H. Zhan, iScience, 2019, 15, 16–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, R. Zhao, W. Deng, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .
N. Goujon, X. L. Pariza and N. Casado, RSC Polym. Chem. Ser., 2021, 34, 288–331 CAS .

          U. S. Department of the Interior & U. S. Geological Survey, Mineral commodity summaries,  2019 Search PubMed .
K. Koshika, M. Kitajima, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2009, 2, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deller, L. A. Jones and S. Maniam, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4955–4979 RSC .
Poly(TEMPO methacrylate)(PTMA) is chemically stable up to 85 °C under air, but the nitroxide content of specimens is often not stoichiometric. PTMA: TCI, https://www.tcichemicals.com/eshop/en/jp/commodity/M1531/. 4-Hydroxy-TEMPO: Sigma-Aldrich, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/product/aldrich/176141.
H. Nishide, S. Iwasa, Y.-J. Pu, T. Suga, K. Nakahara and M. Satoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 827–831 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sukegawa, H. Omata, I. Masuko, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 240–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. G. Hicks, Stable radicals, John Wiley & Sons, New york,  2010 Search PubMed .

          L. Packer, Handbook of antioxidants, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2001 Search PubMed .
A series of viologen and anthraquinone derivatives are commercially available, represented by dimethylviologen dichloride: Sigma-Aldrich, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/product/aldrich/856177, 1,4-dihydroxyanthraquinone: TCI, https://www.tcichemicals.com/US/en/p/D0243, and sodium 2-sulfonylanthraquinone: Sigma-Aldrich, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/product/aldrich/743038.
W. Choi, D. Harada, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19839–19843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, G. Cui and L. Chen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 136–164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liedel, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2110–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Microshnikov, K. Mahankali, N. K. Thangavel, S. Satapathy, L. M. R. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and G. John, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2186–2204 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Garedew, C. H. Lam, L. Petitjean, S. Huang, B. Song, F. Lin, J. E. Jackson, C. M. Saffron and P. T. Anastas, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2868–2899 RSC .
W. Chen, C. Zhao, B. Li, T. Yuan and Q. Zhang, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 565–584 RSC .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganas, Science, 2012, 335, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hernandez, N. Casada, A. M. Zamarayeva, J. K. Duey, M. Armand, A. C. Arias and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 7199–7205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Razaq, L. Nyholm, M. Sjödin, M. Strømme and A. Mihranyan, Adv. Enegy Mater., 2012, 2, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhuang, H. Zhang, N. Chikushi, C. Zhao, K. Oyaizu, X. Chen and H. Nishide, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 1203–1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Nguyen, A. D. Easley, N. Kang, S. Khan, S. M. Lim, Y. H. Rezenom, S. Wang, D. K. Tran, J. Fan, R. A. Letteri, X. He, L. Su, C. H. Yu, J. L. Lutkenhaus and K. L. Wooley, Nature, 2021, 597, 61–66 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hatakeyama-Sato, H. Wakamatsu, R. Katagiri, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800900 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hatakeyama-Sato, H. Wakamatsu, K. Yamagishi, T. Fujie, S. Takeoka, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Small, 2019, 15, 1805296 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yoshihara, H. Isozumi, M. Kasai, H. Yonehara, Y. Ando, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 8335–8340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NEC Co. Tsukuba Research Lab., DIC Co. Graphic Arts Lab., Sumitomo Fine Chemicals, Functional Polymers Lab. and Waseda University, Polymer Chemistry Lab.: NEDO Project on radical battery for an ubiquitous power, 2005–10. https://www.nec.co.jp/press/en/0512/0701.html, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/03/070323141052.htm.
S. Muench, R. Burges, A. L. Balducci, J. C. Brendel, M. Jager, C. Friebe, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 750–755 CrossRef .
S. Muench, R. Burges, A. L. Balducci, J. C. Brendel, M. Jager, C. Friebe, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, J. Polym. Sci., 2021, 59, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .

          AG Evonik Industry, 26 May 2020, https://corporate.evonik.com, https://www.taettooz.com/en/technology.
K. Hatakeyama-Sato, T. Tezuka, R. Ichinoi, S. Matsumoto, K. Sadakuni and K. Oyaizu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2443–2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Friebe, A. L. Balducci and U. S. Schubert, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1–24 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kato, K. Oka, K. Yoshimasa, M. Nakajima, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1900139 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kato, K. Yoshimasa, T. Egashira, T. Oya, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kawahara, K. Fujita and R. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12790–12794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. S. Monte, R. Notario, M. M. G. Calvinho, A. R. R. P. Almeida, L. M. P. F. Amaral, A. I. M. C. L. Ferreira and M. D. M. C. Ribeiro da Silva, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2012, 57, 2486–2496 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gianotti, M. Taillades-Jacquin, J. Roziere and D. J. Jones, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4660–4680 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oka, Y. Kaiwa, M. Kataoka, K. Fujita and K. Oyaizu, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 5876–5879 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Crabtree, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 134–138 RSC .
K. Oka, Y. Kaiwa, S. Furukawa, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 2756–2760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kaiwa, K. Oka, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2021, 32, 1162–1167 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oka, M. Kataoka, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, MRS Commun., 2022, 12, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kato, T. Oya, Y. Shimazaki, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Polym. Int., 2017, 66, 647–652 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Modisha, C. N. M. Ouma, R. Garidzirai, P. Wasserscheid and D. Bessarabov, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 2778–2796 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Aakko-Saksa, C. Cook, J. Kiviaho and T. Repo, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 803–823 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujita, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 92, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oka, Y. Tobita, M. Kataoka, S. Murao, K. Kobayashi, S. Furukawa, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Polym. J., 2021, 53, 799–804 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Z. Ertem, R. Kanega, K. Murata, D. J. Szalda, J. T. Muckerman, E. Fujita and Y. Himeda, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8600–8605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, W. W. Brennessel and W. D. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8564–8567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Orimo, Y. Nakamori, J. R. Eliseo, A. Züttel and C. M. Jensen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4111–4132 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Dalebrook, W. Gan, M. Grasemann, S. Moret and G. Laurenczy, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8735–8751 RSC .
T. Yoshida and K. Kojima, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2015, 24, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miyake, Y. Ogawa, T. Tanaka, J. Ahn, K. Oka, K. Oyaizu and K. Miyatake, Commun. Chem., 2020, 3, 138 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Goor, J. Glenneberg and S. Jacobi, Hydrogen peroxide, Ullmann's encyclopedia of industrial chemistry, Wiley-VCH,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. M. Campos-Martin, G. Blanco-Brieva and J. L. Fierro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6962–6984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, P. Ni, C. Chen, Y. Lu, P. Yang, B. Kong, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801909 CrossRef .
B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2790–2795 RSC .
E. Mitraka, M. Gryszel, M. Vagin, M. J. Jafari, A. Singh, M. Warczak, M. Mitrakas, M. Berggren, T. Ederth, I. Zozoulenko, X. Crispin and E. D. Głowacki, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 1800110 Search PubMed .
The Tafel slope, logJ (current density) vs. the given potential, reflects activity of the electrode material or activation energy of the redox reaction at the electrode-solution interface. The smaller slope is, the better reaction kinetics.
K. Oka, K. Kamimori, B. W. Jensen and H. Nishide, Adv. Energy Sustainable Res., 2021, 2100103 CrossRef .
Overpotential is the deviation of the reaction onset-potential from the equilibrium potential (Eeq) or the excess electrical energy required to progress the electrode reaction.
C. H. Ng, C. A. Ohlin, S. Qiu, C. Sun and B. Winther-Jensen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3253–3265 RSC .
S. Hu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 101–114 RSC .
H. Hou, X. Zeng and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17356–17376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, T. Takii, T. Hagi, S. Mori, Y. Kofuji, Y. Kitagawa, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 985–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, M. Matsumoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 12590–12599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salomaki, L. Marttila, H. Kivela, T. Ouvinen and J. Lukkari, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 6314–6327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Miglbauer, M. Gryszel and E. D. Głowacki, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 673–677 RSC .
L. Migliaccio, M. Gryszel, V. Derek, A. Pezzella and E. D. Głowacki, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 984–990 RSC .
M. Weclawski, M. Jakesova, M. Charyton, N. Demitri, B. Koszarna, K. Oppelt, S. Sariciftci, D. T. Gryko and E. D. Głowacki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20789–20788 RSC .
R. Wei, M. Gryszel, L. Migliaccio and E. D. Głowacki, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10897–10906 RSC .
W. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Ma, D. Li, Z. Wang, M. Dupuis, J. Shi, S. Liao and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 238–245 RSC .
K. Oka, H. Nishide and B. Winther-Jensen, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. David, C. Ocampo-Martínez and R. Sánchez-Peña, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 23, 392–403 CrossRef .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Maehara, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Kuromiya, Y. Nagatsuma, H. Tokudome, S. Akiyama, T. Watanabe, R. Narushima, S. Okunaka, N. Shibata, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2021, 598, 304–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liras, M. Barawi and V. A. de la Peña O'Shea, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5454–5487 RSC .
S. Otep, T. Michinobu and Q. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1900395 Search PubMed .
C. Dai and B. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 24–52 RSC .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, R. Clowes, P. Guiglion, N. J. Brownbill, B. J. Slater, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1792–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Hou, V. Dzhagan, Z. Liao, G. Chai, M. Loeffler, D. Olianas, A. Milani, S. Xu, M. Tommasini, D. R. T. Zahn, Z. Zheng, E. Zschech, R. Jordan and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1140 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, I. H. Oener, T. Wang, T. Zhang, O. Selyshchev, C. Neumann, Y. Fu, Z. Liao, S. Xu, Y. Hou, A. Turchanin, D. R. T. Zahn, E. Zschech, I. M. Weidinger, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10368–10374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oka, O. Tsujimura, T. Suga, H. Nishide and B. Winther-Jensen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1335–1342 RSC .
K. Oka, K. Noguchi, T. Suga, H. Nishide and B. Winther-Jensen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803286 CrossRef .
K. Oka, H. Nishide and B. Winther-Jensen, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sekar and K. Sivula, Chimia, 2021, 75, 169–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mirzakulova, R. Khatmullin, J. Walpita, T. Corrigan, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, S. Vyas, S. Oottikkal, S. F. Manzer, C. M. Hadad and K. D. Glusac, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 794–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, G. Li, X. Liu, B. Zhu, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 4362–4366 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, W. Feng, J. Zhang, Z. Xue, T. Zhao, H. Su, S. Hirano, X. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12563–12566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Z. Xue, X. Lin, Y. Lin, H. Su, S. Hirano, X. Li and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19793–19798 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Liu, H. Li, J. Chen, J. Fei, Z. Yu, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, H. Zheng, Z. Liu, M. Xu, G. Henkelman, L. Wei and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3309–3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, B. Mohanty, M. Nurhuda, S. Dalapati, R. Jana, M. Addicoat, A. Datta, B. K. Jena and A. Bhaumik, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5623–5630 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasada, R. Ichinoi, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5942–5947 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Joo, V. Agarkar, S. H. Sung, B. M. Savoie and B. W. Boudouris, Science, 2018, 359, 1391–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Hansen and J. P. Blinco, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1479–1516 RSC .
S. Wang, A. D. Easley and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Macro Lett., 2020, 9, 358–370 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, M. Sakata, K. Aoki and H. Nishide, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 703–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Striezel, M. Sterby, H. Huang, M. Stromme, R. Emanuelsson and M. Sjödin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9631–9638 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule and A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6871–6913 RSC .
V. Singh and H. R. Byon, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2, 3188–3212 RSC .
D. Zhu, G. Xu, M. Barnes, Y. Li, C.-P. Tseng, Z. Zhang, J.-J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Khalil, M. M. Rahman, R. Verduzco and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bellani, M. R. Antognazza and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801446 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Brini, C. J. Fennell, M. Fernandez-Serra, B. Hribar-Lee, M. Luksic and K. A. Dill, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12385–12414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oka, T. Shibue, N. Sugimura, Y. Watabe, B. Winther-Jensen and H. Nishide, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 223 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Guiseppi-Elie, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2701–2716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. S. Department of Energy and, Office of Scientific and Technical Information, Technical report, Enabling fast charging: a technical gap assessment, Oct 13,  2017.
K. Hatakeyama-Sato, T. Masui, T. Serikawa, Y. Sasaki, W. Choi, S. Doo, H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6375–6382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuka, N. Hayashi, T. Sekiguchi, K. Sumioka, M. Takata, N. Hayo, H. Ikeda, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, S. Uchida, S. Toriyama, S. Nishimura, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide and Y. Nishikitani, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600293 CrossRef .
D. L. Thompson, J. M. Hartley, S. M. Lambert, M. Shiref, G. D. J. Harper, E. Kendrick, P. Anderson, K. S. Ryder, L. Gaines and A. P. Abbott, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7585–7603 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Lv, H. Huang, W. Yan, X. Li, P. Ning, H. Cao and Z. Sun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 6139–6171 RSC .
J. Zhang, G. Liang, C. Yang, J. Hu, Y. Chen and C. Wang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 8434–8440 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Hiroyuki Nishide	Hiroyuki Nishide is a Research Professor in the Research Institute for Science and Engineering and served as a Full Professor in the Department of Applied Chemistry (1987–2018), Waseda University, Tokyo. He received his Ph.D. in 1975 and was a Research Fellow at the Free University Berlin. He is a past president of the Society of Polymer Science, Japan, and of the Federation of Asian Polymer Societies. His interests include the syntheses and applications of functional polymers, with a recent focus on organic polymers for rechargeable and (photo)electrochemical devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Scheme depicting rapid and reversible redox reactions among densely populated redox sites along a polymer backbone. (b) Example of a reversible redox reaction involving the one-electron reduction of the oxidised form (Ox) of a cationic redox molecule with removal of the counter anion (−) to produce the reduced form (Rd) of the charge-neutral redox molecule. (c) Key factors that dominate the reactivity of a pendant redox site using the reduction reaction in (b) as an example. (d) Schematic for a chain of geared redox cycles that efficiently transport electrons.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical redox couples involving organic molecules together with their corresponding redox potentials. A cationic redox molecule is reduced on the left-side of the axis accompanied by the removal of an appropriate number of counter anion for charge compensation. A neutral molecule is reduced to the corresponding anionic molecule on the right-side with the acquisition of an appropriate number of counter cations. The theoretical redox or energy capacity for each system (per full redox, mA h g−1) is also noted for each reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative and recently reported redox polymers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Charge- and hydrogen-transport and -storage driven by concentration gradients.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge–discharge performance of a cell assembled using polyviologen as the anode and a TEMPO polymer as the cathode in aqueous NaCl as the electrolyte at a 60 C rate. (a) Schematic of the test cell with the two electrodes. (b) Relative capacities of the polymers as functions of charge/discharge cycle. (●): 9 anode/4 cathode, (○): Zn/4, (□): Zn/2. Inset: Charging/discharging curve. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2010.	 


1	
9/viologen	
4/TEMPO	Na+/Cl− H2O	1.2	110	60 C; 95%; 2000 cycl; 78%	
78

2	
10/viologen	
4/TEMPO	Na+/Cl− H2O	1.1, 1.5	165	60 C; 85%; 5000 cycl; 90%	
80

3	
24/naphthalene diimide	
20/o-quinone	Li+/H+ H2SO4	0.95	85	120 C; 90%; 1000 cycl; 80%	
82

4	
23/naphthalene diimide	
17/thiophene	Na+/Cl− H2O	<1.0	21	10 C; 25%	
83

5	
27/anthraquinone	
4/TEMPO	Na+/Cl− H2O	1.1	80	10 C; ∼100%; 1000 cycl; 78%	
112

6	
25/perylene diimide	
21/o-quinone	Na+/SO42− H2O	1.0	53	10 C; 98%; 800 cycl; 85%	
108

7	
23/naphthalene diimide	
15/triphenylamine	Li+/TFSI− H2O	<2.1	105 (cathode)	4.6 C; 98%; 700 cycl; 85%	
84

8	
31/thiophene sulfone	
1/TEMPO	(C2H5)4N+/ClO4− CH3CN	2.6	208 (anode)	120 C; 80%; >100 cycl;	
58

9	
28/anthraquinone	
16/aniline	Na+/ClO4− NCC2H4CN	1.6	200	8 C; 68%; >50 cycl; ∼80%	
90

10	
23/naphthalene diimide	
15/triphenylamine	EMIm+/TFSI− ionic liq	1.5	93	20 C; 5000 cycl; ∼75%	
89

11	
30/tetracyanoxylene	
13/thianthrene	Li+/TFSI− DOL-DME	1.35	105	1 C; 250 cycl; 67%	
88

12	
30/tetracyanoxylene	
1/TEMPO	BMIm+/TFSI− PEO deriv	1.1	24	1 C; 1000 cycl; 77%	
116

13	
11/viologen	
3/TEMPO	GEIm+/TFSI− ionic liq polymer	1.1, 1.6	80	1 C; >95%; 25 cycl; 78%	
119

14	
12/viologen	
8/TEMPO	(C4H9)4N+/CF3SO3− PC	1.1, 1.6	38	1 C; ∼90%; 5 cycl; 85%	
111

15	
18/galvinoxyl	
5/TEMPO	(C4H9)4N+/ClO4− CH3CN	0.7	32	10 C; 81%; 250 cycl; 75%	
85


 	Scheme 1  Route used to produce poly(TEMPO methacrylate).	 

 	Scheme 2  Route used to produce dimethyl viologen dichloride and poly(viologen bromide).	 

 	Fig. 6  All-organic, flexible paper-like battery fabricated using a pair of redox polymers and an electrolyte-containing thin-film separator.	 

 	Fig. 7  A completely organic polymer- and aqueous-saline-electrolyte-based rechargeable nanosheet battery. (a) Configuration of the polymer-based nanosheet, (b) photographic images of the cathode in normal/stretched states and the nanosheet device directly attached onto a finger, and (c) schematic of the skin-conformable battery. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  Hydrogen fixation and release by the fluorenone/fluorenol polymer gel. (a) A sheet of fluorenol and fluorenone (reddish) hydrogel on the 5 g scale. (b) The fluorenol sheet sealed in a gas-barrier bag, and after releasing hydrogen. (c) Chemical structure of the fluorenone polymer and schematic showing the hydrogen-fix and -release cycle. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Springer Nature 2016.	 

1	

	Polymer	1.0	Elect red (−1.5 V) + H+ or Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 25 °C, 1 h	Ir cat, 95 °C, 4 h	
121

2	

	Polymer	2.6	Elect red (−0.4 V) + H+ or Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 60 °C, 1 d	Ir cat, 120 °C, 5 h	
128

3	

	Polymer	2.2	Ir cat, H2 1 atm, 60 °C, 1 d	Ir cat, 120 °C, <2 h	
129

4	

	Polymer	2.8	Ir cat, H2 3 atm, 80 °C, 1 d	Ir cat, 180 °C, 1 h	
135

5	

	Liquid	6.1	H2 >10 atm, >200 °C	Pt cat, ∼300 °C	
132 and 133
6	NH3 ⇌ 1/2N2 + 3/2H2	Gas	17	Fe3O4 cat, equilibrium at H2 ∼300 atm, ∼500 °C	
132 and 133
7	Porous carbon/physical adsorption	Powder	<4	H2 >10 atm, <−196 °C	Ambient	
31 and 139

 	Fig. 9  Operational flowchart for a rechargeable fuel cell assembled with a hydrogen-storable polymer (HSP) sheet. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Springer Nature 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structures of π-conjugated and redox-active polymers.	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical catalytic activities of the doped P3HT film toward oxygen reduction. (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the P3HT film in the dark (dotted trace) and when irradiated with light (solid trace) at pH 12; the blue traces correspond to the P3HT film, while the red traces correspond to the doped P3HT film, and the dotted and solid black traces correspond to the glassy carbon substrate in the absence and presence of oxygen, respectively. The Eeq for oxygen reduction to H2O2 was calculated to be −0.12 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) under these experimental conditions. At a higher pH than the pKa of H2O2 (i.e., 11.6) oxygen reduction obeys the following equation to form HO2−: O2 + H2O + 2e− ⇄ HO2− + OH−. HO2− is regarded as an H2O2 equivalent and instantaneously forms H2O2 in neutral water. (b) Surface SEM image of the doped P3HT film. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2021.	 

 	Fig. 12  Energy level diagrams for the polymer-film cathode and oxygen reduction in (a) the dark and (b) when irradiated with light.	 

 	Scheme 3  Oxygen reduction with catechol to give H2O2.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Energy diagram for the combination of a photocathode composed of PTT copolymer 38 and a MnOx anode on a single plate, and (b) photocatalytic H2O2 production on a single transparent, electrically conducting thin plate sandwiched between the polymer layer (for oxygen reduction when illuminated) and MnOx (for water oxidation). Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Wiley-VCH 2021.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chronoamperometry of the polyterthiophene (37) film at 0 V (vs. RHE), 1 sun light on and off activity, (b) a bias-free cell with a photo-irradiated polyterthiphene film cathode wired to a MnOx anode, and (c) time-course (red line) for hydrogen evolution on the 37 film. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier 2021.	 

 	Fig. 15  (left) J–V curves for the hydrogen-evolution reaction at a cathode, and (right) the oxygen-evolution reaction at an anode; η is the overpotential for the cathode and anode at the same current density.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Water oxidation performance or anodic current density of the polythiophene (PTh)/O-doped carbon cloth (o-CC) (blue), its activated form/o-CC (red), and benchmark IrO2 (yellow), (b) S 2p XPS spectrum of the PTh/o-CC anode and the carbon cloth, (e) photographic image of the anode during the oxygen-evolution process, and (k) TEM image of the used PTh/o-CC anode. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
