Bridge engineering in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR10511E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR10511E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5764-5791Bridge engineering in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis

        
          
            Shuxian 
            Zhong†
, 
      
        
          
            Yamin 
            Xi†
, 
      
        
          
            Qin 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianrong 
            Chen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Song 
            Bai
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Advanced Catalysis Materials, College of Geography and Environmental Sciences, College of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321004, P. R. China. E-mail: songbai@zjnu.edu.cn
Received 
      12th December 2019
    , Accepted 16th February 2020First published on 17th February 2020AbstractSolar driven photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis have emerged as promising strategies for clean, low-cost, and environmental-friendly production of renewable energy and removal of pollutants. There are three crucial steps for the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) processes: light absorption, charge separation and transportation, and surface catalytic reactions. While significant achievement has been made in developing multiple-component photocatalysts to optimize the three steps for improved solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency, it remains challenging when weak interfacial contact between components/particles hinders charge transfer, restricts electron–hole separation and lowers the structural stability of catalysts. Moreover, owing to the mismatch of energy bands, an undesirable charge transfer direction leads to an adverse consequence. To tackle these challenges, bridges are implemented to smoothen the interfacial charge transfer, improve the stability of catalysts, mediate the charge transfer directions and improve the photocatalytic/PEC performance. In this review, we present the advances in bridge engineering in photocatalytic/PEC systems. Starting with the definition and classifications of bridges, we summarize the architectures of the reported bridged photocatalysts. Then we systematically discuss the insight into the roles and fundamental mechanisms of bridges in various photocatalytic/PEC systems and their contributions to activity enhancement in various reactions. Finally, the challenges and perspectives of bridged photocatalysts are featured.
1. Introduction
The rapid growth of the world's population and fast development of the world's economy lead to ever-increasing global energy demand and environmental concerns. The depletion of fossil fuels is unavoidable due to long-term overexploitation, while the burning of fossil fuels increases the emission of greenhouse gas and other contaminants. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop a renewable and clean approach to relieve the global energy crisis and perform environmental restoration. Solar-to-chemical energy conversion offers a highly green and sustainable means of storing solar energy efficiently with minimal environmental impact. So far, semiconductor-based photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic (photoelectrochemical, PEC) systems have drawn increasing attention, which are widely used in water splitting, CO2 reduction into renewable fuels, organic contamination decomposition, etc.1–8
Generally, photocatalytic and PEC reaction processes primarily involve three main steps: (i) electron–hole pair generation via the absorption of photons with higher energies than the bandgap (Eg) of photocatalysts (photoelectrodes), (ii) charge separation and their migration to the surface of photocatalysts (photoelectrodes), and (iii) reduction/oxidation reaction occurring on the surface of photocatalysts (photoelectrodes).9–11 The three sequential steps are complementary and indispensable, and the solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency is fundamentally determined by the balance of the thermodynamics and kinetics of these steps. Nevertheless, single-component photocatalysts often suffer from serious electron–hole recombination. Moreover, it is an irreconcilable contradiction for a pure semiconductor to simultaneously possess a wide light absorption range and strong redox ability because the wide light absorption range is achieved through narrowing of Eg of the semiconductor, while strong redox ability is guaranteed by wide Eg.12,13 As a result, the overall energy conversion efficiency of the pristine semiconductor is still low and far from practical applications. To improve the photocatalytic/PEC performance, construction of heterostructured photocatalysts comprising multiple components is a mainstream approach.14–17 For instance, plasmonic metals and photosensitizers have been integrated with semiconductors to extend the light absorption region;18–20 semiconductor heterojunctions have been developed to achieve the spatial separation of electrons and holes on different components;21–23 and cocatalysts have been widely used not only to prevent charge recombination through electron/hole trapping, but also to facilitate reduction/oxidation reactions by providing highly active sites.24–26 Furthermore, photocatalytic heterostructures without a semiconductor involved have also been developed, such as direct plasmonic photocatalysis where a metal acts as both light absorber and catalytic active site.27
During the construction of photocatalytic and PEC systems, interfaces between adjacent components or particles act as key locations for charge transfer and separation.28,29 Photoexcited electrons and holes can only be spatially separated toward different components through the interface between them, while in particulate semiconductor-based PEC systems, interparticle charge transportation is a critical step due to redox reactions only occurring on the electrode surface. Nevertheless, photocatalytic and PEC systems often suffer from weak interfacial contact due to lattice mismatch, hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity difference, small contact area and the existence of interparticle boundaries and interface defects, which have become a bottleneck to achieve high solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency. On the other hand, given the migration of photogenerated electrons and holes from a higher energy position to a lower one, the energy barriers or offsets between adjacent components may not favor the desirable charge transfer direction, leading to an adverse consequence. To overcome these drawbacks, components acting as “bridges” have been used to strengthen the interfacial contact, enhance the interfacial charge transfer efficiency and mediate the interfacial charge transfer direction. The bridges spanning the interfaces not only maintain good compatibility with both sides and enable smooth charge transfer through the conductive channels, but also alter the band alignment and steer the charge transfer pathways. Recently, bridges have drawn increasing attention because of their significant contribution to charge kinetics.30–34 With the assistance of bridges, great progress has been made in photocatalytic/PEC water splitting, CO2 reduction, N2 fixation and pollutant degradation.35–37
Generally, there are three fundamental design principles for bridged systems in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis: (i) fully understanding the roles of bridges in the designed structures according to the specific charge kinetics models of the photocatalytic/PEC systems; (ii) rationally selecting the bridge materials and architectures of bridged systems according to the roles of bridges; and (iii) effectively avoiding the unfavourable factors during the introduction of bridges, such as interfacial defects, light shielding, etc. In this review, for the first time, we focus on the recent advances in the bridge design of photocatalytic materials and demonstrate how to make rational use of bridges for enhanced photocatalytic/PEC performance. After defining and classifying the bridges, we briefly introduce the reported architectures of bridged photocatalysts. Then the functions of bridges in different photocatalytic/PEC systems are discussed in detail from the viewpoint of fundamental mechanisms and the resultant performance improvement in various applications. Finally, the existing challenges and future prospects are presented.
2. Definition and classification of bridges in photocatalytic/PEC systems
It is well known that real bridges are neither the starting point nor the end of a road. The same is the case with the bridges in photocatalytic/PEC systems. Generally, bridges neither produce photogenerated charge carriers through harvesting photons nor consume charge carriers by providing sites for surface reactions, and can be defined as the components offering channels for charge transfer between different components/particles. However, there are also cases where the components not only serve as a charge transfer bridge, but also absorb photons for the production of additional charge carriers or supply partial active sites for surface reactions.
So far, various materials have been reported as bridges in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis, which can be divided into two main divisions: solid nanostructures and coordinated groups/ligands. The reported nano-bridges mainly include metals (Au,31,38–50 Ag,51–66 Cu,67,68 Pd,33,69–73 Pt,32,74–76 Rh,77–81 Ni,82–89 Cd,90,91 Bi,92–95 W,96–98 Ta,99 Nb,99 Ti100), oxides (ITO,101,102 TiO2,103–109 In2O3,110 ZnO,111 LaAlO3,112 Lu2O3,113 Nb2O5114,115), sulfides (ZnS,116,117 CdS,118 In2S3119,120), phosphides (CoNiP,121 FeMnP122), silicides (NiSi123), hydroxides (Ni(OH)2,124 Mg(OH)2125), carbon (graphene,30,34,126–150 carbon nanotubes,151–153 carbon nanodots,154,155 carbon spheres,156 carbon layers157–159) and metal–organic framework (MOF) materials (UiO-66160–162). Among them, metal and carbon nanomaterials with high conductivity are prevalent bridges. In other cases, chemical groups (phosphate,163–165 silicate,166–169 aluminate170) and ligands (cysteine,171 dopamine172,173) connect different parts of heterostructured photocatalysts through the formation of conductive chemical bonds. Generally, nano-bridges can be directly observed by microscopic characterization such as transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. In contrast, group/ligand bridges can only be indirectly recognized by spectroscopic characterization (e.g. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy).
In terms of conductivity, bridges can be classified into conductors, semiconductors and insulators. In principle, conductive bridges provide high-speed channels between particles/components in mediating the transfer and recombination of charge carriers. Semiconductors are widely used to circumvent the mismatch of energy bands and block the undesired carrier transport, while ultrathin insulators reduce the Fermi level pinning for efficient transport of the minority charge carriers and decrease the recombination current of the majority charge carriers.
3. Architectures of bridged photocatalytic/PEC systems
Bridges can be introduced into photocatalytic materials through the formation of different configurations. The geometry architectures of bridged photocatalysts greatly determine the function and efficiency of the bridge in photocatalytic/PEC reactions. Generally, there are six types of widely used architectures, while other complicated and emerging structures can still be ascribed to the derivation from one certain configuration or the combination of different configurations.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, for Type I structure, two components are separately deposited on the surface of bridge supporters either by in situ growth or self-assembly methods.103–105,128,134,136,153 In most cases, bridges have a larger size in comparison with the supported components. Graphene, carbon nanotubes and MOFs are widely used as bridges in Type I structure. Bridges are exposed to the surrounding environment, which may also directly participate in surface redox reactions in addition to acting as a channel for charge transfer. The disadvantage of Type I structure is that the long distance between two components inevitably increases the probability of charge carrier loss during their diffusion along the bridge.
 Fig. 1  Scheme illustrating the architectures of bridged photocatalytic materials. 
Similar to Type I structure, in Type II bridged structure, two components/particles are supported by larger bridge supporters. The only difference is that the two components/particles are in contact with each other.38,50,90,102,106,130,131,146,149,156,159 In other words, the bridges serve as additional highways for charge transport besides the interfaces between them. In some cases, bridges such as graphene and carbon nanotubes are embedded in the bulk consisting of components/particles, in which the components/particles are prepared or assembled in the presence of bridges.102,130,131 In other cases, heterojunctions are formed between different components on the surface of bridge supporters, in which one component partially wets both the surface of the bridge and another component supported by the bridge during the growth process.106 In comparison with Type I structure, the advantages of Type II structure include multiple channels for charge transfer and short charge migration distance between components.
In Type III configuration, a stack nanostructure is formed with a bridge inserted into the interface between two components.124,125,132,158,163,165,166,168 Generally, the surface of component I with a large size is firstly coated by the bridge, followed by the deposition of component II with a small size.124–126 The inserted bridges can be either nanostructures or coordinated groups/ligands. When nanoscale structures are inserted as bridges, the two components are separated from each other.125,132,158 In contrast, as the inserted groups/ligands are thin enough, the two components are in close contact with each other.163,165,166 In comparison with Type I and II structures, component I rather than the bridge serves as the supporter in Type III structure, while the similarity between them is the exposure of the bridge to the ambient environment.
Type IV is also a stack structure, in which nano-bridges are firstly supported by one component (component I) and then encapsulated by another one (component II).31–33,39,41,42,62,69,72,77–80,86–89,98 The selective coating of the bridge by component II is generally realized by three methods: (i) photo-deposition: with the light excitation of component I, photogenerated electrons trapped on the surface of the bridge selectively reduce reactants to form new materials as shell coatings;31,32,41,42,77,79 (ii) chemical deposition: component II completely wets the surface of the bridge via epitaxial growth owing to a small lattice mismatch between them;33,69,72 and (iii) bridge transformation: the component II shell is derived from the surface reaction of the bridge.83,86–89,98 Different from Type III structure, the nano-bridge core in Type IV structure is isolated by the component II shell and the component I supporter from surface reactions. The advantage of this configuration is the smooth charge transfer enabled by a large contact area between the bridge and component II and the protection of the bridge core from corrosion. Moreover, owing to the interface formation between component I and component II, charge transmission can occur through both component I ↔ component II and component I ↔ bridge ↔ component II pathways.
When the nano-bridge and component II on the surface of the component I supporter are in neighboring positions and contact with each other, Type V structure could be obtained.51,53,56,60,64,109 In many cases, the nano-bridges are obtained via partial photoreduction of the loaded component II by photoexcited electrons generated in the component I supporter.53,60,64 Similar to Type IV structure, three components in Type V structure are in contact with each other for multi-channel charge migration. The only difference in Type V structure is the exposure of nano-bridges to outside reactions.
Type VI sandwich structure is mainly fabricated through step-by-step deposition of the bridge and component II layers on component I via methods such as spin-coating, dip-coating, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), electrodeposition, etc.34,96,99,100,109,110,113,122,157 The layered structure can be either flat or curved, in which the curved one generally originates from the component I/II core–shell structure with the bridge as an interlayer. The layered structure is distinguished from Type III and V structures in that the bridge is not exposed, while it different from Type IV structure in that components I and II are spatially separated by the bridge interlayer. The advantage of the layered structure is the large interfacial area between the bridge and the two components. Furthermore, the migration distance of charge carriers and light shielding of component I can be reduced when the thicknesses of the bridge and component II layers are shrunk to an atomic scale.
4. Functions of bridges in various photocatalytic/PEC systems
Based on the architectures discussed above, bridges can be used in various photocatalytic systems. The functions of bridges are greatly dependent on the charge kinetics model in the photocatalytic/PEC systems.
4.1. Bridges in pristine semiconductor systems
In pristine semiconductor photocatalysis/photoelectrocatalysis, when the bulk of photocatalysts or photoelectrodes are constituted by nanoparticles, severe recombination of electrons and holes occurs at the interparticle boundaries when charge carriers migrate across particles to reach the surface of the photocatalyst/photoelectrode. With the insertion of a low-resistance bridge into the matrix of photocatalysts, the interparticle charge transfer is improved with the connecting bridge serving as an in-built electron collector and conductor.130,131 For instance, the incorporation of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets into the BiVO4 photoanode led to a remarkable 10-fold enhancement in PEC water splitting.130 As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the rGO scaffold as an alternative electron pathway greatly facilitates efficient electron transfer by accepting photogenerated electrons from BiVO4 and shuttling them to the collecting electrode, whereas rGO itself does not directly participate in the charge generation and surface reaction. The Choi group compared two nanocomposite photocatalysts of TiO2 nanofibers (NFs) and graphene oxide (GO) sheets: (i) GO/TiO2 NF with GO embedded within the matrix of TiO2 NFs that consists of densely packed TiO2 nanoparticles and (ii) GO(s)/TiO2 NF with the external surface of TiO2 NFs covered with GO (Fig. 2b).131 The photocatalytic H2 production rate of GO/TiO2 NF is higher than that of GO(s)/TiO2 NF with the reason that the embedded GO facilitates interparticle charge transfer and separation in the nanofibers, while the surrounding GO shields the light absorption of TiO2 NFs and blocks their surface active sites. It is worth noting that the surrounding GO in GO(s)/TiO2 NF cannot be regarded as a bridge considering that GO provides the terminal sites for the consumption of electrons extracted from TiO2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrating the enhanced electron transport in BiVO4 in a PEC cell based on BiVO4 and rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the composite structures of GO(s)/TiO2 NF and GO/TiO2 NF and the associated charge transfers for H2 production. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
4.2. Bridges in semiconductor heterostructure systems
Semiconductor heterostructures are generally constructed by integrating two semiconductors in different energy band structures. Generally, Type II heterostructures with a staggered alignment offer ideal platforms for charge separation. Driven by their potential differences of the conduction band (CB) and the valence band (VB), electrons flow to one semiconductor with a more positive CB position, while holes diffuse to another one with a more negative VB position, contributing to the spatial separation of electrons and holes on different components. However, the charge separation efficiency is greatly limited by the poor interfacial charge transfer behavior between two semiconductors. When conductive bridges are inserted into the interface of semiconductor heterostructures and used as electron mediators, rapid charge transfer at the interface contributes to highly efficient charge separation and enhanced photocatalytic/PEC performance.30,34,163–168 For example, the Feng group reported a heterojunction array of α-Fe2O3/rGO/BiV1−xMoxO4 core@shell nanorods for PEC water splitting.30 As shown in Fig. 3a, rGO sheets as an electron conductor transfer the electrons from the CB of the BiV1−xMoxO4 shell to the CB of the Fe2O3 core and then to the Ti substrate. Simultaneously, the holes at the VB of Fe2O3 migrate to the VB of BiV1−xMoxO4via the rGO interlayer. The faster interfacial charge transfer contributes to an enhancement in the photoconversion efficiency. Yu et al. fabricated rGO bridged NiO/TiO2 p–n heterostructured coaxial nanocables (Fig. 3b).34 The zero-bandgap rGO interlayer increases the barrier height by lowering the Fermi level of NiO and increasing the Fermi level of TiO2, which enhances the strength of the built-in electron field (Fig. 3c). As a result, the interfacial charge separation is improved and the photocatalytic H2 production activity is elevated.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the energy band structure of the Fe2O3/rGO/BiV1−xMoxO4 heterojunction and the proposed mechanism of PEC water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustrations of the rGO bridged NiO/TiO2 core/shell coaxial nanocables and (c) the proposed mechanism of rGO mediated charge transfer. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the transfer and separation of photogenerated charges in the –O–P–O– bridged SiW12/C3N4 nanocomposite. Adapted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of CuO/In2O3/ZnO. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
In addition to graphene, phosphate and silicate groups have also been reported to enhance the separation efficiency of electrons and holes in semiconductor heterostructures through the formation of bridged bonds.163–168 As reported by the Wang group, a polyoxometalate cluster of [H4SiO40W12] (SiW12) has been covalently combined with KOH-modified C3N4 through a phosphate-bridged strategy. The phosphate bridges promote the transfer of photogenerated electrons from C3N4 to SiW12 and hole migration in the opposite direction, contributing to the enhanced photocatalytic activity in N2 fixation (Fig. 3d).164 The Jing group demonstrated that the visible photocatalytic activity of the ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposite could be enhanced after introducing silicate bridges.166 The in-built bridge promotes the electron transfer from BiVO4 to ZnO and facilitates the charge separation in BiVO4.
The role of bridges in heterostructures is not limited to provide a high-speed channel, but they also circumvent the mismatch of energy bands between different semiconductors to smoothen the interfacial charge transfer. When semiconductor materials are not in a close energy band, charge carrier migration is partially hindered by the high barrier height owing to the band discontinuity of the CB and the VB. Then a buffer material as a bridge is normally introduced between two components to lower the barrier height. For instance, in CuO/ZnO heterojunctions, photo-induced hole transfer from ZnO to CuO is impeded by a large valence band offset (ΔEVB) between them.110 Then an In2O3 interlayer with moderate Eg is inserted to mitigate ΔEVB (Fig. 3e). The well-aligned band structure of the CuO/In2O3/ZnO heterojunction leads to efficient charge separation and boosts the PEC water splitting performance. Besides, many other buffer interlayer bridged semiconductor heterostructures, such as Cu2O/TiO2/CuO,109 Cu2O/ZnO/AZO (Al-doped ZnO),111 ZnO/ZnS/CdS,116 ZnO/ZnS/ZnIn2S4,117 TiO2/In2S3/AgInS2120 and C3N4/graphene oxide/BiOI,150 have also been reported.
4.3. Bridges in semiconductor/cocatalyst (electrocatalyst) systems
As discussed above, in semiconductor/cocatalyst photocatalytic systems, instead of acting as light-harvesters to generate photoexcited charge carriers, cocatalysts mainly serve as electron/hole acceptors to promote electron–hole separation in the semiconductor and provide alternative active sites to accelerate surface reaction kinetics.24–26,174–177 In addition, specific functional cocatalysts can inhibit the side or back reaction and improve the product selectivity. In terms of function, cocatalysts can be divided into two categories: (i) reduction cocatalysts trapping electrons and providing active sites for reduction half reactions and (ii) oxidation cocatalysts accepting holes and supplying active sites for oxidation half reactions. For both kinds of cocatalysts, the interface between the semiconductor and the cocatalyst is the pivotal location where charge carriers migrate, holding the key to preventing adverse electron–hole recombination in a light-harvesting semiconductor.178 However, many cocatalysts, such as metal oxides and sulfides, often suffer from limited electron trapping ability in spite of strong adsorption and activation abilities to reactants. Then conductive materials are designed to bridge semiconductors and cocatalysts for enhanced charge transfer and separation. For instance, the Wang group fabricated a Pt@Cu2O core–shell cocatalyst to promote the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4 and CO.32 As shown in Fig. 4a, the Cu2O shell provides sites for the preferential activation and conversion of CO2 molecules, while the Pt core extracts the photogenerated electrons from TiO2 and delivers them to Cu2O. Similar core–shell cocatalysts with a metal core as electron bridges are also reported, including Ag@NiO,62 Pd@NiO,73 Rh@Cr2O3,77–81 and Ni@NiO.83–89 In core–shell cocatalysts, the role of the metal core is not limited to acting as a bridge, but also to creating an additional effect in advancing the interfacial charge transfer and surface catalytic reaction.33,179 For instance, atomically controlled Pd@Pt core–shell cocatalysts were fabricated on TiO2 nanosheets by us (Fig. 4b).33 Owing to the different work functions of Pd and Pt, the interfacial polarization effect serves as a new driving force for the migration of photogenerated electrons from the Pd core to the Pt surface, improving the charge separation in the entire system. In this case, the Pt shell with a few atomic layers has to be retained as the interfacial polarization effect decays as the Pt shell thickness increases (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustrating the Pt@Cu2O core–shell cocatalyst for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction selectivity. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of the Pd@Pt3L core–shell cocatalyst supported on TiO2 nanosheets, and (c) differential charge density determined using first principles simulations for Pt{100} shells on Pd{100} substrates in the presence of one additional electron: the olive and cyan colors represent an increase and decrease in electron density, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to metal bridged core–shell cocatalysts in Type IV configuration, carbon nanomaterials as conductive supporters also connect semiconductors and cocatalysts in Type II configuration for accelerated charge transportation. A case in point is the synergism of MoS2 and graphene as cocatalysts for enhanced photocatalytic H2 production activity.136,139,142,180–183 As illustrated in Fig. 5a, when the TiO2/graphene/MoS2 photocatalyst is illuminated by UV light, photo-induced electrons in the CB of TiO2 can be injected into graphene.139 The injected electrons further transfer to MoS2 with graphene as a conductive electron transport “highway” and then react with the adsorbed H+ ions at the edges of MoS2 to form H2. It should be noted that different from metal bridged core–shell cocatalysts, the graphene bridge is exposed to an ambient environment, which may simultaneously provide additional active sites for surface reactions. As in the above TiO2/graphene/MoS2 photocatalyst, it is assumed that some photogenerated electrons transferred to graphene also directly react with H+ to produce H2 on the C atoms (Fig. 5a).139 In some other cases, despite the good electron capture ability of the cocatalyst, the semiconductor itself is not an ideal supporting material for the cocatalyst mainly due to the poor compatibility between them. Then carbon materials with good wetting abilities for both the semiconductor and the cocatalyst are used as bridges between them. For instance, to avoid aggregation of Ni cocatalysts, Zhao et al. anchored single Ni atoms on vacancies in nitrogen-doped graphene as a cocatalyst for photocatalytic H2 evolution.149 Photogenerated electrons migrate from CdS to Ni atoms with graphene as the conducting channel. Similar nano-carbon bridged semiconductor/cocatalyst structures, such as Cd0.8Zn0.2S/graphene/NiSx,135 CdS/graphene/Pd,137 CaFe2O4/(carbon nanotube/graphene)/Pd,153 C3N4/amorphous carbon/NiS,184 NaNbO3/graphene/Pt,185 TiO2/graphene/Cu,186 CdS/graphene/single atomic Co187 and Sr2Ta2O7−xNx/graphene/Pt,188 have also been investigated. In the above structures, it is also expected that the light shielding of the light-harvesting semiconductor by the cocatalyst could be reduced because of the distance between them.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer in the TiO2/graphene/MoS2 composite. Adapted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Ni(OH)2/IrO2 conjugated cocatalyst on the Ti-Fe2O3 electrode for improved water oxidation. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the hydrophilic interface modification for improving the interfacial contact between Ta3N5 and CoOx for enhanced water oxidation. Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
While metal and nano-carbons are used as bridges between the semiconductor and reduction cocatalysts, the semiconductor and oxidation cocatalysts are often bridged by metal hydroxide for photooxidation reactions.124,125 The Li group found that the loading of the Ni(OH)2/IrO2 conjugated cocatalyst on the Ti doped hematite nanorod array (Ti-Fe2O3) photoanode facilitated water oxidation and decreased the onset potential by about 200 mV in PEC water splitting.124 It was found that Ni(OH)2 as a hole-storage layer efficiently captures the photogenerated holes from hematite to improve the charge transfer process across the interface between hematite and the IrO2 catalyst (Fig. 5b). Furthermore, the stored holes in Ni(OH)2 can be utilized by IrO2 more facilely for water oxidation. They also tailored the interface between Ta3N5 and CoOx cocatalyst to improve charge separation and consequent water oxidation efficiency with a magnesia (MgO, which converted into Mg(OH)2 once it was exposed to water) nanolayer as a bridge.125 As an intimate contact can hardly be achieved between hydrophobic Ta3N5 and hydrophilic CoOx, the magnesia nanolayer is used to turn the Ta3N5 surface from hydrophobic to hydrophilic through surface coating prior to CoOx deposition, which not only improves the interfacial contact area between CoOx and Ta3N5, but also reduces the defect density of Ta3N5 through a passivation effect (Fig. 5c).
In PEC systems, electrocatalysts are also integrated with light-absorbing semiconductor electrodes to increase the kinetics of surface reactions.189–191 In addition to facilitating the transfer of photogenerated charge carriers from a light-absorbing semiconductor to an electrocatalyst, a bridge as an intermediate layer also serves as a protection layer to prevent the light absorber from corrosion and acts as a strong binder to the electrocatalysts in the photoanode/photocathode. For instance, the Gong group demonstrated the integration between polycrystalline n+p-Si and NiFe-layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanosheet array by a partially activated Ni (Ni/NiOx) bridging layer for excellent PEC water oxidation.192 In the Si/SiOx/Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH photoanode, Ni makes good contact with Si and protects Si against corrosion, while the NiOx layer has strong bonding with NiFe-LDH owing to the similarity in material structure and composition (Fig. 6a). The intimate contact at each interface guarantees the smooth transfer of accumulated holes to the catalyst. Leung et al. fabricated a photocathode for proton reduction by immobilizing a molecular catalyst on p-doped Si (p-Si) via a mesoporous TiO2 interlayer.193 The mesoporous TiO2 scaffold with lower CB and VB than those of p-Si not only acts as an electron-selective shuttle between p-Si and the catalyst, but also stabilizes p-Si from passivation and enables a high loading of molecular catalysts (Fig. 6b). Koo et al. deposited rGO as an adhesive interlayer between the Cu(In,Ga)Se2/CdS heterojunction photocathode and the Pt catalyst for PEC water splitting.194 The functions of rGO include: (i) provide an efficient transfer path to Pt catalysts; (ii) strongly anchor the Pt catalysts via various structural defects and functional groups to prevent desorption and in-diffusion of Pt; and (iii) prevent the underlying CdS from (photo)corrosion in the liquid electrolyte (Fig. 6c). In addition to above cases, other light-harvesting semiconductor/electrocatalyst photoelectrodes bridged by a conductor or semiconductor interlayer have also been reported, such as TiO2/FeMnP/(Mn1−xFex)OOH122 and BiVO4/rGO/NiFe hydroxide195 photoanodes for H2O oxidation and n+p-Si/Ti/Co-doped WS2,100 Si/NiSi/NiMo123 and Cu(In,Ga)Se2/CdS/TiO2/Pt196 photocathodes for H2 production.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional schematic and energy band alignment of the designed multicomponent n+p-Si/SiOx/Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH photoanode for water oxidation Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of PEC H2 evolution with the Si/mesoTiO2/catalyst photocathode and chemical structures of the immobilized catalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The proposed model and energy band diagram (left) describing the working principles of the Cu(In,Ga)Se2/CdS/rGO/Pt photocathode for H2 evolution and schematic (right) describing the role of the rGO interlayer on the CdS buffer layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Besides, ultrathin insulator layers, which are typically metal oxide layers (e.g. SiO2, HfO2 and Al2O3), are also used in semiconductor/metal photoelectrodes to protect semiconductors from corrosive electrolytes, passivate the semiconductor surface defects and mediate the minority carrier transport from the semiconductor to the metal electrocatalyst with minimal recombination for improving PEC stability and performance.197–201 Generally, driven by the built-in potential governed by the inherent differences in the electronic Fermi levels between the semiconductor and the metal, the Schottky barrier at the semiconductor–metal interface repels the majority carriers and selectively conducts the minority carriers. However, the direct contact between the semiconductor and the metal leads to surface recombination due to the presence of metal-induced gap states that can cause Fermi level pinning and diminish the barrier height of the Schottky junction. The insertion of an ultrathin insulator layer between the metal and the semiconductor substantially reduces the Fermi level pinning for efficient transport of the minority carriers. Fig. 7a shows a typical semiconductor/insulator/metal photoelectrode consisting of a metallic collector situated at the surface of an insulator-covered p-type semiconductor layer.197 As illustrated in Fig. 7b, according to the barrier height of the insulator relative to the energy bands of the semiconductor, the minority charge (electron) carriers tunnel through the insulating layer to the collector to initiate the H2 evolution reaction, while the potential barrier of an insulator layer reduces the recombination current of the majority charge carriers. Moreover, many metal electrocatalysts (e.g. Ni and Co) in the semiconductor/insulator/metal junctions are readily oxidized to oxide (e.g. NiOx and CoOx) or further transformed to oxyhydroxide (e.g. Ni(OH)2 and Co(OH)2) partially or completely with the assistance of an electrolyte.198,200,202–206 For instance, Hill et al. reported that the measured photovoltage (Voc = 0.47 V) and barrier height (ψbh = 0.74 eV) of the n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH photoanode are higher than the calculated Voc (0.11 V) and ψbh (0.61 eV) of n-Si/CoSi2 without the interfacial SiOx layer, respectively, suggesting the minimization of the Fermi level pinning for efficient PEC water oxidation (Fig. 7c and d).198 In the Si/TiOx/NiOx photocathodes fabricated by the Lee group, an amorphous TiOx (a-TiOx) insulator with a low barrier height for electron transfer relative to that for hole transfer not only shows the ability for selective collection of photogenerated minority charge (electron) carriers, but also shows excellent passivation ability for the Si surface defects and protects the Si surface against the corrosive electrolyte permeating through the porous NiOx, thereby retaining stable operation for 10 hours (Fig. 7e).206 It should be noted that the rational thickness of the insulator layer is critical to the minimization of recombination losses and optimization of the generated photovoltage. Generally, too low insulator thickness cannot prevent majority carrier recombination currents and passivate the surface defects effectively, while too high thickness increases the resistance to the minority charge carrier tunneling and lowers the optical transparency of the insulator to sunlight.207,208 According to the studies of the Linic group, lower barrier (p-Si/HfO2/Ti/Pt) and higher barrier (p-Si/HfO2/Al/Pt) PEC systems show optimized performance at a HfO2 thickness of 1.9 and 2.6 nm, respectively, suggesting that the optimized insulator thickness is greatly dependent on the initial barrier height (Fig. 7f).208 Compared to higher barrier systems, lower barrier systems need thicker insulators to minimize majority carrier recombination currents.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic side view of a semiconductor/insulator/metal photoelectrode with a metallic collector situated on an insulator-covered p-type semiconductor, and (b) energy band diagram of a standard semiconductor/insulator/metal junction with a p-type semiconductor. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Calculated photoresponse of the n-Si/CoSi2 photoanode and measured photoresponse of the n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH photoanode, and (d) schematic of the n-Si/CoSi2 photoanode with 0.61 eV barrier height and the n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH photoanode with 0.74 eV barrier height. Adapted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) Schematic illustration of the roles of the TiOx insulator in Si/TiOx/NiOx photocathodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (f) Open-circuit voltage as a function of insulator thickness for p-Si/HfO2/Ti/Pt and p-Si/HfO2/Al/Pt electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
4.4. Bridges in semiconductor/conductor systems
Apart from cocatalysts, the combination of light-harvesting semiconductors with conductive supporters such as graphene and carbon nanotubes represents another promising route to enhance the transfer and separation of photogenerated electrons and holes for improved photocatalytic performance.209–211 Nevertheless, the enhancement is often limited by poor interfacial contact between semiconductors and conductive materials. To solve this problem, bridges are used to strengthen the interfacial contact between them and accelerate the interfacial electron transfer. For example, a unique semiconductor/metal/graphene stack structure was fabricated by us for improved photocatalytic H2 production.69 As shown in Fig. 8a, Pd nanocubes are embedded into the interface between cubic Cu2O and rGO in a Type IV bridged configuration. In comparison with the Cu2O–rGO interface, the strong electronic couplings of Cu2O–Pd and Pd–rGO interfaces favor smooth charge transfer through the Cu2O → Pd → rGO pathway. Another case in point is that dopamine bridging is utilized to strengthen the interfacial contact between TiO2 nanocapsules and conductive melamine-doped graphene sheets for efficient photocatalytic degradation of gaseous HCHO.172 As illustrated in Fig. 8b, photoexcited electrons in TiO2 are quickly transferred to graphene via the dopamine layer wrapped on the surface of TiO2, promoting the separation and mobility of electrons and holes.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge flow in semiconductor/metal/graphene stack design. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustrations of the dopamine bridged melamine–graphene/TiO2 nanocapsule and the photocatalytic degradation process of HCHO. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagrams of the semiconductor–carbon and carbon–metal interfacial charge transfer without (top) and with (bottom) the sandwiching of tunneling layers, and (d) schematic diagrams of the energy band and electronic processes occurring in the semiconductor/metal contact: (left) built-in field and barrier for electron transfer; (middle) thermionic emission; and (right) electron tunneling with a narrower space charge layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
In semiconductor/carbon (metal) photocatalytic structures, photogenerated charge carriers should overcome the built-in fields and potential barriers to realize charge separation (Fig. 8c – top and Fig. 8d – left). Generally, the transfer of electrons through the semiconductor–carbon interface can be mainly described as thermionic emission (Fig. 8d – middle) and electron tunneling (Fig. 8d – right), according to the height and width of the potential barriers of the contacts.118 Because of the large energy dissipation required for thermionic emission, the transfer of photogenerated electrons is not efficient. To facilitate the semiconductor–carbon interfacial charge transfer, Qiao et al. adopted ultrathin dopant-free interlayers to coat graphene to bridge the charge transfer from the semiconductor (Fig. 8c – bottom). Sandwiching the CdS(t) tunneling interlayer not only decreases the width of the potential barriers due to nanostructuring induced band bending confinement and facilitates tunneling of electrons from CdS to graphene with very low energy dissipation (Fig. 8d – right), but also blocks the charge leakage by curing the defects on graphene (Fig. 8c – bottom), contributing to significantly improved photocatalytic H2 evolution.
In PEC systems, rational bridge engineering on the interface between the photoactive semiconductor and the conducting substrate is also important for the efficient transport and separation of photogenerated carriers. For one thing, the interlayer is inserted into the semiconductor–substrate interface to modify the interfacial band offset and lower the barrier height. Early in 2013, the Domen group developed a particle transfer method to fabricate water splitting photoelectrodes using Ta or Nb as a contact layer, in which the insertion of the interlayer between the Ti conductor and LaTiO2N particles led to a remarkable enhancement in the photoanodic current.99 They highlighted the importance of an ohmic interlayer with a negligible barrier for charge transfer to the conductor (Fig. 9a). The Jang group demonstrated a 6-fold enhancement of the water-splitting performance by inserting an atomically thin polar LaAlO3 interlayer into the interface between the WO3 photoanode and the Nb-doped SrTiO3 (Nb:STO) substrate.112 The internal electric field induced by LaAlO3 modifies the effective band offsets, lowers the Schottky barrier and reduces the charge transfer resistance between the oxides by up to 2 orders of magnitude (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration highlighting the importance of an ohmic layer with negligible barrier for charge transfer from LaTiO2N to the conductor. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic interface energy band diagram showing Schottky barrier removal by the insertion of a LaAlO3 interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic energy-band diagram of BiVO4/Lu2O3/ITO. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
And for another, given that both photo-induced electrons and holes may transfer from the semiconductor to the conducting substrate, a bridged interlayer is inserted into the interface to block the undesired carrier transport. As reported by the Liu group, a Lu2O3 layer as an epitaxial hole-blocking medium was integrated with crystalline BiVO4 thin film photoanodes to facilitate carrier transport for PEC water oxidation.113 The Lu2O3 interlayer not only minimizes the structural defect formation at the interface to suppress the charge recombination, but also acts as an effective hole-blocking medium by forming a unique band alignment (a negligible conduction band offset but a much larger valence band offset) with BiVO4 to drive hole delivery to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface for water oxidation (Fig. 9c). Wan et al. demonstrated a nanoscale TaOx interlayer as a passivated electron-selective heterocontact for Si-based PEC water reduction.212 Aside from the effective passivation of Si surface defects, the contribution of the TaOx interlayer includes the following: (i) a small conduction band offset allows electrons to flow from the CB of Si to TaOx and (ii) a large valence band offset provides a barrier to prevent holes flowing from the VB of Si to the oxide and further to the metal cathode. In addition to the transport of only one type of carrier and effective blocking of the other type, an interlayer is also applied to suppress the electron back injection from the conducting substrate to the semiconductor. As a case in point, Hisatomi et al. developed Nb2O5 underlayers for the enhanced PEC performance of an ultrathin hematite photoanode for water splitting.114 The reasonable explanation is that the Nb2O5 underlayer works as a barrier layer for backward electron migration from FTO to hematite, preventing electrons in FTO from recombining with photo-induced holes in the VB of hematite. Additionally, several buffer layer bridged semiconductor/substrate sandwich photoelectrodes have also been constructed, such as Cu2O/Cu2O:Sb/ITO213 and LaFeO3/Au/FTO214 photocathodes and the Ta3N5/NbNx/Ta photoanode.215
4.5. Bridges in plasmonic metal-based systems
Different from cocatalysts and conductive materials, plasmonic metallic nanostructures extend the light absorption region of photocatalysts by acting as light absorbers, which are characterized by their strong interaction with resonant photons through an excitation of the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). The LSPR occurs when the frequency of photons matches the natural frequency of the surface free electrons oscillating against the restoring force of positive nuclei, resulting in coherent oscillation of free electrons in space and energy.18,19 The contribution of LSPR to photocatalysis mainly includes three non-mutually exclusive effects: (i) direct hot charge carrier injection, (ii) electromagnetic field mediated energy transfer, and (iii) resonant photon-scattering energy transfer. For the direct charge transfer mechanism, the resonant optical excitation of surface plasmons produces energetic hot carriers that can transfer to the catalysts and participate in photochemical reactions.216–219 Nonetheless, the opposite transfer of hot carriers often occurs from the catalyst to the plasmonic metal, resulting in the undesirable recombination of hot electrons and holes. Thus the rational bridge design of the interface between the plasmonic metal and the catalyst is highly desirable for smooth migration of hot electrons/holes. Generally, semiconductors are widely used as bridges in this case, where the Schottky barrier between the plasmonic metal and the semiconductor suppresses the backflow of injected hot carriers from the semiconductor to the metal, making sure the further transfer of them to the catalyst for surface reactions. For instance, in the plasmonic Bi/TiO2 heterostructures fabricated by the Bi group, it is found that electrons excited by LSPR transfer from the Bi core to the CB of TiO2 first, and then migrate to the surfaces of the Bi2O3 shell for an improved PEC reduction reaction, where TiO2 serves as a bridge and the reduction reaction does not occur in the absence of it (Fig. 10a).107 As shown in Fig. 10b, the work function of Bi is lower than the Fermi level of n-type TiO2, leading to upward band bending and formation of an electron barrier to prevent the backflow of hot electrons. As for p-type Bi2O3, the Fermi level is lower than the work function of Bi, resulting in downward band bending. In this case, not only the hot electrons of Bi can not transfer to the CB of Bi2O3, but also the electrons of Bi2O3 excited by visible light conversely migrate to Bi and thus depress the LSPR effect. Mubeen et al. constructed an autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter based on a Au nanorod array, in which a crystalline TiO2 layer at the tips of the Au nanorods acted as an electron filter and a support for the Pt nanoparticles, rather than serving as a participant in the light conversion process (Fig. 10c and d).108 During the photosynthetic production of H2, hot electrons from Au pass through TiO2 and are captured by Pt nanoparticles for a reduction reaction, while the Schottky junction between Au and TiO2 prevents the backflow of hot electrons and the migration of hot holes from Au to Pt (Fig. 10e). Other well-defined semiconductor bridged plasmonic metal/catalyst heterostructures such as Au/TiO2/NiOx,103 Au/TiO2/Pd,104,106 Au/TiO2/Pt,105,220 Bi/BiOCl/ZnSn(OH)6221 and Ag/BiOCl/PdOx222 have also been established.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the photogenerated charge transfer route of plasmonic Bi/TiO2 heterostructures under visible light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the bend of the energy gap in Bi/TiO2 and Bi/Bi2O3 interfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the cross-section of an individual photosynthetic unit of an autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter; (d) the corresponding TEM images; and (e) energy level diagram superimposed on a schematic of an individual unit of the plasmonic solar water splitter. Adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Given the relatively low conductivity of semiconductor materials, the migration of hot carriers on the semiconductor bridge for a short distance is important for highly efficient charge transfer. For instance, in the aforementioned Au nanorod array based autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter, it was found that the probability of hot electrons thermalizing and/or being lost in other recombination processes increased with increasing TiO2 layer thickness, reducing the cathodic photocurrent and the resultant H2 production.108 To combat the long carrier diffusion length, rational bridge designs on the plasmonic metal/catalyst heterostructures have been performed. We fabricated Ag/BiOCl/PdOx bridged photocatalysts based on the choice of suitable BiOCl facets in depositing plasmonic Ag and PdOx cocatalyst.222 As illustrated in Fig. 11a, different migration distances of hot holes are achieved with the same loading amounts of Ag and PdOx on different facets of BiOCl, in which co-deposition of Ag and PdOx on the (110) plane realizes the shortest hole diffusion distance in minimizing the loss of hot holes, contributing to the superior photocatalytic O2 evolution performance. In another case, plasmonic metals and cocatalysts are integrated by us on the surface of semiconductors to shorten the migration distance of hot electrons.106 As shown in Fig. 11b, the formation of a Janus heterojunction between plasmonic Au and Pd cocatalyst not only minimizes the migration distance of hot electrons through the Au → TiO2 → Pd pathway, but also provides new channels for direct hot electron transfer through the Au–Pd interface, contributing to incremental visible photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustrating the different average diffuse distances of hot holes in different Ag/BiOCl/PdOx samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustrating the charge kinetics in Au/TiO2/Pd and Au/Pd/TiO2 samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
In many cases, direct contact between the plasmonic metal and the semiconductor cannot guarantee smooth transfer of hot carriers. Then other materials are also reported as bridges in the plasmonic metal-based photocatalytic and PEC systems. As shown in Fig. 12a, in plasmonic Ag/TiO2 photocatalysts, given that the work function of TiO2 is larger than that of Ag, no Schottky barrier can be formed with the direct contact between Ag and TiO2.134 Then the hot electrons injected in TiO2 flow back to Ag and recombine with hot holes. To solve this problem, N-doped rGO is used as an interparticulate electron mediator to conduct the hot electron flow, in which hot electrons generated in Ag flow to rGO in a larger work function through the conductor–conductor contact (Fig. 12b). Then rGO acting as the conductive channel further transmits the electrons to the Schottky junction formed between rGO and TiO2, where the transferred electrons are injected into the CB of TiO2 for H2 evolution with the light excitation of the rGO pump. In other cases, in spite of the theoretical formation of Schottky barriers derived from the difference of the metal work function and the semiconductor Fermi level, plasmonic metal–semiconductor interface states often result in Fermi level pinning and reduce the built-in potential (Fig. 12c).223 Resulting from the deterioration of the Schottky barrier, hot electrons in the semiconductor flow back to the metal and recombine with hot holes. To mitigate the probability of carrier recombination, ultrathin insulator layers are inserted to passivate the interface state and prevent pinning. As illustrated in Fig. 12d, depending on their energy, hot electrons can either tunnel through the insulator barrier or undergo Schottky emission over the barrier, while the backflow of hot electrons is prevented by the barrier. For instance, in the plasmonic Au/SiO2/Fe2O3 heterojunction reported by Li et al., the thin insulating SiO2 layer plays a crucial role in enhancing the plasmon-driven PEC water splitting performance via eliminating the surface state at the Au–Fe2O3 interface and maximizing the barrier height, which prevents the hot electrons from returning to Au and instead transfers them to the surface of Fe2O3.224
 Fig. 12  (a, b) Schematic illustrating the plasmonic photocatalytic mechanism for (a) Ag/TiO2 and (b) Ag/rGO/TiO2 samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c, d) Schematic illustrating the hot electron transfer in (c) plasmonic metal/semiconductor and (d) plasmonic metal/insulator/semiconductor photoelectrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
4.6. Bridges in photosensitizer-based systems
Similar to plasmonic metals, light sensitizers such as dyes, complexes, quantum dots and clusters with a suitable light absorption range are initially excited by photons, and then the photogenerated electrons/holes are transferred to catalysts for reduction/oxide reactions.20,225–232 However, photosensitizer-based systems often undergo insufficient charge transfer from the sensitizer to the catalyst due to their weak interactions. To address this issue, a bridge in good compatibility with both components serves as a substrate for adsorption of the sensitizer and loading of the catalyst. Then efficient charge transfer from the photoexcited sensitizer to the bridge and then to the catalyst is achieved. For instance, the Xiong group developed a highly efficient photocatalytic system for CO2 reduction by bridging the heterogeneous single-atom Co catalyst with the homogeneous light absorber [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 through graphene nanosheets.133 The graphene bridge adsorbs [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 molecules through π–π interaction, offers C/O functional groups as a rigid ligand to anchor Co atoms, and possesses relatively high conductivity to facilitate the transfer of photoexcited electrons from [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 to catalytic Co sites (Fig. 13a). The Lu group prepared an eosin Y-sensitized graphene/NiSx photocatalyst for highly active H2 evolution.233 Graphene not only provides a large area and two-dimensional substrate for the confined growth of NiSx, but also greatly enhances the transfer of photoelectrons from excited eosin Y to the NiSx cocatalyst (Fig. 13b). These advantages offer great opportunities for the wide development of nano-carbon bridged photosensitizer/catalyst heterostructures, such as eosin Y/graphene/PtSn,147 eosin Y/graphene/Pt,234–237 eosin Y/graphene/MoS2,238,239 eosin Y/graphene/CoSnxOy,240 [ZnTMPyP]4+/graphene/MoS2,241 eosin Y/carbon nanotube/Cu3P242 and CdS/carbon nanotube/TiO2/Ni(OH)2.243
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram showing the electron transfer from [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 to the graphene/Co catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b) The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution over the eosin Y-sensitized graphene/NiSx photocatalyst under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) The proposed mechanism of photocatalytic H2 production over RhB-sensitized UiO-66/Pt under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of CuInS2/In2S3/ZnO nanowires. Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to nano-carbons, MOFs, consisting of metal ions or clusters linked together by organic bridging ligands, are another suitable medium for bridging the photosensitizer and the catalyst. For one thing, the large surface area and high pore volume of MOFs lead to a high adsorption capacity for dyes, while the strong π–π interaction between dyes and benzene rings of MOFs ensures efficient charge transfer between them. And for another, the functionalized organic linkers make MOFs a suitable substrate for growing catalysts. For instance, He et al. reported a dye-sensitized UiO-66 MOF for visible photocatalytic H2 production using Pt as a cocatalyst.162 As illustrated in Fig. 13c, RhB molecules directly adsorbed on UiO-66 are excited by visible light, and the excited electrons transfer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of UiO-66 owing to the large energy band offset between excited RhB* and UiO-66, which are subsequently transferred to Pt for proton reduction. As a result, RhB˙+ and the electrons are spatially separated by UiO-66, restraining the charge recombination process. Similar MOF bridged dye-sensitized photocatalysts such as eosin Y/UiO-66/WP160 and erythrosin B/UiO-66/Ni2P161 have also been reported.
In the quantum dot-sensitized PEC system, bridge engineering is also performed on the interfaces of quantum dots and semiconductor photoelectrodes for efficient charge transfer. For instance, Hsu et al. fabricated a hierarchical photoanode by decorating CuInS2 quantum dots on ZnO nanowire arrays with an interlayer of In2S3, in which the In2S3 layer significantly enhanced the photocurrent and decreased the dark current.119 It is indicated that the In2S3 inner shell not only compensates for the band mismatch and facilitates the transfer of photogenerated electrons from CuInS2 to ZnO, but also reduces the energy band bending between CuInS2 and ZnO to prevent the oxidation reaction with the electrolyte through the tunneling effect (Fig. 13d). In the CdSe quantum dot-sensitized ZnO photoanode, the Nb2O5 interlayer facilitates the charge separation by passivating the surface defects of ZnO and forming a stepwise band edge structure between ZnO and CdSe.115
Metal nanoclusters with a precise number of metal atoms and protected by stabilizing ligands have recently emerged as a new class of photosensitizers to extend the absorption range of photocatalysts.244 Different from plasmonic metal nanostructures, the light absorption of metal nanoclusters is attributed to a discrete molecule-like band structure. The Kamat group fabricated a glutathione-capped Aux nanocluster-sensitized TiO2/Pt nanocomposite for photocatalytic water splitting.245 As shown in Fig. 14a, the excited Aux nanoclusters are capable of injecting electrons into the TiO2 bridge under visible light illumination. The electrons then transfer to Pt nanoparticles to enable H2 evolution. In the research by the Xiong group, metal cations are grafted to Aux nanoclusters using L-cysteine as a bridging ligand. Under visible light irradiation, metal cations accept photogenerated electrons from Aux nanoclusters through the bridging ligands and serve as catalytic sites for CO2 reduction (Fig. 14b).171 The Liu group developed well-defined Au nanoparticles and Aux nanoclusters coadorning nanoporous TiO2 nanotube arrays for improved PEC and photocatalytic performances under visible light irradiation.246 As shown in Fig. 14c, two main electron transfer pathways exist in the ternary heterostructure: (i) the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons from Aux clusters to the CB of TiO2 based on a suitable band alignment between clusters and TiO2 and (ii) the initial transfer of electrons from Aux clusters to the Fermi level of Au nanoparticles and then to the CB of TiO2 with Au nanoparticles acting as a bridging medium to reinforce the flow of electrons. Moreover, hot electrons generated from plasmon excitation of Au nanoparticles also flow to the CB of TiO2, while the localized oscillating electric field afforded by the plasmonic Au bridge may also facilitate the transport of electrons photogenerated by Aux clusters.
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the working principle of the Aux-sensitized TiO2/Pt photocatalytic system for the water splitting reaction under visible light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the electron transfer in Aux nanoclusters grafted with metal cations through bridging ligands. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Electron transfer pathways in the Aux/Au/TiO2 ternary system. Adapted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
4.7. Bridges in all-solid-state Z-scheme systems
In semiconductor heterostructures, photogenerated electrons/holes lose their energy during their migration from one semiconductor to another with a more positive CB/negative VB, leading to lower redox ability. In other words, the charge separation efficiency is improved at the expense of charge redox ability. To circumvent this hindrance, a photosystem, which looks like the English letter “Z”, known as the Z-scheme, has been developed by mimicking the natural photosynthesis system.247–250 Generally, a typical Z-scheme photocatalytic system is constituted by two separated photosystems (PS I and PS II) with a dissolved electron acceptor–donor (A–D) pair as mediators. Upon the light excitation of the two photosystems, A is reduced to D by accepting photogenerated electrons from the CB of PS1 in a more positive position, whereas the produced D is oxidized back to A by the holes from the VB of PS II in a more negative position:A + ne− → D (CB of PS I)D + nh+ → A (VB of PS II).Then the photogenerated electrons in the CB of PS II (in a more negative position) and holes in the VB of PS I (in a more positive position) participate in the redox reactions, guaranteeing a higher redox ability. However, the backward reactions also proceed easily, resulting in the obvious decrease in the effective number of photogenerated electrons and holes:A + ne− → D (CB of PS II)D + nh+ → A (VB of PS I).To solve the aforementioned problem, A–D pair free all-solid-state Z-scheme structures have been developed by employing a solid conductive bridge as the electron mediator.251,252 The bridges are inserted between PS I and PS II with an ohmic contact between them in low resistance. The TiO2/Au/CdS photocatalyst reported in 2006 is the first example of an all-solid-state Z-scheme system (Fig. 15a).31 In the TiO2/Au/CdS system with a Type IV bridged configuration, photogenerated electrons in the CB of the TiO2 supporter transfer to the Au core and then to the CdS shell, subsequently recombining with holes in the VB of CdS (Fig. 15b). Simultaneously, electrons in the CB of CdS and holes in the VB of TiO2 with strong redox powers contribute to higher photocatalytic activity in comparison with two-component Au/TiO2 and TiO2/CdS systems in methylviologen reduction. Another excellent example is a redox-mediator-free Z-scheme system consisting of La- and Rh-codoped SrTiO3 (SrTiO3:La,Rh) and Mo-doped BiVO4 (BiVO4:Mo) embedded into a Au layer (Fig. 15c).38 According to the report by the Domen group, the Au layer accelerates the charge transfer from BiVO4:Mo to SrTiO3:La,Rh, contributing to an ultrahigh solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion efficiency (STH) of 1.1% in pure water splitting and an apparent quantum yield of over 30% at 419 nm (Fig. 15d). The bridge mediated charge transfer in the Z-scheme system can be nanoscopically detected by employing a photoassisted Kelvin probe force microscopy technique.39 As shown in Fig. 15e–g, the surface potential voltage (SPV) image of the WO3/Au/In2S3 nanowire exhibits a significant change of 30 mV after light illumination, while WO3/In2S3 only shows a 10 mV change, suggesting In2S3 → Au → WO3 hole transfer upon the excitation of WO3 and In2S3.
 Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image and (b) energy band diagram scheme of the TiO2/Au/CdS system. Adapted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2006 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Schematic of overall water splitting on the SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet, and (d) time courses of the water splitting reaction on a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet under simulated sunlight at 288 K and 5 kPa (open symbols) and 331 K and 10 kPa (closed symbols). Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) TEM and HRTEM images of WO3/Au/In2S3, and (f, g) SPV images of (f) WO3/In2S3 and (g) WO3/Au/In2S3 excited at 410 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from Au,39–46,253 Ag is another widely used solid electron mediator in the design of Z-scheme systems. In most cases, the Ag bridge shares the same metallic element with PS I or PS II, such as AgBr/Ag/BiOBr,51 AgBr/Ag/CeO2,52 Ag3PO4/Ag/SiC,53 Ag2CO3/Ag/AgBr,54 Ag2S/Ag/TiO2,55 Ag3PO4/Ag/WO3−x,57 AgCl/Ag/TaON,59 Ag2CrO4/Ag/C3N4,60 Ag2CO3/Ag/WO3,61 AgCl/Ag/Bi20TiO32,64 AgCl/Ag/H2WO4·H2O65 and AgCl/Ag/MIL-53-Fe.66 In many circumstances, the Ag bridge and PS I/II are derived from the same source/precursor, guaranteeing the formation of an intimate junction between them for smooth interfacial charge transfer. Similar structures can also be seen in CdS/Cd/ZnO,90 CdS/Cd/TiO2,91 BiOCl/Bi/Bi2O3,92 Bi2MoO6/Bi/CdS,93 BiOCl/Bi/AgCl,94 Bi2MoO6/Bi/Cu2O,95 WO3/W/BiVO4,96 WO3/W/Si97 and WO3/W/PbBi2Nb1.9Ti0.1O9,98 among which CdS and WO3 are synthesized by the partial sulfurization of the metallic Cd bridge and partial oxidation of the metallic W bridge, respectively.
It should be noted that some plasmonic metal bridges (e.g. Ag58,64–66 and Bi93,95) simultaneously serve as the electron mediator and light absorber. When PS I, PS II and the bridge are photoexcited, the LSPR of the bridge not only enhances the light absorption of PS I/II through resonant photon scattering, but also induces a built-in electric field and promotes electron–hole separation in PS I/II through local electromagnetic field enhancement,58,93,95 When the bridge and only one PS are photoexcited, the main contribution of the LSPR effect to the Z-scheme system is direct hot charge transfer rather than plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer.64–66 For instance, in the AgCl-Ag-MIL-53-Fe Z-scheme system, AgCl with large Eg cannot be photoexcited by visible light, while MIL-53-Fe and Ag can respond to visible light due to suitable Eg and plasmonic band, respectively.66 As shown in Fig. 16a, LSPR-induced hot electrons of Ag bridges are injected into the CB of AgCl to reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(III). Simultaneously, photogenerated electrons of MIL-53-Fe transfer to Ag to recombine with LSPR-excited hot holes, while holes remain on MIL-53-Fe to oxidize RhB. To prevent the influence of the plasmonic effect, nonplasmonic metals such as Pd70–72 and Pt74,76 have also been used as a bridge in Z-scheme systems. For example, we fabricated a C3N4/Pd/Cu2O Z-scheme photocatalytic structure with Pd nanocubes embedded into the interface between n-type C3N4 and p-type Cu2O.72 The intimate face-to-face contact between monocrystalline Pd(100) and Cu2O(100) with the same crystallographic orientation ensures smooth electron transfer through a C3N4 → Pd → Cu2O pathway and ultimate recombination with holes in Cu2O.
 Fig. 16  (a) Plasmonic Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism of AgCl/Ag/MIL-53-Fe. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the BiVO4/rGO/CuGaS2 Z-scheme system for water splitting with CoOx and Pt as cocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the printed SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo sheet, and (d) photocatalytic activity comparison of SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo and SrTiO3:Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheets, the inset of (d) is the photographic image of the SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2018 Cell Press. 
In addition to the metals discussed above, low-cost carbon materials (graphene,126–129,132,146 carbon nanotubes,151,152 carbon nanodots,154 carbon layers157–159), metal oxides (ITO101,102) and metal sulfides (MoS2254,255) with excellent conductivity have also been used as bridges in all-solid-state Z-scheme systems. For instance, the Kudo group constructed a BiVO4/rGO/CuGaS2 Z-scheme water-splitting system.127 Under visible light irradiation, rGO provides pathways for the recombination of photogenerated electrons in BiVO4 and holes in CuGaS2, leaving holes in BiVO4 and electrons in CuGaS2 to split water (Fig. 16b). To decrease the resulted optical loss by bridges, the Domen group demonstrated the use of ITO nanoparticles as a parent conductive mediator to bridge the SrTiO3:La,Rh and BiVO4:Mo particles fabricated by screen printing (Fig. 16c).102 The printed SrTiO3:La,Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo Z-scheme system exhibits a STH of 0.4% during unassisted sunlight-driven water splitting, greater than that of the system using the same photocatalysts based on the Au bridge (Fig. 16d). It is worth noting that conductors are not indispersible in the construction of all-solid-state Z-scheme systems, where the electrons in the PS with a low CB recombine with the holes in another with a high VB at the solid interface between them.250,251,256 But PS I/PS II systems without bridges generally show lower abilities for charge transfer in comparison with PS I/conductor/PS II systems due to lower electrical resistances of conductors.
All-solid-state Z-scheme systems can be used as PEC photoelectrodes. As illustrated in Fig. 17a, in ZnO/Au/SnO2 nanorod Z-scheme photoanodes, the Au bridge mediates the interfacial electron transfer from the CB of SnO2 to the VB of ZnO in recombining with holes.44 Then the holes accumulated at the SnO2 surface cause oxygen evolution, while the holes concentrated at ZnO transfer to the counter electrode to drive H2 production. More importantly, based on the idea of the all-solid-state Z-scheme, wireless tandem PEC cells can be fabricated.257–259 As illustrated in Fig. 17b, a photocathode and a photoanode are connected back-to-back with an ohmic contact via an inserted conductive bridge.257 With the light excitation of both electrodes, the majority-carrier holes in the photocathode and the majority-carrier electrons in the photoanode recombine at the ohmic contact. Then the minority-carrier electrons diffuse to the photocathode–electrolyte interface for the reduction reaction, whereas the minority-carrier holes diffuse to the photoanode–electrolyte interface for the oxidation reaction. Moreover, the photocathode in the tandem cells can be replaced by a photovoltaic cell in the same Z-scheme design.260–262 Different from PEC systems based on a single light-absorber component, the bias voltage supplied by an external energy source is not necessary for dual-absorber tandem PEC cells to realize efficient overall water splitting. The reason is that Z-scheme structures can straddle both reduction and oxidation potentials of water, which cannot be realized by a single semiconductor photoelectrode with suitable sunlight absorption. Moreover, in comparison with wired tandem PEC cells with separated photoanode and photocathode,263–265 wireless devices have the advantages of mobility, flexible scale and simple design.266 Nowadays, transparent conductive layers such as ITO267 and polytriarylamine261 (PTAA) as well as metal interconnects268 have been used as bridges to mediate the transfer of charge carriers in wireless tandem PEC cells. For instance, by combining a cobalt carbonate (Co–Ci)-catalyzed, extrinsic/intrinsic dual-doped BiVO4 photoanode with a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite single junction solar cell in tandem, the Lee group fabricated a stand-alone, wireless solar water splitting device without an external energy supply (Fig. 17c).261 In the wireless artificial leaf solar hydrogen generator, the BiVO4 photoanode and the perovskite single junction solar cell serve as the front light absorber and the second one, respectively, while PTAA bridges mediate the charge transfer between them (Fig. 17d). The tandem device produces stoichiometric H2 and O2 with an average STH of 3.0% under simulated 1 sun illumination. It should be noted that the reported bridges often lead to higher ohmic resistance at the interfaces between different parts of the device along the electron passage relative to the wire connection, leading to lower efficiency of wireless PEC cells in comparison with their wired counterparts.261,266
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for the photoactivity of ZnO/Au/SnO2 photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Electron energy scheme of PEC water splitting using a dual absorber tandem cell. Adapted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Configuration of a wireless artificial leaf solar hydrogen generator, and (d) energy diagram of an artificial leaf for overall water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
5. Summary and outlook
Bridge engineering on photocatalytic materials represents a promising avenue toward improved performance in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis. To overcome the weak interaction and incompatibility between different components/particles, bridges not only serve as adhesive agents to strengthen their connection and passivate the interface defects involved, but also provide additional conductive channels to avoid interparticle charge transfer. When the band alignment is taken into consideration, bridges not only reduce the barriers or band offsets for the desired charge transfer, but also set barriers or large band offsets to block the undesired charge transport or backflow. As a result, the charge transfer between different components is smoothed for improved electron–hole separation owing to the identical diffusion route and high migration rate. Thereinto, the bridge design has been implemented for the construction of various photocatalytic architectures for significant applications in energy and environment related fields, including pristine semiconductors, semiconductor heterostructures, semiconductor/cocatalyst (catalyst) and semiconductor/conductor structures, plasmonic metal and photosensitizer based heterostructures and all-solid-state Z-scheme structures for water splitting, CO2 reduction, N2 fixation and removal of Cr(VI) and methylviologen. To facilitate reading, Table 1 summarizes the charge kinetics and architectures of bridged photocatalytic and PEC systems as well as the functions of the reported bridges in different types of reactions.
Table 1 Summary of the charge kinetics and architectures of bridged photocatalytic and PEC systems and the functions of the reported bridges in different types of reactions




Photocatalytic/PEC systems
Bridge-mediated charge transfer
Functions of the bridge
Types of reactions
Reported bridges
Architecturesd
Ref.





a e−/h+: transfer of electrons or holes.
b PC: photocatalytic reactions.
c PEC: photoelectrocatalytic reactions.
d Architectures are classified according to Fig. 1.





Pristine semiconductor systems



Improve the interparticle charge transfer
PCb and PECc
Graphene, graphene oxide
Type II

130 and 131



Semiconductor heterostructure systems



Provide the high-speed channel
PC and PEC
Graphene
Type VI

30 and 34



Phosphate and silicate groups
Type III

163–168




a
Circumvent the mismatch of energy bands
PC
GO
Type II

150



PEC
In2O3, TiO2, ZnO, ZnS, In2S3
Type IV

116



Type V

109



Type VI

110, 111, 117 and 120



Semiconductor/cocatalyst (electrocatalyst) systems



(i) Improve the charge trapping ability of the cocatalyst; (ii) circumvent the poor compatibility between the semiconductor and the cocatalyst; (iii) passivate the interfacial defect
PC
Pt, Pd, Ni, Rh, Ag
Type IV

32, 33, 62, 73, 77–81, 88 and 89



Graphene, carbon nanotubes, amorphous carbon
Type I, Type II

135–137, 139, 142, 153 and 180–188



PC and PEC
Ni(OH)2, Mg(OH)2
Type III

124 and 125






(i) Provide the high-speed channel; (ii) prevent the semiconductor from corrosion; (iii) act as a strong binder to the electrocatalyst; (iv) passivate the interfacial defect; (v) reduce the Fermi level pinning for efficient transport of the minority carriers
PEC
Ni/NiOx, TiO2, graphene, SiOx, SiO2, Al2O3, TiOx, HfO2, FeMnP, Ti, NiSi
Type VI

100, 122, 123, 192–198 and 200–208



Semiconductor/conductor systems



(i) Strengthen the interfacial contact between the semiconductor and the conductor; (ii) lower the Schottky barrier and facilitate charge tunneling
PC
Pd
Type IV

69



Dopamine, CdS(t)
Type III

118 and 172






(i) Lower the Schottky barrier; (ii) block the undesired carrier transport; (iii) passivate the interfacial defect
PEC
Ta, Nb, Au, LaAlO3, Lu2O3, TaOx, Nb2O5, Cu2O:Sb, NbNx
Type VI

99, 112–114 and 212–215



Plasmonic metal-based systems



Block the backflow of hot charge carriers
PC and PEC
TiO2, BiOCl, graphene
Type I

103–105, 134 and 220–222



Type II

106 and 107



Type III

108



PEC
Al2O3, SiO2
Type III, Type VI

223 and 224



Photosensitizer-based systems



(i) Provide the high-speed channel; (ii) serve as a substrate for the adsorption of the sensitizer and loading of the catalyst
PC
Graphene, carbon nanotubes, UiO-66, TiO2
Type I, Type II

133, 147, 160, 161, 233–243 and 245



Au, L-cysteine
Type III

171 and 246



(i) Circumvent the mismatch of energy bands; (ii) passivate the interfacial defect
PEC
In2S3, Nb2O5
Type III, Type VI

115 and 119



All-solid-state Z-scheme systems (wireless tandem PEC cells)



(i) Mediate the transfer and recombination of charge carriers; (ii) provide hot electrons for the reduction half reaction when semiconductor II is not excited
PC and PEC
Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Cu, Cd, Bi, W, graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanodots, carbon layers, ITO, MoS2, aluminate group
Type I, Type II

38, 50, 90, 126–129, 146, 151, 152 and 159






Type III

132, 157, 158, 170 and 254



Type IV

31, 39, 40, 42–45, 70, 72 and 98



Type V

51, 53, 56, 60, 64 and 154



Type VI

55, 96 and 97






Mediate the transfer and recombination of charge carriers
PEC
ITO, PTAA, metal interconnect
Type VI

261, 267 and 268










There is no doubt that many pioneering works on bridge engineering have been performed in photocatalytic materials and great progress has been achieved in the investigation of related mechanisms. However, the photocatalytic/PEC reaction is a complex process and the study of bridges in photocatalytic/PEC systems is still at an initial stage. The cost and performance of the existing bridged photocatalysts are far from fulfilling the requirements of practical significance, and need to be further investigated. Firstly, noble metals are widely used as bridges, which are too scarce and expensive to be used for large-scale energy production and environmental remedy. Moreover, light shielding of the bridges often abates the photon absorption ability of the bridged catalyst. Therefore, the development of noble-metal free bridges with high transparency and low cost is highly desirable. More studies should focus on the bridges based on earth-abundant metal, carbon and organic materials. Secondly, the solid–solid contact interface between the bridge and the component can be built by physical and chemical methods, which involve interparticle electrostatic interaction and heterogeneous nucleation growth process, respectively. Both methods cannot guarantee the intimate interface contact in a large area and exclude the interface defects to a large extent. Given that good interface quality is critical for highly efficient charge transfer, novel strategies should be explored to integrate the bridge and components with pristine interfaces, especially for two materials with substantially different lattice structures or processing conditions which cannot be epitaxially grown together. Thirdly, the geometry architecture of the bridged system is another factor influencing its photocatalytic/PEC performance. Nowadays, the full exertion of the function of the bridge is often limited by the imbalance of light harvesting, charge separation and surface reaction. Thus the spatial distribution of the light absorber, bridge and surface active sites should be optimized for multiple collaborations and synergism. Fourthly, a deep understanding of the bridging processes, such as the charge carrier transfer along the bridges, is still lagging behind the development of bridged photocatalysts. To advance the fundamental understanding of the related mechanisms, in situ observations at high spatial, spectral and temporal resolutions are highly desirable for delineating a true, multidimensional picture of these processes in action.
Despite these and other challenges, bridges open up new possibilities to integrate materials that cannot be directly combined and enable the development of novel architectures with unprecedented photocatalytic/PEC performance. Such exciting prospects call for more efforts to maximize the potential of bridges to achieve a breakthrough in the efficiency for commercialization and industrialization. It is hoped that the current review will provide guidelines to assist the development of next-generation bridged photocatalytic/PEC systems—scalable devices with high conversion efficiency which can be mass produced and readily extensible to large sizes for the acceptance and conversion of large amounts of sunlight in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21603191 and 21775138), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. LY20B030003 and LQ16B010001) and the Public Welfare Technology Application Research Plan Project of Zhejiang Province (Analysis Test Item, No. 2017C37024).
Notes and references
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernadez-Garcia and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemannt, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, L. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, J. Wang, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2799–2823 RSC .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893–2939 RSC .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Chen, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920–6937 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Peng and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 RSC .
L. Wei, C. Yu, Q. Zhang, H. Liud and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22411–22436 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 RSC .
Y. P. Yuan, L. W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934–3951 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniecc and S. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Yang, G. Zhang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804710 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, W. Jiang, Z. Li and Y. Xiong, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 223–239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10261–10271 RSC .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5776–5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14810–14814 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, W. Guo, J. Qiu, X. Mou, A. Li, J. P. Claverie and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 207–217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, N. Zhang, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 296–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, C. Gao, J. Low and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2031–2205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, L. Wang, Z. Li and Y. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600216 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, F. Fan, Q. Han, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao, C. Li and Z. Zou, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5547–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, S. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Shi, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801214 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, S. Xie, B. Weng and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18804–18814 RSC .
F. Ye, H. Li, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Feng, S. Dai, J. Yue, F. Hua and H. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 465–471 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Li, H. Y. Cheng, Y. H. Chiu and Y. J. Tsu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15720–15729 RSC .
Y. C. Pu, W. H. Lin and Y. J. Hsu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 343–351 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Guan, D. Wu, X. Zhao, S. Bao, B. Tian and J. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6958–6968 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, C. Xu, C. Li and Y. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19704–19708 RSC .
M. Liang, T. Borjigin, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, B. Liu and H. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34123–34131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Feng, B. Wang, K. Wang, F. Gao, Y. Zhao and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Li, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, J. Liu, C. Gong, L. Tian, T. Peng and L. Zan, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1677–1683 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wen, C. G. Niu, L. Zhang, C. Liang, H. Guo and G. M. Zeng, J. Catal., 2018, 358, 141–154 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, F. Bing, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4652–4658 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Zhong and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5474–5481 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Li, Y. Gong, S. Bai, H. Ju, C. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Zhu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3621–3629 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kai, J. Li and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27686–27696 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bu, Z. Chen and C. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, C. Feng, H. Dong, J. Wang, H. Feng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou and Y. Pang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1494–1511 RSC .
J. Hou, C. Yang, Z. Wang, Q. Ji, Y. Li, G. Huang, S. Jiao and H. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 579–589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, X. Quan, H. Yu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 439–449 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, L. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Leng, H. Wang, Z. Wu, T. Xiong, J. Liang and G. Zeng, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 2175–2185 RSC .
R. Pang, K. Teramura, H. Tatsumi, H. Asakura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1053–1056 RSC .
M. Ou, S. Wan, Q. Zhong, S. Zhang, Y. Song, L. Guo, W. Cai and Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 97–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Z. Wang, C. Yang, W. Zhou, S. Jiao and H. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5132–5141 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Li, Y. Ma, H. Yu and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14648–14655 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, C. Zeng, L. Ai, Z. Hao and J. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2111–2119 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, D. W. Shao, L. C. Zheng, L. J. Zheng, D. Q. Feng, J. P. Xu, X. H. Zhang, W. C. Wang, W. H. Wang, F. Lu, H. Dong, Y. H. Cheng, H. Liu and R. K. Zheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 917–926 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, J. Ge, L. Wang, M. Gong, M. Deng, Q. Kong, L. Song, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5689–5695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ye, Y. Su, X. Quan, S. Chen, H. Yu and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 347–355 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, G. Qiu, Y. Xiao, X. Tao, W. Peng and B. Li, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 378–390 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin, L. Bai, Y. Zhu, S. Zhong, L. Zhao, Z. Li and S. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23133–23142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Husin, W. N. Su, C. J. Pan, J. Y. Liu, J. Rick, S. C. Yang, W. T. Chuang, H. S. Sheu and B. J. Hwang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13529–13540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, M. Xia, B. Xu, J. Wei, B. Yang and G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 481–491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, F. Xian, Y. Wang, K. Ye, M. S. Balogun, L. Gu, X. Liu, Z. Rui and H. Ji, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6137–6143 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, B. Xu, X. Yang, J. Wei, B. Yang, L. Zhao and G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117812 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoshida, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, A. Ishikawa, J. Kubota, Y. Sakata, Y. Ikezawa and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10151–10157 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, A. Pierre, M. G. Kibria, K. Cui, X. Han, K. H. Bevan, H. Guo, S. Paradis, A. R. Hakima and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2353–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dionigi, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl, A. Xiong, K. Maeda, K. Domen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2012, 292, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Ikeda, H. Ohtsuka, A. Xiong, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 7750–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, J. Ran, B. Zhu, H. Ju, J. Yu, L. Song and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2018, 14, 1801705–1801714 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Li and X. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2864–2870 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. Liu, T. Aoki and P. A. Crozier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7207–7214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Husin, W. N. Su, H. M. Chen, C. J. Pan, S. H. Chang, J. Rick, W. T. Chuang, H. S. Sheuc and B. J. Hwang, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1745–1754 RSC .
K. Han, T. Kreuger, B. Mei and G. Mul, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1610–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. Zhang and P. A. Crozier, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 172–173, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, R. Zhang, Y. Ye, L. Wang, Z. Ma, F. Su, H. Xie, Y. Zhou, P. K. Wong and L. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9726–9735 RSC .
C. W. Tsai, H. M. Chen, R. S. Liu, K. Asakura and T. S. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10180–10186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Liu, L. Wang, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 42–46 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, Y. Xing, H. Li, P. Feng and Z. Sun, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 851–860 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deng, Q. Zhang, L. Yang, X. Luo, A. Wang, S. Luo and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Li, K. Dai and C. Liang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 696–706 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, S. Zhang, Z. Xing, Z. Li, J. Yi, J. Zou, Q. Zhu and W. Zhou, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 7887–7895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, L. Meng, Y. Dai, M. Zhang, C. Sun, S. Yang, H. He, S. Wang and H. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 381, 120953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, T. Xie, T. Zhang, T. Pu, Y. Bu and J. P. Ao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12956–12961 RSC .
Z. Xing, S. Shen, M. Wang, F. Ren, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Xiao, W. Wu and C. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 143902 CrossRef .
H. G. Kim, E. D. Jeong, P. H. Borse, S. Jeon, K. Yong, J. S. Lee, W. Li and S. H. Oh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 064103 CrossRef .
T. Minegishi, N. Nishimura, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1120–1124 RSC .
R. Fan, G. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. Mi and M. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. G. Zhao and M. Miyauchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17132–17137 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Qkunaka, H. Tokudome, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 2667–2680 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanaka, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa, H. Kominami and T. Tanaka, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2574–2580 RSC .
W. Jiang, S. Bai, L. Wang, X. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Li, D. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Small, 2016, 12, 1640–1648 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanaka, K. Nakanishi, R. Hamada, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, Q. Chen, R. Wang, A. Wang, J. Wang, S. Zhong, Y. Liu, J. Chen and S. Bai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900775 CrossRef .
Z. Jiao, M. Shang, J. Liu, G. Lu, X. Wang and Y. Bi, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Wen, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 5231–5236 RSC .
Y. C. Chen, Z. J. Wu and Y. K. Hsu, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lahmar, A. Azizi, G. Schmerberc and A. Dinia, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 68663–68674 RSC .
T. L. Kim, M. J. Choi, T. H. Lee, W. Sohn and H. W. Jang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5897–5903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, D. Yan, X. Tong and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705512 CrossRef .
T. Hisatomi, H. Dotan, M. Stefik, K. Sivula, A. Rothschild, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2699–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kang, S. Y. Lee, M. G. Gangc, K. S. Ahnb and J. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 262–267 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Wu, Y. L. Zhang, L. Z. Long, C. P. Cen and X. J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20716–20721 RSC .
J. Han, Z. Liu, K. Guo, B. Wang, X. Zhang and T. Hong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiao, H. B. Tao, B. Liu and J. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, 1804391 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, H. H. Chang and Y. K. Hsu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10861–10868 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Guo, J. Han, Y. Li, T. Cui, B. Wang, J. Ya and C. Zhou, Small, 2014, 10, 3153–3161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, Y. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Su and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19025–19035 RSC .
D. E. Schipper, Z. Zhao, A. P. Leitner, L. Xie, F. Qin, M. K. Alam, S. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Ren, Z. Wang, J. Bao and K. H. Whitmire, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Vijselaar, R. M. Tiggelaar, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1086–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Liu, C. Ding, Z. Chen, F. Zhang, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19607–19612 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Qi, F. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7102–7106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Iwashina, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 604–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Kim, S. Kim, J. K. Kang and W. Choi, J. Catal., 2014, 309, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Meng, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 800–803 RSC .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704624 CrossRef .
Q. Lang, Y. Chen, T. Huang, L. Yang, S. Zhong, L. Wu, J. Chen and S. Bai, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, H. Li, H. An, B. Yang, J. Wei and G. Yang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1532–1545 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yuan, J. R. Tu, Z. J. Ye, D. Q. Chen, B. Hu, Y. W. Huang, T. T. Chen, D. P. Cao, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, M. Q. Yang, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19156–19166 RSC .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xian, D. Li, J. Chen, X. Li, M. He, Y. Shao, L. Yu and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13157–13166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, Z. Wang, G. Wang, T. R. Gengenbach, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic, J. Yu and X. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, Z. Mei, T. Wang, Q. Kang, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7078–7087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yan, X. Lu, S. Zuo, Z. Li, C. Yao and C. Ni, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 59–68 CrossRef .
J. Meng, Q. Chen, J. Lu and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 550–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Shen, X. Yang, T. Zhang and H. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 562–573 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Suzuki, A. Iwase, H. Tanaka, S. Sato, A. Kudo and T. Morikawa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13283–13290 RSC .
C. Kong, S. Min and G. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9281–9283 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, J. R. Tu, Z. J. Ye, D. Q. Chen, B. Hu, Y. W. Huang, T. T. Chen, D. P. Cao, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. Sun, S. Li, C. Huang, W. Yao, W. Chen, T. Zeng, Q. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11863–11874 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, G. Zhu, Q. Liu, L. Geng and J. He, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 7903–7910 RSC .
Y. Lin, S. Wu, X. Li, X. Wu, C. Yang, G. Zeng, Y. Peng, Q. Zhou and L. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 557–570 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. Wu, M. Gao, Y. Xin and C. Chai, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 16, 461–470 CrossRef .
M. Bagherzadeh, R. Kaveh and H. Mahmoudi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16257–16266 RSC .
X. Wu, J. Zhao, L. Wang, M. Han, M. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 501–509 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Cui, H. Meng and J. Yu, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1766–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Che, G. Che, P. Zhou, C. Liu and H. Dong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 262–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pang, Y. Li, G. Xu, Y. Hu, Z. Kou, Q. Feng, J. Lv, Y. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, K. M. Cho, A. Al-Saggaf, I. Gereige and H. T. Jung, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4170–4177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, Y. Zhang and Q. Ma, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 689–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Y. Tong, L. Gu, Z. Xue and Y. Yuan, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2502–2506 RSC .
J. He, J. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Duan, Y. Wang and Z. Ya, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7063–7066 RSC .
P. Luan, M. Xie, X. Fu, Y. Qu, X. Sun and L. Jing, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5043–5050 RSC .
C. Xiao, L. Zhang, K. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Zhou and W. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Y. Qu, S. Chen, R. Yan, M. Humayun, Y. Liu, L. Bai, L. Jing and H. Fu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1147–1154 RSC .
X. Fu, M. Xie, P. Luan and L. Jing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18550–18557 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C. Li, X. Fu, F. Raziq, Y. Qu and L. Jing, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37275–37280 RSC .
K. Hu, Z. Li, S. Chen, J. Bian, Y. Qu, J. Tang and L. Jing, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700320 CrossRef .
L. Sun, B. Li, X. Chu, N. Sun, Y. Qu, X. Zhang, I. Khan, L. Bai and L. Jing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9916–9927 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Qin, H. Wang, M. Chu, A. Zada, X. Zhang, J. Li, F. Raziq, Y. Qu and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, J. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ling, R. Long and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16514–16520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Muhammad, P. Hu, B. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Sun, Z. Tong and Z. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 182–193 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miljevic, B. Geiseler, T. Bergfeldt, P. Bockstaller and L. Fruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 907–915 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chang, X. Hai and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502555 CrossRef .
Y. J. Yuan, H. W. Lu, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 4113–4127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, W. Yin, L. Wang, Z. Li and Y. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57446–57463 RSC .
E. Aronovitch, P. Kalisman, S. Mangel, L. Houben, L. Amirav and M. Bar-Sadan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3760–3764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Kumar, S. Hong, D. A. Reddy and T. K. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, N. L. Reddy, H. S. Kushwaha, A. Kumar, M. V. Shankar, K. Bhattacharyya, A. Halder and V. Krishnan, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3588–3603 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, M. Wang, C. Ran and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1709–1712 RSC .
B. Zhu, B. Lin, Y. Zhou, P. Sun, Q. Yao, Y. Chen and B. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3819–3827 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, Z. Yang, R. Shen, H. Li, X. Y. Luo, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2224–2236 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Cao, Q. Liu and W. L. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117901 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lv, S. X. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. X. Chang, Y. Chen and W. F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18542–18549 RSC .
Q. Zhao, W. Yao, C. Huang, Q. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42734–42741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mukherji, B. Seger, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3483–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 81–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Nellist, F. A. L. Laskowski, F. Lin, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 733–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, B. F. Bachman and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2427–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gou, A. Batool, G. Xie, R. Boddula, L. Tian, S. U. Jan and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1516–1521 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Leung, J. Warnan, D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, J. Willkomm and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5172–5180 RSC .
B. Koo, S. Byun, S. W. Nam, S. Y. Moon, S. Kim, J. Y. Park, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705136 CrossRef .
X. Han, Y. Wei, J. Su and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14695–14703 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, S. W. Nam, R. Haight, S. Kim, S. Oh, M. Cho, J. Oh, J. Y. Lee, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5279–5287 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers and J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1150–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu and M. Chong, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 347–373 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Digdaya, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, B. J. Trzesniewski, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Satterthwaite, A. G. Scheuermann, P. K. Hurley, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13140–13149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jung, J. Y. Yu and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7955–7962 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Jung, J. Y. Yu and J. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5412–5418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Jung, S. H. Kim, S. S. Shinde, D. H. Kim, C. Lin and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23013–23020 RSC .
J. Y. Jung, J. Y. Yu, R. B. Wehrspohn and J. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 1660–1668 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Jung, D. W. Kim, T. J. Park and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1046–1053 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. D. Prange, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2487–2496 RSC .
J. Quinn, J. Hemmerling and S. Linic, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2632–2638 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 45, 753–759 CrossRef .
X. Xie, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13278–13292 RSC .
Y. Wan, S. K. Karuturi, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, D. Yan, J. Peng, P. R. Narangari, S. Mokkapati, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Baek, J. S. Kim, Y. B. Kim, J. H. Yoon, H. B. R. Lee and H. K. Cho, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8213–8221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. He, Y. Mi, J. Zhu, F. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, M. Chen and D. Cao, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 26780–26786 RSC .
C. Wang, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, M. Katayama and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13837–13843 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ye, R. Long, H. Huang and Y. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1008–1021 RSC .
R. Long, Y. Li, L. Song and Y. Xiong, Small, 2015, 11, 3873–3889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5328–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. J. Wong, J. H. Ho, Y. Jiang and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30575–30582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Wuc, G. Zeng, W. Tud, C. Sheng, Y. Deng, F. Chen and J. W. Chew, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 543–553 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, F. Ye, L. Li, J. Lu, S. Zhong and S. Bai, Small, 2017, 13, 1701607 CrossRef PubMed .
F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Mihi, D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3581–3588 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, P. Wang, H. Li, M. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Qi and Y. Jin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14290–14297 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, Z. T. Yu, D. Q. Chen and Z. G. Zou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 603–631 RSC .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
P. Xiao, P. Wang, H. Li, Q. Li, Y. Shi, X. L. Wu, H. Lin, J. Chen and X. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 345, 123–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, R. Wang, C. Zhao, Z. Chen, X. Yang, D. Bukhvalov, Z. Lin and Q. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 1064–1075 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. Lou, H. Zhang, W. Song, X. L. Wu, H. Lin, J. Chen, S. Liu and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 201–209 RSC .
C. Zhao, Z. Chen, J. Xu, Q. Liu, H. Xu, H. Tang, G. Li, Y. Jiang, F. Qu, Z. Lin and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117867 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, H. Tang, W. Liu, C. Han, X. Yang, Q. Liu and J. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6310–6315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, F. Qu, L. Tian, X. Yang, Z. Zou and Z. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kong, S. Min and G. Lu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2763–2769 CrossRef CAS .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13938–13945 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Wang, C. Kong, Y. Wu, Y. Li and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13561–13568 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Luo, W. Zhang, W. Gao, X. Ning, H. Liu, B. Tian, B. Yang and G. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 371–383 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Zhang, K. Feng, B. Chen, Q. Y. Meng, Z. J. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1815–1821 RSC .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25415–25424 CrossRef CAS .
U. Maitra, U. Gupta, M. De, R. Datta, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13057–13061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kong, S. Min and G. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5037–5039 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, D. Chen, J. Zhong, L. X. Yang, J. J. Wang, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24452–24462 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shen, J. Xie, Y. Ding, S. Liu, A. Adamski, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3243–3250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Wang and Z. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Abbas, P. V. Kamat and J. H. Bang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 840–854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1801294 CrossRef .
H. Li, W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500389 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, M. Song, H. Wang, X. Zhang, N. Sui, Q. Zhang, V. L. Colvind and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 11071–11082 RSC .
X. Yang, Z. Chen, J. Xu, H. Tang, K. Chen and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15285–15293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Shi, Y. Zou, D. Ma, Z. Fan, L. Cheng, D. Sun, Z. Wang, C. Niu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9292–9303 RSC .
L. Tian, X. Yang, X. Cui, Q. Liu and H. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 463, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Tian, X. Zhao, H. Tang, Q. Liu and G. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prevot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605–3618 RSC .
J. Brillet, J. H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 823–827 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, M. Ma, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, J. K. Kim, H. K. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 182–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Gratzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 61–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, M. Shaner, C. Wiggenhorn, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6949–6957 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, J. L. Young, H. Lim, W. E. Klein, H. Chen, Y. Xi, B. Gai, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme illustrating the architectures of bridged photocatalytic materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrating the enhanced electron transport in BiVO4 in a PEC cell based on BiVO4 and rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the composite structures of GO(s)/TiO2 NF and GO/TiO2 NF and the associated charge transfers for H2 production. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the energy band structure of the Fe2O3/rGO/BiV1−xMoxO4 heterojunction and the proposed mechanism of PEC water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustrations of the rGO bridged NiO/TiO2 core/shell coaxial nanocables and (c) the proposed mechanism of rGO mediated charge transfer. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the transfer and separation of photogenerated charges in the –O–P–O– bridged SiW12/C3N4 nanocomposite. Adapted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of CuO/In2O3/ZnO. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustrating the Pt@Cu2O core–shell cocatalyst for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction selectivity. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of the Pd@Pt3L core–shell cocatalyst supported on TiO2 nanosheets, and (c) differential charge density determined using first principles simulations for Pt{100} shells on Pd{100} substrates in the presence of one additional electron: the olive and cyan colors represent an increase and decrease in electron density, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer in the TiO2/graphene/MoS2 composite. Adapted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Ni(OH)2/IrO2 conjugated cocatalyst on the Ti-Fe2O3 electrode for improved water oxidation. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the hydrophilic interface modification for improving the interfacial contact between Ta3N5 and CoOx for enhanced water oxidation. Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional schematic and energy band alignment of the designed multicomponent n+p-Si/SiOx/Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH photoanode for water oxidation Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of PEC H2 evolution with the Si/mesoTiO2/catalyst photocathode and chemical structures of the immobilized catalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The proposed model and energy band diagram (left) describing the working principles of the Cu(In,Ga)Se2/CdS/rGO/Pt photocathode for H2 evolution and schematic (right) describing the role of the rGO interlayer on the CdS buffer layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic side view of a semiconductor/insulator/metal photoelectrode with a metallic collector situated on an insulator-covered p-type semiconductor, and (b) energy band diagram of a standard semiconductor/insulator/metal junction with a p-type semiconductor. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Calculated photoresponse of the n-Si/CoSi2 photoanode and measured photoresponse of the n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH photoanode, and (d) schematic of the n-Si/CoSi2 photoanode with 0.61 eV barrier height and the n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH photoanode with 0.74 eV barrier height. Adapted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) Schematic illustration of the roles of the TiOx insulator in Si/TiOx/NiOx photocathodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (f) Open-circuit voltage as a function of insulator thickness for p-Si/HfO2/Ti/Pt and p-Si/HfO2/Al/Pt electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge flow in semiconductor/metal/graphene stack design. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustrations of the dopamine bridged melamine–graphene/TiO2 nanocapsule and the photocatalytic degradation process of HCHO. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagrams of the semiconductor–carbon and carbon–metal interfacial charge transfer without (top) and with (bottom) the sandwiching of tunneling layers, and (d) schematic diagrams of the energy band and electronic processes occurring in the semiconductor/metal contact: (left) built-in field and barrier for electron transfer; (middle) thermionic emission; and (right) electron tunneling with a narrower space charge layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration highlighting the importance of an ohmic layer with negligible barrier for charge transfer from LaTiO2N to the conductor. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic interface energy band diagram showing Schottky barrier removal by the insertion of a LaAlO3 interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic energy-band diagram of BiVO4/Lu2O3/ITO. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the photogenerated charge transfer route of plasmonic Bi/TiO2 heterostructures under visible light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the bend of the energy gap in Bi/TiO2 and Bi/Bi2O3 interfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the cross-section of an individual photosynthetic unit of an autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter; (d) the corresponding TEM images; and (e) energy level diagram superimposed on a schematic of an individual unit of the plasmonic solar water splitter. Adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustrating the different average diffuse distances of hot holes in different Ag/BiOCl/PdOx samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustrating the charge kinetics in Au/TiO2/Pd and Au/Pd/TiO2 samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a, b) Schematic illustrating the plasmonic photocatalytic mechanism for (a) Ag/TiO2 and (b) Ag/rGO/TiO2 samples under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c, d) Schematic illustrating the hot electron transfer in (c) plasmonic metal/semiconductor and (d) plasmonic metal/insulator/semiconductor photoelectrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram showing the electron transfer from [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 to the graphene/Co catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b) The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution over the eosin Y-sensitized graphene/NiSx photocatalyst under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) The proposed mechanism of photocatalytic H2 production over RhB-sensitized UiO-66/Pt under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of CuInS2/In2S3/ZnO nanowires. Adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the working principle of the Aux-sensitized TiO2/Pt photocatalytic system for the water splitting reaction under visible light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the electron transfer in Aux nanoclusters grafted with metal cations through bridging ligands. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Electron transfer pathways in the Aux/Au/TiO2 ternary system. Adapted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 
A + ne− → D (CB of PS I)
D + nh+ → A (VB of PS II).
A + ne− → D (CB of PS II)
D + nh+ → A (VB of PS I).

 	Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image and (b) energy band diagram scheme of the TiO2/Au/CdS system. Adapted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2006 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Schematic of overall water splitting on the SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet, and (d) time courses of the water splitting reaction on a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet under simulated sunlight at 288 K and 5 kPa (open symbols) and 331 K and 10 kPa (closed symbols). Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) TEM and HRTEM images of WO3/Au/In2S3, and (f, g) SPV images of (f) WO3/In2S3 and (g) WO3/Au/In2S3 excited at 410 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Plasmonic Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism of AgCl/Ag/MIL-53-Fe. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the BiVO4/rGO/CuGaS2 Z-scheme system for water splitting with CoOx and Pt as cocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the printed SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo sheet, and (d) photocatalytic activity comparison of SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo and SrTiO3:Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheets, the inset of (d) is the photographic image of the SrTiO3:Rh/ITO/BiVO4:Mo sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2018 Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for the photoactivity of ZnO/Au/SnO2 photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Electron energy scheme of PEC water splitting using a dual absorber tandem cell. Adapted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Configuration of a wireless artificial leaf solar hydrogen generator, and (d) energy diagram of an artificial leaf for overall water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 


Pristine semiconductor systems	

	Improve the interparticle charge transfer	PCb and PECc	Graphene, graphene oxide	Type II	
130 and 131

Semiconductor heterostructure systems	

	Provide the high-speed channel	PC and PEC	Graphene	Type VI	
30 and 34

Phosphate and silicate groups	Type III	
163–168


a	Circumvent the mismatch of energy bands	PC	GO	Type II	
150

PEC	In2O3, TiO2, ZnO, ZnS, In2S3	Type IV	
116

Type V	
109

Type VI	
110, 111, 117 and 120

Semiconductor/cocatalyst (electrocatalyst) systems	

	(i) Improve the charge trapping ability of the cocatalyst; (ii) circumvent the poor compatibility between the semiconductor and the cocatalyst; (iii) passivate the interfacial defect	PC	Pt, Pd, Ni, Rh, Ag	Type IV	
32, 33, 62, 73, 77–81, 88 and 89

Graphene, carbon nanotubes, amorphous carbon	Type I, Type II	
135–137, 139, 142, 153 and 180–188

PC and PEC	Ni(OH)2, Mg(OH)2	Type III	
124 and 125



	(i) Provide the high-speed channel; (ii) prevent the semiconductor from corrosion; (iii) act as a strong binder to the electrocatalyst; (iv) passivate the interfacial defect; (v) reduce the Fermi level pinning for efficient transport of the minority carriers	PEC	Ni/NiOx, TiO2, graphene, SiOx, SiO2, Al2O3, TiOx, HfO2, FeMnP, Ti, NiSi	Type VI	
100, 122, 123, 192–198 and 200–208

Semiconductor/conductor systems	

	(i) Strengthen the interfacial contact between the semiconductor and the conductor; (ii) lower the Schottky barrier and facilitate charge tunneling	PC	Pd	Type IV	
69

Dopamine, CdS(t)	Type III	
118 and 172



	(i) Lower the Schottky barrier; (ii) block the undesired carrier transport; (iii) passivate the interfacial defect	PEC	Ta, Nb, Au, LaAlO3, Lu2O3, TaOx, Nb2O5, Cu2O:Sb, NbNx	Type VI	
99, 112–114 and 212–215

Plasmonic metal-based systems	

	Block the backflow of hot charge carriers	PC and PEC	TiO2, BiOCl, graphene	Type I	
103–105, 134 and 220–222

Type II	
106 and 107

Type III	
108

PEC	Al2O3, SiO2	Type III, Type VI	
223 and 224

Photosensitizer-based systems	

	(i) Provide the high-speed channel; (ii) serve as a substrate for the adsorption of the sensitizer and loading of the catalyst	PC	Graphene, carbon nanotubes, UiO-66, TiO2	Type I, Type II	
133, 147, 160, 161, 233–243 and 245

Au, L-cysteine	Type III	
171 and 246

(i) Circumvent the mismatch of energy bands; (ii) passivate the interfacial defect	PEC	In2S3, Nb2O5	Type III, Type VI	
115 and 119

All-solid-state Z-scheme systems (wireless tandem PEC cells)	

	(i) Mediate the transfer and recombination of charge carriers; (ii) provide hot electrons for the reduction half reaction when semiconductor II is not excited	PC and PEC	Au, Ag, Pd, Pt, Cu, Cd, Bi, W, graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanodots, carbon layers, ITO, MoS2, aluminate group	Type I, Type II	
38, 50, 90, 126–129, 146, 151, 152 and 159



	Type III	
132, 157, 158, 170 and 254

Type IV	
31, 39, 40, 42–45, 70, 72 and 98

Type V	
51, 53, 56, 60, 64 and 154

Type VI	
55, 96 and 97



	Mediate the transfer and recombination of charge carriers	PEC	ITO, PTAA, metal interconnect	Type VI	
261, 267 and 268




Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
