Biomass-derived carbon: synthesis and applications in energy storage and conversion  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6GC01172A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6GC01172A
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4824-4854Biomass-derived carbon: synthesis and applications in energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Jiang 
            Deng
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mingming 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Advanced Materials and Catalysis Group, Center for Chemistry of High-performance and Novel Materials, Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310028, P. R. China. E-mail: chemwy@zju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-571-87951895
Received 
      26th April 2016
    , Accepted 4th June 2016First published on 6th June 2016AbstractThe explosive growth of energy consumption demands highly efficient energy conversion and storage devices, whose innovation greatly depends on the development of advanced electrode materials and catalysts. Among those advanced materials explored, carbon materials have drawn much attention due to their excellent properties, such as high specific surface area and tunable porous structures. Challenges also come from global warming and environmental pollution, which leads to the requirement of sustainable carbon-rich precursors for carbon materials. Hence, the use of biomass for carbon materials features the concepts of green chemistry. This review summarizes the most advanced progress in biomass-derived carbons for use in fuel cells, electrocatalytic water splitting devices, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Several synthetic strategies for synthesizing biomass-derived carbons, including direct pyrolysis, hydrothermal carbonization, and ionothermal carbonization, have been reviewed, and the corresponding formation mechanisms and prospects are also discussed. This provides fundamental insight and offers important guidelines for the future design of biomass-derived carbons in specific energy applications.Jiang DengJiang Deng is a Ph.D. candidate in the Advanced Materials and Catalysis Group at Zhejiang University under the direction of Prof. Yong Wang. He received his B.S. degree from Guangxi University in 2013. His current research includes the synthesis and processing of carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.Mingming LiMingming Li studied at Xinjiang University and received his B.S. degree in 2012. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, under the supervision of Prof. Yong Wang. His current research interests are on functional carbon nanomaterials and their applications as catalyst supports for catalytic hydrogenation and oxidation reactions.Yong WangProf. Dr Yong Wang studied chemical engineering at Xiangtan University from 1998 to 2002. He received his Ph.D. degree from Zhejiang University in 2007. After a postdoctoral stay at the Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, he joined the Max Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam/Germany in 2009. He rejoined Zhejiang University and became a Professor for Chemistry in 2011. His research focuses on carbon nanomaterials and their applications in heterogeneous catalysis and energy storage and conversion.
1 Introduction
As the power source metric of civilization, energy has deep implications for the life of humanity. Currently, fossil fuels still contribute to most of the world's energy demand. The consumption of fossil fuels, which include coal, oil and natural gas, has accelerated dramatically due to the worldwide economic expansion and population explosion.1 It is said that the global reserves of oil are able to supply energy and chemicals for no more than 40 years.2 Moreover, greenhouse gas emissions resulting from the combustion of fossil fuels have caused serious environmental problems. In response to this problem, the development of green, renewable and highly efficient methods of energy conversion, as well as new energy storage technologies, is in high demand. Fuel cells, solar cells, supercapacitors, and lithium-ion batteries etc.3–6 are among the most promising options. It is known that all the materials used in these devices hold the key to fundamental advances in energy conversion and storage. Therefore, high-performance materials should have specific properties and be rationally designed for applications in the crucial fields of energy conversion and storage. Besides, considering the environmental issues and cost, the synthesis of these materials should be relatively simple and energy-efficient, and ideally based on natural, abundant and renewable resources.7
Among the materials exploited, carbon materials have attracted intense interest because of their good electronic conductivity, adjustable porosity/morphology, and excellent stability.8,9 The discovery of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene, which possess attractive nanostructures and functionalization patterns, has made the areas related to advanced carbon materials particularly thriving.1 However, these carbon nanomaterials are heavily reliant on fossil fuel-based precursors (e.g., CH4, phenol, and pitch) and harsh or energy intensive synthetic conditions (e.g., electric-arc discharge, chemical vapor deposition, and laser ablation), which are environmentally harmful and costly.10 Worse still, some synthetic processes utilize toxic reagents, leading to environmental pollution. For example, the classical Hummers’ method for graphite oxidation consumes a strong oxidant (KMnO4) and H2SO4, bringing up environmental arguments.11 Therefore, carbon materials derived from renewable biomass have drawn great attention because of their easy processibility, tunable pore/surface properties, and relatively low cost, etc.
Biomass, which often refers to plants or plant-based materials derived from nature, can be synthesized through biological photosynthesis using CO2 and water as raw materials under sunlight. According to statistics, biomass production worldwide is 104.9 petagrams of carbon per year.12 A huge amount of biomass, such as agricultural resides and forest by-products, have been simply burnt to elevate the value of waste biomass. This process is of low efficiency in energy utilization and also causes serious air pollution. As carbon-rich precursors, biomass have served as raw materials for carbon materials for a long time. The classical synthetic methodologies are on the basis of the combination of direct pyrolysis with an activation method – the products are hence named activated carbons (ACs). With the choice of suitable activators, various work has reported that porous carbon derived from biomass can obtain well-defined micropore size distribution and an ultrahigh specific surface area (SSA) up to 3000 m2 g−1.13 However, ACs are limited to the use of electrode materials in energy storage/conversion devices, as the pores in ACs are mainly restricted to micropores, which are not favorable for efficient electrolyte ion diffusion.14 Several strategies, including designing novel synthetic methods or finding effective post-modification techniques, were employed to optimize the porous structure, ensuring good electrochemical application. The synthetic strategies of biomass-derived carbon have a tremendous influence on the size-/surface-dependent (e.g., morphological, electrical, and mechanical) properties, which is useful in enhancing energy conversion/storage performance.7
As a novel, low-cost, environmentally friendly route, hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) based on carbon-rich precursors was introduced for functional carbon materials.15 HTC is usually conducted at mild processing temperatures (<300 °C) and the carbonization medium is water, under self-generated pressures. By using the tools of colloid and polymer science, it is possible to tune the final morphology, porosity and physicochemical properties to meet the desired applications.16 For example, with the utilization of so-called nanocasting, coral-like carbon with hierarchical pores (containing macro-, meso- and micropores) and a high SSA (∼800 m2 g−1) was fabricated.17 Besides HTC, some other carbonization methodologies, including ionothermal carbonization (ITC) and molten salt carbonization, also serve as effectively complementary protocols.18,19 In spite of the aforementioned effective approaches, it is not easy to control the properties of biomass-derived carbon to satisfy the requirements of different applications. To date, with the combination of effective synthesis strategies and renewable biomass, great progress has been made in the fields of catalysis, adsorption/separation, energy conversion and storage. Several groups have summarized recent progress of biomass-derived carbon in catalysis,20–22 rechargeable lithium/sodium batteries,23 and Song et al. also gave a brief introduction to the preparation and applications of crude biomass.24 Besides the large roles in those important fields, biomass-derived carbons are also important in energy applications (energy conversion and storage in electrochemical application).25 Herein, we will focus on the synthesis and functionalization of biomass-derived carbon materials. The understanding of the mechanism during the fabrication processes is essential for a well-designed synthetic protocol, the mechanisms of which are hence discussed. Furthermore, we also present the most advanced progress of biomass-derived carbon in applications as electrode materials concerning energy conversion (e.g., oxygen reduction reaction, electrooxidation reaction, electrocatalytic water splitting) and energy storage (supercapacitor and lithium-ion battery anodes). Finally, the prospects and future developments in the synthesis of biomass-derived carbon materials for energy applications are also suggested.
2 Synthetic strategies for biomass-derived carbon
The carbon content of biomass is found to be between 45 and 50% (by oven-dry mass).26 Thermochemical conversion methodologies, in which most of the carbons remain and other elements are ejected, are necessary for the purpose of preparing carbonaceous materials.27 The properties of the resultant products are highly reliant on the preparation strategies.
2.1 Carbon from pyrolysis of biomass
Frankly, most carbon materials used in our daily life are derived from biomass (i.e., coconut shell, woods, and agricultural wastes) which is treated in inert gas at elevated temperatures.6 The operating steps are handy, although the mechanistic understanding of pyrolysis is limited due to the complexity of the reaction environment. Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin are the three main components of biomass, and when calcined under inert gas, they may undergo different chemical routes. At the first stage (<100 °C), moisture mainly volatilizes. When the temperature is set higher, hemicellulose degrades easily (220–315 °C). The pyrolysis of cellulose is focused at 315–400 °C, while that of lignin covers a wide range of temperature.28 The carbonization eliminates all the volatile materials including the heteroatoms (CO2, CH4, CO, and some organics); hence, the major component of the residual solid is carbon. Additionally, the formation of conjugated carbon atoms in the sp2 state during carbonization is beneficial for electrochemical applications. The ultimate performance of direct pyrolysis derived carbon (DPCs) in electrochemical applications is heavily reliant upon the structural and textural features, e.g., the porosity, morphology, and physicochemical properties, which are possibly designed by a judicious choice of organic precursors and the processing conditions (e.g. heating rate, residence time, and final temperature).29 For example, compared to traditional DPCs that contain limited pores, multi-porous carbon with hierarchical micro–meso–macro pores was synthesized by flash heating (∼50 °C s−1) of wood biomass.30 In addition, a well-known route for the synthesis of porous carbon (famous as Starbon®), which has been presented in detail in other reviews,7,15 is formed on the basis of starch gel that possesses plenty of pores derived from the expansion process. Currently, a mild burn-off protocol (activation) is still commonly employed to optimize the pore structure of DPCs by mixing carbon or carbon precursors with activators (KOH, ZnCl2, and K2CO3) undergoing an elevated temperature treatment.6
2.2 Carbon from activation
DPCs usually suffer from a low SSA and poor porous structures, which are essential for electrochemical applications.31 Activation, including chemical and physical activation, is vital to enhance the properties of the biomass-derived carbons. Physical activation is a two-step process which involves the carbonization of carbon precursors at a proper temperature (usually <800 °C) followed by the activation of the reserved char at an elevated temperature in the presence of suitable activators such as air, CO2, and steam, whereas the chemical activation process pulls the two steps together, that is, mixing the biomass with the activator followed by calcination at a suitable temperature.32 In the activation process, the activators have a great effect on the properties of the final products. Among those activators, KOH is very promising due to its lower activation temperature, leading to high yields, and a well-defined micropore size distribution with an ultrahigh SSA (up to 3000 m2 g−1). Through KOH activation, micropores and small mesopores can be introduced into the framework of various structured carbons.33 The high SSA and increased micropore and mesopore volume give rise to excellent properties in energy storage and conversion. Although the activation mechanism of KOH is complex and it is not understood clearly, three main activation processes for the KOH activation of carbon are accepted:13 (1) potassium compounds, including KOH and some other compounds (K2CO3 and K2O) formed during the calcination process, react with carbon, generating the pore network; (2) the intermediate products (H2O and CO2) contribute to the further development of the porosity via the gasification of carbon; (3) the as-prepared metallic K intercalates effectively into the lattice of the carbon matrix, leading to the expansion of the carbon lattice. The porous structure is created, after the metallic K and other K compounds are removed.
With traditional activation, an extremely high SSA can be achieved; however, the pores in those ACs are micropores that are not favorable for effective electrolyte diffusion. Hence, hierarchically porous carbons (containing macro-, meso-, and micropores) which can provide well interconnected pores are currently an attractive candidate. Recently, Wang et al.34,35 reported a novel one-pot methodology for hierarchically porous carbons (HPCs). This method was easily conducted by mixing the carbon precursors and the leavening-reagents (KHCO3), followed by undergoing an elevated temperature treatment (Fig. 1a). The HPCs can be obtained after the removal of inorganic salts. The authors proposed that the macropores derived from high-pressure artificial aeration came from the decomposition of the leavening agents, whereas the mesopores and micropores originated from the corroding of the leavening agents. Also, the authors found that different precursors lead to derived carbon materials with different morphologies and porous structures. As aforementioned, cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin are the three basic components of crude biomass. Cellulose is composed of a linear chain of different number of β(1 → 4) linked D-glucose units, hemicellulose contains a branched structure consisting of both pentose and hexose, and lignin possesses p-hydroxyphenyl, guaiacyl, and syringyl components. It is obvious that both cellulose and hemicellulose contain plenty of hydroxyl groups and lignin features polyaromatic units. When cellulose and hemicellulose undergo the KHCO3-assisted pyrolysis, the plentiful hydroxyl groups in cellulose and hemicellulose undergoes dehydration condensation among the different parent polymers, resulting in a macroporous structure. The easy homolysis of the β–O–4 bonds in lignin will result in aliphatic units that are easily etched by the activator and benzene-containing units which lead to intact nanosheets. Also, the ternary mixtures of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin with different mass ratios were treated under the leavening method, and the results showed that the derived carbon materials present a macroporous structure when containing less than 50% of lignin (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of HPCs: mixing the biomass with the “leavening” agents followed by pyrolysis under an inert gas,34 (b) the SEM images with different mass ratios of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 and 35. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Activation with oxidants, usually leading to a high oxygen content, reduces the degree of graphitization and the conductivity of carbon materials, thus hindering application in the electrochemical area. An activation methodology based on a reductant (NH3) was introduced by Ji et al.36 The authors simply pyrolyzed the cellulose-based filter under NH3. The as-prepared carbon showed a high SSA (1973.3 m2 g−1) with the original morphology almost intact. Additionally, the carbon materials obtained through NH3 activation exhibited N-doping, which could efficiently enhance the performance in electrochemical use. In this regard, NH3 activation is promising for improving the porosity as well as functionalizing the carbon materials.
2.3 Hydrothermal carbonization
Material chemists have long been inspired by natural processes to deal with common concerns about energy and the environment. Hydrothermal conditions, i.e., an aqueous medium over 100 °C and 0.1 MPa, are widely found in nature. Many minerals, peat and coal can form under these circumstances.37 The pioneering work, carried out by Bergius in 1913, was the transformation of cellulose into coal-like materials under hydrothermal conditions.16 Later, many scientists studied the influence of the source, the temperature and the pH on the outcome of the reaction and the mechanism of the formation of the products.38,39

2.3.1 The mechanism of hydrothermal carbonization. 
Recently, HTC has been usually applied at mild temperatures (130–250 °C) and in water under self-generated pressures. It has become an effective approach for the production of various carbonaceous materials, mainly because of the contribution of several working groups on the unveiling the HTC-derived carbons (HTCs) structure and their formation mechanism.41,42 The treatment of biomass under hydrothermal conditions can facilitate physical and chemical interaction between reagents and the solvent, resulting in the formation of carbon materials.
The chemical reactions involved in the hydrothermal process are very complex. It is commonly accepted that the hydrothermal treatment of biomass contains five procedures, i.e., hydrolysis, dehydration, decarboxylation, polymerization, and aromatization.43 To clarify the exact mechanisms of HTC formation, it is necessary to conduct research based on pure carbohydrates with powerful characterization techniques.44 Different carbon sources lead to specific intermediates, which also control the different final product structures and morphologies. During the initial stages of the hydrothermal treatment, the dehydration of hexose (i.e., glucose, sucrose, starch etc.) and pentose (xylose, ribose) leads to the formation of hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) and furfural as well as some organic acids. Those acids would lower the pH and catalyze the in situ dehydration of carbohydrates. The as-obtained intermediate HMF finally condenses to form furan-rich materials (Fig. 2a). As for pentose, the products derived from polymerization–polycondensation of the furfural intermediates possess a higher aromatic character, as well as a lower fraction of carboxyl and carbonyl groups (Fig. 2a). Besides the different structures between hexose-based carbons and pentose-based ones, the morphologies also vary. The droplet derived from the emulsification of furfural (water solubility <8.5 m/v%) in solution acts as the confinement reactor for self-polymerization. Hence, the HTCs based on pentose are separated carbon spheres, while the hexose-based carbons are characterized by interconnected spherical particles because of the good solubility of HMF in water (Fig. 2b and c). The transformation of biopolymers (i.e. cellulose, lignin, and hemicellulose) is, at some level, a formidable task because of the stability against chemical treatment and insolubility in most solvents. For cellulose, the most abundant renewable resource, the HTC mechanism undergoes different procedures between the cellulose/water interface and the bulk of cellulose. At the cellulose/water interface, the cellulose hydrolyzes into glucose, which follows the same procedure as pure glucose during hydrothermal treatment.40 For the cellulose present in the bulk, the procedures resemble the pyrolytic process with intramolecular rearrangement, dehydration, and decarboxylation reactions. The as-obtained HTCs, the structure of which is different from the furan-rich structure, possess a well-developed aromatic nature but an ill-defined shape.41
 Fig. 2  (a) Reaction pathways encountered in the formation of hydrothermal carbons from hexose and pentose sources, leading to differently structured and shaped materials; SEM images of HTCs derived from (b) glucose and (c) xylose.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright© 2008 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides the carbon precursors, the hydrothermal treatment temperature is also a powerful switch. Both the chemical nature and the morphology of the HTCs can be controlled by tuning the temperature under mild processing conditions.41 For example, a higher hydrothermal treatment temperature leads to a larger particle size as well as a more homogeneous average size when glucose is used as the precursor. As aforementioned, HTCs derived from cellulose usually possess an ill-defined shape. However, when cellulose is processed with a higher HTC temperature, the morphology is characterized to be spherical particles. Meanwhile, the carbon content and aromatic nature increase when the reaction temperature is set at higher values, whatever carbon precursors are used.


2.3.2 Microwave-assisted HTC. 
Consideration should be also taken of residence time and energy-saving issues. In addition to a conventional heating system, in which the energy is produced by convective or conductive heating devices, microwave heating is a novel conceptual design due to its rapid heating, reduced times, and energy saving nature. Lee et al.45 reported a microwave-assisted hydrothermal strategy for the synthesis of carbon microspheres derived from glucose. Compared with conventional HTC (1–24 h), microwave-assisted HTC took only 15 min, which was more effective and energy-saving. Furthermore, the as-obtained carbon showed a spherical shape, whose average diameter can be switched simply by tuning the glucose solution concentration. There is no doubt that microwave-assisted HTC shows great potential for the synthesis of HTCs.


2.3.3 Template methods based on HTC. 
Carbon materials derived from activation methodologies usually feature narrow micropore size distributions in the supermicropore range (0.7–2 nm), which is not favorable for quick electrolyte diffusion. The template method is a powerful tool to introduce pores with pore sizes ranging from 1 to 200 nm, and even an ordered pore structure, which is impossible to achieve through traditional activation.46 The pioneering template synthesis of porous carbon was reported by Knox et al.,47 which is now commonly described containing hard-template (nanocasting) and soft-template methods. In the hard-template method, a pre-formed porous solid is infiltrated with the carbon precursor, which dehydrates and polymerizes/carbonizes at the confined zone. The porous carbon (a reverse replica) is produced after the removal of the original parent. This methodology has made use of a series of intrinsic porous structures (e.g. SBA-15,48 AAO membranes,49 silica spheres,50,51etc.) of well-defined shapes, yielding ordered mesoporous carbons, hollow carbon nanotubes, hollow spheres, etc. However, the removal of sacrificial templates based on silica would consume toxic reagents (e.g., HF), arousing arguments regarding environmental issues.
Compared with hard-template methods, the soft-template method, based on the self-assembling of a block copolymer, is more convenient and “green”. Pluronic® F127 is the typical surfactant used in the soft-template method. When the concentration of F127 is higher than its critical micelle concentration (CMC), micelles would be formed in the aqueous solution before the hydrothermal treatment. The hydrophobic cores of the micelles, formed by PPO chains of F127, are the source of the pores. White and co-workers52 announced the direct synthesis of ordered porous HTCs using an amphiphilic triblock copolymer (Pluronic® F127) as the soft template and fructose as the carbon precursor. The obtained HTCs featured ordered micropores, which could be tuned into ordered mesopores with the addition of trimethylbenzene during the HTC process. In particular, with the help of F127, the carbon materials derived from lignin, whose highly branched structure makes the generation of highly controlled porosity difficult, could possess well-defined mesopores.53,54 However, micelles formed by F127 are not stable at high HTC temperatures (>130 °C), which would lead to a low polymerization degree of HTCs, whose ordered pores would be destroyed when undergoing thermal treatment at an elevated temperature. Recently, an insoluble melamine sulfate was introduced to improve the HTC/soft templating, the products of which can maintain an ordered pore structure after thermal treatment at 900 °C. The as-obtained products possess a hierarchical structure containing ordered mesopores, nanoparticles, and monolithic structures.190


2.3.4 Additive-assisted HTC. 
Although templating methods (including soft-templating and hard-templating) are powerful tools to form controllable morphologies and porous properties, they are somewhat expensive and are also incompatible with heteroatom-doping. In this respect, HTC based on additive-assisted approaches provides more opportunities to switch the properties of HTCs. The specific additives could function to allow in situ doping, surface modification, and structure direction. Titirici et al.57 described a study that concerned a one-step HTC route for the production of carbonaceous materials loaded with carboxylic groups by the addition of acrylic acid. Another two typical cases with regard to the controlled morphology included borax and phenolic compounds, yielding carbon aerogels through HTC.58,59 In the borax-mediated HTC strategy, the borax additive has a catalytic impact on the HTC of glucose, which is mainly due to two aspects: (1) the competitive reaction of borax with the HMF-deactivation acetalization, leading to an increased formation of the free HMF; (2) the interaction of borax with sugar diols forms negatively charged complexes, catalyzing the isomerization to fructose, which can be dehydrated more easily compared to glucose. Through a boron dial complex initiated “template effect”, interpolyfuran chain cross-linking would be promoted, yielding gels.
Though some promising results have been achieved, more work should been conducted to expand the additive-assisted HTC methods. The use of carbon-rich additives shows more advantages than those inorganic salt assisted HTC that require an extra removal procedure. Recently, Wang et al.60 described a poly(ionic liquid)s-assisted HTC protocol, where the as-obtained HTCs featured nanoparticles whose size ranged from 20 to 50 nm. In this study, the poly(ionic liquid)s (PILs), whose positive charge introduced electrostatic repulsion, could stabilize the primary nanoparticles formed at the initial HTC stage. With the post-synthesis carbonization at a moderate temperature (550 °C), the PILs, especially the PILs with a nitrile group, also ended up in the products, yielding N-doped carbon materials. The author also found that the corresponding ionic liquid-assisted HTCs also exhibited a higher SSA than the HTCs without any additives, which revealed the importance of the PILs with multivalent binding power. However, the weight fractions of the PILs additives were large (13.3–0.6%), resulting in a high cost. In this regard, several works61,62 displayed a novel one-pot HTC method to produce absolutely monodisperse, uniform colloidal carbon spheres (pore size: 550–750 nm) based on a tiny amount of sodium polyacrylate (PAANa) (<0.1 wt% of the precursor) (Scheme 1). At the beginning of the HTC process, PAANa was adsorbed onto the carbon seeds, therein offering stronger electrostatic repulsion between the particles. The appropriate dosage of PAANa allowed glucose to move to the surface smoothly, thus enlarging the carbon seeds. When the PAANa was substituted for kayexalate (<1% relative to carbohydrate), the as-prepared products presented a slight aggregation of highly dispersed and uniform carbon spheres with sizes between 60 to 80 nm. The huge difference may be attributed to the denser absorbed layer derived from kayexalate, because of the extra phenyl group, which would hinder the precursor moving in. Because of the lack of precursor, the carbon spheres derived from kayexalate-assisted HTC are smaller than those of PAANa-assisted HTC.
 Scheme 1  Schematic of sodium polyacrylate-assisted HTC process.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright© 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.3.5 Post-thermal treatment of HTCs. 
Actually, HTCs are somewhat not “real” carbon materials as a result of their low carbon content (<80%). The HTCs directly derived from carbohydrates usually suffer from a low SSA41 (SBET < 10 m2 g−1) and poor electro-conductivity, resulting in restricted applications in energy storage and conversion. In this regard, a post-thermal treatment, during which sp3 C–X (X: e.g., C, O, H) bonds are transformed into aromatic sp2 CC bonds, is essential for HTCs to form a dense graphitic structure.63 Some surface oxygen-containing functional groups of carbons decompose to form different products ranging from CO and CO2 to H2O at specific temperatures64 (Fig. 3). An activation method is usually introduced to improve the porosity and SSA of HTCs, for which the mechanism is the similar to the description in section 2.2. However, as aforementioned, KOH is somewhat a violent activator, which would destroy the morphology of the initial carbon materials under the elevated temperature treatment. Worse still, the strong alkalinity of KOH, as well as some hazardous by-products, is harmful for the environment. Of course, the morphology of HTCs wouldn't be destroyed by undergoing an activation process after precarbonization under a high temperature.65 Considering the fact that most activators are oxidants, recently, Wang et al.61,62 developed a methodology by using static air (the O2 content ≈21%) as the activator to activate the carbon spheres stemming from the hydrothermal carbonization of carbohydrates. This convenient strategy in the absence of a post-treatment (such as water washing and filtering) is environment-friendly and cost-effective. The as-prepared air-activation carbon spheres show a high SSA (up to 1306 m2 g−1) and a high mesopore volume proportion (63.9%).
 Fig. 3  Surface oxygen-containing groups on carbon and their decomposition by TPD.64 Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. 

2.4 Ionothermal carbonization
Ionic liquids (ILs), which are liquids below 100 °C, were initially developed as molten electrolytes for battery applications.66 Currently, ILs also play a significant role as benign solvents in the biomass-derived carbon synthesis field due to their good biomass solubility, suppressed solvent volatility, and excellent thermal stability (Scheme 2). Dai et al.67 reported an ionothermal carbonization (ITC) strategy to fabricate mesoporous carbon using a protic ionic liquid. The ability to form hydrogen bonds with solutes can enhance the solubility of carbohydrates and their latent acidity function to catalyze the dehydration of carbohydrates. Compared with HTC, in which water produces significant autogenous pressure at elevated temperatures, ITC is more easily handled using an unsealed vessel. In addition, the ITC-derived carbon materials (ITCs) possess higher SSA values (as compared to HTCs; ∼200 vs. ∼10 m2 g−1) with slightly higher carbonization yields (∼40%).55 It is convenient to introduce a melt element, acting as an in situ catalyst, into the ILs to satisfy the specific requirements. For example, metal-containing ILs (i.e. [Bmim][FeCl4]) are employed as a combined good ionothermal solvent and catalyst for the synthesis of functional biomass-derived carbons.68 It is disclosed that ITCs have a more pronounced aromatic region in comparison to their HTCs equivalents, which is related to the catalytic effect of the Fe present in the ILs. In spite of the difference in structure between the HTCs and ITCs, the formation of the ITCs obeys a similar dehydration/polymerization polycondensation mechanism based on HMF for hexose and furfural for pentose. In addition, the nitrogen-doped character of ITCs is another gift for functional carbon materials. For instance, the nitrogen content is as high as 8% when using [Bmim][BF4] as the solvent and glucose as the precursor.66 Although ILs can be recovered after the carbonization reaction and re-used without the requirement of further purification, their high price still hinders their wide use in industry. Still, ITC is a strong complementary protocol for the updating of biomass into functional carbon materials.
 Scheme 2  A typical example of ionothermal synthesis based on biomass.55 Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
2.5 Molten salt carbonization (MSC)
Post-treatment (elevated temperature treatment), required for both HTCs and ITCs, resulting in high electro-conductivity and a well-defined pore structure, is an essential procedure for carbon materials applied in electronic devices. Molten salt synthesis derived carbons (MSCs), which are synthesized at high temperature, do not need another elevated temperature treatment. In this respect, molten salt synthesis is an extension and complementary to the ITC and HTC approaches. The reaction rates are usually seriously limited by the slow diffusion of the reactants in the solid state reaction system, while the wet chemistry methods, which are favorable for mass transfer, provide more chance for the synthesis of valuable carbon material.18 Recently, Liu et al.65 converted glucose to porous carbons with an amorphous nature and adjustable pore size in the presence of LiCl–KCl. In addition, activators (KOH, K2SO3, and Na2S2O3etc.), which are introduced into the molten salt system conveniently, lead to functional MSCs with an ultra-high SSA (3200 m2 g−1). When the concentration of glucose is low (glucose/salt ratio = 1:100), strongly hydrophobic graphene could be synthesized at 800 °C.65 Besides the metal halide systems, oxide salt systems can also serve as reaction media for the synthesis of carbon materials from biomass. The different components of the mixture alter the properties (i.e. melting point) of molten salt systems, thus adjusting the properties of the final carbon product. Taking the eutectic Na2CO3–K2CO3 mixture for instance, when using peanut shells as the precursor, the as-obtained carbon materials owned the highest SSA among those prepared using LiCO3–Na2CO3–K2CO3, CaCl2, and CaCl2–NaCl.69 Although the door is open to generate rational carbon in some meaningful cases, a lot of work is still to be done to deal with some difficulties, such as knowledge of the exact mechanism.
2.6 Perspectives on preparation of biomass-derived carbon
Crude biomass consists of natural polymers (cellulose, lignin, and hemicellulose) as well as some bits of inorganics (SiO2), which are so complex that it remains a big challenge to develop a general methodology to obtain a controlled porous structure. A simple activation route can result in microporous materials with ill-defined shapes. Moreover, most existing methods, particularly those designed for water-soluble biomass derivatives, are incapable of accurate control of the porous structure towards polysaccharides, such as cellulose, or crude biomass, which is abundant on the earth. Although it is meaningful to introduce the KHCO3 or NaHCO3 assisted pyrolysis protocol towards crude biomass because the as-prepared products have a hierarchically porous structure regardless of the raw materials,34 it still remains a big challenge to realize ordered porous carbon based on crude biomass. In general, methodologies based on wet chemistry methods (HTC, ITC, and MSC) are still the most powerful routes to adjust the properties of biomass-derived carbon. Note that the natural polymers (cellulose, lignin, and hemicellulose) are insoluble in most solutions; it would be useful to find a suitable solution and effective additives for the controllable synthesis of biomass-derived carbons.
3 Applications in fuel cells
A fuel cell is a device that converts chemical energy into electricity on the basis of redox reactions. Fuel cells consist of the oxidation of fuel (e.g. H2 oxidation, alcohol oxidation) at the anode and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode.70
Accordingly, the exploration of catalysts for the purpose of effective ORR and alcohol electrooxidation is the key point in this field. Catalysts based on noble metals are among the most effective, but are restricted because of their high cost and low reserves. The fabrication of novel carbon materials for the destination of reducing the use of noble metals is a hot-spot in the research of fuel cells.71 Some strategies such as optimizing the porous structure (enhancing the specific surface area, introducing hierarchical pores), heteroatom doping, and the preparation of composites are usually used to achieve this goal.72 Importantly, it is rather competitive to address the dilemma of the cost and the activity of catalyst using crude biomass as a resource.
3.1 Electrocatalytic oxidation of alcohols
Currently, Pt/C catalysts are widely employed as the desired electrocatalysts for alcohol oxidation in fuel cells. However, the high cost and scarcity of Pt metal, together with the limited electrocatalytic performance and short life cycles of Pt/C in the alcohol oxidation process has limited large-scale production.73 As a response, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the development of Pt-free catalysts or functional carbon materials as the desired support. Biomass-derived carbon has received intensive concern because of the various advantages of biomass, such as being renewable, abundant and environmentally friendly. As an illustration of this concept, Wang and coworkers74 recently prepared an okara-derived carbon (ODC) by carbonizing okara in N2 at 800 °C, and after depositing Pt nanoparticles, the Pt/ODC catalyst was tested in methanol electrooxidation. The obtained catalyst showed roughly distributed Pt nanoparticles with an average size of 3 nm, and the electrocatalytic activities for methanol oxidation in an N2-saturated solution of 0.5 mol L−1 CH3OH + 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 (scan rate of 50 mV s−1) demonstrated better performance compared to Pt/C (Vulcan XC-72), showing a more negative onset potential (0.42 V vs. 0.49 V) and a higher peak current density (12.2 vs. 7.0 mV cm−2). The good electrocatalytic activity of the Pt/ODC catalyst may be attributed to the support effect of ODC: (1) the high degree of graphitization in the pyrolyzed carbon can improve the conductivity of the composite, thus leading to higher electrochemical performance, and (2) the multi-grain interfaces of Pt/ODC provides more active sites to promote the reaction. However, the catalyst demonstrated similar resistance to the poisoning of carbonaceous species compared with commercial Pt/C in the electrooxidation process (with If/Ib of 0.86 vs. 0.84) and the corresponding curves of stability tests were not given. Also, Xing et al.75 employed green biomass chitosan and cheap carbon black as nitrogen-doped carbon precursors to produce nitrogen-doped carbon (NC), and a Pt/NC catalyst was obtained after the simple deposition of Pt on the as-prepared NC. This was tested in the methanol elctrooxidation reaction. Compared to commercial Pt/C and home-made Pt/C, the biomass derived NC supported Pt catalyst demonstrated a much higher anode peak current (1.4 and 1.6 times better, respectively), better COads tolerance and superior electrocatalytic stability, shedding light on the fact that green and abundant biomass materials can be used as functional carbon material precursors for high-performance electrochemical devices. The COads tolerance significantly affects the life-time of the electrocatalyst in the oxidation of alcohols. Carbides, the electrons of which could transfer into Pt NPs (that would be beneficial to CO desorption), have been regarded as a kind of promising support to improve the utilization of Pt as the anode catalyst in fuel cells. Fu et al. recently introduced a vapor deposition strategy to synthesize nanocomposites composed of 17 nm SiC nanoparticles uniformly dispersed on graphitic carbon nanosheets (denoted as SiC/GC), which supported 10 wt% Pt as a high performance electrocatalyst in the methanol oxidation reaction. The superior activity (1585.3 A g−1 Pt), along with the good stability and the superior CO stripping for the SiC/GC supported Pt catalysts, was ascribed to the large ECSA, the synergistic effect of Pt and SiC, and the small size of SiC.76
Besides the tremendous efforts towards the synthesis of functional carbon supports derived from biomass, replacing the above mentioned Pt based catalysts with inexpensive Pd based catalysts was also of great significance. Wang's group recently found that nitrogen-doped carbon materials were very active supports in a variety of reactions such as catalytic oxidations77 and hydrogenations.69,78 Their performance in ethanol electrooxidation was also illustrated.79 N-doped mesoporous carbon was prepared from biomass derived D-glucosamine hydrochloride, and after deposition of palladium nanoparticles, the Pd@CN was tested in ethanol electrooxidation. Results showed that the catalyst exhibited 4 and 2 times higher peak current density than Pd@active carbon and Pd@non-nitrogen carbon, respectively. Detailed investigation and characterization further proved that the introduction of nitrogen into the carbon matrix improved the Pd0 percentage and enhanced the binding energy of Pd with CN, again demonstrating the positive effect of the nitrogen heteroatom in practical applications. Herein, a series of work towards alcohol electrooxidation by biomass derived carbon supported Pd catalysts were reported in detail with enhanced catalytic activity by Shen’s group.80–82,85 By simply employing a traditional hard templating method (with polystyrene spheres or silica spheres as the hard template) with biomass derived glucose as the carbon precursor, a series of interesting carbon materials with different morphologies such as hollow spheres, hollow hemispheres or a honeycomb-like morphology (Fig. 4) were obtained. After depositing Pd on the carbon supports, assisted by an intermittent microwave heating (IMH) method, the final Pd@C catalysts demonstrated very similar particle sizes (6–7 nm in average size), and ethanol electrooxidation experiments proved that the catalysts were three to five times higher in peak current density than Pd/C (Vulcan XC-72) and showed much higher electrochemical active surface area (EASA).82,85 The reasons for this were the improved dispersion and utilization of the precious metal nanoparticles as evidenced by the enhanced EASA, and notably, the attractive hemispherical structure in the study resulted in the improvement of mass transfer during alcohol oxidation, and concentrated alcohol can be used to increase the energy density of the fuel cell system.
 Fig. 4  TEM or SEM images of the morphology of the synthesized carbon supports derived from glucose: (a) TEM image of hollow carbon spheres templated by polystyrene spheres (PSs).80 (b) SEM image of hollow carbon spheres templated by solid core microporous shell silica (SCMSS).81 (c) SEM image of honeycomb-like carbon templated by solid core mesoporous shell silica (SCMSS).82 (d) SEM image of hollow carbon hemispheres templated by solid core mesoporous shell silica (SCMSS).83 (e) SEM image of hollow carbon hemispheres templated by polystyrene spheres (PSs).84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80–83. Copyright © 2007 Elsevier B.V., Copyright© 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright © 2010 Professor T. Nejat Veziroglu. Published by Elsevier Ltd, Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V., Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. 
3.2 Electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reactions
The oxygen reduction (ORR) is a very important energy conversion reaction in fuel cells.86 Traditionally used commercial Pt/C is widely recognized as a superior ORR catalyst, however, the high cost, poor long-term stability, and scarcity of the noble metal Pt prove to be obstructions to its commercialization. The electrochemical ORR can occur via a 4-electron (4e−) pathway producing H2O or −OH, or via a 2-electron (2e−) pathway producing H2O2 or HO2−.87 The more efficient 4e− process is believed to be more desirable for fuel cells. As such, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the exploration of cheap and earth abundant alternative electrocatalysts for the 4e− ORR with comparable electrochemical performance to Pt/C.88 Since the discovery by Dai’s group71 that nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes demonstrated high catalytic activity, long-term stability and superior CO tolerance for ORR, various metal-free nitrogen-doped carbon materials or N-doped carbon based non-precious metal composites have been fabricated to overcome the shortcomings of Pt/C while showing excellent activity. The reported theoretical studies indicate that the enhanced ORR activity of heteroatom-doped (e.g., N, S, P) carbon materials is due to the more electronegative heteroatom that induces net positive charges on the adjacent carbon atoms, which favors the adsorption of the oxygen with low overpotential.
Comprehensively, considering the advantages of nitrogen doping, the easy accessibility of carbon precursors and simple experimental operation procedures, nitrogen-rich biomasses and their derivatives have been recently chosen as desired precursors for nitrogen-containing carbon materials. Compared with traditional nitrogen doping methods (carbonization of heteroatom-containing expensive organic chemicals, high temperature post treatment or electrochemical methods), employing biomass or its derivatives as nitrogen-doped carbon precursors allows the incorporation of nitrogen with a controlled chemistry without post-synthesis doping, while complying with the concept of being sustainable and environmentally friendly. Therefore, a number of reported works have witnessed both biomass derivatives (e.g., chitosan,89,90 glucosamine hydrochloride (GAH),51 glucose59) and crude biomass (e.g., prawn shells,91 amaranthus,91 grass,92 nori,93 plant leaves,94,95 fruit peels,96 agricultural wastes,97–99etc.) to produce nitrogen-doped carbon materials or N-doped carbon based non-precious metal composites as active catalysts for ORR. In principle, a large SSA and more active sites in the carbon materials are of great significance to the ORR activity. Thus, it is highly desirable to develop reasonable but simple synthetic methods to fabricate carbon catalysts with high SSA and a tunable pore structure, as well as a suitable morphology.93 Notably, considering the complex chemical structure of biomass, a series of synthetic methods such as HTC, thermal annealing with the addition of an activator and direct high temperature thermal carbonization were developed. For cost-efficiency considerations, simple synthetic methods utilizing easily accessible biomass (especially inedible crude biomass such as tree leaves or plant stalk) are very welcome and show broad prospects for practical applications.

3.2.1 Metal-free carbon. 
The recently discovered environmentally friendly and facile HTC procedure has attracted intensive interest, as it involves the use of renewable resources (e.g., glucose) at low temperatures (<250 °C) in an aqueous medium under self-generated pressure.3,100 Therefore, HTC was most often employed as a desired method to deal with biomass precursors. With the aim of achieving highly active carbon materials for the ORR from biomass through HTC, many groups have made contributions to this area.99,101–103 Non-porous carbon products are not favorable for the ORR, and thus a variety of techniques, ranging from hard-template to soft-template and to template-free methods, have been developed.
Recently, nitrogen-doped carbon hollow spheres with different diameters (∼50–450 nm) prepared through a hard-template method using SiO2 spheres as the template and biomass-derived GAH as the carbon resource was reported by Wang’s group, demonstrating excellent electrocatalytic activity as a metal-free catalyst for the ORR in both alkaline and acid solution.51 However, this method encountered problems associated with the removal of the SiO2 template using very poisonous NH4HF2, which is rather harmful to both the environment and to human health. As a response to this, many researchers used soft templates (such as melamine) as a sacrificial agent93 or GO as a structure formation agent without the need for the removal of GO.90 Notably, the melamine soft template using nori as the carbon precursor, as reported by Liao and coworkers,93 demonstrated that the soft method is not only very easy as it discards the need to wash out the added template, but also the final carbon products can even achieve comparable or even superior activity to that of Johnson Matthey Pt/C.
Though using a soft template in the HTC seems to be very attractive, the chase to develop even simpler but friendly methods without any additives to prepare active carbon for the ORR was not stopped.93,95,99 Zhao’s group92 did such a good job in preparing N-doped carbon nanodot/nanosheet aggregates (N-CNAs) by a facile, one-step hydrothermal method using dried Monkey Grass as the sole starting material without any synthetic chemicals. After concentration of the obtained nanodot/nanosheet solution (N-CNs) (photo (1) in Fig. 5(a)) via evaporation, a dark brown colored solution containing N-CNAs (photo (2) in Fig. 5(a)) was obtained. TEM images showed that the diluted solution was a mixture of 2–6 nm nanodots and 10–50 nm nanosheets (Fig. 5b), while the concentrated solution demonstrated particle-like shapes assembled by aggregating the nanodot-anchored nanosheets (Fig. 5c). Interestingly, the N-CNAs were directly subjected to an activity test for the ORR without a further high-temperature carbonization step, and the results demonstrated excellent activity. It was found that the N-CNAs and the commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts possess an almost identical onset potential of −0.08 V, indicating an intrinsic characteristic of a low overpotential for the ORR. Moreover, the current density of the N-CNAs electrocatalyst resulting from the ORR is comparable to that of a Pt/C electrocatalyst, indicating a superior electrocatalytic activity of the N-CNAs. Further, an efficient 4e− ORR process was observed and the stability test showed superior operational stability over the commercial Pt/C. To explain the reasons for the high activity, the authors made a deeper investigation into the analysis on the effect of the different types of doped N atoms on the ORR electrocatalytic activity using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The results indicated that the doped pyridinic-N plays an important role in the excellent four-electron ORR activity of N-CNAs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication procedure of the N-CNs and N-CNAs. (b) and (c) TEM images of the N-CNs and N-CNAs; the insets are corresponding high magnification TEM and HRTEM images.92 Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To preserve the perfect pore structure of the final products formed in the very early stage of the synthetic process, a very popular method called freeze-drying has been frequently used.104,105 As a result of it being even simpler, the HTC process was replaced by a freeze-drying method by Zhang et al. in the synthesis of an N-doped carbon electrocatalyst from chitosan.106 Using urea as the soft template, chitosan was vigorously mixed with urea in a 5% acetic acid/water solution, and after freeze-drying the obtained white solid was sent to an Ar furnace for high temperature carbonization with a slow ramping rate of 3 °C min−1. This simple method was found to prepare highly porous three-dimensional nitrogen doped carbon nanosheets (NCN) with a BET surface area as high as ∼1510 m2 g−1. ORR tests showed that the NCN demonstrated identical electrocatalytic activity, and better stability and methanol tolerance compared to commercial Pt/C. The interconnected ultrathin nanosheet architecture, the ultrahigh BET surface area and a high proportion of graphitic nitrogen species were the reasons for the enhanced ORR activity of NCN. Obviously, the finding stating that the graphitic nitrogen promotes the ORR activity was somehow in contradiction with some reported works,89,92,108 demonstrating the difficulty of confirming exactly that the ORR activity enhancement was due to one single type of nitrogen, and this issue remains to be further investigated.
Developing template-free methods but maintaining the porosity of the carbon framework complies with the goal of simplifying the synthetic process, thus ensuring a low fabrication cost. A simple ionothermal method using ZnCl2 as the activator was recently found to be very effective in fabricating porous materials.109,110 The use of this method for the preparation of carbon catalysts active for the ORR from biomass such as soybean, bamboo fungus99 and bacteria107 has been reported. Yang’s group107 recently employed ZnCl2 as the activator and Bacillus subtilis as the carbon precursor, preparing nitrogen doped carbon materials (BZ-800) that are active in the ORR and as supercapacitors. As comparisons, KOH activated carbon (BP-800) and direct carbonized carbon (B-800) were also prepared. BZ-800 displayed bulk aggregations with nanometer-sized spherical particles intercalated with disordered, network-like interstitial pores (Fig. 6). A high BET surface area of 985 m2 g−1 was observed for BZ-800, but this value was only 96 m2 g−1 for B-800. Although BP-800 has a higher value of 1578 m2 g−1, the nitrogen content was only 0.68% (4.66% and 3.73% for BZ-800 and B-800, respectively). The ORR tests showed that BZ-800 exhibited the best activity, illustrating the synergic effect of nitrogen and porosity in triggering the high activity of nitrogen doped carbon for the ORR.
 Fig. 6  (a, b) SEM, (c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM images of BZ-800.107 Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The simplest carbon preparation is the direct high-temperature annealing of biomass precursors without adding anything in an inert gas atmosphere. Very few people did this because this will result in carbon products with nearly no porosity, which is very unfavorable for practical application in electrocatalytic tests. Though the task is difficult, through reasonably selecting a biomass precursor, many groups have successfully fabricated porous carbon while still showing good ORR activity.91,94 Zhao and coworkers94 found that prawn shells are excellent carbon precursors for preparing bimodal-pore (micro- and meso-porous pores) structured nitrogen doped carbon fibers with a high specific area of 526 m2 g−1, demonstrating even a more positive onset-potential, better stability and high resistance to the crossover effect compared to commercial Pt/C. However, the tedious pretreatment of the prawn shells using KOH, HCl and NaCl was not that environmentally friendly. Discarding the complex pretreatment procedures, Gao and coworkers91 directly carbonized dried amaranthus waste in a N2 atmosphere and nitrogen-doped carbons (NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, NDC-L-900) was obtained with amorphous structures (Fig. 7a), demonstrating comparable ORR activity to commercial Pt/C. TEM images showed that the activated carbons are normally composed of randomly stacked graphite-like layers (Fig. 7b and c), with high specific areas up to 949, 988 and 1008 m2 g−1 for NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, NDC-L-900, respectively (Fig. 7d). ORR tests demonstrated that NDC-L-800 has the highest activity, showing an onset potential of 0.27 V (0.3 V for Pt/C) and a high current density of −4.38 mV cm−2 (−4.66 mV cm−2 for Pt/C). XPS analysis of the carbon materials illustrated that pyridinic N and quaternary N play vital roles in reducing the overpotential for the ORR process. Thus, the authors declared that reasonable nitrogen doping, the porous nature of the carbon along with the high specific area and excellent conductivity leads to a superior electrocatalytic ORR activity. Although demonstrating inferior ORR activity to Pt/C, the very simple synthetic method from biomass waste shows unexpected potential in future applications, such as in the area of energy storage.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD pattern over the 2θ range of 5–90° of NDC-L-600, NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, and NDC-L-900. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of NDC-L-800. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, and NDC-L-900. The inset shows the pore-size distributions (PSDs) of the four samples.91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.2 Carbon-based non-precious metal composites. 
Transition metal oxides have been widely used as active electrocatalysts111–113 or active components in carbon based non-precious metal composites for the ORR. Interestingly, after the combination of transition metal and carbonaceous materials, synergistic catalytic effects towards the ORR can be observed.114 Although the activity of many N-doped carbon materials are comparable to commercial Pt/C for the ORR in alkaline media, much room for improvement remains, especially in acid media. Considering the synergistic effect of metal oxides and N-doped carbon in improving ORR activity, exploration of fabricating carbon based non-precious metal oxide hybrid catalysts has received intensive attention. Obviously, the selection of cheap and abundant biomass as carbon precursors is highly desirable for a successful future for fuel cells. The frequently explored metal oxides hybridized in biomass derived carbons include Co3O4,115 Fe oxide92,96,98,116,117 and CoFe2O4.118 Compared with bare carbon and metal oxide materials, an apparent increase in ORR activity was observed for the final desired hybrid electrocatalysts, demonstrating attractive future prospects as new generation ORR catalysts.
A typical example of a biomass derived carbon hybridized with metal oxide as a desired ORR catalyst was demonstrated by Fellinger and coworkers.115 Blood powder was used as the carbon precursor, and employing CaCO3 as a hard template produced foam-like nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur ternary-doped porous carbon (BDHC) with a SSA as high as 1288 m2 g−1. A wet-chemistry method was utilized to immobilize Co3O4 nanoparticles on the porous BDHC, obtaining finely dispersed Co3O4 (∼3 nm) on the surface of 27 wt% Co3O4@BDHC2 with a much decreased SSA of 159 m2 g−1 (Scheme 3). The hybrid Co3O4@BDHC2, with retained meso- and macropore structures and finely dispersed Co3O4 nanoparticles demonstrated very attractive potential in the electrocatalytic reactions. ORR tests showed that the hybrid catalyst showed positively shifted peak potentials in cyclic voltammetry (CV) compared to both bare BDHC and Co3O4, clearly indicating a significant ORR activity enhancement upon the hybridization of BDHC and Co3O4. Moreover, the hybrid showed comparable half-wave potential to that of Pt/C in linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), a more efficient 4e− pathway and excellent resistance to the methanol crossover effect. The SSA and the strongly heteroatom doped material featured stable anchoring sites for the immobilization of Co3O4, which greatly reduced the aggregation and growth of the decorated Co3O4 nanoparticles and improved the charge transfer between the two species. Notably, the synergistic effect between the carbon scaffold and the cobalt oxide was successfully demonstrated in the ORR, thus proving the wide potential of metal oxide decoration on a carbon structure in improving the ORR activity.
 Scheme 3  Schematic of the fabrication process for Co3O4 decorated BDHC.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

3.3 Perspectives on fuel cell of biomass-derived carbon
For the anode of a fuel cell, it has been hard to find cheaper substitutes (e.g. non-noble metals) for noble metal based catalysts up to now. An effective alternative is to develop advanced carbon materials as supports to reduce the dosage of noble metals but maintain the high efficiency. Also, the exploration of new catalysts that are able to catalyze the oxidation of renewable biofuel (e.g. glucose) at the anode of a fuel cell is also promising, as biofuel is more easily acquired and stored. With respect to the cathode (referring to the ORR), the activities of metal-free carbon based catalysts are beyond the actual industrial demand. Still, it is urgent to develop hybrids of carbon and non-noble metals with high catalytic activity, especially in acidic electrolytes.
4 Applications in water splitting
Hydrogen (H2) is an efficient energy carrier (∼ 39 kWh kg−1).119 Currently, H2 is mainly produced from natural gas via steam methane reforming; however, the by-product CO2 exacerbates the greenhouse effect.120,121 The water splitting reaction, producing both H2 and O2, satisfies the atom-economy, because of the full usage of H2 and O2 in a fuel cell. A catalyst is absolutely essential for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (2H+ + 2e− → H2) to reduce the overpotential and consequently increase the faradaic efficiency. Pt-based catalysts with high costs and low reserves are still the most effective for the HER with a near-zero overpotential. Hence, a number of works have tried to reduce the dosage of noble metals but maintained the high performance of the catalyst by designing specific catalyst supports. Carbonaceous materials with a high SSA and robust stability towards acidic and basic media render an industrially viable option. For instance, Kalyani et al.122 reported a green alternative catalyst support derived from turf grass for water electrolysis. The as-prepared carbonaceous materials show cost-competitiveness towards commercial ones (e.g. Vulcan XC-72).
4.1 Electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction
Significantly, a variety of non-precious materials (e.g., carbides,124 sulphides,125 metal alloys126) have been investigated as catalysts for the HER. Among these low-cost candidates, MoS2-based catalysts show great promise for the HER.123 However, the poor conductivity as well as the aggregation due to the strong van der Waals interactions of the lamellae reduces the activity of MoS2. In this regard, the combination of carbon materials, with high conductivity and well-defined structures, and MoS2 may be one of the best alternatives. The research conducted by Yang et al.123 proved that biomass-derived carbon supported MoS2 (MoS2/AC) showed great potential for the HER. MoS2/AC was prepared via a hydrothermal treatment of the mixture of Na2MoO4, glucose, and NH2CSNH2 at 240 °C for 24 h followed by thermal treatment at 800 °C for 2 h in an argon atmosphere. The MoS2/AC composites presented a three-dimensional sphere-like architecture with a diameter of about 500 nm (Fig. 8a and b). Besides, Fig. 8c shows that the MoS2 nanowhiskers with an average thickness of 20 nm were uniformly dispersed around the sphere, also corresponding with the elemental mapping images (Fig. 8e). Moreover, the distinguishable lattice fringes (Fig. 8d) complied with the existence of MoS2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements uncovered the good conductivity of MoS2/AC with a low charge-transfer resistance, which was favorable towards the electrocatalytic activity. When assessed as an electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 after iR-compensation, MoS2/AC showed high HER performance with a low onset overpotential (80 mV) as well as a high cathodic current density (91 mA cm−2 at overpotential of 200 mV). As for the control groups, neither pure MoS2 (onset overpotential of 180 mV) nor commercial bulk MoS2 (onset overpotential of 170 mV) exhibited comparative HER performance (Fig. 8f). Meanwhile, MoS2/AC had good durability in a long-term electrochemical process with a slight activity loss after 1000 cycles. A Tafel analysis (Fig. 8e) of the J–V curves revealed that the HER on the MoS2/AC catalytic systems was controlled by a Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism. The excellent HER performance of MoS2/AC was attributed to the amorphous carbon, which inhibited the aggregation of MoS2 nanosheets, thus exposing abundant catalytic edge sites and rendering the catalyst with good conductivity. Scientists can always be enlightened by the fundamental mechanisms of chemical changes and search for inspiration in other research fields. Transition-metal phosphides (TMPs) have been intensively investigated as catalysts for hydride sulfurization (HDS), which relies on the reversible binding of catalysts and hydrogen, with hydrogen dissociation to promote H2S formation. Inspired by the similar process of the HER, several works127,128 have reported the design of a series of catalysts based on TMPs, which are able to accomplish great deeds (high catalytic efficiency with robust stability). Recently, Guo et al.129 prepared a hybrid with highly dispersive CoP nanocrystals embedded in different carbon matrices (abbreviated as CoP-carbon), including reduced graphene oxide (RGO), macroporous carbon (MPC), mesoporous carbon vesicles (MCVs) and ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC). The synthetic strategies are shown in ref. 129. TEM images as well as the particle size distributions (Fig. 9a–d1) uncovered that the CoP nanocrystals in the four carbon matrices were well-dispersed, with the average diameters ranging from 4.5 nm to 7.5 nm, among which the CoP nanocrystals in CoP-OMC showed the smallest particle size. All the four CoP-carbon materials were assessed as a cathode for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4, the onset potential (−77.7 mV) and the over-potential (141.73 mV) (Fig. 9e) of the CoP-OMC catalyst were smaller than those of free CoP (onset potential of −167.40 mV and over-potential of 212.29 mV) and the other three CoP-carbon based electrodes. The substrate of ordered mesoporous carbon can elevate the performance of CoP-based samples due to the following factors: (1) the mesoporous carbon matrix significantly inhibited the aggregation of CoP, thus yielding tiny CoP nanocrystals and exposing a higher number of active sites; (2) the excellent conductivity of carbon matrix lead to a higher proton/electron transport rate, resulting in a small inner resistance; (3) continuous frameworks of ordered mesoporous carbon provided excellent reactant transport efficiency as well as short transport pathways for electrolytes, reducing the diffusion resistance. Moreover, the polarization curves (Fig. 9f) demonstrated the robust durability of CoP-OMC, and deduced the positive effect of the OMC in comparison with the durability of CoP. The well-dispersed CoP nanoparticles are tightly inlaid inside the carbon skeletons, resulting in no performance degradation after electrolysis for more than 30 h at a static over-potential of 150 mV vs. RHE for the CoP-OMC catalyst (Fig. 9g).
 Fig. 8  SEM images (a) of MoS2/AC; TEM image (b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of MoS2/AC; (e) the high angle annular dark-field scanning TEM image and corresponding elemental mapping images of MoS2/AC; (f) polarization performance curves on a rotating glassy carbon disk electrode for various electrocatalysts; (g) the Tafel plots with the linear portions.123 Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright© 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 9  TEM images of the (a) CoP–RGO, (b) CoP–MPC, (c) CoP–MCV, and (d) CoP–OMC samples. The inset of d corresponds to the HR-TEM image of the CoP–OMC sample. Histograms of the particle size distributions for the (a1) CoP–RGO, (b1) CoP–MPC, (c1) CoP–MCV, and (d1) CoP–OMC samples; (e) LSV curves of the CoP-carbon catalysts and Pt–C; (f) polarization curves for CoP–OMC and free CoP NPs; (g) time dependence of the current density for CoP–OMC at a static over-potential of 150 mV for 30 hours.129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the anode reaction employed in water splitting, in which the sluggish kinetics in the electrocatalytic evolution of O2 is another great factor determining the water splitting rate. Pt, Ru, and their alloys with high cost and low abundance offer the best OER performance but lack long-term stability. Over recent years, the pursuit of catalysts based on earth-abundant elements (e.g. cobalt oxides or substituted cobaltites130–133) applied in the OER has shown more potential in practical applications. As aforementioned, carbon nanomaterials are widely applied in electrochemical devices. Besides their tunable pore structure and morphologies, the bulk properties and surface physicochemical characteristics can be improved by heteroatom doping. Recently, Zhang et al.115 reported a catalyst based on Co3O4 decorated blood derived carbon (Co3O4@BDHC2), in which heteroatoms in blood can achieve in situ doping. This work highlighted the synergistic effect of Co3O4 and carbon in the electrocatalysis of the ORR. The corresponding fabrication of this catalyst was been presented in section 3.2.2. The hybrid was also applied in the OER, based on the reactions between the Co(II), Co(III), and Co(IV) species on the surface of the catalyst (Fig. 10a). In comparison with the Co3O4/BDHC2 mixture, the free Co3O4 and the Co3O4/carbon black, the cobalt oxides intimately made contact with the carbon scaffold, yielding a synergistic effect which led to a characteristic over-potential of 360 mV at 10 mA cm−1 (Fig. 10b). An activity loss of only 4% was observed in a long-term chronoamperometric stability test (Fig. 10c) in 0.1 M KOH, whereas standard IrO2 material lost ∼35% of its initial activity after just 42 minutes, indicating the excellent stability of Co3O4/BDHC2. Undoubtedly, the high surface area and strongly heteroatom doped carbon material featured stable anchoring sites for the immobilization of Co3O4, which greatly reduced the aggregation and growth of the decorated Co3O4 nanoparticles, resulting in exploitation of the greater number of exposed active sites.
 Fig. 10  (a) Mechanism for the OER process at the Co3O4 electrode in alkaline solution; (b) LSV curves of catalysts measured in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm; (c) durability of catalysts at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH, 1600 rpm.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another typical case coupling transition metal elements with biomass-derived carbon was reported by Yang and co-workers.118 A CoFe2O4/biocarbon nanocomposite (CFO/BC) was successfully and ingeniously prepared via a biomineralization process with yeast cells as biocarbon sources. The as-prepared CFO/BC showed a better performance in OER than separate BC as well as CFO, which revealed the importance of the synergistic effect between the BC and CFO. Besides the transition metal oxides, catalysts based on rare earth elements have also been regarded as promising catalysts for the OER. Yan et al.128 designed a catalyst based on La2O3 doped carbon (La2O3@CMSs) via two steps, combining HTC (preparing the carbon sphere) with impregnation. The authors highlighted the bifunctional electrocatalysis (ORR and OER) of the material and revealed that the La–O and C–O at the surface leaded to synergistic interactions with the La2O3@CMSs, therefore improving the bifunctional electrocatalytic activity.
4.3 Bifunctional electrocatalysis for HER and OER
As presented in sections 4.1 and 4.2, most studies have focused on the HER or OER separately, and several studies115,128 have highlighted the bifunctional electrocatalysis of the OER and ORR. However, utilizing a bifunctional catalyst for both the HER and OER remains a big challenge, which is a crucial step for achieving overall water splitting catalysts. With thoughts of the superiority of carbon conductivity, the low H atom binding energy of metallic cobalt, and the better OER activity of cobalt oxide, Wang et al.134 fabricated cobalt–cobalt oxide/N-doped carbon hybrids (CoOx@CN) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the HER and OER through a simple one-pot thermal treatment of melamine, CoNO3·6H2O, and D(+)-glucosamine hydrochloride. XRD, HRTEM, and XPS characterization uncovered the components of metallic Co, CoO, and Co3O4. Fig. 11a indicates that the cobalt NPs were uniformly dispersed on the substrates with an average size of 12.3 nm (inset of Fig. 11a). When evaluated for the HER in 1 M KOH solution, CoOx@CN exhibited a small onset potential of 85 mV as well as a small overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11b). Moreover, excellent durability was demonstrated through the time-dependent curve at an overpotential of 350 mV, showing negligible degradation of the current density even after a long period of 6000 s. A Tafel slope of 115 mV dec−1 for CoOx@CN revealed that the HER may be controlled by a Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism. Through well-designed experiments, the author uncovered that Co0 and Co3O4 were the active species in the HER, while the cobalt oxide and Co in CoOx@CN were the synergistic active sites for the HER. From Fig. 10b, the nitrogen-free sample (CoOx@C) synthesized through similar preparation to that of CoOx@CN showed weaker performance than CoOx@CN. This result could be attributed to the increasing of percentage of Co0 due to the electro-donating effect of nitrogen, leading to the reduction of Co2+ to Co0. The catalytic ability of CoOx@CN towards the OER was examined by LSV in 1 M KOH. The overpotential of 0.26 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was comparable and even superior to that of most reported catalysts. The authors also highlighted that the variation of the valence state of metals during the HER and OER process would have an impact on the catalytic ability. The R-CoOx@CN (CoOx@CN after half an hour of the HER) exhibited a remarkably better OER catalytic performance than CoOx@CN (Fig. 11c), which is mainly because of the increasing percentage of Co2+ during the HER process. When applying CoOx@CN as the cathode and the R-CoOx@CN as anode, water electrolysis with a current density of 20 mA cm−1 at 1.55 V was achieved (Fig. 11d). As observed in the inset of Fig. 11d, the cell displayed significant stability over nearly 3 h, showing great potential for industrial application.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of CoOx@CN with the inset showing the corresponding particle-size distribution histogram; (b) LSV curves of different catalysts for the HER; (c) LSV curves of different catalysts for the OER; (d) LSV of water electrolysis using the original CoOx@CN as a HER catalyst and CoOx@CN after HER as an OER catalyst in 1 M KOH, with the inset showing the stability test at 10 mA cm−2.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Perspectives on water splitting of biomass-derived carbon
As can be seen from the above sections, carbon materials are often chosen to support metal compounds to enhance the catalytic performances of the HER or OER catalysts. A few studies showed that heteroatom-doped nanocarbons exhibited HER activity, but their performance is lower than metal-based catalysts.135 In order to reduce the usage of noble metal, the development of carbon/non-noble metal hybrids is still promising. Metal-embedded nanocarbon is also attractive, as metal nanoparticles are well encapsulated by graphitic carbon layers which provide high chemical stability towards a range of different pH values.
5 Applications in supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs) are of great interest as promising electrochemical energy storage devices.136 In principle, on the basis of their energy storage mechanism, SCs can be classified into two categories. One category is electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLC), where the capacitance is based on the electrostatic adsorption of electrolyte ions on the surface area of electrically conductive porous electrodes. Another category is pseudo-capacitors, where the energy storage is based on reversible redox reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Both of the two mechanisms closely rely on the nature of the electrode materials, e.g. the availability of pores, the conductivity of the materials, and the wettability of the electrodes, which are determined by the kind of surface functionalities. Among the materials applied in SCs, carbon-based materials are the most widely used electrodes because of their often-cited excellent physicochemical properties, including low production costs, good electrical conductivity, tunable porosity, ease of processability, and the variety of forms that they can take.137 The pursuit of high performance carbon-based materials for SCs is usually achieved by preparing carbon materials with a high SSA (via choosing an appropriate activation method), forming a special surface electronic structure (via selecting specific carbon precursors or some other additives) or specific morphologies (through nanocasting and other synthetic technologies).
5.1 Activated biomass-derived carbon for SCs
From the economic point of view, ACs-based electrodes, because of their low cost, are especially attractive for SCs. A simple carbonization process with post-activation treatment, applied to an extensive range of different biomass, can yield plentiful ACs for SCs. The post-activation process is vital to switch the porosity and the distribution of surface functional groups of ACs, significantly influencing their specific capacitance. Wu et al.138 studied the effects of pore structure and electrolyte on capacitive characteristics. In their study, ACs with similar SSA values but different pore structures were fabricated from fir wood and pistachio shell by means of steam activation or KOH activation. In comparison with KOH-activated ACs that possess micropores and a larger density of oxygen functional groups, steam-activated ACs had a greater number of mesopores (33.3–49.5% vs. 9.2–15.3% of KOH-activated ACs) as well as fewer oxygen functional groups. All the ACs were evaluated as electrodes in different electrolytes (1 M NaNO3, 1 M HNO3, and 0.5 M H2SO4). The double-layer capacitance of steam-activated carbons is a weak function of the scan rate of CV in both neutral and acidic electrolytes, while the KOH-activated ACs showed an obvious decrease in the specific capacitance upon increasing the scan rate of CV. Among the four different ACs, the KOH-activated ACs derived from fir wood showed the best capacitive performance in H2SO4 (180 F g−1 measured at 10 mV s−1). Besides the high SSA, the good crystallinity of carbon materials, which is favorable for charge transfer, also decreases the SSA. It is necessary to balance these two contradictory important factors for high performance SCs. In response to this dilemma, several works focused on enhancing the electroconductivity but maintaining the high SSA of ACs at the same time.153,167 A graphitic catalyst precursor (FeCl3) and activating agent (ZnCl2) were introduced simultaneously into the skeleton of biomass (coconut shell and silk), leading to an extremely high SSA (1874 m2 g−1 for coconut shell derived ACs and 2494 m2 g−1 for silk derived ACs) and excellent performance in SCs (268 F g−1 and 242 F g−1) (Tables 1 and 2).
Table 1 Maximum capacitance values of activated carbons derived from biomass precursors. Capacitances are three-electrode equivalents for a single electrode




Biomass
Activation method

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Maximum capacitance (F g−1)
Measurement conditions
Electrolyte




Argan seed shell139
KOH/melamine
2062
355
125 mA g−1
1 M H2SO4


Firwood140
H2O
1131
140
25 mV s−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Pistachio shell138
KOH
1096
120
10 mV s−1
0.5 M H2SO4


Banana fibers141
ZnCl2
1097
74
500 mA g−1
1 M Na2SO4


Corn grains142
KOH
3199
257
1 mA cm−2
6 M KOH


Waste coffee beans143
ZnCl2
1019
368
50 mA g−1
1 M H2SO4


Sugarcane bagasse144
ZnCl2
1788
300
250 mA g−1
1 M H2SO4


Sunflower seed shell145
KOH
2509
311
250 mA g−1
30 wt% KOH


Cornstalk146
K4[Fe(CN)6]
788
213
1 A g−1
6 M KOH


Rice husk147
KOH
2783
179.4
6.25 A g−1
6 M KOH


Enteromorpha prolifera148
KOH
2283
296
0.5 A g−1
30 wt% KOH


Tea-leaves149
KOH
2841
330
1 A g−1
2 M KOH


Human hair150
KOH
1306
445
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


107
2 A g−1
1 M LiPF6


Rubber Wood Sawdust151
CO2
912
138
0.01 A cm−2
1 M H2SO4


Gelatin152
NaOH
3012
385
0.05 A g−1
6 M KOH


Coconut shell153
ZnCl2/FeCl3
1874
268
1 A g−1
6 M KOH


Carrageenan154
KOH
2502
261
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


Rice straw155
H3PO4
396
112
—
1 M H2SO4


Cattail156
KOH
1951
336
2 mV s−1
6 M KOH


Watermelon157
—
158
281
5 mV s−1
6 M KOH


Kenaf stem158
NiCl2
1480
327
2 mV s−1
1 M H2SO4


Auricularia159
KOH
1103
374
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


Chicken eggshell membranes160
Air
221
297
0.2 A g−1
1 M KOH


284
0.2 A g−1
1 M H2SO4


Spruce161
Air/KOH
2836
246
2 mV s−1
6 M KOH


Kelp162
NH3
1003
440
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


Bagasse163
CaCl2/urea
806
323
1 A g−1
6 M KOH


Shiitake mushroom161
H3PO4/KOH
2988
306
1 A g−1
6 M KOH


Soybean164
KOH
580
425
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


Broad bean shells165
KOH
655
229
0.5 A g−1
1 M H2SO4


Corn husk166
KOH
867
356
1 A g−1
6 M KOH




Table 2 Maximum capacitance values of activated carbons derived from biomass precursors. Capacitances are two-electrode equivalents for a single electrode




Biomass
Activation method

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Maximum capacitance (F g−1)
Measurement conditions
Electrolyte




Bamboo168
KOH
1251
260
1 mA cm−2
30 wt% H2SO4


Coffee grounds169
H3PO4
742
38
0.05 A g−1
1 M H2SO4


Pine-cone170
KOH
3950
142
1 A g−1
1 M LiPF6


Coffee grounds143
ZnCl2
1019
368
0.05 A g−1
1 M H2SO4


Microalgae/glucose171
KOH
2130
200
0.1 A g−1
6 M LiCl


Wheat bran172
KOH
2189
294
0.5 A g−1
6 M KOH


129
0.25 A g−1
1 M TEABF4/AN


Pomelo peel173
KOH
2105
43.5
0.5 A g−1
1 M NaNO3


Bean dregs174
KOH
2876
281
0.1 A g−1
1 M H2SO4


Lotus pollen175
KOH
3037
207
1 A g−1
Neat EMIMBF4


Silk167
FeCl3/ZnCl2
2494
242
0.1 A g−1
Neat EMIMBF4




Besides the parent element C, biomass also contains various elements (O and N), serving as in situ doping sources for the synthesis of biomass-derived carbon. Meanwhile, the capacitive characteristics of ACs would be significantly affected by the raw materials used as well as the activation method applied. Work summarized in Tables 1 and 2 has focused on combining specific carbon precursors with an appropriate activation method in order to achieve excellent capacitive performance with low costs. All of these biomass-derived carbons contain a variable pore structure and functional groups that determine the electrochemical performance. However, it is not easy to make a summary of which factors are essential for ACs-based capacitors with high performance because of the complex test systems. In this regard, a systematic investigation of variable effects on electrochemical performance in supercapacitors is desired. Bandosz et al.174,176 carried out systematic research on the effect of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing functional groups of microporous ACs on their electrochemical performance. The raw material, S208 coconut-shell-based carbon (denoted as S), was preoxidized by nitric acid (the as-obtained products were labeled as S-O). Then, S-O was modified by urea and melamine, giving products that were denoted as S-UO and S-MO, respectively. In contrast, the urea or melamine modified samples without preoxidation were named as S-M and S-U, respectively. As seen from Table 3, the oxygen and nitrogen contents, as well as their species, were different from each other. The chemical formula of nitrogen and oxygen functionalities within the carbon matrices is schematically shown in Fig. 12. The presence of oxygen containing groups, derived from the oxidization with nitric acid, not only attracts melamine and urea but also contributes to the surface reactions. Because of the different contents of nitrogen in the precursors (67% in melamine and 47% in urea) as well as the molecule size and the different reaction process (melamine would form bulky resin at high temperatures), the different treatments resulted in changes in the number and the kind of surface species (Table 3). Based on the XPS analysis, the urea treatment favored the formation of pyridinic-N (N-6), whereas melamine had a positive effect on the formation of quaternary-N (N-Q). Analysis of the electrochemical behavior of urea- and melamine-treated samples revealed the roles of the specific pore size and the functional groups on 1 M H2SO4. Pores between 0.5 and 0.6 nm are the most effective in a double-layer formation, thanks to their good correlation with the size of hydrated ions (the corresponding sizes of (H2O)12 and H3O+ are 5.33 Å and 4.2 Å, respectively). Meanwhile, pseudocapacitive interactions took place on negatively charged pyrrolic-N (N-5) and pyridinic-N (N-6) along with quinone oxygen (O-I), while the positive charge on quaternary-N (N-Q) and pyridinic-N-oxide (N-X) led to electron transfer through the carbon, and hence has a positive effect on the capacitance.
 Fig. 12  Schematic model of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing surface functional groups on carbon.177 Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Table 3 The oxygen and nitrogen contents based on elementary analysis of their species on the basis of XPS analysis177




Sample
Na
N-5b
N-6b
N-Qb
N-Xb
Oa
O-Ib
O-IIb
O-IIIb





a Oxygen and nitrogen contents [%] came from elemental analysis.
b Relative surface concentrations of nitrogen and oxygen species obtained by fitting the N 1s and O 1s core level XPS spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.





S
0.12
—
—
—
—
20.18
37.0
59.5
3.5


S-O
0.08
—
—
—
—
16.36
42.0
54.8
3.2


S-U
2.9
27.0
48.2
20.5
4.30
11.5
44.6
47.9
7.5


S-UO
3.7
19.9
53.5
16.4
10.10
4.8
37.8
54.1
8.1


S-M
4.0
22.2
44.7
26.1
7.04
10
51.6
51.6
6.1


S-MO
4.1
24.5
46.1
22.3
7.09
7.1
30.8
57.9
11.5




In addition, some biomass possesses special nano-structures, which also impacts the texture of the carbon materials. For example, the porous surface structure of different pollens (Fig. 13a–d) offers better access to a higher SSA and a more mesoporous structure, leading to excellent specific capacitance and high energy density. Another example is a carbonized eggshell membrane that possesses three-dimensional macropores (Fig. 13e) derived from interwoven connected carbon fibers. The excellent structure, as well as the high N and O contents, made these materials exhibit exceptional specific capacitances (Table 1). The matching fabricated process, announced by Yang et al.107,178 based on fungi (Fig. 13), was important towards special biomass being chosen for high performance SCs. Recently, Li et al.179 focused on research on carbon materials derived from hemp bast fiber, which has a multilevel layered structure composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. As shown in Scheme 4, the wall of a hollow hemp fiber is mainly composed of three layers, where the internal (S3) and outer (S1) layers are mainly composed of hemicellulose and lignin while the middle layer (S2) is primarily crystalline cellulose (70 wt%). In their study, they found that a hydrothermal treatment, which could degrade the hemicellulose and lignin (S1 and S3) and carbonize the cellulose (S2), is critical to achieve the carbon nanosheet morphology. By combining hydrothermal and activation processes, the as-prepared carbon achieved graphene-like carbon nanosheets with a SSA up to 2287 m2 g−1. Electrodes based on the materials originated from hemp fiber displayed remarkable electrochemical properties in a conventional ionic liquid electrolyte. For example, at a very high power density of 20 kW kg−1, the energy densities are 19 (at 20 °C), 34 (at 60 °C), and 40 (at 100 °C) Wh kg−1, respectively. Moreover, the energy density of 12 Wh kg−1 of the assembled SC device is higher than that of commercially available SCs.
 Fig. 13  SEM images of pollens of (a) lotus, (b) peony, (c) rape, and (d) camellia; and (e) eggshell membranes; (f) the smooth face of auriculariaes.160,175,178 Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, 175 and 178. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Scheme 4  Schematic of the synthesis process for hemp-derived carbon nanosheets.179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
For the reason that the polysaccharides in biomass decompose in the narrow temperature range of 300–350 °C, classical pyrolysis usually results in char with a small oxygen and nitrogen content. In this respect, the technique of HTC for the conversion of biomass or biomass derivatives is favorable since it can maintain a high content of oxygen and nitrogen in the desired materials because of the low fabricated temperature. Titirici et al.180 introduced KOH activation into the HTCs derived from D-glucoasmine, for the HTCs often suffer from a low SSA. By tuning the mass ratio of HTCs to KOH, the products acquire a high SSA (571 m2 g−1) with proper N content (4.4%), resulting in an exceptional performance in SCs (∼50 Wh kg−1 in 1 M H2SO4 and ∼40 Wh kg−1 in 1 M KOH at the specific power of 0.1 kW kg−1).
5.2 Non-activated biomass-derived carbon for SCs
When applied in SCs, traditional ACs, however, suffer from slow ion transportation because of the small micropores in ACs. The use of activators can optimize the pore structure; however, this raises environmental arguments as well. In this respect, it is of great significance to fabricate carbon materials with a specific nanostructure based on nanocasting, soft-templating or “additive” methodologies (described in section 2). Up to date, researchers have reported various carbons, including carbon spheres,181,182 carbon hollow spheres,4,183 ordered mesoporous carbon184etc., on the basis of biomass and biomass derivatives.
Liu et al.185 prepared hierarchically porous carbon hollow-spheres as a high performance electrical double-layer capacitor material. They fabricated carbon hollow-spheres using silica spheres as the hard template and glucose as the precursor through a HTC process (Scheme 5). The carbon hollow-spheres have a hierarchically porous structure with a microporous shell and a meso/macroporous core. The capacitance of the supercapacitor electrode based on the hollow-spheres was 269 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in 6 M KOH. Moreover, the excellent pore structure also led to a good retention of ∼73% of the capacitance when the charge/discharge rate changes from 0.5 A g−1 to 10 A g−1. Briefly, the nanocasting is somewhat verbose and hazardous because of the poisonous reagents (e.g. HF) during the removal of the hard template. In recent years, several strategies have focused on additive-assisted HTC, which is more sustainable and environmentally friendly, to prepare carbons with optimized porous structures.62,186,187 For example, hierarchically porous carbons (HPCs) with 3D macro-mesopores and short-range meso-micropores were fabricated via a two-step strategy combining PAANa-assisted HTC with air activation. Macro and mesopores were constructed by the slight accumulation/aggregation of carbon spheres ranging from 60 to 80 nm, while micropores were introduced by air activation. Different types of pore play specific roles for high performance SCs, that is, macropores (diameter >50 nm) serve as buffering micro-reservoirs that minimize diffusion distances, while short-range mesopores can provide a larger accessible surface area and smaller ion-transport resistance, while the presence of micropores (<2 nm) that are accessible to electrolyte ions is essential for high energy storage. The specific capacitance of 170 F g−1 (based on two-electrode test system) at 0.1 A g−1 in 6 M KOH was displayed based on the as-obtained HPCs derived from fructose. When the current density was adjusted to 10 A g−1, a capacitance of 140 F g−1 was still maintained, leading to an excellent retention of 82%.62 The additives in the fabrication process are indeed a powerful tool to control the morphology and porous structure, besides which the surface chemistry and conductivity can also be adjusted by choosing appropriate additives and biomass.188,189
 Scheme 5  Schematic of the fabrication process of carbon hollow-spheres.185 Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
The synthesis of ordered mesoporous carbons (OMCs) is always a hot topic because of their regular, uniform and interpenetrating mesopores, tunable pore sizes and surface areas. Zhao et al.186 reported the synthesis of OMCs for SCs through a soft-templating method employing β-cyclodextrin as a renewable carbon precursor and Pluronic F127 as templates. However, the carbon materials derived from the traditional soft-templating method often suffer from a bulk morphology that is unfavorable for the quick diffusion of electrolytes besides the ordered mesopores. Recently, Wang et al.190 introduced insoluble melamine sulfate into the classical soft-templating method, where the assembly of D-fructose with soft templates was greatly promoted, yielding carbon materials with a flower-like structure (Fig. 14a) as well as ordered mesopores (Fig. 14d). To verify the vital role of the melamine sulfate during the self-assembly process, a contrasting sample was prepared in the absence of sulfuric acid. The contrast carbon suffered from a mussy morphology, showing a poor capacity as an electrode for SCs (Fig. 14e and f). The specific capacitance of the SCs using flower-like ordered mesoporous carbon was ∼200 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a good capacitance retention of 84% when the current density increased from 0.2 to 2 A g−1. Most of the strategies described above are batch processes which enhances the cost for industrial production. Industries are more interested in continuous production. A strategy of spray pyrolysis was reported by O'Connell et al.191 for the fabrication of carbon spheres with rich mesopores. The as-obtained samples consisted of monodispersed and hollow carbon spheres and exhibited a capacity of 112 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1.
 Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images and (c and d) TEM images of flower-like ordered mesoporous carbon; (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves and (f) rate capability plots of flower-like ordered mesoporous carbon and the contrast sample prepared in the absence of sulfuric acid.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Composites based on biomass for SCs
SCs show a higher energy density than the traditional dielectric capacitor, however, the relatively low energy density of SCs compared to batteries still restricts their application in daily life. Hence, the pursuit of a high energy density as well as a high power density has motivated researchers to employ metallic oxides192–194 (e.g. RuO2, MnO2) or conducting polymers195,196 which can provide powerful energy through reversible faradaic processes. However, the poor conductivity of metallic oxides such as MnO2 hinders their applications as electrode materials.197 The mechanical degradation of conducting polymers during faradaic charging processes also leads to a poor cyclability.198 One effective approach to solve these problems is the fabrication of composites based on carbon materials, which can improve the electrical conductivity and mechanical strength of the composite materials.199,200 Some representative examples include carbonaceous aerogels/MnO2,198 Ni(OH)2/graphene,201 and conducting-polymer-based composites195etc.
The performance of the composites (carbon material/metal oxide or conducting polymer) is highly dependent on the properties of the support. Currently, carbonaceous aerogels (CAs) with interconnected pores and good electroconductivity serve as flexible skeletons for metallic oxides and conducting polymers applied as electrodes for a high energy density SCs. However, traditional methods202,203 such as sol–gel and supercritical CO2 drying are complex and not particularly feasible. Plenty of different biomass sources can facilitate the synthesis of functional carbon materials by providing the carbon precursors with special properties.204,205 Xu et al.206 recently prepared flexible CAs using the crude biomass of watermelon as the carbon source (Fig. 15a). By further embedding Fe3O4 nanoparticles into the networks of the carbonaceous gels, magnetite carbon aerogels (MCAs) with a 3D porous structure could be fabricated (Fig. 15a1). The as-obtained MCAs exhibited an excellent capacitance of 333 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 within a potential window of 1.0 to 0 V in 6 M KOH solution. When the discharge current density was set as 6 A g−1, the MCAs exhibited a considerable capacitance of 222 F g−1, with high rate capability. Meanwhile, the MCAs also showed outstanding cycling stability with 96% of capacitance retention after 1000 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 15b). The author highlighted that the interconnected 3D porous structure of MCAs ensured the good performance in SCs.
 Fig. 15  Digital photos of (a) MCAs and (a1) lightweight MCAs monolith lifted by a magnet; (b) cycling stability of the MCAs electrode at a charge/discharge current density of 1 A g−1 for 1000 cycles.206 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Generally, metal oxides with different morphologies were coated on the surface of these carbon materials. However, these composites were not resistant to corrosion and easily aggregated, resulting in inferior cycling stability and a weak rate capability. Recently, MnOx encapsulated multiporous carbon nanofibers (M-MCNFs) were fabricated through a dopamine-assisted HTC process by using cryptomelane-type manganese oxide nanowires as the hard-template and glucose as the carbon resource. The hard template finally turned into Mn3O4 nanoparticles encapsulated in multiporous carbon nanofibers that can provide faradaic pseudocapacitance without complicated post treatment. The M-MCNFs presented a capacitance of 313 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and showed no degradation after 8000 charge/discharge cycles.207
Actually, the use of metallic oxides, which could provide pseudocapacitance through reversible redox reactions, could lead to heavy metal pollution, whereas functional groups (e.g. pyridinic-N and quinone oxygen etc.) undergo redox reactions, providing extra capacitance. Béguin et al.208,209 prepared a series of chars containing sufficiently high amounts of oxygen incorporated in the carbon framework using oxygen-rich carbon precursors (alginate) or even crude biomass (seaweed). Those products exhibited comparable or even higher performance than Maxsorb. Furthermore, Park et al.210 recently designed a hybrid combining graphene with lignins (the products were named RLs), inspired by the fact that the well-defined redox active centers found in plants and animals are phenolics. On the basis of the spectroscopic and electrochemical analysis of the hybrids, lignins were anchored onto the surface of a reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheet through strong π–π and hydrophobic interactions between the aromatic backbone of lignin and RGO sheets, which was favorable for the electron diffusion. The schematic of the synthesis process as well as the reversible redox reaction of quinone moieties is presented in Fig. 16. In addition, this hybrid makes use of the excellent conductivity of graphene and the pseudocapacitance of the quinone moieties confined on the lignin nanocrystals, and provides a maximum capacitance of 432 F g−1 with remarkable rate and cyclic performances (∼96% retention after 3000 cycles). Systematic studies showed that the fundamental electrochemical behaviors was not similar to the classical diffusion-controlled insertion mechanism, however, it was based on a surface dominant charge-transfer reaction.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the synthesis process for RLs and their energy-storage mechanism originating from natural polymers.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co KGaA, Weinheim. 
5.4 Perspectives on supercapcitors of biomass-derived carbon
For electronic double layer capacitors (EDLC) fabricated by carbon materials, micopores with the same size as ions in electrolytes are essential for SCs with relatively high energy density. Moreover, the existence of macro and mesopores with appropriate sizes are also essential for the fast diffusion of electrolytes which can endow SCs with a high power density. However, the energy density of EDLC is still beyond practical requirements. The recent breakthrough of SCs based on carbon materials came from the combination of an optimized pore structure and heteroatom-doping, which provides a bright future for carbon materials.211 It also stressed the importance of faradaic pseudocapacitance for SCs with a high energy density. The development of carbon-based complexes (carbon/MnOx, doped-carbon/MnOx) which combine EDLC and pseudocapacitance still holds great promise to fabricate SCs with both high power and energy density.
6 Application in lithium-ion batteries
Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, due to their reduced weight, high energy storage capability, and low self-discharge, have been widely used in many portable devices such as smart phones, laptops, and digital cameras etc.212 Generally, commercial Li-ion batteries often employ transition metal oxides (e.g., LiCoO2 or more recently LiFePO4) cathodes and graphitic carbon anodes, where one Li ion can be intercalated per 6 C atoms, providing a theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1.213 When charging, Li-ions are deintercalated from the cathode and flow to the anode, where the Li-ions intercalate in the graphite, allowing the conversion of chemical energy into electrical energy. Discharging follows the reverse process.214 However, the graphite anode limits the recharge rates of Li-ion batteries because of a safety hazard caused by metallic lithium dendrite growth on the graphite anode at high rates.215 Although the use of disordered carbon (also named hard carbon) could intercalate more Li and achieve improved capacities of 500–900 mA h g−1, the charge-rate was rather low for practical applications.216 The development of advanced Li-ion batteries made great demands on the fabrication of excellent materials for electrodes to improve the reversible capacity, the Coulombic efficiency and cycle performance. In this regard, the biomass-derived carbons with tunable properties (e.g., conductivity, SSA, and surface electrochemistry etc.) could serve as suitable materials for anodes in a Li-ion battery.215 Moreover, as presented in section 2, those properties could be strongly affected by the synthetic methodologies, which hence should be carefully developed.
6.1 Carbons based on templating for Li-ion batteries
As a commonly cited functional strategy, N-doping is usually applied to elevate the performance of the carbon materials used as the electrode in Li-ion battery.217,218 It is especially more appropriate for biomass-derived carbons which can be easy-to-handle by choosing a proper carbon source or specific additives.167,181,219 The residue nitrogen left in the carbon materials makes the neighboring carbons more electronegative and thus more Li can adsorb/intercalate in these areas.221 Also, N-doping can improve the Li storage in carbon, predicted by theoretical calculations on the basis of the electronegativity difference between carbon and nitrogen.221 Although the role of N-functionality increased non-linearly with N-content, highly doped carbons exhibit much better performance than lightly doped carbons in Li-ion batteries.222,223 However, this positive effect is limited by the relatively low content of nitrogen as well as the poor porous structure. The key in achieving a high performance of a Li-ion battery is to fabricate carbons with optimal pore structures and a high nitrogen content.
The cooperation between an N-rich carbon resource and templating that can introduce the porous structure into carbon seemed to be a proper alternative route.221 As a result, Wang et al.220 recently synthesized a mesoporous N-rich carbon with 10% N by utilizing egg white and a mesoporous cellular foam (MCF) silica template (Fig. 17a). The thiol modified MCF allowed the effective adsorption of the egg white, containing plenty of proteins, which served as the N-rich precursor. The protein derived mesoporous carbon (PMC) possessed almost the same SSA (∼800 m2 g−1) but different N content varying from ∼6% to ∼10% under different calcination temperatures (e.g., 650 °C, 750 °C, and 850 °C; the carbons were named PMC-650, PMC-750, PMC-850 accordingly). The pore size distributions revealed that the mesopores were successfully introduced into the PMC through hard-templating. The performance of PMC as a Li-battery anode material was investigated in a half-cell configuration. A typical cyclic CV of PMC-600 with a pronounced cathodic peak at 0–1 V is exhibited in Fig. 17b. The PMC-650 delivered an initial lithium insertion capacity of 3094 mA h g−1 and a reversible charging capacity of 1780 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 (Fig. 17c). The high capacity of 1365 mA h g−1 at the 100th cycle was more than 3 times higher than the theoretical capacity of graphite (372 mA h g−1). Compared with the un-doped mesoporous carbon, PMC showed a higher Coulombic efficiency in the first cycle, which revealed that the N-functionalities can reduce the extent of the irreversible capacity loss reactions that occur during the first cycle. The PMC-650 displayed better electrochemical performance than PMC-750 and PMC-850 (Fig. 17d), in spite of their similar SSA and pore structures. This may be attributed to the higher N content as well as the higher pyridinic-N content, which is more favorable than pyrrolic-N for Li storage.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of PMC with the template of MCF and the possible Li storage mechanism; (b) electrochemical performance of PMC in a Li-battery half-cell configuration vs. Li metal. Cyclic voltammograms at 0.1 mV s−1; (c) and charge–discharge curves of PMC-650 at 0.1 A g−1 (d) charge–discharge capacities vs. cycle number for PMC.220 Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright© 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.2 Carbons based on non-templating for Li-ion batteries
Plenty of biomass has served as a precursor for hard carbon, which may achieve much greater improvements than commercial graphite in Li-ion storage. It is no wonder that the direct pyrolysis of biomass, such as alginic acid224 and mangrove charcoal,225 has led to hard carbons with good performance in Li-ion storage. The introduction of an appropriate pore texture into hard carbons is more attractive since the specific pores can provide pathways for the easy accessibility of electrolyte and fast transportation of electrolytes.226 Generally, porogenic agents (e.g., KOH, NaOH, and ZnCl2etc.) and suitable crude biomass would be utilized during the fabrication of biomass-derived carbon with an optimized pore structure.226,228 More recently, Xiao et al.227 reported hierarchical porous nitrogen-rich carbon (HPNC) derived from wheat straw, which contained lots of porous fibers. Those porous fibers possessed a number of capillaries with strong adsorbability of KOH, which is beneficial for obtaining homogeneous porous materials. With the addition of KOH, HPNC possessed hierarchical pores (containing micro-, meso-, and macropores simultaneously) (Fig. 18a and b). Although AWS (where there was no pretreatment of acid comparing with HPNC) exhibited a similar morphology to HPNC, the walls of HPNC were thinner than that of AWS (60 nm vs. 100 nm). HPNC displayed a reversible charging capacity of 1470 mA h g−1, which was much higher than that of AWS and the direct pyrolysis products (Fig. 18c). Furthermore, a reversible capacity of 198 mA h g−1 was even achieved at an extremely high current density of 100 C (Fig. 18d). HPNC also showed an excellent cycling performance of 659 mA h g−1 at 10 C after 300 cycles. The high specific capacity and excellent rate performance of HPNC could be assigned to the following reasons: (1) the hierarchical pores offered a large electrode/electrolyte interface for the charge-transfer reaction; (2) the macropores and mesopores could accelerate the kinetic process of Li-ion diffusion and improve the power density, while the micropores could serve as charge accommodation sites, making sure of the high energy storage; (3) the acid pretreatment before KOH activation increased the relative content of N and removed the metallic elements, leading to more bonding sites, which could interfere with the intercalation of the Li+; (4) the high content of N (∼5%) could provide strong electronegativity and interactions between the Li and the carbon network, enhancing the electronic conductivity and electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of HPNC; (c) charge and discharge curves of HPNC; (d) different rates charge–discharge capacities versus cycle number for HPNC.227 Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright © 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some crude biomass possesses a specific nanostructure, which would be destroyed under rigid pyrolysis. Worse still, the harsh activation agents which would normally be applied to obtain a high SSA would corrode the reaction devices during the calcination process. In this regard, HTC, as a benign and eco-friendly alternative, is somewhat more suitable for the synthesis of biomass-derived carbon. On the basis of the above, Titirici et al.229 chose rice husk as the precursor undergoing an HTC process for the synthesis of fibrous porous carbon (FPC). The authors used formic acid to remove the hemicellulose and lignin under the HTC process at 230 °C for 48 h. The as-obtained HTCs were calcined at 900 °C in an inert atmosphere, and then etched by NH4HF2 to fabricate the FPCs. As shown in Fig. 18b, a fibrous porous network with hierarchical pores was observed, while the products derived from the direct pyrolysis of formic acid treated rice husk exhibited a compact morphology (Fig. 19a). The authors also stressed the importance of the pretreatment of formic acid, without which the products showed a cluttered network containing carbon spheres and nanosheets. When assessed as an anode in Li-ion batteries, the FPC material displayed an initial discharge capacity of 789 mA h g−1. The reversible capacities were 218 and 137 mA h g−1 at 1 C and 10 C, respectively, and the capacity can be recovered (227 mA h g−1 at 1 C) after cycling at different current rates (Fig. 19c). The capacity of 403 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles was higher than the initial discharge capacity of 396 mA h g−1, which was ascribed to electrochemical activation of a small amount of SiO2 (Fig. 19d). The superior electrochemical performance of FPC was ascribed to the improved electronic conductivity (102 S m−1) and its unique mesoporous as well as macroporous hierarchical nanofibrous network. In the above work, the authors also highlighted that SiO2, a component of rice husk, served as an “in situ” sacrificial template, of which the removal would also consume toxic reagents.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) the products derived from the direct pyrolysis of rice husk and (b) FPCs; (c) rate performance versus different current densities; (d) capacity retention behavior of the anode derived from FPCs as a function of cycle number.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.3 Carbon-based composites for Li-ion batteries
Nowadays, commercial Li-ion batteries, because of their relatively low energy density and especially poor power density, are not satisfactory for application in vehicular engines, though they are used widely in many portable devices. Undoubtedly, the pursuit of batteries with high energy density is always meaningful, and hence many scientists have paid attention to some anode materials (Si, Sn, and Mn oxides) with high specific capacities (Table 4).214,230,231 However, those materials usually suffer from poor conductivity and worse still, some materials (Si and Sn) suffer from severe volume changes during the charge and discharge processes, causing the capacity of the cell to rapidly decay. This dilemma can be solved through several strategies,232,233 one of which is to generate carbon-based composites.234,235
Table 4 Capacitance properties of some commonly studied anode materials from the IVA group230




 
Graphite
Si
Ge
Sn




Gravimetric capacity/mA h g−1
372
3579
1384
960


Volumetric capacity/mA h cm−3
756
2190
2180
1991




As presented in Table 4, silicon (Si) has demonstrated an ultrahigh gravimetric capacity of ∼3600 mA h g−1, which provides a bright alternative for high energy density Li-ion batteries. Several synthetic strategies, such as electrospraying236 and spray drying,237 have been used on the basis of forming silicon nanoparticles coated with carbon. Moreover, Zhang et al.238 found that a composite of silicon with a porous carbon coating could serve as an anode for Li-ion batteries with high capacitance and robust cyclability. In their synthetic route, Si nanoparticles were firstly dispersed into an aqueous solution of Pluronic F127 and glucose, forming the suspension liquid. The suspension liquid underwent a hydrothermal process and subsequent carbonization, and nanostructured silicon/porous carbon spheres (N-SPC) were obtained (Fig. 20a). From the TEM image (Fig. 20a), the silicon nanoparticles were coated with carbon shell with a thickness of 15–20 nm. At the same time, the porous structure of the carbon shell was revealed by N2 sorption isotherms in addition to the TEM image. The Si content in the N-SPC was estimated to be 65.5% through TGA measurement. When serving as anode materials for a Li-ion battery and measured at a current density of 0.4 A g−1, the bare Si nanoparticles showed an initial charge (discharge) capacity of 2262 (3194) mA h g−1 (Fig. 20b), which was much higher than that of N-SPC (charge capacity of 1698 mA h g−1 and discharge capacity of 1878 mA h g−1) (Fig. 20c). However, the capacity of bare Si nanoparticles then quickly decreased to 490 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles, while N-SPC retained a reversible capacity of 1607 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of 99.1%, even after 100 cycles (Fig. 20d). This excellent performance of N-SPC demonstrated that the porous carbon shell could effectively alleviate the pulverization of the Si particles (Fig. 20c inset). Moreover, the N-SPC electrode maintained an average reversible capacity of 1050 mA h g−1 with a high Coulombic efficiency (>99%) when the current density increased from 0.4 to 10 A g−1, which was better than that of the bulky Si/carbon composite.239 The author proposed that the porous structure resulted in a large surface area and provided a large contact area between the electrode and electrolytes, and allowed efficient Li ion diffusion, thus leading to good rate performance.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic mechanism of the synthesis of nanostructured silicon/porous carbon spheres; the charge–discharge curves and schematic diagram of the lithiation–delithiation process (inset) of (b) Si NPs and (c) N-SPC, and (d) their cycling performance at a constant density of 0.4 A g−1.238 Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Usually, different compounds were needed for the fabrication of a composite. When some biomass (rice husk240 or seaweed241) was used as a resource, the synthetic process seemed to be simpler and more economical. For example, rice husk contains over 60% silica as well as 10–40% carbon, and hence could serve as sources of carbon/Si composites.242 Whilst some groups243,244 devoted to the development of advanced silicon-based electrode materials derived from rice husk for Li ion batteries achieved high reversible capacities, their manufacturing processes are very fussy. In this respect, the fabrication of carbon–silica composites with high capacity (∼2800 mA h g−1) and good cyclability through a simple pyrolysis protocol shows great potential in industry.240
6.4 Perspectives on Li-ion battery of biomass-derived carbon
Although the high capacitance (∼1500 mA h g−1) of hard carbon, which is higher than the theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1, is acquired based on a half-cell test, its capacitance is still lower than that of some other elements (e.g. Si, 3579 mA h g−1).230 However, Si is a semiconductor and it suffers from severe volume changes during the charge/discharge processes, causing rapid capacity decay of the cell. In this respect, exploration of carbon-based complexes is still the appropriate alternative. According to some examples listed above,234,235,238 the capacitance of carbon-based complexes such as C/Si is rather lower than the theoretical capacity of Si, regardless of the excellent cyclic stability. It remains a possibility to switch the porous structure or the surface electron effect (heteroatom doping) of the outer carbon to acquire a high capacity as well as robust cyclic stability.
7 Carbon-based composites for hybrid supercapacitors
Currently, research related to Li-ion batteries has seldom achieved a high power density to bridge the battery-supercapacitor divide, which is mainly because of the slow lithiation/delithiation process as well as the long path length for inefficient lithium diffusion. Several scientists devoted themselves to the building of hybrid supercapacitors (HSCs) with high power density as well as super energy density.245 HSC systems utilize a capacitor-type electrode as a cathode via the sorption of ions, and a Li-ion battery electrode as the counter electrode via Li-ion insertion/intercalation (Fig. 21a). They exhibit a larger energy density than SCs and a higher power density than Li-ion batteries (Fig. 21b), and are proving to be an effective way to bridge the gap between Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors.246 The performance of HSCs is determined by both electrodes which involves the utilization of carbon materials. As a consequence, biomass with specific primary structures and components have satisfied the requirements for the design of advanced carbon materials, which provide great promise despite their sustainable properties and really low cost.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic showing charge-storage processes of a hybrid supercapacitor, (b) Ragone plot sketching the recent status of supercapacitors, commercialized batteries and hybrid electrodes with hybrid devices.246 
In initial work, commercial activated carbon was used as the negative electrode and lithium-ion intercalated compounds were used as materials for positive electrodes.247 Valuable work based on crude biomass was carried out by Li’s group,248 providing a good proof-of-concept study by building three-dimensional arrays of MnO employed in graphene-like carbon nanosheets (3D-MnO/CNS). The 3D-CNS derived from hemp bast fiber consisted of an interconnected three-dimensional assembly of carbon nanosheets, whose detailed synthetic process was presented in section 5.1. As shown in Fig. 22a, different mass loadings of MnO (41 wt% for 3D-MnO/CNS-1 and 73 wt% for 3D-MnO/CNS-2) were deposited at the 3D-CNS through two steps: KMnO4/K2SO4 solution was firstly used to disperse MnO2, which was followed by reduction in hydrogen to produce homogenously dispersed MnO. With the help of N2 sorption analysis, MnO nanoparticles were believed to fill the micropores and mesopores of the underlying carbon. TEM results showed that the average particle sizes for MnO in 3D-MnO/CNS-1 and 3D-MnO/CNS-2 were 35 nm and 42 nm, respectively, which shortened the electrolyte diffusion within ∼20 nm. The electrochemical performance of 3D-MnO/CNS was investigated in a half-cell configuration versus Li metal. As exhibited in Fig. 22b, both 3D-MnO/CNS-1 and 3D-MnO/CNS-2 showed a higher capacity than that of 3D-CNS and bare MnO and their actual capacity improved even over the range tested (500 cycles). This unique cycling stability was mainly attributed to the elastically flexible CNS support that prevented MnO particles from losing electrical contact and from agglomerating. Then, the rate-dependent capacities of 3D-MnO/CNS were measured. 3D-MnO/CNS-2 showed capacities of ∼1332 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, ∼450 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1, and ∼285 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1, which were superior to previously reported values for state-of-the-art MnO and MnO/C composites. To achieve a high power density, the authors fabricated a 3D-MnO/CNS||3D-CNS hybrid device, where 3D-MnO/CNS was employed as one of the electrodes and 3D-CNS was employed as another one. The assembled 3D-MnO/CNS||3D-CNS device with a mass ratio of 1:2 delivered 184 Wh kg−1 at 83 W kg−1 and 90 Wh kg−1 at 15000 W kg−1, higher than that of a traditional Li-ion battery. Moreover, it also exhibited excellent cyclability with a capacity retention of 76% after 5000 cycles. This study provides a good case for the fabrication of energy storage devices with high performance from crude biomass.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D-MnO/CNS synthesis and structure, (b) cycling performance at constant density of 2 A g−1 (hollow, discharge capacity; solid, charge capacity), (c) performance comparison (all device weights normalized) of 3D-MnO/CNS||3D-CNS versus commercial energy storage devices.248 Reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the well-designed porous structure of biomass-derived carbons, the benefits of N-doping in carbon materials for high performance HSCs were presented by Cai’s group.249 Nitrogen-doped ACs (NACs) was prepared by pyrolysis of a mixture of corncob and KOH with NH3 as the nitrogen source. NACs with different nitrogen contents were prepared by varying the pyrolytic temperature. NACs were chosen as the cathodic materials and carbon-coated Si nanoparticles acted as counter electrode materials to fabricate the HSCs. The authors presented that an appropriate content of nitrogen, along with a high SSA, is the key factor for high performance HSCs. Also, an increased amount of oxidized pyridinic N in NAC at a higher temperature, because of its positive charge on the N, would lead to poorer ion adsorption, thus resulting in lower capacity.176
HSCs are hybrid devices with a combination of capacitive and faradaic electrodes, and are actually asymmetric capacitors. The charges stored in both electrodes must be balanced in order to reach the highest cell voltage. So the mass of active electrode materials has to be well controlled. However, it is still difficult to make full use of the overall specific energy density of battery-type electrodes because of the sluggish kinetics of the redox reaction. To overcome this drawback, carbon materials with hierarchically porous frameworks, along with nanoparticulate electroactive phases, may be feasible.
8 Summary and outlook
The huge amounts of biomass available, the gifts of the sun, as well as advanced preparation techniques underlie the fantastic structures and properties of biomass-derived carbon. The structures (e.g., morphology, pore geometry, and surface area etc.) and the surface or network properties (e.g., heteroatom-doping etc.) of biomass-derived carbon are conveniently adjusted by varying the synthetic strategies or selecting suitable precursors for the sake of specific applications. In this review, we have presented most of the synthetic methods for the preparation of advanced biomass-derived carbon, as well as the mechanisms during those processes. The most advanced applications of biomass-derived carbon in energy conversion and storage, mainly the use in fuel cells, electrocatalytic water splitting, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries, have also been summarized. These related reports have introduced nano-science into the synthesis of biomass-derived carbon materials and emphasised the concepts of Green Chemistry, greatly expanding the applications of biomass-derived carbon.
Varieties of biomass-derived carbons are built through plenty of synthetic strategies to satisfy specific applications and elevate the value of biomass. Among those advanced synthetic protocols, HTC is one of the most powerful strategies to switch the properties of biomass-derived carbon. However, there are still some challenges that hinder its wide use. On the one hand, most HTCs, especially those derived from carbohydrates, are characterized with irregular and highly cross-linked carbonaceous clusters. It is a big challenge to develop effective methods to prepare monodisperse and highly uniform carbon spheres with tunable sizes ranging from 50 nm–1 μm. On the other hand, the successful preparation of carbons with ordered pores has been reported in a few cases, whilst the carbon resource was limited to fructose with a relatively low temperature (<130 °C). It is meaningful to throw light on the clear mechanism of self-assembly between carbohydrates and micelles under a relatively high temperature (130–250 °C). Then, on the basis of those mechanisms, effective methods should be designed for carbon with ordered pores. Another challenge comes from the utilization of crude biomass, whose derived carbons usually suffer from ill-defined morphologies and a poorly porous structure. Traditional activation methods are usually applied for the introduction of a porous structure, however, these typically feature micropores. It is a big challenge to fabricate carbons with well-defined shapes and hierarchical pores from crude biomass.
Generally, carbons, because of their good electronic conductivity and high surface area, have served as supports for active constituents (e.g., Pt, Pd, Co3O4, and MoS2) for electrocatalysis (e.g., ORR, OER, and HER etc.), playing a vital role on the electrocatalytic ability. Some excellent results have already been achieved through well-designed experiments, however, challenges still remain both in theoretical and real industrial applications. In theory, the frequently investigated nitrogen-doped carbon materials demonstrate superior performances in various electrochemical tests, however, we still do not know the exact type of nitrogen species in the carbon matrices contributing to the high performance, and this issue remains to be further investigated, accompanied by theoretical calculations based on more real experimental conditions. As for the practical side, noble metal-based catalysts usually showed excellent activities and robust stabilities in electrocatalysis. But the high cost and scarcity of noble metals limits their wide use. Although metal-free catalysts show robust stability towards complex reaction systems, because of the relative chemical inertness of carbon materials, their poor activities were still far away from the requirements for practical application. On the other hand, the activities of some carbon-based non-precious metal composites were comparable to noble metal-based catalysts, however, their stabilities were unsatisfactory. Some studies highlighted that ultrathin graphene shells strongly promote electron penetration from the active sites to the graphene surface via theoretical calculations. Thus, a possible route to solve those irreconcilable difficulties is by designing carbon-encapsulated hybrids, where the outer carbon layers need to be well-designed for the sake of sustaining the catalytic abilities of the active sites, as well as protecting the active sites. In this respect, the development of carbon/non-precious metal composites shows great potential to elevate the performance as well as the stability of the catalysts.
It is not difficult to obtain carbon materials with a high surface area, but it is not easy to achieve this through more sustainable methodologies. Large surface areas always sustained a good capacity in EDLCs. As is reviewed here, papers involving biomass-derived carbons applied in SCs are huge in number. The destination of research about biomass-derived carbon applied in SCs has been focused on searching for cheaper biomass, as well as a suitable synthetic strategy. Undoubtedly, the selection of precursors plays a critical role in obtaining desirable porosities. It is also essential to find cheaper precursors for industrial application. However, some scientists have pointed out that a reliable measurement of the performance of a material is crucial for the development of SCs.250 Because of the complexity of test systems, it may be difficult to make systematic summaries of the key factors determining the performance of SCs. The similar dilemma also hinders the development of Li-ion batteries. Some methodologies to measure the performance of materials for use as a Li-ion battery electrode were on the basis of half-cells. However, Caballero et al.251 found that carbon materials as an electrode in a Li-ion battery showed improved performance under tests based on a half-cell, but still a poor capacity in full Li-ion batteries (using the spinel LiMn2O4 as a cathode). With consideration of those above troubles, it is essential to build standard and reliable test systems. For practical applications, the complicated fabrication processes of electrodes used in SCs or Li-ion batteries are still costly, because the electrode materials derived from biomass being treated at elevated temperature are powder. The use of binders (PVDF, PTFE, and Nafion), conductivity improvers (CNTs and carbon black), and current collectors (aluminum foil, copper foil, and nickel foam) restrict the mass of the active material, which would lead to a low capacity based on the total device. Hence, the development of free-standing electrode materials from crude biomass to achieve high capacity is very promising.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91534114 & 21376208), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (LR13B030001), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2016FZA3006), and the Partner Group Program of the Zhejiang University and the Max-Planck Society are greatly appreciated.
Notes and references
L. Dai, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Chheda, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7164–7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604–5618 CAS .
M.-M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103–116 RSC .
M. Noked, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1563–1578 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
D. Upare, S. Yoon and C. Lee, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2011, 28, 731–743 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Offeman and W. Hummers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339–1339 CrossRef .
C. B. Field, M. J. Behrenfeld, J. T. Randerson and P. Falkowski, Science, 1998, 281, 237–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710–23725 RSC .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 379–382 CrossRef .
R. J. White, V. Budarin, R. Luque, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 3401–3418 RSC .
M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103–116 RSC .
S. Kubo, R. J. White, K. Tauer and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4781–4790 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, N. Fechler and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8237–8265 RSC .
Z.-L. Xie and D. S. Su, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 2015, 1137–1147 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, A. M. Balu, J. C. van der Waal and R. Luque, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1608–1629 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, F. Xu, H. Li and Y. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3670–3693 CAS .
P. Zhang, H. Zhu and S. Dai, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2788–2805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao and F. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 91–103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, P. Li and W. Shen, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 2257–2271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, A. Bhaumik and K. C. W. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3574–3592 CAS .
S. W. Leavit, Eos, Trans., Am. Geophys. Union, 1998, 79, 20–20 Search PubMed .

          P. Basu, Biomass
gasification, pyrolysis and torrefaction: practical design and theory, Academic Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. P. Yang, R. Yan, H. P. Chen, D. H. Lee and C. G. Zheng, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1781–1788 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
F. Kurosaki, H. Koyanaka, M. Tsujimoto and Y. Imamura, Carbon, 2008, 46, 850–857 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
P. T. Williams and A. R. Reed, Biomass Bioenergy, 2006, 30, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1400–1410 CAS .
J. Deng, T. Xiong, F. Xu, M. li, C. Han, Y. Gong, H. Wang and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 7, 4053–4060 RSC .
J. Deng, T. Y. Xiong, H. Y. Wang, A. M. Zheng and Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b00388 .
W. Luo, B. Wang, C. G. Heron, M. J. Allen, J. Morre, C. S. Maier, W. F. Stickle and X. L. Ji, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2225–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rabenau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1985, 24, 1026–1040 CrossRef .
M. W. Haenel, Fuel, 1992, 71, 1211–1223 CrossRef CAS .
E. Berl and A. Schmidt, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1932, 493, 97–123 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and N. Baccile, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1204–1212 RSC .
C. Falco, N. Baccile and M.-M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3273–3281 RSC .
L. Yu, C. Falco, J. Weber, R. J. White, J. Y. Howe and M.-M. Titirici, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12373–12383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Funke and F. Ziegler, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2010, 4, 160–177 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, C. Falco and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4839–4869 RSC .
A. Jung, S. Han, T. Kim, W. J. Cho and K.-H. Lee, Carbon, 2013, 60, 307–316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubo, R. Demir-Cakan, L. Zhao, R. J. White and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 188–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Knox, B. Kaur and G. R. Millward, J. Chromatogr. A, 1986, 352, 3–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073–2094 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubo, I. Tan, R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Z.-A. Qiao and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9246–9256 RSC .
C. Han, S. Wang, J. Wang, M. Li, J. Deng, H. Li and Y. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 1809–1819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubo, R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4882–4885 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saha, Y. Li, Z. Bi, J. Chen, J. K. Keum, D. K. Hensley, H. A. Grappe, H. M. Meyer III, S. Dai and M. P. Paranthaman, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 900–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saha, E. A. Payzant, A. S. Kumbhar and A. K. Naskar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5868–5874 CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Gong, Z. Wei, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Li, S. Dai and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12515–12522 CAS .
Y. Gong, L. Xie, H. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12633–12636 RSC .
R. Demir-Cakan, N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 484–490 CrossRef CAS .
T.-P. Fellinger, R. J. White, M.-M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3254–3260 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, S. A. Wohlgemuth, P. Osiceanu and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2514–2524 RSC .
P. Zhang, J. Yuan, T.-P. Fellinger, M. Antonietti, H. Li and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6028–6032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, H. Wang, Z. Wei, L. Xie and Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2435–2441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Z. Wei, J. Wang, P. Zhang, H. Li and Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Small, 2014, 10, 193–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Figueiredo, M. F. R. Pereira, M. M. A. Freitas and J. J. M. Órfão, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1379–1389 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, W. Lv, Y. Tao, J. Shao, C. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Luo, D.-W. Wang and Q.-H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6896–6903 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Gong, Y. Lv, Y. Guo, Y. Wang, C. Wang and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2334–2336 RSC .
J. S. Lee, R. T. Mayes, H. Luo and S. Dai, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3364–3368 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Xie, R. J. White, J. Weber, A. Taubert and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7434–7442 RSC .
H. Yin, B. Lu, Y. Xu, D. Tang, X. Mao, W. Xiao, D. Wang and A. N. Alshawabkeh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 8101–8108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Li, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 517–531 RSC .
Y.-J. Wang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7625–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Wang, S. Ji, H. Feng and R. Wang, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. Zhu, L. Liang, C. Li, C. Liu, J. Liao and W. Xing, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154–155, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Zhao, P. Yu, C. Tian, F. Sun, H. Feng, W. Zhou, J. Wang and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24139–24147 CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Gong, H. Li, Z. Chen and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1593 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Gong, P. Zhang, H. Li and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16987–16990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, T. Xiong, Y. Li, X. Xu, M. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12637–12640 RSC .
F. P. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li, X. Zhang and P. K. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Shen, Z. Yan, H. Meng, M. Wu, G. Cui, R. Wang, L. Wang, K. Si and H. Fu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 191–198 RSC .
Z. Yan, G. He, G. Zhang, H. Meng and P. K. Shen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, H. Meng, L. Shi, Z. Li and P. K. Shen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, Z. Hu, C. Chen, H. Meng, P. K. Shen, H. Ji and Y. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7146–7151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, H. Meng, P. K. Shen, Y. Meng and H. Ji, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4728–4736 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
R. Bashyam and P. Zelenay, Nature, 2006, 443, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Wu, G. Z. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. X. Zhang and H. J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1334–1337 RSC .
Z. Zhang and P. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45619–45624 RSC .
S. Y. Gao, K. R. Geng, H. Y. Liu, X. J. Wei, M. Zhang, P. Wang and J. J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 221–229 CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Li, X. Liu, P. Liu, H. Yang, T. An, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Small, 2014, 10, 3371–3378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, H. Peng, C. You, Z. Fu, P. Huang, H. Song and S. Liao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 138, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, Z. Cao, Q. Zhao, H. Liang and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Fan, X. Wei, C. Hu, L. Wang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6320–6325 CAS .
M. Ma, Y. Dai, J.-l. Zou, L. Wang, K. Pan and H.-g. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13438–13447 CAS .
F. Liu, H. Peng, X. Qiao, Z. Fu, P. Huang and S. Liao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10128–10134 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Guo, W.-L. Liao and C.-G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 841–847 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, H. Fan and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18263–18270 CAS .
Y. Fang, D. Gu, Y. Zou, Z. Wu, F. Li, R. Che, Y. Deng, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-A. Wohlgemuth, R. J. White, M.-G. Willinger, M.-M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1515–1523 RSC .
J. P. Paraknowitsch, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1170–1172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, J. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9367–9369 RSC .

          J. Yamaki, M. Wakihara and O. Yamamoto, Lithium Ion Batteries - Fundamentals and Performance,  1998 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Wang, R. Butler, N. L. Campbell, J. Long, B. Tan, D. J. Duncalf, A. J. Foster, A. Hopkinson and D. Taylor, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 506–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Duan, Q. Zhao, F. Pan, B. Zhang and J. Zhang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8238–8245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, J. Yin, X. Wang, H. Wang and X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1305–1312 CrossRef CAS .
D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 CAS .
P. Kuhn, A. Forget, D. Su, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13333–13337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, M. Srinivasan and Y. Ni, Carbon, 2001, 39, 877–886 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gorlin, C.-J. Chung, D. Nordlund, B. M. Clemens and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2687–2694 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, P. Jégou, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21600–21607 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Antonietti and T. P. Fellinger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7655–7665 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ji, H. Feng, V. Linkov and R. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12039–12042 RSC .
S. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Bao, J. Wang, C. Chen, H. Li and Y. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2937–2944 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, W. Bian, Z. Yang, J. Tian, C. Jin, M. Shen, Z. Zhou and R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18012–18017 CAS .
A. Züttel, Naturwissenschaften, 2004, 91, 157–172 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, Z. Xu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kalyani, A. Anitha and A. Darchen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 10364–10372 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Zhu and X. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10680–10685 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, Y. C. Kimmel and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3025–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Graetzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
J. R. McKone, B. F. Sadtler, C. A. Werlang, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, C. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Zhou, B. Pan, K. Tang, J. Zuo and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 499–503 CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. Xiao, Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, Z. Yang, Y. Xue, Y.-M. Yan and K. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20229–20237 CAS .
M. Li, X. Liu, Y. Xiong, X. Bo, Y. Zhang, C. Han and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4255–4265 CAS .
P. Du and R. Eisenberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6012–6021 CAS .
S. Yusuf and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2753–2760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Risch, K. Klingan, F. Ringleb, P. Chernev, I. Zaharieva, A. Fischer and H. Dau, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 542–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Li and D. Mitlin, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 332–337 CrossRef .
E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1775–1787 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Wu, R. L. Tseng, C. C. Hu and C. C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elmouwahidi, Z. Zapata-Benabithe, F. Carrasco-Marin and C. Moreno-Castilla, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 111, 185–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Wu, R. L. Tseng, C. C. Hu and C. C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2004, 138, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, C. Luo, A. M. Stephan, K. S. Nahm, S. Thomas and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7527–7531 CAS .
M. S. Balathanigaimani, W. G. Shim, M. J. Lee, C. Kim, J. W. Lee and H. Moon, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 868–871 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Rufford, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, Z. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1594–1597 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Rufford, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, K. Khosla, Z. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 912–918 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Xing, S. Zhuo, J. Zhou, F. Li, S. Z. Qiao and G. Q. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. Mu, C. G. Tian, L. Sun, W. Zhou, P. Yu, J. Yin and H. G. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 880–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Ding, B. Zou, Y. N. Li, H. Q. Liu, Z. C. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Su and Y. P. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 423, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, W. Xing, J. Zhou, G. Wang, S. Zhuo, Z. Liu, Q. Xue and Z. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, X. B. Yan, R. T. Wang, J. W. Lang, Y. J. Ou and Q. J. Xue, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qian, F. Sun, Y. Xu, L. Qiu, C. Liu, S. Wang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 379–386 CAS .
E. Taer, M. Deraman, I. A. Talib, A. Awitdrus, S. A. Hashmi and A. A. Umar, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 3301–3315 CAS .
B. Xu, S. S. Hou, G. P. Cao, F. Wu and Y. S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19088–19093 RSC .
L. Sun, C. G. Tian, M. T. Li, X. Y. Meng, L. Wang, R. H. Wang, J. Yin and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6462–6470 CAS .
Y. Fan, X. Yang, B. Zhu, P.-F. Liu and H.-T. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 584–590 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thambidurai, J. Lourdusamy, J. John and S. Ganesan, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2014, 31, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Fan, D. P. Qi, Y. Xiao, J. Yan and T. Wei, Mater. Lett., 2013, 101, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, D. Yang, B. Wang and Z. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23412–23419 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, L. Zuo, S. Chen, S. Chen, H. Hou and Y. Song, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51072–51079 RSC .
C. Long, X. Chen, L. Jiang, L. Zhi and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, B. S. Amirkhiz, X. H. Tan, Z. W. Xu, H. L. Wang, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, S. Gao, P. Zang, X. Yang, Y. Bai, H. Xu, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, Carbon, 2015, 93, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Liu, X. Gao, B. Yao, K. Huo, Y. Cheng, X. Cheng, D. Chen, B. Wang, W. Sun, D. Ding, M. Liu and L. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24622–24628 CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Li and L. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 177–187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Long, L. Jiang, X. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, C. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Carbon, 2015, 93, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, J. Han, B. Ding, P. Nie, J. Pan, H. Dou, H. Li and X. Zhang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1668–1674 RSC .
S. Song, F. Ma, G. Wu, D. Ma, W. Geng and J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18154–18162 CAS .
J. Hou, C. Cao, F. Idrees and X. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Kim, B.-J. Lee, H. Suezaki, T. Chino, Y. Abe, T. Yanagiura, K. C. Park and M. Endo, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1592–1595 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, T. Sun and D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2330–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Karthikeyan, S. Amaresh, S. N. Lee, X. Sun, V. Aravindan, Y.-G. Lee and Y. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1435–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sevilla, W. Gu, C. Falco, M. M. Titirici, A. B. Fuertes and G. Yushin, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Min and Y. Yu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 19, 577–584 CrossRef .
C. Peng, J. Lang, S. Xu and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54662–54667 RSC .
C. Ruan, K. Ai and L. Lu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30887–30895 RSC .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 1342–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1475–1488 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Seredych, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 438–447 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, X. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2745–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. W. Xu, A. Kohandehghan, Z. Li, K. Cui, X. H. Tan, T. J. Stephenson, C. K. King'ondu, C. M. B. Holt, B. C. Olsen, J. K. Tak, D. Harfield, A. O. Anyia and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5131–5141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, N. Baccile, S. Gross, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3778–3787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Z.-A. Qiao and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9246–9256 RSC .
C. Han, S. Wang, J. Wang, M. Li, J. Deng, H. Li and Y. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1809–1819 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645–8650 RSC .
Y. Han, X. Dong, C. Zhang and S. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 211, 92–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, W. Li, J. Wang, Y. Song, A. A. Elzatahry, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14657–14661 RSC .
D. Krishnan, K. Raidongia, J. Shao and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 449–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Jiao, L. Sun, L. Wang, A. Wu, H. Yan, M. Meng, C. Tian, B. Jiang and H. Fu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2418–2427 RSC .
L. Sun, C. Tian, Y. Fu, Y. Yang, J. Yin, L. Wang and H. Fu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 564–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, C. Han, J. Wang, J. Deng, M. Zhu, J. Yao, H. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6872–6877 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Graser, R. Zhao, F. Gao and M. J. O'Connell, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11156–11165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balasubramanian and P. Kamatchi Kamaraj, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, D. C. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, Z. L. Wang and M. L. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3135–3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Hu, K.-H. Chang, M.-C. Lin and Y.-T. Wu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2690–2695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, D. Yu, Q. Zhang, K. Goh, L. Wei, Y. Yong, R. Jiang, J. Wei and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, L. Hu, N. Liu, H. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Q. Xu, J. Zhang, H. Yang, B. Wang, D. Yang, J. Hu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9689–9697 CAS .
L.-Q. Fan, G.-J. Liu, J.-H. Wu, L. Liu, J.-M. Lin and Y.-L. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, F. Liu, Q. Li, Q. Shou, J. Cheng, L. Zhang, B. J. Nelson and X. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16331–16337 RSC .
H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Y. Liang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. ElKhatat and S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2887–2903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Al-Muhtaseb and J. A. Ritter, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 101–114 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 670–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Gong and Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45753–45759 RSC .
X.-L. Wu, T. Wen, H.-L. Guo, S. Yang, X. Wang and A.-W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Q. Chen, F. Xu, Z. Z. Wei and Y. Wang, Nano Res., 2016 DOI:10.1007/s12274-016-1162-2 .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, F. Leroux and F. Béguin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1877–1882 CrossRef .
E. Raymundo-Pinero, M. Cadek and F. Beguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Kim, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. B. Lee and H. S. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. P. Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Roberts, X. Li and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4341–4356 RSC .
D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 136–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bhattacharjya, H.-Y. Park, M.-S. Kim, H.-S. Choi, S. N. Inamdar and J.-S. Yu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 318–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Li, K. Park, J. Song, J. Hong, L. Zhou, Y.-W. Mai, H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16280–16283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Baccile, G. Laurent, C. Coelho, F. Babonneau, L. Zhao and M.-M. Titirici, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8976–8982 CAS .
Z. Li, Z. W. Xu, X. H. Tan, H. L. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 CAS .
Y. Mao, H. Duan, B. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Hu, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7950–7955 CAS .
F. Zheng, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, W. C. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Wu, L.-L. Chen, S. Xin, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-G. Guo, Q.-S. Kong and Y.-Z. Xia, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 703–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, R. Luo, W. Qiao, S.-H. Yoon and I. Mochida, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, K.-X. Wang, G.-D. Li and J.-S. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 130–133 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Lin, W. Yang, Y. Meng, Y. Guo, M. Li and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9684–9690 CAS .
G. T.-K. Fey and C.-L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Schnepp and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5269–5273 CAS .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, N. I. Schwarzburger and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6810–6818 CAS .
K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 28–41 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tu, L. Hu, S. Jiao, J. Hou and H. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18549–18554 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. Guo and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9562–9567 RSC .
Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, L.-J. Wan, C.-J. Li and Y.-G. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14148–14154 CAS .
D. S. Jung, T. H. Hwang, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2092–2097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shao, D. Tang, Y. Mai and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15068–15075 CAS .
X. Shen, D. Mu, S. Chen, B. Xu, B. Wu and F. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 552, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Xue, B. Gao, P. Gao, C. Mou and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64744–64746 RSC .
A. Lisowska-Oleksiak, A. P. Nowak and B. Wicikowska, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40439–40443 RSC .
Y. Shen, P. Zhao and Q. Shao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 188, 46–76 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. Proietti Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jung, M.-H. Ryou, Y. J. Sung, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
H. S. Choi and C. R. Park, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5336–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Xu, Z. Li, K. Cui, J. Ding, A. Kohandehghan, X. Tan, B. Zahiri, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1987–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 CAS .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 CAS .
A. Caballero, L. Hernán and J. Morales, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 658–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Jiang Deng	Jiang Deng is a Ph.D. candidate in the Advanced Materials and Catalysis Group at Zhejiang University under the direction of Prof. Yong Wang. He received his B.S. degree from Guangxi University in 2013. His current research includes the synthesis and processing of carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.
Mingming Li	Mingming Li studied at Xinjiang University and received his B.S. degree in 2012. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, under the supervision of Prof. Yong Wang. His current research interests are on functional carbon nanomaterials and their applications as catalyst supports for catalytic hydrogenation and oxidation reactions.
Yong Wang	Prof. Dr Yong Wang studied chemical engineering at Xiangtan University from 1998 to 2002. He received his Ph.D. degree from Zhejiang University in 2007. After a postdoctoral stay at the Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, he joined the Max Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam/Germany in 2009. He rejoined Zhejiang University and became a Professor for Chemistry in 2011. His research focuses on carbon nanomaterials and their applications in heterogeneous catalysis and energy storage and conversion.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of HPCs: mixing the biomass with the “leavening” agents followed by pyrolysis under an inert gas,34 (b) the SEM images with different mass ratios of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin.35 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 and 35. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Reaction pathways encountered in the formation of hydrothermal carbons from hexose and pentose sources, leading to differently structured and shaped materials; SEM images of HTCs derived from (b) glucose and (c) xylose.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright© 2008 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of sodium polyacrylate-assisted HTC process.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright© 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface oxygen-containing groups on carbon and their decomposition by TPD.64 Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Scheme 2  A typical example of ionothermal synthesis based on biomass.55 Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM or SEM images of the morphology of the synthesized carbon supports derived from glucose: (a) TEM image of hollow carbon spheres templated by polystyrene spheres (PSs).80 (b) SEM image of hollow carbon spheres templated by solid core microporous shell silica (SCMSS).81 (c) SEM image of honeycomb-like carbon templated by solid core mesoporous shell silica (SCMSS).82 (d) SEM image of hollow carbon hemispheres templated by solid core mesoporous shell silica (SCMSS).83 (e) SEM image of hollow carbon hemispheres templated by polystyrene spheres (PSs).84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80–83. Copyright © 2007 Elsevier B.V., Copyright© 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright © 2010 Professor T. Nejat Veziroglu. Published by Elsevier Ltd, Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V., Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication procedure of the N-CNs and N-CNAs. (b) and (c) TEM images of the N-CNs and N-CNAs; the insets are corresponding high magnification TEM and HRTEM images.92 Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a, b) SEM, (c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM images of BZ-800.107 Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD pattern over the 2θ range of 5–90° of NDC-L-600, NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, and NDC-L-900. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of NDC-L-800. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of NDC-L-700, NDC-L-800, and NDC-L-900. The inset shows the pore-size distributions (PSDs) of the four samples.91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic of the fabrication process for Co3O4 decorated BDHC.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images (a) of MoS2/AC; TEM image (b) and HRTEM images (c and d) of MoS2/AC; (e) the high angle annular dark-field scanning TEM image and corresponding elemental mapping images of MoS2/AC; (f) polarization performance curves on a rotating glassy carbon disk electrode for various electrocatalysts; (g) the Tafel plots with the linear portions.123 Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright© 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images of the (a) CoP–RGO, (b) CoP–MPC, (c) CoP–MCV, and (d) CoP–OMC samples. The inset of d corresponds to the HR-TEM image of the CoP–OMC sample. Histograms of the particle size distributions for the (a1) CoP–RGO, (b1) CoP–MPC, (c1) CoP–MCV, and (d1) CoP–OMC samples; (e) LSV curves of the CoP-carbon catalysts and Pt–C; (f) polarization curves for CoP–OMC and free CoP NPs; (g) time dependence of the current density for CoP–OMC at a static over-potential of 150 mV for 30 hours.129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Mechanism for the OER process at the Co3O4 electrode in alkaline solution; (b) LSV curves of catalysts measured in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm; (c) durability of catalysts at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH, 1600 rpm.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of CoOx@CN with the inset showing the corresponding particle-size distribution histogram; (b) LSV curves of different catalysts for the HER; (c) LSV curves of different catalysts for the OER; (d) LSV of water electrolysis using the original CoOx@CN as a HER catalyst and CoOx@CN after HER as an OER catalyst in 1 M KOH, with the inset showing the stability test at 10 mA cm−2.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

Argan seed shell139	KOH/melamine	2062	355	125 mA g−1	1 M H2SO4
Firwood140	H2O	1131	140	25 mV s−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Pistachio shell138	KOH	1096	120	10 mV s−1	0.5 M H2SO4
Banana fibers141	ZnCl2	1097	74	500 mA g−1	1 M Na2SO4
Corn grains142	KOH	3199	257	1 mA cm−2	6 M KOH
Waste coffee beans143	ZnCl2	1019	368	50 mA g−1	1 M H2SO4
Sugarcane bagasse144	ZnCl2	1788	300	250 mA g−1	1 M H2SO4
Sunflower seed shell145	KOH	2509	311	250 mA g−1	30 wt% KOH
Cornstalk146	K4[Fe(CN)6]	788	213	1 A g−1	6 M KOH
Rice husk147	KOH	2783	179.4	6.25 A g−1	6 M KOH
Enteromorpha prolifera148	KOH	2283	296	0.5 A g−1	30 wt% KOH
Tea-leaves149	KOH	2841	330	1 A g−1	2 M KOH
Human hair150	KOH	1306	445	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
107	2 A g−1	1 M LiPF6
Rubber Wood Sawdust151	CO2	912	138	0.01 A cm−2	1 M H2SO4
Gelatin152	NaOH	3012	385	0.05 A g−1	6 M KOH
Coconut shell153	ZnCl2/FeCl3	1874	268	1 A g−1	6 M KOH
Carrageenan154	KOH	2502	261	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
Rice straw155	H3PO4	396	112	—	1 M H2SO4
Cattail156	KOH	1951	336	2 mV s−1	6 M KOH
Watermelon157	—	158	281	5 mV s−1	6 M KOH
Kenaf stem158	NiCl2	1480	327	2 mV s−1	1 M H2SO4
Auricularia159	KOH	1103	374	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
Chicken eggshell membranes160	Air	221	297	0.2 A g−1	1 M KOH
284	0.2 A g−1	1 M H2SO4
Spruce161	Air/KOH	2836	246	2 mV s−1	6 M KOH
Kelp162	NH3	1003	440	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
Bagasse163	CaCl2/urea	806	323	1 A g−1	6 M KOH
Shiitake mushroom161	H3PO4/KOH	2988	306	1 A g−1	6 M KOH
Soybean164	KOH	580	425	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
Broad bean shells165	KOH	655	229	0.5 A g−1	1 M H2SO4
Corn husk166	KOH	867	356	1 A g−1	6 M KOH

Bamboo168	KOH	1251	260	1 mA cm−2	30 wt% H2SO4
Coffee grounds169	H3PO4	742	38	0.05 A g−1	1 M H2SO4
Pine-cone170	KOH	3950	142	1 A g−1	1 M LiPF6
Coffee grounds143	ZnCl2	1019	368	0.05 A g−1	1 M H2SO4
Microalgae/glucose171	KOH	2130	200	0.1 A g−1	6 M LiCl
Wheat bran172	KOH	2189	294	0.5 A g−1	6 M KOH
129	0.25 A g−1	1 M TEABF4/AN
Pomelo peel173	KOH	2105	43.5	0.5 A g−1	1 M NaNO3
Bean dregs174	KOH	2876	281	0.1 A g−1	1 M H2SO4
Lotus pollen175	KOH	3037	207	1 A g−1	Neat EMIMBF4
Silk167	FeCl3/ZnCl2	2494	242	0.1 A g−1	Neat EMIMBF4

 	Fig. 12  Schematic model of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing surface functional groups on carbon.177 Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


S	0.12	—	—	—	—	20.18	37.0	59.5	3.5
S-O	0.08	—	—	—	—	16.36	42.0	54.8	3.2
S-U	2.9	27.0	48.2	20.5	4.30	11.5	44.6	47.9	7.5
S-UO	3.7	19.9	53.5	16.4	10.10	4.8	37.8	54.1	8.1
S-M	4.0	22.2	44.7	26.1	7.04	10	51.6	51.6	6.1
S-MO	4.1	24.5	46.1	22.3	7.09	7.1	30.8	57.9	11.5

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of pollens of (a) lotus, (b) peony, (c) rape, and (d) camellia; and (e) eggshell membranes; (f) the smooth face of auriculariaes.160,175,178 Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, 175 and 178. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic of the synthesis process for hemp-derived carbon nanosheets.179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 5  Schematic of the fabrication process of carbon hollow-spheres.185 Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images and (c and d) TEM images of flower-like ordered mesoporous carbon; (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves and (f) rate capability plots of flower-like ordered mesoporous carbon and the contrast sample prepared in the absence of sulfuric acid.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Digital photos of (a) MCAs and (a1) lightweight MCAs monolith lifted by a magnet; (b) cycling stability of the MCAs electrode at a charge/discharge current density of 1 A g−1 for 1000 cycles.206 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the synthesis process for RLs and their energy-storage mechanism originating from natural polymers.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of PMC with the template of MCF and the possible Li storage mechanism; (b) electrochemical performance of PMC in a Li-battery half-cell configuration vs. Li metal. Cyclic voltammograms at 0.1 mV s−1; (c) and charge–discharge curves of PMC-650 at 0.1 A g−1 (d) charge–discharge capacities vs. cycle number for PMC.220 Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright© 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of HPNC; (c) charge and discharge curves of HPNC; (d) different rates charge–discharge capacities versus cycle number for HPNC.227 Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright © 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of (a) the products derived from the direct pyrolysis of rice husk and (b) FPCs; (c) rate performance versus different current densities; (d) capacity retention behavior of the anode derived from FPCs as a function of cycle number.229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Gravimetric capacity/mA h g−1	372	3579	1384	960
Volumetric capacity/mA h cm−3	756	2190	2180	1991

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic mechanism of the synthesis of nanostructured silicon/porous carbon spheres; the charge–discharge curves and schematic diagram of the lithiation–delithiation process (inset) of (b) Si NPs and (c) N-SPC, and (d) their cycling performance at a constant density of 0.4 A g−1.238 Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic showing charge-storage processes of a hybrid supercapacitor, (b) Ragone plot sketching the recent status of supercapacitors, commercialized batteries and hybrid electrodes with hybrid devices.246	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D-MnO/CNS synthesis and structure, (b) cycling performance at constant density of 2 A g−1 (hollow, discharge capacity; solid, charge capacity), (c) performance comparison (all device weights normalized) of 3D-MnO/CNS||3D-CNS versus commercial energy storage devices.248 Reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
