Fine tuning of Fermi level by charged impurity-defect cluster formation and thermoelectric properties in n-type PbTe-based compounds   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04220B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04220B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16488-16500Fine tuning of Fermi level by charged impurity-defect cluster formation and thermoelectric properties in n-type PbTe-based compounds†

        
          
            Min Ho 
            Lee
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sungjin 
            Park
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jae Ki 
            Lee
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jaywan 
            Chung
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Byungki 
            Ryu
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Su-Dong 
            Park
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jong-Soo 
            Rhyee
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Applied Sciences and Institute of Natural Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 17104, Korea. E-mail: jsrhyee@khu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-204-8122;   Tel: +82-31-201-2415
bLeibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research, Dresden 01069, Germany
cEnergy Conversion Research Center, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute, Changwon 51543, Korea. E-mail: byungkiryu@keri.re.kr;  Fax: +82-55-280-1590;   Tel: +82-55-280-1657
Received 
      23rd April 2019
    , Accepted 14th June 2019First published on 18th June 2019AbstractThere have been significant developments in the enhancement of the thermoelectric (TE) performances of p-type PbTe compounds; however, the TE performances of n-type compounds are not comparable with those of p-type ones. For optimizing the high performance, effective Fermi level tuning is critical. Here, we found that extrinsic doping caused complex defect configurations, resulting in unconventional lattice dynamics and abnormal electronic/thermal transport properties. From the formation energy calculation, the increase in the lattice parameter of PbTe compounds having excess Pb was correlated with the formation of interstitials (Pbint and Teint), Pb–Te antisite defects, and cluster-type defects [(PbTe–TePb), (Pb–Pb)Te, (Te–Te)Pb, and (Pbint–2PbTe)]. When we applied extrinsic n-type doping such as excess Pb and Bi doping, counterpart hole doping-type complex defects were easily generated. The charge compensation effects due to the intrinsic defects such as the VTe2+ and Pbint2+ point defects and cluster-type anionic defects such as Pbint–2(PbTe) resulted in an unconventional electrical transport behavior with respect to the excess Pb concentration in Pb1+xTe. Bi doping in Pb1−xBixTe also gave rise to complex cluster-type defects such as nBiPb–VPb (n = 2 and 3) simultaneously. The complex cluster-type defects not only suppressed the doping efficiency but also increased the scattering exponent in the Seebeck coefficient, resulting in the enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient. The charge compensation between the charged impurity and defect cluster doping was beneficial for fine tuning of the Fermi level for optimal carrier concentration.
1. Introduction
Thermoelectric (TE) materials can be applied to solid-state cooling and waste heat power generation, which are beneficial for effective energy conversion systems. The efficiency of TE materials is determined by the dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT = σS2T/κ, where S, σ, T, and κ are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, absolute temperature, and thermal conductivity, respectively.
Among various TE materials, PbTe-based bulk materials show high TE performances in the intermediate temperature range (500–800 K) through extensive approaches such as band engineering (resonant valence bonds and/or band convergence) for a high power factor and hierarchical structural control to reduce the lattice thermal conductivity.1–8 The ZT values of p-type PbTe-based TE materials can reach up to 2.0–2.3 at around 915 K.9–11 The performances of n-type materials are inferior to those of the p-type PbTe materials, where the ZT value remains below 1.2–2.0.12–15 Because a TE module consists of coupled legs using both p- and n-type elements, a TE device requires both p- and n-type materials with high TE performances. The thermoelectric performance can be maximized via optimum carrier doping because the optimum carrier concentrations for high thermoelectric performances are in the range of 1019–1021 cm−3.16–19 Doping with alkaline and alkaline earth elements such as Na, K, and Mg is effective in a p-type PbTe compound,20–24 while La and halogen elements such as iodine and chlorine are effective for doping in an n-type PbTe compound.25,26
It is generally known that carrier density and thermoelectric properties are significantly affected by defects as well as dopant concentrations. In addition, the understanding of defect chemistry is very crucial in various fields of research such as opto-electronic devices including photo-detectors,27,28 solar cells,29 electrocatalysts,30 memristors,31 and thermoelectric devices.32
When foreign atoms are incorporated in the PbTe matrix, many defects and vacancies are created with respect to the cationic or anionic impurities due to the buckling of crystalline lattices. The defect chemistry in PbTe compounds has long been investigated but has not been clarified yet in terms of the atomic configuration of the defects and dopants.33–40 It is noteworthy that the defects configurations are different between the donor-like and acceptor-like dopants in the PbTe compounds.33,34
When we synthesize PbTe compounds, small non-stoichiometry of Pb and Te can give rise to intrinsic defects.36 In addition, the defect chemistry of the PbTe compounds for the substitution of various anionic and cationic chemical elements is not fully understood yet. In order to control or optimize thermoelectric properties, the physical and chemical understanding of the defect chemistry of the thermoelectric materials is essential. The PbTe compound is a very good model to investigate defect chemistry due to its simple rock salt crystal structure and well-defined intrinsic defects in the stoichiometric compound.
Here, we theoretically investigated the intrinsic defects of pristine PbTe and the available effective n-type dopants such as Sb and Bi in the Pb sites of the PbTe matrix. First principle calculations showed that charged cluster doping tuned the Fermi level in Bi- and Sb-doped PbTe compounds. Many possible intrinsic defects configurations with Sb and Bi doping in n-type PbTe were very complex compared with those of the other doped p-type PbTe compounds. The major cationic defects (Te vacancy; Tevac2+) competed with two anionic intrinsic defects (Pb vacancy; Pbvac2− and antisite defects of Pb in Te sites; PbTe2−) with increasing chemical potential under the Pb-rich condition.
The theoretical prediction was confirmed by the investigation of the experimental thermoelectric properties of (self-doped) PbTe having excess Pb and Bi- and Sb-doped Pb1−xTxTe compounds. Even though the Sb-doped Pb1−xSbxTe compounds showed higher ZT values than Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe, we did not consider the Pb1−xSbxTe compounds because the mechanical strength of the Pb1−xSbxTe compounds significantly decreased on increasing the Sb doping concentration, which was not good for use in TE devices. We believe that the sintering condition of the compounds was not well optimized; thus, this needs further investigation in order to improve the mechanical properties while preserving the high thermoelectric performance of Sb-doped PbTe.
Bi doping gave rise to cluster-type defect formation, resulting in the enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient. The cluster-type defects by Bi doping also caused low doping efficiency so that the increase in the carrier concentration was relatively ineffective with respect to the Bi doping concentration. Therefore, fine tuning of the carrier concentration was expected and a stable carrier concentration was obtained of the order of 1019 cm−3 for a wide range of Bi doping. This result suggests that the complex defect configuration and correlation between intrinsic defects and extrinsic doping should be taken into account in order to control the TE properties effectively in the PbTe system with carrier density optimization.
2. Experimental and theoretical details
2.1 Theoretical calculations
In order to investigate the defect properties of binary PbTe and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe, we conducted the first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The plane wave DFT code and the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) were used with the projector-augmented-wave (PAW) method and the generalized-gradient-approximation (GGA) for the exchange-correlation functional parameterized by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE).41–45 For the defect model calculation, we adopted a PbTe cubic supercell with 64 atoms. The atomic structures were fully relaxed to optimize the cell volume and the internal atomic parameters with the k-point mesh of (2 × 2 × 2) based on the Monkhorst–Pack (MP) scheme.46 The calculated bulk lattice parameter was 6.575 Å.
The TE properties of pristine PbTe were calculated from the Boltzmann Transport Equation (BTE) by using the BoltzTraP code within the rigid band approximation and the constant relaxation time approximation (CRTA) for the k-space integration.47 The transport coefficient was computed as a function of the Fermi level. In addition, the carrier doping density was calculated with respect to the number of excess electrons per unit cell volume. The thermal effect of the electrons was obtained by the Fermi–Dirac distribution function. For the Boltzmann transport calculations, the error in the band gap estimation in DFT-PBE calculations is corrected to the experimental value of 0.3 eV in PbTe using the Scissor operation.
In BoltzTraP, the electrical conductivity σ is given by σ = (σ/τ)CRTA × τ(T,n), where (σ/τ)CRTA is calculated within the CRTA assumption. Note that (σ/τ)CRTA is obtained only from a band structure. In order to calculate σ, the relaxation time τ should be given. Here, we used a typical electron-phonon regime, where τ is proportional to 1/T and decreases with the carrier concentration n (τ ∝ n−1/3).48 Thus, we used the following expression: τ = τ300K × (300 K/T) × (1019 cm−3/n)1/3, where τ300K is 2 × 10−14 s for p-type and 3 × 10−14 s for n-type cases.
In order to confirm the effect on defects in PbTe, we considered various vacancies, interstitials, anti-site defects, and their related complex defects. We employed the supercell approach to describe the point defects. We used the 64 atom (2 × 2 × 2) cubic supercell with 32 Pb and 32 Te atoms. As we used the 63 atom supercell, one additional/removed atom changed the stoichiometry by 1/32. For simplicity, we only considered a single point defect per 64 atom supercell. The vacancy defect was employed by removing a single Pb or Te atom in the supercell. For example, there are 31 Pb and 32 Te atoms in the Pb-vacancy supercell. Interstitial doping is modeled by the atomic substitution of a single Pb or Te at the interstitial position surrounded by 4 Pb and 4 Te atoms in the supercell. The PbTe antisite defect is generated by replacing the single Te(Pb) atom at different sites of the Pb(Te) atom such that we use Pb33Te31 and Pb31Te33 for PbTe and TePb antisite defect supercells, respectively.
We also investigated the defect properties of the complex defects such as the antisite-pair PbTe–TePb, Pb-dimer in Te [(Pb–Pb)Te], Te-dimer in Pb [(Te–Te)Pb], and interstitial Pb plus two Pb in Te [Pbint–2PbTe]. Additionally, we theoretically verified two kinds of substitutional n-type impurities in the Pb and Te sites such as the Pb site ([MPb], where M = La, In, Sb, and Bi) and the Te site ([QTe], where Q = Se and I) to confirm the effective n-type dopant in the PbTe matrix. In particular, we focused on the Bi-related intrinsic and complex defect calculations to confirm the Bi doping effect in PbTe.
The formation energy (EFORM) of the defects in PbTe was calculated using the following equation:49,50  Here, E[D] is the total energy with defects, E0 is the total energy without defects, i is the index of atomic species, Δni is the number of atoms being exchanged during the formation of the defects, μi is the atomic chemical potential, and EF, EVBM, and δV are the Fermi level, energy at the valence band maximum, and the local potential correction, respectively. Please note that in the formation energy calculations, we included the spin orbit interaction (SOI), which is critical for describing the charge defect formation energy owing to the positions of the band edge states. For the position of the band edge states, we used the band edge positions computed from the k-point mesh of (4 × 4 × 4) based on the Monkhorst–Pack (MP) scheme in the (2 × 2 × 2) cubic supercell.
The binding energy (Eb) of complex defects from D1, D2, …, and Dn was calculated using the following equation:49,50Eb[D1, D2, …, Dn] = EFORM[D1] + EFORM[D2] + … + EFORM[Dn] − EFORM[D1, D2, …, Dn]Here, the positive binding energy implies the spontaneous interaction between defects. Here, the binding energy is obtained using the formation energy of the neutral defects including SOI.
2.2 Experimental details
The crystalline ingots of Pb1−xBixTe (x = 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.04) were synthesized by a melting and slow cooling process. The high purity elements Pb (99.999%), Bi (99.999%), and Te (99.999%) were weighed according to the stoichiometric molar ratios of Pb1−xBixTe and were sealed in evacuated quartz tubes. The quartz ampoules were melted at 1273 K for 12 h and air quenched, followed by annealing at 973 K in a box furnace. The synthesized ingots were ground in an agate mortar and the powder was sintered by spark plasma sintering (SPS) at 873 K with a uniaxial pressure of 50 MPa for 5 minutes.
The phase identification and structural characterization were achieved by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation. The Seebeck coefficient and the electrical resistivity were measured by a four-probe point contact method using a thermoelectric measurement system (ZEM-3 ULVAC, Japan). The thermal conductivity was obtained by using the equation κ = ρsλCp, where ρs, λ, and Cp are the sample density, thermal diffusivity measured by the laser flash method (LFA-447, NETZSCH, Germany), and the specific heat measured by the physical property measurement system (PPMS Dynacool 14 T, Quantum Design, USA), respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Thermoelectric transport in PbTe: theoretical prediction

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the temperature-dependent Seebeck coefficients S(T) for various the carrier densities for the p- and n- type PbTe compounds, which are calculated from the Boltzmann transport equations combined with the DFT band structures. For slightly doped PbTe (hole density nhole and electron density nel were in the range of 1017–1018 cm−3), the Seebeck coefficient rapidly decreased with increasing temperature due to the bipolar diffusion effect. The signs of the Seebeck coefficients for low-doped p-type PbTe (nhole < 1 × 1018 cm−3) changed from positive to negative with increasing temperature, while the sign reversal behavior was not observed for n-type PbTe. The drastic changes in S(T) observed for low-doped PbTe (n < 1 × 1018 cm−3) for both the p-type and n-type compounds were suppressed on increasing the carrier density.
 Fig. 1  Temperature-dependent Seebeck coefficient S(T) (a) and power factor (c) of p-type PbTe and the Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b) and power factor (d) of n-type PbTe compounds for various carrier densities, as indicated, from the Boltzmann transport calculations coupled with DFT band structures. 
Note that in an intrinsic semiconductor, the variation in the Fermi level with temperature is given by the relation Eg/2 + (3kBT/4)ln(mh/me).51 In PbTe, the effective mass of holes is larger than that of electrons.52 Thus, for the lightly doped p-type PbTe with a hole concentration of 1017 cm−3, the Fermi level shifted up to the conduction band side with increasing temperature, resulting in an n-type behavior at a high temperature. In heavily doped n-type PbTe (n = 4 × 1019 cm−3), S(T) exhibited a typical metallic behavior with temperature.
At an intermediate doping range (1018–1019 cm−3), there are broad peaks of S(T) in both the p- and n-type cases, which come from the bipolar diffusion effect. The maximum peaks of S(T) shift to the high temperature side on increasing the carrier density. For carrier densities between 1 × 1018 and 4 × 1018 cm−3, the maximum values of S(T) were in the range of 400–600 K for both the p- and n-type compounds. Because the effective mass of holes is larger than that of electrons, different effective masses of the electrons and holes reduced the bipolar diffusion effect in the n-type compound. The absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients for n-type PbTe were smaller than those of p-type PbTe. S(T) in low-doped p-type PbTe decreased more rapidly on increasing the temperature than that of n-type PbTe because the Fermi level was below the mid-gap in the p-type compound, showing a more significant bipolar diffusion effect.
When we compared the S(T) behaviors for both p- and n-type PbTe compounds, there were two distinctive properties. First, the absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients of the n-type compound were smaller than that of the p-type compound. Second, the peak of S(T) of the n-type compounds dropped rapidly than that of the p-type compounds with increasing carrier density. This indicated that the optimal doping range of the n-type compounds is very narrow compared with that of the p-type compounds. Furthermore, the optimum value of S(T) in the n-type compounds was found at a lower carrier density than that of the p-type compounds.
The temperature-dependent power factor S2σ is presented in Fig. 1(c) and (d) for p-type and n-type PbTe, respectively. High power factors were expected at the carrier densities of 4 × 1019 cm−3 in p-type PbTe (3 mW m−1 K−1 at 300 K) (c) and 4 × 1018 cm−3 in n-type PbTe (1.5 mW m−1 K−1 at 300 K) (d). The power factor of the n-type compound exhibited a lower value (by half) at a much lower carrier density (by one order of magnitude).

Fig. 2 presents the semi-log plot of the Pisarenko's relation between the Seebeck coefficient and the carrier density at isothermal temperatures. As we stated above, maximum Seebeck coefficients of the n-type compound were seen at a lower carrier density compared with that for the p-type compound. The absolute value of the Seebeck coefficient for the n-type compound was lower than that of the p-type compound, indicating that the lower power factor in the n-type compound is mainly attributed to the lower Seebeck coefficient compared with that of the p-type compound. The decrease in the Seebeck coefficient with decreasing carrier density at a low carrier density was due to the bipolar effect of the carriers because the bipolar contribution becomes significant when the Fermi level resides in the middle of the narrow band gap.
 Fig. 2  Pisarenko plot of isothermal Seebeck coefficient with respect to the carrier concentration S(n) at various temperatures, as indicated for p- and n-type PbTe. 

Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the formation energies of various intrinsic and extrinsic Bi point defects under Pb- and Te-rich conditions, respectively. The band gap of PbTe was calculated to be 0.1 eV in GGA with SOI, while it changed to 0.4 eV in hybrid-DFT with SOI, which was comparable to the experimental band gap (0.3–0.4 eV).53–55 Note that the donor/acceptor nature of a point intrinsic defect does not change even when we use the band edge positions from the hybrid-DFT results. For the intrinsic defects, we considered the basic defects such as the Pb and Te vacancies (Pbvac and Tevac), Pb and Te interstitials (Pbint and Teint), and Pb–Te anti-site defects (PbTe and TePb) [Fig. 4(a) and (b) for Pb-rich and Te-rich conditions, respectively]. The result of the defects in PbTe is that the formation energies of the major defects range from ∼0 eV to 2 eV, and this indicates that there are abundant intrinsic defects in binary PbTe. Also, note that the type of the most probable defect changed with the chemical potential. Under Te-rich conditions, the counter defects Pbvac2− and TePb2+ could coexist.
 Fig. 3  Theoretical formation energy calculations of intrinsic point defects in PbTe as a function of the Fermi level in Te-rich (a) and Pb-rich (b) conditions for Pb vacancy (red dot-dash line), Te vacancy (grey dot line), Pb interstitial (yellow dot-dash line), Te interstitial (blue dashed line), Pb anti-site defect at Te-site PbTe (green dot-dashed line), Te anti-site defect at Pb-site TePb (blue dot-dashed line), Bi substitutional defect at Pb-site BiPb (black solid line), and Sb substitutional defect at Pb-site SbPb (black dashed line). 
 Fig. 4  Electronic band structures of PbTe with respect to various intrinsic defects are presented: pristine PbTe (a), Pb vacancy Pbvac (b), Te vacancy Tevac (c), Pb interstitial Pbint (d), Te interistitial Teint (e), Pb anti-site defect at Te site PbTe (f), Te anti-site defect at Pb site TePb (g), and the complex defect of Pbint–2PbTe (h). The valence band maximum is set to zero for defect formation energy and band structure calculations. The grey and red lines represent the electronic band structures of bulk PbTe without and with the point impurity defects, respectively. The green lines indicate the Fermi level of each PbTe system. 
However, on going from the Te-rich to Pb-rich conditions, the most probable defects changed to Tevac2+, Pbint2+, and PbTe2+. Hence, Pb-rich conditions lead to the enhanced stability in n-type conduction compared to that for the Te-rich conditions. Thus, the carrier transport of pristine binary PbTe can be modified by controlling the intrinsic defects.38,56–58
The defect formation energies of Bi and Sb point impurities in PbTe are also included in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Note that the defect formation energies of the impurities are lower than those of the intrinsic defects. Thus, although there are abundant intrinsic defects in PbTe, the extrinsic defects become significant in impurity-doped PbTe. This indicates that the type of electrical conduction (p- or n-type) will be mainly determined by the defect properties of the impurity dopants not by the intrinsic defects. We would like to mention that, however, the low defect formation energies of intrinsic defects may lead to defect compensation of the extrinsic defects by the formation of complex-type defects, which will be mentioned later.
The electronic band structures of PbTe without and with intrinsic defects are shown in Fig. 4(a)–(h). The density of states of each case is presented in the ESI Fig. S1–S9.† Note that the band edges were at the Γ-point due to band folding in the (2 × 2 × 2) simple cubic super cell, while they were at the L-point for the FCC primitive cell. The band structure of PbTe with Pb vacancy Pbvac showed a typical p-type character, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The pristine bulk band was not disturbed by the formation of Pbvac. The Te vacancy Tevac [Fig. 4(c)] and the Pb interstitial defect Pbint [Fig. 4(d)] showed a typical n-type character. Although the formation energy of Tevac was lower than that of Pbint, Pbint gave rise to an effective n-type band structure. The Teint and Pb and Te anti-site defects generated defect levels near the conduction band minimum (CBM), as shown in Fig. 4(e)–(g). Furthermore, we consider formable cluster-type defects such as Pbint–2PbTe under Pb-rich conditions, as presented in Fig. 4(h). In the cluster-type defects (Pbint–2PbTe) in the PbTe matrix, the Fermi level goes up near the conduction band minimum (CBM). The cluster-type defect can be generated in the PbTe matrix when Pbint and PbTe interact with each other. The abnormal change in the lattice parameter and complicated electrical transport properties in PbTe compounds having excess Pb may be associated with the formation of the complex defects having a larger volume, which will be explained later in detail.
Although the TE properties of p-type PbTe have been significantly enhanced with extensive research in previous reports,6–13 the n-type performance has not reached the level of p-type performance. Therefore, the conversion efficiency of a PbTe-based TE module is restricted for the n-type TE performance. La and iodine are well-known n-type dopants.25,26 Therefore, we theoretically investigated the substitutional n-type doping at the Pb sites (MPb, M = La, Hf, Ta, In, Bi, Sb, and Sn) and iodine substitutional doping at the Te sites (ITe).

Fig. 5 shows the electronic band structures of PbTe with point impurities. The density of states for the impurity-doped ones is presented in the ESI (Fig. S10–S17†). The band structures of La-, Hf-, and Ta-doped PbTe revealed a stable n-type band feature without impurity bands near the gap, as shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c), respectively. The Fermi level lies well above the CBM and the band gap slightly increases by substitutional doping. For HfPb and TaPb, the impurity bands can be found, but they are located above the Fermi level. This implies that the electron carriers are not perturbed by impurity doping.
 Fig. 5  Electronic band structures of n-type doped PbTe doped with various dopants. The dopants are substitutional-type dopants at the Pb site except for iodine at the Te site (g): (a) La-doped PbTe (LaPb), (b) Hf-doped PbTe (HfPb), (c) Ta-doped PbTe (TaPb), (d) In-doped PbTe (InPb), (e) Bi-doped PbTe (BiPb), (f) Sb-doped PbTe (SbPb), (g) I-doped PbTe (ITe), and (h) Sn-doped PbTe (SnPb). 

Fig. 5(d) shows the band structure of In-doped PbTe. In a previous report, the theoretical calculation for In-doped PbTe presented that indium doping can cause a resonant state.27 The impurity band from the In atom is located below CBM, forming the resonant state at the mid-gap between CBM and valence band maximum (VBM). The impurity band is half-filled so that it acts as a single donor. Furthermore, we cannot expect high doping efficiency due to the low Fermi level. Instead, we speculated that there may be a temperature-dependent doping nature of In-doped PbTe owing to the thermal activation of electrons from the impurity bands.
The band structures of Bi- and Sb-doped PbTe also showed a shallow donor feature, as shown in Fig. 5(e) and (f), respectively, resulting in sharp density of states at the Fermi level, as presented in Fig. S14 and S15 (ESI†). In addition, we can confirm the resonant impurity level around the conduction band by perturbing the CBM states, which is not found in La-, Hf-, and Ta-doped PbTe. Compared to the In-doped PbTe band, the resonant impurity bands were found to be located above CBM and the impurity bands were still highly mixed with the host band (please see DOSs of the compounds in Fig. S10–S17†).

Fig. 5(g) presents the band structure of I-doped PbTe at the Te site. It also shows a very good shallow donor feature without the formation of an impurity band around and near the CBM, due to which the DOS at the Fermi level is very small. Fig. 5(h) shows the band structure of Sn-doped PbTe. Sn has the same charge as that of Pb, indicating that Sn itself is not an n-type source; however, from the band structure calculations, the Sn-doped PbTe (Pb0.6Sn0.4Te) showed a strong p-type conduction behavior in the experimental results.59–61 In a previous study on Sn-alloyed PbTe, p-type conduction was caused by the formation of Sn/Pb vacancies in Sn-rich tellurides and not by Sn substitution. This implied that the extrinsic defect configuration can more dominantly contribute to the increase in the p-type conduction behavior than the Fermi level tuning effect in Sn-doped PbTe.
 Fig. 6  Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of Pb excess doped PbTe (a) and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe (b). 
Moreover, this also indicates that the extrinsic doping of PbTe correlates with the intrinsic defects, resulting in an unexpected behavior in electronic transport properties such as the accelerated generation of the intrinsic defects or the interaction between the intrinsic and extrinsic defects. Therefore, when we adopt an extrinsic dopant for PbTe, we have to consider the relation between the intrinsic and extrinsic defect configurations when the formation energy of an extrinsic dopant is low enough to compete with the intrinsic defects.
3.2 Thermoelectric properties of Pb1+xTe having excess Pb and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe
Here, we synthesized Bi-doped PbTe compounds and Pb1+xTe having excess Pb by melting, grinding, and spark plasma sintering. The powder X-ray diffraction patterns of PbTe having excess Pb and those of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds are presented in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. The main peaks of all the samples correspond to the rock salt PbTe structure with the space group Fmm. Small peaks for excess Pb are seen, but the peaks are negligibly small compared with the background signal, indicating a single phase of the compound. The Bi-doped compounds, i.e., Pb1−xBixTe (x = 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, and 4 at%) did not show any noticeable impurity peaks, as presented in Fig. 6(b).
In the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, pristine PbTe and small Bi-doped (0.5%) PbTe compounds show clear crystalline lattices, as presented in Fig. S18(a) and (d),† respectively. On increasing the doping of excess Pb and Bi-doping concentrations, we observed an enhancement in the lattice strain, implying the existence of various disorders and defects, as shown in Fig. S18(b), (c) and (e), (f),† respectively.
The lattice parameters of the Pb1+xTe compounds are increased linearly with increasing excess Pb concentration, as shown in Fig. 7(a) (red circle), indicating that excess Pb participates as a dopant at any kind. For the Bi-doped compounds Pb1−xBixTe, the lattice parameters drastically decreased up to 3 at% and were saturated at a higher doping range than 4% due to the smaller ionic radius of Bi3+ (∼1.08 Å) than that of Pb2+ (∼1.20 Å), which is consistent with previous results.62 The saturation of the lattice parameter when the Bi-doping concentration is higher than 4% indicates that the solubility limit of Bi doping is about 4%.
 Fig. 7  Variation of the lattice parameters for Pb1+xTe and Pb1−xBixTe (a). Hall carrier density nH for Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe and Pb excess Pb1+xTe (b) and La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe compounds (c) with respect to the doping concentration x at 300 K. Material hardness of Sb-, Bi-doped, and Pb excess PbTe compounds (d). 
The Hall carrier density nH values with respect to the doping concentration of the dopants are depicted in Fig. 7(b) and (c). The carrier density of PbTe doped with excess Pb was unaffected at excess Pb concentration. The carrier density of Bi-doped PbTe significantly increased (∼4 × 1019 cm−3) up to x = 4 at%. La is a well-known effective n-type dopant in PbTe. The La doping efficiency (≈90%) is very high and the carrier concentration can be controlled in a wide range (1 × 1019–9 × 1019 cm−3) by only about 1 at% doping.26 The Bi-doping efficiency is about 40%, which is lower than that of La. Interestingly, even though the formation energy of Bi-doping at the Pb site is lower than that of the intrinsic defects, the doping efficiency is lower than that of La doping. Under Pb-rich and LaTe-rich (Bi2Te3-rich) conditions, the formation energy of LaPb+ (BiPb+) was calculated to be 0.82 eV (−0.27 eV) in n-type PbTe, where the Fermi level is at the CBM energy. In order to confirm this behavior, we investigated the effects of Bi defects in the PbTe matrix.
Here, we focused only on the Bi-doping effect as n-type doping because of the brittleness of the material in Sb-doped PbTe compounds. Fig. 7(d) shows the material hardness of Sb-, Bi-, and excess-Pb-doped PbTe compounds. The material strength of our PbTe (≈0.99 GPa) was lower than that of the previously reported binary PbTe (≈1.18 GPa).63 Although the material strength of Bi-doped PbTe compounds decreased, it maintained relatively high hardness (≫ 0.79 GPa). The material hardness of Sb-doped PbTe compounds (≫ 0.53 GPa) significantly decreased with increasing Sb doping concentration. It is not clear why Sb doping decreases the mechanical strength of PbTe. One possibility is that the sintering conditions of Sb-doped PbTe were not well optimized. We applied the same sintering condition of spark plasma sintering (600 °C/5 min/50 MPa). The melting point of Bi (265 °C) is quite lower than that of Sb (950 °C). Therefore, the sintering temperature of Sb-doped PbTe should be higher than that of the Bi-doped one. In this sense, when we synthesized a sample of Sb-doped PbTe, it also gave reasonable results, which were consistent with that of the Bi-doped samples and the theoretical results.
In order to understand the abnormal behavior on increasing the lattice parameter of PbTe doped with excess Pb (Fig. 7(a)), we theoretically calculated the volume change (Δa/a (%)) for a 64-atom PbTe supercell with considerable defects, as shown Table 1. Here, we considered not only the above-mentioned formable point defect configurations, but also the formation of cluster-type defects such as the anti-site pair defect [PbTe–TePb], Pb dimer defect at the Te-site [(Pb–Pb)Te], Te dimer defect at the Pb-site [(Te–Te)Pb], and Pb interstitial with two Pb-antisite defects [Pbint–2(PbTe)]. The defect generation became very complex in the PbTe matrix due to the low formation energy of the intrinsic defects and the attractive interaction of each defect. VTe, TePb, and VPb displayed the lowest formation energies, i.e., +1.211, +0.972, and +1.581 eV for Pb-rich, Te-rich, and Bi-rich PbTe, respectively.
Table 1 Variation of lattice parameter (Δa/a (%)) of PbTe with the formation of defects, the calculated formation energy (EFORM) of the defects under Pb- and Te-rich conditions, and the binding energy (EBIND) for cluster-type defects. Here, for simplicity of computations, we considered the neutral defects




Defects (D)
Δa/a (%)

E
FORM [D] (eV)

E
BIND (eV)


Pb-rich
Te-rich




VPb
−0.34
1.981
1.249
—


VTe
−0.26
1.211
1.942
—


Pbint
0.8
1.685
2.416
—


Teint
0.72
3.179
2.447
—


PbTe
−0.06
1.323
2.786
—


TePb
−0.25
2.435
0.972
—


PbTe–TePb
0.07
2.360
2.360
1.398


(Pb–Pb)Te
0.76
2.540
4.735
0.467


(Te–Te)Pb
0.68
5.046
2.852
0.567


Pbint–2(PbTe)
0.62
2.814
6.472
1.516




From the formation energy calculations, we speculated that the increased lattice parameter of PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb can be correlated with the formation of interstitial (Pbint and Teint) and cluster-type defects [(PbTe–TePb), (Pb–Pb)Te, (Te–Te)Pb, and (Pbint–2PbTe)] because (Δa/a (%)) shows positive values for the defect configurations, which are consistent with the experimental observations of enlarged volumes in the samples doped with excess Pb.
It is not likely that the increase in the lattice parameter is correlated with the Te interstitial Teint and the Te-dimer anti-site (Te–Te)Pb defects due to the high formation energy (Teint = 3.179 eV and (Te–Te)Pb = 5.046 eV). The Pb-dimer anti-site defect (Pb–Pb)Te is also difficult to generate in the PbTe matrix because it has the lowest binding energy. Therefore, we believe that the defects in the order Pbint ≫ PbTe–TePb ≫ Pbint–2PbTe dominantly contribute to the increase in the lattice parameter in PbTe doped with excess Pb.
Furthermore, the formation of these cluster defects is related to the electrical transport properties of PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb. If we only consider the VTe2+ and Pbint2+ point defects with low formation energy, the carrier density should be high with high electrical conductivity under the n-type condition. However, the carrier density of PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb did not increase significantly on increasing the Pb concentration, as shown in Fig. 7(b). In addition, the temperature-dependent electrical conductivity σ(T) of the Pb1.04Te compounds showed a semiconducting behavior (T ≤ 550 K), as shown in Fig. 8(a). This means that the charge compensation defects should be generated in the PbTe matrix. The increase in the lattice parameter and the semiconducting behavior of σ(T) in Pb-excess PbTe are not caused by single or double dominant defect types.
 Fig. 8  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of PbTe doped with excess Pb: the electrical conductivity σ(T) (a), Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b), total thermal conductivity κ(T) (c) and lattice thermal conductivity κL(T) (d) for Pb1+xTe (x = 0, 0.04 and 0.08). Inset of (d) represents the temperature-dependent Lorenz number. 
The cluster-type defects can lead to the charge compensation effect and increase in the lattice parameters. From the formation energies of the defect clusters, there can be attractive interaction between the point defects, leading to the formation of defect-clustering and charge compensation. In particular, as confirmed in the band structure calculation result in Fig. 4(h), the Pbint–2(PbTe) cluster-type defects may not yield an increase in the carrier concentration. The formation energy of Pbint–2(PbTe) per Pb atom was only 0.938 eV, which was smaller than the formation energy of VTe. The complex scattering centers in the cluster-type defects could reduce the electrical mobility. Actually, the electrical mobility of PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb significantly decreased (Pb1.04Te = 0.94 cm2 V−1 S−1 and Pb1.08Te = 1.87 cm2 V−1 S−1) compared with that of pristine PbTe (3.2 cm2 V−1 S−1). Therefore, we can conclude that the complicated intrinsic defect configurations and the cluster-type defects in the PbTe matrix under Pb-rich conditions are strongly related to the electrical transport properties.

Table 2 shows the formation energy and the variation in lattice parameter calculations for the Bi-related extrinsic defects doped in Pb1−xBixTe compounds. The Bi-substitutional doping at the Pb site is the most probable defect with the lowest formation energy among simple point defect configurations under Te-rich conditions. Bi acts as a shallow donor at the Pb site and this substitutional defect (BiPb) has more stable formation energy than that of the others. Therefore, at a first glance, we anticipated that almost all Bi doping leads to the formation of BiPb.
Table 2 Variation of the lattice parameters (Δa/a (%)) for Pb1−xBixTe with the formation of defects, the calculated formation energy (EFORM) of the defects under Pb- and Te-rich conditions, and the binding energy (EBIND) for cluster-type defects. Here, for simplicity for computations, we considered the neutral defects




Defect (D)
Δa/a (%)

E
FORM [D] (eV)

E
BIND [D] (eV)


Pb-rich
Te-rich




BiPb
−0.02
0.043
0.409
—


BiTe
−0.04
0.050
1.879
—


Biint
0.81
1.579
2.677
—


(Bi2)Pb
0.77
1.404
2.867
0.219


(Bi2)Te
0.89
0.994
3.920
0.636


BiPb + BiTe
0
−0.510
1.684
0.604


2BiPb
−0.03
0.118
0.849
−0.031


2BiPb + VPb
−0.24
0.810
0.810
1.257


3BiPb + VPb
−0.29
0.717
1.083
1.393




However, we found that the Bi atom is not simply doped at the Pb site due to the following reasons. First, the reduction in Bi doping efficiency is correlated to the formation of cluster-type defects such as Bi antisite defect pair (BiPb + BiTe), Bi dimer defect (2BiPb), and cluster defects (2BiPb + VPb and 3BiPb + VPb) due to the attractive interaction between different charged defects. The representative defect configurations in the Bi-related defects are depicted in Fig. S19 of ESI.† The attractive interaction between the charged defects forms dimer and/or complex defects. From the positive binding energies between the defects, we expect that 2BiPb and other Bi-related cluster defects can be easily formed in Bi-doped PbTe. The formation energy of Bi-related cluster defects is lower than that of the Pb-related cluster defects, implying that the Bi-related cluster defects can be more dominantly generated in the PbTe matrix than the other cluster defects with the increase in Bi doping concentration.
The formation of complex defects can decrease the lattice parameters, which is consistent with the experimental results. Thus, we believe that the formation of Bi-donor states as well as the Bi-related complex defects is responsible for n-type conduction with ∼1 × 1019 cm−3 carrier density and the decrease in the lattice parameters.

Fig. 8 and 9 show the temperature-dependent TE properties of Pb-excess-doped PbTe and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds, respectively. Fig. 8(a) presents the electrical conductivity σ(T) of Pb-excess-doped PbTe compounds. The σ(T) values of pristine PbTe and Pb1.08Te exhibited broad minimum near 550 K, indicating the transition from semiconducting behavior to metallic behavior with decreasing temperature. Even though the Hall carrier density did not change with excess Pb concentration, σ(T) of Pb1.04Te showed a different behavior: a broad maximum near 550 K corresponding to the transition from metallic to semiconducting behavior with decreasing temperature. The unconventional behavior of the semiconducting transition can be ascribed to the formation of complex defects.
 Fig. 9  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe: the electrical conductivity σ(T) (a), Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b), total thermal conductivity κ(T) (c), and lattice thermal conductivity κL(T) (d) for Pb1−xBixTe (x = 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4%). Inset of (d) represents the temperature-dependent Lorenz number. 
The σ(T) values of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds showed metallic behavior with temperature and increased with increasing Bi-doping concentration; they reached about 280–1250 S cm−1 at 300 K due to the enhancement in carrier density [Fig. 9(a)].
The σ(T) value of this bulk Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe was lower than that of Pb1−xBixTe nanocubes synthesized by the solvothermal method (700–2500 S cm−1).65 The σ(T) values of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds were lower than that of La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe (500–5000 S cm−1) even when the samples exhibited similar carrier density. For example, the electrical conductivity of Pb0.94La0.06Te was 4500 S cm−1 for nH ≈ 5.8 × 1019 cm−3, while σ(T) of Pb0.97Bi0.03Te was 1200 S cm−1 for nH ≈ 4 × 1019 cm−3.26
We argued that the Bi-doping efficiency can be suppressed with the formation of Bi-related complex defects due to the charge compensation effect. However, it is not enough to explain the lower electrical conductivity value of Pb0.97Bi0.03Te than that of Pb0.94La0.06Te because the difference in electrical conductivities for both the samples is almost 4 times of each other, while the difference in the doping efficiency between Bi (≈40%) and La (≈90%) is almost 2 times.
This means that the Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds have a more complex scattering mechanism than La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe compounds. Therefore, the complex defects not only suppress the doping efficiency but also cause the complex scattering mechanism in the PbTe matrix. This behavior was also confirmed in our previous report, which is seriously related to the enhancement in the Seebeck coefficient.49
The Seebeck coefficient S(T) of pristine PbTe showed sign change from positive to negative near 600 K with increasing temperature, as shown in Fig. 8(b). S(T) of PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb showed stable n-type properties; the values of S(T) were Pb1.04Te = −370 μV K−1 and Pb1.08Te = −320 μV K−1 with low carrier density nH: Pb1.04Te = 2 × 1018 cm−3 and Pb1.08Te = 5.4 × 1018 cm−3 at 300 K, respectively. The experimentally measured S(T) values were higher than the theoretically expected ones (−250 to −150 μV K−1) within (2 × 1018–5.4 × 1018 cm−3) the carrier density range. In our previous report for Ag-doped SnTe, we confirmed that S(T) can be enhanced by a change in the scattering exponent through the formation of complex defects.49 The Seebeck coefficient of the degenerated semiconductor is expressed by  where the scattering exponent r depends on the scattering mechanism: −1/2 for acoustic phonon scattering, ∼0 for neutral impurity scattering, and 3/2 for ionized impurity scattering.64,66 The scattering exponent r can be increased with the formation of complex defects, which cause the enhancement in S(T). As confirmed above, because the PbTe compounds doped with excess Pb also have complex defect configuration, S(T) can also be increased with a complex scattering exponent.
The Seebeck coefficients of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds showed a similar behavior to that of PbTe doped with excess Pb. The compounds revealed a stable n-type behavior and the absolute values decreased with increasing carrier density. Furthermore, the measured values of S(T) (−37 to −150 μV K−1) were higher than the theoretically expected values (−20 to −50 μV K−1) within the measured carrier density range (0.5 × 1018–4 × 1019 cm−3). The S(T) values of the compounds were higher than those of the Pb1−xBixTe nanocubes (−70 to −100 μV K−1).65 This might be also driven by the complex scattering exponent with the formation of complex defects. Actually, the electrical mobility values of the Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds (152–197 cm2 V−1 s−1) were lower than those of the La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe compounds (429–1106 cm2 V−1 s−1). Therefore, although the Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds have similar carrier density to that of La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe samples, the electrical conductivity can be significantly decreased than that of the La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe samples and the measured S(T) values are higher than the theoretically expected values.
The S(T) values of Pb1−xLaxTe were higher than the values of Pb1−xBixTe despite the high carrier density and mobility of the Pb1−xLaxTe compounds. The high S(T) values of Pb1−xLaxTe may arise from the high density of states. Therefore, we should take into account not only the correlation between the intrinsic and extrinsic defect configurations but also the formation of the cluster defects with extrinsic doping in order to effectively improve the TE performance by carrier optimization.
The total thermal conductivity κ(T) and lattice thermal conductivity κL(T) are presented for PbTe doped with excess Pb [Fig. 8(c) and (d)] and for Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe [Fig. 9(c) and (d)] compounds. All the thermal conductivities decreased with increasing temperature due to the acoustic phonon contribution. The small increase in κ(T) for pristine PbTe at a temperature higher than 500 K is due to the bipolar diffusion effect on thermal conductivity. The κ(T) value of Pb1.04Te increased compared to that of pristine PbTe; in contrast, κ(T) of Pb1.08Te drastically decreased due to the reduction in lattice thermal conductivity because the Pb precipitation and complex defects caused significant phonon scattering, which is consistent with our previous result.49
Because the thermal conductivity consists of electronic thermal conductivity κel and lattice thermal conductivity κL, κ = κel + κL, the lattice thermal conductivity can be obtained by subtracting the electrical part from the total thermal conductivity. The electronic thermal conductivity κel can be calculated from the Wiedemann–Franz law κel = L0σT, where L0, σ, and T are the Lorenz number, electrical conductivity, and absolute temperature, respectively. Because the Lorenz number is incorrect for the correlated metal and many degenerated semiconductors, in order to obtain a more reliable Lorenz number, we calculated it by using the following equation:  Here, r is the scattering parameter, η = EF/kBT is the reduced Fermi energy, and Fn(η) is the n-th order Fermi integral given by the following equation:  
For most cases, the scattering parameter for acoustic phonon scattering is r = −1/2. The reduced Fermi energy η can be obtained by fitting the Seebeck coefficient to the following equation:  
The temperature-dependent Lorenz numbers obtained from the above equations for Pb-excess PbTe and Pb1−xBixTe are shown in the insets of Fig. 8(d) and 9(d), respectively. The Lorenz number decreases with increasing temperature, which is lower than the value of L0 = 2.45 × 10−8 W Ω K−2.
While the total thermal conductivities of the Pb1−xBixTe compounds (2.2–2.6 W m−1 K−1) are generally higher than those of PbTe doped with excess Pb (2.0–2.4 W m−1 K−1) due to the enhancement in electronic thermal conductivity, the lattice thermal conductivities of Pb1−xBixTe compounds (1.6–2.0 W m−1 K−1) are lower than those of PbTe doped with excess Pb (1.97–2.4 W m−1 K−1). The thermal conductivity of bulk Pb1−xBixTe compounds was similar to that of the Pb1−xBixTe nanocubes.65 When we take into account the high electrical conductivity of the Pb1−xBixTe nanocubes, the lattice thermal conductivity of the Pb1−xBixTe nanocubes might be lower than that of the bulk samples. The reduction in the lattice thermal conductivity is also related to the formation of complex defects. When we compared the lattice thermal conductivity of Pb1−xBixTe with that of the other compounds, we could clearly confirm that the complex defects are associated with the reduction in lattice thermal conductivity. The total thermal conductivities of the previously reported Pb1−xLaxTe and PbTe1−xIx showed significantly increased values (2.0–5.5 W m−1 K−1) due to the increase in the electronic thermal conductivity. The lattice thermal conductivities of the compounds were in the range of 2.0–3.0 W m−1 K−1.25,26 The lattice thermal conductivity of Pb1−xBixTe was almost 20% lower than those of Pb1−xLaxTe and PbTe1−xIx in the same carrier density range.
The power factor S2σ and dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT for the Pb-excess PbTe and Pb1−xBixTe compounds are presented in Fig. 10. The temperature-dependent power factor and ZT value of pristine PbTe significantly decreased with increasing temperature due to the bipolar diffusion effect. The power factor and ZT values of PbTe compounds with excess Pb were enhanced on increasing excess Pb doping concentration in the high-temperature region, as presented in Fig. 10(a) and (b), respectively.
 Fig. 10  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric performance. Power factor (a) and dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT (b) for Pb-excess PbTe; power factor (c) and dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT (d) for Pb1−xBixTe. 
The power factors of Pb1−xLaxTe (2.2–3.2 mW m−1 K−1) and PbTe1−xIx (2.2–4.4 mW m−1 K−1) were higher than the ones for Pb1−xBixTe (0.2–1.25 mW m−1 K−1) due to the high electrical conductivity.25,26 The power factor of Pb1−xBixTe compounds decreased with increasing Bi concentration, due to which the ZT values also significantly decreased for the high Bi doping range (>1%). This was caused by a significant decrease in the Seebeck coefficients in spite of the enhancement in the electrical conductivity and increase in the carrier density, which is generally observed in many n-type PbTe TE materials such as Pb1−xLaxTe, Pb1−xBixTe, and PbTe1−xIx. This implies that the TE performance of n-type PbTe materials can be improved to a greater extent than that of the p-type materials when we find an optimum carrier concentration range at a low doping level. As a result, the maximum ZT value for the Pb1−xBixTe compounds was 0.54 at 700 K for the low doping (1–2%) range.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we theoretically investigated the possible vacancies and defects in Te-rich (p-type) and Pb-rich (n-type) conditions for PbTe compounds in terms of various intrinsic and extrinsic defect configurations. From the electronic band structure calculations as well as the formation energy calculations for various defects and doping configurations, we confirmed that Bi and Sb are effective dopants in the n-type case. In addition, when we adopted extrinsic dopants such as excess Pb and Bi, the counterpart complex defects could be easily generated in n-type PbTe.
The thermoelectric properties and lattice parameter changes in Pb-excess-doped PbTe and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds could be understood by theoretical calculations in terms of various defects. The abnormal increase in the lattice parameter of PbTe doped with excess Pb could be ascribed to the contribution of various defects in the order Pb interstitial Pbint, Pb–Te anti-site defect PbTe–TePb, and complex defect cluster Pbint–2PbTe. The charge compensation effect due to the intrinsic defect configurations of VTe2+ and Pbint2+ point defects and anionic cluster-type defects gave rise to unconventional electrical transport properties with respect to the Pb excess concentration in Pb1+xTe.
The cluster-type defects were easily generated in Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe compounds. The complex cluster defects of Pb1−xBixTe compounds not only suppressed the doping efficiency but also gave rise to a complex scattering mechanism. The charge compensation effect between the intrinsic defects and cluster-type defect configurations was beneficial for fine tuning the optimal carrier concentration. The formation of complex defects increased the scattering exponent, resulting in the enhancement in the Seebeck coefficient.
This investigation strongly suggests that when we adopt extrinsic doping, various intrinsic vacancies and defects are generated simultaneously, affecting the electrical and thermal transport properties. Therefore, a detailed understanding and well-defined defect control are very important for fine tuning the carrier optimization in order to increase the thermoelectric performance, which can be applied in many other thermoelectric or chalcogenide material systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. S. R. was supported by the Materials and Components Technology Development Program of MOTIE/KEIT (10063286), Republic of Korea. B. K. R and S. D. P. were supported by Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute (KERI) Primary Research Program through the National Research Council and Technology (NST) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) of the Republic of Korea (No. 19-12-N0101-22).
Notes and references
L. D. Zhao, H. J. Wu, S. Q. Hao, C. I. Wu, X. Y. Zhou, K. Biswas, J. Q. He, T. P. Hogan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3346–3355 RSC .
Z. Chen, Z. Jian, W. Li, Y. Chang, B. Ge, R. Hanus, J. Yang, Y. Chen, M. Huang, G. J. Snyder and Y. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606768 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ahn, M.-K. Han, J. He, J. Androulakis, S. Ballikaya, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5227–5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. König, M. D. Nielsen, Y.-B. Gao, M. Winkler, A. Jacquot, H. Böttner and J. P. Heremans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205126 CrossRef .
J. Androulakis, I. Todorov, D.-Y. Chung, S. Ballikaya, G. Wang, C. Uher and M. Kanatzidis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 115209 CrossRef .
Y. Pei, X. Shi, A. LaLonde, H. Wang, L. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Nature, 2011, 473, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat, K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka and G. J. Snyder, Science, 2008, 321, 554–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Heremans, B. Wiendlocha and A. M. Chamoire, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5510–5530 RSC .
K. Biswas, J. He, I. D. Blum, C. I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Wu, L.-D. Zhao, F. S. Zheng, D. Wu, Y. L. Pei, X. Tong, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Q. He, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4, 4515 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ginting, C.-C. Lin, R. Lydia, H. S. So, H. Lee, J. Hwang, W. Kim, R. A. R. A. Orabi and J.-S. Rhyee, Acta Mater., 2017, 131, 98–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pei, A. F. May and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Z. Luo, S. Hao, X. Zhang, X. Hua, S. Cai, G. Tan, T. P. Bailey, R. Ma, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3220–3230 RSC .
M.-S. Kim, W.-J. Lee, K.-H. Cho, J.-P. Ahn and Y.-M. Sung, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7197–7207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Yamini, H. Wang, D. Ginting, D. R. G. Mitchell, S. X. Dou and G. J. Snyder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11476–11483 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. J. Goldsmid, Introduction to Thermoelectricity, Springer, Heidelberg,  2009 Search PubMed .
E. S. Toberer, A. F. May and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 624–634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. S. Dyck, B. M. Hernandez and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4982–4983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas, J. He, Q. Zhang, G. Wang, C. Uher, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, A. LaLonde, S. Iwanaga and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2085–2089 RSC .
Y. Pei, A. D. LaLonde, N. A. Heinz, X. Shi, S. Iwanaga, H. Wang, L. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5674–5678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, A. D. LaLonde, N. A. Heinz and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 670–675 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, F. Cao, W. Liu, K. Lukas, B. Yu, S. Chen, C. Opeil, D. Broido, G. Chen and Z. Ren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10031–10038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. LaLonde, Y. Pei and G. J. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2090–2096 RSC .
C.-C. Lin, G. Kim, D. Ginting, K. Ahn and J.-S. Rhyee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10927–10934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Ning and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 223–229 RSC .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2591–2610 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Fu, V. Ramalingam, H. Kim, C.-H. Lin, X. Fang, H. N. Alshareef and J.-H. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 12, 1900180 CrossRef .
A. Manikandan, L. Lee, Y.-C. Wang, C.-W. Chen, Y.-Z. Chen, H. Medina, J.-Y. Tseng, Z. M. Wang and Y.-L. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13320–13328 RSC .
J. R. D. Retamal, C.-H. Ho, K.-T. Tsai, J.-J. Ke and J.-H. He, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 938–943 CAS .
H. Jin, J. Li, J. Iocozzia, X. Zeng, P.-C. Wei, C. Yang, N. Li, Z. Liu, J. H. He, T. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Lin and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. DOI:10.1002/anie.201901106 .
S. Ahmad, K. Hoang and S. D. Mahanti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 056403 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ahmad, S. D. Mahanti, K. Hoang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 155205 CrossRef .
S. Bajaj, G. S. Pomrehn, J. W. Doak, W. Gierlotka, H.-j. Wu, S.-W. Chen, C. Wolverton, W. A. Goddard and G. Jeffrey Snyder, Acta Mater., 2015, 92, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goyal, P. Gorai, E. S. Toberer and V. Stevanović, npj Comput. Mater., 2017, 3, 42 CrossRef .
K. Hoang, S. D. Mahanti and P. Jena, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 115432 CrossRef .
B. Ryu, M.-W. Oh, J. K. Lee, J. E. Lee, S.-J. Joo, B.-S. Kim, B.-K. Min, H.-W. Lee and S.-D. Park, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 015705 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, W. Li, C. Chang, Y. Chen, L. Huang, J. He and L.-D. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 724, 208–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiong, G. Lee, R. P. Gupta, W. Wang, B. E. Gnade and K. Cho, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 405403 CrossRef .
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, B864–B871 CrossRef .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–A1138 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .
G. K. H. Madsen and D. J. Singh, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2006, 175, 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 5, 024006 CrossRef .
M. H. Lee, D.-G. Byeon, J.-S. Rhyee and B. Ryu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2235–2242 RSC .
C. Freysoldt, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, G. Kresse, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2014, 86, 253–305 CrossRef .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th edn,  2005, ch. 8, p. 207 Search PubMed.
D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 195217 CrossRef .
K. V. Narasimham, J. C. Joshi, K. N. Chopra, C. Jagadish and A. L. Dawar, Infrared Phys., 1983, 23, 349–353 CrossRef CAS .
N. Piccioli, J. M. Besson and M. Balkanski, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1974, 35, 971–977 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Tauber, A. A. Machonis and I. B. Cadoff, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 4855–4860 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Brebrick and E. Gubner, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 36, 1283–1289 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Scanlon, Phys. Rev., 1962, 126, 509–513 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Sealy and A. J. Crocker, J. Mater. Sci., 1973, 8, 1737–1743 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Bis and J. R. Dixon, J. Appl. Phys., 1969, 40, 1918–1921 CrossRef CAS .
F. Masatomo and S. Yasuo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 5, 128 CrossRef .
M. Orihashi, Y. Noda, L. Chen and T. Hirai, Mater. Trans., 2000, 41, 1196–1201 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tan, C. C. Stoumpos, S. Wang, T. P. Bailey, L.-D. Zhao, C. Uher and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700099 CrossRef .
J. E. Ni, E. D. Case, K. N. Khabir, R. C. Stewart, C.-I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, E. J. Timm, S. N. Girard and M. G. Kanatzidis, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 170, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
C. Erginsoy, Phys. Rev., 1950, 79, 1013 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Z.-G. Chen, M. Hong, L. Wang, D. Kong, L. Huang, G. Han, Y. Zou, M. Dargusch and J. Zou, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rosi, Solid-State Electron., 1968, 11, 833–868 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04220bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 		 
Eb[D1, D2, …, Dn] = EFORM[D1] + EFORM[D2] + … + EFORM[Dn] − EFORM[D1, D2, …, Dn]

 	Fig. 1  Temperature-dependent Seebeck coefficient S(T) (a) and power factor (c) of p-type PbTe and the Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b) and power factor (d) of n-type PbTe compounds for various carrier densities, as indicated, from the Boltzmann transport calculations coupled with DFT band structures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Pisarenko plot of isothermal Seebeck coefficient with respect to the carrier concentration S(n) at various temperatures, as indicated for p- and n-type PbTe.	 

 	Fig. 3  Theoretical formation energy calculations of intrinsic point defects in PbTe as a function of the Fermi level in Te-rich (a) and Pb-rich (b) conditions for Pb vacancy (red dot-dash line), Te vacancy (grey dot line), Pb interstitial (yellow dot-dash line), Te interstitial (blue dashed line), Pb anti-site defect at Te-site PbTe (green dot-dashed line), Te anti-site defect at Pb-site TePb (blue dot-dashed line), Bi substitutional defect at Pb-site BiPb (black solid line), and Sb substitutional defect at Pb-site SbPb (black dashed line).	 

 	Fig. 4  Electronic band structures of PbTe with respect to various intrinsic defects are presented: pristine PbTe (a), Pb vacancy Pbvac (b), Te vacancy Tevac (c), Pb interstitial Pbint (d), Te interistitial Teint (e), Pb anti-site defect at Te site PbTe (f), Te anti-site defect at Pb site TePb (g), and the complex defect of Pbint–2PbTe (h). The valence band maximum is set to zero for defect formation energy and band structure calculations. The grey and red lines represent the electronic band structures of bulk PbTe without and with the point impurity defects, respectively. The green lines indicate the Fermi level of each PbTe system.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electronic band structures of n-type doped PbTe doped with various dopants. The dopants are substitutional-type dopants at the Pb site except for iodine at the Te site (g): (a) La-doped PbTe (LaPb), (b) Hf-doped PbTe (HfPb), (c) Ta-doped PbTe (TaPb), (d) In-doped PbTe (InPb), (e) Bi-doped PbTe (BiPb), (f) Sb-doped PbTe (SbPb), (g) I-doped PbTe (ITe), and (h) Sn-doped PbTe (SnPb).	 

 	Fig. 6  Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of Pb excess doped PbTe (a) and Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  Variation of the lattice parameters for Pb1+xTe and Pb1−xBixTe (a). Hall carrier density nH for Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe and Pb excess Pb1+xTe (b) and La-doped Pb1−xLaxTe compounds (c) with respect to the doping concentration x at 300 K. Material hardness of Sb-, Bi-doped, and Pb excess PbTe compounds (d).	 


VPb	−0.34	1.981	1.249	—
VTe	−0.26	1.211	1.942	—
Pbint	0.8	1.685	2.416	—
Teint	0.72	3.179	2.447	—
PbTe	−0.06	1.323	2.786	—
TePb	−0.25	2.435	0.972	—
PbTe–TePb	0.07	2.360	2.360	1.398
(Pb–Pb)Te	0.76	2.540	4.735	0.467
(Te–Te)Pb	0.68	5.046	2.852	0.567
Pbint–2(PbTe)	0.62	2.814	6.472	1.516

 	Fig. 8  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of PbTe doped with excess Pb: the electrical conductivity σ(T) (a), Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b), total thermal conductivity κ(T) (c) and lattice thermal conductivity κL(T) (d) for Pb1+xTe (x = 0, 0.04 and 0.08). Inset of (d) represents the temperature-dependent Lorenz number.	 


BiPb	−0.02	0.043	0.409	—
BiTe	−0.04	0.050	1.879	—
Biint	0.81	1.579	2.677	—
(Bi2)Pb	0.77	1.404	2.867	0.219
(Bi2)Te	0.89	0.994	3.920	0.636
BiPb + BiTe	0	−0.510	1.684	0.604
2BiPb	−0.03	0.118	0.849	−0.031
2BiPb + VPb	−0.24	0.810	0.810	1.257
3BiPb + VPb	−0.29	0.717	1.083	1.393

 	Fig. 9  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of Bi-doped Pb1−xBixTe: the electrical conductivity σ(T) (a), Seebeck coefficient S(T) (b), total thermal conductivity κ(T) (c), and lattice thermal conductivity κL(T) (d) for Pb1−xBixTe (x = 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4%). Inset of (d) represents the temperature-dependent Lorenz number.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Temperature-dependent thermoelectric performance. Power factor (a) and dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT (b) for Pb-excess PbTe; power factor (c) and dimensionless figure-of-merit ZT (d) for Pb1−xBixTe.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta04220b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
