The role of the capping agent and nanocrystal size in photoinduced hydrogen evolution using CdTe/CdS quantum dot sensitizers   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0DT01195A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01195A
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 10212-10223The role of the capping agent and nanocrystal size in photoinduced hydrogen evolution using CdTe/CdS quantum dot sensitizers†

        
          
            Elisabetta 
            Benazzi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Valerio C. 
            Coni
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mattia 
            Boni
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Raffaello 
            Mazzaro
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vittorio 
            Morandi
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mirco 
            Natali
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Via L. Borsari 46, 44121, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: elisabetta.benazzi@unife.it; mirco.natali@unife.it
bCNR-IMM Bologna, Via P. Gobetti 101, 40139 Bologna, Italy
cCentro Interuniversitario per la Conversione Chimica dell'Energia Solare (SolarChem), sez. Di Ferrara, Via L. Borsari 46, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
Received 
      31st March 2020
    , Accepted 26th June 2020First published on 30th June 2020AbstractHydrogen production via light-driven water splitting is a key process in the context of solar energy conversion. In this respect, the choice of suitable light-harvesting units appears as a major challenge, particularly as far as stability issues are concerned. In this work, we report on the use of CdTe/CdS QDs as photosensitizers for light-assisted hydrogen evolution in combination with a nickel bis(diphosphine) catalyst (1) and ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor. QDs of different sizes (1.7–3.4 nm) and with different capping agents (MPA, MAA, and MSA) have been prepared and their performance assessed in the above-mentioned photocatalytic reaction. Detailed photophysical studies have been also accomplished to highlight the charge transfer processes relevant to the photocatalytic reaction. Hydrogen evolution is observed with remarkable efficiencies when compared to common coordination compounds like Ru(bpy)32+ (where bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) as light-harvesting units. Furthermore, the hydrogen evolution performance under irradiation is strongly determined by the nature of the capping agent and the QD size and can be related to the concentration of the surface defects within the semiconducting nanocrystal. Overall, the present results outline how QDs featuring large quantum yields and long lifetimes are desirable to achieve sustained hydrogen evolution upon irradiation and that a precise control of the structural and photophysical properties thus appears as a major requirement towards profitable photocatalytic applications.
Introduction
The economic progress and the constant demographic increase in the world population have led to a drastic enhancement in the global energy demand. How to meet this request has become a central topic for scientific research. The use of fossil fuels would imply a further increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels with catastrophic consequences on climate change.1 The solution to the energy problem must be an energy source that is abundant, cheap, and with low environmental impact. Solar energy is the most suitable candidate for this purpose; it has an irradiating power of 120000 TW and in nature is used to support photosynthetic organisms capable of converting carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates and molecular oxygen (natural photosynthesis).2 Hence, the development of an efficient artificial photosynthetic system, generating fuel with sunlight, can provide a valid alternative to tackle the global energy issue.
The use of hydrogen as an energy vector, in particular, is a technically feasible approach.3,4 Direct methods for generating hydrogen and oxygen via water splitting using solar irradiation are under development. However, important challenges still need to be addressed before a low-cost, highly efficient, and environmentally benign technology is established. To achieve the reductive side of water splitting, a number of approaches have been investigated. The most extensively studied are molecular and/or materials-based systems.5–10 Concerning molecular ones, light-driven proton reduction to dihydrogen can be driven by systems consisting of three main components: a sacrificial electron donor (SED), a light harvesting unit (PS), and a hydrogen evolution catalyst (HEC).11–13 These systems provide a unique way to test new sensitizer and/or catalyst units and allow a favourable description of mechanistic aspects related to the coupling of such components in view of potential applications.11 The appropriate choice of the photosensitizer is a crucial parameter in light-driven proton reduction. Complexes of ruthenium(II), iridium(III), rhenium(I), or platinum(II)14–22 and metalloporphyrins23–30 are among the most widely employed chromophores. However, one of the vital problems of these systems is the low stability along with H2 generation in aqueous solutions, due to the competitive decomposition pathways. From this viewpoint, quantum dots may represent a valid alternative.
Quantum dots (QDs), also known as semiconductor nanocrystals, are under heavy investigation in many research fields due to their unique optical properties such as broad absorption and narrow emission with peak positions tunable by their sizes and bandwidths controllable to a certain degree by their size distribution.31 QD preparation requires the nucleation in the nm scale of the semiconducting material through the use of suitable stabilizing agents that cover the surface of the QDs acting as a protective layer. Furthermore, by varying the chemical nature of the surface agent, it is possible to select the environment in which the QDs can be solubilized. Photocatalytic hybrid systems that combine molecular catalysts and semiconductor nanoparticles, such as CdX (where X = S, Se, and Te),32–37 ZnS,38,39 and CdSe/ZnS40 as well as cadmium-free CuInS2/ZnS41 as light-harvesting materials, have been successfully reported in recent years. From this perspective, the use of CdTe QDs as sensitizers for hydrogen evolution is not common and is limited to a few cases. In the first reports, MPA-capped CdTe QDs have been used in combination with natural hydrogenases for the production of hydrogen under visible-light irradiation.42,43 A system based on CdTe QDs has been studied by Sun and co-workers, coupled to cobalt catalysts characterized by sulfur-based binders to promote the formation of sensitizer/catalyst hybrids.44 This approach was extremely favourable, showing high activity towards the reduction of protons to hydrogen with remarkable stability. At the same time, Llobet and co-workers studied in detail the photocatalytic performance and mechanism of hydrogen evolution promoted by CdTe QDs in combination with a macrocyclic cobalt complex as a HEC.45 However, a thorough understanding of the impact of the particle size, stabilizing agents, etc. of QDs on the photocatalytic performance of related three-component systems is currently elusive. Starting from these considerations, in this work, we have studied light-driven hydrogen evolution in a three-component system composed of mixed CdTe/CdS QDs as sensitizers, a nickel Dubois complex (1) as catalyst (HEC),46,47 and ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Summary of the components used in this study and related working principles. 
QDs of different sizes were prepared using three different stabilizing agents. An assessment of the photocatalytic properties towards hydrogen evolution along with the corresponding photophysical characteristics suggests that minimization of the surface defects of the semiconducting nanocrystal is imperative in order to attain enhanced hydrogen evolution under illumination.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and characterization
The synthesis of the QDs was carried out in an aqueous solution using an established protocol, by the reaction of CdCl2 and K2TeO3 in the presence of a capping agent and NaBH4.48 Three different stabilizing agents were used (Scheme 1): mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), mercaptosuccinic acid (MSA), and mercaptoacetic acid (MAA). Since the properties of the resulting QDs are expected to depend on the molar ratio of the reactants, pH, temperature, etc., we adopted the optimized conditions used by Wu and co-workers48 (see Experimental section). By controlling the reaction time, QDs having specific optical properties were obtained. In all three cases, as the reaction time increases, a red shift of both the absorption and emission spectra occurs which is attributed to the narrowing of the band gap as a result of the increase in the nanoparticle size. In Fig. 1a are displayed the absorption spectra of QDs with an MPA capping agent obtained at different reaction times, while in Fig. 1b are reported the corresponding emission profiles. These spectral profiles are consistent with the obtainment of water-soluble QDs.48
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption and (b) emission spectra of MPA QDs (2.6–8.9 μM depending on the size)50 in aqueous solution at pH 10.5 (excitation was performed at the excitonic absorption maximum). 
The absorption spectra of all samples are characterized by a featuring band in the visible region (with the maxima between 450 and 600 nm depending on the sample), attributable to the excitonic transition, and an absorption tail at shorter wavelengths. The emission spectra show a main contribution arising from the direct exciton deactivation, characteristic of QDs based on cadmium chalcogenides and characterized by a small Stokes shift, plus some less intense contributions at longer wavelengths, particularly evident for short reaction times, attributable to emission from trap states.49 Similar trends were observed for both the MAA- and MSA-capped QDs (Fig. S1 and S2,† respectively), although the reaction proceeds faster using MSA as a stabilizing agent. To evaluate the photocatalytic properties of QDs towards hydrogen evolution, we decided to isolate samples with two specific sizes for all the three capping agents with absorption maxima in the range of 510–520 and 550–570 nm and corresponding to nanocrystals featuring either green or yellow luminescence, respectively. For these samples, using an established protocol,50 it is possible to estimate the average diameter of the nanoparticles as 2.7(±0.1) and 3.3(±0.1) nm, respectively. At the same time, different MPA-capped QDs featuring absorption maxima at 481 nm, 502 nm, and 538 nm were isolated for the photocatalytic tests, corresponding to nanoparticles with average diameters of 1.7, 2.4, and 3.1 nm.50 For all these samples, emission quantum yields were estimated using either rhodamine or fluorescein as standards (Table 1).51 Furthermore, time-resolved emission decays were recorded by TC-SPC (Fig. S3–S11†). As expected, the decays were not mono-exponential and were fit using a tri-exponential function. An average lifetime (〈τ〉) was estimated as the weighted average of the three components (Table 1). From these data it was possible to calculate the values of both the radiative (kR) and non-radiative rate constants (kNR).
Table 1 Emission quantum yield (Φ), lifetime (τ), radiative (kR) and non-radiative rate constants (kNR) of MAA, MPA and MSA QDs




QDsa
〈τ〉b (ns)

Φ




k
Rd (107 s−1)

k
NRe (107 s−1)





a Diameters were calculated according to ref. 50 from the absorption spectrum.
b Weighted average lifetime from a triexponential fitting.
c Calculated using either rhodamine 6G (ethanol) or fluorescein (0.1 M NaOH) as standards.
d Calculated from the equation Φ = kR·τ.
e Calculated from the equation τ = 1/(kR + kNR).






MAA, d = 2.6 nm
14
0.13
0.9
6.2



MAA, d = 3.2 nm
17
0.20
1.2
4.4



MSA, d = 2.8 nm
24
0.35
1.4
2.7



MSA, d = 3.4 nm
36
0.32
0.9
1.9



MPA, d = 1.7 nm
15
0.14
0.9
6.5



MPA, d = 2.4 nm
19
0.23
1.2
4.1



MPA, d = 2.8 nm
27
0.30
1.1
2.6



MPA, d = 3.1 nm
35
0.38
1.1
1.7



MPA, d = 3.3 nm
44
0.49
1.1
1.2




A closer inspection of the emission data clearly suggests that the radiative constants are appreciably independent of the capping agent and nanoparticle size (∼107 s−1). In contrast, the non-radiative rate constant increases from MPA- to MSA- and finally to MAA-capped QDs, while it decreases with increasing nanoparticle size for all samples. This trend is in apparent contradiction with the energy-gap-law considerations and can be explained in terms of different contents of surface defects.52 A high concentration of surface defects involves the presence of intra band-gap electronic states that act as favourable intermediates towards exciton deactivation and electron–hole recombination.
Combined HR-TEM and EDS analyses were performed on all the differently capped QDs featuring the most red-shifted absorption in order to obtain additional information on the QD morphology and composition. Low magnification TEM images of the three QD samples are depicted in Fig. 2a–c and show only slight aggregation due to the deposition process. EDS analysis (Table S1†) confirms the presence of Cd, Te, and S within all samples. The relative concentration is also reported, but it should be considered qualitative due to the limited size of the nanocrystal. An increasing Te content is evidenced by shifting from MPA-capped QDs to MSA- and MAA-capped ones. The elements are homogeneously distributed along the QDs, as displayed by the STEM-EDS profile reported in Fig. 2h. Cd, S and Te-related signals are indeed simultaneously rising upon performing the EDS analysis on a single QD (an MAA-capped sample reported as an example). Size distribution analysis was then performed based on the STEM micrographs (Fig. 2g). Average diameters of 3.0(±0.4), 3.8(±0.9), and 3.5(±0.7) nm were estimated for MPA-, MAA-, and MSA-capped QDs, in fairly good agreement with the theoretically predicted values.50 HR-TEM micrographs were collected to obtain further insights into the QD composition. Interestingly, all QDs are crystalline in nature, as displayed by the relative fast Fourier transform analysis (Fig. 2d–f), which displays the typical diffraction fringes of single domain nanocrystals. However, the pattern observed was mainly compatible with the crystal lattice of CdS phases, in particular with zincblende (cubic), for all QDs and Wurtzite (hexagonal) for MAA-capped QDs only. This is consistent with the XRD analysis reported by Wu and co-workers48 on the same QDs and can be similarly attributed to the formation of a thick CdS shell onto a CdTe core occurring via degradation of the sulfur-based capping agent during the course of the reaction. The possibility of CdS to act as a protective shell for the CdTe core might effectively passivate the CdTe QD surface and explain the progressive enhancement in terms of luminescence quantum yield and lifetime observed upon increasing the QDs’ size (see above, Table 1).48 Nevertheless, we also ought to consider that the present results, and in particular the observed homogeneous elemental distribution (Fig. 2h), strongly support the hypothesis that, instead of core–shell nanoparticles, the synthetic procedure here adopted leads to the formation of nanoparticles featuring a mixed CdS/CdTe phase in which the Te2− anions act as the dopant of CdS QDs.53,54 However, since the decomposition of the capping agent occurs in parallel with the growth of the CdTe nanocrystal, it is very likely that contribution from a CdS phase might be particularly relevant for QDs of larger size such as the ones examined herein. Thus, in this latter option, a higher CdS content with increasing the QD size may be beneficial for the improvement of the luminescence properties, as experimentally observed.
 Fig. 2  Low magnification TEM images of (a) MPA-, (b) MSA-, and (c) MAA-capped QDs; (d–f) high magnification HR-TEM detail of a single quantum dot and relative fast Fourier transform analysis for MPA-, MSA-, and MAA-capped QDs, respectively, displaying in all cases the typical pattern of the [1,1,0] CdS zincblende cubic phase; (g) size distribution analysis obtained in the STEM-HAADF mode of MPA-, MSA-, and MAA-capped QDs; (h) elemental distribution along a linear profile of MAA-capped QDs, displayed in the reference STEM-HAADF micrograph in the inset, in which Cd, S, and Te distribution is reported to understand QD composition. 
Thermodynamic considerations
Before investigating the performance of the three-component system with respect to light-driven hydrogen evolution, we first evaluated the thermodynamic feasibility of the whole photochemical process. This can be conceived as a series of consecutive one-electron redox reactions in which the electrons supplied by the ascorbate donor are used for the reduction of two protons to dihydrogen through the use of light and a catalyst. A general energy scheme relevant to the photocatalytic reduction of hydrogen promoted by QDs as sensitizers in combination with Dubois-type catalyst 1 and ascorbate (AscH−) as a sacrificial agent is shown in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 production using QDs as sensitizers, ascorbic acid as the sacrificial agent, and 1 as the catalyst: (a) first and (b) second electron transfer sequence. 
The excitation of QDs involves an electron promotion from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) as the hole in the VB has to be filled by electron transfer from the ascorbate donor and the electron in the CB has to be employed for the reduction of the catalyst. This process has to take place twice to allow the accumulation of two reducing equivalents on the catalyst that are able to carry out the two-electron reduction of protons to hydrogen.
The redox processes involving protons and ascorbate are of proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) nature; therefore, they are pH dependent (E(H+/H2) = 0 V and E(Asc˙−/AscH−) = +0.71 V vs. NHE at pH 0).55,56 Concerning the nickel complex 1, the relevant potentials to be considered, measured in acetonitrile, are E(Ni(II)/Ni(I)) = −0.25 V vs. NHE and E(Ni(I)/Ni(0)) = −0.41 V vs. NHE, according to the most likely EECC catalytic mechanism.46 In order to determine the potentials associated with the CB and VB of all QDs considered, we employed a procedure recently reported by Llobet and co-workers.45 The potential values estimated are reported in Table 2. We first estimated the spectroscopic energy (E00) from the intersection between the normalized absorption and the emission spectra (Fig. 1, S1 and S2†). Then, the cyclic voltammetry of the samples under anodic scan (Fig. S12–S14†) was performed to extract the VB potential. This value is comparable for all the QDs tested and also to that of MPA-capped CdTe QDs previously reported (+0.94 V vs. NHE, as obtained by CV).45 Then, the difference between the potential of the VB and the spectroscopic energy yields the potential of the CB (Table 2).‡ From the data collected, it can be argued that all the photoinduced electron transfer processes leading to hydrogen formation are thermodynamically allowed for all samples. In particular, the ET from the ascorbate donor to the VB displays comparable driving forces independent of the size and capping agent used. In contrast, the ET from the CB to the catalyst 1 becomes more exergonic upon the reduction of the nanocrystal size. The capping agent has a marginal, but non-negligible, role in the energetics of the ET from the CB of QDs to the catalyst, with the MAA QD samples displaying slightly larger driving forces than MPA and lastly than MSA.
Table 2 Valence band potential (EVB), conduction band potential (ECB), and spectroscopic energy (E00) of QDs




QDs

E
VBa (V)

E
CBb (V)

E
00 (eV)





a Potentials estimated by CV (see Fig. S12–S14†) and referenced to NHE upon addition of +0.24 V.
b Estimated as the difference between the oxidation potential and the spectroscopic energy E00.






MAA, d = 2.6 nm
+1.00
−1.30
2.30



MAA, d = 3.2 nm
+1.02
−1.17
2.19



MSA, d = 2.8 nm
+1.00
−1.23
2.23



MSA, d = 3.4 nm
+1.01
−1.10
2.10



MPA, d = 1.7 nm
+0.99
−1.31
2.30



MPA, d = 2.4 nm
+1.01
−1.24
2.25



MPA, d = 2.8 nm
+1.00
−1.21
2.21



MPA, d = 3.1 nm
+0.99
−1.20
2.19



MPA, d = 3.3 nm
+1.01
−1.13
2.14




Light-driven hydrogen evolution
The photocatalytic performances were assessed upon the visible-light irradiation of aqueous solutions of QDs with a suitable size and with the proper capping agent as directly obtained from the synthetic protocol reported above. The addition of catalyst 1 and appropriate amounts of ascorbic acid and sodium ascorbate to provide a pH = 5 was made prior to oxygen removal (by purging with Ar) and subsequent irradiation. The choice of the pH conditions is dictated by a two-fold reason: (i) pH 5 is the optimum pH for hydrogen evolution in aqueous solution catalysed by the nickel complex 1,46 (ii) at lower pH, MAA, MPA, and MSA-capped QDs are not stable in aqueous solution due to the protonation of the carboxylate groups and subsequent precipitation.
We first started to examine light-driven hydrogen evolution upon the irradiation of the three-component system containing red QDs (3.3(±0.1) nm diameter) having MPA as the capping agent and optimized the conditions by varying the concentration of either the nickel catalyst or the sacrificial agent. The preliminary considerations on the performance of the process can be drawn by looking at the kinetics shown in Fig. 3 and 4. Attention has been paid to the estimation of the hydrogen evolution rates, extracted from the slope of the curves in the linear section, and to the maximum quantity of hydrogen produced, represented by the plateau value, and to the corresponding values of maximum TOF and TON, respectively, obtained by normalizing the maximum rate and amount of H2 produced by the catalyst concentration.
 Fig. 3  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation for MPA QDs with d = 3.3 nm by varying the concentration of 1 ([QDs] = 2.6 μM, buffer ascorbate = 1.68 M, pH = 5, Ar-purged solutions) and (b) corresponding maximum TONs and TOFs. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation for MPA QDs with d = 3.3 nm by varying the concentration of ascorbate at pH 5 ([QDs] = 2.6 μM, [1] = 50 μM, Ar-purged solutions) and (b) corresponding maximum TONs and TOFs. 
Upon continuous visible-light irradiation of the three-component system, hydrogen production is observed, as detected by GC analysis, for up to 8 h. In the presence of 1.68 M ascorbic acid at pH 5, both the hydrogen evolution rate and maximum amount of hydrogen produced increase with the increase in catalyst concentration from 16 μM to 50 μM (Fig. 3a). Maximum TONs between 480 and 780 and maximum TOFs between 2.0 and 4.1 min−1 can be estimated under these conditions, with the highest values attained at the lowest catalyst concentration tested (Fig. 3b). Control experiments conducted in the absence of the nickel complex 1 show that negligible hydrogen is produced (maximum quantity of ∼2 μmol after 8 h of irradiation), suggesting the key role of the nickel complex in accelerating hydrogen production. On the other hand, by fixing the catalyst concentration at 50 μM and varying the quantity of the ascorbate donor in the solution at pH 5, both the rate and the amount of hydrogen produced at plateau are maximized for a 1.68 M concentration of sacrificial agent (Fig. 4). We then decided to test the MPA QDs of different colours and sizes, namely 1.7, 2.4, 2.8, and 3.1, and QDs with comparable size but different capping agents. Concentrations of 50 μM and 1.68 M of catalyst 1 and sacrificial agent, respectively, were employed, corresponding to the optimized conditions extracted for MPA-capped QDs.
From the comparison in Fig. 5a and b it can be observed that, under full spectrum irradiation, QDs with decreasing size exhibit lower hydrogen evolution rates and total amount of product at plateau. Interestingly, this is true in the case of all stabilizing agents (Fig. S15 and S16†). At first glance, considering that irradiation is performed with a polychromatic source (xenon lamp, 400–700 nm wavelength range), these differences could be related to the different absorption properties of the QDs since larger (i.e., more red-shifted) QDs are expected to absorb a larger fraction of the incoming light source. In order to rule out this hypothesis, we thus normalized the photocatalytic response and in particular the hydrogen evolution rate by a suitable parameter accounting for the fraction of absorbed photons from the Xe light source (see inset in Fig. 5c). Although the differences in hydrogen evolution rates (and the derived TOF values, Fig. 5c) are somewhat attenuated with this procedure, these results still confirm that the hydrogen evolution performances increase with an increase in the size of the QDs. These results are in contrast to the data reported by Osterloh and co-workers on hydrogen evolution promoted by 2-mercaptoethanol-stabilized CdSe QDs in water at pH 9.2 using Na2SO3 as the sacrificial donor.59,60 Possible reasons can be related to the different nature and energetics of the CdSe QDs as well as the specific synthetic protocol of the CdSe samples used in that work and the corresponding photophysical properties (actually unknown)59,60 compared to those of our QDs. Under optimized conditions, a quantum yield of Φ = 0.6% was estimated for light-driven hydrogen evolution by MPA-capped QDs.§
 Fig. 5  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation at pH = 5 for MPA QDs with different diameters ([QDs] = 2.6–8.9 μM depending on the size,50 buffer ascorbate = 1.68 M, [1] = 50 μM, Ar-purged solutions); (b) corresponding maximum TON and TOF values; (c) maximum TOFs normalized with respect to the fraction of photon absorbed for MPA QDs with different diameters, and (inset) fraction of the Xe lamp emission absorbed by the QDs tested. 
Finally, the effect of the capping agent was considered under identical experimental conditions. Green emissive (d = 2.7(±0.1) nm) MPA- and MSA-capped QDs perform similarly and better than both MAA- capped QDs (Fig. S15†); whereas in the case of yellow emissive (d = 3.3(±0.1) nm) QDs, the MPA-capped sample performs significantly better than both MSA- and MAA-capped QD analogues (Fig. S16†). It should be noticed that, in this respect, all the comparisons have been made by normalizing the TOF parameter with respect to the absorbed photons in order to account for the slightly different absorption properties of the QDs with different capping agents. Overall, in all cases, the MAA- and MPA-capped QDs result as the less efficient and better performing samples, respectively, towards light-driven hydrogen evolution (Fig. S16b†).
As to the turnover limiting reactions, theoretically, the maximum amount of hydrogen that can be produced in a three-component system involving ascorbate as the sacrificial agent corresponds to the number of moles of the electron donor.11 From the comparison between the theoretical and the experimental data, the ascorbate consumed in the conditions of maximum hydrogen production is equal to ca. 20%. Therefore, the photocatalytic activity is not limited by the consumption of the sacrificial agent. The degradation of the coordination complexes used as catalysts is known and observed in systems of this type, thus it may be one of the possible reasons for photocatalysis deactivation.62 At the same time, the deactivation of the QD sensitizers can be considered and is supported by the visual analysis of the photocatalytic mixture which, once the photocatalysis process ceases, presents a brown precipitate. This can be very reasonably ascribed to the progressive aggregation of the nanoparticles, following the breakdown of the binder layers. This hypothesis was further confirmed by the TEM analysis of the precipitate which shows the presence of large aggregates (Fig. S17†). The size distribution, obtained by STEM analysis, is rather polydisperse with nanoparticles displaying an average diameter of ca. 5 nm (Fig. S17†), suggesting a sort of re-crystallization process induced by the photocatalysis experiment. Interestingly, the photocatalysis experiment does not affect the composition of the sample (Table S1†) nor the crystal phase of the QDs. Importantly, this material is inactive towards light-driven hydrogen evolution. As a matter of fact, after the centrifugation and subsequent redispersion of the post-catalytic material in a fresh solution of 1 and ascorbate at pH 5, a negligible amount of hydrogen is produced upon irradiation.
From the data obtained above, two considerations can be made in order to compare the results reported here with those of analogue systems and to rationalize the observed trend in hydrogen evolution performances. (i) Under comparable operating conditions, the MPA-capped QDs are better sensitizers than the Ru(bpy)32+ chromophores in combination with the same nickel catalyst 1 and the ascorbate donor, particularly in terms of the moles of hydrogen produced over time and the corresponding TON value.46 This can be partly explained considering the greater stability of semiconductors with respect to molecular chromophores such as coordination complexes, which are known to display enhanced degradation routes at both the excited state and reduced level.63–65 (ii) The results reported herein for the samples with MPA-capped QDs with 3.3 nm diameter are in line with those previously reported by Llobet and co-workers using red, MPA-capped CdTe QDs in combination with a cobalt macrocyclic complex.45 (iii) The efficiency and performance of the investigated photocatalytic system depend on the characteristics of the QDs, i.e., their size and the stabilizing agent used. This issue will be discussed in more detail hereafter.
Characterization of the photocatalytic system
In order to clarify the origin of the size-dependent activity and the effect of the different capping agents, we first performed a photophysical characterization of the three component system. As reference systems for the following analysis, we took two different samples per capping agents, namely QDs of d = 2.7(±0.1) nm and 3.3(±0.1) nm.
To allow the production of hydrogen as a result of continuous irradiation with QDs as the sensitizers, it is necessary that after excitation the electrons in the conduction band (CB) of the QDs are transferred to the catalyst and the holes in the valence band (VB) are transferred to the sacrificial donor. As previously mentioned, these processes are thermodynamically allowed for all systems. On the other hand, these processes compete with the deactivation associated with the photogenerated electron–hole pair; as a consequence, they have to be fast enough to be efficient. Luminescence measurements on QDs in the presence of different quantities of 1 were performed to verify the feasibility and efficiency of the electron transfer from the CB of the QDs to the nickel complex (Fig. S18–S20†). In all cases, the addition of 1 leads to a decrease of the emission intensity which confirms the occurrence of the electron transfer process here considered. The efficiencies are dependent on the catalyst concentration and range between 33 and 45% for all the samples examined at a concentration of [1] = 50 μM. Stern–Volmer analysis (Fig. S21†) was then applied to the emission data to gain further mechanistic understanding. From the fitting of experimental data according to the equation I0/I = 1 + Ksv [1], Ksv were extracted, which enables the calculation of kQ (Table S2†) from the relationship Ksv = kQ·τ0. The values obtained are in the order of ∼1011 M−1 s−1 and are thus incompatible with a dynamic quenching mechanism. On the contrary, they suggest a predominantly static contribution in which quenching by the catalyst occurs within catalyst/QD adducts formed via pre-association at the ground state level. This association can be promoted either by the presence of carboxylate groups in the catalyst or by electrostatic and/or hydrophobic interactions. The static nature of the quenching process is further supported by time-resolved luminescence measurements which show the same average lifetime for the QDs in the absence and in the presence of complex 1 (Fig. S22†). Based on these considerations, we can state that the efficiency of the oxidative quenching of the excited state depends only on the equilibrium constant for the formation of the hybrid adducts, namely Ksv. Accordingly, quenching by the catalyst is more efficient for QDs with d = 3.3(±0.1) nm. The enhanced surface area in the largest QDs may possibly account for this evidence. Furthermore, the larger driving force for the ET from the CB to the nickel catalyst 1 with decreasing nanocrystal size, as previously inferred from the data in Table 2, does not represent a relevant factor in the efficiency of the catalyst activation step. Finally, no particular differences are found when different capping agents are considered. This may suggest that the efficiency of the electron transfer from the CB to catalyst 1 is not a determining factor in promoting enhanced hydrogen evolution.
We then evaluated the efficiency of the electron transfer process involving the ascorbate donor and the VB of the QDs. The emission spectra of QDs in the presence of 1.68 M ascorbate at pH 5 were thus recorded and compared with those in the absence of the donor (Fig. S23–S25†). From this comparison it can be seen that, in the presence of the sacrificial agent, the emission is red shifted and significantly reduced in intensity. The red shift induced by the ascorbate donor was already observed in QDs at large donor concentrations45 and might be related to the presence of interactions between the QDs and the sacrificial agent, given the high concentration of the latter. On the other hand, the observed quenching of the emission in the presence of ascorbate suggests that the photoinduced electron transfer from the donor to the VB takes place efficiently for all the samples analysed. However, given the observed red shift, estimation of the efficiency of the electron transfer process from the emission spectrum cannot be accurately performed. We thus measured the lifetime by TC-SPC in the presence and absence of ascorbate buffer (Fig. S26–S31†). In all cases, a faster decay of the emission is observed, due to the occurrence of the electron transfer from the ascorbate to the VB of the QDs, and from these values quenching efficiencies ranging from 57 to 95% can be determined (Table S3†). These values are generally higher for the MSA- and MAA-capped QDs than for the MPA-capped ones. This apparently contradicts what is shown in the hydrogen production tests under continuous irradiation, in which the best photocatalytic performances were observed for the MPA samples. Probably, the intrinsic characteristics of the QDs rather than the efficiency of the individual electron transfer processes, play an important role in the performances observed in photocatalysis.
In order to rationalize the trend in the hydrogen evolution activity experimentally determined, we may recall the photophysical results previously described (Table 1) and match these values with the efficiency measured in photocatalytic tests. As a matter of fact, from a closer inspection of the data, it can be observed that longer lifetimes and higher emission quantum yields are always accompanied by faster photocatalytic production of hydrogen under comparable experimental conditions, with MPA QDs of 3.3 nm diameter delivering the highest quantity of hydrogen (120 μmol) after 8 hours of irradiation with faster rates when combined with 50 μM 1 and 1.68 M buffer at pH = 5. As previously outlined, small emission quantum yields and lifetimes are related to enhanced non-radiative deactivations ascribable to a larger concentration of surface defects within the QDs. Surface defects determine the presence of intra-band gap electronic states which may act as competitive recombination channels with respect to the forward charge separation and accumulation processes on the catalyst platform, necessary for efficient hydrogen production. According to these considerations, the MAA- and MSA-capped QDs are expected to possess a greater concentration of surface defects than the MPA QDs of identical size. Also, with the same capping agent, QDs with increasingly smaller sizes prepared using the present synthetic approach48 display a larger concentration of surface defects and a corresponding decrease of hydrogen evolution performance in the three-component system examined. Hence, from the experimental data it can be concluded that, in order to obtain sustained hydrogen evolution using QDs and, more generally, semiconductor nanocrystals, large emission quantum yields and long lifetimes are desirable. Accordingly, a thorough control of the synthetic protocol of the target QDs is of imperative importance as is the detailed assessment of the corresponding photophysical properties. In this respect, the choice of the capping agent and the suitable choice of the nanocrystal size are of remarkable importance towards profitable applications. Consistent with the results reported herein, it is indeed not surprising that most of the photocatalytic systems for H2 production reported to date, using CdTe QDs (or, most likely, mixed CdTe/CdS QDs)48,53,54 as photosensitizers, have been prepared with MPA as the capping agent and employing red absorbing nanocrystals.42,43,45
Charge carrier dynamics in photoassisted H2 evolution
As previously outlined, excitonic charge carriers (i.e., electrons and holes at the band edges) play a determining role in light-driven hydrogen evolution within the three-component system using QDs with 1 and ascorbate as the catalyst and the donor, respectively. However, the previous investigation does not give information as to the potential role of trapped charge carriers within the photocatalytic process. Indeed, while the emission measurements provide information regarding the reactivity of photogenerated electrons and holes in the energy levels characteristic of the exciton (i.e., at the CB and VB band edges, respectively), they do not provide indications as far as the reactivity of charge carriers in trap states is concerned.
In order to characterize the charge carrier dynamics on the basis of photoinduced hydrogen evolution, we chose the best performing system (namely MPA-capped QDs of 3.3 nm diameter) and performed transient absorption spectroscopy measurements by nanosecond laser flash photolysis under the experimental conditions used in the hydrogen evolution tests (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Transient absorption spectra of (a) MPA QDs (2.6 μM), (b) MPA QDs (2.6 μM) in the presence of ascorbate buffer (1.68 M), and (c) MPA QDs (2.6 μM) with both the ascorbate buffer and the nickel catalyst 1 (50 μM), obtained by laser flash photolysis (excitation at 532 nm, Ar-purged solutions). 
In the absence of both the donor and the nickel catalyst 1, the transient spectrum sampled at 180 μs after the laser pulse is characterized by bleaching at wavelengths between 540 and 640 nm and absorption at wavelengths greater than 640 nm (Fig. 6a). The negative signal corresponds to the bleaching of the excitonic transition due to the depopulation of the ground state, while the positive signal is attributable to the absorption of charge carriers, in particular, trapped holes.45,66 This spectrum decays towards the baseline (the isosbestic point at 640 nm and ΔOD = 0) which is consistent with the repopulation of the ground state. The lifetime measured at 580 nm (τ ∼ 7 ms, Fig. S32†) is considerably greater than the one measured by emission. This allows us to infer that the transient spectrum detected here is ascribable to the formation of intra-bandgap states, likely involving both photogenerated electrons and holes, which decay to the ground state in the ms timescale (Fig. 6a).
In the presence of the ascorbate donor, two effects can be observed: (i) the amount of transient sampled at 180 μs (Fig. 6b) is considerably smaller and corresponds to ca half of the same signal in the QDs’ sample alone (Fig. 6a) and (ii) the transient spectrum at 180 μs, previously associated with the charge carriers in the intra-bandgap states, decays more rapidly (τ ∼ 0.4 ms, Fig. S33†), forming an absorption with two maxima at 580 and 620 nm that remains stable in a longer timescale (>10 ms), and can be associated with photogenerated electrons, in analogy to the corresponding fingerprint in other semiconducting materials.67,68
These pieces of evidence confirm that: (i) an aliquot of trap states (ca. a half) is not populated due to the direct (fast) reaction of the holes at the VB edge with the ascorbate donor, according to the emission measurements reported above and (ii) a fraction of surface trapped holes react irreversibly with the ascorbate donor. This reaction sequence leaves long-lived electrons in the QDs as evidenced by the stable, broad absorption in the visible spectrum between 540 and 640 nm.
In the presence of both the ascorbate donor and catalyst 1 (Fig. 6c), the transient spectrum associated with trapped charge carriers decays rapidly (τ ∼ 0.5 ms Fig. S34†) due to the reaction of the holes with the donor as observed before (Fig. 6b). However, the lack of any long-lived positive signals suggests that photogenerated electrons are efficiently and quickly transferred to the nickel catalyst 1.
A resume of the photophysical data is reported in Fig. 7, which combines the previous considerations from steady-state and time-resolved emissions with the transient absorption data.
 Fig. 7  Summary of the primary photoinduced processes with related timescale. 
Accordingly, we can summarize that upon photoexcitation: (i) holes at the VB band edge react in the ns timescale with remarkable efficiency with the ascorbate donor, (ii) a fraction of trapped holes react with the same sacrificial agent in the ms time-scale, and (iii) photogenerated electrons are efficiently transferred to the nickel catalyst 1. As to the latter point, the formation of QDs/catalyst adducts is expected to foster the forward electron transfer cascade at the basis of hydrogen evolution. Rates in the sub-ns timescale are indeed expected according to the time-resolved emission measurements. Nevertheless, the intrinsic high efficiency in the hole-scavenging process and the failure to observe any long-lived electrons in the three-component system (Fig. 5c) very likely suggest that the bimolecular electron transfer processes from the QDs to catalyst 1 might be efficient as well.
The experimental observation of trapped charge carriers by laser flash photolysis points towards an active role of trap states in the photocatalytic process. Similarly, it can also be envisaged that the trap states (in particular deep trap states) may be actively involved in detrimental charge recombination pathways, thus affecting light-driven hydrogen evolution activity, as previously inferred.
Experimental section
Materials and methods
All reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. Milli-Q water was obtained using a Millipore apparatus, equipped with 0.22 μm filters. The nickel complex 1, available from a previous study,46 was used. The absorption spectra were recorded by using a Cary 300 UV-Vis (Agilent Technologies) spectrophotometer. The emission spectra were recorded by using an Edinburgh FLS 920 spectrofluorometer. The emission lifetimes of the same samples were acquired by using a Picoquant Picoharp 300 time correlated single photon counter at a 4 ps resolution by using a 480 nm pulsed LED source. Fitting of the decay histogram was accomplished by a dedicated Fluofit program. Nanosecond transient measurements were performed with a custom laser spectrometer comprising a Continuum Surelite II Nd:YAG laser (FWHM 6–8 ns) with a frequency doubling (532 nm) option and an Applied Photophysics xenon light source including a mod. 720 150 W lamp housing, a mod. 620 power-controlled lamp supply and a mod. 03–102 arc lamp pulser. Laser excitation was provided at 90° with respect to the white light probe beam and was attenuated to an average power of 5 mJ per pulse using a series of neutral density filters (Edmund Optics). The light transmitted by the sample was focused onto the entrance slit of a 300 mm focal length Acton SpectraPro 2300i triple grating, flat field, double exit monochromator equipped with a photomultiplier detector (Hamamatsu R3896). The signals from the photomultiplier (kinetic traces) were processed by means of a TeledyneLeCroy 604Zi (400 MHz, 20 GS s−1) digital oscilloscope.
The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out on a PGSTAT 302N potentiostat (Autolab) in a three-electrode cell, using a saturated calomel electrode (Amel) as the reference electrode, a glassy carbon as the working electrode and a Pt wire as the counter electrode. CV measurements at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 were conducted directly on the aqueous solutions obtained from the synthetic process upon the addition of 0.1 M LiClO4 as the supporting electrolyte.
The high resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM) characterization was carried out by using an FEI Tecnai F20 field emission instrument, operated at 200 keV. The scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode, coupled with high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were employed to perform size distribution analysis and to detect sample composition and elemental distribution. TEM grids were prepared by drop casting the QD solution on a continuous Formvar film coated Cu grid. No evidence of deposition-induced structural change or aggregation was observed.
The light-driven hydrogen evolution experiments were carried out upon continuous visible-light irradiation of a reactor containing the solution (a 10 mm pathlength pyrex glass cuvette with headspace obtained from a round-bottom flask). Solutions were purged using argon gas for 15 minutes prior to irradiation. A 175 W Xenon light was used as the light source, a cut-off filter at λ = 400 nm and a hot mirror were employed providing a suitable irradiation between 400 and 700 nm. The gas phase of the reaction vessel was analysed by using an Agilent Technologies 490 microGC equipped with a 5 Å molecular sieve column (10 m), a thermal conductivity detector, and by using argon as the carrier gas. Additional details of the setup and procedures used for the hydrogen evolution experiments can be found in previous reports.23,64,65
Synthesis of QDs
QDs capped with MAA (mercaptoacetic acid), MPA (mercaptopropionic acid) and MSA (mercaptosuccinic acid) were synthesized according to a literature procedure.48 The molar ratio of Cd2+/stabilizing agent/TeO32− was 1:1:0.2. Briefly, 0.4 mmol of CdCl2 was dissolved into 100 mL of deionized water. Then 0.4 mmol of the stabilizing agent (MAA, MPA or MSA) was added and the pH was adjusted with 1 M NaOH solution to the value of 10.5. After stirring for 5 min, 0.08 mmol of K2TeO3, dissolved in 100 mL of deionized water, was added into the above solution. Then, 160 mg of NaBH4 was added into the precursor solution. After the reactions proceeded for another 5 minutes, the flask was attached to a condenser and refluxed at 100 °C under open-air conditions. By controlling the reaction time, QDs with desired optical properties were obtained.
Conclusions
In this work, CdTe/CdS QDs with different sizes and capping agents (i.e., MPA, MAA and MSA) were synthesized. The samples were characterized by conventional techniques such as UV-visible absorption and emission spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. Structural characterization was accomplished by means of HR-TEM/EDS, which suggests the formation of mixed CdTe/CdS QDs. The synthesized QD samples were tested for photoinduced hydrogen evolution in combination with the nickel DuBois catalyst 1 and ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor. The results show that all the prepared systems are active towards hydrogen production under visible light irradiation, outperforming the standard Ru(bpy)32+ chromophore. QDs with MPA as stabilizing agents and a diameter of d = 3.3 nm were identified as the best sample with maximum quantities of hydrogen produced upon irradiation equal to 120 μmol using 50 μM of 1 and 1.68 M ascorbate at pH 5. More importantly, the efficiency of the photocatalytic system based on QDs improves as the size of the nanoparticles increases and using MPA as the stabilizing agent rather than MAA or MSA. The trend in hydrogen evolution photoactivity parallels the trend in luminescence quantum yield and lifetime and is consistent with a lower surface defectiveness of the QDs with larger dimensions and MPA capping agent. Overall, the present work clearly highlights the role of semiconducting nanocrystals as suitable sensitizers for energy conversion schemes and evidences how a careful adjustment and regulation of the surface properties is of pivotal importance in order to optimize the photocatalytic performance in view of potential applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. N. gratefully acknowledges Dr. Diego Guzmán (Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana, Santiago, Chile) for fruitful discussions. Financial support from the University of Ferrara (FAR2019) is also gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Natali and F. Scandola, Supramolecular artificial photosynthesis, in Applied Photochemistry: When Light Meets Molecules, Lecture Notes in Chemistry, ed. G. Bergamini and S. Silvi, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artero and J. M. Saveant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3808 RSC .
M. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760 RSC .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, K.-R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, D. Wang, L. Alibabaei, D. Ashford and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shan, A. K. Das, S. Marquard, B. H. Farnum, D. Wang, R. M. Bullock and T. J. Meyer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3693 RSC .
Y. Pellegrin and F. Odobel, C. R. Chim., 2017, 20, 283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ladomenou, M. Natali, E. Iengo, G. Charalampidis, F. Scandola and A. G. Coutsolelos, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 304–305, 38 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Andreiadis, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Photochem. Photobiol., 2011, 87, 946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. C. Lo, C. E. Castillo, R. Gueret, J. Fortage, M. Rebarz, M. Sliwa, F. Thomas, C. J. McAdam, G. B. Jameson, D. A. McMorran, J. D. Crowley, M. N. Collomb and A. G. Blackman, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Deponti, A. Luisa, M. Natali, E. Iengo and F. Scandola, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 16345 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Natali, E. Badetti, E. Deponti, M. Gamberoni, F. A. Scaramuzzo, A. Sartorel and C. Zonta, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 14764 RSC .
J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Probst, M. Guttentag, A. Rodenberg, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Probst, A. Rodenberg, M. Guttentag, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Probst, C. Kolano, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, J. Schneider, P. Jarosz and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Li, Y. Chen and W. F. Fu, Catal. Commun., 2014, 45, 91 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Schneider, P. Jarosz, J. Zhang, W. W. Brennessel and R. Eisenberg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Natali, R. Argazzi, C. Chiorboli, E. Iengo and F. Scandola, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lazarides, M. Delor, I. V. Sazanovich, T. M. McCormick, I. Georgakaki, G. Charalambidis, J. A. Weinstein and A. G. Coutsolelos, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 521 RSC .
A. Panagiotopoulos, K. Ladomenou, D. Y. Sun, V. Artero and A. G. Coutsolelos, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 6732 RSC .
G. Landrou, A. A. Panagiotopoulos, K. Ladomenou and A. G. Coutsolelos, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2016, 20, 534 CrossRef CAS .
N. Queyriaux, E. Giannoudis, C. D. Windle, S. Roy, J. Pecaut, A. G. Coutsolelos, V. Artero and M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 553 RSC .
E. Nikoloudakis, K. Karikis, J. J. Han, C. Kokotidou, A. Charisiadis, F. Folias, A. M. Douvas, A. Mitraki, G. Charalambidis, X. H. Yan and A. G. Coutsolelos, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3557 RSC .
S. Salzl, M. Ertl and G. Knor, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8141 RSC .
E. Giannoudis, E. Benazzi, J. Karlsson, C. Graeme, S. Panagiotakis, G. Landrou, P. Angaridis, V. Nikolaou, C. Matthaiaki, G. Charalambidis, E. A. Gibson and A. G. Coutsolelos, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. D. Scholes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1157 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. A. Wheeler and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Jian, Q. Liu, Z. J. Li, F. Wang, X. B. Li, C. B. Li, B. Liu, Q. Y. Meng, B. Chen, K. Feng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2695 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wen, J. Yang, X. Zong, B. Ma, D. Wang and C. Li, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 318 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Li, Z. J. Li, S. Yu, G. X. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Y. Meng, B. Chen, K. Feng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2597 RSC .
C. Baslak, E. Aslan, I. H. Patir, M. Kus and M. Ersoz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 20523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han and R. Eisenberg, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen, X. Wang, L. Huang, G. Ma, J. Yang and C. Li, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 84 CrossRef PubMed .
X. W. Song, H. M. Wen, C. B. Ma, M. Q. Hu, H. H. Cui and C. N. Chen, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 28, 267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, K. L. Mulfort, P. Du and L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sandroni, R. Gueret, K. D. Wegner, P. Reiss, J. Fortage, D. Aldakov and M.-N. Collomb, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1752 RSC .

  (a) K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Greene, C. A. Joseph, M. J. Maroney and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Han, M. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Wu, Y. Yanga and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7008 RSC .
C. Gimbert-Suriñach, J. Albero, T. Stoll, J. Fortage, M.-N. Collomb, A. Deronzier, E. Palomares and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7655 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Bergamini and M. Natali, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14653 RSC .
U. J. Kilgore, J. A. S. Roberts, D. H. Pool, A. M. Appel, M. P. Stewart, M. R. DuBois, W. J. Dougherty, W. S. Kassel, R. M. Bullock and D. L. DuBois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Dou, J. Zhang and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14573 RSC .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakamaru, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1982, 55, 1639 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Houtepen, I. Infante, W. Van der Stam, I. du Fossé, H. A. C. Bergstein, G. Grimaldi, R. W. Crisp, J. O. V. Monchen and N. Kirkwood, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15712 CrossRef .
H. Qian, C. Dong, J. Weng and J. Ren, Small, 2006, 2, 747 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ying, D. Li, S. Guo, S. Dong and J. Wang, PLoS One, 2008, 3, e2222 CrossRef .
M. Natali, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1330 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. J. Bielski, A. O. Allen and H. A. Schwarz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 3516 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Wang, W. G. Wang, X. J. Wang, H. Y. Wang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3193 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. J. Li, X. B. Fan, X. B. Li, J. X. Li, C. Ye, J. J. Wang, S. Yu, C. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Q. Y. Meng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rajh, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11999 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Holmes, T. K. Townsend and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 371 RSC .
J. Zhao, M. A. Holmes and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Natali, F. Nastasi, F. Puntoriero and A. Sartorel, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 2019, 2027 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Eckenhoff, W. R. McNamara, P. Du and R. Eisenberg, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2013, 1827, 958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Khnayzer, V. S. Thoi, M. Nippe, A. E. King, J. W. Jurss, K. A. El Roz, J. R. Long, C. J. Chang and F. N. Castellano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1477 RSC .
M. Natali, A. Luisa, E. Iengo and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1842 RSC .
E. Deponti and M. Natali, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9136 RSC .
M. Abdellah, K. J. Karki, N. Lenngren, K. Zheng, T. Pascher, A. Yartsev and T. Pullerits, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21682 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas, X. Wang, S. R. Pendlebury, P. Barnes, M. Ling, C. Sotelo-Vazquez, R. Quesada-Cabrera, C. Li, I. P. Parkin and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Godin, Y. Wang, M. A. Zwijneenburg, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammetry, results from TC-SPC, other photocatalytic results. See DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01195A‡ The potentials of the CB for red-absorbing QDs, here calculated, are less negative than those reported by Wu and co-workers for CdTe QDs of similar size.35,57 This difference stems from the more positive VB potential considered (+0.09 V vs. NHE) and obtained by pulse radiolysis.58 We would like to point out that, assuming this latter value for the VB potential in our system, oxidation of the ascorbate donor at pH 5 (+0.4 V vs. NHE) would not be thermodynamically allowed.§ The quantum yield of hydrogen evolution (Φ) has been estimated from the ratio between the initial rate of hydrogen production (5.0 × 1015 H2 molecules per s corresponding to a rate of 30 μmol h−1) and the absorbed photon flux (8.3 × 1017 photons per s, Fig. S35†) estimated by integration considering the spectral irradiance of the Xe lamp used in our setup, the LHE of the irradiated solution and the irradiated surface area (5 cm2). Considering that the maximum value of Φ in photoinduced hydrogen formation with the three-component system here used is 50%,11 this value translates into an overall quantum efficiency (QE)61 of 1.2%.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Summary of the components used in this study and related working principles.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption and (b) emission spectra of MPA QDs (2.6–8.9 μM depending on the size)50 in aqueous solution at pH 10.5 (excitation was performed at the excitonic absorption maximum).	 



MAA, d = 2.6 nm	14	0.13	0.9	6.2

MAA, d = 3.2 nm	17	0.20	1.2	4.4

MSA, d = 2.8 nm	24	0.35	1.4	2.7

MSA, d = 3.4 nm	36	0.32	0.9	1.9

MPA, d = 1.7 nm	15	0.14	0.9	6.5

MPA, d = 2.4 nm	19	0.23	1.2	4.1

MPA, d = 2.8 nm	27	0.30	1.1	2.6

MPA, d = 3.1 nm	35	0.38	1.1	1.7

MPA, d = 3.3 nm	44	0.49	1.1	1.2

 	Fig. 2  Low magnification TEM images of (a) MPA-, (b) MSA-, and (c) MAA-capped QDs; (d–f) high magnification HR-TEM detail of a single quantum dot and relative fast Fourier transform analysis for MPA-, MSA-, and MAA-capped QDs, respectively, displaying in all cases the typical pattern of the [1,1,0] CdS zincblende cubic phase; (g) size distribution analysis obtained in the STEM-HAADF mode of MPA-, MSA-, and MAA-capped QDs; (h) elemental distribution along a linear profile of MAA-capped QDs, displayed in the reference STEM-HAADF micrograph in the inset, in which Cd, S, and Te distribution is reported to understand QD composition.	 

 	Scheme 2  Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 production using QDs as sensitizers, ascorbic acid as the sacrificial agent, and 1 as the catalyst: (a) first and (b) second electron transfer sequence.	 



MAA, d = 2.6 nm	+1.00	−1.30	2.30

MAA, d = 3.2 nm	+1.02	−1.17	2.19

MSA, d = 2.8 nm	+1.00	−1.23	2.23

MSA, d = 3.4 nm	+1.01	−1.10	2.10

MPA, d = 1.7 nm	+0.99	−1.31	2.30

MPA, d = 2.4 nm	+1.01	−1.24	2.25

MPA, d = 2.8 nm	+1.00	−1.21	2.21

MPA, d = 3.1 nm	+0.99	−1.20	2.19

MPA, d = 3.3 nm	+1.01	−1.13	2.14

 	Fig. 3  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation for MPA QDs with d = 3.3 nm by varying the concentration of 1 ([QDs] = 2.6 μM, buffer ascorbate = 1.68 M, pH = 5, Ar-purged solutions) and (b) corresponding maximum TONs and TOFs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation for MPA QDs with d = 3.3 nm by varying the concentration of ascorbate at pH 5 ([QDs] = 2.6 μM, [1] = 50 μM, Ar-purged solutions) and (b) corresponding maximum TONs and TOFs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Moles of H2 produced vs. time upon irradiation at pH = 5 for MPA QDs with different diameters ([QDs] = 2.6–8.9 μM depending on the size,50 buffer ascorbate = 1.68 M, [1] = 50 μM, Ar-purged solutions); (b) corresponding maximum TON and TOF values; (c) maximum TOFs normalized with respect to the fraction of photon absorbed for MPA QDs with different diameters, and (inset) fraction of the Xe lamp emission absorbed by the QDs tested.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transient absorption spectra of (a) MPA QDs (2.6 μM), (b) MPA QDs (2.6 μM) in the presence of ascorbate buffer (1.68 M), and (c) MPA QDs (2.6 μM) with both the ascorbate buffer and the nickel catalyst 1 (50 μM), obtained by laser flash photolysis (excitation at 532 nm, Ar-purged solutions).	 

 	Fig. 7  Summary of the primary photoinduced processes with related timescale.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammetry, results from TC-SPC, other photocatalytic results. See DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01195A
‡ The potentials of the CB for red-absorbing QDs, here calculated, are less negative than those reported by Wu and co-workers for CdTe QDs of similar size.35,57 This difference stems from the more positive VB potential considered (+0.09 V vs. NHE) and obtained by pulse radiolysis.58 We would like to point out that, assuming this latter value for the VB potential in our system, oxidation of the ascorbate donor at pH 5 (+0.4 V vs. NHE) would not be thermodynamically allowed.
§ The quantum yield of hydrogen evolution (Φ) has been estimated from the ratio between the initial rate of hydrogen production (5.0 × 1015 H2 molecules per s corresponding to a rate of 30 μmol h−1) and the absorbed photon flux (8.3 × 1017 photons per s, Fig. S35†) estimated by integration considering the spectral irradiance of the Xe lamp used in our setup, the LHE of the irradiated solution and the irradiated surface area (5 cm2). Considering that the maximum value of Φ in photoinduced hydrogen formation with the three-component system here used is 50%,11 this value translates into an overall quantum efficiency (QE)61 of 1.2%.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
