Recent highlights and future prospects on mixed-metal MOFs as emerging supercapacitor candidates  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0DT01676D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01676D
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 11792-11818Recent highlights and future prospects on mixed-metal MOFs as emerging supercapacitor candidates

        
          
            Richa 
            Rajak
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ravinder 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shagufi Naz 
            Ansari
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohit 
            Saraf
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Shaikh M. 
            Mobin
          
          
        
      *abc
aDiscipline of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore, 453552, India. E-mail: xray@iiti.ac.in
bDiscipline of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science (MEMS), Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore, 453552, India
cDiscipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore 453552, India
Received 
      8th May 2020
    , Accepted 24th July 2020First published on 24th July 2020AbstractMixed-metal metal–organic frameworks (M-MOFs) consist of at least two different metal ions as nodes in the same framework. The incorporation of a second or more metal ions provides structural/compositional diversity, multi-functionality and stability to the framework. Moreover, the periodical array of different metal ions in the framework may alter the physical/chemical properties of M-MOFs and result in fascinating applications. M-MOFs with exciting structural features offer superior supercapacitor performances compared to single metal MOFs due to the synergic effect of different metal ions. In this review, we summarize several synthetic methods to construct M-MOFs by employing various organic ligands or metalloligands. Further, we discuss the electrochemical performance of several M-MOFs and their derived composite materials for supercapacitor applications.Richa RajakRicha Rajak was born in 1993 in Madhya Pradesh, India. She completed her BS-MS Dual Degree in Chemistry in 2015 at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal, India. Presently, she is a Ph.D. scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore and her research work is based on the synthesis and structural analysis of metal–organic frameworks and their applications in supercapacitors, sensing, adsorption and catalysis.Ravinder KumarRavinder Kumar was born in 1993 in Haryana, India. He received his Master's Degree (2017) in Chemistry (Hons.) from the University of Delhi. He is a research scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore. His research work is related to the fields of metal–organic frameworks, covalent–organic frameworks and their applications.Shagufi Naz AnsariShagufi Naz Ansari was born on 3 June 1990 in Uttar Pradesh, India. She received her Master's Degree (2014) in Industrial Chemistry (Hons.) from Aligarh Muslim University. She is a research scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore. Her research work is related to the area of metal–organic frameworks and their applications.Mohit SarafDr Saraf received his PhD in Metallurgy Engineering & Materials Science from Indian Institute of Technology Indore in 2019, and Bachelors-Masters (Integrated) in Nanotechnology from University of Rajasthan, Jaipur in 2013. He has won several national and international accolades including CAS Future Leaders 2020, Fulbright-Nehru Postdoctoral Fellowship (2020–2021) and Green Talents award (2018). His research focuses on developing different families of nanomaterials and their composites for electrochemical energy storage applications.Shaikh M. MobinDr Shaikh obtained his Bachelor's and Master's from Wilson College, University of Mumbai with a major in Chemistry and PhD from Mumbai University in Chemistry. In 2012, he joined IIT Indore and now working as an Associate Professor in Discipline of Chemistry. He developed a multi-disciplinary research group working in wide areas of research including solid-state structural transformation, design and synthesis of newer class of MOFs and their applications in energy storage, conversion and biomedical devices, exploring metal nano-oxide materials for energy storage, conversion, optical and electro-chemical sensing, metal nano-oxide materials derived by employing metal complexes/MOFs as single-source molecular precursors as catalysts in organic transformations and developing greener c-dots for bioimaging and biomarkers. Moreover, his research group is interested in the design and synthesis of small molecules as cellular organelle targets and docking.
1. Introduction
Together with the modernization of human civilization, the need for energy has been a driving force for innovation and the development of society. However, the continuous depletion of natural resources has amplified the demand for sustainable clean and green energy.1 Accordingly, to solve this problem, various classes of cleaner energy sources such as wind energy, solar power, and sea tides have been explored for the development of energy conversion and storage devices.2a Undoubtedly, solar energy has been exploited vastly due to the efficient conversion of solar energy into electricity. However, in the efficient storage of electricity derived from solar energy, it still remains a challenge to maintain a balance between the demand and supply of energy.2b,c Furthermore, the intermittent nature of solar energy restricts its practical applications to combat the high energy demand.3 Thus, the use of large systems (e.g. transportation systems) remains difficult to supply energy efficiently from the consumption of solar energy. Therefore, reliable technologies for energy storage such as supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries have gained tremendous attention from the scientific community.4,5 Together with batteries and fuel cells, supercapacitors are also important energy storage devices owing to their promising features such as rapid charge–discharge cycle, high power density and long cycle life.6 Based on the mechanism their of charge storage behavior, supercapacitors are classified into two categories, i.e. electrical double-layered capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.7a EDLCs consist of various carbon-based materials such as graphene, activated carbon, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), where electric charge is stored in the electric double layers produced at the boundary between the electrode and the electrolyte.7b–d In contrast, redox-active materials such as metal oxides (MOs) and conducting polymers fall into the category of pseudocapacitors. The materials used to fabricate high-performance supercapacitors must possess some crucial properties such as temperature stability, large specific surface area, high resistance against corrosion, optimized size with a regular distribution of pores, cost effectiveness, and suitable processing.8–12 In the early 1990s, Yaghi et al. defined a new class of porous materials, i.e. metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). MOFs are well known for their porous crystalline architectures with periodic networks comprised of rich metal centers. Their stable architectures display a large surface area with well-regulated pores, which endow MOFs with vast potential applications.17–19 This new class of materials outperforms all related materials in various applications such as catalysis, gas separation and storage, drug delivery, ion sensing, optoelectronics and charge storage.13–16 Furthermore, MOFs and their derivatives exhibit superior specific surface area, structural flexibility, and penetrability to guest molecules, and therefore, can be considered as potential candidates for charge storage applications.20–23 For the electrochemical studies, MOFs were explored in the early 2010s and delivered encouraging performances.24,25 According to recent research trends, MOFs and their derived nanostructures have been widely recognized for their great application possibilities in solar cells, electrochemical sensors, fuel cells, supercapacitors, and Li-ion batteries.19,26–28 Additionally, the development of new multi-functional MOFs is a very important area of research, where the incorporation of mixed ligands/metals is the most common approach to alter the properties of MOFs.
Mixed metallic metal–organic frameworks (M-MOFs) are advanced materials with enhanced framework complexity to achieve improved performances compared to single metal MOFs.29,30 M-MOFs consist of two or more different metal nodes in the MOF unit. It is also possible to have immobilized metal ions, metal complex/nanoparticles and organometallic units anywhere in the MOF unit with or without interactions and their structure provides fascinating multi-functionality/complexity and tunable properties for specific applications.29–33
2. Synthetic strategies
M-MOFs can be synthesized by employing multiple metal salts as the metal precursor in various synthetic techniques such as the slow diffusion, hydro/solvothermal, slow evaporation sonication and mechanochemical methods.34–37 The above synthetic approaches for the construction of M-MOFs proceed via either one-pot synthesis or post-synthetic modification methods. Conventionally, O- and N-donor ligands (strong Lewis base) are used to generate strong bonds with highly charged metal ions (strong Lewis acid). Moreover, the synthetic methodology of M-MOFs depends on the following factors of metal ions: (i) similar chemical behavior, (ii) similar ionic radius, and (iii) same coulombic charge to increase the homogeneous co-incorporation of various metal ions in the same structure;38,39 otherwise, the resultant MOF may preferentially contain only one metal in its nodal position, and another metal somewhere in the amorphous part/free substantial portion of the solid material without being involved in the crystallinity of the MOF unit.40,41 Additionally, the size of the metal cations also plays an essential role, which is related to their excellent coordination with specific anionic moieties. Thus, ionic radius/size-based deliberations are useful in envisioning the strength of crystalline phases.42–44 Moreover, a large difference in the size (ionic radius) of metal cations can obstruct the homogeneous mixing in the molecular unit of M-MOFs.43 However, the incorporation of mixed multitopic ligands can generate M-MOFs using the different hardness–softness of metal ions, which is difficult to construct utilizing the common multitopic ligands. Thus, linkers carrying distinct donor atoms can bind with different Lewis acidic metal nodes to preferably prepare M-MOFs.42,44,45 M-MOFs can be thermodynamically/kinetically controlled based on the nature and ratio of their different metal precursors and synthesis parameters. These conditions also influence the contribution and position of their metal nodes. To characterize the obtained structure of M-MOFs, various advanced techniques such as extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) are applied. These high-resolution techniques give information on the metal environment and geometrical information/average coordination number as well as average bond lengths together with other data. Data from the EXAFS technique can lead to the more desirable characterization of M-MOFs to provide evidence of the co-incorporation of different metal nodes in a homogeneous manner. However, the utilization of high-resolution techniques is not sufficient to predict the oxidation states of different metals in M-MOFs, especially transition metal ions.
2.1 One-pot synthesis or direct synthesis approach
M-MOFs can be constructed using an appropriate mixture of two or more different metal precursors during the direct synthesis approach, as shown in Fig. 1. The key point of the one-pot synthesis is its simplicity and reduction of synthetic steps.44,46,47 In this strategy, it is also important to produce a controllable distribution of metal nodes in the formed framework.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the one-pot synthesis of M-MOFs using different metal nodes. 
However, the construction of M-MOFs via a one-step approach is very challenging because the incorporation of additional metal ions into MOFs often produces inconsistent topologies and breakable networks.29,30,48 Recently, many researchers have made considerable progress in this area. Serre et al.49 reported a direct synthetic approach to prepare a bimetallic MIL-53(Cr/Fe) framework. The M-MOF was synthesized via the hydrothermal method using a stoichiometric ratio of chromium nitrate, iron powder, terephthalic acid and hydrofluoric acid in water. The authors observed breathing behavior in the M-MOF since it could undergo reversible expansion and contraction in its structure under external stimuli such as temperature/pressure and involvement of guest particles. Another strategy to ensure a highly controlled ratio of metal ions in M-MOFs was also explored by Lah's50 group. They demonstrated a series of isostructural bimetallic NixM1−x-ITHDs [M = Zn(II) and Co(II)] with varying molar ratios of Ni(II), Zn(II) and Co(II) metals, which exhibited enhanced porosity and surface area compared to that of the pristine MOF. Ranjbar et al. prepared Ni/Co-MOF using a direct synthetic approach through the hydrothermal method by adding an equimolar ratio of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Co(NO3)2·6H2O solution into an aqueous mixture of terephthalic acid and pyrazine ligands, resulting in a 3D framework.51 Subsequently, He and coworkers also reported the fabrication of Ni/Co-MOF through a simple hydrothermal method using Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (BTC) and polyvinylpyrrolidone K-30 (PVP).52,53 Young et al. also prepared M-MOFs of NiCo-MOF-74 using NiCl2, CoCl2 and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid in the presence of PVP through the solvothermal method, which exhibited a constant spherical morphology with a size of 500 nm.54 Iqbal et al. demonstrated a series of bimetallic Co/Fe-MOFs through a one-pot synthetic approach using 2-aminoterephthalic acid. They varied the stoichiometric ratio of Co and Fe metal salts, and the resulting structure consisted of M3(μ3-O) trimeric clusters, as depicted in Fig. 2a–c.55 The construction of Co/Fe-MOFs took place via the replacement of irons from the Fe3O cluster (a) of MIL-88 to create a new Fe2Co(μ3-O) cluster in the framework, and subsequently, a Co3O (b) cluster was incorporated in the MOF unit. The above phenomena depended on the hard/soft acid-base theory, where Fe3+ coordinates to carboxylate and Co2+ can bind with N–H (c).56,57
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Fe/Co-MOFs with different possible secondary building units (SBUs). (a) Fe3(μ3-O) trinuclear cluster, (b) Co3(μ3-O) cluster, (c) coordination of Co with the NH2 functionally of the ligand. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
M-MOFs containing the same metallic species in mixed-valence states can also be synthesized through the direct synthesis approach.48,58,59 Zhang et al. reported the synthesis of a mixed-valence redox-active cobalt(II/III) MOF using CoCl2·6H2O benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate and 2,4,6-tri(4-pyridinyl)-1,3,5-triazine via a solvothermal method.58 Fischer's group demonstrated the synthesis of mixed-valence Ru(II)/Ru(III)-based M-MOFs with 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate through the solvothermal method.59 Generally, the contribution of two different metal nodes in one molecular unit creates M-MOFs. However, Yaghi and coworkers established multivariate MOFs (MTV-MOFs), which contained more than two divalent transition/alkaline metal ions in one SBU to generate advanced M-MOF materials, where various metal ions were distinctly arranged inside the solid.60 They demonstrated a series of 23 nanocrystalline nMOF-74s. The nanocrystalline nMOF-74 framework was prepared via a microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction using 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid and acetate salts of Co, Mg, Ni, Zn, Mn, Fe, and Cd in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (Fig. 3). These MOFs were also explored for electrochemical applications because of their structural versatility, different functionality/geometry, presence of multi-metallic nodes, varying pore size and nanocrystalline nature.60 Subsequently, Zhang et al. reported a multivariate MOF-177 through the solvothermal technique using a triangular 1,3,5-benzenetribenzoate (BTB) linker and octahedral Zn4O(–COO)6 node, which exhibited a 3D framework with the qom topology.61 They demonstrated that other essential factors such as pH, coordination sphere, reactivity and solubility play an important role in defining the ratio of metal nodes present in the formation of MTV-MOFs.60,61 Considering the various possibilities in the synthetic method, suitable screening of diverse conditions determined the impact of different parameters in the M-MOFs.
 Fig. 3  Series of nMOF-74s containing different metals in the MOF. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. 
2.2 Post-synthetic modification
The post-synthetic method is a useful strategy for the formation of targeted heterometallic MOF units, which are unattainable or difficult to achieve using direct synthesis or a one-pot synthesis approach. Generally, the post-synthetic modification approach is employed for ligand exchange, which recently has been incorporated to construct mixed metallic frameworks due to the distinct reactivity of their metal components.33,62–64 The typical post-synthetic modification method for the formation of M-MOFs involves new metal insertion, exchange of metal nodes and trans-metalation by immersing MOFs in a different metal salt solution (Fig. 4). A controllable stoichiometric ratio of metal nodes in M-MOFs can also be achieved using the post-synthetic approach,64 which can tune the physical and chemical properties of M-MOFs for a specific application and is crucial to construct di- and trivalent redox-active M-MOFs for energy storage.
 Fig. 4  Schematic synthesis of M-MOFs by post-synthetic approach. 
The process metal ion exchange in post-synthetic modification is kinetically controlled.65a–d Generally, metal ion exchange is achieved by stirring pristine MOF with a suitable solution of other metal ions, which can partially replace the metal nodes of the pristine MOF, followed by controlling the reaction time, concentration and temperature.65d,e,66 Generally, the metal ion exchange process is mainly conducted on “labile”, weakly stable MOFs, which contain weak metal–ligand bonds. However, it is also explored for the highly stable UiO, ZIF, and MIL inert MOFs. Fei et al.67 first established the post-synthetic/metal exchange on thermally/chemically intact zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-based MOF structures in 2013. They introduced the redox-active Mn2+ ions in ZIF materials without deforming the framework of ZIF-8 and ZIF-71. The metal exchange process of ZIF-71 and ZIF-8 was reversible, where 12% and 10% of the Zn2+ ion centers were substituted with Mn2+ ions for ZIF-71 and ZIF-8, respectively. Kerr et al.68 reported three copper and uranium-based M-MOFs through the post-synthetic method by utilizing pre-synthesized Cu-complexes and treatment with UO22+. Generally, the metal ion exchange method has been investigated via a solvent-assisted approach, although another metal ion exchange approach for post-synthetic modification was also explored by Li's group.69 They demonstrated a series of bimetallic PCN-6′ (M) through a vapor-assisted solid-phase method by mixing PCN-6′ and solid CoCl2, FeCl2, MnCl2, and ZnCl2 using a grinding process. The proportion of exchanged second metal was 18.4% for Mn, 19.5% for Fe, 11.7% for Co, and 16.8% for Zn. Dinca et al.63 demonstrated a post-synthetic ion exchange method using transition metal nodes such as V2+, Ti3+, Cr2+/Cr3+, Mn2+, and Fe2+ in MOF-5 as a host material to assist in the synthesis of redox-active M-MOFs (Fig. 5). The synthesis of M-MOFs was achieved by immersing the crystals of MOF-5 in concentrated DMF solution of Fe(BF4)2·6H2O, MnCl2, CrCl2 or VCl2(pyridine)4 for 7 days to obtain M-MOF-5, while CrCl3·3THF, VCl3·3THF and TiCl3·3THF salts were employed to introduce Cr3+, V3+ and Ti3+ metal ions. It is well known that the metal exchange technique to construct M-MOFs is influenced by the reversible nature of the metal and ligand coordination bonds of highly crystalline MOFs.70,71
 Fig. 5  Post-synthetic conversation of insert metal cations in MOF-5. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. 
Demetalation/metal insertion is another alternative post-synthetic strategy for the synthesis of M-MOFs.32,33,71–73 In a typical method, vacant nodes can be created in pristine MOFs through elimination, and the simultaneous refilling of vacancies by another metal node generates M-MOFs.71 Metal insertion in various MOFs is also an advantageous technique to obtain M-MOFs. It is carried out by sacking different metal complexes in suitable pristine MOFs with the chelating functional groups, which leads to the formation of M-MOFs.72–74
MOFs containing bifunctional ligands can subsequently connect with other metal nodes and generate M-MOFs. Post-synthetic modification is the common two-step process used for the preparation of M-MOFs that are difficult to construct through the direct synthesis method.74–76 However, it is challenging to control the position of the metal node and stoichiometric composition in the final M-MOFs. Kim et al.77 reported a stepwise synthetic route for the synthesis of stoichiometric controllable NiZn-MOF-74 and MgZn-MOF-74. Moreover, stoichiometric controlled M-MOFs were also published by employing a two-step mechanosynthesis procedure. This strategy exhibited substantial enhancement in controlling the 1:1 stoichiometric composition of two discrete metal ions in an M-MOF, which was facilitated by RT mechanochemical milling reactions (Fig. 6a–c).34,78 Recently, Ayoub et al. demonstrated a simple two-step mechanochemical strategy for the preparation of twelve microporous MM′-MOF-74 in a controlled stoichiometric ratio (1:1) of divalent transition metal and main group metal ions, where M = Zn, Mg, Ni, Cu, Co; M′ = Zn, Co, Ca, Mg, and Cu,34 where they observed noticeable color changes in the reaction mixture (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Synthetic route of MM′-MOF-74 (a) mechanochemical synthesis, (b) conventional solution methods, and (c) images of the mechanochemically prepared MM′-MOF-74. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
2.3 Metalloligands
Incorporating metalloligands is a useful approach to construct mixed metallic MOFs. In this synthetic approach, metal-containing ligands are employed with compatible metal salts to prepare M-MOFs. Another method involves the immobilization of metal complexes to construct varying structural motifs of M-MOFs via direct synthesis or ligand exchange approaches.79–81 The important factors to utilize metalloligands are their specific coordination with one type of metal ion and rational immobilization of various metal sites to generate M-MOFs. This method used a pre-functionalized metallocomplex as the ligand or ligand exchange strategies to develop new types of M-MOFs (Fig. 7).79–81
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of M-MOFs using metalloligands and via ligand exchange approaches. 
An appropriate example of the construction of M-MOFs based on metalloligands is the incorporation of the 1,1′-ferrocene dicarboxylic acid (FcDCA) ligand. Du et al. reported a series of M-MOFs by employing the FcDCA ligand together with other metal ions through the solvothermal method.82 In our previous works, we used the 1,1′-ferrocene dicarboxylic acid metalloligand to construct M-MOFs (Fig. 8a and b).16,83 These M-MOFs were obtained through the slow diffusion method at room temperature (RT). Moreover, a specific metalloligand coordinates with metal ions in different binding modes to generate M-MOFs with fascinating structural diversity.79–82
 Fig. 8  (a and b) Synthesis of M-MOFs using metalloligands. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, Copyright 2019, and ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017, respectively. 
This phenomenon is related to the incorporation of preformed metallocomplexes as ligands to achieve an advanced class of M-MOFs. MTV-MOFs were also obtained by employing two different oxamide-based metalloligands. The framework consisted of a hexagonal channel with two flexible and functional “arms” (–CH2OH and –CH2CH2SCH3).81
In the aforementioned section, we discussed different synthetic strategies for the synthesis of M-MOFs. Although it is challenging to incorporate various metal ions in a single structure, it has been reported that a similar size, hardness–softness of metallic species, charge density, and synthetic conditions are crucial parameters for the successful synthesis of M-MOFs. However, the current review focuses on the potential of M-MOFs and their derivatives to develop advanced materials for charge storage applications.
3. Mixed-metal MOFs in supercapacitors
3.1 M-MOFs as supercapacitor electrode materials
Recently, M-MOFs have attracted great attention in supercapacitor applications.83,84 Supercapacitors are emerging energy storage technologies that can supply efficient power to electronic devices and also exhibit high power density, superior cyclic stability and higher charge–discharge ability.19,85–87 The electrochemical performance of MOFs generally relies on several factors such as structural stability, functionality, conductivity and morphology.88,89 There are several reports on single metal MOFs as suitable supercapacitor materials.90,91 Very recently, the paradigm shifted to the incorporation of M-MOFs that deliver superior framework stability and tunable breathing behavior owing to their high oxidation state and synergic effect of their mixed metal component, resulting in higher capacitance performance and excellent cyclic stability compared to that of single metal MOFs.35,92,93 Subsequently, the development of electrochemically active M-MOFs for direct usage in supercapacitors is one of the essential tasks. Some reports have presented the direct consumption of M-MOFs for supercapacitor application.85,94,95
Ranjbar's51 group first reported a bimetallic MOF for supercapacitor application. The Ni/Co-MOF was prepared via the direct synthesis approach and the resultant M-MOF exhibited a 3D framework. The structural analysis suggested that the Ni2+ and Co2+ metal ions were equally distributed in the Ni/Co-MOF framework, where the occupation of each metal ion was 50%, which was also verified by the ICP technique.51 In the 2D frameworks, the terephthalic acid linker was linked with two different metal nodes via bidentate and bridged coordination modes, as shown in Fig. 9a. Further, the resultant infinite 2D layers were pillared with pyrazine molecules and generated a 3D framework (Fig. 9b). Owing to the high surface area of Ni/Co-MOF, it exhibited a high specific capacitance (1049 F g−1 at of 1 A g−1) with remarkable rate ability (642 F g−1 at 10 A g−1) in 3 M KOH electrolyte solution. The higher specific capacitance of Ni/Co-MOF was attributed to the involvement of both metal components in the redox reactions. The MOF showed excellent stability and retained 97.4% of its original capacitance after 5000 cycles, signifying its capacity as a promising pseudocapacitive material.51
 Fig. 9  (a) Infinite 2D layer of Ni/Co-MOF along the a-axis and (b) 3D framework of Ni/Co-MOF along the b-axis. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. 
Xia et al.96 prepared hollow structured Ni-MOF nanoflakes and Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes through the solvothermal method, which were employed as supercapacitor materials. In the synthesis of the Ni-MOF nanoflakes and Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes, as-synthesized ZIF-67 was dispersed in methanol by adding an equimolar ratio of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O/Co(NO3)2·6H2O in methanol solution, respectively. The Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes exhibited a superior capacitance performance (530.4 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) in 1 M LiOH electrolytic solution, which was higher than that of Ni-MOF (306.8 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1). The Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes demonstrated good rate capacity and superior cyclic performance with a negligible change in capacitance.96 The optimized capacitance corresponded to the 2D nanoflake structure of Ni/Co-MOF, which accelerated the charge and electron transfer during the charge–discharge process. Gao et al.52 also prepared a dandelion-like hollow structure Ni/Co-MOF via the hydrothermal method, which showed an excellent specific capacitance (758 F g−1 at 1 A g−1) in 2 M KOH electrolyte. Ni/Co-MOF retained 75% of its primary capacitance after 5000 cycles with excellent rate ability of 89% at 10 A g−1.52 This high capacitance can be ascribed to the small size of the Co2+ ions that partially substitute the Ni2+ ions, resulting in the generation of more defects and free holes in the MOF framework, which enhanced the electric conductivity.53 Zhao et al. constructed an Ni/Co-MOF via the solvothermal method using NiCl2·6H2O, BTC and a different ratio of CoCl2·6H2O in DMF:H2O solution.97 The resultant network can be demonstrated as a layered structure with small pores on its surface, which may enhance the contact between the MOF and electrolyte in the supercapacitor. Ni/Co-MOF exhibited an excellent specific capacitance of 1067 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and stability up to 2500 cycles and retained 68.4% of its initial capacitance. Wang et al.98 constructed an NiCo-MOF nanomaterial on nickel foam (NF) via a simple one-step hydrothermal reaction using Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Co(NO3)2·6H2O, terephthalic acid and nickel foam in water and ethanol. The optimized molar ratio of Ni/Co for the obtained triangle-like NiCo-MOF/NF was 3:2, which demonstrated a high specific capacitance of 2230 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is higher than that of other reported M-MOFs (Fig. 10). The outstanding supercapacitor performance was ascribed to the 3D well-aligned nanosheet structure of the NiCo-MOF/NF arrays, which boosted the electroactive area, and the presence of conductive NF substrate, enhancing the charge transfer from the electrode to the conductive material.98
 Fig. 10  Plot of specific capacitance versus (vs.) current density for NiCo-MOF/NF (inset: synthesis of NiCo-MOF/NF). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
Owing to the fascinating properties of MOFs, intricate frameworks such as polycatatened entangled MOFs have also been studied for supercapacitor applications. Polycatenation frameworks have high structural complexity/dimensionality and they can tune the breathing behavior of MOFs, providing a high supercapacitor performance. Gong et al.99 reported the first example of a supercapacitor based on polycatenated entangled frameworks of Cd- and Zn-MOFs with the very low supercapacitance performance of 22 F g−1 and 23 F g−1, respectively.99
In our previous work, we reported the use of a Co-based M-MOF as a supercapacitor electrode material.83 Fe/Co-MOF was synthesized via the slow diffusion technique by adding an equimolar ratio of Co(NO3)2·6H2O and mixed ligands of 1,1′-ferrocene dicarboxylic acid (FcDCA) and 4,4′-bipyridyl (bpy) in aqueous methanolic solution. The structural analysis revealed the 2D + 2D → 3D inclined polycatenation framework of the Fe/Co-MOF. Due to the presence of 11 lattice and 6 coordinated water molecules, the formed 3D framework was stabilized by electrostatic interactions such as π⋯π stacking and hydrogen bonding interactions, which provided a conducting pathway for charge transfer (Fig. 11a). From a topological point of view, the whole network was classified as a 2D + 2D → 3D inclined polycatenation class with a Doc1/1 class (Fig. 11b). The presence of FcDCA resulted in an enhanced surface area for Fe/Co-MOF (41.56 m2 g−1) compared to Co-MOF (10.30 m2 g−1).83 Fe/Co-MOF exhibited a high specific capacitance (446.8 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1) in 1 M KOH aqueous solution without the use of any binder (Fig. 11c–f), which was much higher than that of Co-MOF (58.72 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1). Thus, the above results indicate that the existence of FcDCA together with bpy provides structural flexibility, which was highly suitable to boost the supercapacitance performance of Fe/Co-MOF. This MOF exhibited an excellent rate performance and retained 81% of its primary capacitance at 10 A g−1. It also showed excellent cyclic stability up to 800 cycles with 88.37% retention of its initial capacitance, suggesting its capacity as a promising pseudocapacitive material. This observation gives new prospects to construct progressive M-MOFs with superior supercapacitor performances.83
 Fig. 11  (a) Inter/intra-molecular H-bonding interaction between the two 2D frameworks present in Fe/Co-MOF, (b) 2D + 2D → 3D inclined polycatenation topological simplification as Doc1/1 class, (c) CV curves of bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE), and Fe/Co-MOF at 100 mV s−1, (d) CV curves at varying scan rates (10–500 mV s−1) in Fe/Co-MOF, (e) GCD profiles at different current densities (1.2–50 A g−1), and (f) GCD curves of bare GCE and Fe/Co-MOF at 1.2 A g−1. Here, 1-GCE is the MOF-based electrode. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
Subsequently, according to recent reports, it has been observed that the presence of Na metal ions and redox-active linkers enhances the framework stability of electrode materials during the charge/discharge cycles, resulting in enhanced cycling stability.35,93 In our recently published work, we synthesized a sodium–cobalt-based mixed metallic MOF using a mixed ligand strategy. It was synthesized through a slow diffusion method using Co(NO3)2·6H2O and the sodium salt of 2,5′-thiophenedicarboxylic acid (SDCA) and Azopy in a 2:1:1 molar ratio at RT. The structural analysis indicated that the ratio of Co(II) and Na(I) metal node was 1:2 and the obtained framework exhibited a 3D architecture. The presence of both metal ions and other elements was also confirmed through XPS analysis. From a topological point of view, the obtained 3D framework was demonstrated as a new type of topology and the whole 3D network could be simplified as a 4,4,6-connected net with an smm3 topology (Fig. 12a–e).100 The high capacitance was attributed to the contribution of both metal nodes. The observed high specific capacitance was 321.8 F g−1 at 4 A g−1 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolytic solution. Also, it showed a prominent rate performance of ∼78.9% of its original capacitance at 16 A g−1. Na/Co-MOF showed excellent cycling stability up to 5000 cycles, which is ascribed to the presence of Na ions and flexibility of the framework. After 5000 cycles of repeated charge–discharge experiments at a current density of 18 A g−1, the specific capacitance remains at 97.4% of its initial capacitance. Thus, the above-mixed ligand strategy of incorporating various metal nodes using mixed ligands prominently increases the complexity of MOFs and boosts their synergistic properties, which are very important for electrochemical applications.100
 Fig. 12  (a–d) Linkers in MOF with the connected nodes and links of the underlying net. (e) 4,4,6-Connected net with smm3 topology. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
The recent work by Wu and coworkers demonstrated a flower-like polycrystalline Ni–Co metal–organic framework (Ni–Co-MOF), which was simply fabricated via the hydrothermal method with Ni and Co metal precursor and isophthalic acid in a mixed solution of water, ethanol, and DMF. The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analysis revealed the layered structure of Ni–Co-MOF. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis demonstrated a flower-like morphology with a diameter of around 10 nm, as shown in Fig. 13a and b. Flower-like shape and particle size are also confirmed by TEM analysis (Fig. 13c and d).94
 Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images of the Ni–Co coordination, (c and d) TEM images of the Ni–Co coordination and the SAED pattern (inset) of the Ni–Co coordination, (e) CD profiles of Ni–Co MOF at varying current densities, and (f) specific capacitance of Ni–Co MOF with different Ni/Co ratios. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
The sample fabricated at 150 °C with a ratio of Ni:Co = 1:1 was used in the experiments, which demonstrated a better electrochemical performance compared to the other fabricated materials at different temperatures with different ratios of Ni and Co metal ions. Among them, Ni–Co-MOF showed the highest specific capacitance of 833 C g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 with a high rate ability of 714 C g−1 at 20 A g−1 (Fig. 13e and f). Ni–Co-MOF showed excellent cyclic stability up to 5000 cycles with a negligible decrease in its initial specific capacitance, retaining 95.6% of its initial value. The better electrochemical performance of Ni–Co-based MOFs or composites compared to pure Ni or Co-based materials may be due to the contribution of both metal ions, which improves the stability of the materials, thus leading to enhanced supercapacitor performances.94 Kazemi et al.95 synthesized Co–Mn-MOF via the reaction of CoCl2·6H2O, Mn(NO3)2·6H2O and terephthalic acid using a 1:1:2 molar ratio in DMF through a one-pot solvothermal approach. The SEM images revealed the layered structure of Co–Mn-MOF having a layer size in the range of 100 nm to the mm scale (Fig. 14a and b). Owning to the high surface area of Co–Mn-MOF, it was demonstrated to a promising pseudocapacitive material with excellent cyclic stability up to 1500 cycles and it retained 95% of its initial capacitance. It showed an exceptional areal capacitance of 1.318 F cm−2 in KOH electrolytic solution. However, Co–Mn-MOF with activated carbon demonstrated a good specific capacitance value of 106.7 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1, high rate capacity (more than 50% at 5 A g−1 and excellent cyclic stability (85% after 3000 cycles).95
 Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images at different magnifications, (c) CV profiles at different scan rates (5, 10, 25, 50, and 75 mV s−1), and (d) charge/discharge profiles at different currents. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
The charge storage mechanism can be explained through the insertion/disinsertion of K+ ions into the Co–Mn-MOF framework by Mn species, resulting in enhanced pseudocapacitive characteristics similar to a carbon-based electrode material. The presence of redox peaks in the CV profiles is ascribed to the redox reaction of Co metal ions (Fig. 14c). The GCD profile demonstrates two drops in potential at different areas in the discharge curves, as depicted in Fig. 14d, where the first drop is ascribed to nonlinear voltage drop due to the pseudocapacitive characteristic and the sharp decay with the second linear drop may attributed to the double-layer mechanism of the supercapacitor performance of Co–Mn-MOF.95
3.2 M-MOF-derived metal oxides, metal sulfides, and metal phosphides as supercapacitor materials
By varying the coordinating sites and size of linkers in MOFs, the size and volume of their pores can be tuned easily. Besides their tunable sizes and pore volumes, their high surface area and advantage of preserving these properties upon combustion even at high temperature make MOFs an excellent sacrifice surface to obtain MOs. The resulting MOs exhibit an exceptionally large surface area with a rich morphology, controllable structure, and active surface area.101 The redox-active nature of MOs and their cost-effective production have brought them into the limelight as materials for the fabrication of electrodes for supercapacitor devices. The rich morphological surface area with desirable volume and size of pores of MOs are their key features utilized is electrochemical charge storage devices. Accordingly, to facilitate more functionalized and morphologically richer MOs, various techniques have been applied, such as hydrothermal synthesis, microwave sonication approach, sonochemical synthetic approach, and electro-deposition. Recently, several energy storage-oriented publications based on MOFs and derivative materials have been published worldwide. Among them, the MOF-derived MOs were shown to be superior. For example, solvothermally grown ZIF-67 (Co-ZIF) was synthesized, which possessed a I3m space group of a cubic system containing Co(NO3)2·6H2O as an inorganic salt and 2-methylimidazole as an organic linker.14 Saraf et al. further calcined this Co-ZIF to obtain Co3O4 nanoparticles and deposited them on the surface of an electrode to conduct the charge storage experiment. At a higher charge density of 5 A g−1, a specific capacitance 190 F g−1 of was recorded with a decent cycling stability of 71.42% even after 5000 cycles.
Li et al. synthesized porous microflowers of Co3O4 MOs via the simple calcination of a flower-shaped Co-MOF.102 This Co-MOF was synthesized through a solvothermal process. This group synthesized Co-MOFs using nicotinic acid as the organic linker together with Co(NO3)2·6H2O as the inorganic salt, and NaOH in alcohol to produce a pink color precipitate. The flower-like morphology was maintained in the combustion process and the MOF-derived MOs were used to fabricate supercapacitor electrodes. These MOs electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 240.2 F g−1 at a current density of 0.625 A g−1 and retained 96.3% capacitance even in the 2000th charge–discharge cycle. The specific capacitance of these microflowers was measured to be in the range of 240.02 to 202.1 F g−1 for a charge density ranging from 0.625 to 6.25 A g−1, demonstrating the retention of 84.1% of their initial capacity. This indicated the good rate capability of these as-fabricated micro-flower-based electrodes. Further, to enhance the charge storage capabilities of cobalt metal oxide nanostructures, Liu et al. improved their surface activity.103 Specifically, NaBH4 was used as a reducing agent to generate the affordable R-Co3O4 from ZIF-67. This resulted in an enhancement in specific capacitance up to 329 F g−1 on 1 A g−1 rather than only 116 F g−1 at the same current density. However, although this new class of charge storage is exciting, and from the above-mentioned reports, it is clear that MOF-derived MOs result in a significant improvement in specific capacitance, these reported values are much lower than the theoretical values, for example, the reported value for Co3O4 is 3560 F g−1.104 Additionally, for nickel oxide, its theoretical value is 2584 F g−1, and that for Mn2O3 is 1109 F g−1.105,106 This discrepancy may be due to the pulverization of the material during the charge–discharge process, together with the poor electrical conductivity of mono metal oxides. With structural rigidity, this problem can be overcome by preparing mixed metal MOs for further improvement.
To achieve this goal, a variety of mixed metal oxides (MMOs) have been prepared from M-MOFs such as scheelite-like, spinel, and CaFe2O4-type crystal structures.107,108 These MMOs exhibit richer redox chemistry than single MOs because of their relatively low electron transfer activation energy. They always contain at least one transition metal and one electrochemical active or inactive ion, or sometimes more. Based on their greater structural stability, relatively high reversible capacity, and electrical conductance, these bimetallic metal oxides (BMOs) have been widely studied to modify and prepare novel electrode materials for supercapacitors. Owing to their diverse morphological variety and configuration, there are several reports on the use of BMOs to functionalize electrode materials and electrodes for supercapacitors. Jiang et al. used Pluronic P123 and H2C2O4 dissolved in a mixture of polyethylene glycol:ethanol (4:1) with Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Co(NO3)2·6H2O was stirred for 10 min.109 After filtration and washing with water–ethanol several times, the precipitate was collected and dried for 6 h at 60 °C. Followed by air combustion, the dried precipitate turned into porous 1D NiCo2O4 nanowires. These MMOs were further processed at RT via a polyethylene glycol-directed facile technique to remove impurities. The modified electrode material exhibited a reasonably high specific capacitance of 743 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. It also displayed improved cyclic stability and retained 93.8% of its initial capacitance at the same current density. Wei et al. reported spinel 2D sheet-like nanostructures of NiMn2O4, which were fabricated through a one-pot hydrothermal synthesis method.108 Co(NH2)2, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and NH4F were stirred in distilled water with KMnO4 for 12 h at 160 °C. After filtration and washing with water–ethanol several times, the mixture was dried for 12 h at 60 °C followed by combustion at 350 °C for 2 h. Further, on investigating it as a binder-free material, it exhibited much higher specific capacitance compared to Mn3O4. Also, in the cyclic stability test (1000 cycles), it retained up to 96% of its initial capacitance as 662.5 and 370.5 F g−1 in two different electrolytes at a current density of 1 A g−1. To optimize the dimensionality factor, a 3D flower-shaped NiCo2O4 was prepared by An et al.110 This nanostructure was prepared via the solvothermal process followed by annealing. Metal glycolate and surfactant played a crucial role in the morphological enhancement in these flower-shaped BMOs. The Ni–Co mixed metal oxide displayed a remarkably high specific capacitance of 755.2 and 1191.2 F g−1 at current densities of 10 A g−1 and 1 A g−1, respectively. Its larger surface area of 212.6 m2 g−1 was the reason for its higher specific capacitance. Still, the common issue with these methods is achieving a precise metal ratio and molecular level mixing by generating a homogeneous phase in MMOs. A well-defined stoichiometric ratio and even atomic-level precision in homogenous mixing were found in mixed metallic MOFs, which can be easily transformed into MMOs.
A general strategy widely investigated by various scientific groups is to take advantage of M-MOFs as a precursor for MMOs. These M-MOFs are generally synthesized via the typical method, i.e. one-pot synthesis (Fig. 15). The as-synthesized M-MOFs are dried at a significantly high temperature to remove solvent molecules from their cavity and impurities followed by high-temperature combustion of the obtained precursor under various environments.112–115
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of mixed metallic MOF-derived mixed-metallic oxides. 
Taking advantage of the tunable nature of M-MOFs, Chen et al. reported the first mixed MOs (ZnCo2O4) derived from a Zn–Co-MOF (JUC-155) and utilized it as an electrode material in supercapacitors.111 This group used ZnCl2 with CoCl2·6H2O salts, and the organic counterpart was BTC in a mixture of DMF and water, which were reacted for 6 h at 80 °C. Block-shaped purple-red shaded JUC-155 was collected upon cooling to RT, which was an I4cm space group tetragonal system. After calcination at three different temperatures (400 °C, 450 °C, and 500 °C), JUC-155 produced three forms of Zn–Co-MMOs, which were further denoted as compound 1, compound 2, and compound 3, respectively (Fig. 16a–f). JUC-155 was calcined in air for 2 h at 400 °C and transformed into porous spinel phase ZnCoO4 nanoparticles (NPs). These NPs when utilized as electrode materials exhibited a specific capacitance of 450 F g−1 at a very low scan rate of 5 mV s−1, and maintained 97.9% of their initial capacitance even after 1500 cycles. After introducing the concept of MMOs from M-MOFs, this research group explored a series of Ni–Co-MMOs, which were isomorphic to the Co3O4 crystals derived from the MOF-74 topological phase.112 They prepared a series of isostructural MOFs of MOF-74 in a mixture prepared with the V/V/V combination of water–ethanol–DMF (1:1:1) using 2,5-hydroxyterephthalic acid as an organic linker with Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O as inorganic salts in various combinations to generate five MOFs in a solvothermal process at 100 °C for 24 h.
 Fig. 16  SEM and energy–dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) mapping images of compound 1 (a and d), compound 2 (b and e), and compound 3 (c and f), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
All these synthesized MOFs were submerged in methanol to facilitate the formation of pores by removing the impurities trapped in them. This further improved and maintained the desired stoichiometric ratio of both metals up to atomic level precision in the MMO samples upon calcination. After calcination of these M-MOFs, a series of NixCo3−xO4 material were derived from MOF-74-NiCo4, MOF-74-NiCo2, MOF-74-NiCo1, MOF-74-Co, and MOF-74-Ni showing the composition ratio of Co:Ni = 4:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:0, and 0:1, respectively (Fig. 17). This series was examined to determine the electrochemical relation with the intentional doping of one metal in another metal oxide. The authors described the direct impact of a higher concentration of Ni3+ ions on the charge storage capacity of the NixCo3−xO4 series. NiCo1-MMOs exhibited the highest surface area among the NixCo3−xO4 series, which was prepared via the calcination of MOF-74-NiCo and provided a larger surface with more Ni3+, resulting in its superior performance compared to the individual Ni-MOs and Co-MOs. Moreover, in the NixCo3−xO4 series, NiCo1-MMOs exhibited higher charge storage capability compared to the Co3O4 MOs NPs. NiCo1-MMOs displayed a specific capacitance value of 782 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and retained up to 75% of its initial capacity at a current density of 20 A g−1. Even after 10000 charge–discharge cycles at 10 A g−1, the specific capacitance was retained up to 557 F g−1 using a 1:1 ratio of Ni:Co, with the Ni–Co MMOs exhibiting higher capacitive properties compared to their counterparts, showing the highest capacitance of 797 F g−1 and excellent cyclic stability. Jayakumar et al. further explored the effect from the altering amount of Ni-metal in NixCo3−xO4 MMOs, where the authors optimized the ratios of Ni:Co = 0.5:1, 1:1, and 1.5:1 to generate hollow Ni–Co MMOs from ZIF-67.113
 Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the Ni–Co MO materials derived from the multivariate MOF-74 crystal (where Y = 1, 2, and 4). Colors are for Ni, cyan; O, red; Co, pink; and C, gray; and the H atoms are omitted for clarity. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
ZIF-67 was prepared via the standard process of crystallization at RT, in which both starting materials were added to two immiscible solvents separately and left undisturbed for the crystallization process. The reaction mixture of Co(NO3)2·6H2O as the inorganic salt with 2-methyl-imidazole as an organic linker was left undisturbed for a period of 24 h to obtain crystalline ZIF-67. The obtained crystals of ZIF-67 were processed in methanol and dried at 60 °C under vacuum overnight to remove the impurities from the cavity sites of ZIF-67. Nickel was introduced as a dopant from a Ni(NO3)2·6H2O salt to the processed ZIF-67 at 90 °C for a period of 1 h. These samples were again washed with ethanol and calcined in air at 350 °C for 1 h, followed by natural cooling, further producing Ni–Co MMOs. The prepared Ni–Co MMOs possessed a rhomboid dodecahedron shape similar to ZIF-67, but no well-defined structural representation of pure Co3O4 was obtained. Introducing Ni3+ into Co3O4 resulted in a relatively more structured and regular morphology. NiCo2O4 exhibited a flawless clear surface as its modified morphology, which is the result of an increase in the amount of Ni in the sample. Hollower and thinner layered surface nanostructures appeared to form at a 1:1 ratio of Co:Ni. A further increment in Ni-metal concentration provided a dendron–like thick surface formed by the additional nickel oxide layer on the surface. The novel morphology formed using a ratio of 1:1 from Co:Ni was superior to the other combinations in capacitance by delivering a specific capacitance of 1931 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1, also showing 69.5% capacitance retention even after 5000 repeated charge–discharge cycles.
An Mn–Co MMO combination was explored by Dong et al., where they synthesized MMOs from Mn–Co-ZIFs through a calcination process.114 A mixed metallic ZIF was produced by using Mn(NO3)2·4H2O and Co(NO3)2·4H2O as the source of the inorganic part and 2-methylimidazole as the organic counterpart in a hydrothermal process for 12 h at 80 °C. The As-prepared mixed metallic ZIF was processed by washing several times in water–ethanol and dried for 12 h to remove the captured solvent and impurities from the cavity sites of Mn–Co-ZIF. This process was followed by calcination in air at 400 °C for 2 h to produce Mn–Co-MMOs. Dang and coworkers synthesized nano-caged MnCo2O4 MMOs and compared their electrochemical performance with the Co3O4 fabricated electrode obtained from Co-ZIFs by the same preparation process. MnCo2O4 outperformed Co3O4 with a better specific capacitance of 1763 F g−1vs. 1209 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 together with capacitance retention of 95.0% vs. 81.2%, respectively. With this unique morphology, it is believed that the hollow structured nanocages have an appropriate channel size, which provided better interaction to charge carriers through the interconnected NPs.
Lan et al. synthesized a greenish bimetallic MOF using Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Mn(NO3)2·4H2O as the source of inorganic part and benzenedicarboxylic acid as the organic counterpart in ethanol as the solvent in an autoclave at 120 °C for 4 h.115 After washing and drying, the as-prepared bimetallic MOFs were further annealed at 450 °C in air, developing a flower-shaped MnNi2O4 mixed metal oxide. The M-MOF-derived MMOs exhibited an excellent specific capacitance equivalent to 2848 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with promising capacitance retention stability of 93.25% at 10 A g−1 after 5000 cycles. Further, this group assembled an MnNi2O4vs. active carbon for positive vs. negative electrode and observed a power density of 800 W kg−1vs. energy density of 142.8 W h kg−1 together with excellent cyclic stability for up to 2000 cycles.
To improve the properties of MMOs derived from M-MOFs for charge storage applications, Zardkhoshoui et al. utilized graphene sheets to wrap MMOs and further used the graphene-wrapped multi-shelled/yolk-shell NiM2O4 (M = Ga and Fe) hollow spheres as electrodes in a supercapacitor device.116 Because of its highly porous nature and hollow spherical shape, NiM2O4 was used as an electrode material. Multi-shelled NiGa2O4 fabricated using graphene sheets worked as a positive electrode, and its counterpart yolk-shell NiFe2O4 functionalized as a negative electrode. M-MOFs were produced via the typical one-pot synthesis method. For Ni–Ga MOFs, Zardkhoshoui et al. used Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Ga(NO3)3·xH2O salts as inorganic precursors, while isophthalic acid was used as an organic linker in a mixture of acetone and DMF for 4 h at 160 °C to produce a crystalline product. Ni–Fe MOFs were also synthesized via a hydrothermal process at 120 °C for 6 h using 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O as constructing units in a DMF–acetone mixture. The as-synthesized Ni–Ga MOFs and Ni–Fe MOFs were calcined at 350 °C to 500 °C, and 400 °C, respectively, under an argon environment to yield MMOs. Further, they were treated with isopropyl alcohol and triethoxysilane overnight to activate their surfaces. The obtained products were stirred for 6 h with graphene oxide (GO) in water to achieve graphene-wrapped Ni–Ga MMOs (GW-MSNGOHS) and graphene-wrapped Ni–Fe MMOs (GW-YS-NFOHS). After drying under an argon environment for a period of 4 h at 500 °C, these graphene wrapped-MMOs were used as an electrode in a supercapacitor device. The GW-YS-NFOHS- and GW-MSNGOHS-modified electrodes provided a rapid pathway for charge carriers, which was reflected in their capacities (254.25 mA h g−1 and 411.25 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) and exceptional cyclability (98.9% and 90.9%), respectively. The advantages of the engineered positive and negative electrodes in the fabrication of an asymmetric device (GW-MSNGOHS//GW-YS-NFOHS) resulted in an exceptionally good energy density vs. power density (118.97 W h kg−1vs. 1702 W kg−1), maintaining a high capacity of 140.2 mA g−1 at 1 A g−1. Even after 10000 cycles, a remarkable capacity retention rate of 92.1% was observed.
Recently, M-MOF-derived materials besides metal oxides have also been explored in the domain of charge storage application. A series of NiXCo2−XPY/C nanohybrids carrying different Ni/Co molar ratios was synthesized by Zhou et al. via in situ calcination and phosphorization of various MOF precursors.117 A general scheme of the M-MOF-derived carbon-based Ni–Co metal phosphide materials is shown in Fig. 18. Different concentration ratios of NiCl2·6H2O and CoCl2·6H2O were mixed together with 1,10-phenanthroline as an organic linker for constructing seven different MOFs. The ratio of these metal ions was 1:0, 0:1, 1:1, 1:4, 1:2, 2:1, and 4:1 to generate Ni-MOF, Co-MOF, and Ni/Co-MOF 1–1, Ni/Co-MOF 1–4, Ni/Co-MOF 1–2, Ni/Co-MOF 2–1, and Ni/Co-MOF 4–1, respectively. The as-synthesized MOFs were washed and dried at 70 °C. Subsequently, these MOFs were further phosphorized by calcination under an N2 environment at 450 °C for 2 h, resulting in a batch of NiXCo2−XPY/C nanohybrids. Among them, the NiCoP/C material displayed a specific capacity of 775.1 C g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a retention as high as 75.1% even at the high current density of 20 A g−1. In the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device, NiCoP/C with activated carbon (AC) delivered an energy density as high as 47.6 W h kg−1vs. a power density of 798.9 W kg−1 with good electrochemical stability.
 Fig. 18  General schematic representation of the carbon-based Ni–Co metal phosphide materials derived from M-MOFs, where M represents various combinations of nickel and copper. 
To achieve a superior material, Yang et al. studied metal sulfides and reported an asymmetric supercapacitor device with multi-metallic sulfides, where the fabricated materials were used as the working electrodes.118 This group synthesized a series of molybdenum-doped mixed metallic sulfides (MMoSx), where M represents a various combinations of Ni and Co. To give it a clearer picture, a general schematic representation of the MMoSX derived from the M-MOFs is shown in Fig. 19. Three isostructural MOFs were synthesized using similar reaction conditions just by altering the inorganic salts. In a hydrothermal process at 120 °C for 48 h, terephthalic acid was used as an organic linker in all three MOFs while NiCl2·6H2O and CoCl2·6H2O were used as the source of metal ions in the ratio of 1:0, 0:1, and 1:1 to generate Ni-MOF, Co-MOF, and Ni/Co-MOF, respectively. The as-synthesized MOFs were washed with DMF–ethanol several times followed by drying at 55 °C for 12 h under vacuum. Finally, these MOFs were further doped by molybdenum and sulfur using a hydrothermal process at 180 °C for 24 h, resulting in a series of mixed metallic sulfides MMoSx (M = Ni, Co, and Co/Ni). Among them, NiCoMoSx was found to be superior, displaying a specific capacitance of 2595 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and retained up to 90.8% of its initial capacity at the same current density even after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. An asymmetric supercapacitor device was developed by assembling NiCoMoSx with activated carbon, producing an energy density as high as 48.2 W h kg−1vs. a power density of 807.2 W kg−1, suggesting that NiCoMoSX is a promising material. Even after 10000 cycles, its retention rate was 91.6% with a coulomb efficiency as high as 95.8%.
 Fig. 19  General schematic representation of MMoSX derived from M-MOFs, where M represents three combinations of Ni and Co. M = Ni:Co of 1:1, 0:1, and 1:0. 
Even after the significant progress achieved, it should be noted that there is an urgent need for simple and cost-effective techniques to produce functional MMOs from M-MOFs, which demonstrate high supercapacitor performances and can also be suitable for various other applications.108,109,113,115 By developing novel and efficient strategies and without compromising the fascinating properties of these materials, the focus should be on lowering their cost together with enhancing the possibility of the large-scale production of MMOs. Some of the possible synthesis routes for the large-scale production of M-MOFs and derived materials are summarized in the literature.140a,b However, this field is open and any new, and facile method for preparing MMOs using M-MOFs as a precursor can be a game changer.
3.3 M-MOF composites as supercapacitor materials

3.3.1 M-MOF@GO, rGO, CNTs. 
Graphene and its derivatives provide huge advantages for supercapacitor applications since they possess a huge surface area, incredible electrical conductivity, and excellent thermal/chemical stabilities, and hence emerged as the most popular materials recently introduced as EDLC supercapacitors.121,122 Supercapacitors employing graphene exhibit a high power density but low specific capacitance.123 Hence, the desire for high energy density and cycle life has not been fulfilled.124 There are numerous reports on the association of MOF with graphene structures, which propose that these composites are effective alternatives to resolve the above problems.122 However, their cyclic stability and retention capacitance remain a problem. Therefore, the integration of mixed metal MOFs with graphene materials has been explored, which revealed very high specific capacitance together with excellent cyclic stability and complete retention of their initial capacitance.
Hong et al. proposed a series of hybrids by growing Ni–Co MOF on sheets of graphene oxide (GO) by varying its concentration to obtain Ni–Co-MOF/GO 1 (0.1 g of GO), Ni–Co-MOF/GO 2 (0.2 g of GO) and Ni–Co-MOF/GO 3 (0.3 g of GO). These hybrids were prepared via a solvothermal process in a one-pot reaction by mixing Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O as metal precursors and 2-methylimidazole as the ligand in a dispersion of GO (Fig. 20a–e).125a The Ni–Co-MOF/GO hybrids maintained their 3D structure. Ni–Co-MOF 2 crystals with a chestnut-like shape were embedded on GO sheets, which provided a greater contact area between the electrolyte and electrode, causing a reduced path for the diffusion of ions. Ni–Co-MOF/GO 1, Ni–Co-MOF/GO 2, and Ni–Co-MOF/GO 3 exhibited specific capacitances of 230.9, 447.2, and 341.8 F g−1, respectively, at a current density of 1 A g−1. Ni–Co-MOF/GO 2 achieved the highest specific capacitance with remarkable cyclic stability of 99.6% after undergoing 300 cycles. However, the specific capacitance observed for Ni–Co-MOF was 120.0 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a retention of 81% after 300 cycles. The excellent electrochemical performance and capacitive features of the hybrid electrode were due to the synergistic effects and redox chemistry of Ni and Co present as binary metals in M-MOF and GO. Further, its fabrication with GO created 3D nanostructures, resulting in admirable energy storage properties. Its high mechanical strength is credited to the large number of oxygen atoms from the functional groups of GO, which are well-coordinated with Ni and Co ions from the solvent and organic ligands, also resulting in an enhancement in the cycle performance of the electrode. The bimetallic system present inside the composite offers a system in which the original metal ion can be replaced by a second metal ion, providing a new functionality.125b
 Fig. 20  (a) Pictorial representation of the preparation of the Ni–Co-MOF/GO composites. FE-SEM images of (b) Ni–Co-MOF, (c) Ni–Co-MOF/GO, (d) CV profile of Ni–Co-MOF/GO hybrid in 6.0 M KOH electrolyte at various scan rates, and (e) GCD curves profile at various charge current densities. Reproduced from ref. 125a with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
The hybridized form was also suggested by Rajak et al. through the fusion of an Na/Zn bimetallic 2D layered MOF Na/Zn-MOF with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) via a simple ultra-sonication method to combine their advantages in a heterostructure (Fig. 21a–e).35 Na/Zn-MOF is a 2-D layered structure synthesized through a slow diffusion approach with Na(I) and Zn(II) ions present in 2:1 in its structural framework, showing an octahedral and trigonal bipyramidal geometry, respectively. These adjacent 2D layers grew to form a supramolecular 3D framework via C–H⋯π interactions. The FESEM images presented irregular flower-shaped structures with a size 40 nm to 1.5 μm. The significant specific capacitance of 435.2 F g−1 at 1.6 A g−1 was observed in the case of the mixed metallic MOF/rGO heterostructures with no observed loss in capacity after undergoing 4000 cycles without using any binders. This high specific capacitance is attributed to the synergistic interaction and collaboration of two divergent 2D materials. Superior supercapacitor properties were observed due to the enhanced participation of electrolyte ions inside the spaces of the layered structures, allowing the ions to move faster. These 2D materials with layered structures provide appropriate stacking and interfusion to provide structural rigidity, enabling the durable cyclic efficiency to the supercapacitor material. The rich redox process owing to the presence of the heterometal ions Na and Zn in the mixed metallic MOF and interactions present in the crystal framework of MOF improved the cyclic stability.
 Fig. 21  (a) Coordination modes of the Zn(II) and Na(I) ion sites in 1 (Na/Zn-MOF). (b) Probable scheme for the construction of 3 (Na/Zn-MOF//rGO). Comparison of the CV graphs of (c) bare GCE and 1-GCE, (d) bare GCE and 3-GCE, and (e) GCD profiles of 3-GCE at different scan rates. Here, 1-GCE and 3-GCE are the Na/Zn-MOF- and Na–Zn-MOF/rGO-based electrodes, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
Borhani et al. reported the preparation of 5 MOFs Co(ZIF-67), Zn (ZIF-8) as MOF1 and MOF5, and three hybrid MOFs, where Co0.75Zn0.25, Co0.5Zn0.5 and Co0.25Zn0.75-ZIFs are MOF 2, 3 and 4 respectively, within 24 h in aqueous medium.126 They converted the MOFs into metal-oxides separately by heating them at 500 °C for 60 min as pure CO3O4, three hybrids of CO3O4/ZnO, and pure ZnO, named HTZIF1 to 5, respectively. Further, rGO was used to form a hybrid with MOFs 1 to 5 named HTZIF1 to 5, respectively, and their electrochemical performances analyzed via CV, GCD, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The specific capacitances values measured for rGO/HTZIF1 were 123, 119, 109, 96, 83 and 74 F g−1 and that for rGO/HTZIF5 128, 115, 109, 103, 84 and 76 F g−1 at current densities of 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10 A g−1, respectively. The specific capacitances values for rGO/HTZIF3 were measured to be 204, 192, 178, 169, 143, and 130 F g−1 at various current densities (Fig. 22a–j). Then an asymmetric supercapacitor was fabricated using rGO as the anode and active materials as the cathode by in KOH as the electrolyte. A high energy density (equivalent to 12.4 W h kg−1) and power density (equivalent to 8500 W kg−1) were demonstrated by the ASC with a virtuous cycle life (giving a capacity retention of 87% after 2000 cycles).
 Fig. 22  (a and b) CV and GCD curves of rGO/ZIFs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 and current density of 3 A g−1. (c) Specific capacitance at different current densities for ZIFs. (d and e) CV, and GCD curves of rGO/HTZIFs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 and current density of 3 A g−1. (f) Specific capacitance at different current densities for HTZIFs. (g) CV graphs for rGO and composite rGO/HTZIF3 electrodes at a similar scan rate. (h) CV profile of the asymmetric supercapacitor device at varying scan rates of 10, 25, 50, and 100 mV s−1. (i) GCD profile of the ASC at various current densities of 1–10 A g−1. (j) Cycling performance of ASC device at a current density of 3 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2017. 
The frequent use of CNT as a substrate for the growth and restriction of active substances is well known for efficiently improving the stability and electrical conductivity of active materials in electrochemical devices for energy storage.127a,b Recently, fixing MOFs on the surface of CNTs has become an effective way to improve the capacitance performances of MOF materials.
Jiao and coworkers recently synthesized two bimetallic MOFs (Ni/Co-MOF and Ni/Zn-MOF) via a one-step hydrothermal approach at 120 °C using Co(NO3)2·6H2O/Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, and NiCl2 as the metal precursor and benzene dicarboxylic acid (BDC) as the ligand dissolved in N-dimethylformamide (DMF).53 The electrochemical performance of both M-MOFs was compared with that of Ni-MOF having the same structural assembly and coordination modes. For the advanced practical evaluation of M-MOFs, hybrid supercapacitors of mixed-MOFs with CNTs–COOH were proposed and compared with the Ni-MOF/CNTs–COOH hybrid. In the SEM images, both MOFs displayed a flower-like morphology made of various nano-sheets with a thickness of 30 nm (Fig. 23 1a–1d). The elemental compositions of the MOFs were further confirmed by energy dispersive spectroscopy analysis. Their crystal structure was similar with a layered arrangement constructed from 1D chains created by octahedron metal ions coordinated with terephthalic acid ligand. The layered structures were interconnected by hydrogen bonds through water molecules, contributing to the cohesion and stability of the MOF. However, the spaces between the interlayers were larger than the ionic radius of OH−, which enhanced the ion diffusion and storage with better ionic intercalation. The specific surface area of Ni/Co-MOF was observed to be 404.5 m2 g−1 and Ni/Zn-MOF 367.5 m2 g−1, consistent with the well-known fact that a larger surface area leads to higher electrochemical activity. The potential windows displayed a better electrochemical performance for M-MOFs. The specific capacities of Co/Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF and Ni-MOF were observed to be 236.1, 161.5 and 122 mA h g−1 at a current density 1 A g−1 and 195.6, 90.3 and 50.8 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 current density, showing a capacity retention of 82.8%, 56% and 37%, respectively. The flower-shaped morphology of M-MOFs worked as a conductive pathway and provided commendable charge transport for the Faradaic reaction. The electrochemical measurements for the hybrid supercapacitor cells (HSC) were conducted by fabricating Co/Ni-MOF//CNTs–COOH (CNC-HSC), Zn/Ni-MOF//CNTs–COOH (ZNC-HSC) and Ni-MOF//CNTs–COOH (NC-ASC) in a KOH (3 M) solution. This hybrid supercapacitor combined the benefits of the Faradaic reactions provided by M-MOFs and capacitive behavior delivered by CNT–COOH, which improved the power density and energy density concurrently. CNC-HSC, ZNC-HSC, and NC-ASC retained 86% and 80% and 50% of their initial capacities after 5000 cycles, respectively, demonstrating the good cyclic stability of the M-MOF hybrids owing to the elevated phase transformation. CNC-HSC exhibited a unique power density of 1450 W kg−1 and high energy density of 54.7 W h kg−1, simultaneously. ZNC-HSC displayed an exceptional power density of 1450 W kg−1 and a high energy density of 49.5 W h kg−1. However, NC-ASC displayed a power density of 1400 W kg−1 with a low energy density of 37.7 W h kg−1. These observations were further verified by EIS analysis (Fig. 23 2a–2d).
 Fig. 23  (1a–d) SEM images of the as-synthesized Co/Ni-MOF. (2a) Comparison of CV profiles of the pristine Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF, and Co/Ni-MOF 5 mV s−1. (2b) GCD curves of Co/Ni-MOF at various current densities. (2c) CV profile of Co/Ni-MOF between 5 and 80 mV s−1, and (2d) EIS analysis. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
In a recent report, Wang et al. synthesized a composite of Ni/Co-MOF and carboxylated MWCNT through the in situ growth of M-MOF on CNTs via the solvothermal technique.128 Ni/Co-MOF was prepared utilizing 4,4′-biphenyl dicarboxylic acid (BPDC) as a ligand. In the carboxylated MWCNT, the hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups provided a base for binding with Ni2+ and Co2+, which further helped in the growth of Ni/Co-MOF crystals on the surface of MWCNT (Fig. 24a). A flower string-like morphology was observed for Ni/Co-MOF/MWCNT from the growth and wrapping of Ni/Co-MOF nanosheets on the MWCNT surface due to the bonds and affinity between them since the carboxyl groups on MWCNT are coordinated to metal ions of M-MOF and carboxyl groups of M-MOFs are connected to the carboxyl groups of MWCNT through hydrogen bonding. On comparison with pure hydrangea-like microspheres of Ni/Co-MOF, the string flower-shaped nano-sheets of Ni/Co-MOF/MWCNT were observed to be well dispersed and loosely distributed (Fig. 24b and c). The corresponding specific capacitance values were observed to be 1010, 976, 934, 828, and 760 F g−1 at 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10 A g−1, respectively, in 2 M KOH electrolyte. In the initial 300 cycles, the specific capacitance and columbic efficiency displayed a slight increment due to the promoted migration of ions. After 3000 cycles, it maintained 89.4% of its maximum value with 98% maintenance of columbic efficiency, indicating the complete discharge of the composites (Fig. 24d and e). The insertion of MWCNT improved the conductivity and specific capacitance of the MOF and diminished the internal resistance of the MOF materials with a reduction in charge transfer hindrance. Thus, the combined effect of the MWCNT-assisted enhanced properties and redox chemistry of Ni/Co-MOF improved the cyclic stability, reversibility, and rate capability, including enhanced energy density and power density.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of the NiCo-MOF and NiCo-MOF/MWCNT composites. SEM images of (b) NiCo-MOF/WMCNT and (c) NiCo-MOF. (d) CV profile at different scan rates, (e) GCD graphs at various current densities of NiCo-MOF/MWCNT electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Springer, Copyright 2019. 


3.3.2 M-MOF-derived nanoporous carbon grown on carbon cloth. 
Besides the formation of composites with graphene or CNTs, there is one report on the design of a porous electrode where an Ni/Co-MOF with a honeycomb-like morphology was directly grown on carbon cloth via the hydrothermal technique to prepare Ni/Co-MOF@CC.129 Ni/Co-MOF is a layered structure, where its central metal ions are connected to the BDC ligands and coordinated water molecules to form 2D frameworks, which are interconnected via hydrogen bonds to form a 3D network, delivering stability to the MOF. The specific surface area observed for Ni/Co-MOF@CC was 691 m2 g−1. The highest specific capacity exhibited by Ni/Co-MOF@CC was 1180.5 mC cm−2 at 3 mA cm−2 with excellent capacity retention of 97.6% after 5000 cycles. However, compared with Ni-MOF@Carbon cloth (Ni-MOF@CC) and Co-MOF@Carbon cloth (Co-MOF@CC) with the same structural features, coordination modes and morphology, specific capacities equivalent to 811.8 and 927.1 mC cm−2 were observed, respectively. The observed specific surface area of Ni-MOF and Co-MOF was 344 m2 g−1 and 372 m2 g−1, respectively. The spaces between the interlayers of all the MOFs were quite large to allow easy movement of the electrolyte and fast intercalation of ions. Therefore, these layered structures displayed decent electrochemical performances. The reason for the improved electrochemical performance of Ni/Co-MOF@CC is attributed to the synergetic effect of the mixed central metal ions, which improves the specific surface area and porosity, and successively enhances the contact area between the electrolyte and electrode and decreases the ion transport path length. The ionic conductivity and electron transfer rate of the inactive materials are also influenced by the incorporation of cobalt, which boosts the reaction kinetics and increases the current response.


3.3.3 M-MOF grown on nanofibers. 
Tian et al. prepared 4 supercapacitor electrodes, PPNF/M-Ni MOF (M = Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe), by growing a bimetallic MOF on PPNFs (preoxidized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers) via the incorporation of the above metals with Ni separately in a vessel as the metal precursor and compared their electrochemical performances in KOH as the electrolyte. Then, they also developed a solid-state supercapacitor by employing PPNF/Co–Ni MOF//CNF-G by assembling PPNF/Co–Ni MOF as the positive material and CNF-G as the negative one. PPNFs were obtained via the calcination of PAN at 240 °C and mixed with MOF precursors to obtain PPNF@M-Ni MOF through a hydrothermal process at 120 °C for 16 h. The electrospun nanofibers with 1D chains and tunable nano-sizes and porosity acted as a support for enhancing the super capacitance properties and cycle stability.130a–e The calculated specific capacities of the PPNF/Co–Ni MOF, PPNF/Zn–Ni MOF, PPNF/Cu–Ni MOF, and PPNF/Fe–Ni MOF electrodes were 1096.2, 234.1, 361.6, and 393.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, respectively. Meanwhile, their calculated specific capacities were 548.1, 117.05, 180.8, and 196.75 C g−1, respectively. It is clearly stated that the charge storage capability of the abovementioned MOF hybrids followed the order of Co > Fe > Cu > Zn. The destruction of the flower-like morphology in the case of Zn and its low surface area were suggested to be the major cause of its low charge storage capability. However, Cu ions were more involved in assembling an independent Cu-MOF rather than being incorporated in Ni-MOF to form a Cu–Ni MOF, and hence its electrochemical properties were inferior being a mono-metallic MOF. PPNF/Co–Ni MOF displayed the best specific capacitance behavior due to its uniform flower-like nanosheets and nanofibers, providing a large specific surface area together with the synergistic influence of Co and Ni ions with good redox activity and acceptable electronic conductivity, which helped in maintaining 49.8% of its initial capacitance value at 15 A g−1. Further, the fabricated PPNF/Co–Ni MOF//CNF-G yielded a specific capacitance of 263.3, 252.6, 240.9, 202.4, and 135.0 F g−1 at the current densities of 2, 5, 7, 10, and 15 A g−1, respectively. In the initial charge–discharge cycle, an increase in capacitance was observed, which may be due to the activation of CNF-G together with the hydrolysis of the PPNF@Co–Ni MOF. A high energy density of 93.6 W h kg−1 was obtained at the unique power density of 1600.0 W kg−1 having a retention rate of 85.5% after 10000 cycles with no major drop from its initial value (Fig. 25a–f).
 Fig. 25  (a) Scheme for the synthesis of PPNF@M-Ni MOF (M = Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe) and the coordination modes of Ni MOF and Co–Ni MOF. (b) FESEM image of PPNF@Ni MOF and (c) CV profile of PPNF@Co–Ni MOF at different scan rates. (d) GCD measurements of PPNF@Co–Ni MOF at different current densities. (e and f) CV and GCD curves at 10 mV s−1 and 1 A g−1 for the PPNF@M-Ni MOF (M = Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe) samples. Reproduced from ref. 130a with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 


3.3.4 Bimetallic M-MOF sulfide/N-doped carbon composite. 
To achieve improved energy density, heteroatom doping (such as N, B, P, O, and S) on carbon is becoming an interesting area of research for the preparation of electrode materials.131a–d Among them, nitrogen-doped carbon appears to be the most promising for the improvement of capacitance, while maintaining a high rate capability and extended cycle life via surface Faradaic reactions.131e–h Being more electronegative than carbon, the doping of N on carbon results in the generation of defect sites, which enhance the electrical conductivity by providing greater charge/electron carrier movement.131d,i–k
A composite with N-doped carbon was reported in 2019, where Zhan and coworkers designed a unique strategy by employing Ni/Co-MOF to synthesize a bimetallic Ni/Co sulfide and its composites with nitrogen-doped carbon a having hollow spherical structure.131l NiCo-BTC was used as the precursor for M-MOF. It was found that maximum electrochemical performance of the Ni–Co–S-n/NC composite was obtained at the Ni/Co molar ratio 0.5, exhibiting a decent specific capacity of 543.9 C g−1 at a current density 1 A g−1 with 67% retention in capacitance with a twenty-fold increase in current density (Fig. 26a–f). Unique hollow spherical structures were observed in the FESEM images of the Ni–Co–S-n/NC composite. These hollow structures are beneficial due to their minimized charge transfer distance, plentiful active sites, great surface area and less prospect for aggregation of nano-size components.131m–p This group further explored its practical applications by assembling an ASC utilizing the Ni–Co–S-n/NC composite as the cathode and carbon black as the anode. The ASC delivered a specific capacitance of 111.2 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and about 68.5% of capacitance retention was observed at a current density of 10 A g−1. The device retained 81.5% of its capacitance value after 3000 cycles at 4 A g−1, revealing quite good electrochemical stability and almost 100% coulombic efficiency, showing good electrochemical reversibility. The device achieved a respectable energy density of 39.6 W h kg−1 at 808 W kg−1 power density, indicating the practical applications of N-doped hollow composites.
 Fig. 26  (a) Synthetic route for the hollow Ni–Co–S-n/NC composites. (b) SEM image of Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC composite, (c) GCD outline of the hollow Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC composite at different current densities. (d) Probable scheme of the Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC//AC ASC. (e and f) CV and GCD profiles of Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC//AC ASC measured at various scan rates and current densities. Reproduced from ref. 131c with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
In another report, Javed et al. synthesized unique hierarchical bimetallic sulfide (Znx/Co–S1−x) nanocrystals engrained in nitrogen-doped carbon at 400 °C (where, x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0). These bimetallic sulfides were prepared via an in situ approach from MOF-derived bimetallic oxides via the hydrothermal method followed by their controlled sulfidation.132 The exclusively prepared porous and firm nanocomposite ZCS-NC-II exhibited an extraordinary pseudocapacitive performance with a high specific capacitance of 2133.2 F g−1 (equivalent to 354.53 mA h g−1) at a current density of 1.25 A g−1 without using any commercial binder. It exhibited excellent capacitance retention of 95.63% after 10000 cycles showing significant rate capability and cycle stability in aqueous 6 M LiCl electrolyte (Fig. 27a–e). These capacitance values were 2.5 times greater than that of ZCO-NC, which exhibited a specific capacitance of 847.78 F g−1 at 1.25 A g−1. Further, an asymmetric flexible solid-state supercapacitor was developed, where ZCS-NC-II was employed as the positive electrode and M-MOF-derived N-doped mesoporous carbon (Zn/Co:50/50) was assembled as a negative electrode. The whole assembly exhibited a capacitance value of 290 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The energy density of this ASC exceeded all previously reported symmetric and asymmetric solid-state supercapacitors based on composites of mono/bimetallic sulfides or oxides and carbon materials. The device exhibited an energy density of 92.59 W h kg−1 with a retention of 91.82% over 5000 cycles.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation for the growth of Zn/Co-MOF-derived nanosheets on a carbon cloth substrate and their sulfurization followed by sintering to form mesoporous zinc–cobalt–sulfide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped carbon. (b) SEM image, (c) CV and (d) GCD profiles, and (e) plot of current density vs. specific capacitance and obtained areal capacitance. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
It was reported that 2D Zn/Co-MOF nanosheet arrays were grown on flexible carbon cloth and after annealing, subjected to sulfurization via hydrothermal ion exchange reaction to form Zn-CoS-NSs/CC.133 The recovered sulfide nanosheets displayed quite high conductivity having a ductile structure. An ASC device with high performance was developed, where the above prepared Zn-CoS-NSs/CC was used as a scaffold to fabricate Ni(OH)2 nanosheet shells as a pseudocapacitive material via the cathodic electro-deposition process in an electrolyte solution of 0.1 M Ni(NO3)2·6H2O at −1.0 V electro-deposition potential for a period of 500 s.
The prepared Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NS was 3D well-aligned core-shell heterostructures used without any binder, and when validated for its electrochemical performance, displayed an excellent capacitance equivalent to 8.1 F cm−2 at 3 mA cm−2, i.e., 2730 F g−1, with firm and high electrochemical stability with good structural flexibility (Fig. 28a–j). The developed ASCs with reasonably engineered electrodes delivered an elevated energy density of 75 W h kg−1 at a high power density of 0.4 kW kg−1, showing an admirable specific capacitance of 210.7 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 with a capacitance retention of 82% after 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 28  SEM images of (a) Zn/Co-MOF nanosheets on CC, (b) ZnCoO-NSs/CC, (c) ZnCoS-NSs/CC, and (d) Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NSs. Electrochemical performances of the Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NS/CC electrode with 2 M KOH solution in a three-electrode system: (e) CV curves at different scan rates, and (f) GCD profiles at diverse current densities of Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NSs. (g) Areal and mass-specific capacitance values vs. current density. Comparative graphs of Ni(OH)2@-ZnCoS-NS/CC, Ni(OH)2@ZnCoO-NS/CC, and ZnCoS-NS electrode systems in terms of: (h) GCD curves at a current density of 3 mA cm−2, (i) areal specific capacitance values vs. current density, and (j) cycling performance at a high current density of 20 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 


3.3.5 M-MOF composite with sulfur-doped graphene. 
In 2019, Rajpurohit et al. constructed a new bimetallic MOF (CuFeBTC) utilizing Cu and Fe and 1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid as the metal centers and ligand, respectively, with a surface area of 313.54 m2 g−1 and developed its hybrid integrating CuFeBTC on the surface of sulfur-doped graphene (S-GNS) with a surface area of 568.75 m2 g−1 and compared their supercapacitance performances.134 On comparing the capacitive behavior of (S-GNS), (CuFeBTC)-MOF, and (CuFeBTC)-MOF/S-GNS, it was revealed that the capacitive behavior of the CuFeBTC/S-GNS electrode was outstanding with a specific capacitance of 1164.3 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, exhibiting a sufficient rate capability. Further, the utilization of the CuFeBTC/S-GNS nanocomposite electrode for the configuration of symmetric supercapacitor supplied a significant energy density of 96.57 W h kg−1 and power density of 1595.12 W kg−1 at an operational voltage of 1.8 V. This symmetric supercapacitor exhibited an exceptional cycle life of 10000 cycles and specific capacitance retention of 92.5% at a current density 1.0 A g−1. The energy storage retention of this symmetric supercapacitor device was displayed as 50.2 W h kg−1 measured at a current density of 20.0 A g−1 with a high power density of 26973.13 W kg−1. The combined features of the bimetallic (CuFeBTC) MOF and sulfur-doped graphene boosted the electrochemical properties of the composite. The porous and hollow structure of the composite material increased the electrode/electrolyte contact area and boosted the charge conveyance across the electrolyte. The synergistic effects of bimetallic MOF with active redox sites and highly conductive S-GNS facilitated the permeation of electrolyte ions in the active material and delivered the high specific capacitance.
In 2019, Tan and coworkers prepared hybrid NiCo2S4@MoS2 materials, where precursor ZIFs with dodecahedral shape crystals were transformed into bimetallic-layered double hydroxide followed by successive sulfuration to form a heterostructure made up of a rough surface with randomly decorated nanosheets (Fig. 29a–c). The specific capacitance of NiCo2S4@MoS2 was 860 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a retention of 71.9% after 1000 cycles, revealing a good rate capability (Fig. 29d–g). NiCo2S4 was combined with rGO and MoS2 having 2D structures as an active approach to compensate for the inherent restrictions of pure NiCo2S4, further improving its electrochemical performance. The better electrochemical performances were suggested to be due to the well-organized hollow dodecahedrons, which provided a huge surface area and more reaction sites, the synergistic effects of the heterostructure, the electronic interactions managed by a better nano-interface, and the hollow structure avoided the binding of H2 bubbles to the surface of electrode, maintaining the consistency of the required solid–liquid interface.135
 Fig. 29  (a) SEM images of ZIF-67, (b and c) SEM images of NiCo2S4@MoS2, (d) CV curves, (e) GCD curves at different scan rates and current densities, respectively, of the NiCo2S4@MoS2 heterostructures, (f) rate capability, and (g) cycling performance of the NiCo2S4 and NiCo2S4@MoS2 heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 


3.3.6 N,S-co-doped M-MOF composites. 
Heteroatom doping is conveniently used for regulating and improving the remarkable physical and chemical properties of carbon.136a Heteroatom doping encourages redox reactions and increases the wettability of the electrodes, subsequently refining the supercapacitor performance.136b Pristine graphene is a semiconductor having a zero-band-gap, which can be opened via the doping of hetero-atoms. N-Doped carbon nanotubes develop metallic character by shifting the Fermi level to the valence bands.136c Doping of nitrogen also enhances the conductivity of the carbon skeleton. Sulfur species play a significant role in modifying the properties of carbon electrodes either by building bonds between S atoms and benzene rings or by participating in conjugated planar arrangements with delocalized p-electrons. The synergistic conjugation between carbon and electron-rich sulfur results in a higher electron density at the surface. Therefore, the capacitance can be increased due to the greater electrolyte dielectric constant. Surface polarization as an outcome of the applied electric field facilitates the charge transfer process.136d Covalent sulfur complexes produced with carbon are comparatively firm and can be disintegrated beyond 1000 °C by treating with heat under vacuum.
Li et al. prepared bimetallic nanocomposites of a bimetallic Ni/Co-MOF as a precursor and further co-doped them with nitrogen and sulfur by vulcanization reaction and annealing.136e The prepared NS-BNs exhibited an outstanding specific capacitance of 1529 F g−1 and 1068 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1 and 10 A g−1, respectively, displaying a great rate performance. Ni/Co-MOF with a 2D layered framework was synthesized through a solvothermal process by incorporating Co(NO3)2·6H2O in Ni-MOF, using ethanol as the solvent at 90 °C. Layered stacked nano-sheets were observed in the FESEM images of Ni-MOF; however, wrinkled stacked nano-sheets with a rough surface were detected in the images of Ni/Co-MOF, leading to additional redox-active sites, and the stacking of flower-like pellets into nano-sheets was observed in the case of NS-BNs. Doping of heteroatoms significantly enriches the physical and chemical properties of the electrode. Here, sulfur provided flexibility due to its lower electronegative character than the O atom and N doping reduced the resistance in electron movement. The synergistic properties of bi-metals Ni and Co and their co-doping with sulfur and nitrogen elements delivered ample sites for enhanced redox reactions and facilitated the diffusion and movement of electrolytes across the channels, which consequently boosted the electrochemical performances. The retention rate of 89.2% was observed after 10000 cycles, showing excellent cyclic stability. Further, an asymmetric supercapacitor was assembled, exhibiting a large energy density of 41.04 W h kg−1 at a power density of 750 W kg−1 (Fig. 30a–f).
 Fig. 30  (a and b) CV and GCD curves of Ni foam, Ni-MOF, Ni/Co-MOF, and NS-BNs measured at scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and current density 1 A g−1. (c) Specific capacitance vs. current density. (d) Nyquist plots. (e) CV profile of NS-BNs at 5 mV s−1 to 80 mV s−1. (f) GCD profile of NS-BNs at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 136e with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 


3.3.7 M-MOF-derived oxides/metal nanocomposites. 
The well-regulated structures of MOFs with tunable pore sizes enable the fast interfacial transport of ions, acting as a template for the preparation of porous metal oxides. The mixed metal oxide nanostructures synthesized from M-MOFs through direct heat treatment exhibit similar morphology and patterns as that of the parent MOFs. However, annealing in the presence of N2 followed by air is predominantly favorable for conserving the original structures and arrangements of the parent MOFs.137a These M-MOF derived MMOs exhibit a higher surface area than the metal oxides synthesized from other procedures, readily producing porous architectures. The diffusion of ions strongly affects the surface Faradaic processes and the pores established in MOF-derived metal oxides sustain this diffusion, which results in the enhanced electrochemical activity of the electrode material.111–114,137b Yamauchi and coworkers reported a new porous hybrid material via one-pot synthesis using NiCo-MOF-74 as a precursor and converting it into hybrid mixture of metals, metal oxides, and carbon.54 NiCo-MOF-74 was prepared using Ni and Co as metal salts and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid as a ligand in DMF via a solvothermal approach. It exhibited uniform hollow spherical structures of smooth surfaces with a specific surface area of 729.5 m2 g−1. The first hybrid consisted of graphitic carbon/NixCo1−x composites prepared at 800 °C (termed NC-800), which exhibited a high specific capacitance of 715 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Treatment of NiCo-MOF-74 at 350 °C resulted in the formation of NixCo1−x/NixCo1−xO composites with evaluated electrochemical performances of 513 F g−1 specific capacitance at 1 A g−1 and no loss in initial capacitance after 2500 cycles, showing good cyclic stability. Both hybrids maintained uniform hollow spherical structures, but with rough surfaces having a pore size distribution in the range of 5 to 50 nm. These hybrid materials showing remarkable electrochemical properties contained graphitic carbon and binary mixed metals, where the synergy between them enhanced the electrical conductivity of the composites. The easy diffusion of electrolyte was facilitated by the presence of mesopores having a large surface area and pore volume.
In a recent report, a bimetallic Co/Ni-MOF [(NixCo3−x)3O(BTC)2(H2O)-(DMF)]n was used as a template to generate Cox/Ni1−x(OH)2, a layered structure, via an alkali hydrolysis approach (Fig. 31a), which exhibited an outstanding specific capacitance of 1956 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1.137c This capacitance value was 1.59 times and 15.37 times that of the MOF-derived Ni(OH)2 and Co(OH)2, respectively. However, the cycling performance was quite low, possessing 48% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles, which was further improved by forming the NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2 ternary composite (Ni/Co-TC) via the selective oxidation of Cox/Ni1−x(OH)2. The as-synthesized ternary composite with a structure of accordion-like nanosheets displayed 90.7% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles, which is quite high in comparison to its precursors. An asymmetric all-solid-state hybrid supercapacitor was also established by the ternary composite, named Ni/Co-TC//AC, which exhibited a high energy density of 36.98 W h kg−1 at a power density of 801.49 W kg−1 (Fig. 31b–e). The above work presented an approach of hydrolysis-oxidation to assemble multi-component electrode materials through a bimetallic MOF template, resulting in precise morphologies and outstanding electrochemical properties.
 Fig. 31  (a) Synthetic process of (NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2). CV profile (b) and GCD graphs (c) of NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2. (d) Specific capacitance of Ni/Co-TC, Co/Ni-MOF-3:1–600, and Co/Ni(OH)2-3:1–600. (e) Comparison of the cycle life of Co/Ni(OH)2-3:1 and Ni/Co-TC. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
In this review, selected examples of M-MOFs and their derived material were discussed. A complete overview of the similar state-of-the-art materials based on various factors such as material used, type of MOFs, synthetic conditions, specific capacitance, electrolyte and cyclic stability is summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1 Comparison of supercapacitor performance of similar state-of-the-art M-MOFs and M-MOF-derived materials




Sr. no.
Material/type of MOFs
Synthetic condition
Sp. cap. (F g−1)
Electrolyte
Rate of scan (mV s−1/A g−1)
Retention of sp. cap. (%)
Ref.




1.
Ni–Co-MOF/3D MOF
200 °C
1049
3 M KOH
—/1
97.4 after 5000 cycles

51



2.
Ni–Co-MOF/dandelion hollow structure
150 °C
758
2 M KOH
—/1
75 after 5000 cycles

52



3.
Co–Fe-MOF/3D inclined polycatenated
RT
446.8
1 M KOH
—/1.2
∼88 after 800 cycles

83



4.
Co–Mn MOF/layered MOF
120 °C
106.7
2 M KOH
10/—
95 after 1500 cycles

95



5.
Ni–Co-MOF/nanoflake-like structure
60 °C
530.4
1 M LiOH
—/0.5
∼99 after 2000 cycles

96



6.
Ni–Co-MOF-5/flower-like structure
120 °C
1220.2
3 M KOH
—/1
87.8 after 3000 cycles

139b



7.
2D NSs NiMn2O4/direct salt sacrificing
350 °C
662.5
1 M Na2SO4
—/1
96 after 1000 cycles

108



8.
NiCo2O4/1D NWs direct salt sacrificing
60 °C
743
1 M KOH
—/1
93.8 after 3000 cycles

109



9.
3D-flower shaped NiCo2O4/direct salt sacrificing
180 °C
1191.2
2 M KOH
—/1
63.4 after 1500 cycles

110



10.
NPs ZnCo2O4/scarifying JUC-155
400 °C
450
6 M KOH
5/—
97.9 after 1500 cycles

111



11.
NiCo2O4/sacrificing MOF-74-Ni1Co1
400 °C
797
6 M KOH
—/1
75 after 10000 cycles

112



12.
Ni–Co MMOs/sacrificing ZIF-67
350 °C
1931
2 M KOH
—/1
69.5 after 5000 cycles

113



13.
MnCo2O4/scarifying Mn–Co-ZIF
400 °C
1763
2 M KOH
—/1
95 after 4500 cycles

114



14.
Flower-shaped MnNi2O4/sacrificing Mn–Ni-MOFs
450 °C
2848
6 M KOH
—/1
93.25 after 5000 cycles

115





Table 2 Comparison of the supercapacitor performance of similar state-of-the-art M-MOF composite material




Sr. no.
Material
Type of MOFs
Synthetic condition
Sp. cap. (F g−1)
Electrolyte
Scan (mA cm−2/A g−1)
Retention of sp. cap.
Ref.




1.

M-MOF@graphene



HTZIF3/rGO
Rhombic dodecahedron
500 °C
204
6 M KOH
—/1
87% after 2000 cycles

26



Na/Zn-MOF/rGO
2-D layered MOF with flower shaped structure
RT
435.2
0.5 M Na2SO4
—/1.6
99.9% after 4000 cycles

35



Ni–Co-MOF/GO
Chestnut-shaped 3D structure
37 °C
447.2
6 M KOH
—/1
99.6% after 300 cycles

125a



2.

M-MOF@CNTs



Ni/Co-MOF/MWCNT
Flower-shaped nano-sheets
110 °C
1010
2 M KOH
—/0.5
89.4% after 3000 cycles

128



3.

M-MOF@CC



Ni/Co-MOF@CC
Layered
120 °C
1180.5 mC cm−2
2 M KOH
3/—
97.6% after 5000 cycles

129



4.

M-MOF@nanofibers



PPNF/Co–Ni MOF
Flower-like nanosheets
120 °C
1096.2
3 M KOH
—/1
100% after 10000 cycles

130a



PPNF/Cu–Ni MOF
Cuboid wrapped with nanosheets
180.8 °C
361.6
3 M KOH
—/1
—

130a



PPNF/Fe–Ni MOF
—
196.75 °C
393.5
3 M KOH
—/1
—

130a



PPNF/Zn–Ni MOF
Irregular flower shape
117.05 °C
234.1
3 M KOH
—/1
—

130a



5.

M-MOF sulfide@N doped carbon composite



Ni–Co–S-n/NC
Hollow spherical structure
—
543.9 C g−1
—
—/1
81.5% after 3000 cycles

131l



ZCS-NC-II
Ultra-thin nanosheets
100 °C
2133.2
6 M LiCl
—/1.25
95.63% after 10000 cycles

132



Zn-CoS-NSs/CC
2D nano sheets
200 °C
2730
2 M KOH
—/3
82% after 10000 cycles

133



6.

M-MOF@S doped graphene



CuFeBTC/S-GNS
Wrinkled nanosheets
500 °C
1164.3
3 M KOH
—/1
92.5% after 10000 cycles

134



NiCo2S4@MoS2
Dodecahedral shape
—
860
—
—/1
71.9% after 1000 cycles

135



7.

N,S co-doped M-MOF composite



NS-BNs
Layered stacked nano-sheets
65 °C
1529
6 M KOH
—/1
89.2% after 10000 cycles

136e



8.

M-MOF derived MOs@metal nano-composites



NC-800 NixCo1−x/NixCo1−xO
Spherical structures
800 °C
715
6 M KOH
—/1
100% after 2500 cycles

54



Ni/Co-TC
Hollow spherical structure
105 °C
513
6 M KOH
—/1
90.7% after 10000 cycles

137c






4. Future scope
M-MOFs are a promising class of MOF materials that offers numerous benefits over single metal MOFs. The incorporation of different metal ions significantly increases the complexity and stability of MOFs, which leads to promising synergic properties. M-MOFs demonstrating structural stability and multi-functionality can offer superior performances to single metal MOFs.16,48,100 Generally, the applications of M-MOFs depend on the reactivity of their metal ions.33,48 Although the synthesis of M-MOFs appears to be feasible and simple, there are several substantial tasks: (a) incorporating various metal ions in the same structure and find their nodal positions, (b) preparation of a controllable stoichiometric composition of metal ions in one structure, and (c) predicting/controlling the functionally and topologies of M-MOFs. Recently, M-MOFs have attracted significant consideration in the area of supercapacitors due to the increased complexity/stability, redox-active metal ions and breathing behavior of their frameworks.35,51,83,95 The strategy to enhance framework complexity can be easily applied in M-MOFs to boost their supercapacitive performance. M-MOFs have emerged as a popular sacrificial precursor to obtain mixed-metal oxides/sulphide/phosphide and their easy preparation method together with exciting properties such as tunable pore size, large surface area, redox-activity and reticular nature. Furthermore, the activated surface of M-MOF-derived materials is considered to be crucial to ensure high stability and activity of supercapacitors. M-MOF-derived mixed-metal oxides/sulphide/phosphide or further modified materials provide a rapid charge transfer pathway by shorting the mechanistic diffusion pathway, which results in a notable improvement in reaction kinetics. MMOs prepared from M-MOFs offer superior charge storage capabilities compared to MMOs prepared by other methods due to their rigid structure and precise mixing of atomic-level constituent elements.9,111,117–120 Selecting sulfur or phosphorus atoms instead of the oxygen atom further enhances their charge storage capability.113,117,118
However, M-MOF-derived materials have only started receiving attention recently, and thus need more exposure for their development. Furthermore, their commercial viability remains a prime challenge and has been a persistent issue like other many fascinating materials. During industrial-level production, a cost-effective and simple synthetic process of these materials, and subsequently electrodes, is necessary for their mass production. The durability of the fabricating material is one of the most critical factors of supercapacitors for long-term stability during charge–discharge in practical application.115,120 The improvement in the conductivity of these materials is very important for enhancing the rate performance and capacitance in supercapacitors. Thus, considering all these issues, it is crucial to develop innovative synthetic pathways to achieve the highly scalable, cost-effective production of M-MOFs.
Bimetallic MOFs offer huge possibilities for designing and modifying the properties of MOFs.138 The intrinsic properties of MOFs such as bandgap and thermal stability are largely influenced by the incorporation of a second metal cation. Single metallic MOF derivatives enhance the properties of electrode materials in a limited mode, whereas massive constructive changes in properties and functionalities are observed when mixed bi-metallic or tri-metallic MOFs are used as precursors to derive these nano-porous materials.14,113,116 There are many bimetallic MOFs reported up to date, most of which are Ni/Co MOFs and their derived oxides, sulfides, or composites with carbon, sulfur or nitrogen.33,34,36,37,54,131c,135,136 The presence of two metals in bi-metallic MOFs works in a synergistic way to increase the redox reactions and result in the enhanced movement of ions in the electrolyte, which consequently improves their electrochemical performance. However, still there is much more to explore since the synthesis of M-MOFs is limited to some transition metals only. Also, the applications of M-MOFs will find more possibilities in solid-state flexible supercapacitors, and in lithium-ion batteries, which still needs further exploration. Bimetallic MOF-based nanofibers exhibit brilliant electrochemical applications in flexible supercapacitors and can further be utilized in wearable electronics and devices due to their high stability, light weight, large surface area, flexibility and good conductivity. These wearable electronics can be worn near to the skin surface and transmit information after the detection of signals. Hence, the emerging world of M-MOFs is full of exciting opportunities and possibilities.
5. Conclusions
Herein, we mentioned several synthetic methods such as one-pot synthesis, post-synthetic modification, and use of metalloligands for the preparation of M-MOFs. It has been explored that a similar size, hardness–softness of metallic species, charge density, and synthetic conditions are crucial parameters for the successful synthesis of M-MOFs. The design of M-MOFs with high framework stability and tunable breathing characteristics may lead towards the synthesis of M-MOFs containing various metal centers to achieve a new class of advanced materials for supercapacitor applications. Also, the fabrication of hybrid nanostructured material derived from M-MOFs can certainly expand the family of energy storage materials. However, M-MOFs and their derived materials have not been fully explored to date, and the number of reported synthetic routes is limited. Nevertheless, it is possible in the future that we may see several advanced materials that will exploit the fascinating properties of M-MOFs in building high-performing supercapacitor devices for industrial purposes.
Abbreviations

ACActivated carbon
BDCBenzene dicarboxylic acid
BMOsBimetallic metal oxides
BPDC4, 4′-Biphenyl dicarboxylic acid
bpy4,4′-Bipyridyl
BTB1,3,5-Benzenetribenzoate
BTC1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
CVCyclic voltammetry
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
EDLCsElectric double-layered capacitors
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FcDCA1,1′-Ferrocene dicarboxylic acid
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
GOGraphene oxide
GW-MSNGOHSGraphene-wrapped multi-shelled Ni–Ga oxide hollow spheres
GW-YS-NFOHSGraphene-wrapped yolk-shell Ni–Fe oxide hollow spheres
HSCHybrid supercapacitor cells
MOsMetal oxides
M-MOFsMixed-metal metal–organic frameworks
MMoSxMolybdenum-doped mixed-metallic metal sulfides
MMOsMixed-metal metal oxides
MTV-MOFsMultivariate metal–organic frameworks
NCNitrogen-doped carbon composite
NFNickel foam
NPsNanoparticles
NSsNanosheets
NWsNanowires
PPNFsPreoxidized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone K-30
PXRDPowder X-ray diffraction
rGOReduced graphene oxide
RTRoom temperature
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SBUsSecondary building units
TEMTransmission electron microscopy

vs.

Versus

XANESX-Ray absorption near edge structure
ZIFsZeolitic imidazolate frameworks

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. M. M. sincerely thanks all the authors for their kind efforts in writing and revising this manuscript under lockdown situation with all hurdles and well utilising work from home time. S. M. M. thanks SERB-DST (Project No. EMR/2016/001113), CSIR (Project No. 01(2935)/18/EMR-II), New Delhi, India and IIT Indore for financial support. R. R. and R. K. thank DST-INSPIRE and CSIR-JRF fellowships, respectively. S. N. A. and M. S. gratefully acknowledges MHRD, India for providing teaching assistantship (TA) fellowship.
References
S. Shafiee and E. Topal, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 181–189 CrossRef .

  (a) D. Gielen, F. Boshell, D. Saygin, M. D. Bazilian, N. Wagner and R. Gorini, Energy Strategy Rev., 2019, 24, 38–50 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Xiang, X. Zhao, L. Ta, J. Ye, S. Wu, S. Zhang and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 269–276 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
A. P. Owusu and S. Asumadu-Sarkodie, Cogent Eng., 2016, 3, 1167990 Search PubMed .

  (a) T. Kim, W. Song, D.-Y. Son, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2942–2964 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Chen, D. Bresser, M. Saraf, P. Gerlach, A. Balducci, S. Kunz, D. Schröder, S. Passerini and J. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2205–2219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Poonam, K. Sharma, A. Arora and S. K. Tripathi, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 21, 801–825 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. N. Ansari, M. Saraf, A. K. Gupta and S. M. Mobin, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3566–3571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zou, L. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Wang, T. Wik and M. Pecht, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 286–296 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Wu, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 697–716 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Portet, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, E. Flahaut and C. Laberty-Robert, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 4174–4181 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Pan, J. Li and Y. P. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
J. R. Miller and A. F. Burke, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 53 CAS .
M. Saraf, K. Natarajan and S. M. Mobin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16588–16595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Shim, W. Chen, C. Doty, C. Xu and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4151–4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, G. G. Li and H. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saraf, R. Rajak and S. M. Mobin, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 8142–8149 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Ansari, P. Kumar, A. K. Gupta, P. Mathur and S. M. Mobin, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9723–9732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf, S. K. Verma, R. Kumar and S. M. Mobin, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 16065–16074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Luo, C. Liu, X. Y. Gan, P. F. Muldoon, N. A. Diemler, J. E. Millstone and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2161–2168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Gupta, M. Saraf, P. K. Bharadwaj and S. M. Mobin, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9844–9854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saraf, R. Rajak and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16432–16445 RSC .
R. Kaur, K.-H. Kim, A. Paul and A. Deep, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3991–4002 RSC .
M. C. Das, S. Xiang, Z. Zhang and B. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10510–10520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saraf, K. Natarajan and S. M. Mobin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10489–10504 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, Z. Wei, Z.-Y. Gu, T.-F. Liu, J. Park, J. Park, J. Tian, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang and T. Gentle III, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5561–5593 RSC .
G. Korotcenkov, S. D. Han and J. R. Stetter, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1402–1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Zeng, Q.-X. Wang, Y.-X. Tan, S. Hu, H.-X. Zhao, L.-S. Long and M. Kurmoo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2561–2563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Itoi, S. Hayashi, H. Matsufusa and Y. Ohzawa, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3201–3204 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Che, X. Sun, J. Dou and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9769–9772 RSC .
K. Zhao, W. Zhu, S. Liu, X. Wei, G. Ye, Y. Su and Z. He, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 536–562 RSC .
S. Abednatanzi, P. G. Derakhshandeh, H. Depauw, F.-X. Coudert, H. Vrielinck, P. V. D. Voort and K. Leus, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2535–2565 RSC .
A. D. Burrows, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3623–3642 RSC .
M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali, A. Dhakshinamoorthy and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15188–15205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14382–14384 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Gonzalez, E. D. Bloch, J. A. Mason, S. J. Teat and J. R. Long, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 2995–3005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ayoub, B. Karadeniz, A. J. Howarth, O. K. Farha, I. Đilovic, L. S. Germann, R. E. Dinnebier, K. Užarević and T. Frisčic, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5494–5501 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1725–1736 RSC .
M. Y. Masoomi, M. Bagheri and A. Morsali, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 37, 502–508 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Xie, J. Huang and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. K. Hocking and T. W. Hambley, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 2833–2835 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Li, J. Xu, R. Feng, T. L. Hu and X. H. Bu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8501–8513 RSC .
V. Colombo, S. Galli, H. J. Choi, G. D. Han, A. Maspero, G. Palmisano, N. Masciocchi and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1311–1319 RSC .
J. Canivet, M. Vandichel and D. Farrusseng, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4090–4099 RSC .
Z. Fang, B. Bueken, D. E. De Vos and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7234–7255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Wang, H. Deng, H. Furukawa, F. Gandara, K. E. Cordova, D. Peri and O. M. Yaghi, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5881–5883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, Z.-H. Yan, V. A. Blatov, L. Wang and D.-F. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 1277–1289 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Liu, Y.-J. Qi, D. Zhao, H.-H. Li and S.-T. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 516–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, Z.-S. Bai, J. Fan, J. Xu and W.-Y. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 5190–5196 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peng, L. Ma, L. Liang, Y. Ma, C. Yang and H. Deng, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 922–930 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiric and H. Garcia, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 5238–5261 RSC .
F. Nouar, T. Devic, H. Chevreau, N. Guillou, E. Gibson, G. Clet, M. Daturi, A. Vimont, J. M. Greneche, M. I. Breeze, R. I. Walton, P. L. Llewellyne and C. Serre, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10237–10239 RSC .
X. Song, M. Oh and M. S. Lah, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10869–10876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Ranjbar, M. Soleimania and H. R. Naderi, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 9187–9193 RSC .
S. Gao, Y. Sui, F. Wei, J. Qi, Q. Meng, Y. Ren and Y. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, D. Chen, C. Yan, Y. Hu, Q. Zhang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1094–1102 RSC .
C. Young, J. Kim, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2007–2015 CrossRef CAS .
B. Iqbal, M. Saleem, S. N. Arshad, J. Rashid, N. Hussain and M. Zaheer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 10490–10498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Serre, F. Millange, S. Surbl and G. Frey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6285–6289 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Meesuk, U. A. Jayasooriya and R. D. Cannon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 2009–2016 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y.-Q. Hu, T. Han, Y.-Q. Zhai and Y.-Z. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15786–15792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, K. Freitag, S. Wannapaiboon, C. Schneider, K. Epp, G. Kieslich and R. A. Fischer, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 12492–12495 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Zhang, H. Furukawa, N. Ko, W. Nie, H. J. Park, S. Okajima, K. E. Cordova, H. Deng, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2641–2650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Fan, Y. Ren, J. Liao, C. Qi and H. Jiang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 1203–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Brozek and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12886–12891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-P. Cui, X.-D. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Zhao, M. Azam, S. I. Al-Resayes and W.-Y. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 14157–14163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Wang, S. He, H. Wang, S. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Huang, Y. Pang, C.-K. Tsung and T. Li, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7755–7761 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Song, S. Jeong, D. Kim and M. S. Lah, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5753–5756 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Bosch, S. Yuan, W. Rutledge and H.-C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(4), 857–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Y. Nooria and K. Akhbari, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 1782–1808 RSC ; 
  (e) D. Sun, F. Sun, X. Deng and Z. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54(17), 8639–8643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Caskey and A. J. Matzger, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7942–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Fei, J. F. Cahill, K. A. Prather and S. M. Cohen, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 4011–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Kerr and C. L. Cahill, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 4094–4103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. Du, N. Yuan, X. Jia and J. Li, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6452–6456 RSC .
F. Vermoortele, B. Bueken, G. Le Bars, B. Van de Voorde, M. Vandichel, K. Houthoofd, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, M. Waroquier, V. Van Speybroeck, C. Kirschhock and D. E. De Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11465–11468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Brozek and M. Dinca, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2110–2113 RSC .
M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2855–2863 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. T. Nguyen, N. M. Schweitzer, C.-Y. Chang, T. L. Drake, M. C. So, P. C. Stair, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2496–2500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Y.-P. Chen, J. Qin, W. Lu, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, M. Bosch, T.-F. Liu, X. Lian and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 45, 14696–14700 CrossRef PubMed .
N. T. Nguyen, T. N. Lo, J. Kim, H. T. Nguyen, T. B. Le, K. E. Cordova and H. Furukawa, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 6201–6207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schoedel, L. Wojtas, S. P. Kelley, R. D. Rogers, M. Eddaoudi and M. J. Zaworotko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11421–11424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5071–5076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan, J. OQConnor and S. L. James, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3515–3517 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Han, L. Li, J. Cheng, D. Yuan and J. Luo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 5466–5472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, W.-X. Nie, L.-P. Wang, C.-H. Liao, S.-S. Bao and L.-M. Zheng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 13, 6615–6624 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. Mon, E. Tiburcio, M. Viciano-Chumillas, L. H. G. Kalinke, J. Ferrando-Soria, D. Armentano and E. Pardo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13601–13609 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-D. Du, W. Zheng, X.-H. Yi, J.-P. Zhao, P. W and C.-C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 2608–2616 RSC .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf, A. Mohammad and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17998–18011 RSC .
X. Chu, F. Meng, T. Deng, Y. Lu, O. Bondarchuk, M. Sui, M. Feng, H. Li and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5669–5677 RSC .
J. Yang, C. Yu, C. Hu, M. Wang, S. Li, H. Huang, K. Bustillo, X. Han, C. Zhao, W. Guo, Z. Zeng, H. Zheng and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 0, 1803272 CrossRef .
X. Han, K. Tao, D. Wang and L. Han, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2735–2741 RSC .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066–2074 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5038–5041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, M. Oh, M. Park, J. W. Yoon, J.-S. Chang and M. S. Lah, Chem. Commun., 2009, 36, 5397–5399 RSC .

  (a) F. S. Ke, Y. S. Wu and H. Deng, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 223, 109–121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Liu, C. Shi, C. Zhai, M. Cheng, Q. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Qu, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, D. Chen, R. Zou, K. S. Walton and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 66–73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Du, M. Chen, X.-G. Yang, J. Wen, X. Wang, S.-M. Fang and C.-S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9828–9834 RSC .

  (a) A. Morozan and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269–9290 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Yang, Z. Ma, W. Gao and M. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Zhu, H. Wen, M. Ma, W. Wang, L. Yang, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Cheng, X. Sun and Y. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10499–10502 RSC ; 
  (d) W. Du, Y.-L. Bai, J. Xu, H. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 281–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Qiu and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16640–16644 RSC .

  (a) G. Hu, M. Zhang, L. Wu, Z. Peng, K. Du and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33546–33552 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 86 CrossRef ; 
  (c) P. Ghosh, Y. J. Colon and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11329–11331 RSC .
C. Ye, Q. Qin, J. Liu, W. Mao, J. Yan, Y. Wang, J. Cui, Q. Zhang, L. Yang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4998–5008 RSC .
S. H. Kazemi, B. Hosseinzadeh, H. Kazemi, M. A. Kiani and S. Hajati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23063–23073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Guo, S. Guo and Q. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 43 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, L. Zeng, G. Cheng, L. Yu and H. Zeng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Q. Zhong, Y. Zeng, D. Cheng, Y. Xiong and Y. Bu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 42–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Li, P.-G. Jiang, Q.-F. Li and J.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 1603–1611 RSC .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1642–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Xu, W. Yang, W. Shen, H. Xue and H. Pang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704435 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-C. Li, X.-N. Hua, P.-F. Liu, Y.-X. Xie and L. Han, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 168, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, T. Deng, X. Hu, X. Shi, H. Wang, T. Qin, X. Zhang, J. Qi, W. Zhang and W. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 319–323 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, L. Yu, H. E. Hoster and X. W. D. Lou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 877–881 RSC .
M. J. Deng, F. L. Huang, I. W. Sun, W. T. Tsai and J. K. Chang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 175602 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Devaraj, G. S. Gabriel, S. R. Gajjela and P. Balaya, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A57 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Kumbhar, A. D. Jagadale, N. M. Shinde and C. D. Lokhande, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 259, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Zhang, D. Hou and T. Li, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 14963–14969 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Mab and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4465–4467 RSC .
C. An, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Xu, C. Xu, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 385–392 RSC .
S. Chen, M. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Pan, L. Zhu, D. Zhang, Q. Fang and S. Qiu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 177–183 RSC .
S. Chen, M. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Pan, L. Zhu and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20145–20152 RSC .
A. Jayakumar, R. P. Antony, R. Wang and J.-M. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1603102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lan, X. Wang, R. Zhao, M. Dong, L. Fang and L. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 821, 153546 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Zardkhoshoui and S. S. H. Davarani, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1643–1656 RSC .
Q. Zhou, Y. Gong and K. Tao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134582 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, H. Guo, L. Yue, Q. Li, M. Xu, L. Zhang, T. Fan and W. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 834, 154118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saraf, K. Natarajan and S. M. Mobin, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 9299–9313 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Shao and S. P. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 1–22 CrossRef .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X.-B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Choi, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1178–1182 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Hong, S. J. Park and S. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 311, 62–71 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Sun, F. Sun, X. Deng and Z. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8639–8648 CrossRef CAS .
S. Borhani, M. Moradi, M. A. Kiani, S. Hajati and J. Toth, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 14413–14425 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Yang and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 58100–58106 RSC ; 
  (b) P. Wen, P. Gong, J. Sun, J. Wang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13874–13883 RSC .
X. Wang, N. Yang, Q. Li, F. He, Y. Yang, B. Wua, J. Chu, A. Zhou and S. Xiong, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 277, 575–586 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, N. Wang, W. Hu and S. Komarneni, J. Porous Mater., 2019, 26, 921–929 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Tian, N. Song, M. Zhong, X. Lu and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1280–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Lu, C. Wang, F. Favier and N. Pinna, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601301 CrossRef ; 
  (c) D. Tian, S. Chen, W. Zhu, C. Wang and X. Lu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1653–1660 RSC ; 
  (d) X. Zhao, G. Nie, Y. Luan, X. Wang, S. Yan and Y. Z. Long, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 808, 151737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. Luan, G. Nie, X. Zhao, N. Qiao, X. Liu, H. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Z. Long, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 308, 121–130 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. B. Yang, J. Ren, Z. T. Zhang, X. L. Chen, G. Z. Guan, L. B. Qiu, Y. Zhang and H. S. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Y. Wen, B. Wang, C. C. Huang, L. Z. Wang and D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Q. Wei, X. Tong, G. Zhang, J. Qiao, Q. Gong and S. Sun, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 1574–1602 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (f) S. L. Candelaria, Y. Y. Shao, W. Zhou, X. L. Li, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. H. Li and G. Z. Cao, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 195–220 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) S. Mukherjee, D. A. Cullen, K. Karakalos, K. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, H. Xu, K. L. More, G. Wang and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 217–226 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) K. Chen, Z. Sun, R. Fang, Y. Shi, H. M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707592 CrossRef ; 
  (i) J. Wei, D. Zhou, Z. Sun, Y. Deng, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2322–2328 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) F. Cao, M. Zhao, Y. Yu, B. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Yang, X. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6924–6927 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (k) A. Yaumi, M. A. Bakar and B. Hameed, Energy, 2017, 138, 776–784 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) M. Yi, C. Zhang, C. Cao, C. Xu, B. Sa, D. Cai and H. Zhan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 3916–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (m) J. Qi, X. Lai, J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Ren, Y. Yang, Q. Jin, L. Zhang, R. Yu, G. Ma, Z. Su, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6749–6773 RSC ; 
  (n) D. Tian, X. L. Zhou, Y. H. Zhang, Z. Zhou and X. H. Bu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8159–8161 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (o) Y. M. Chen, Z. Li and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 10667–10670 CrossRef ; 
  (p) L. Shen, L. Yu, H. B. Wu, X. Y. Yu, X. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. S. Javed, H. Lei, J. Li, Z. Wang and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17435–17445 RSC .
W. Sun, Y. Du, G. Wu, G. Gao, H. Zhu, J. Shen, K. Zhang and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7138–7150 RSC .
A. S. Rajpurohit, N. S. Punde and A. K. Srivastava, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 328–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Z. Song, F.-F. Sun, Y.-L. Meng, Z.-W. Wang, Q.-F. Sua and Z. Tan, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 3601–3608 RSC .

  (a) W. Shen and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 999–1013 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Si, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, S. Li, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 397–405 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Zhu, X. Gan, A. M-Creary, R. Lv, Z. Lin and M. Terrones, Nano Today, 2020, 30, 100829 CrossRef ; 
  (d) W. Kiciński, M. Szala and M. Bystrzejewski, Carbon, 2014, 68, 1–32 CrossRef ; 
  (e) Q. Li, L. Yue, L. Li, H. Liu, W. Yao, N. Wu, L. Zhang, H. Guo and W. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 810, 151961 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Guan, X. Liu, W. Ren, X. Li, C. Cheng and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602391 CrossRef ; 
  (c) H. Mei, Y. Mei, S. Zhang, Z. Xiao, B. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Fan, Z. Huang, W. Kang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10953–10960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, K. Wan, D. Plessers, B. Sels, J. Song, L. Chen, T. Zhang, P. Tang, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol and J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1616–1628 RSC .

  (a) V. Gupta, S. Gupta and N. Miura, J. Power Sources, 2009, 195, 3757–3760 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Chen, M.-K. Wu, K. Tao, J.-J. Zhou, Y.-L. Li, X. Han and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5639–5645 RSC .

  (a) J. Ren, X. Dyosiba, N. M. Musyok, H. W. Langmia, M. Mathe and S. Liao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 352, 187–219 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Rubio-Martinez, C. Avci-Camur, A. W. Thornton, I. Imaz, D. Maspoch and M. R. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3453–3480 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Richa Rajak	Richa Rajak was born in 1993 in Madhya Pradesh, India. She completed her BS-MS Dual Degree in Chemistry in 2015 at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal, India. Presently, she is a Ph.D. scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore and her research work is based on the synthesis and structural analysis of metal–organic frameworks and their applications in supercapacitors, sensing, adsorption and catalysis.
Ravinder Kumar	Ravinder Kumar was born in 1993 in Haryana, India. He received his Master's Degree (2017) in Chemistry (Hons.) from the University of Delhi. He is a research scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore. His research work is related to the fields of metal–organic frameworks, covalent–organic frameworks and their applications.
Shagufi Naz Ansari	Shagufi Naz Ansari was born on 3 June 1990 in Uttar Pradesh, India. She received her Master's Degree (2014) in Industrial Chemistry (Hons.) from Aligarh Muslim University. She is a research scholar at Discipline of Chemistry, IIT Indore. Her research work is related to the area of metal–organic frameworks and their applications.
Mohit Saraf	Dr Saraf received his PhD in Metallurgy Engineering & Materials Science from Indian Institute of Technology Indore in 2019, and Bachelors-Masters (Integrated) in Nanotechnology from University of Rajasthan, Jaipur in 2013. He has won several national and international accolades including CAS Future Leaders 2020, Fulbright-Nehru Postdoctoral Fellowship (2020–2021) and Green Talents award (2018). His research focuses on developing different families of nanomaterials and their composites for electrochemical energy storage applications.
Shaikh M. Mobin	Dr Shaikh obtained his Bachelor's and Master's from Wilson College, University of Mumbai with a major in Chemistry and PhD from Mumbai University in Chemistry. In 2012, he joined IIT Indore and now working as an Associate Professor in Discipline of Chemistry. He developed a multi-disciplinary research group working in wide areas of research including solid-state structural transformation, design and synthesis of newer class of MOFs and their applications in energy storage, conversion and biomedical devices, exploring metal nano-oxide materials for energy storage, conversion, optical and electro-chemical sensing, metal nano-oxide materials derived by employing metal complexes/MOFs as single-source molecular precursors as catalysts in organic transformations and developing greener c-dots for bioimaging and biomarkers. Moreover, his research group is interested in the design and synthesis of small molecules as cellular organelle targets and docking.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the one-pot synthesis of M-MOFs using different metal nodes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Fe/Co-MOFs with different possible secondary building units (SBUs). (a) Fe3(μ3-O) trinuclear cluster, (b) Co3(μ3-O) cluster, (c) coordination of Co with the NH2 functionally of the ligand. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Series of nMOF-74s containing different metals in the MOF. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic synthesis of M-MOFs by post-synthetic approach.	 

 	Fig. 5  Post-synthetic conversation of insert metal cations in MOF-5. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthetic route of MM′-MOF-74 (a) mechanochemical synthesis, (b) conventional solution methods, and (c) images of the mechanochemically prepared MM′-MOF-74. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of M-MOFs using metalloligands and via ligand exchange approaches.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) Synthesis of M-MOFs using metalloligands. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, Copyright 2019, and ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Infinite 2D layer of Ni/Co-MOF along the a-axis and (b) 3D framework of Ni/Co-MOF along the b-axis. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  Plot of specific capacitance versus (vs.) current density for NiCo-MOF/NF (inset: synthesis of NiCo-MOF/NF). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Inter/intra-molecular H-bonding interaction between the two 2D frameworks present in Fe/Co-MOF, (b) 2D + 2D → 3D inclined polycatenation topological simplification as Doc1/1 class, (c) CV curves of bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE), and Fe/Co-MOF at 100 mV s−1, (d) CV curves at varying scan rates (10–500 mV s−1) in Fe/Co-MOF, (e) GCD profiles at different current densities (1.2–50 A g−1), and (f) GCD curves of bare GCE and Fe/Co-MOF at 1.2 A g−1. Here, 1-GCE is the MOF-based electrode. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a–d) Linkers in MOF with the connected nodes and links of the underlying net. (e) 4,4,6-Connected net with smm3 topology. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images of the Ni–Co coordination, (c and d) TEM images of the Ni–Co coordination and the SAED pattern (inset) of the Ni–Co coordination, (e) CD profiles of Ni–Co MOF at varying current densities, and (f) specific capacitance of Ni–Co MOF with different Ni/Co ratios. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM images at different magnifications, (c) CV profiles at different scan rates (5, 10, 25, 50, and 75 mV s−1), and (d) charge/discharge profiles at different currents. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of mixed metallic MOF-derived mixed-metallic oxides.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM and energy–dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) mapping images of compound 1 (a and d), compound 2 (b and e), and compound 3 (c and f), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the Ni–Co MO materials derived from the multivariate MOF-74 crystal (where Y = 1, 2, and 4). Colors are for Ni, cyan; O, red; Co, pink; and C, gray; and the H atoms are omitted for clarity. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  General schematic representation of the carbon-based Ni–Co metal phosphide materials derived from M-MOFs, where M represents various combinations of nickel and copper.	 

 	Fig. 19  General schematic representation of MMoSX derived from M-MOFs, where M represents three combinations of Ni and Co. M = Ni:Co of 1:1, 0:1, and 1:0.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Pictorial representation of the preparation of the Ni–Co-MOF/GO composites. FE-SEM images of (b) Ni–Co-MOF, (c) Ni–Co-MOF/GO, (d) CV profile of Ni–Co-MOF/GO hybrid in 6.0 M KOH electrolyte at various scan rates, and (e) GCD curves profile at various charge current densities. Reproduced from ref. 125a with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Coordination modes of the Zn(II) and Na(I) ion sites in 1 (Na/Zn-MOF). (b) Probable scheme for the construction of 3 (Na/Zn-MOF//rGO). Comparison of the CV graphs of (c) bare GCE and 1-GCE, (d) bare GCE and 3-GCE, and (e) GCD profiles of 3-GCE at different scan rates. Here, 1-GCE and 3-GCE are the Na/Zn-MOF- and Na–Zn-MOF/rGO-based electrodes, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) CV and GCD curves of rGO/ZIFs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 and current density of 3 A g−1. (c) Specific capacitance at different current densities for ZIFs. (d and e) CV, and GCD curves of rGO/HTZIFs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 and current density of 3 A g−1. (f) Specific capacitance at different current densities for HTZIFs. (g) CV graphs for rGO and composite rGO/HTZIF3 electrodes at a similar scan rate. (h) CV profile of the asymmetric supercapacitor device at varying scan rates of 10, 25, 50, and 100 mV s−1. (i) GCD profile of the ASC at various current densities of 1–10 A g−1. (j) Cycling performance of ASC device at a current density of 3 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 23  (1a–d) SEM images of the as-synthesized Co/Ni-MOF. (2a) Comparison of CV profiles of the pristine Ni-MOF, Zn/Ni-MOF, and Co/Ni-MOF 5 mV s−1. (2b) GCD curves of Co/Ni-MOF at various current densities. (2c) CV profile of Co/Ni-MOF between 5 and 80 mV s−1, and (2d) EIS analysis. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of the NiCo-MOF and NiCo-MOF/MWCNT composites. SEM images of (b) NiCo-MOF/WMCNT and (c) NiCo-MOF. (d) CV profile at different scan rates, (e) GCD graphs at various current densities of NiCo-MOF/MWCNT electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Springer, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Scheme for the synthesis of PPNF@M-Ni MOF (M = Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe) and the coordination modes of Ni MOF and Co–Ni MOF. (b) FESEM image of PPNF@Ni MOF and (c) CV profile of PPNF@Co–Ni MOF at different scan rates. (d) GCD measurements of PPNF@Co–Ni MOF at different current densities. (e and f) CV and GCD curves at 10 mV s−1 and 1 A g−1 for the PPNF@M-Ni MOF (M = Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe) samples. Reproduced from ref. 130a with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Synthetic route for the hollow Ni–Co–S-n/NC composites. (b) SEM image of Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC composite, (c) GCD outline of the hollow Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC composite at different current densities. (d) Probable scheme of the Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC//AC ASC. (e and f) CV and GCD profiles of Ni–Co–S-0.5/NC//AC ASC measured at various scan rates and current densities. Reproduced from ref. 131c with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation for the growth of Zn/Co-MOF-derived nanosheets on a carbon cloth substrate and their sulfurization followed by sintering to form mesoporous zinc–cobalt–sulfide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped carbon. (b) SEM image, (c) CV and (d) GCD profiles, and (e) plot of current density vs. specific capacitance and obtained areal capacitance. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 28  SEM images of (a) Zn/Co-MOF nanosheets on CC, (b) ZnCoO-NSs/CC, (c) ZnCoS-NSs/CC, and (d) Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NSs. Electrochemical performances of the Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NS/CC electrode with 2 M KOH solution in a three-electrode system: (e) CV curves at different scan rates, and (f) GCD profiles at diverse current densities of Ni(OH)2@ZnCoS-NSs. (g) Areal and mass-specific capacitance values vs. current density. Comparative graphs of Ni(OH)2@-ZnCoS-NS/CC, Ni(OH)2@ZnCoO-NS/CC, and ZnCoS-NS electrode systems in terms of: (h) GCD curves at a current density of 3 mA cm−2, (i) areal specific capacitance values vs. current density, and (j) cycling performance at a high current density of 20 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) SEM images of ZIF-67, (b and c) SEM images of NiCo2S4@MoS2, (d) CV curves, (e) GCD curves at different scan rates and current densities, respectively, of the NiCo2S4@MoS2 heterostructures, (f) rate capability, and (g) cycling performance of the NiCo2S4 and NiCo2S4@MoS2 heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a and b) CV and GCD curves of Ni foam, Ni-MOF, Ni/Co-MOF, and NS-BNs measured at scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and current density 1 A g−1. (c) Specific capacitance vs. current density. (d) Nyquist plots. (e) CV profile of NS-BNs at 5 mV s−1 to 80 mV s−1. (f) GCD profile of NS-BNs at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 136e with permission from the Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Synthetic process of (NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2). CV profile (b) and GCD graphs (c) of NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2. (d) Specific capacitance of Ni/Co-TC, Co/Ni-MOF-3:1–600, and Co/Ni(OH)2-3:1–600. (e) Comparison of the cycle life of Co/Ni(OH)2-3:1 and Ni/Co-TC. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

1.	Ni–Co-MOF/3D MOF	200 °C	1049	3 M KOH	—/1	97.4 after 5000 cycles	
51

2.	Ni–Co-MOF/dandelion hollow structure	150 °C	758	2 M KOH	—/1	75 after 5000 cycles	
52

3.	Co–Fe-MOF/3D inclined polycatenated	RT	446.8	1 M KOH	—/1.2	∼88 after 800 cycles	
83

4.	Co–Mn MOF/layered MOF	120 °C	106.7	2 M KOH	10/—	95 after 1500 cycles	
95

5.	Ni–Co-MOF/nanoflake-like structure	60 °C	530.4	1 M LiOH	—/0.5	∼99 after 2000 cycles	
96

6.	Ni–Co-MOF-5/flower-like structure	120 °C	1220.2	3 M KOH	—/1	87.8 after 3000 cycles	
139b

7.	2D NSs NiMn2O4/direct salt sacrificing	350 °C	662.5	1 M Na2SO4	—/1	96 after 1000 cycles	
108

8.	NiCo2O4/1D NWs direct salt sacrificing	60 °C	743	1 M KOH	—/1	93.8 after 3000 cycles	
109

9.	3D-flower shaped NiCo2O4/direct salt sacrificing	180 °C	1191.2	2 M KOH	—/1	63.4 after 1500 cycles	
110

10.	NPs ZnCo2O4/scarifying JUC-155	400 °C	450	6 M KOH	5/—	97.9 after 1500 cycles	
111

11.	NiCo2O4/sacrificing MOF-74-Ni1Co1	400 °C	797	6 M KOH	—/1	75 after 10000 cycles	
112

12.	Ni–Co MMOs/sacrificing ZIF-67	350 °C	1931	2 M KOH	—/1	69.5 after 5000 cycles	
113

13.	MnCo2O4/scarifying Mn–Co-ZIF	400 °C	1763	2 M KOH	—/1	95 after 4500 cycles	
114

14.	Flower-shaped MnNi2O4/sacrificing Mn–Ni-MOFs	450 °C	2848	6 M KOH	—/1	93.25 after 5000 cycles	
115


1.	
M-MOF@graphene

HTZIF3/rGO	Rhombic dodecahedron	500 °C	204	6 M KOH	—/1	87% after 2000 cycles	
26

Na/Zn-MOF/rGO	2-D layered MOF with flower shaped structure	RT	435.2	0.5 M Na2SO4	—/1.6	99.9% after 4000 cycles	
35

Ni–Co-MOF/GO	Chestnut-shaped 3D structure	37 °C	447.2	6 M KOH	—/1	99.6% after 300 cycles	
125a

2.	
M-MOF@CNTs

Ni/Co-MOF/MWCNT	Flower-shaped nano-sheets	110 °C	1010	2 M KOH	—/0.5	89.4% after 3000 cycles	
128

3.	
M-MOF@CC

Ni/Co-MOF@CC	Layered	120 °C	1180.5 mC cm−2	2 M KOH	3/—	97.6% after 5000 cycles	
129

4.	
M-MOF@nanofibers

PPNF/Co–Ni MOF	Flower-like nanosheets	120 °C	1096.2	3 M KOH	—/1	100% after 10000 cycles	
130a

PPNF/Cu–Ni MOF	Cuboid wrapped with nanosheets	180.8 °C	361.6	3 M KOH	—/1	—	
130a

PPNF/Fe–Ni MOF	—	196.75 °C	393.5	3 M KOH	—/1	—	
130a

PPNF/Zn–Ni MOF	Irregular flower shape	117.05 °C	234.1	3 M KOH	—/1	—	
130a

5.	
M-MOF sulfide@N doped carbon composite

Ni–Co–S-n/NC	Hollow spherical structure	—	543.9 C g−1	—	—/1	81.5% after 3000 cycles	
131l

ZCS-NC-II	Ultra-thin nanosheets	100 °C	2133.2	6 M LiCl	—/1.25	95.63% after 10000 cycles	
132

Zn-CoS-NSs/CC	2D nano sheets	200 °C	2730	2 M KOH	—/3	82% after 10000 cycles	
133

6.	
M-MOF@S doped graphene

CuFeBTC/S-GNS	Wrinkled nanosheets	500 °C	1164.3	3 M KOH	—/1	92.5% after 10000 cycles	
134

NiCo2S4@MoS2	Dodecahedral shape	—	860	—	—/1	71.9% after 1000 cycles	
135

7.	
N,S co-doped M-MOF composite

NS-BNs	Layered stacked nano-sheets	65 °C	1529	6 M KOH	—/1	89.2% after 10000 cycles	
136e

8.	
M-MOF derived MOs@metal nano-composites

NC-800 NixCo1−x/NixCo1−xO	Spherical structures	800 °C	715	6 M KOH	—/1	100% after 2500 cycles	
54

Ni/Co-TC	Hollow spherical structure	105 °C	513	6 M KOH	—/1	90.7% after 10000 cycles	
137c

AC	Activated carbon
BDC	Benzene dicarboxylic acid
BMOs	Bimetallic metal oxides
BPDC	4, 4′-Biphenyl dicarboxylic acid
bpy	4,4′-Bipyridyl
BTB	1,3,5-Benzenetribenzoate
BTC	1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
EDLCs	Electric double-layered capacitors
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FcDCA	1,1′-Ferrocene dicarboxylic acid
GCE	Glassy carbon electrode
GO	Graphene oxide
GW-MSNGOHS	Graphene-wrapped multi-shelled Ni–Ga oxide hollow spheres
GW-YS-NFOHS	Graphene-wrapped yolk-shell Ni–Fe oxide hollow spheres
HSC	Hybrid supercapacitor cells
MOs	Metal oxides
M-MOFs	Mixed-metal metal–organic frameworks
MMoSx	Molybdenum-doped mixed-metallic metal sulfides
MMOs	Mixed-metal metal oxides
MTV-MOFs	Multivariate metal–organic frameworks
NC	Nitrogen-doped carbon composite
NF	Nickel foam
NPs	Nanoparticles
NSs	Nanosheets
NWs	Nanowires
PPNFs	Preoxidized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone K-30
PXRD	Powder X-ray diffraction
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
RT	Room temperature
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SBUs	Secondary building units
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy

vs.
	
Versus

XANES	X-Ray absorption near edge structure
ZIFs	Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
