The nature of excited states in dipolar donor/fullerene complexes for organic solar cells: evolution with the donor stack size   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP02296K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP02296K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15955-15963The nature of excited states in dipolar donor/fullerene complexes for organic solar cells: evolution with the donor stack size†

        
          
            Xingxing 
            Shen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guangchao 
            Han
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yuanping 
            Yi
          
        
      *a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: ypyi@iccas.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      7th April 2016
    , Accepted 18th May 2016First published on 20th May 2016AbstractElectronic delocalization at donor/acceptor (D/A) interfaces can play an important role in photocurrent generation for organic solar cells. Here, we have investigated the nature of local excited and interfacial charge transfer (CT) states in model complexes including one to four anti-parallel stacking dipolar donor (DTDCTB) molecules and one fullerene (C60) molecule by means of density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT (TDDFT). For all the donor-to-acceptor CT states, despite the number of DTDCTB molecules in the complexes, the hole is mainly localized on a single DTDCTB, and moves farther away from C60 for the energy higher level. However, the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and the excitonic states (EX) including the bright and dark EX are delocalized over the whole donor stacks in the complexes. This implies that the formation of ordered DTDCTB arrangements can substantially shorten the exciton diffusion process and facilitate ultrafast charge generation. Interestingly, owing to strong intermolecular Coulomb attraction, the donor-to-donor CT states are situated below the local excited states, but can approach the donor-to-acceptor CT states, indicating a weak role as charge traps. Our work would be helpful for understanding the electronic delocalization effects in organic solar cells.
1. Introduction
The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic photovoltaics (OPV) is critically dependent on the photoexcited exciton dynamics at the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface.1–3 The excitonic (EX) states are produced in the donor and acceptor by photoexcitation, and then they evolve into interfacial charge transfer (CT) states with a strong Coulomb energy of several tens of electronvolts at the D/A interface.4,5 With the help of the built-in electric field and thermal energy, the CT excitons are dissociated and separated into free charge carriers via charge-separation states.6,7
The nature of EX and CT states is crucial for exciton dissociation (ED) and charge separation (CS) processes at the D/A interface. However, the role of electronic delocalization of EX and CT states in the ED and CS efficiencies is still debated. On the one hand, an ultrafast population of CT states could be formed from the hot delocalized singlet excitons of P3HT, and the yield of free charges increased with the increasing excitation energy.8 In addition, prior to localization induced by structure relaxation, highly delocalized intrachain excitons were found to extend along substantial chain lengths and might couple with delocalized CT states to preferentially form well-separated charge pairs.9 On the other hand, it was found that hot excitons had a negligible impact on internal quantum yields,10 charge generation efficiencies were independent of initial exciton delocalization,11 and more delocalized interchain excitons were even detrimental to the performance of solar cells based on a low-bandgap polymer.12 At the same time, experimental results revealed that charge generation could be significantly promoted by delocalization of CT states.13,14 Moreover, first-principles calculations showed that hot CT states were more delocalized in a single polymer chain, and pump–push experiments demonstrated that efficient charge separation could occur through such hot states.15,16 However, there were also some theoretical investigations showing that the lowest and hot CT states were all localized in the phthalocyanine–C60 and pentacene–C60 systems.17–20 These contradictory results call for further studies to elucidate the excited-state properties of many other organic photovoltaic systems.
As far as we know, the interfacial excited-state properties have been rarely investigated for the D–A structured conjugated polymers or small molecules that are widely applied in OPV. Recently, DTDCTB (see Fig. S1a (ESI†) for the chemical structure), a small molecule with the D–A–A structure and a strong dipole, has been developed and exhibits an antiparallel cofacial π–π stacking.21 The DTDCTB-based OPV devices were intensively studied,22–28 and the PCE was improved to exceed 8% by device engineering.29 The electronic and charge transport properties of pure DTDCTB have been investigated by quantum-chemical calculations,30,31 but the excited-state properties of the DTDCTB/fullerene complexes are still unexplored.
In order to shed some light on the electronic delocalization effects in plenty of D–A type organic photovoltaic donor materials, we here choose representative DTDCTB/C60 complexes as a case study. Through increasing the number of DTDCTB molecules in the system, we have investigated the evolution of the nature of the excited states in the DTDCTB/C60 complexes by means of density functional theory and their time-dependent extension.
2. Theoretical methodologies
2.1. Model nDTDCTB/C60 complexes
In our calculations, the DTDCTB clusters were directly extracted from the experimental crystal structure forming of anti-parallel π–π stacks. The geometry of C60 was optimized by DFT at the B3LYP/6-31G** level. Then one C60 was added on the top of the backbone of the first DTDCTB to build the D/A complexes. The structures of the model DTDCTB clusters and DTDCTB/C60 complexes are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1b (ESI†). Actually, there are two kinds of cofacial intermolecular π–π stacking (dimers I and II, shown in Fig. S1b, ESI†) in the DTDCTB crystal.21 To make a comparison between I and II, the electronic couplings for hole and electron transfer and charge recombination were calculated using a fragment orbital approach32 in combination with a basis set orthogonalization procedure33 at the DFT-B3LYP/6-31G** and tuned-ωB97X/6-31G** level, and the binding energies were also evaluated (see Table S1 (ESI†), tests of different basis sets are also provided). As shown in Table S1 (ESI†), all the couplings as well as the binding energies are larger for dimer I than dimer II, indicating that the I-type π–π stack is better and more stable than the II-type one. Therefore, the DTDCTB/C60 complexes were constructed with C60 facing the I-type stacking DTDCTB and one to four DTDCTB molecules were extracted directly from the experimental crystal structure. For convenience, we label the DTDCTB molecules with symbols α, β, γ, and δ in sequence starting from C60. In our previous work, atomistic molecular dynamics simulation showed that C60 prefers to be parallel to the DTDCTB backbone.34 Moreover, the C60 orientation relative to the donor could have important impacts on excited states.18 In light of these reasons, we consider two interfacial orientations, where a hexagon (H) or a carbon–carbon double bond (CC) is parallel to the benzothiadiazole unit of DTDCTB to build nDTDCTB/C60H or nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes with the closest distance between DTDCTB and C60 fixed at 3.5 Å. From Table S1 (ESI†), it is found that the electronic coupling for electron transfer is larger for the CC orientation than for the H orientation while the situation is reversed for charge recombination. Similar couplings for hole transfer are found for the two orientations.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of (a) the nDTDCTB cluster and (b) nDTDCTB/C60CC complex structures. 
2.2. Computational details
Long-range corrected (LRC) functionals with a tuned range-separation parameter (ω) have been proved to be successful for describing D–A molecules with significant CT character.35 The single-point and excitation energies of the nDTDCTB clusters and nDTDCTB/C60 complexes were calculated by means of DFT and TDDFT at the tuned-ωB97X/6-31G* level, respectively. Moreover, a conductor-like polarizable continuum model (CPCM) with a dielectric constant of 4.7 was applied to represent an electrostatic environment in the solid state.36 In order to elucidate the excited-state transition characteristics, natural transition orbitals (NTOs) and transition density matrices were calculated using the Multiwfn program.37
The optimized ω values for the nDTDCTB clusters and nDTDCTB/C60 complexes were obtained by minimizing the following J(ω),35 JIP(ω) = |εNH(ω) + EN−1(ω) − EN(ω)|(1) JEA(ω) = |εN+1H(ω) + EN(ω) − EN+1(ω)|(2) J(ω) = JIP(ω) + JEA(ω)(3)where εNH(ω) and EN(ω) are the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy and SCF energy of the N-electron system in the gas phase, respectively. All the DFT and TDDFT calculations were carried out using the Gaussian-09 Rev D.01 program.38 The optimized ω values are collected in Table S2 (ESI†). For both the pure DTDCTB stacks and DTDCTB/C60 complexes, the tuned ω is decreased and converges to 0.1 as the number of DTDCTB increases. The same results of optimized ω are obtained for different interfacial orientations in the DTDCTB/C60 complexes.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Frontier molecular orbitals of the DTDCTB clusters
As seen in Fig. 2, as the size increases, the HOMO energy increases from −6.20 to −5.72 eV, while the LUMO energy decreases slightly from −1.66 to −1.86 eV, both showing convergence trends. The evolution of ionization potential (IP) is generally consistent with the HOMO energy, but the IP value is relatively insensitive to the cluster size and estimated to be 4.92–5.13 eV, compared well with the experimental results in solution (5.15 eV) measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and in thin films (5.30 eV) measured by UV photoelectron spectroscopy.22 The electron affinity (EA) is hardly changed for all the DTDCTB clusters and estimated to be ca. −2.67 eV, which is overestimated by about 1.0 eV with respect to the experimental value (−3.71 eV) obtained by CV in solution. In accordance with the stronger coupling for hole transfer than electron transfer in the DTDCTB dimers (Table S1, ESI†), the energy splitting among the frontier occupied orbitals is larger than that among the frontier unoccupied orbitals in the DTDCTB clusters.
 Fig. 2  Energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals and IP and EA values for the DTDCTB clusters (H and L denote the HOMO and the LUMO, respectively). 
The frontier molecular orbitals are depicted in Fig. 3. For 1DTDCTB, the HOMO is delocalized over the whole molecule, while the LUMO is mostly distributed on the electron-withdrawing units. The frontier occupied and unoccupied orbitals of the clusters are combined with the HOMO and the LUMO of single DTDCTB molecules, respectively. The HOMO−1 and HOMO or LUMO and LUMO+1 of 2DTDCTB are the bonding and anti-bonding superposition of the HOMO or LUMO of two isolated DTDCTB molecules, respectively. In the case of 3DTDCTB, the HOMO−2 and HOMO originate, respectively, from the HOMO−1 and HOMO of dimer I with a stronger coupling while the HOMO−1 is from the HOMO of the remaining single DTDCTB. For 4DTDCTB, all the four frontier occupied orbitals are evenly delocalized over the whole stack; the higher-energy orbital exhibits more anti-bonding superposition modes. Surprisingly, the frontier unoccupied orbitals of 3DTDCTB and 4DTDCTB appear to be much localized. For 3DTDCTB, the LUMO and LUMO+1 are, respectively, localized on the II and I-type dimers while the LUMO+2 is relatively delocalized. For 4DTDCTB, the LUMO and LUMO+3 are mainly localized on the middle II-type dimer while LUMO+1 and LUMO+2 are distributed on the two side molecules. The unbalanced electron distribution between occupied and unoccupied frontier orbitals implies that intermolecular charge transfer could occur in the lowest excited states for the DTDCTB clusters.
 Fig. 3  Pictorial representation of the frontier molecular orbitals of the DTDCTB clusters. 
3.2. Excited states of the DTDCTB clusters
Interestingly, intermolecular charge-transfer states (ddCT) between the adjacent DTDCTB molecules are indeed lying below the lowest local excited states (see Fig. 4a). As expected from the typical cofacial H-aggregate model,39 the bright EX states of large oscillator strengths (f) are higher in energy than the dark EX states of small f. However, the ddCT states between nonadjacent molecules in 3DTDCTB and 4DTDCTB (not shown in Fig. 4a) locate above the bright EX states due to the reduced Coulomb attraction. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4a, there are 1, 2, and 3 dark EX and 2, 4, and 6 ddCT below the lowest bright EX for 2DTDCTB, 3DTDCTB, and 4DTDCTB, respectively. The excitation energies of the bright EX states for 1–4DTDCTB show a weak odd–even damped oscillation and are calculated to be ca. 2.15 eV, and their corresponding f values increase linearly from 1.04 to 3.06 (Fig. 4b), characteristic of the bright Frenkel excitons of parallel-stacking molecular aggregates. Compared with the experimental data obtained at the maximum of absorption spectra in thin films, the calculated excitation energies are overestimated by ca. 0.3 eV for the bright EX states. The excitation energies of the lowest dark EX and ddCT states are both decreased and converged as the number of DTDCTB molecules increases. By and large, for all the DTDCTB clusters, the lowest dark EX and ddCT states are lying below the bright EX state by ca. 0.20 and 0.40 eV, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Excited-state energy levels below the lowest bright EX states and (b) oscillator strengths of the lowest bright EX states for the DTDCTB clusters. 
The natural transition orbitals (NTOs) and transition density matrices were calculated to analyze the nature of electronic transition for the lowest bright EX, dark EX, and ddCT states (Fig. 5, 6 and Fig. S2, ESI†). Clearly, for the bright EX, the pairwise electron and hole are always distributed on the same molecules, characteristic of pure local excitation from the HOMO to the LUMO in each molecule; more importantly, the overall hole and electron can spread the whole stack (Fig. 5). Similarly, the lowest dark EX states are primarily delocalized (Fig. S2b, ESI†). Meanwhile, as seen from the transition density matrices in Fig. 6, a small fraction of intermolecular transition in the I-type dimers is hybridized due to the considerable electronic couplings for electron and hole transfer. In the case of the lowest ddCT states, intermolecular CT within the I-type dimers becomes dominant (Fig. S2a, ESI†). It should be noted that, as discerned by the transition density matrices in Fig. 6, the intermolecular CT in the ddCT and dark EX states for 2DTDCTB is symmetric. In the case of 3DTDCTB and 4DTDCTB, the CT directions are opposite in the lowest ddCT and dark EX states.
 Fig. 5  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest bright EX states with large oscillator strengths for the DTDCTB clusters. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included. 
 Fig. 6  Transition density matrices of the lowest ddCT, the lowest dark EX, and the lowest bright EX states for the DTDCTB clusters. 
3.3. Frontier molecular orbitals of the nDTDCTB/C60 complexes
The calculated frontier molecular orbitals are shown in Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI†), and their energies are collected in Fig. 7 and Fig. S5 (ESI†) for the nDTDCTB/C60CC and nDTDCTB/C60H complexes, respectively. Irrespective of the different C60 orientations, the two types of complexes display almost the same results. The frontier occupied orbitals of the complexes are the same as those of the pure DTDCTB clusters. The complex HOMO energies show similar increasing trends as the pure DTDCTB clusters except that the HOMO energies are 0.16 and 0.09 eV higher for 1DTDCTB/C60 and 2DTDCT/C60 than the corresponding pure donor clusters, respectively. Compared with the DTDCTB clusters, the ionization potentials for the complexes are hardly changed. For the frontier unoccupied orbitals, the C60-localized orbitals are triply degenerate and locate below the donor-localized ones by ca. 0.2 eV. The donor-localized frontier unoccupied orbitals are also localized while the electron distributions appear to change with respect to the pure DTDCTB clusters. However, their energies are only slightly decreased for 1–2DTDCTB after the addition of C60. The electron affinities of the complexes are independent of the complex size and calculated to be −2.82 eV, which is overestimated by ca. 1.2 eV compared with the experimental result (−4.0 eV) obtained by a low-energy inverse photoemission spectroscopy.40
 Fig. 7  Energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals and IP and EA values for the nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes (H and L denote the HOMO and the LUMO, respectively). 
3.4. EX and ddCT states in the nDTDCTB/C60 complexes
The excited-state energy alignments for the nDTDCTB/C60CC and nDTDCTB/C60H complexes are shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. S6 (ESI†), respectively. For the local excited states on the donor, the energetic order is the same as that of the pure DTDCTB clusters, namely, ddCT < dark EX < bright EX (Fig. 8a and Fig. S6a, ESI†). Specifically, for the relative large systems containing 3DTDCTB and 4DTDCTB, the energies for the ddCT, dark EX and bright EX states are almost unaffected by the addition of C60. However, the addition of C60 results in a small decrease in energy for all the ddCT, dark EX, and bright EX states in complexes 1DTDCTB/C60 and 2DTDCTB/C60 with respect to the corresponding pure clusters. Notably, the bright EX state of complex 2DTDCTB/C60CC is split into two states, which are located at 2.11 (f = 0.78) and 2.17 eV (f = 0.72), respectively; the latter with a higher energy is mixed with a donor-to-acceptor CT component. As a whole, the oscillator strengths of the bright EX states are still linearly dependent on the number of DTDCTB molecules but slightly lower than those of the pure clusters (Fig. S7, ESI†).
 Fig. 8  Energy levels of (a) the EX states and the ddCT states between adjacent DTDCTB molecules and (b) donor-to-acceptor CT states in the nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes. 
The calculated NTOs of the bright EX states for the nDTDCTB/C60CC and nDTDCTB/C60H complexes are shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. S8 (ESI†), respectively. Because of symmetry broken, both holes and electrons of each contribution are no longer distributed evenly on the DTDCTB molecules for the complexes containing two or four DTDCTB molecules. Nonetheless, the overall hole and electron can still spread the whole DTDCTB stack, which would shorten exciton diffusion processes and promote ultrafast charge separation observed in experiments. Moreover, in the case of 2DTDCTB/C60, electrons can be extended to C60, suggesting a mixture of local and donor-to-acceptor CT excitation. Fig. S9 (ESI†) depicts the NTOs of the lowest dark EX state. It can be found that this excitation tends to be localized on the dimer adjacent to C60. Additionally, an appreciable donor-to-acceptor charge transfer is involved in 3DTDCTB/C60H and 4DTDCTB/C60H. The two types of complexes show the same hole and electron of the lowest ddCT state (Fig. S10, ESI†). Interestingly, electron transfer occurs mainly from the β to α DTDCTB, indicating that the lowest ddCT state is possible to facilitate exciton dissociation and charge separation at the D/A interface.
 Fig. 9  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest EX state with a large oscillator strength in nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included. 
3.5. Donor-to-acceptor CT states in the nDTDCTB/C60 complexes
The nature of donor-to-acceptor CT states plays a crucial role in the determination of the exciton-dissociation and charge-separation processes. Unfortunately, according to the NTO analyses, our calculations reveal that all the donor-to-acceptor CT (daCT) states are basically localized for the studied complexes (Fig. 10 and Fig. S11, S12, ESI†). Undoubtedly, the electron is localized on C60 for all the lowest daCT states. The hole is mainly situated on the α, β, γ, and δ DTDCTB from the energy lowest to highest daCT state, respectively. We note that each of these daCT states includes three close sub-states originating from the triple degeneracy of the C60 LUMO. In the case of 1DTDCTB/C60, the sole daCT state, i.e., the αCT state is mixed with C60-localized excitation, especially for the 1DTDCTB/C60H (Fig. S11, ESI†). For 4DTDCTB/C60, the hole can be spread over the γ and δ DTDCTB molecules in the γCT and δCT states, showing some delocalization trend in the high-lying long-range daCT states.
 Fig. 10  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest αCT, βCT, γCT, and δCT states in complex 4DTDCTB/C60CC. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included. 
The daCT energies for nDTDCTB/C60CC are summarized in Fig. 8b. The energy is increased in the order of αCT < βCT < γCT < δCT due to the reduced Coulomb attraction arising from the elongated distance between holes and electrons. As the complex system is extended, all the daCT excitation energies are decreased and tend to converge. Moreover, the energy difference among the αCT, βCT, γCT, and δCT states gets smaller. The energy gradient is also decreased when the daCT energy goes higher. Compared with the EX and ddCT states, the αCT and βCT states all locate above them for 1DTDCTB/C60CC and 2DTDCTB/C60CC. However, in the larger complex systems, the αCT states are lying below the bright EX states. The energy ordering and evolution for the daCT states in nDTDCTB/C60H are similar (see Fig. S6b, ESI†). However, their energies are about 40–70 meV lower than those of nDTDCTB/C60CC due to closer intermolecular contact. Consequently, the lowest two αCT states already locate below the bright EX state in 2DTDCTB/C60H. It should be noted that the lowest αCT state is lying above the lowest ddCT state by about 0.3 eV. Considering that our calculations overestimate the EA values for the complexes (1.2 eV) by a larger extent than the pure DTDCTB clusters (1.0 eV) as discussed above, the energies of the αCT states can get closer to or even lower than those of the ddCT states in reality. Therefore, the effect of the ddCT states as being charge traps would be substantially reduced19 and even the exciton-dissociation and charge-separation processes could be promoted via the ddCT states.
4. Conclusions
In summary, the nature of the excited states for model DTDCTB/C60 complexes was investigated by DFT and TDDFT using an ω tuned long range corrected functional. The calculated results reveal that, as the number of DTDCTB molecules in the system is increased, the energies of the bright EX state increase, while those of the ddCT, dark EX and daCT states decrease gradually. Importantly, the complex HOMO shows delocalized electron distribution. And the bright EX states can also spread the whole donor bulk, which will significantly shorten the exciton diffusion processes and facilitate ultrafast exciton dissociation and charge generation. However, the daCT states, even the higher-energy daCT states appear to be localized. Interestingly, the ddCT states are lying below the EX states, but close to the daCT states, thus tending to play a weak role as charge traps.
However, it should be stressed that the investigated systems are too small to represent a real solid environment. Besides more reliable methods for improved description of higher energy CT states,41 extended systems with more donor and acceptor molecules are required to obtain more accurate energy-level alignments and electronic transition properties of local excited and CT states, which is still a challenge for computational chemistry.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91333117), the National Basic Research (973) Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2014CB643506), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB12020200).
References
X. Y. Zhu, Q. Yang and M. Muntwiler, Charge-transfer excitons at organic semiconductor surfaces and interfaces, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1779–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Charge photogeneration in organic solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Molecular understanding of organic solar cells: the challenges, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef PubMed .
L. W. Barbour, R. D. Pensack, M. Hegadorn, S. Arzhantsev and J. B. Asbury, Excitation transport and charge separation in an organic photovoltaic material: Watching excitations diffuse to interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3926–3934 CAS .
C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Role of the charge transfer state in organic donor–acceptor solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4097–4111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Servaites, B. M. Savoie, J. B. Brink, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Modeling geminate pair dissociation in organic solar cells: high power conversion efficiencies achieved with moderate optical bandgaps, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8343–8350 CAS .
D. Veldman, O. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, Compositional and Electric Field Dependence of the Dissociation of Charge Transfer Excitons in Alternating Polyfluorene Copolymer/Fullerene Blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schulze, M. Hänsel and P. Tegeder, Hot Excitons Increase the Donor/Acceptor Charge Transfer Yield, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28527–28534 CAS .
K. Chen, A. J. Barker, M. E. Reish, K. C. Gordon and J. M. Hodgkiss, Broadband Ultrafast Photoluminescence Spectroscopy Resolves Charge Photogeneration via Delocalized Hot Excitons in Polymer:Fullerene Photovoltaic Blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18502–18512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, K. Vandewal, S. R. Yost, M. E. Bahlke, L. Goris, M. A. Baldo, J. V. Manca and T. V. Voorhis, Charge Transfer State Versus Hot Exciton Dissociation In Polymer–Fullerene Blended Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11878–11880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Savoie, A. Rao, A. A. Bakulin, S. Gelinas, B. Movaghar, R. H. Friend, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Unequal Partnership: Asymmetric Roles of Polymeric Donor and Fullerene Acceptor in Generating Free Charge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2876–2884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, D. Lee, R. D. Schaller, X. B. Zuo, B. Lee, T. F. Luo, H. F. Gao and L. Huang, Relationship between Interchain Interaction, Exciton Delocalization, and Charge Separation in Low-Bandgap Copolymer Blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10024–10032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Paraecattil and N. Banerji, Charge separation pathways in a highly efficient polymer:fullerene solar cell material, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1472–1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. K. Murthy, M. Gao, M. J. W. Vermeulen, L. D. A. Siebbeles and T. J. Savenije, Mechanism of Mobile Charge Carrier Generation in Blends of Conjugated Polymers and Fullerenes: Significance of Charge Delocalization and Excess Free Energy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9214–9220 CAS .
D. Niedzialek, I. Duchemin, T. B. de Queiroz, S. Osella, A. Rao, R. Friend, X. Blase, S. Kümmel and D. Beljonne, First Principles Calculations of Charge Transfer Excitations in Polymer–Fullerene Complexes: Influence of Excess Energy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1972–1984 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. van Loosdrecht, M.
S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, The role of driving energy and delocalized States for charge separation in organic semiconductors, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Jailaubekov, A. P. Willard, J. R. Tritsch, W. L. Chan, N. Sai, R. Gearba, L. G. Kaake, K. J. Williams, K. Leung, P. J. Rossky and X. Y. Zhu, Hot charge-transfer excitons set the time limit for charge separation at donor/acceptor interfaces in organic photovoltaics, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-R. Zhang, J. S. Sears, B. Yang, S. G. Aziz, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, Theoretical Study of the Local and Charge-Transfer Excitations in Model Complexes of Pentacene–C60 Using Tuned Range-Separated Hybrid Functionals, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 2379–2388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Lee, B. D. Dunietz and E. Geva, Donor-to-Donor vs. Donor-to-Acceptor Interfacial Charge Transfer States in the Phthalocyanine–Fullerene Organic Photovoltaic System, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3810–3816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, Y. Yi, C.-R. Zhang, S. G. Aziz, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, Impact of Electron Delocalization on the Nature of the Charge-Transfer States in Model Pentacene/C60 Interfaces: A Density Functional Theory Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27648–27656 CAS .
L. Y. Lin, Y. H. Chen, Z. Y. Huang, H. W. Lin, S. H. Chou, F. Lin, C. W. Chen, Y. H. Liu and K. T. Wong, A low-energy-gap organic dye for high-performance small-molecule organic solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15822–15825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chen, L. Y. Lin, C. W. Lu, F. Lin, Z. Y. Huang, H. W. Lin, P. H. Wang, Y. H. Liu, K. T. Wong and J. Wen, 
            et al., Vacuum-deposited small-molecule organic solar cells with high power conversion efficiencies by judicious molecular design and device optimization, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13616–13623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Lin, Y. H. Chen, Z. Y. Huang, C. W. Chen, L. Y. Lin, F. Lin and K. T. Wong, Highly efficient bifacial transparent organic solar cells with power conversion efficiency greater than 3% and transparency of 50%, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1722–1728 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lin, H. W. Kang, Z. Y. Huang, C. W. Chen, Y. H. Chen, L. Y. Lin, F. Lin and K. T. Wong, An effective bilayer cathode buffer for highly efficient small molecule organic solar cells, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1925–1929 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheyns, M. Kim, B. Verreet and B. P. Rand, Accurate spectral response measurements of a complementary absorbing organic tandem cell with fill factor exceeding the subcells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 093302 CrossRef .
X. Z. Che, X. Xiao, J. D. Zimmerman, D. J. Fan and S. R. Forrest, High-Efficiency, Vacuum-Deposited, Small-Molecule Organic Tandem and Triple-Junction Photovoltaic Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 1400568 Search PubMed .
H. W. Lin, J. H. Chang, W. C. Huang, Y. T. Lin, L. Y. Lin, F. Lin, K. T. Wong, H. F. Wang, R. M. Ho and H. F. Meng, Highly efficient organic solar cells using a solution-processed active layer with a small molecule donor and pristine fullerene, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3709–3714 CAS .
H. S. Shim, C. K. Moon, J. Kim, C. K. Wang, B. Sim, F. Lin, K. T. Wong, Y. Seo and J. J. Kim, Efficient Vacuum-Deposited Ternary Organic Solar Cells with Broad Absorption, Energy Transfer, and Enhanced Hole Mobility, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1214–1219 CAS .
O. L. Griffith, X. Liu, J. A. Amonoo, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson, P. F. Green and S. R. Forrest, Charge transport and exciton dissociation in organic solar cells consisting of dipolar donors mixed with C70, Phys. Rev. B, 2015, 92, 085404 CrossRef .
D. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Ding, X. Zhao and Z. Geng, Density functional theory design and characterization of D–A–A type electron donors with narrow band gap for small-molecule organic solar cells, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2014, 1029, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, Y. Yi, S. W. Cho and W. K. Choi, Theoretical investigation on the electronic and charge transport characteristics of push–pull molecules for organic photovoltaic cells, Synth. Met., 2014, 194, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
K. Senthilkumar, F. C. Grozema, F. M. Bickelhaupt and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Charge Transport in Columnar Stacked Triphenylenes: Effects of Conformational Fluctuations on Charge Transfer Integrals and Site Energies, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 9809–9817 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Valeev, V. Coropceanu, D. A. da Silva Filho, S. Salman and J.-L. Brédas, Effect of Electronic Polarization on Charge-Transport Parameters in Molecular Organic Semiconductors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9882–9886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Han, X. X. Shen and Y. P. Yi, Deposition Growth and Morphologies of C60 on DTDCTB Surfaces: An Atomistic Insight into the Integrated Impact of Surface Stability, Landscape, and Molecular Orientation, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500329 Search PubMed .
L. Pandey, C. Doiron, J. S. Sears and J.-L. Brédas, Lowest excited states and optical absorption spectra of donor–acceptor copolymers for organic photovoltaics: a new picture emerging from tuned long-range corrected density functionals, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14243–14248 RSC .
M. Cossi, N. Rega, G. Scalmani and V. Barone, Energies, Structures, and Electronic Properties of Molecules in Solution with the C-PCM Solvation Model, J. Comput. Chem., 2003, 24, 669–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu and F. W. Chen, Multiwfn: A Multifunctional Wavefunction Analyzer, J. Comput. Chem., 2012, 33, 580–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci and G. A. Petersson, et al., Gaussian 09, Rev. D01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .
F. C. Spano, J. Clark, C. Silva and R. H. Friend, Determining exciton coherence from the photoluminescence spectral line shape in poly(3-hexylthiophene) thin films, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 074904 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yoshida, Low-Energy Inverse Photoemission Study on the Electron Affinities of Fullerene Derivatives for Organic Photovoltaic Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24377–24382 CAS .
A. K. Manna, M. H. Lee, K. L. McMahon and B. D. Dunietz, Calculating High Energy Charge Transfer States Using Optimally Tuned Range-Separated Hybrid Functionals, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11, 1110–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The intermolecular packing and their electronic couplings in the DTDCTB crystal structure, tuned range-separation parameters, frontier molecular orbitals and NTO of the lowest ddCT and dark EX states of DTDCTB clusters, NTO of the lowest ddCT, dark EX, and hot donor-to-acceptor CT states of nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes, and frontier molecular orbitals and NTO of excited states of nDTDCTB/C60H complexes. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp02296kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of (a) the nDTDCTB cluster and (b) nDTDCTB/C60CC complex structures.	 
JIP(ω) = |εNH(ω) + EN−1(ω) − EN(ω)|	(1)
JEA(ω) = |εN+1H(ω) + EN(ω) − EN+1(ω)|	(2)
J(ω) = JIP(ω) + JEA(ω)	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals and IP and EA values for the DTDCTB clusters (H and L denote the HOMO and the LUMO, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 3  Pictorial representation of the frontier molecular orbitals of the DTDCTB clusters.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Excited-state energy levels below the lowest bright EX states and (b) oscillator strengths of the lowest bright EX states for the DTDCTB clusters.	 

 	Fig. 5  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest bright EX states with large oscillator strengths for the DTDCTB clusters. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transition density matrices of the lowest ddCT, the lowest dark EX, and the lowest bright EX states for the DTDCTB clusters.	 

 	Fig. 7  Energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals and IP and EA values for the nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes (H and L denote the HOMO and the LUMO, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 8  Energy levels of (a) the EX states and the ddCT states between adjacent DTDCTB molecules and (b) donor-to-acceptor CT states in the nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes.	 

 	Fig. 9  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest EX state with a large oscillator strength in nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included.	 

 	Fig. 10  Natural transition orbitals of the lowest αCT, βCT, γCT, and δCT states in complex 4DTDCTB/C60CC. The weight of the hole–electron contribution to the excitation is also included.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The intermolecular packing and their electronic couplings in the DTDCTB crystal structure, tuned range-separation parameters, frontier molecular orbitals and NTO of the lowest ddCT and dark EX states of DTDCTB clusters, NTO of the lowest ddCT, dark EX, and hot donor-to-acceptor CT states of nDTDCTB/C60CC complexes, and frontier molecular orbitals and NTO of excited states of nDTDCTB/C60H complexes. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp02296k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
