Skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00207H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00207H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3759-3793Skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring

        
          
            Yan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      abcd, 
      
        
          
            Hossam 
            Haick
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Shuyang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chunya 
            Wang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sunghoon 
            Lee
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tomoyuki 
            Yokota
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Takao 
            Someya
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Guangdong Technion-Israel Institute of Technology (GTIIT), Shantou, Guangdong 515063, China
bTechnion-Israel Institute of Technology (IIT), Haifa 32000, Israel
cDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: someya@ee.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
dGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Guangdong Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Shantou, Guangdong 515063, China
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel
Received 
      15th March 2022
    First published on 14th April 2022AbstractSkin bioelectronics are considered as an ideal platform for personalised healthcare because of their unique characteristics, such as thinness, light weight, good biocompatibility, excellent mechanical robustness, and great skin conformability. Recent advances in skin-interfaced bioelectronics have promoted various applications in healthcare and precision medicine. Particularly, skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring offer powerful analysis of a broad spectrum of health statuses, providing a route to early disease diagnosis and treatment. In this review, we discuss (1) representative healthcare sensing devices, (2) material and structure selection, device properties, and wireless technologies of skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring, (3) healthcare applications: acquisition and analysis of electrophysiological, biophysical, and biochemical signals, and comprehensive monitoring, and (4) rational guidelines for the design of future skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring. Long-term, continuous health monitoring of advanced skin bioelectronics will open unprecedented opportunities for timely disease prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment, demonstrating great promise to revolutionise traditional medical practices.
Yan Wang
Yan Wang is currently an assistant professor at Guangdong Technion. She received her PhD degree majoring in Chemical Engineering from Monash University in 2018 and completed her postdoc training at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. Her current research mainly focuses on materials development and the practical implementation of soft wearables in real-life situations towards ambulatory healthcare and the Internet of Things.
Hossam Haick
Hossam Haick, professor at the Technion, is an expert in the field of nanotechnology and smart sensors. He is the founder and leader of several European consortiums for the development of advanced generations of nanosensors for the fourth industrial revolution and disease diagnosis. His research interests include nanomaterial-based chemical (flexible) sensors, electronic skin, nanoarray devices for screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of disease, breath analysis, volatile biomarkers, and molecular electronic devices.
Shuyang Guo
Shuyang Guo is currently a second-year master's degree holder major in electrical engineering at the Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo. She was born in China in 1997 and graduated from the University of Electronic Science and Technology with a bachelor's degree in 2020. Her current research interests are flexible electronics for human health monitoring.
Chunya Wang
Chunya Wang received her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2018 and then joined Prof. David Kaplan's group in Department of Biomedical Engineering at Tufts University as a postdoctoral scholar. From 2019 to 2021, she worked in Prof. Takao Someya's group as a Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) research fellow in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. Presently, she is an associate professor at the China University of Petroleum (Beijing). Her current research interests include advanced biomaterials, functional biogels, advanced carbon materials and their applications for soft bioelectronics and energy devices.
Sunghoon Lee
Sunghoon Lee received his BS degree from the Department of Applied Physics, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009, and his MS and PhD degrees from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo, in 2011 and 2017, respectively. Since 2019, he has been a project assistant professor and a lecturer at the University of Tokyo. His current research interests include organic electronics, soft electronics, and flexible electronics.
Tomoyuki Yokota
Tomoyuki Yokota was born in Tochigi, Japan, in 1985. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2013. Since 2019, he has been an associate professor at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. His current research interests include organic photonic devices, flexible electronics, printed electronics, large-area sensors, and wearable electronics.
Takao Someya
Takao Someya received his PhD degree in electrical engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1997. From 2001 to 2003, he was a visiting scholar at the Nanocenter (NSEC), Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, and at the Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ, USA. Since 2009, he has been a professor at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Tokyo. Since 2015, he has also been the chief scientist at the Thin-film Device Laboratory and a team leader at the Center for Emergent Matter Science, RIKEN, Wako, Japan. His current research interests include organic transistors, flexible electronics, plastic integrated circuits, large-area sensors, and plastic actuators.
1. Introduction
By leveraging the progressive advancement of microfabrication technologies, wireless communication, and miniaturised microelectronics, current commercialized wearables can continuously monitor individuals’ physiological signals under normal life conditions.1 These collected bio-signals play crucial roles in analysing the health status of wearers, especially elderly individuals, subjects with chronic conditions, and the performance of athletes. One limitation of the commercialised wearables, such as smart watches, bands, and apparel-based gadgets, is that they cannot form conformable contact with the human skin, resulting in poor signals and wear comfort. Furthermore, these wearables are usually constrained to several specific body locations, thus limiting the mobility of wearers.2
An emerging class of bioelectronics—skin bioelectronics—can mitigate this problem by having excellent skin conformability even under large, repetitive deformations.3,4 The robust, dynamic device–skin interface makes bioelectronics capable of monitoring real-time, continuous physiological, bioelectrical, and biochemical signals in an imperceptible way.5,6 It is touted as an ideal platform for personalised healthcare owing to its unique characteristics, such as thinness, lightweight, good biocompatibility, excellent mechanical robustness, and exceptional skin conformability.7 The rapid advancement of skin-interfaced electronics has enabled the implementation of emerging applications such as soft robotics, human–machine interfaces, and the Internet of Things,8 as well as numerous biomedical applications in health monitoring, fitness/wellness, disease diagnosis, therapy and drug delivery, and smart prostheses.9–11 In particular, skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring can collect timely, high-fidelity vital bio-signals, such as human activity, body temperature, cardiac mapping, electrophysiological signals, as well as molecular analysis of body fluid and exhalation of the subject in daily living.12–14 The collected biometric information offers powerful analysis of a broad spectrum of health status, opening a route for predictive disease prevention, screening, diagnoses, and treatment in a convenient and non-invasive way.15–17 Representative skin bioelectronics are shown in Fig. 1.18–29 The development of skin bioelectronics has shown their capabilities of high precision health monitoring and biodiagonise.17,30 There are many reviews focused on skin or wearable electronics for health monitoring. Some summarize advanced materials or devices,7,11,31 some put emphases on the continuous monitoring of one particular target, such as molecules, activity, or wound.13,32,33 However, none of them focuses on skin bioelectronics for long-term healthcare. Skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring presents tremendous capabilities for timely disease diagnosis and treatment, promising to revolutionise traditional medical practices. Therefore, there lacks a review to provide a bird's eye-view of skin bioelectronics with a focus on long-term, continuous health monitoring. The proposed topic is extremely timely. The knowledge and insights provided in this review will benefit the wider scientific community in three aspects: (1) stimulate development of advanced wearable technologies for high-performance skin bioelectronics; (2) encourage continued progress of skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous monitoring of a broad spectrum of health conditions of the subject; and (3) expedite the realization of the full potential of future skin-interfaced bioelectronics that can provide point-of-care healthcare in home and community settings. Moreover, a review on such a topic will attract considerable scientific interest from researchers in the soft electronic and biomedicine field, and significant commercial attention from users, health-care funders, tech-giants, and health-care providers.
 Fig. 1  Representative examples of advanced skin bioelectronics for human health monitoring (2016–2021). Reproduced with permission from ref. 18–29. Copyright 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 Nature Publishing Group, 2016, 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2017 Wiley-VCH; 2021 National Academy of Sciences. 
This review begins with a highlight on representative skin-interfaced sensing devices for healthcare with a focus on materials, device structure, and mechanism, and then elaborates materials and structure selection, device properties, and wireless technologies of skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring. The review will also highlight promising real-life applications of skin bioelectronics with long-term operation capabilities (see an overview of the report in Fig. 2).34–41 We then conclude with a summary of the remaining challenges, opportunities, and future directions in the field of skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring.
 Fig. 2  Overview of this report (Sections 2–4). Section 2 reviews and discusses representative skin-interfaced sensing devices for human healthcare. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34–39. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH; 2021 National Academy of Sciences; 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2018 Elsevier; 2018, 2020 Nature Publishing Group. Section 3 discusses material and structure selection, device properties, and wireless monitoring of skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 41. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society; 2015 Elsevier. Section 4 reviews healthcare applications of skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring. 
2. Representative healthcare sensing
Substantial progress has been made in recent years in the field of skin bioelectronics due to the advancement in materials science, engineering technologies, nanofabrication, and system integration.42 By constructing rigid, inorganic functional materials into a soft compliant format with elastomeric materials, soft bioelectronic systems can laminate conformably on arbitrary parts of the human body and maintain device functionalities under continuous, repetitive skin deformations. To realise the full potential of skin bioelectronics in health monitoring, all skin-interfaced electronic components should have state-of-the-art operational characteristics throughout long-term, continuous wearing, during which the sensing devices extract bioinformatics from the human body, energy devices provide a power source, integrated circuit process and transport data, and display convey results and feedback to the wearers.7 Initially, we will focus on skin-integrated soft sensing devices in human healthcare.
In fact, our body is constantly radiating highly personalised electrical, mechanical, thermal, and biochemical signals indicating our health, emotions, and actions. For example, electrophysiological signals are generated by the electrical activities of the heart, brain, and muscles. Physical activities cause a physiological response from the skin. Body secretions, such as tears and sweat, can offer crucial biomedical information (e.g., pH, ions, molecules, and volatile organic compounds) for disease management.43 The measurement and analysis of the aforementioned health indicators will be discussed in Section 4. To collect these bio-signals, corresponding skin-mountable sensing devices have been developed.44 In terms of working mechanisms, we classify skin sensing devices into four categories: electrical, biophysical, optical, and biochemical. We further discuss other emerging sensing devices, such as transistor-based and multimodal devices.
2.1. Four sensing modalities
In this section, we discuss electrical, biophysical, optical, and then biochemical sensing devices. For each sensing modality, the working mechanism, materials, and device configurations will be discussed individually.

2.1.1. Electrical sensing. 
Electrical sensors can be classified into wet and dry electrodes based on different skin contacts. As prolonged or repeated attachment to the human skin is necessary for long-term applications, wet electrodes (e.g., standard Ag/AgCl gel electrodes) are not suitable considering the potential drying and skin irritation issues.45 In this review, we will discuss dry electrodes. A dry electrode has direct contact with the human skin and provides a non-invasive approach for long-term biopotential signal monitoring. Minute changes in skin electrical resistance are recorded via the conformal electrical contact.46 Moisture on the skin, such as sweat, enhances the stabilisation of the dry electrodes. As shown in Fig. 3, a parallel circuit of leakage resistance and capacitance has been used to represent the electrical circuit model for a conformable electrode–skin interface.47 As a result, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the recorded biopotential signals depends on several parameters: electrode conductivity, area of skin contact, and air gap at the interface. In its simplest form, a dry electrode can be built from any conductive material that can be in contact with the human skin. To achieve skin compliance, tattoo or substrate-free dry electrodes have been developed. An ultrathin layer of conductive materials made from carbon nanomaterials, metallic nanomaterials, conductive polymers, and their hybrids has been invented for such a purpose.21,48–50 Another way to achieve conformability and stretchability is to integrate the aforementioned conductive materials with elastomeric materials, such as natural polymers (e.g., cellulose and silk),51 silicon elastomers (e.g., Ecoflex,52 polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)),53,54 polyimide (PI),55 polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyurethane (PU),56 polyethylene (PE), parylene,57 acrylate,58 electrospun nanofibres,27,59 and biodegradable polymers such as poly(vinyl acetate) (PVA) and polylactic acid,60 where a two-layer structure, a foam structure, or a composite film is constructed. A wide range of materials have been used as conductive building blocks to fabricate on-skin electrical sensors. Typical conductive materials are metal films,61,62 nanostructured materials63 (e.g., metallic nanoparticles64 and nanowires,65 carbon nanotubes,66–68 graphene69–71), liquid metals,72,73 conducting polymers,74,75 and their hybrids (Fig. 4).76,77
 Fig. 3  The skin-electrode interface and circuit model of on-skin electrical sensors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 4  Active materials for electrical sensing of skin bioelectronics. (a) Scheme of thin Au/PET film for epidermal electrical sensors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (b) Surface SEM image of AuNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of oxidation-free Cu–Au core–shell NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM image of CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 IOPscience. (e) SEM image of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2019 IEEE. (f) SEM image of gallium–indium alloy (EGaIn). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (g) A photograph of PEDOT:PSS nanofilm electrode on human skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM image of AgNWs–graphene hybrid materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2019 IOPscience. (i) SEM image of CNTs-graphene hybrid materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In the modern era of the Internet of Things, electrical sensors provide promising opportunities to achieve mobile health. In addition to typical biopotential recording, such as electrocardiogram (ECG), electrooculogram (EOG), electromyography (EMG), and electroencephalogram (EEG), electrical skin sensors can be used to stimulate the skin surface, or to determine the electrical properties of the skin itself, including the hydration level, electrolyte concentration, and onset of sweating.78,79


2.1.2. Biophysical sensing. 
Skin-interfaced biophysical sensors include strain, pressure, tactile, temperature, and acoustic sensors. Their detection capability of these sensing devices ranges from identifying minus mechanical skin deformations caused by blood flow to significant skin stretching induced by bending motions of the joint. In terms of working mechanisms, physical sensors can be classified into four types: piezoresistive, capacitive, piezoelectric and triboelectric, and iontronic.78 The working mechanisms of each sensing modality are shown in Fig. 5.78
 Fig. 5  Schematics illustrating the different modalities of mechanical sensors. (a) Piezoresistivity; (b) Capacitance; (c) Piezoelectricity; (d) Iontronic. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Four fundamental modes of triboelectricity. 
The piezoresistive effect is described as the change in electrical properties induced by mechanical deformations, i.e., strain and pressure. The sensitivity of a strain gauge is characterised by a gauge factor (GF): ,80 wherein ΔR and ΔL are resistance and length changes, respectively; R0 and L0 are the initial resistance and device length, respectively, and ε is the applied strain.81 For a pressure sensor with forces applied in the normal directions, the sensitivity (S) is denoted as: . Here, ΔI and ΔP are the current and pressure changes, respectively, and I0 is the initial current with no pressure.82,83 Among skin electronics, soft piezoresistive physical sensors have been widely investigated owing to their simple device structures. A typical piezoresistive physical sensor is constructed by depositing electrical materials onto an polymeric substrate or embedding them into a polymer matrix.84,85 Commonly used polymeric substrates include PI, Parylene, poly(styrene–ethylene–butylene–styrene) SEBS, Ecoflex, PDMS, PU, and PVA.55 Various kinds of electrically active materials have been utilised for the development of on-skin biophysical sensors, such as metallic materials (e.g., metal films, metal liquid, metallic nanomaterials),86–88 ionic liquids,80,89 carbon-based materials (e.g., carbon black, graphene, carbon nanotubes),90 conducive polymers,91,92 and their hybrids.93,94 For example, Ag nanowires (NWs) and AuNWs integrated percolating networks were used to fabricate an on-skin transparent strain sensor for emotion monitoring, with a gauge factor of up to 236.95 Resistive-type sensors developed by using these materials exhibit advantages such as high sensitivity, low detection limit, low hysteresis, and good cyclic performance. Additionally, the low working voltage and energy consumption make resistive-type sensors an ideal candidate for ambulatory healthcare systems.96
Capacitive-type sensors have a typical sandwich structure constructed by two parallel electrodes and a middle dielectric layer. The capacitance (C) can be calculated by , where ε0 presents the permittivity of the dielectric layer, and S and d are the electrode area and distance between electrodes, respectively.97 Deformations such as strain or pressure lead to capacitance changes. Conductive materials such as metallic materials (e.g., metal films, metal liquids, metallic nanomaterials) and carbon-based materials have been used to fabricate electrode plates.98 Capacitive-type sensors have excellent sensing linearity, although their parasitic noises from the body and environment should be considered in real-life applications.
The piezoelectric effect is a change in electrical polarisation inside the piezoelectrical material under external force, pressure, or strain, rendering a change in surface charge (voltage) at the surface of the piezoelectric material. Piezoelectricity is generated instantaneously, hence, piezoelectric sensors have a fast response time and high sensitivity. Popular piezoelectric materials are poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)), zinc oxide nanowires (ZnO NWs), lead zirconate titanate (PZT),99 and aluminium nitride (AlN).100 Recently, Sun et al. utilized conformable piezoelectric thin films to reliably decode facial movement, with integration of algorithms and three dimensional (3D) digital image correlation.100 Piezoelectric sensors have promising features such as high sensitivity, real-time sensing, and good flexibility, and can be used as self-powered skin sensors.
The basic working mechanism of a triboelectric-type sensor is that the mechanical deformation induces relative displacement between two triboelectric parts, which leads to potential differences between the two working electrodes and drives electrons to flow across.101 Zhonglin Wang et al. have developed numerous wearable electronics based on the triboelectric effect.102 The triboelectric effect exists widely in human life, and it occurs for any material, in any state (solid, liquid, gas).103 Similar to piezoelectric sensors, triboelectric sensors are good candidates for self-powered skin sensors owing to the simple structure, easy fabrication, various working modes, multiple options regarding materials, and high power density. Various materials can be used for triboelectric-type sensors, such as polyamide, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), and silk.104,105
Iontronic-type sensors can substantially overcome parasitic noise by enhanced stress/pressure-induced capacitive change at the nanoscopic electric double layer (EDL) interface. They are made from ionic materials, such as ionic liquids, ionic gels, or ionic nanofibres, which are distinct from the traditional parallel-plate capacitive sensors.106,107 Iontronic sensors exhibit high transparency, good stretchability, and remarkable device sensitivity. As for on-skin applications, a material's choice of iontronic sensors should be carefully considered due to the biocompatibility issues. Recently, studies have shown that modulating EDL at liquid/solid interfaces can result in electricity generation while under environmental stimuli.108,109 An EDL-based self-powered triboelectric sensor was developed using a pyramid-structured hydrogel and dielectric polymer.110


2.1.3. Optical sensing. 
Nowadays, commercialised gadgets equipped with optical sensors can measure bio-signals including step count, respiratory rate, blood oxygenation, heart rate, and even sleep habits. Such optoelectronic technologies have attracted considerable attention in the field of wearable electronics. Optical sensors are immune to electromagnetic radiation and are capable of non-invasive interrogation of biological matters at relatively large penetration depths.111 A large amount of biomedical information is obtained by non-invasive skin-interfaced optical devices, where the measurement is taken while the skin is exposed to a particular wavelength of light source. The light sources are chosen based on specific applications, ranging from a single-wavelength laser to narrow bandwidth light emitting diodes (LEDs). To acquire the biomedical signals, such as blood pressure, heart rate, or glucose concentration, the optical sensors measure the change of reflected, absorbed, or refracted light.111,112 Typical optical technologies include organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic photo diodes (OPDs), organic phototransistors (OPTs), photoresistors, optical fibres, colorimetric, plasmonic, and fluorometric sensors.112–116 Heart rate and oxygenation are widely monitored parameters for organic optoelectronic devices. Chemical biomarkers, such as pH, metabolites (e.g., glucose and lactic acid) and electrolytes (e.g., H+, Na+ and Cl−) in body fluids can be monitored using optical chemical sensors, such as those based on colorimetric, fluorescence, and luminescence.117–119
Organic optoelectronic devices, including OLEDs, OPDs, and OPTs can be produced on flexible elastomers to achieve wearability onto the human skin.120 Wearable OLED, OPD, and OPT devices have shown promising features, such as a cost-effective, large-area, low-temperature process, and the ability to tailor optical properties via molecular engineering.116 These devices are termed photonic skin sensors. Fig. 6 displays the device structure and working mechanism of organic optoelectronic devices.116 OLEDs consist of organic light-emitting materials sandwiched between an anode and a cathode. Between the anode and cathode, an emissive layer (EML) is between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport layer (HTL). When a voltage is applied, electrons and holes recombine in the EML, leading to light illumination. OPDs have a structure similar to OLEDs, where a photoactive layer is sandwiched between an anode and a cathode, however with an opposite working mechanism. When an incident light has sufficient energy, excitons are generated and separated into free holes and electrons, which then diffuse to the anode and cathode through the HTL and ETL. OPTs are a type of light-sensitive organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), which are composed of gate, source, and drain electrodes, a dielectric layer, and a light-responsive semiconducting channel layer. Under illumination, the channel layer absorbs light, then a photocurrent is generated by the OPT. A photoresistor has a relatively simple structure with a straightforward working mechanism, where the resistance changes under light irradiation. Compared to other optical sensors, photoresistors have a longer response time, but with a large dynamic range.121
 Fig. 6  Device structure and working mechanism of organic optoelectronic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Transparent, conducting electrodes are crucial components of photonic skin sensing devices. Metallic NWs/nanofibres,122–124 carbon nanomaterials (graphene and carbon nanotubes),125 liquid metal,126 and conducting polymers127 such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) have been utilised as electrode materials with adjustable transparency and conductivity. For active semiconducting materials, composites made of emissive polymers, ionic conductors, and salts have been used for OLEDs, whereas solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) materials are among the popular choices for OPDs.128 For photoresistors, active materials such as cadmium sulfide (CdS), molybdenum disulphide (MoS2), and perovskite have been reported recently.121 The performance of photonic skin devices can be enhanced by tunning the device interface, device structure, and components in the active layers.


2.1.4. Biochemical sensing. 
Direct chemical detection is used extensively in gold-standard blood and urine tests, which are usually accompanied with hospitalized bulky and expensive analytical instruments. As attractive alternatives to these bucky instruments, on-skin biochemical sensors enable dynamic assessment of human health at the molecular level. Particularly in the past 5 years, innovative materials and flexible designs have led to the development of myriad biochemical sensors that can identify and quantify representative electrolytes, metabolites, heavy metals, and toxic gases directly in body fluids, such as saliva, tears, sweat, wound, and interstitial fluid, as well as exhaled breath.13,129 As mentioned in the optical sensing subsection, a number of biochemical signals can be detected with optical sensors via chemical-to-optical transduction. In the following, we will discuss biochemical sensors using chemical-to-electrical transduction. Fig. 7a presents the working principle of a typical electrochemical biosensor.130 An analyte can be sampled and analysed using various electrochemical approaches, such as two major approaches of amperometric and potentiometric techniques, and others including voltametric techniques, affinity-based immunosensors and DNA sensors, which exhibit electrical changes, i.e., current or potential, at a functionalized electrode and transduce the correlated analyte concentrations to readable signals.130 A typical soft electrochemical sensor comprises three elements: a flexible substrate, an active layer, and electrodes.131 The electrodes generally comprise a working electrode (WE) or sensing electrode, a counter electrode (CE), and an additional reference electrode (RE) that help stabilise the system by maintaining a certain potential to compensate the imbalance caused by the continuous chemical reactions at the WE.132 An electrolyte layer is present between the electrodes to separate them.130 Potentiometric chemical sensors measure potential change under the selective recognition of a target analyte. An ion-selective electrode is used to allow only one particular ion analyte that will determine the voltage response (Fig. 7b). In terms of amperometric chemical sensors, a potential is applied between the WE and RE, leading to a current change by the electron-transfer reaction in the presence of the target analyte (Fig. 7c).78
 Fig. 7  Working mechanism of electrochemical sensors. (a) Working principle of a typical electrochemical biosensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Potentiometric and (c) amperometric modalities. RE is the reference electrode, CE is the counter electrode, and WE is the working electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Commonly used substrate materials include the polymerics described in the section of electrical sensing, these polymers enable bio-compatible physical properties and interfaces for skin-laminated biochemical sensors. Metallic nanomaterials including transition metal-based nanomaterials, carbon-based materials, conducting polymers, and their hybrids have been commonly used for electrode preparation because of their high conductivity and easy fabrication.130,133 Among them, gold nanomaterials are popular because of their excellent biocompatibility and superior resistance to oxidation. Currently, two major approaches, such as enzymes and antibody/aptamer have been utilised to modify WEs to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor. In contrast to electrical materials that remain constant in electrodes, active materials in WEs need to have a high enough sensitivity to the analyte of interest. The most common types of nanomaterials used in recent chemical sensors include transition metal-, carbon-, and polymer-based materials.131 These materials are used both in solely pristine form and in combination as a form of nanocomposites, such as polymer/metal,134 carbon/metal,135 and polymer/carbon.136

2.2. Other sensing devices
With the above four well-developed sensing modalities, emerging sensor platforms have been further developed, leading to transistor-based and multimodal sensing devices. In the following part, we will focus on transistor-based and multimodal sensing devices.

2.2.1. Transistor-based sensing. 
Organic transistors have excellent biocompatibility, readout integration, large-area coverage, power efficiency, and can be easily integrated into portable electronic devices. They have been spotlighted as a tool of choice for skin bioelectronics correlated mainly to chemical and biophysical (e.g., strain, pressure and temperature) sensors.137–139 An obvious advantage of organic transistor-based sensors is their higher sensitivity than two-terminal-based sensors, because of their signal amplification and controllability that is obtained by modulating the gate voltage.96,116,140 A wide range of conjugated small molecules, polymers, and room-temperature liquid crystals have been applied as active channel semiconductors in soft organic transistor devices.137 The material choice depends on the applications and requirements of the specific sensors.
For chemical sensing, there are two types of transistor-based sensors: OFETs and organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs). Typically, OFETs comprise three electrodes, a semiconducting layer, and a gate dielectric layer. The semiconducting layer is usually exposed to the analyte of interest, acting as both an electronic transport material and a chemical sensing layer. For OECTs, an electrolyte is adopted instead of a dielectric layer, which is sandwiched between the gate electrode and the active semiconducting layer. Under the exposure to an analyte, potential changes occur across the gate/electrolyte or electrolyte/channel interfaces.140,141 Although the working mechanisms are different, these transistors can interact with target analytes via similar device engineering to enable diverse biosensors.137,142 In the physical sensing area, organic transistors have been used to address the matrix reading of the pressure mappings.143 Innovative printing methods, such as ink-jet, reverse offset, roll-to-roll gravure offset, screen printing, and dispersing printing, ultimately led to fabrication or organic transistor-based sensor arrays for a wide range of biomedical applications.144–147 Transistor-based biophysical sensors exhibit higher sensitivity than resistive and capacitive-type devices due to their capacities to vary the conductance of channel materials by controlling the gate voltage. These features make transistor-based sensors attractive candidates for advanced skin bioelectronics.


2.2.2. Multimodal sensing. 
A single sensor monitoring system is neither practical nor ergonomically sound for long-term and continuous health monitoring. To achieve higher productivity in health monitoring, more sensing functionalities are necessary. Multimodal sensors are expected to be integrated into one skin device, such that one device can detect and quantify multiple external stimuli and provide a comprehensive analysis of the multiple bio-signals to make an accurate assessment on an individual's health condition.148,149 For example, the utilization of photoplethysmogram (PPG) sensors in combination with ECG sensors provides more reliable disease diagnosis and health-monitoring capability than a single device.150 Multimodal sensors can be realised by assembling sensors with various functions, which can simplify the integration of sensors and miniaturise their volume.29,151 There has been a plethora of reported multi-sensor systems that can detect multiple vital signs in a single device.23,27,152 Concurrent detection of two or more different bio-signals,153 such as temperature and pressure,154 pressure and biochemical signals,155 and biochemical, electrophysiological and skin temperature,156 have been reported by a large number of researchers in the soft electronic area.
Additionally, the rapid advancements in novel sensing materials, fabrication strategies, and innovative electronic constitution not only support the progressive development of versatile integration of multimodal sensors, but also allow the realisation of sensor platforms with promising functionalities such as self-healing, visualization, diagnosis and therapy, and self-powering.92,153,157–162

3. Towards long-term, continuous health monitoring
To allow long-term, continuous health monitoring, generally, skin bioelectronics should be mechanically and biologically compatible with the human body when collecting bioinformatics.163 To achieve personalised medical care through long-term, continuous health monitoring, other issues, such as power sources and communication technologies, should also be considered. In this section, we will discuss material and structure selection, mechanical robustness, and wireless monitoring of skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring. Representative examples are presented, with a focus on discussion and comparison of the performances of various materials and designs.
3.1. Materials and structure selection
From a material and structure perspective, recent efforts in four areas, are reviewed and discussed in this section: ultrathin materials and devices, biocompatibility, breathability, and waterproofness,

3.1.1. Ultrathin materials and devices. 
To satisfy mechanical compliance, skin bioelectronics are usually made into ultrathin formats.164,165 Flexural rigidity is highly correlated with the conformability of a film to a rough surface, which is defined as . Here, E, t, and ν denote the Young's modulus, thickness, and Poisson's ratio of the thin film, respectively. Therefore, reducing the thickness is the most effective approach to decreasing flexural rigidity due to the cubic dependence on thickness.166,167 Ultrathin materials are the primary choice for skin bioelectronics. For example, thin PI substrates have been widely used to construct epidermal electronics.168–170 Popular ultrathin materials are thin polymeric films167 such as Parylene,57 electrospun nanofibres,39 and ultrathin conducting films from polymers171 and metallic172 or carbon-based173 nanomaterials. With such materials, we have seen the development of various ultrathin conformable skin bioelectronics in the last six years, such as tattoo-like sensors,174,175 energy devices,176 photonic skins,19 and integrated circuits.177 In addition to thin film formats, ultrathin porous devices have also been developed, usually accompanied with the additional advantage of gas permeability. These thin, porous devices can obtain excellent skin conformability for high-quality health monitoring. Zhou et al. developed a porous thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) film using the breath-figure method. Then a highly conductive AgNW/TPU composite was fabricated by dip-coating and heat-pressing, with a total thickness of 4.6 μm. No allergic reactions and sweat accumulation occurred after 7 days of wearing on the human skin.178 The AgNW/TPU electrode demonstrated comparable SNR of the ECG signals to that of Ag/AgCl gel electrodes. Another example is a conformable strain gauge sensor made from PU-PDMS nanomesh coated with a gold layer (Fig. 8a).179 The total thickness of the nanomesh sensor was approximately 430 ± 18 nm. The authors demonstrated that the nanomesh strain gauge did not affect the natural skin motions, the face with nanomesh-attached exhibited similar strain mapping with that of the face without sensors (Fig. 8b and c). Additionally, long-term wearing for 3.5 h did not influence the sensor performance because of its ultrasoft nanomesh structure and thinness geometry.
 Fig. 8  Ultrathin materials and devices, and biocompatibility of skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Microscopical images of the nanomesh strain gauge on fingertip replica, demonstrating distinct sweat pore features. (b) Photograph of a face during speech of “a.” (c) Strain mapping of the face during speech of “a.” Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schema of Au coated AgNW and a photograph of the Ag–Au nanocomposite before and under strain. (e) Biocompatibility test: confocal microscope image of H9C2 cells after exposure to control and Ag–Au nanocomposite samples for 24 h. (f) Multifunctional skin patch and collected EMG signals under electrical stimulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.1.2. Sensing materials. 
A wide of materials have been used as sensing materials to construct skin bioelectronics. Representative examples can be seen in Fig. 4, including zero dimension (0D) (e.g., fullerenes, quantum dots, metallic NPs), one dimension (1D), two dimension (2D) nanomaterials, liquid materials, and polymers. Among them, 1D, i.e., CNT and NWs (e.g., Cu,180 Ag,181 Au,86 and ZnO182) are one of the most promising sensing materials, due to their high electrical conductivity, intrinsic flexibility, and transparency. They are sensitive to a wide spectrum of stimuli, such as tactile, temperature, and molecules.183,184 Besides sensors, CNTs have also been applied as active channel materials for soft transistors.185 To reduce contact resistance between 1D nanomaterials, many approaches have been used, such as sintering,186 pressing,34 increasing loading materials,187 templating,188 and mixing with softer fillers.189 Furthermore, surface modifications have also been used to enhance contacts of 1D nanomaterial networks, leading to better electrical properties.
2D nanomaterials have a shape of sheet or membrane. They include graphene, MoS2, MXene, and black phosphorus.190 As a typical 2D material, graphene can be obtained using a micromechanical exfoliation and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. Graphene is a film of sp2-hybridized carbons, that exhibits excellent transparency (∼97.7%), high electrical/thermal conductivities (200000 cm2 (V s)−1 and 5000 W m−1 K−1), and biocompatibility.50 It has been extensively used as active materials for flexible/stretchable sensors to detect biophysical, electrophysiological, and biochemical signals.191 MoS2 is a semiconductor, exhibiting thinness, superior photoabsorption, and piezoresistivity. It is an excellent material for strain sensor,192 humidity sensor,193 and nonvolatile memory.194 MoS2 and graphene can form high-quality contact because of strong van der Waals adhesion forces. Therefore, they can be integrated as promising building blocks for soft electronics and optoelectronics.50
Conductive polymers are promising sensing materials due to their advantageous electrical and mechanical properties. There are highly π-conjugated polymer chains in conductive polymers. By doping, conductive polymers can be conductive or semiconductive, depending on the dopant and doping level.195 There are dozens of conductive polymers now, such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), polyaniline (PANI), PEDOT:PSS, polypyrrole (PPy), polyacetylene (PA), and polythiophene (PTh). P3HT, PANI, PEDOT:PSS, and PPy have also been employed as active channel materials in FETs. Among the available conductive polymers, PEDOT:PSS is the most studied one because of its easy fabrication, high conductivity, and biocompatibility. Towards long-term health monitoring, novel materials and fabrication techniques are required while using conductive polymers. Very recently, Chen et al. reported a substrate-free PEDOT:PSS film as an ultra-conformable E-tattoo.196 The skin adhesion can be regulated during the transformation of gel to dry PEDOT:PSS. This E-tattoo could achieve higher signal quality than that of commercial Ag/AgCl electrodes. The PEDOT:PSS electrode could adhere to the human skin for more than 10 h without falling off.


3.1.3. Biocompatibility. 
Skin bioelectronic devices have direct contact with the human skin, where biocompatibility is a critical parameter to be considered, especially for long-term applications.197 Considerable efforts have been focused on the development of biocompatible active materials and biocompatible encapsulating layers.198–200 As a result, numerous biocompatible skin bioelectronics have been reported ranging from sensors,201,202 to energy devices,203,204 to integrated circuits.205 For example, a biocomposite electrode was developed by using biocompatible silk fibroin (SF) and PPy.206 The two materials form interlocking structures by interfacial polymerisation, thereby achieving highly adhesive and stretchable biocomposite electrodes. The electrodes could be attached to the human skin and reliable ECG signals were collected continuously during running for 2 h. This work provides impressive material solutions for future skin bioelectronics for long-term health monitoring.
To overcome the silver ion leaching and oxidation issue, a thick gold sheath was deposited on the surface of the AgNW surface to obtain a biocompatible and highly conductive material (maximum conductivity of 72600 S cm−1) (Fig. 8d and e).23 The conductivity of the Ag–Au nanocomposite showed negligible changes during 3 weeks of storage in phosphate-buffered saline solution. They fabricated multifunctional skin devices with the biocompatible nanocomposite by patterning on a PDMS substrate, and their devices successfully measured real-time electrophysiological signals and delivered electrical and thermal stimulation (Fig. 8f). Furthermore, Bandodkar et al. developed a biocompatible battery that was powered by sweat, then the battery was applied to power skin integrated circuits for continuous health monitoring.205 The battery comprised a skin-safe electrode and separator materials, and sweat as the electrolyte. It consisted of hybrid silicone and paper-based microfluidic systems to enable rapid sweat capture and storage. The electrical isolation circuits enabled high-quality heart rate measurements from ECG signals, with performance aligned with standardised values from the American National Standards Institute/Association. A general way to quantitively evaluate biocompatibility is cell viability assay,207,208 which is in vitro, i.e., a cellular-level biocompatibility. An in vivo approach is to attach samples onto animal tissues or human skin and investigate the presence of inflammation,209 fibrotic reaction,23 or irritations.21


3.1.4. Breathability. 
Although many current skin bioelectronics are based on a low-permeability film-type form factor, a health microenvironment allows the human skin to ‘breathe’, that is, there is sufficient permeability to air, water vapour, and liquid.210,211 To realise the full potential of long-term health monitoring, breathability is one of the key features to target for skin bioelectronics.59,212 Breathable electronic devices also improve the biocompatibility of skin electronic devices because they do not cause inflammation and are gas-permeable.211 Electrospun nanofibres are one of the most used materials for breathable electronics because of their porous structure, diverse configurations, and excellent mechanical properties.59,213,214 A typical example is the use of substrate-free nanomesh devices.21 Simply evaporating a gold layer on a dissolvable PVA electrospun nanofibre mat results in the thin gold layer bonding to the human skin after water mist treatment. No negative feedback was reported after 7-day attachment of the nanomesh skin patch, opening possibilities for continuous, long-term health monitoring. Later, the team utilised the nanomesh system and developed several breathable skin devices, including electrical sensors,34 strain gauges,179 hydration sensors,79 and mechanoacoustic sensors.215 With the all-nanofibre-based device design, mechanoacoustic heart signals were continuously monitored for 10 h.215 Recently, Ma et al. developed highly stretchable permeable monolithic skin bioelectronics from a liquid–metal fibre mat.27 The mat showed excellent biocompatibility both in in vivo and in vitro tests and exhibited stretchability of over 1800% strain. One week of wearing did not cause any discomfort. The authors successfully demonstrated the reliable operation of the ECG and sweat sensors and skin heater (Fig. 9a–d).
 Fig. 9  Breathable and waterproof skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Permeable monolithic skin electronics made from a superelastic liquid–metal fibre mat. (b–d) The device could monitor ECG signals, sweat volume, and heating performance simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Device design of a waterproof, microfluidic skin devices for body hydration management. (f) Device used during vigorous physical activities in aquatic environment. (g) Sweat measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Breathability can also be achieved by ultrathin film electronics.216 For instance, a bubble-blow method was employed to fabricate a 90 nm-thick thermoplastic elastomer, then a breathable electrode was obtained by integrating the nanomembrane with AuNWs. The total thickness of the dry electrode was 160 nm. The dry electrodes could survive 5 h wearing without causing any discomfort to the subject.217 Another 95 nm thick PDMS nanofilm was constructed using an effective dip-coating approach. With a gold layer deposited on the top of the nanofilm, a gas-permeable dry electrode was obtained and self-adhered to the human skin for one week high-fidelity ECG monitoring.166 Compared to the film-type, well-encapsulated skin devices, breathable electronics may suffer from inferior SNR and/or weak stability due to difficult encapsulation, particularly for foam-based breathable electronics.218,219 Novel materials and fabrication technologies should be developed to solve these issues. To quantitively evaluate breathability, water vapor transmission rate has been widely used.34,178 In this experiment, glass bottles (with a certain amount of water) are sealed with the tested samples and put in a thermostatic chamber undisturbed for a period. The weight of the bottle will be measured periodically. Some researchers also utilize commercial tools to evaluate the air/water permeability rate.27,220


3.1.5. Waterproofness. 
During long-term usage, particularly for health and fitness monitoring in athletics where there is a lot of sweat or in aquatic environments, the skin bioelectronic devices may experience deterioration or even device failure. Possible reasons could be device delamination from the skin or analyte contamination, Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop waterproof or washable skin bioelectronics in varied hydrated conditions, such as sweating, raining, swimming, and showering.221 Novel materials and structure engineering have been utilised to develop skin bioelectronics that are capable of sustaining high adhesion and water resistance in hydrated environments. With electrospun porous materials, researchers have achieved breathable and water-resistant skin bioelectronics by introducing hydrophobic materials.222 Additionally, the specialised design of fibre mats can guide the direction of sweat transport, thus maintaining the electrical performance of the skin-attached devices.223,224
In addition to porous materials, film-type electronics have also been investigated.225 Reeder et al. developed waterproof, epidermal, microfluidic and electronic systems that adhere to the human skin for sweat collection, biomarker analysis, and thermography, even in aquatic settings. They chose polymer materials with ultralow rates of water/chemical penetration, and particularly designed inlets and outlets of microfluidic channels to prevent contamination in aquatic surroundings without impeding in-flow sweat. The developed system could bond to the human skin and perform key hydration mapping via underwater sweat collection and skin thermography during vigorous physical activity in controlled, indoor conditions and in open ocean swimming, to realise personalised hydration strategies for athletics and fitness areas (Fig. 9e–g).226 Because the performance of some energy generators such as biofuel cells (BFCs), triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), and piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) suffer from humidity caused by sweat, additional encapsulations may solve the problem but result in increased thickness of the devices. Zhou et al. developed a waterproof magnetoelastic generator using a biomechanical energy source. The magnetoelastic generator was fully water resistant without encapsulation because the magnetic field can go through water with negligible intensity loss. The integrated system could continuously measure cardiovascular health under the condition of heavy perspiration.227

3.2. Device properties
Human skin is in time-dynamic motions, which require that skin bioelectronics can survive repetitive bending, stretching, compressing, twisting, etc. In other words, skin bioelectronics should be thin, lightweight, and have robust skin adhesion, good flexibility and stretchability and mechanical durability to ensure stable functionalities during long-term, continuous health monitoring. In the following part, we will discuss aspects of skin adhesion, flexibility/stretchability, and mechanical durability in detail.

3.2.1. Skin adhesion. 
It is worth mentioning that the skin bioelectronics discussed in the subsection of ultrathin materials and devices adhere to the human skin by pure van der Waals forces, owing to their sufficient thinness and ultraflexibility.166 One obvious advantage of gel-free self-adhesiveness is that the bio-devices can bond to human skin without further external forces or adhesive materials, which are burdensome and limit an individual's mobility.48,217 As a representative example, Nawrocki et al. reported a sub-300 nm dry thin-film electrical sensor that could self-adhere to the human skin without any additional adhesives. The dry electrode could attach to the human skin and monitor ECG and EMG signals for as long as 10 h, with a signal quality comparable to that of adhesive Ag/AgCl gel electrodes.228 Generally, soft electronic devices are vulnerable to rigorous mechanical disruptions if the device thickness is ultralow.
For long-term health monitoring, good mechanical durability of the device is highly important, considering the consistent and dynamic skin motions. Therefore, advanced materials and innovative structure designs should be used to overcome the trade-off between mechanical durability and geometric thinness. With nanofibre reinforcement, Wang et al. developed robust, self-adhesive dry electrodes with a thickness of 165 nm.166 The reinforced PDMS nanofilm exhibited an impressively high area adhesion energy of 159 μJ cm−2. The as-fabricated Au-PDMS-reinforced nanofilm electrode could self-adhere to human skin for one week for high-quality ECG monitoring. It is worth mentioning that direct drawn-on skin electronics can also achieve ultra-conformability with the human skin for long-term health monitoring.38 In addition to self-adhesion of ultrathin devices, for devices with a thickness approximately or over tens of micrometres, there are several strategies to obtain long-term dry skin adhesion.171 One is to design adhesive structures (e.g., microneedles, micropores, mushroom-shaped, and 3D suction cups) on biocompatible elastomers, such as Ecoflex229 and PDMS.230 Another strategy is to modify biocompatible polymers, such as PDMS and silk, to achieve dry skin adhesiveness.171,199 For instance, a sticky ECG sensor was enabled by modifying PDMS with ethoxylated polyethylenimine (PEIE).231 By adding 10 wt% conductive CNT into the PDMS with 3 wt% PEIE, the authors could achieve a ECG sensor that stuck to the human skin very well. The device maintained its functionality after 100 cyclic adhesion and attaching cycles to the human skin. Furthermore, it was shown that 30 h of skin attachment did not cause any discomfort to the subject. These results indicate that this material has great potential for long-term health monitoring. Zhang et al developed a self-adhesive dry electrode by adding D-sorbitol into the blends of PEDOT:PSS, waterborne polyurethane (WPU) (Fig. 10a and b).171 This dry electrode (thickness: >20 μm) achieved a skin adhesive force up to 0.41 N cm−1, which resulted in continuous high-performance ECG signal monitoring for 16 h, and long-term monitoring for 1 month (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  Skin adhesion and flexibility/stretchability of skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Fabrication process of the adhesive composite. (b) Adhesion performance of the PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. (c) Photographs showing the robust adherence of dry electrodes on the human skin. No irritation was found after 16 h use at the attachment sites. (d) ECG monitoring results of the dry electrodes and Ag/AgCl commercial electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Structure of the AgNW/SEBS nanomembrane. (f) Photographs demonstrating nanomembranes before and under strain of 500%. Inset scanning electron microscope (SEM) image shows the surface morphology under 500% strain. (g) A photograph of an on-skin multifunctional sensor array made from the nanomembranes and the measured EMG results from three channels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.2.2. Flexibility/stretchability. 
Mechanical flexibility/stretchability, which are the key factors in determining the comfort level of users and the portability of devices, have attracted tremendous attention worldwide for developing skin bioelectronics with such features.232 Good mechanical flexibility/stretchability enables the conformal contact with curvilinear, dynamic human skin and makes the acute health measurement possible. The ability to stretch should be over 10% strain on flat skins, and nearly 60% strain for full-range body motions, depending on the device placement and target applications. In the last six years, the progressive development of novel materials, structure engineering, and fabrication techniques has led to great advances in the mechanical flexibility/stretchability in skin bioelectronics.233,234
There are two well-known and widely used strategies to obtain the desired mechanical flexibility/stretchability for the target applications in health monitoring: intrinsically stretchable materials and structure designs.10,154 In addition to flexible/stretchable elastomer substrates, popular intrinsically stretchable active materials include metallic/carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, organic semiconducting polymers, and nanocomposites. Intrinsically stretchable skin bioelectronics can be developed with these materials. A typical example is an intrinsically stretchable polymer transistor array with a high device density of 347 transistors per square centimetre.37 The transistor was made from CNT-based electrodes, crosslinked SEBS as the dielectric, and a semiconducting ‘conjugated polymer/elastomer phase separation induced elasticity’ (CONPHINE) film. The array could be stretched both parallelly and perpendicularly up to 100% strain in the direction of charge transport, without cracks, delamination, or wrinkles. To achieve stretchability with rigid materials, appropriate geometry design can be utilised to obtain stretchable structures, such as net-shaped, island-bridge, kirigami, serpentine, and in-/out-of plane buckles.235,236 Also, many researchers have developed high-performance mechanical flexibility/stretchability with combined strategies.88 For example, Wang et al. developed a highly stretchable transparent electrode combining soft vertically aligned AuNWs and porous stretchable nanomesh structures.54 The electrode had a sheet resistance as low as 1.7 ± 0.8 Ω per square, and could be stretched with over 100% strain. Apart from the mechanical flexibility and stretchability, simultaneous realisation of geometry thinness is highly intriguing as for skin bioelectronics.166 By manipulating AgNW alignment with a surface nanocomposite design, Jung et al. reported a highly elastic nanomembrane for multifunctional skin electronics (Fig. 10e). The densely aligned AgNWs conferred high conductivity and stretchability of 540% strain, which is nearly the limit of that of the bare elastomer (570%) (Fig. 10f).152 A multimodal sensor array was fabricated using photopatterned nanomembranes, where the sensors were connected by vertical interconnect access. The developed arrays could measure temperature, strain, humidity, and electrophysiological signals simultaneously (Fig. 10g).


3.2.3. Mechanical durability. 
Mechanical durability plays a pivotal role in the lifespan of skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring. To enable long-term applications, the skin-interfaced devices should sustain their electrical functionalities under repetitive skin deformations. This requires the mechanical robustness of two ‘soft–rigid’ interfaces: (1) rigid functional materials and soft elastomer substrates in skin bioelectronics, and (2) rigid bioelectronic devices and soft biological skin. Strategies such as an additional intermediate layer,228 surface treatment,179 heat pressing,34 cold welding,152 reinforcement,237 infiltrating,238 mixing,23 and encapsulation239,240 have been employed to improve the adhesion of the rigid–soft interface during device fabrication, thus enhancing device durability. Generally, through these fabrication techniques, a functional surface composite or homogeneous composite can be obtained. A direct way to evaluate the mechanical durability of skin bioelectronics is by fatigue test via cyclic pressure loading and unloading, stretching and releasing, attaching and detaching.241–244 A highly durable physical sensor was fabricated by embedding reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/deionised water (DI) liquid sensing elements into Ecoflex rubber.245 Under strain or pressure, the contact change of the nanofoams in the liquid led to resistance change. The sensor exhibited stable electrical responses during 15000 loading and unloading cycles under 25 kPa, and 10000 stretching and releasing cycles under 40% strain.
In addition to the fatigue evaluation of mechanical durability on the skin device itself, in vivo evaluations have also been used for long-term health monitoring. This can be done by measuring the on-skin device performance or observing the device morphology under repetitive skin deformations intentionally. For example, to evaluate the mechanical durability of nanomesh devices, the authors attached the device on the finger and measured the electrical resistance under 10000 clenching cycles.21 The sensor also survived being rubbed 20 times with a plastic pen with a pressing force of 150 kPa because of the good mechanical durability of the nanomesh. As another example, a nanomesh-based strain gauge was laminated on the human wrist and monitored during 10000 cycles of hand bending and relaxing motions.179 After 3.5 h of attachment on the human skin, the devices maintained their functionality.


3.2.4. Long-term stability. 
For continuous health monitoring, the long-term stability of skin electronics is very important. Long-term stability requires multiple aspects of characteristics including skin conformability,246–248 air/water permeability,249,250 environmental stability,251–253 electrical–mechanical stability,254,255etc. Efforts are underway to develop stable materials and manufacturing methods to accommodate on-demand, continuous health monitoring and diagnostics.
The high conformability and adhesion in a sweaty environment over a long time is important for long-term monitoring. And the function of a device should not deteriorate rapidly over time and should not generate noise. One strategy to achieve long-term stable measurements is by creating long-term stable electrodes, which allows the free connection of measurement circuits. Yang et al. reported a SF-based biocomposite conformal and adhesive polymer electrode by combining PPy and SF gels, which enabled long-term monitoring of mobile electrophysiological signals. The reported electrode exhibited excellent stability and sensitivity during 2 h of continuous ECG signal monitoring.256 Jeong et al. reported a highly conformable and reusable capacitive epidermal electronic system for electrophysiological monitoring.257 This is also a strategy for making long-term stable electrodes. Another strategy to achieve long-term stability is to directly manufacture electronic skins with conformability and stability. Patel et al. reported a fully biocompatible and highly conductive composite ink based on a drawn-on-skin (DoS) sensor platform.38 This ink can be deposited directly on human skin using a modified ballpoint pen. Sensing circuits drawn with this ink can be used to capture critical electrophysiological signals, such as EEG, EMG, ECG, etc., with a high signal quality. An in situ fabricated sensor was produced by drawing the DoS electrophysiological sensor on the forehead for recording EEG, and high signal-to-noise EEG signals were obtained on each of 3 days of testing. The sensor was not dislodged or malfunctioning during the 3 days, demonstrating the robustness of this sensor for long-term monitoring.209
Separating the device from skin by packaging it in a silicone shell (e.g., Ecoflex) is another strategy to achieve long-term stability.31,258–261 Stable continuous monitoring can be achieved as long as the liquid does not leak or evaporate out of the packaging over time, or its performance decreases over time. Wang et al. reported a stretchable strain sensor like a rubber band by filling and sealing the Ecoflex with an ionic liquid, which had excellent stability and durability. Because of the waterproof nature of Ecoflex, this sensor was stable in sweat. The electrical properties of the sensor remained virtually unchanged after 6 months of room strage.52
Skin bioelectronics with self-healing capabilities is another means of achieving long-term stability.262–264 Jin et al. reported an intrinsically stretchable and self-healing semiconductor film, which can be used in pressure and strain monitoring.265 The brittle semiconductor film was durable and self-healing because the dynamic metal–ligand coordination bonds in the film can rebuild themselves after fracture. The scarring of the cut film disappears completely within 24 h at room temperature. In addition, the electrical properties of this semiconductor film are unaffected during 15 h of operation, even when immersed in sweat.

3.3. Wireless technologies
Towards long-term, continuous health monitoring, skin bioelectronic systems have an urgent need for wireless communications to transmit data to the wearer and a distant server and even for a sustainable power supply. Because wired connections constrain the users’ mobility and may experience frequent failed connections, they are not preferred for long-term health monitoring. Therefore, wireless technology can be adopted as the most viable and reliable alternative for data communication.44

3.3.1. Communication technologies for skin bioelectronic systems. 
Immense efforts have been dedicated to integrating wireless technology with skin bioelectronics.266–269 Popular commercial wireless technologies include Bluetooth, Bluetooth low energy (BLE), ZigBee, infrared data association (IrDA), ultra-wide band (UWB), radio frequency identification (RFID), near field communication (NFC), and wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi). Each wireless technology has different modulation, data rate, power consumption, distance range, and security.44 The chosen wireless module depends on the specific requirements of the target applications. Among them, NFC and BLE are popular candidates for short-range communication in long-term monitoring systems for skin bioelectronics, owing to the advantages of low-power consumption.8 Generally, there are two ways to connect the wireless system with skin sensors: one is to design compact skin circuits with miniaturised IC chips, and the other one is to use wires to connect skin devices with IC chips fixed on clothing. The first approach should consider local mechanical constraints on the skin, whereas the second approach requires human involvement. To remove all direct contacts between rigid components and the human body, Niu et al. developed a specially designed RFID system, where a body area sensor network (bodyNET) composed of chip-free and battery-free stretchable skin sensor tags were wirelessly linked to flexible silicon readout circuits on textiles.24 The bodyNET system had multiple sensor nodes, located in multiple places on the human body to collect various bio-signals. One node was composed of a stretchable skin sensor (target) and an on-textile flexible readout circuit (initiator), which were connected wirelessly via RFID (Fig. 11a). The skin sensor consisted of a stretchable inductor, a stretchable capacitor, and a resistive strain sensor, and the initiator was composed of antenna signal readout circuits and flexible batteries. The developed system eliminated on-skin rigid electronic parts, resulting in improved wear comfort and mechanical robustness. The authors successfully demonstrated continuous and hands-free monitoring of respiration, pulse rate, and body movement, and long-term sleep monitoring for 1 h (Fig. 11b–d). Another work which utilised wireless powering and communication was enabled by a loop antenna on a flexible printed circuit board (PCB), which was bonded to the backside of the skin sensor.270
 Fig. 11  Wireless communication of skin bioelectronics. (a) Schematic design and optical photo of bodyNET, demonstrating the wireless connection between skin sensor and rigid components. (b) A photograph of bodyNET. (c) Output signals of breath, pulse, and arm movement. (d) Output signals on a smart phone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the long-range communication stage, data are transmitted to a distant server and can be accessed by caregivers for the purpose of personalised healthcare management. In this case, safeguarding of personal medical information must be seriously taken into consideration. Methods such as encryption and authentication techniques can be utilised to secure a relatively safe transmission channel.44 This issue can also be solved using the soft form factor. Tian et al. confined wireless communication to within 10 cm to the human body using conductive fabrics.271 This metatextile can support surface-plasmon-like modes at radio communication frequencies, enabling the propagation of wireless signals around the body without disturbance under motions. This work paves the way of soft platforms for wireless sensing, signal processing and energy transfer.


3.3.2. Ability to power itself. 
Maintaining stable operation of multiple sensors and wireless transceivers in a skin bioelectronic system requires several micro-/milliwatts of power. However, the mainstream power supply of current wearables is batteries, which are rigid, have explosive issues, and require regular charging or replacement.148,272 Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop soft, compliant, and sustainable power systems. Furthermore, the ability to power itself simplifies circuit design and enables portable sensing. There are many self-powered skin sensors and devices that harvest energy from biological, mechanical, light, or thermal sources from the human body and/or the ambient environment.234 To name a few, the emerging soft skin-like energy devices include energy generation devices, such as solar cells, biofuel cells (BFCs), triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), and piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs), and energy storage devices such as supercapacitors and batteries.101,103,273–276 The generated power can be stored in supercapacitors or batteries to drive other electronic devices.277 Flexible rectifying diodes have been developed to rectify the alternating current (AC) form of power from piezo/triboelectric nanogenerators to the direct current (DC) form for energy storage and further usage.278
A self-powered piezoelectric PZT pressure sensor was demonstrated to enable in vivo measurement of radial/carotid pulse signals in near-surface arteries. The output voltage obtained by arterial pressure successfully operated the LED and speaker module of a signal processing circuit composed of amplifiers, band-pass filters, and comparators to identify the arterial pulse.176 This work evidenced that the self-powered pulse sensor could be utilised for a continuous real-time health/wellness monitoring system. Another example of harvesting mechanical forces is the use of a giant magnetoelastic effect in micromagnet/silicone composites. Combined with a magnetic induction layer made from liquid–metal coils patterned on PDMS, the soft magnetoelastic composite worked as a water-resistant magnetoelastic generator adhering conformably to human skin (Fig. 12a–c).227 The output electric current and voltage of the soft magnetoelastic generator survived for up to one week while submerged in artificial perspiration. Recently, an ultraflexible integrated system has been developed using an organic photovoltaic (OPV) powering polymer LEDs and OPDs. A self-powered PPG sensor was demonstrated for the first time with such a system, paving the way for future ambulatory healthcare platforms (Fig. 12d–f).279 Meanwhile, researchers have been investigating hybrid energy devices through the synergy of different energy devices, such as solar cells, electromagnetic generators, and electrochemical cells, in serial or parallel mode.104,280 These endeavours will greatly improve energy harvesting efficiencies and address the power issues in skin bioelectronics for long-term healthcare applications.281
 Fig. 12  Self-powered skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Combined with a magnetic induction layer, the soft magnetoelastic composite worked as a water-resistant magnetoelastic generator adhering conformably to the human skin. (b) Arterial pulse wave recorded underwater and with sweat. (c) Extracted key arterial parameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. (d) An ultraflexible, self-powered PPG sensor on human hands, where OPV generates electrical power from sunlight and drives polymer LED and OPD. (e) A photograph of the device. (f) Output voltage signals from PPG measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.3.3. System integration. 
Wireless integrated skin bioelectronics make long-term, continuous health monitoring viable, and offer opportunities for the development of versatile skin devices as a diagnostic tool in personalised healthcare.282 A completed integrated system is composed of skin bioelectronics, power management, and signals acquisition, processing, and transmission.268 Usually, miniaturised integrated circuit (IC) chips are utilised for power and data management.8 They are placed either on the skin by directly integrating with skin devices, or on textiles or other human belongings using wireless connections with skin devices. If IC chips are placed on the skin, the integrated platform should be soft enough to achieve skin compliance.283 For instance, a wireless soft skin electronic patch was invented to measure temperature and thermal transport properties in healthy and diseased skin.267 The wireless platform is a compact, miniaturised skin patch (quarter size), composed of a flexible thermal actuator/sensor module and wireless platform to provide BLE communication capabilities. Additionally, computational methods have enabled the assessment of the hydration levels using bilayer models for the skin, with clinical-grade levels of accuracy. To continuously monitor pressure and temperature changes at the skin-prothesis interface, a fully integrated platform was developed using a soft, thin, wireless, and battery-free on-skin sensors and a paired wireless module on the surface of the protheses socket.270 The module on the socket was able to wirelessly power and communicate with the sensor, as well as a mobile gadget that could receive data and display results wirelessly. A 3D designed pressure sensor was fabricated using a compressive buckling technique, where a deformation would induce resistance changes in the strain gauges. This platform could wirelessly monitor pressure and temperature at the skin-prosthesis interface simultaneously, even during sitting, walking, and standing conditions.
Combined with advanced data processing techniques such as machine learning, integrated skin bioelectronics can be used for disease management.233,284 Recently, Zavanelli et al. reported a single, user-friendly skin patch for at-home wireless monitoring of sleep apnoea and sleep stages (Fig. 13a and b).285 This work provided health caregivers with all clinically relevant metrics outlined by The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) via a non-invasive approach. The skin patch consisted of a soft PPG sensor, an ECG sensor, advanced signal processing techniques, and time-series machine learning (Fig. 13c). It also realised simultaneous measurements of specific mechanical, electrical, and optical responses in a single location during obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). These signals were analysed with a feedforward neural network (FFNN) to classify sleep into the wake, rapid eye movement (REM), and non-REM (NREM) sleep stages (Fig. 13d). Nine patients were involved in this study, four of whom exhibited apnoea symptoms after repetitive assessment. Furthermore, after integration with LED elements, an integrated on-skin platform can enable visualization of real-time health signals on the human skin.161,177
 Fig. 13  Integrated circuits of skin bioelectronics. (a) A photograph of a soft integrated skin patch attached on the human sternum. (b) Diagram of the components in the portable device. (c) Simultaneous measurements of seismocardiography (SCG), ECG, and PPG signals. (d) A photograph of a subject wearing a skin patch and a commercial device. (e) Hypnogram comparison of the determined sleep stages between the soft patch and commercial device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

4. Healthcare applications
Human health can be characterised by a variety of highly personalised electrical, mechanical, thermal, and biochemical signals that are constantly radiated from the human body. Nowadays, skin bioelectronics can be designed to target the specific biological signals mentioned above.267,286 Hence, long-term, continuous use of non-invasive skin bioelectronics can be of immense help in the evaluation of individuals’ health and the early prediction of malfunctions of body organs such as the heart and lungs, leading to timely and effective treatment.
4.1. Electrophysiological signals
As one of the vital signs, electrophysiological signals of long-term, continuous monitoring can provide critical clinical cues of an individual's health condition. In this section, we discuss typical electrophysiological signals, such as ECG, EMG, and EEG using skin bioelectronics.

4.1.1. ECG. 
An ECG is a diagnostic tool that captures electrical signals and reveals the heart's beating process. Long-term, continuous ECG monitoring can facilitate the early diagnosis of cardiovascular disease and ensure prompt disease management. As a result, many on-skin ECG sensors have been developed for continuous cardiac health monitoring.22,72,287–289 Compared to gel electrodes, dry electrodes have been considered as more appropriate candidates for long-term applications. Thinner devices can achieve better conformability, lower contact impedance, and consequently a larger SNR. A ∼3 μm-thick ECG sensor was made using self-similar serpentine-structured Au/poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)/PI.290 The sensor could bear large, repetitive skin deformations. A continuous 48 h ECG recording was demonstrated while the electrode was laminated onto the left chest. Ameri et al. developed a graphene tattoo sensor that is only ∼460 nm thick. The electrical tattoo had a transparency of ∼85% and could be stretched to over 40% strain.48 Because of the ultra-thinness, the graphene tattoo could adhere to the human skin for several hours by van der Waals forces alone. The open-mesh structure also made the sensor breathable and ultraflexible. The recorded ECG signals of the graphene tattoos had SNRs comparable to those of gold standard commercial gel electrodes. A 165 nm-thick nanofilm electrode was demonstrated to sustain one week of skin attachment for long-term ECG monitoring.166 The nanofilm substrate was made from reinforced PDMS by PU nanofibres, resulting in greatly improved mechanical durability. A 70 nm-thick Au layer was evaporated onto the PDMS film to obtain self-adhesive dry electrodes. The thinness geometry led to sufficient gas permeability. The nanofilm electrode achieved a high SNR (34 dB) for one week of ECG monitoring. Octopus-inspired microsucker electrodes have been developed to achieve both dry and wet skin adhesion, demonstrating its promising application for long-term health monitoring.291
In a comprehensive health evaluation, ECG signals are one of the key bio-signals to be measured.168,266 For instance, in pregnancy monitoring, Ryu et al. developed a time-synchronized wireless platform that could be applied to the entire continuum of antepartum and postpartum care. The system was able to continuously monitor a series of bio-signals, such as ECG, respiratory rate, pulse oxygenation, and blood pressure.28


4.1.2. EMG. 
EMG is the recorded electrical signals induced by skeletal muscles, which can be used to evaluate neuromuscular functions, especially for patients with stroke or Parkinson's disease. Moreover, EMG signals can be utilised to analyse ergonomics, sports science, physiotherapy treatment of motion disorders or in rehabilitation settings, or as electrical stimulators.46,163 For skin bioelectronics, surface EMG is measured non-invasively through the epidermis, which heavily depends on the skin surface over the target muscles. In this case, proper device placement is critically important to avoid motion artifacts caused by unrelated biopotential signals. Normally, electrical sensors are attached onto muscles on the face, arm, and leg, to obtain related myoelectrical signals.21,34
Shahandashti et al. reported patterned Au/Cu/PI/PDMS EMG electrodes with the ability for long-term health monitoring.292 The contact impedance of the electrodes was comparable to that of wet Ag/AgCl electrodes, and EMG signals from the forearm had an SNR of 55 dB. A wireless EMG sensing system was prepared using a printed graphene/PI/Ecoflex electrode and circuit. The subjects wore the device on the upper leg and measured the EMG signals with muscle flexion. The soft electrodes survived multiple uses (>ten times) with consistent adhesion performance and EMG signals.293 After integrating with a deep learning algorithm, the device could differentiate six muscle activities with an accuracy of >97%. A SEBS nanofilm was integrated with AgNWs to obtain a breathable epidermal EMG electrode.217 The thickness of the nanofilm was 90 nm, enabling an ultrathin nanofilm electrode with a thickness of 160 nm. The resulting dry electrodes adhered to human skin for 5 h without causing skin allergies or damage. A conformable ultrathin electrode (∼100 nm-thick) was made by graphene/PEDOT:PSS. Five pairs of electrodes were attached to the human face muscles, and the measured EMG signals had SNR values of 20 dB. These EMG signals were then used to precisely control a robotic hand.294


4.1.3. EEG. 
Brain-related diseases such as epileptic seizures, stroke, and neuromuscular diseases can be diagnosed by EEG monitoring, because the EEG is the recording of brain activity-related electrical potential and can provide vital information of neuronal activities.47 Considering its non-invasive monitoring of brain electrical activity with high temporal resolution, portability and relatively low cost, electroencephalography has been instrumental in clinical settings and in the research field of brain–machine interfaces.295,296 Compared to other electrical biosignals such as ECG and EMG, EEG signals are relatively weak with typical microvolt-scale amplitudes and with a main frequency range of 0.3 to above 30 Hz, which makes it more challenging to achieve highly effective recording of EEG.297 Conformal contact between the electrodes and the skin surface is of great importance for the continuous and stable monitoring of electrophysiological signals with a high SNR value, because it can provide an intimate electrode–skin interface. Based on the electrode–skin interface state, electrodes for EEG recording can be generally categorised into three different types: wet electrodes,298 semi-dry electrodes,299,300 and dry electrodes.301
In comparison with the wet and semi-dry electrodes, dry electrodes that do not require conductive gels or electrolyte fluid, show some advantageous merits such as improved user-friendliness and time-saving pre-preparation setup for portable EEG recording.302 Dry electrodes with various morphologies such as skin-conformal electrodes,294,303–305 ultrathin electronic tattoos,48,306 flexible sponge electrodes,307 elastomeric hair electrodes,308 micro-pillar-structured electrodes,171 and microneedle electrodes,309 have been designed and developed for user-friendly and potential long-term EEG detecting. As for the skin-conformal and ultrathin tattoo electrodes, they are only suitable for non-hairy skin surfaces, such as the outer ear location, frontal region, and shaved scalp.303 It is notable that a thin layer of spray-on bandage needs to be applied once or twice a day to facilitate strong adhesion of the ultrathin electrode platform to the skin and to provide environmental protection for long-term usage. To collect the scalp EEG signals, the hair needs to be shaved for the conformal mounting of epidermal electrodes on the scalp.229Fig. 14a shows the application of breathable large-area epidermal electrodes for the full-scalp and long-term EEG recording. Because of their thinness and softness, the large-area epidermal metal mesh electrodes incorporated with an additional thin layer of conductive polyacrylate gel to further reduce the interfacial impedance, could be conformably mounted on the scalp without hairs to record EEG signals with full-scalp coverage (Fig. 14b and c). These epidermal electrodes have the potential for long-term EEG recording, as demonstrated by the highly effective capture of P3 event-related potential components during an auditory oddball task over a five-day period of continuous wear of the electrodes (Fig. 14d).
 Fig. 14  Skin bioelectronics for EEG recording. (a) Large-area epidermal electrodes covering the scalp for multi-channel EEG recording. (b and c) EEG signals collected by the epidermal multi-electrodes. (e) Event-related potentials captured by the epidermal electrode during five days of continuous wear. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Flexible wireless scalp electronics composed of dry hair electrodes, skin-like membrane electrodes, and a miniaturised wireless electronic system. (f) In vivo demonstration of the wireless scalp electronics for SSVEP-based BMI. (c) EEG signals recorded by the scalp electronics, namely, alpha rhythms and SSVEPs with different frequencies, and the control of a wireless electric wheelchair via SSVEP signals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. 
To capture EEG signals from a hairy scalp, it is necessary to design dry electrodes with particular structures that could make the electrodes bypass hair to make good contact with the scalp, such as an elastomer leg structure,308 elastic sponge structure,307 micro-pillar structure,171 and microneedle structure.309 For this type of dry electrodes, external mechanical fixtures and force are required to ensure the contact of electrodes with a hairy scalp. As shown in Fig. 14e, a dry hair electrode with conductive elastomer legs combined with a stretchable skin-like electrode, and a flexible miniaturised wireless electronic circuit, was developed and utilised as fully portable and wireless scalp electronics for EEG recording.308 Because of the elasticity of the conductive legs of the hair electrode, slight pressure applied on the hair electrode allowed the conductive legs to separate the hairs and form good contact with the scalp, and thus a fabric headband was utilised to fix the hair electrode and apply pressure on it (Fig. 14f). This wireless scalp electronic system was demonstrated to be feasible for steady-state visually evoked potential (SSVEP) based brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) (Fig. 14f). In detail, the scalp electronics were used to record SSVEP data when the subjects gazed at different light-emitting diode stimuli and EEG alpha rhythms when the subjects closed their eyes, and then these data were utilised to wirelessly control target machines such as a wireless electric wheelchair (Fig. 14g). Despite their improved user-friendliness and long-term EEG recording potential, dry electrodes still have some limitations such as relatively high electrode-scalp impedance, inferior signal quality, and susceptibility to motion artifacts. Developing reliable and user-friendly EEG electrodes with low electrode-scalp contact impedance and long-term stable interfaces remains highly desirable and challenging for practical EEG applications in various scenarios.

4.2. Biophysical signals
Skin bioelectronics can measure diverse biophysical signals, such as temperature, strain, pressure, tactile, and sound. These signals provide effective cues concerning an individual's health status as well as disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment, physical therapy, and rehabilitation if measured in a long-term, continuous manner. In the following part, we introduce the measurement of typical biophysical signals, such as body temperature, human activity, and cardiac mapping.

4.2.1. Body temperature. 
Physiological temperature is a vital bio-signal that varies temporally and spatially. Deviation of a few degrees from core body temperature may cause impairment and fatality in the human body. For example, temperature changes have significant correlations with insomnia, sleep quality, stroke, skin disease, and cognitive functions.44,267,310 Continuous measurement of localised body temperature despite large deformation is critical to understand the thermal principle of homeostasis, and to evaluate sophisticated health conditions.310,311 To this end, various skin devices have been reported for continuous temperature sensing.312,313
Typical on-skin temperature sensors are thermo-sensitive conductive composites and conductors, while others include thermocouples, semiconductors, and field effect transistors. A negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistor-based artificial skin was constructed using a laser-induced reductive sintering scheme.314 The temperature sensor was made from a nickel electrode and a nickel oxide sensing channel. The device exhibited a fast response time of less than 50 ms due to the thin PET substrate. The value of the materials constant of thermistor was calculated to be as high as 8162 K near room temperature. The sensor was sensitive enough to capture small temperature changes caused by inhalation and exhalation. It is requisite to maintain a stable sensing performance of on-skin temperature sensors during long-term applications. A strain-insensitive temperature sensor was developed by structure designing serpentine-structured free-standing stretchable fibres of a reduced graphene oxide/PU composite. The temperature changes were negligible within the strain range of 0–50%. The device further survived 10000 cycles of stretching and releasing at 50% strain. After integrating onto a bandage, the temperature sensor had a maximum sensing resolution of 0.1 °C. Stable on-body temperature sensing was demonstrated after attaching the bandage onto human skin, even during various body movements.315 To minimise humidity disturbance, Wang et al. introduced a crosslinker of (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS) to PEDOT:PSS. The fully printed temperature sensor showed great stability under an environmental humidity range of 30–80% RH, with a temperature sensitivity of −0.77% °C−1 between 25–50 °C. The authors finally demonstrated wireless, real-time, continuous temperature sensing after integrating with a printed flexible hybrid circuit.316 For body temperature monitoring, it is necessary to require a high temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) ranging from 34 to 42 °C.96


4.2.2. Human activity. 
Human motion and locomotion monitoring can be useful for rehabilitation, sports, disease prevention and diagnosis, prognostic monitoring of patients, and elderly care.44,317 Any irregular or even habitual movement can offer critical information related to human health. For example, periodic analysis of body movements can detect abnormal gait patterns and sudden hand tremors, which are the precursors of fatal diseases including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and diabetes, and contribute to the early management of these diseases.6,318 To monitor human activity, physical skin sensors conform to, for example, the human face, neck, hand, joints, and foot, and provide long-term, continuous signal recording induced by human motions.319,320 Thus far, numerous skin devices have been developed to detect activities ranging from subtle skin deformations induced by wrist pulses to large strains by joint bending.321–324
Movements on the human face are highly correlated to facial expressions.100 Wang et al. reported a smart facial mask from vertically aligned AuNWs.325 The skin patch was fabricated by directly growing AuNWs on an Ecolfex substrate. Due to the Jannus structure of the AuNWs and their good adhesion to the substrate, the gold film could be stretched to 800% strain. The placement of each sensor on the face was determined by the designated muscle groups related to facial expressions. Using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) library, five different facial expressions could be readily read out from a mobile screen in real time in a wireless manner. Facilitated with algorithms and a three-dimensional digital image correlation system, Sun et al. reported that their developed piezoelectric thin films could differentiate facial movements from healthy individuals and patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.100
As the most dynamic parts of the human body, the movements of hands and limbs have been extensively studied.326 Together with machine learning techniques, Jeong et al. developed a skin-integrated sensor network for early identification of atypical infant movement behaviours.327 Several sensors were strategically placed on different parts of the infant for full-body motion measurements, and operated in a wide-bandwidth and time-synchronized manner (Fig. 15a). The collected data were then used to reconstruct three-dimensional motions in avatar form that could be accessed by caregivers (Fig. 15b). The authors successfully demonstrated long-term and follow-up monitoring for as long as 3 months after childbirth (Fig. 15c). The reported strategy exhibits great potentiality to diagnose neurological dysfunctions at the earliest time in infancy and initiate clinical interventions.
 Fig. 15  Skin bioelectronics for human activity monitoring. (a) Schematic illustration of the device and measurement setup for the monitoring of full-body motions. (b) Prone posture captured by video and results of reconstructed 3D motion. (c) Follow-up movement measurement when the subjects were 1 wk, 1 mo, and 3 mo old. Reproduced with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2021 National Academy of Sciences. (d) A photograph showing sensor-applied fingers. (e) Cross sectional SEM image demonstrating sensor layouts. (f) Experiment setup of the evaluation of the sensation effect. Results show the nanomesh pressure sensors have minimal interference on natural human feelings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
To monitor subtle skin deformations, high sensitivity is not enough. The devices should also be designed to be soft and thin to minimise any disturbance caused by the device itself. To avoid sensation or motion disturbance on the natural skins, our group developed ultrasoft nanomesh-based strain gauges179 and pressure sensors.25 The pressure sensors were fabricated by laminating four layers of different nanomeshes (two electrodes, an intermediate layer, and an encapsulation layer) to the human skin (Fig. 15d and e). The overall thickness of the device was approximately 13 μm. To quantitatively evaluate the effect of the sensor on the human sensation, the grip force was measured and compared while manipulating objects. The results show that the sensor-attached finger has comparable grip forces to those of the base fingers (Fig. 15f). A polymeric film (2 μm-thick)-attached finger led to a 14% increase in the grip force.

4.3. Biochemical signals
Molecular data from the human body is an important and direct indicator of human health. Traditional clinical practices always involve invasive blood retrieval with pain and infection risk, such as finger pricking in glucose monitoring for diabetics. Soft, on-skin bioelectronic devices have gained tremendous attention because they provide a non-invasive, continuous method for label-free measurements of disease-related chemical biomarkers from body fluids, such as sweat and blood, and skin volatolomics.13

4.3.1. Sweat. 
Sweat can be easily accessed and is widely distributed all over the human body. It contains abundant chemical components, such as metabolites (e.g., glucose, lactate, and uric acid), electrolytes (e.g., sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride), exogenous agents (e.g., drugs and ethanol), proteins, and hormones, which make sweat one of the ideal body fluids for biomedical sensing.328,329 Abnormal health status and disease can result in concentration changes of existing constituents or generation of new chemicals in sweat.13 In recent years, many skin interfaced colorimetric, electrochemical, and microfluidic devices have been developed for continuous sweat monitoring for health management and clinical diagnostics.330,331 To collect eccrine sweat, simple and direct stimulations include intense physical activity, heat exposure, wicking, and localised chemical inducement. Among all the chemical components present in sweat, most research studies have focused on the analytics of chloride, lactate, and glucose.
Abnormally high chloride concentration in sweat has been adopted as the gold standard for cystic fibrosis diagnosis.330,332 A newborn-safe adhesive microfluidic device was developed to non-invasively monitor sweat chloride concentrations of varying ages. The microfluidic sweat sticker could perform simple and rapid collection of sweat for cystic fibrosis diagnosis and management.333 In this work, sweat capture was enabled by skin stimulation via pilocarpine iontophoresis. Microchannel structures were made using PDMS; sweat would enter the inlets (skin-faced side) from laser-patterned openings. Each chamber could collect a total volume of 47 μL. Patterned adhesives were added to optimize sweat collection. The chloride array with reagent silver chloranilate produced a colour response proportional to the chloride concentration. The results could be read out using real-time image analysis. The device was able to validate cystic fibrosis patients with an accuracy comparable to current device platforms.
Establishing a reliable relationship between regional and whole-body sweat monitoring is a crucial step for providing new insights into the physiological relevance of sweat analysis. Recently, Baker et al. developed a microfluidic device for the measurement of sweat rate and chloride concentration.334 It is worth mentioning that the microfluidic platform can precisely capture, store, and measure in real-time at well-defined regions of the skin. The intricate microchannels were made with stacks of thin-film polymers created by laser and die cutting techniques. Even in the presence of heavy sweat excretion, the microfluidic device could conform well to the human skin. They utilised colorimetric sensing to evaluate the regional sweat rate and chloride concentrations. Finally, whole-body sweating rate and sweat chloride were obtained using algorithms and systematic studies of 312 athletes.


4.3.2. Blood. 
Blood plays a crucial role in transporting essential substances such as nutrients and oxygen, shipping metabolic waste products, and maintaining the physical and chemical balance of cells in the human body. Therefore, blood is an important parameter in clinical diagnosis and health monitoring.335–337 Earlier blood testing devices often required sensors to be implanted in the body or invasive blood draws, which are highly detrimental in view of continuous health monitoring.13 Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) signals are important indicators of a person's vital state. Moreover, other symptoms or physical conditions such as acute and chronic respiratory disease also have potential relationships with SaO2 values.338–340 Because SaO2 measurement requires invasive blood drawing,341 the peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) signal becomes an effective and ubiquitous parameter to estimate SaO2 in a non-invasive and continuous manner by a pulse oximeter using an optical approach.342–345 Because oxygenated (HbO2) and nonoxygenated haemoglobin (Hb) in blood vessels have different absorptivity for light with specific wavelengths. Generally, two light sources with different wavelengths are applied in a pulse oximeter for the detection of HbO2 and Hb separately. Changes in the optical properties are then converted into electrical signals by a photodetector.344,346,347 There have been extensive studies in the field of skin-integrated organic pulse oximeters (OPOs) for SpO2 measurement with OLEDs and OPDs348–351 based on the photoelectric method, which mainly consists of transmission352 and reflection modes.19,353,354 However, the transmissive PPG requires the operating location to be restricted to thin parts of the body, which limits the feasibility of continuous monitoring. On the other hand, OPOs with reflective configuration can be applied to various pulsating surfaces of the human body, enabling the placement of the light sources and detectors on the same plane.355 As shown in Fig. 16, a reflective SpO2 OPO sensor was developed. This minimised the opportunity for wasted light by placing circular red and green OLEDs side by side to estimate HbO2 and Hb respectively and wrapping the OLEDs around a single OPD in a shape of the number ‘8’ (Fig. 16a). Therefore, the OPD could achieve and couple almost all the light generated from the OLEDs in different directions. In all tested body parts, the OPO obtained reliable signals for heart rate and SpO2 with a power consumption of 17 μW for red light and 31 μW for green light (Fig. 16b).353 This low-power consumption and location-independent on-skin device has been proved to be a greet candidate for prolonged, continuous SpO2 monitoring in blood.
 Fig. 16  Skin bioelectronics for blood monitoring. (a) Schematic diagram of the proposed OPO sensor. The right figure shows an enlarged cross section representing the structure of the device and the light reception process in the skin medium. (b) The left figure is the PPG, heart rate, and SpO2 signals obtained from the neck using red and green OLEDs. H.R, heart rate; B.P.M., beats per minute. The right photograph showing the human neck applied with the skin device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


4.3.3. Skin volatolomics. 
A new frontier for fast, risk-free, and potentially inexpensive diagnostics is based on volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are compounds that are released into the bloodstream by or because of diseased/infected cells and can be detected from air trapped above the skin (the “skin headspace”) (Fig. 17a). According to the literature, the skin volatolomics of a healthy subject contain ∼530 VOCs with a total of 1840 VOCs, whereas for comparison the breath contains 872 VOCs.356 The composition of skin volatolomics is highly diverse and includes hydrocarbons, ketones, aldehydes, organic acids, esters, ketones, and alcohols. The VOCs in the skin emerge at very early stages of the disease and, therefore, their isolation and detection should serve as a pathway for early detection of the disease. Deviation from a healthy VOC range may indicate either disease or high disease risk. Comprehensive reviews regarding the potential of VOCs as chemical biomarkers for disease diagnostics have been published.357–359
 Fig. 17  Skin bioelectronics for VOCs. (a) Concept for the VOC-based detection and monitoring of diseases with skin bioelectronic devices. The signal or sensing response of the device varies according to the pattern of different VOCs; represented by circles of different size and colour detected from the human skin (upper panel). The numerous sensors forming the wearable identify whether the VOCs present are characteristic of a disease. The wearable device could be self-healing to maintain functionality when scratched or cut (lower panel). (b) Boxplot of the canonical score of the linear Discriminant Factor Analysis (DFA) model of sensing signals collected from the GNP-based wearable device attached to the skin of patients with active TB and health controls. Each point represents one sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 366. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c and d) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of sensing response from a self-healable NP-based flexible sensor array to 11 kinds of VOCs (20 ppm) emitted from skin in healthy states. Significant difference in the sensing patterns was given by each sensor part, indicating the possibility of differentiating all these VOCs using this sensor array (c) before cutting and (d) after 1 day self-healing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Among the very few studies of skin-related VOCs published in the literature, a series of off-line analyses (i.e., collecting the samples by a specific collection method and then transferring the sample to as separate instrument for analysis) have examined the headspace of the skin of healthy subjects,360,361 or of biopsy samples, taken by invasive surgical procedures from skin areas with melanoma.362–365 In all of these studies, heavy, time-consuming and expensive spectrometry and/or electronic nose devices were used. To overcome these challenges, on-skin devices have been designed for sensing the disease VOCs and to continuously monitor the changes in the body in a non-invasive manner. In this wearable design, there is no need to take any specific action for collecting samples, because VOCs emitted in the skin headspace vaporise automatically and are continuously captured by the skin sensors (Fig. 17a). This unique VOC tracking enables the users to constantly check their health without interrupting daily activities. A prominent example of this approach includes an online exploratory pilot study using a wearable electronic device based on an array of cross-reactive chemiresistive films of molecularly modified gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) that are directly placed on the skin of the anterior part of the arm. This study included 29 healthy subjects and 18 patients with confirmed active pulmonary TB patients. Post-processing analysis resulted in 86.2% specificity, 94.4% sensitivity, and 89.4% accuracy in discriminating between active pulmonary TB patients and control samples (Fig. 17b).366 These findings strengthen the potential of wearable devices for detecting diseases under field conditions in a real-time mode. The patches can also be worn continuously to monitor the disease treatment and to ensure that the treatment is effective. To enable extended usage periods, several studies have proposed to design a sensor array to be self-healing if scratched or cut in the device.367 By integrating a self-healable polymer substrate with five kinds of GNP films, a sensor array gave a fast self-healing rate (<3 h) and excellent healing efficiency in both the substrate and sensing films. The reported platform was used for sensing pressure and 11 kinds of VOCs that were emitted through skin and correlated with health conditions (Fig. 17c and d).367 The skin-based sensor array exhibited satisfactory sensitivity, a low detection limit, and promising discrimination features in monitoring both VOC and pressure variation, even after full healing (Fig. 17c and d). These results present a new type of smart sensing device, with a desirable performance in the possible detection and/or clinical application for several different purposes.

4.4. Comprehensive signals
To comprehensively evaluate some specific health conditions, such as wound healing and cardiac health, solely measuring electrophysiological, biophysical, or biochemical signals is not enough. It requires a fusion of at least two species of these signals. Here, we discuss the latest development of skin bioelectronics for wound and cardiac health monitoring.

4.4.1. Wound healing. 
During the process of wound healing, quantitative assessment of wound parameters, such as temperature, pH, hydration, impedance, bacteria load, glucose, and uric acid, can monitor the status of wound recovery and determine the presence of infection.368–370 In contrast, qualitative assessment by visual examination is more subjective and easily influenced by the surrounding environment and experience of the practitioner. Therefore, quantitative wound monitoring can help to reduce prolonged hospital stays, the number of doctor visits, and treatment-related long-term laboratory tests.33 In this regard, with skin bioelectronics, abundant biophysical, chemical, or electrophysiological markers can be used as diagnostic targets to indicate the state of wound healing.370
Suitable wound monitoring devices should protect the wound from infection and provide an environment that accelerates wound healing.371 The following features are expected for good wound monitoring devices to protect the wound from infection and provide an environment that accelerates wound healing.371 The following features are expected for a good wound monitoring device: no obstruction to wound-secreted exudate, maintenance of appropriate humidity to prevent wound infection or dehydration, biocompatibility and non-toxicity, appropriate mechanical strength, permeability for gas exchange, comfort, and easy removal. Skin bioelectronics have been used to monitor human health imperceptibly and noninvasively from the skin.1,168,372
In recent years, there has been enormous progress in the field of on-skin devices for monitoring pH, temperature, hydration, pressure, thermal conductivity, uric acid, glucose concentrations and other parameters during the wound healing process.373–377 Farooqui et al. constructed a wireless wound monitoring smart bandage by inkjet printing, integrating capacitive sensors and resistive sensors, the former for bleeding monitoring and pressure sensing, and the latter for pH monitoring. Tests demonstrated that bending cycles did not affect the performance of the sensor, making it promising for continuous wound monitoring.373 However, thick film-type skin devices cannot avoid the accumulation of skin by-products, such as sweat on the interface of skin and electronic devices, which hinders accurate skin sensing over a long period of attachment,378 and reduces the homeostatic function of the skin (e.g., skin barrier function).379 The lack of permeability also leads to a disturbance in skin health information that is essential for internal disorders (e.g., allergies) and diagnosis of skin diseases (e.g., erythema) monitoring. Therefore, researchers have been working on designing innovative wound monitors that can ‘breathe’. As shown in Fig. 18, a fully perforated skin device inspired by sweat pores containing inorganic sensor arrays was developed for long-term seamless skin health monitoring, and it worked well for long-term wound monitoring. The elastomer adhesives and the modulus of inorganic thin-film sensors were made to be engineered into hole patterns, which were designed precisely to avoid completely blocking the sweat pores on the human skin. To ensure the permeability, circular holes were designed, leading gas and sweat to escape through the sweat pores. Multiple sensors were also perforated to inhibit sweat retention. Because the wound completely interacted with the outside environment, the perforated e-skin did not prohibit the wound healing process at all. Meanwhile, the good permeability avoided sensor damage due to sweat accumulation, which enabled continuous monitoring of the pulse, hydration level, temperature, and photoconductance for up to two weeks. This has been demonstrated by the recovery of injured human skin with and without e-skin over a period of two weeks as shown in Fig. 18c.378
 Fig. 18  Skin bioelectronics for wound monitoring. (a) A photograph showing conformal contact of the perforated skin bioelectronic device on the human skin. (b) Long-term skin regeneration was monitored over a period of 2 weeks. (c) The graph shows the level of hydration of the inflamed skin as a function of the number of days of device lamination. A hydration sensor in the skin device was compared to a conventional hydration analyser (Corneometer CM 825). Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


4.4.2. Cardiac mapping. 
Cardiovascular diseases are among the leading causes of death worldwide. Heart status should be continuously monitored, especially in those with cardiovascular diseases. Skin bioelectronics offer a convenient, non-invasive approach to continuously measure bio-signals related to heart diseases.380 Directly interfaced with the chest, wrist, neck, or other parts of the human body, soft bioelectronic devices can perform biophysical, biochemical, and electrophysiological sensing induced by heart activities. Related biophysical signals include blood pressure, blood flow, heartbeat, pulse wave, heart sounds, temperature, and pulse pressure.380–384 Generally, to evaluate heart conditions, multiple signals should be detected simultaneously and continuously.
Liu et al. demonstrated a mechano-acoustic sensing platform for cardiovascular diagnostics.385 The skin patch had a mass of 213.6 mg and a thickness of 2 mm with a soft form factor (effective moduli of 31.8 kPa in the x direction and 31.1 kPa in the y direction). The skin patch was also water-permeable and exhibited reversible adhesiveness (Fig. 19a and b). The sensing part was made of a mechano-acoustic sensor, low-pass and high-pass filters, a preamplifier, and capacitive electrodes for electrophysiological sensing. For a healthy individual, the first sound (S1) has an acoustic frequency of 10–180 Hz, and the second sound (S2) of 50–250 Hz. The sensor covered a0.5–550 Hz frequency bandwidth, which is sufficient for cardiovascular sounds and speech. The seismocardiography measurement results were comparable to those of the JABES Electronics Stethoscope (Fig. 19c and d). Constant intensity murmur at the tricuspid and pulmonary sites was validated in an elderly female patient with tricuspid and pulmonary regurgitation. Another example is an epidermal patch that can be used to measure blood pressure, heart rate, and metabolic biomarkers simultaneously (Fig. 19e).29 The haemodynamic signals were monitored by ultrasonic transducers, which transmitted ultrasound beams to the artery under electrical pulses. Eight transducers were employed to align with the artery to obtain the optimal blood pressure value (Fig. 19f). No blood pressure waveform changed when turning the neck to 90 degrees because of the good mechanical robustness. It was validated that exercise could lead to increased blood pressure, heart rate, and lactate levels (Fig. 19g). The reported epidermal patch has great implications for self-monitoring in personalised health management. Furthermore, a high-resolution (508 p.p.i.) imager has been demonstrated to obtain images of fingerprints, veins, and mapping of pulse waves. The ultrathin imager is evidenced to be an effective tool for cardiac mapping.26
 Fig. 19  Skin bioelectronics for cardiac mapping. (a) Device structure of epidermal mechano-acoustic sensing. (b) A photograph of the epidermal skin patch on the chest. (c) Measured ECG and heart sound signals. (d) Comparison of heart sound signals measured by the epidermal device and the commercial electronic stethoscope. Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Device structure of an epidermal patch for simultaneous monitoring of haemodynamic and metabolic biomarkers. (f) A photograph of the epidermal device attached onto the human neck. (g) Blood pressure measured before and after exercise. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. 

5. Conclusions and outlook
In this report, we first review advanced sensing devices, with a focus on materials, device structures, and working principles of electrical, biophysical, optical, and biochemical sensing modalities. Then we elaborate on the requirements of the material and structure selection, device properties, and wireless technologies for skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring. Finally, potential healthcare applications are discussed and reviewed in electrophysiological, biophysical, biochemical signals, and comprehensive monitoring.
Innovative materials design and structure engineering have made thin, soft, and biocompatible skin electronics facile and competent for long-term, continuous health monitoring. For example, advanced, non-invasive skin bioelectronic patches have shown the ability to (1) continuously monitor a specific vital signal for disease detection and management, such as diabetes and cardiac disease;385,386 and (2) comprehensively evaluate an individual's health status wirelessly, ranging from newborns to pregnant women.28,327 Despite the significant advancements in this field, many practical challenges still remain. We outline several remaining challenges with pertinent solutions below.
Measurement capabilities
Currently, most biophysical, electrical, optical, and biochemical sensing modalities are kept isolated from each other in skin bioelectronic devices. It limits the sensing capabilities and will result in high-price products. To achieve higher productivity in health monitoring, it is necessary to combine several sensing modalities in one platform. In this case, more selective and specific bio-signals can be measured to comprehensively evaluate health conditions. Besides multi-sensing, other performances, such as good linearity and high enough sensitivity for target applications are also important parameters to consider. Though a variety of advanced soft materials have been developed as sensing materials for skin bioelectronics, their electrical or electrochemical properties still need further improvements to reach the established performance of the rigid electronic materials. Further studies on materials and device structures to enhance sensing capabilities are needed.
Robust rigid–soft interface.
Thin, soft skin bioelectronics have been demonstrated to have excellent skin compliance and the ability to survive a high-cycle fatigue test under repetitive mechanical deformations. However, after laminating onto the human skin, the device is not sufficiently robust to survive long-term, continuous, time-dynamic skin deformations. including stretching, compressing, and twisting. It requires robust adhesion at the skin–device interface and robust device configuration in a dynamic environment. One possible solution is to develop ultrathin biocompatible adhesives with good mechanical robustness. However, ultrathin bioelectronic devices usually suffer from limited stretchability and mechanical durability due to the trade-off between geometry thinness and mechanical robustness. A good understanding and further investigation on materials and rigid–soft interface design is required to prevent interface failure in long-term use.
Long-term stability
Long-term stability requires skin bioelectronics to have high skin compliance, mechanical durability, and stretchability. To achieve these properties simultaneously, efforts are needed to develop advanced soft nanomaterials.50 Additionally, to maintain stable functionalities, skin bioelectronics should be able to survive in moisturized conditions during long-term skin attachment. To tackle this issue, hydrophobic materials or proper encapsulation are needed. In the case of reusable devices, they should be robust enough to sustain repetitive attachment and detachment cycles. In addition to the challenges mentioned above, particularly for biomedical sensors to be adopted in continuous health monitoring, effective sampling and transport of body fluids over the sensor surface is crucial for ensuring good reproducibility and avoiding contamination.78 Moreover, reconcentration techniques are required considering that the analyte concentration in excretive biofluid is not as reliable as that of blood. In most cases, a simple attach–press–sensor is inadequate. Addressing challenges in long-term, continuous biochemical sensors will further involve knowledge and techniques related to fluid handling, reconcentration, incubation, and more effective sensing modalities beyond ion-selective and enzymatic approaches.
System integration
A final goal in this field is to achieve a closed-loop system for healthcare management that can be applied in real-life situations. In this endeavour, miniaturisation, sensor sophistication, analytics, power, communication, secure data management, integration, and incorporation of machine learning should all be taken into consideration for the transformation of laboratory prototypes to fully portable, multifunctional, and intelligent skin patches with long-term, continuous sensing capabilities.387 A comprehensive validation of the system is necessary for widespread adoption. Immerse populations of clinical study are required to establish operational performance equivalence to existing clinical methods. Furthermore, joint efforts from materials and device engineers, data scientists, and medical professionals are required for technical progress. Users and caregivers need to be more closely involved.372
Commercialization
To realise commercialisation of skin bioelectronics, cost-effective fabrication technologies for high throughput and large-scale customization are needed. Traditional manufacture methods, such as photolithography, etching process, and high-vacuum deposition, need expensive equipment and are time consuming. This will increase the price of the products. Advanced fabrication techniques, such as printing, can enable mass fabrication and decrease the manufacturing cost. Furthermore, to obtain favourable biocompatibilities, the fabrication process should not involve any toxic materials or solvents. Innovative fabrication technologies are necessary to guarantee material compatibility with the processing parameters.
Although there are unmet challenges, we believe that skin bioelectronics will realise their full potential with the ongoing development of all the aspects mentioned. Next-generation skin bioelectronics are expected to be self-powered, multifunctional, and intelligent, and able to acquire bio-signals throughout daily life for personalised healthcare management. It will be possible to integrate them into the lifestyles of both healthy individuals and patients, allowing healthcare accessibility to those living in geographically remote or economically limited areas.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Japan Science and Technology (JST) ACCEL (grant number JPMJMI17F1). Y. Wang would like to acknowledge support from the Technion, and the start-up fund from Guangdong Technion.
Notes and references
T. Someya and M. Amagai, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 382–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ray, J. Choi, J. Reeder, S. P. Lee, A. J. Aranyosi, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Curr. Opin. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 9, 47–56 CrossRef .
D.-H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 14, 113–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Abe and M. Nishizawa, APL Bioeng., 2021, 5, 041509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuk, B. Lu and X. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1642–1667 RSC .
Z. Lou, L. Wang, K. Jiang, Z. Wei and G. Shen, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100523 CrossRef .
J. Y. Oh and Z. Bao, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900186 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Kim, Y. Wang, H. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and H. Peng, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 634–640 CrossRef CAS .
N. Matsuhisa, X. Chen, Z. Bao and T. Someya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2946–2966 RSC .
H. Jin, Y. S. Abu-Raya and H. Haick, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700024 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tu, R. M. Torrente-Rodríguez, M. Wang and W. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and W. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1465–1491 RSC .
J. Rogers, Z. Bao and T.-W. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 521–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mirjalali, S. Peng, Z. Fang, C. H. Wang and S. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2100545 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Song, W. Ye and Z. Fan, J. Semicond., 2019, 40, 111601 CrossRef CAS .
O. Zohar, M. Khatib, R. Omar, R. Vishinkin, Y. Y. Broza and H. Haick, View, 2021, 2, 20200172 CrossRef .
H. Lee, T. K. Choi, Y. B. Lee, H. R. Cho, R. Ghaffari, L. Wang, H. J. Choi, T. D. Chung, N. Lu, T. Hyeon, S. H. Choi and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 566–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno, N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana, W. Yukita, M. Koizumi and T. Someya, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501856 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ouyang, J. Tian, G. Sun, Y. Zou, Z. Liu, H. Li, L. Zhao, B. Shi, Y. Fan and Y. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703456 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Miyamoto, S. Lee, N. F. Cooray, S. Lee, M. Mori, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jin, L. Yoda, T. Yokota and A. Itoh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Qiu, S. K. Ameri, H. Jang, Z. Dai, Y. Huang and N. Lu, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 6 CrossRef .
S. Choi, S. I. Han, D. Jung, H. J. Hwang, C. Lim, S. Bae, O. K. Park, C. M. Tschabrunn, M. Lee and S. Y. Bae, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1048–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niu, N. Matsuhisa, L. Beker, J. Li, S. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Yan, Y. Yun, W. Burnett, A. S. Y. Poon, J. B. H. Tok, X. Chen and Z. Bao, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 361–368 CrossRef .
S. Lee, S. Franklin, F. A. Hassani, T. Yokota, M. O. G. Nayeem, Y. Wang, R. Leib, G. Cheng, D. W. Franklin and T. Someya, Science, 2020, 370, 966–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokota, T. Nakamura, H. Kato, M. Mochizuki, M. Tada, M. Uchida, S. Lee, M. Koizumi, W. Yukita, A. Takimoto and T. Someya, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 113–121 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, Q. Huang, Q. Xu, Q. Zhuang, X. Zhao, Y. Yang, H. Qiu, Z. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Chai and Z. Zijian, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 859–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ryu, D. H. Kim, J. T. Price, J. Y. Lee, H. U. Chung, E. Allen, J. R. Walter, H. Jeong, J. Cao and E. Kulikova, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2100466118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Sempionatto, M. Lin, L. Yin, K. Pei, T. Sonsa-ard, A. N. de Loyola Silva, A. A. Khorshed, F. Zhang, N. Tostado and S. Xu, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2021, 737–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 119, 150501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Pharr and G. A. Salvatore, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9614–9635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Mukhopadhyay, IEEE Sens. J., 2014, 15, 1321–1330 Search PubMed .
M. S. Brown, B. Ashley and A. Koh, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2018, 6, 47 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jiang, M. O. G. Nayeem, K. Fukuda, S. Ding, H. Jin, T. Yokota, D. Inoue, D. Hashizume and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903446 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Su, Q. Zou, Y. Li, Y. Chen, S.-Y. Teng, J. T. Kelleher, R. Nith, P. Cheng, N. Li, W. Liu, S. Dai, Y. Liu, A. Mazursky, J. Xu, L. Jin, P. Lopes and S. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabi4563 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Mishra, A. Barfidokht, A. Karajic, J. R. Sempionatto, J. Wang and J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 966–972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Xu, W. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, R. Rastak, F. Molina-Lopez, J. W. Chung, S. Niu, V. R. Feig and J. Lopez, Nature, 2018, 555, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ershad, A. Thukral, J. Yue, P. Comeaux, Y. Lu, H. Shim, K. Sim, N.-I. Kim, Z. Rao and R. Guevara, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, G. Chen, Y. Cui, S. Ji, Z. Liu, C. Wan, Y. Liu, Y. Lu, C. Wang and N. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 9955–9966 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Tian, Y. Liu, K. Koumoto and J. Chen, Joule, 2019, 3, 1399–1403 CrossRef .
J. Kim, G. A. Salvatore, H. Araki, A. M. Chiarelli, Z. Xie, A. Banks, X. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. W. Lee, K.-I. Jang, S. Y. Heo, K. Cho, H. Luo, B. Zimmerman, J. Kim, L. Yan, X. Feng, S. Xu, M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600418 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, H. Ota, D. Kiriya, K. Takei and A. Javey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Lee, M. K. Kim and C. H. Lee, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 21, 299–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majumder, T. Mondal and M. J. Deen, Sensors, 2017, 17, 130 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung and G. Cauwenberghs, IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2010, 3, 106–119 Search PubMed .
G. Acar, O. Ozturk, A. J. Golparvar, T. A. Elboshra, K. Böhringer and M. K. Yapici, Electronics, 2019, 8, 479 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Yang, K. Zhu, S. Liu, W. Guo, Z. Jiang and Z. Li, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2001938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kabiri Ameri, R. Ho, H. Jang, L. Tao, Y. Wang, L. Wang, D. M. Schnyer, D. Akinwande and N. Lu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7634–7641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Ferrari, S. Sudha, S. Tarantino, R. Esposti, F. Bolzoni, P. Cavallari, C. Cipriani, V. Mattoli and F. Greco, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700771 CrossRef PubMed .
K. W. Cho, S.-H. Sunwoo, Y. J. Hong, J. H. Koo, J. H. Kim, S. Baik, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 5068–5143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Xia, Y. Zhang and D. L. Kaplan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2916–2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, S. J. Wang, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 208–213 RSC .
D. Qi, K. Zhang, G. Tian, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, D. Dong, Y. Zhao, L. W. Yap, Q. Shi, T. An, Y. Ling, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15948–15955 RSC .
M. Hassan, G. Abbas, N. Li, A. Afzal, Z. Haider, S. Ahmed, X. Xu, C. Pan and Z. Peng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2100773 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, S. Peng, W. Sun, G. Gu, Q. Zhang and X. Guo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800681 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Nawrocki, N. Matsuhisa, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500452 CrossRef .
B. Hwang and T. G. Yun, Composites, Part B, 2019, 163, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Yokota and T. Someya, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okamura, K. Kabata, M. Kinoshita, D. Saitoh and S. Takeoka, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4388–4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, Z. Liu, C. Wan, Y. Jiang, T. Wang, M. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Pan and M. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. C. Chen, L. Nicolini, P. Pasupathy, J. Sacks, B. Su, R. Yang, D. Sanchez, Y. F. Chang and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6423–6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao and Y. Zhu, JOM, 2016, 68, 1145–1155 CrossRef .
I. You, B. Kim, J. Park, K. Koh, S. Shin, S. Jung and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6359–6364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, J. Bang, P. Won, Y. Kim, J. Jung, J. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, S. Hong and N. L. Jeon, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chu and H. E. Naguib, Smart Mater. Struct., 2021, 30, 065003 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Jung, J.-H. Moon, D.-H. Baek, J.-H. Lee, Y.-Y. Choi, J.-S. Hong and S.-H. Lee, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 59, 1472–1479 Search PubMed .
B.-C. Kang and T.-J. Ha, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 05GD02 CrossRef .
R. Kumar, R. Singh, D. Hui, L. Feo and F. Fraternali, Composites, Part B, 2018, 134, 193–206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lou, R. Li, Z. Li, T. Liang, Z. Wei, M. Run, X. Yan and X. Liu, Sensors, 2016, 16, 1833 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. Suvarnaphaet, S. Sasivimolkul, C. Sukkasem, D. Pukesamsombut, N. Tanadchangsaeng, S. Boonyagul and S. Pechprasarn, Biodegradable Electrode patch made of Graphene/PHA for ECG detecting Applications, 2019 12th Biomedical Engineering International Conference (BMEiCON),  2019, pp. 1–5 DOI:10.1109/BMEiCON47515.2019.8990243.
R. Guo, X. Wang, W. Yu, J. Tang and J. Liu, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2018, 61, 1031–1037 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, J. Zhang and J. Liu, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e58771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zucca, C. Cipriani, S. Tarantino, D. Ricci, V. Mattoli and F. Greco, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 983–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhong, W. Wang and D. Yu, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 4913–4926 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, P. He and J. Yang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 455401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, J. Park, J. Sohn, D. Cho and S. Jeon, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4770–4778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heikenfeld, A. Jajack, J. Rogers, P. Gutruf, L. Tian, T. Pan, R. Li, M. Khine, J. Kim and J. Wang, Lab Chip, 2018, 18, 217–248 RSC .
R. Matsukawa, A. Miyamoto, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 2001322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, B. Su, S. Gong, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, D. T. Lai, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, K. J. Si, Q. Shi, N. N. Jason, T. Sridhar, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19700–19708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Yap, Q. Shi, S. Gong, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Gu, K. Suzuki, Y. Zhu and W. Cheng, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2019, 104, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, M. Yang, F. Lin, S. Gong, Y. Wang, T. An, Y. Zhao and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29014–29021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, S. Gong, Q. Zhai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, M. Yang and W. Cheng, Small, 2019, 15, 1804853 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. W. Yap, D. Dong, Q. Shi, Y. Wang, W. Cheng and X. Han, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, S. Gong and W. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1668–1711 RSC .
Y. G. Park, G. Y. Lee, J. Jang, S. M. Yun, E. Kim and J. U. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 2002280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, Y. Ling, Y. Zhao, D. Dong, Q. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 640–647 RSC .
D. Y. Choi, M. H. Kim, Y. S. Oh, S.-H. Jung, J. H. Jung, H. J. Sung, H. W. Lee and H. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1770–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Su, N. Wu, H. Wan, S. Wan, H. Bi and L. Sun, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Yu, X. Cui, M. Dong, J. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Fan, Y. Zhu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11710–11730 RSC .
N. Matsuhisa, S. Niu, S. J. O’Neill, J. Kang, Y. Ochiai, T. Katsumata, H.-C. Wu, M. Ashizawa, G.-J. N. Wang and D. Zhong, Nature, 2021, 600, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, M. K. Choi, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 1006–1017 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Chossat, Y.-L. Park, R. J. Wood and V. Duchaine, IEEE Sens. J., 2013, 13, 3405–3414 CAS .
M. D. Ho, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, Y. Wang, D. Dong, Y. Zhao and W. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700845 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602790 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Nur, N. Matsuhisa, Z. Jiang, M. O. G. Nayeem, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5610–5617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and X. Yan, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 43, 175–188 CrossRef .
A. Khan, Z. Abas, H. S. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 053002 CrossRef .
T. Sun, F. Tasnim, R. T. McIntosh, N. Amiri, D. Solav, M. T. Anbarani, D. Sadat, L. Zhang, Y. Gu and M. A. Karami, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2020, 4, 954–972 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rao, Z. Chen, D. Zhao, Y. Yin, X. Wang and F. Yi, Sensors, 2019, 19, 2763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhong Lin, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, npj Flexible Electron., 2017, 1, 10 CrossRef .
A. Chen, C. Zhang, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, R. Li and T. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705122 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Shi, Z. Liu, Q. Wang and C. F. Guo, Micro Nano Lett., 2021, 14, 21 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Deng, M. Leung, Z. Yang, R. X. Xu, Z. L. Wang, X. C. Zeng and Z. Wang, Nature, 2020, 578, 392–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jia, Z. H. Guo, L. Li, C. Pan, P. Zhang, F. Xu, X. Pu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19651–19660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. S. Ballard and A. Ozcan, in Mobile Health: Sensors, Analytic Methods, and Applications, ed. J. M. Rehg, S. A. Murphy and S. Kumar, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, pp. 313–342 Search PubMed .
A. Ahmad Tarar, U. Mohammad and S. K. Srivastava, Biosensors, 2020, 10, 56 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Bansal, S. Hou, O. Kulyk, E. M. Bowman and I. D. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7638–7644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Pan, Z. Zhang, H. Wu, N. Yao, D. Cai, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, G. Sun and L. Wang, Opto-electron. Adv., 2020, 3, 190022 CAS .
R. Fu, T. Warnakula, Q. Shi, L. W. Yap, D. Dong, Y. Liu, M. Premaratne and W. Cheng, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1515–1523 RSC .
H. Lee, Z. Jiang, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, S. Park and T. Someya, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2021, 146, 100631 CrossRef .
A. Koh, D. Kang, Y. Xue, S. Lee, R. M. Pielak, J. Kim, T. Hwang, S. Min, A. Banks and P. Bastien, Sci. Transl. Med., 2016, 8, 366ra165 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, Y. Liu, K. Chen, W. J. Shin, C. J. Lu, G. W. Kong, D. Patnaik, S. H. Lee, J. F. Cortes and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2014, 10, 3083–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, D. Kang, S. Han, S. B. Kim and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601355 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, H. Wang, M. Koizumi, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Lin, Y. Firdaus, Y. Wang, S. Lee and T. Yokota, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3129–3135 RSC .
T. Yokota, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2004416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Nam and D. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 47 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Lee, W.-Y. Jin, M. M. Ovhal, N. Kumar and J.-W. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1087–1110 RSC .
Q. Huang and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60736–60762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chae and Y. H. Lee, Nano Converg., 2014, 1, 15 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, Y. Lu, G. Chen, M. Yang and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2518–2533 RSC .
S. Meer, A. Kausar and T. Iqbal, Polym. Plast. Technol. Eng., 2016, 55, 1416–1440 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, S. Rich, S. Lee, K. Fukuda, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Proc. IEEE, 2019, 107, 2137–2154 CAS .
L. Yu, Z. Yang and M. An, Biosci. Trends, 2019, 13, 308–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yang and F. Yan, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 3, 53–67 CrossRef .
M. A. A. Mamun and M. R. Yuce, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dervisevic, M. Alba, B. Prieto-Simon and N. Voelcker, Nano Today, 2020, 30, 100828 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dervisevic, M. Dervisevic, Y. Wang, L. F. Malaver-Ortega, W. Cheng, K. L. Tuck, N. H. Voelcker and V. Cadarso, Electroanalysis, 2020, 32, 1850–1858 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kim, J. Jun, J. S. Lee and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8451–8459 RSC .
Z. Gao, Z. Lou, S. Chen, L. Li, K. Jiang, Z. Fu, W. Han and G. Shen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 511–519 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maity and R. T. R. Kumar, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1822–1830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuvaraja, A. Nawaz, Q. Liu, D. Dubal, S. G. Surya, K. N. Salama and P. Sonar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3423–3460 RSC .
H. Chen, S. Dong, M. Bai, N. Cheng, H. Wang, M. Li, H. Du, S. Hu, Y. Yang and T. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2113–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, R. Omar, R. Zhang, N. Tang, M. Khatib, Q. Xu, Y. Milyutin, W. Saliba, Y. Y. Broza, W. Wu, M. Yuan and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2108607 Search PubMed .
M. Y. Lee, H. R. Lee, C. H. Park, S. G. Han and J. H. Oh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2829–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota, Y. Jimbo, Y. Wang, M. O. G. Nayeem, M. Nishinaka and T. Someya, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3601–3609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. Lee, W. Lee, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906982 CrossRef CAS .
T. Someya, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Kato, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 9966–9970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokota, Y. Inoue, Y. Terakawa, J. Reeder, M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Ware, K. Yang, K. Mabuchi, T. Murakawa and M. Sekino, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 14533–14538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuhisa, D. Inoue, P. Zalar, H. Jin, Y. Matsuba, A. Itoh, T. Yokota, D. Hashizume and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wang and Q. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806092 CrossRef .
M. Song, J. Seo, H. Kim and Y. Kim, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 4065–4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ha, S. Lim and H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4043–4064 RSC .
R. Gravina, P. Alinia, H. Ghasemzadeh and G. Fortino, Inf. Fusion, 2017, 35, 68–80 CrossRef .
H. U. Chung, A. Y. Rwei, A. Hourlier-Fargette, S. Xu, K. Lee, E. C. Dunne, Z. Xie, C. Liu, A. Carlini and D. H. Kim, Nat. Med., 2020, 26, 418–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. D. M. Jayathilaka, K. Qi, Y. Qin, A. Chinnappan, W. Serrano-García, C. Baskar, H. Wang, J. He, S. Cui and S. W. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805921 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jung, C. Lim, H. J. Shim, Y. Kim, C. Park, J. Jung, S. I. Han, S.-H. Sunwoo, K. W. Cho and G. D. Cha, Science, 2021, 373, 1022–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Lu and K. Takei, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800628 CrossRef .
Z. Lou, S. Chen, L. Wang, R. Shi, L. Li, K. Jiang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ai, Z. Lou, S. Chen, D. Chen, Z. M. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hozumi, S. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 1918–1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. An, Y. Ling, S. Gong, B. Zhu, Y. Zhao, D. Dong, L. W. Yap, Y. Wang and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800473 CrossRef .
E. J. Markvicka, M. D. Bartlett, X. Huang and C. Majidi, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 618–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Son, J. Kang, O. Vardoulis, Y. Kim, N. Matsuhisa, J. Y. Oh, J. W. To, J. Mun, T. Katsumata and Y. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1057–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Ren and C. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 15, 894–903 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Choi, J. Yang, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 10 CrossRef .
K. Yamagishi, I. Kirino, I. Takahashi, H. Amano, S. Takeoka, Y. Morimoto and T. Fujie, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 3, 27–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Liang, Y. Cao, Z. Han and X. Feng, npj Flexible Electron., 2020, 4, 2 CrossRef .
S. Choi, H. Lee, R. Ghaffari, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4203–4218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Z. Bao and G. G. Malliaras, Nature, 2016, 540, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Lee, H. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Jimbo, C. Wang, B. Wang, J. J. Kim, M. Koizumi, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118 Search PubMed .
K. Yamagishi, S. Takeoka and T. Fujie, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 520–531 RSC .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H.-J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y.-W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schwartz, B. C. K. Tee, J. Mei, A. L. Appleton, D. H. Kim, H. Wang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1859 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Yeo, Y. S. Kim, J. Lee, A. Ameen, L. Shi, M. Li, S. Wang, R. Ma, S. H. Jin and Z. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2773–2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. S. Kumar, H. He, C. J. Cai, X. He, H. Gao, S. Yue, C. Li, R. C.-S. Seet and H. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Fan, X. Li, S. Y. Kuang, L. Zhang, Y. H. Chen, L. Liu, K. Zhang, S. W. Ma, F. Liang and T. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9326–9332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lee, H. J. Byeon, J. H. Lee, D. H. Baek, K. H. Lee, J. S. Hong and S.-H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 839–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, L. W. Yap, B. Zhu, Q. Zhai, Y. Liu, Q. Lyu, K. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Ling, D. T. H. Lai, F. Marzbanrad and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, H. J. Shim, J. Yang, M. K. Choi, D. C. Kim, J. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700217 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhou, S. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Du, Y. Ma and Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5798–5805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota, H. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, M. Koizumi and T. Someya, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb7043 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng and J. Zhu, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 1679–1708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwon, Y. D. Suh, J. Lee, P. Lee, S. Han, S. Hong, J. Yeo, H. Lee and S. H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7445–7461 RSC .
X. Xiao, L. Yuan, J. Zhong, T. Ding, Y. Liu, Z. Cai, Y. Rong, H. Han, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5440–5444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rdest and D. Janas, Sensors, 2021, 21, 5847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600314 CrossRef .
L. Cai and C. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 320 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Lee, Y. Oh, J.-M. Hong, Y. W. Park and B.-K. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14170 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Dong, S. Gong, L. Brassart, Y. Wang, T. An and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800462 CrossRef .
H. Wu, D. Kong, Z. Ruan, P.-C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. Hu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lee, J. Ham, J. Lee, S. Hong, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, S. E. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee and D. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5671–5678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, Y. Lee, K. W. Cho, J. H. Koo and D.-H. Kim, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 52, 73–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiao, X. Li, T. Hirtz, G. Deng, Y. Wei, M. Li, S. Ji, Q. Wu, J. Jian and F. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18923–18945 RSC .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao and T. F. Heinz, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, N. Li, H. Yu, Z. Wei, M. Liao, P. Chen, S. Wang, D. Shi, Q. Sun and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702076 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Son, S. I. Chae, M. Kim, M. K. Choi, J. Yang, K. Park, V. S. Kale, J. H. Koo, C. Choi and M. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9326–9332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Huang and S. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801368 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Zhou, X. Yuan, C. Li, L. Liu and H. You, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 114118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, K. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, K. K. Kim, K. Lee, W. Lee, H. Jeon and S. H. Ko, Adv. Biomed. Res., 2021, 2100111 Search PubMed .
S. Stauss and I. Honma, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 91, 492–505 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao and K. Uhrich, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2019, 34, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Soomro, F. Jabbar, M. Ali, J.-W. Lee, S. W. Mun and K. H. Choi, J. Mater. Sci. Mater., 2019, 30, 9455–9465 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, H. Li, J. Dou, Q. Wang, W. He, C. Wang, D. Li, J. M. Lin and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. K. Oh, N. Nabulsi, H. Johnson, W. Wang and J.-H. Ryou, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 670–679 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Liu, Z. Yan, F. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007221 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bandodkar, S. P. Lee, I. Huang, W. Li, S. Wang, C. J. Su, W. J. Jeang, T. Hang, S. Mehta, N. Nyberg, P. Gutruf, J. Choi, J. Koo, J. T. Reeder, R. Tseng, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 554–562 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, S. Ji, I. Chaturvedi, H. Xia, T. Wang, G. Chen, L. Pan, C. Wan, D. Qi and Y.-S. Ong, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 478–484 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J. Bang, P. Won, Y. Kim, J. Jung, J. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, S. Hong and N. L. Jeon, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mou, J. Qi, L. Tang, R. Dong, Y. Xia, Y. Gao and X. Jiang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Patel, F. Ershad, J. Lee, L. Chacon-Alberty, Y. Wang, M. A. Morales-Garza, A. Haces-Garcia, S. Jang, L. Gonzalez, L. Contreras, A. Agarwal, Z. Rao, G. Liu, I. R. Efimov, Y. S. Zhang, M. Zhao, R. R. Isseroff, A. Karim, A. Elgalad, W. Zhu, X. Wu and C. Yu, Small, 2022, 2107099 CrossRef .
W. Yang, N. W. Li, S. Zhao, Z. Yuan, J. Wang, X. Du, B. Wang, R. Cao, X. Li and W. Xu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700241 CrossRef .
F. Chen, Q. Huang and Z. Zheng, Small Structures, 2022, 3, 2100135 CrossRef .
S. S. H. Abir, M. U. K. Sadaf, S. K. Saha, A. Touhami, K. Lozano and M. J. Uddin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60401–60412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Fan, P. T. Yu, F. Liang, X. Li, H. Y. Li, L. Liu, J. W. Cao, X. J. Zhao, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16053–16062 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, Z. Huang and J. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2105084 CrossRef PubMed .
M. O. G. Nayeem, S. Lee, H. Jin, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jinno, A. Miyamoto, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 7063–7070 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Li, Y. Li, M. Ding, J. Xie and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23689–23696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, L. Li, S. Wang, Q. Lu, Y. Bai, F. Sun, T. Li, Y. Li, Z. Wang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, B. Sun, Y. Ling, Q. Fei, Z. Chen, X. Li, P. Guo, N. Jeon, S. Goswami, Y. Liao, S. Ding, Q. Yu, J. Lin, G. Huang and Z. Yan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, R. N. McCay, S. Goswami, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Ling, J. Lin and Z. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804327 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, H. Liu, X. Zhong, B. Jiang and Z. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 36609–36619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Niu, H. Liu, R. He, Z. Li, H. Ren, B. Gao, H. Guo, G. M. Genin and F. Xu, Mater. Today, 2020, 41, 219–242 CrossRef .
W. Yuan, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, X. Wei, O. Yang, Y. Liu, L. He, S. Cui, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2101139 CrossRef .
H. Huang, N. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Dong, L. Han, S. Wan, G. Dou and L. Sun, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 2101602 Search PubMed .
B. Dai, K. Li, L. Shi, X. Wan, X. Liu, F. Zhang, L. Jiang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ji, C. Wan, T. Wang, Q. Li, G. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Yang, X. Liu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Reeder, J. Choi, Y. Xue, P. Gutruf, J. Hanson, M. Liu, T. Ray, A. J. Bandodkar, R. Avila and W. Xia, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau6356 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Zhao, J. Xu, Y. Fang, G. Chen, Y. Song, S. Li and J. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1670–1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Nawrocki, H. Jin, S. Lee, T. Yokota, M. Sekino and T. Someya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803279 CrossRef .
L. Tian, B. Zimmerman, A. Akhtar, K. J. Yu, M. Moore, J. Wu, R. J. Larsen, J. W. Lee, J. Li, Y. Liu, B. Metzger, S. Qu, X. Guo, K. E. Mathewson, J. A. Fan, J. Cornman, M. Fatina, Z. Xie, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Dolcos, M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, T. Bretl, L. J. Hargrove, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 3, 194–205 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Baik, H. J. Lee, D. W. Kim, J. W. Kim, Y. Lee and C. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803309 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, D. Yamamoto, M. Takada, H. Naito, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700495 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, N. Tang, R. Omar, Z. Hu, T. Duong, J. Wang, W. Wu and H. Haick, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2105482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. R. Pyun, M. T. Lee, H. B. Lee and S. H. J. A. F. M. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2110535 CrossRef .
S. Li, G. Liu, R. Li, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, M. Huang, M. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Zhou, H. Tang, L. Wang, G. Fang and Y. Su, ACS Nano, 2021, 16, 541–553 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shuang, D. Xiaosheng, L. Yaofa, L. Shiyu, Z. Mi, D. Zongliang, C. Xu and W. Haibo, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127363 CrossRef .
Y. Ling, K. Guo, B. Zhu, B. Prieto-Simon, N. H. Voelcker and W. Cheng, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 1380–1387 RSC .
P. Jin, P. Wang, W. Pang, H. Wang, Y. Jiao, J. Zhang, B. Lu, B. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Ma and X. Feng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2101126 CrossRef .
C. Kwon, D. Seong, J. Ha, D. Chun, J.-H. Bae, K. Yoon, M. Lee, J. Woo, C. Won, S. Lee, Y. Mei, K.-I. Jang, D. Son and T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, B. Hao, W. Song, S. Chen, D. Li, L. Luo, Z. Xia, D. Cheng, A. Xu and G. Cai, Composites, Part B, 2020, 183, 107683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, W.-Y. Cheng, Y.-C. Li, H.-M. Wu, Y.-C. Wu, H.-W. Lu, S.-L. Cheng, L. Li, K.-C. Chang and H.-J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, P. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Hu, Z. Wang, W. Nie, L. Zou, C. Li and X. Han, Composites, Part A, 2022, 152, 106700 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, T. Yu, W. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, G. Ye, Y. Zhao, X. Du, X. Liu and L. Yang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 999–1007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, J. Qi, F. Li and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5264–5271 RSC .
S. H. Jeong, S. Zhang, K. Hjort, J. Hilborn and Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5830–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, P. Wan, J. Wen, M. Gong, X. Wu, Y. Wang, R. Shi and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703852 CrossRef .
J.-H. Kim, S.-R. Kim, H.-J. Kil, Y.-C. Kim and J.-W. Park, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4531–4540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, Jama, 2015, 313, 561–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, C. Lee and K. Y. Suh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 1429–1441 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Lee, J. H. Ryu, I. B. Baek, Y. Kim, W. I. Jang, S. H. Kim, Y. S. Yoon, S. H. Kim, S. G. Hong and S. Byun, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700621 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Ferrari, U. Ismailov, J.-M. Badier, F. Greco and E. Ismailova, npj Flexible Electron., 2020, 4, 4 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jung, J. Moon, D. Baek, J. Lee, Y. Choi, J. Hong and S. Lee, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 59, 1472–1479 Search PubMed .
J. Song, X. Feng and Y. Huang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2016, 3, 128–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng and Z. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2282–2290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, S. Ji, I. Chaturvedi, H. Xia, T. Wang, G. Chen, L. Pan, C. Wan, D. Qi, Y.-S. Ong and X. Chen, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 478–484 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jeong, M. K. Kim, H. Cheng, W.-H. Yeo, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 642–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, M. Pharr, L. Wang, J. Kim, Y. Liu, Y. Xue, R. Ning, X. Wang, H. U. Chung and X. Feng, Small, 2017, 13, 1602954 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Xue, H. Luan, M. Pharr, X. Feng, J. A. Rogers and Y. Huang, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2017, 117, 137–142 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee, Y. Ma, K. I. Jang, A. Banks, T. Pan, X. Feng, J. S. Kim, D. Kang, M. S. Raj and B. L. McGrane, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3698–3704 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, X. Wang, W. Yu, J. Tang and J. Liu, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2018, 61, 1031–1037 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and M. W. Urban, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7446–7467 RSC .
C. Gong, J. Liang, W. Hu, X. Niu, S. Ma, H. T. Hahn and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4186–4191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, D. Son, T. Katsumata, Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Lopez, H.-C. Wu, J. Kang, J. Park, X. Gu, J. Mun, N. G.-J. Wang, Y. Yin, W. Cai, Y. Yun, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav3097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Jang, K. Li, H. U. Chung, S. Xu, H. N. Jung, Y. Yang, J. W. Kwak, H. H. Jung, J. Song, C. Yang, A. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Y. Lee, B. H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, J. Lee, Y. Yu, B. J. Kim, H. Jang, K. J. Yu, J. Kim, J. W. Lee, J.-W. Jeong, Y. M. Song, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kwon, H. Wang, J. Lim, K. S. Chun, H. Jang, I. Yoo, D. Wu, A. J. Chen, C. G. Gu, L. Lipschultz, J. U. Kim, J. Kim, H. Jeong, H. Luan, Y. Park, C.-J. Su, Y. Ishida, S. R. Madhvapathy, A. Ikoma, J. W. Kwak, D. S. Yang, A. Banks, S. Xu, Y. Huang, J.-K. Chang and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2020398118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Y. Hao, Y. Li, H. Hu, C. Wang, A. Nomoto, T. Pan, Y. Gu, Y. Chen, T. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Lei, N. Kim, C. Wang, L. Zhang, J. W. Ward, A. Maralani, X. Li, M. F. Durstock, A. Pisano, Y. Lin and S. Xu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 473–480 CrossRef .
J. Byun, Y. Lee, J. Yoon, B. Lee, E. Oh, S. Chung, T. Lee, K.-J. Cho, J. Kim and Y. Hong, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, eaas9020 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Kwak, M. Han, Z. Xie, H. U. Chung, J. Y. Lee, R. Avila, J. Yohay, X. Chen, C. Liang, M. Patel, I. Jung, J. Kim, M. Namkoong, K. Kwon, X. Guo, C. Ogle, D. Grande, D. Ryu, D. H. Kim, S. Madhvapathy, C. Liu, D. S. Yang, Y. Park, R. Caldwell, A. Banks, S. Xu, Y. Huang, S. Fatone and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2020, 12, eabc4327 Search PubMed .
X. Tian, P. M. Lee, Y. J. Tan, T. L. Wu, H. Yao, M. Zhang, Z. Li, K. A. Ng, B. C. Tee and J. S. Ho, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 243–251 CrossRef .
N. P. Shetti, A. Mishra, S. Basu, R. J. Mascarenhas, R. R. Kakarla and T. Aminabhavi, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 1823–1835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, C. Tianrui, G. Yansong, L. Kui, J. Yanli, L. Dengfeng, J. Xinran, W. Yang, H. Xingcan, W. Han, L. Yiming, L. Jian, B. Yiming, G. Kai, Z. Nianrong, M. Hua, H. Dongsheng, L. Zhou, Y. Xinge and C. Lingqian, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106786 CrossRef .
Y. Hao, X. He, L. Wang, X. Qin, G. Chen and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2109790 Search PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 164, H3007 CrossRef .
L. Manjakkal, L. Yin, A. Nathan, J. Wang and R. Dahiya, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2100899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pu, M. Liu, X. Chen, J. Sun, C. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700015 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Mei, T. Wang, W. Huo, S. Cui, H. Liang and X. Du, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 289–299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinno, T. Yokota, M. Koizumi, W. Yukita, M. Saito, I. Osaka, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Lian, T. Cheng, W. Zhang, B. Lu, K. Tan, C. Liu and C. Shen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 17128–17141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. He, C. Boyer, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, S. Peng, D. Chu and C. H. Wang, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 5465–5486 RSC .
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D.-H. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis and A. Javey, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, R. He, H. Liu, Y. Niu, Z. Li, F. Han, J. Li, X. Zhang and F. Xu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2021, 322, 112611 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, B. Dong, T. He, Z. Sun, J. Zhu, Z. Zhang and C. Lee, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 1131–1162 CrossRef .
N. Zavanelli, H. Kim, J. Kim, R. Herbert, M. Mahmood, Y.-S. Kim, S. Kwon, N. B. Bolus, F. B. Torstrick, C. S. Lee and W.-H. Yeo, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabl4146 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan and M. Rodgers, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., 2012, 9, 21 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ramasamy and A. Balan, Sens. Rev., 2018, 38, 412–419 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, D. Yamamoto, M. Takada, H. Naito, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700495 CrossRef PubMed .
H. U. Chung, B. H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, J. Lee, Z. Xie, E. M. Ibler, K. Lee, A. Banks, J. Y. Jeong and J. Kim, Science, 2019, 363, eaau0780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dong, X. Cheng, T. Xiong and X. Wang, Biomed. Microdevices, 2019, 21, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chun, W. Son, D. W. Kim, J. Lee, H. Min, H. Jung, D. Kwon, A.-H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim and S. K. Lim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16951–16957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Shahandashti, H. Pourkheyrollah, A. Jahanshahi and H. Ghafoorifard, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 295, 678–686 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Kwon, H. Kim, M. Mahmood, Y.-S. Kim, C. Demolder and W.-H. Yeo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49398–49406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, T. Yu, Y. Zhang, G. Ye, H. Cui, C. He, W. Jiang, Y. Zhai and C. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seeber, L.-M. Cantonas, M. Hoevels, T. Sesia, V. Visser-Vandewalle and C. M. Michel, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Chaudhary, N. Birbaumer and A. Ramos-Murguialday, Nat. Rev. Neurol., 2016, 12, 513–525 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. N. Oon, A. Saidatul and Z. Ibrahim, Analysis on Non-Linear Features of Electroencephalogram (EEG) Signal for Neuromarketing Application, 2018 International Conference on Computational Approach in Smart Systems Design and Applications (ICASSDA),  2018, pp. 1–8 DOI:10.1109/ICASSDA.2018.8477618.
G. Li, J. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. Wu, Y. Tian, J. Liu, D. Chen and Q. He, J. Neural Eng., 2020, 17, 026001 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-Y. Kim, Y. J. Yun, J. Jeong, C.-Y. Kim, K.-R. Müller and S.-W. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabe7432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Wang and Y. Y. Duan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, J. Wu, Y. Xia, Q. He and H. Jin, J. Neural Eng., 2020, 17, 051004 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. Gan, Y. Zhang and J. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2100612 Search PubMed .
J. J. Norton, D. S. Lee, J. W. Lee, W. Lee, O. Kwon, P. Won, S.-Y. Jung, H. Cheng, J.-W. Jeong and A. Akce, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3920–3925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, B. Zimmerman, A. Akhtar, K. J. Yu, M. Moore, J. Wu, R. J. Larsen, J. W. Lee, J. Li and Y. Liu, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2019, 3, 194–205 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K.-J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kireev, E. Okogbue, R. Jayanth, T.-J. Ko, Y. Jung and D. Akinwande, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2800–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, J. Liu, W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Jia, Z. Li, M. Murtaza, H. Wang and J. Song, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6853–6861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahmood, D. Mzurikwao, Y.-S. Kim, Y. Lee, S. Mishra, R. Herbert, A. Duarte, C. S. Ang and W.-H. Yeo, Nat. Mach. Intell., 2019, 1, 412–422 CrossRef .
M. Mahmood, S. Kwon, Y.-S. Kim, P. Siriaraya, J. Choi, O. Boris, K. Kang, K. J. Yu, Y. C. Jang, C. S. Ang and W.-H. Yeo, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2101129 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, L. N. Zhang, X. M. Tao and X. Ding, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601371 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Wei, L. Tang, X. Song, W. Luo, J. Chu, T. Gao, H. Shi and C. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 25609–25615 RSC .
Y. Su, C. Ma, J. Chen, H. Wu, W. Luo, Y. Peng, Z. Luo, L. Li, Y. Tan and O. M. Omisore, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Kuzubasoglu and S. K. Bahadir, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 112282 CrossRef .
J. Shin, B. Jeong, J. Kim, V. B. Nam, Y. Yoon, J. Jung, S. Hong, H. Lee, H. Eom and J. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Trung, T. M. L. Dang, S. Ramasundaram, P. T. Toi, S. Y. Park and N.-E. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 2317–2327 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Wang, T. Sekine, Y. Takeda, K. Yokosawa, H. Matsui, D. Kumaki, T. Shiba, T. Nishikawa and S. Tokito, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 2467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Trung and N. E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4338–4372 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, S. Yang, P. Zhao, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Ye, X. Zhao, N. Cui, Y. Tong and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13287–13295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. Kim, Y. Lee, H. S. Lee and H. Ko, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500661 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dejace, N. Laubeuf, I. Furfaro and S. P. Lacour, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2019, 1, 1900079 CrossRef .
C. Tan, Z. Dong, Y. Li, H. Zhao, X. Huang, Z. Zhou, J.-W. Jiang, Y.-Z. Long, P. Jiang and T.-Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Li, H. Song, H. Huang and J. Gou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7371–7380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lan, T. Yin, C. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Yao, Z. Wang, S. Qu, Z. Ye, J. Ping and Y. Ying, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 319–328 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, W. Li, Y. Bao, F. Han, L. Gao, J. Xu, Y. Ma, D. Han and L. Niu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42826–42836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, S. J. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, D. Dong, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9742–9749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Díaz, J. B. Stephenson and M. A. Labrador, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 234 CrossRef .
H. Jeong, S. S. Kwak, S. Sohn, J. Y. Lee, Y. J. Lee, M. K. O’Brien, Y. Park, R. Avila, J.-T. Kim and J.-Y. Yoo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118 Search PubMed .
J. Choi, R. Ghaffari, L. B. Baker and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar3921 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, W. J. Jeang, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 12, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ghaffari, D. S. Yang, J. Kim, A. Mansour, J. A. Wright Jr, J. B. Model, D. E. Wright, J. A. Rogers and T. R. Ray, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 2787–2801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pal, V. G. Nadiger, D. Goswami and R. Martinez, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 160, 112206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Choi, A. Thaxton, I. C. Jeong, K. Kim, P. R. Sosnay, G. R. Cutting and P. C. Searson, J. Cyst. Fibros., 2018, 17, e35–e38 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Ray, M. Ivanovic, P. M. Curtis, D. Franklin, K. Guventurk, W. J. Jeang, J. Chafetz, H. Gaertner, G. Young, S. Rebollo, J. B. Model, S. P. Lee, J. Ciraldo, J. T. Reeder, A. Hourlier-Fargette, A. J. Bandodkar, J. Choi, A. J. Aranyosi, R. Ghaffari, S. A. McColley, S. Haymond and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Transl. Med., 2021, 13, eabd8109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Baker, J. B. Model, K. A. Barnes, M. L. Anderson, S. P. Lee, K. A. Lee, S. D. Brown, A. J. Reimel, T. J. Roberts, R. P. Nuccio, J. L. Bonsignore, C. T. Ungaro, J. M. Carter, W. Li, M. S. Seib, J. T. Reeder, A. J. Aranyosi, J. A. Rogers and R. Ghaffari, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabe3929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Peters, M. A. van Agtmael, S. A. Danner, P. H. Savelkoul and C. M. Vandenbroucke-Grauls, Lancet Infect. Dis., 2004, 4, 751–760 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hallek, B. D. Cheson, D. Catovsky, F. Caligaris-Cappio, G. Dighiero, H. Döhner, P. Hillmen, M. J. Keating, E. Montserrat, K. R. Rai and T. J. Kipps, Blood, 2008, 111, 5446–5456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Association, Diabetes Care, 2004, 27, s5–s10 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun and N. Thakor, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2016, 63, 463–477 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Xu, X. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Jiang, C. Zhang, B. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601013 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Gil, R. Bailon, J. Maria Vergara and P. Laguna, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2010, 57, 1079–1088 Search PubMed .
M. Yelderman and W. New, Anesthesiologists, 1983, 59, 349–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Qi, S. Fan, Z. Qiao, J. C. Yeo and C. T. Lim, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jubran, Crit. Care, 2015, 19, 272 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mendelson, Clin. Chem., 1992, 38, 1601–1607 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Giardino, L. Chan and S. Borson, Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback., 2004, 29, 121–133 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Tremper, Chest, 1989, 95, 713–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Wukitsch, M. T. Petterson, D. R. Tobler and J. A. Pologe, J. Clin. Monit., 1988, 4, 290–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, H. Lee, J. Jang, J. Lee, M. Kim, J. Lee, H. Kim, S. Yoo and H. J. Yoo, IEEE Trans. Emerg. Sel. Top. Circ. Syst., 2017, 7, 50–59 Search PubMed .
D. Han, Y. Khan, J. Ting, S. M. King, N. Yaacobi-Gross, M. J. Humphries, C. J. Newsome and A. C. Arias, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606206 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cai, X. Xu, W. Yang, J. Chen and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808138 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Hong, H. Jeong, K. W. Cho, N. Lu and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808247 CrossRef .
C. M. Lochner, Y. Khan, A. Pierre and A. C. Arias, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, E. Kim, Y. Lee, H. Kim, J. Lee, M. Kim, H.-J. Yoo and S. Yoo, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abdollahi, E. J. Markvicka, C. Majidi and A. W. Feinberg, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 1901735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tamura, Y. Maeda, M. Sekine and M. Yoshida, Electronics, 2014, 3, 282–302 CrossRef .
B. de Lacy Costello, A. Amann, H. Al-Kateb, C. Flynn, W. Filipiak, T. Khalid, D. Osborne and N. M. Ratcliffe, J. Breath Res., 2014, 8, 014001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Broza, R. Vishinkin, O. Barash, M. K. Nakhleh and H. Haick, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4781–4859 RSC .
Y. Y. Broza, P. Mochalski, V. Ruzsanyi, A. Amann and H. Haick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11036–11048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Haick, Y. Y. Broza, P. Mochalski, V. Ruzsanyi and A. Amann, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1423–1449 RSC .
Y. Y. Broza, L. Zuri and H. Haick, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4611 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Mochalski, J. King, K. Unterkofler, H. Hinterhuber and A. Amann, J. Chromatogr., B, 2014, 959, 62–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Abaffy, R. Duncan, D. D. Riemer, O. Tietje, G. Elgart, C. Milikowski and R. A. DeFazio, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e13813 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Abaffy, M. Möller, D. Riemer, C. Milikowski and R. DeFazio, Metabolomics, 2013, 9, 998–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, M. Gallagher, M. H. Ozdener, C. J. Wysocki, B. R. Goldsmith, A. Isamah, A. Faranda, S. S. Fakharzadeh, M. Herlyn and A. C. Johnson, J. Chromatogr., B, 2013, 931, 90–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pennazza, M. Santonico, A. Bartolazzi, R. Paolesse, C. Di Natale, R. Bono, V. Tamburrelli, S. Cristina and A. D'Amico, Procedia Chem., 2009, 1, 995–998 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vishinkin, R. Busool, E. Mansour, F. Fish, A. Esmail, P. Kumar, A. Gharaa, J. C. Cancilla, J. S. Torrecilla, G. Skenders, M. Leja, K. Dheda, S. Singh and H. Haick, Adv. Sci., 2021, 2100235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, T.-P. Huynh and H. Haick, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4194–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tang, Y. Zheng, D. Cui and H. Haick, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2101292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hattori, L. Falgout, W. Lee, S. Y. Jung, E. Poon, J. W. Lee, I. Na, A. Geisler, D. Sadhwani and Y. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1597–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, X. Qi, G. Shi, M. Zhang and H. Haick, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1708–1733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qin, H. Guo, Z. Dai, X. Yan and X. Ning, J. Semicond., 2019, 40, 111607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, A. Jayaraman and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2019, 571, 319–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Farooqui and A. Shamim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Melai, P. Salvo, N. Calisi, L. Moni, A. Bonini, C. Paoletti, T. Lomonaco, V. Mollica, R. Fuoco and F. Di Francesco, Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2016, 1898–1901 CAS .
W. Lyu, Y. Ma, S. Chen, H. Li, P. Wang, Y. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Jankowska, M. B. Bannwarth, C. Schulenburg, G. Faccio, K. Maniura-Weber, R. M. Rossi, L. Scherer, M. Richter and L. F. Boesel, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 87, 312–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sharifuzzaman, A. Chhetry, M. A. Zahed, S. H. Yoon, C. I. Park, S. Zhang, S. Chandra Barman, S. Sharma, H. Yoon and J. Y. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 169, 112637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yeon, H. Lee, Y. Kim, D. Lee, Y. Lee, J.-S. Lee, J. Shin, C. Choi, J.-H. Kang, J. M. Suh, H. Kim, H. S. Kum, J. Lee, D. Kim, K. Ko, B. S. Ma, P. Lin, S. Han, S. Kim, S.-H. Bae, T.-S. Kim, M.-C. Park, Y.-C. Joo, E. Kim, J. Han and J. Kim, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabg8459 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. M. Leung, A. Calatroni, L. S. Zaramela, P. K. LeBeau, N. Dyjack, K. Brar, G. David, K. Johnson, S. Leung, M. Ramirez-Gama, B. Liang, C. Rios, M. T. Montgomery, B. N. Richers, C. F. Hall, K. A. Norquest, J. Jung, I. Bronova, S. Kreimer, C. C. Talbot, D. Crumrine, R. N. Cole, P. Elias, K. Zengler, M. A. Seibold, E. Berdyshev and E. Goleva, Sci. Transl. Med., 2019, 11, eaav2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ershad, K. Sim, A. Thukral, Y. S. Zhang and C. Yu, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 031301 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Zhou, N. Luo and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700975 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Li, H. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. Huang, M. Lin, Z. Zhang, Z. Yin, B. Huang, H. Gong, S. Bhaskaran, Y. Gu, M. Makihata, Y. Guo, Y. Lei, Y. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Li, T. Zhang, Z. Chen, A. P. Pisano, L. Zhang, Q. Zhou and S. Xu, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2018, 2, 687–695 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cheng, J. Wang, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2022, 13, 838–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Meng, X. Xiao, W. Wei, G. Chen, A. Nashalian, S. Shen, X. Xiao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2022, 2109357 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. J. S. Norton, R. Qazi, Z. Zou, K. R. Ammann, H. Liu, L. Yan, P. L. Tran, K.-I. Jang, J. W. Lee, D. Zhang, K. A. Kilian, S. H. Jung, T. Bretl, J. Xiao, M. J. Slepian, Y. Huang, J.-W. Jeong and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601185 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Guy, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 493–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. San Chun, Y. J. Kang, J. Y. Lee, M. Nguyen, B. Lee, R. Lee, H. H. Jo, E. Allen, H. Chen and J. Kim, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf9405 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yan Wang
	Yan Wang is currently an assistant professor at Guangdong Technion. She received her PhD degree majoring in Chemical Engineering from Monash University in 2018 and completed her postdoc training at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. Her current research mainly focuses on materials development and the practical implementation of soft wearables in real-life situations towards ambulatory healthcare and the Internet of Things.

Hossam Haick
	Hossam Haick, professor at the Technion, is an expert in the field of nanotechnology and smart sensors. He is the founder and leader of several European consortiums for the development of advanced generations of nanosensors for the fourth industrial revolution and disease diagnosis. His research interests include nanomaterial-based chemical (flexible) sensors, electronic skin, nanoarray devices for screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of disease, breath analysis, volatile biomarkers, and molecular electronic devices.

Shuyang Guo
	Shuyang Guo is currently a second-year master's degree holder major in electrical engineering at the Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo. She was born in China in 1997 and graduated from the University of Electronic Science and Technology with a bachelor's degree in 2020. Her current research interests are flexible electronics for human health monitoring.

Chunya Wang
	Chunya Wang received her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2018 and then joined Prof. David Kaplan's group in Department of Biomedical Engineering at Tufts University as a postdoctoral scholar. From 2019 to 2021, she worked in Prof. Takao Someya's group as a Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) research fellow in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. Presently, she is an associate professor at the China University of Petroleum (Beijing). Her current research interests include advanced biomaterials, functional biogels, advanced carbon materials and their applications for soft bioelectronics and energy devices.

Sunghoon Lee
	Sunghoon Lee received his BS degree from the Department of Applied Physics, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009, and his MS and PhD degrees from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo, in 2011 and 2017, respectively. Since 2019, he has been a project assistant professor and a lecturer at the University of Tokyo. His current research interests include organic electronics, soft electronics, and flexible electronics.

Tomoyuki Yokota
	Tomoyuki Yokota was born in Tochigi, Japan, in 1985. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2013. Since 2019, he has been an associate professor at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Tokyo. His current research interests include organic photonic devices, flexible electronics, printed electronics, large-area sensors, and wearable electronics.

Takao Someya
	Takao Someya received his PhD degree in electrical engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1997. From 2001 to 2003, he was a visiting scholar at the Nanocenter (NSEC), Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, and at the Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ, USA. Since 2009, he has been a professor at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Tokyo. Since 2015, he has also been the chief scientist at the Thin-film Device Laboratory and a team leader at the Center for Emergent Matter Science, RIKEN, Wako, Japan. His current research interests include organic transistors, flexible electronics, plastic integrated circuits, large-area sensors, and plastic actuators.

 	Fig. 1  Representative examples of advanced skin bioelectronics for human health monitoring (2016–2021). Reproduced with permission from ref. 18–29. Copyright 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 Nature Publishing Group, 2016, 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2017 Wiley-VCH; 2021 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of this report (Sections 2–4). Section 2 reviews and discusses representative skin-interfaced sensing devices for human healthcare. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34–39. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH; 2021 National Academy of Sciences; 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2018 Elsevier; 2018, 2020 Nature Publishing Group. Section 3 discusses material and structure selection, device properties, and wireless monitoring of skin bioelectronics towards long-term, continuous health monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 41. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society; 2015 Elsevier. Section 4 reviews healthcare applications of skin bioelectronics for long-term, continuous health monitoring.	 

 	Fig. 3  The skin-electrode interface and circuit model of on-skin electrical sensors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Active materials for electrical sensing of skin bioelectronics. (a) Scheme of thin Au/PET film for epidermal electrical sensors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (b) Surface SEM image of AuNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of oxidation-free Cu–Au core–shell NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (d) SEM image of CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 IOPscience. (e) SEM image of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2019 IEEE. (f) SEM image of gallium–indium alloy (EGaIn). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (g) A photograph of PEDOT:PSS nanofilm electrode on human skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM image of AgNWs–graphene hybrid materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2019 IOPscience. (i) SEM image of CNTs-graphene hybrid materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematics illustrating the different modalities of mechanical sensors. (a) Piezoresistivity; (b) Capacitance; (c) Piezoelectricity; (d) Iontronic. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Four fundamental modes of triboelectricity.	 

 	Fig. 6  Device structure and working mechanism of organic optoelectronic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Working mechanism of electrochemical sensors. (a) Working principle of a typical electrochemical biosensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Potentiometric and (c) amperometric modalities. RE is the reference electrode, CE is the counter electrode, and WE is the working electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ultrathin materials and devices, and biocompatibility of skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Microscopical images of the nanomesh strain gauge on fingertip replica, demonstrating distinct sweat pore features. (b) Photograph of a face during speech of “a.” (c) Strain mapping of the face during speech of “a.” Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schema of Au coated AgNW and a photograph of the Ag–Au nanocomposite before and under strain. (e) Biocompatibility test: confocal microscope image of H9C2 cells after exposure to control and Ag–Au nanocomposite samples for 24 h. (f) Multifunctional skin patch and collected EMG signals under electrical stimulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  Breathable and waterproof skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Permeable monolithic skin electronics made from a superelastic liquid–metal fibre mat. (b–d) The device could monitor ECG signals, sweat volume, and heating performance simultaneously. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Device design of a waterproof, microfluidic skin devices for body hydration management. (f) Device used during vigorous physical activities in aquatic environment. (g) Sweat measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  Skin adhesion and flexibility/stretchability of skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Fabrication process of the adhesive composite. (b) Adhesion performance of the PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. (c) Photographs showing the robust adherence of dry electrodes on the human skin. No irritation was found after 16 h use at the attachment sites. (d) ECG monitoring results of the dry electrodes and Ag/AgCl commercial electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Structure of the AgNW/SEBS nanomembrane. (f) Photographs demonstrating nanomembranes before and under strain of 500%. Inset scanning electron microscope (SEM) image shows the surface morphology under 500% strain. (g) A photograph of an on-skin multifunctional sensor array made from the nanomembranes and the measured EMG results from three channels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  Wireless communication of skin bioelectronics. (a) Schematic design and optical photo of bodyNET, demonstrating the wireless connection between skin sensor and rigid components. (b) A photograph of bodyNET. (c) Output signals of breath, pulse, and arm movement. (d) Output signals on a smart phone. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Self-powered skin bioelectronic devices. (a) Combined with a magnetic induction layer, the soft magnetoelastic composite worked as a water-resistant magnetoelastic generator adhering conformably to the human skin. (b) Arterial pulse wave recorded underwater and with sweat. (c) Extracted key arterial parameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. (d) An ultraflexible, self-powered PPG sensor on human hands, where OPV generates electrical power from sunlight and drives polymer LED and OPD. (e) A photograph of the device. (f) Output voltage signals from PPG measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Integrated circuits of skin bioelectronics. (a) A photograph of a soft integrated skin patch attached on the human sternum. (b) Diagram of the components in the portable device. (c) Simultaneous measurements of seismocardiography (SCG), ECG, and PPG signals. (d) A photograph of a subject wearing a skin patch and a commercial device. (e) Hypnogram comparison of the determined sleep stages between the soft patch and commercial device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 14  Skin bioelectronics for EEG recording. (a) Large-area epidermal electrodes covering the scalp for multi-channel EEG recording. (b and c) EEG signals collected by the epidermal multi-electrodes. (e) Event-related potentials captured by the epidermal electrode during five days of continuous wear. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Flexible wireless scalp electronics composed of dry hair electrodes, skin-like membrane electrodes, and a miniaturised wireless electronic system. (f) In vivo demonstration of the wireless scalp electronics for SSVEP-based BMI. (c) EEG signals recorded by the scalp electronics, namely, alpha rhythms and SSVEPs with different frequencies, and the control of a wireless electric wheelchair via SSVEP signals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Skin bioelectronics for human activity monitoring. (a) Schematic illustration of the device and measurement setup for the monitoring of full-body motions. (b) Prone posture captured by video and results of reconstructed 3D motion. (c) Follow-up movement measurement when the subjects were 1 wk, 1 mo, and 3 mo old. Reproduced with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2021 National Academy of Sciences. (d) A photograph showing sensor-applied fingers. (e) Cross sectional SEM image demonstrating sensor layouts. (f) Experiment setup of the evaluation of the sensation effect. Results show the nanomesh pressure sensors have minimal interference on natural human feelings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  Skin bioelectronics for blood monitoring. (a) Schematic diagram of the proposed OPO sensor. The right figure shows an enlarged cross section representing the structure of the device and the light reception process in the skin medium. (b) The left figure is the PPG, heart rate, and SpO2 signals obtained from the neck using red and green OLEDs. H.R, heart rate; B.P.M., beats per minute. The right photograph showing the human neck applied with the skin device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 17  Skin bioelectronics for VOCs. (a) Concept for the VOC-based detection and monitoring of diseases with skin bioelectronic devices. The signal or sensing response of the device varies according to the pattern of different VOCs; represented by circles of different size and colour detected from the human skin (upper panel). The numerous sensors forming the wearable identify whether the VOCs present are characteristic of a disease. The wearable device could be self-healing to maintain functionality when scratched or cut (lower panel). (b) Boxplot of the canonical score of the linear Discriminant Factor Analysis (DFA) model of sensing signals collected from the GNP-based wearable device attached to the skin of patients with active TB and health controls. Each point represents one sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 366. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c and d) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of sensing response from a self-healable NP-based flexible sensor array to 11 kinds of VOCs (20 ppm) emitted from skin in healthy states. Significant difference in the sensing patterns was given by each sensor part, indicating the possibility of differentiating all these VOCs using this sensor array (c) before cutting and (d) after 1 day self-healing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Skin bioelectronics for wound monitoring. (a) A photograph showing conformal contact of the perforated skin bioelectronic device on the human skin. (b) Long-term skin regeneration was monitored over a period of 2 weeks. (c) The graph shows the level of hydration of the inflamed skin as a function of the number of days of device lamination. A hydration sensor in the skin device was compared to a conventional hydration analyser (Corneometer CM 825). Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 19  Skin bioelectronics for cardiac mapping. (a) Device structure of epidermal mechano-acoustic sensing. (b) A photograph of the epidermal skin patch on the chest. (c) Measured ECG and heart sound signals. (d) Comparison of heart sound signals measured by the epidermal device and the commercial electronic stethoscope. Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Device structure of an epidermal patch for simultaneous monitoring of haemodynamic and metabolic biomarkers. (f) A photograph of the epidermal device attached onto the human neck. (g) Blood pressure measured before and after exercise. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
