Role of solid oxide  fuel cells in a balanced energy strategy  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02445K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02445K
(Analysis)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5498-5509Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRole of solid oxide fuel cells in a balanced energy strategy

        
          
            Eric D. 
            Wachsman
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Craig A. 
            Marlowe
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kang Taek 
            Lee
          
        
      
University of Maryland Energy Research Center, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA. E-mail: ewach@umd.edu
Received 
      23rd August 2011
    , Accepted 19th October 2011First published on 7th November 2011AbstractThe 2012 Department of Energy (DOE) budget request significantly reduces fuel cell RD&D funding and would cease to support the Solid State Energy Conversion Alliance (SECA), DOE's solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) program. This would be a grave mistake considering the US's historic dominance in fuel cell RD&D, exciting recent technological advancements in fuel cells, and clear positive market signals around the globe. In this paper we discuss DOE's energy RD&D policy, how SOFCs address every key DOE strategy, and why recent advances should make SOFCs an integral part of our energy RD&D policy. Moreover, we compare the prospects of low temperature SOFCs with the more common proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) in the absence of a hydrogen infrastructure.

Broader impact

Fuel
            cells are the most efficient technology to convert chemical energy to electricity and thus could have a major impact on reducing fuel consumption and CO2 emissions. Hydrogen is an energy carrier, not an energy resource. Unfortunately, fuel cells have been linked perceptually and programatically to a hydrogen economy. Moreover, the tremendous infrastructural cost of creating the hydrogen economy has relegated fuel cells to a “future technology”. This perception has resulted in a drastic reduction in funding by the US Department of Energy in favor of vehicle electrification. In fact, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are fuel flexible, capable of operating on both conventional fuels (e.g., natural gas and gasoline) and future alternative fuels (e.g., H2 and biofuels). The primary technical challenge for SOFCs has been high operating temperature and its impact on cost, reliability, and (for transportation applications) start-up time. Significant reductions in operating temperature have been achieved over the last decade without sacrificing power density, thus, reducing cost, improving reliability, and putting SOFCs on the path toward near term commercial viability in a number of stationary power applications. Moreover, recent increases in power density and further temperature reductions have made transportation applications feasible. Thus it seems clear that SOFCs are an important part of a balanced energy RD&D portfolio, with or without a hydrogen infrastructure.

1. Introduction
Whether constrained by the world's limited hydrocarbon resources, or the need for emission reductions, the efficient production of electricity is a fundamental requirement for the modern world. SOFCs have the highest potential efficiency for the conversion of fuel to electricity. Their ability to operate on any hydrocarbon fuel, both conventional and biomass, or hydrogen, suggests they can play a critical role in both our current and future energy solutions.
The US has been leading efforts at lowering costs and increasing the performance of SOFCs through the DOE Office of Fossil Energy's SECA program. The program has shown significant progress with several SECA industry teams approaching commercialization of their resulting technology. Around the world, numerous countries have recognized the potential of SOFCs and have commenced meaningful commercialization efforts in combined heat and power (CHP) applications.
Recent progress in lowering operating temperature and power density improvements have made SOFCs a unique energy technology platform that offers stunning potential for electrical generation in not only centralized, but distributed and even mobile applications. Lowering operating temperatures reduces manufacturing costs, vastly simplifies the integration of balance of plant (BOP) components and enables thermal cycling. Improved thermal cycling capabilities of low-temperature SOFCs (LT-SOFCs) would allow them to also play an important role in load following applications such as non-base-load electricity generation and transportation.
1.1 US energy RD&D policy
On March 14, 2011, DOE produced its first “Quadrennial Technology Review Framing Document” (Technology Review) as a means to facilitate stakeholder engagement in the nation's energy technology RD&D policy decisions. The Technology Review lays out six key strategies to guide efforts at achieving the Administration's high-level goals of reducing oil dependency and pollution, and creating jobs through continued investment in clean energy.1 As shown in Fig. 1, DOE's overall plan can be viewed as a matrix of Stationary and Transportation market sectors each having a strategy that focuses on increasing energy supply, improving efficiency and beginning the strategic build-out of a new energy infrastructure. While the plan's composition appears sound, the exclusion of fuel cells from playing a meaningful role in executing these strategies does not.
 Fig. 1  Six key DOE energy strategies.1 
As indicated in Table 1, fuel cells are singularly suited to fulfilling all of DOE's key strategies. While the other energy technologies can provide part of the solution, non-fuel cell energy technologies have characteristics that limit their applicability in one or more key strategies. For example, the primary role that wind energy can play in transportation is displacing fossil fuels in the generation of electricity (Stationary strategy) that subsequently can be used (with batteries) in an electric vehicle (EV) or plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV). While high-temperature nuclear and solar thermal can generate hydrogen for alternative fuels (Transportation strategy) or electric power for EV's, their scale limit them to large centralized generation. Similarly, batteries can be used to compensate for renewable energy's transients, but cannot produce electricity. Moreover, the losses associated with the reversible electrochemical storage of energy do not increase efficiency, although their use in hybrid electric vehicles (HEV's) and PHEV's can increase overall vehicle system efficiency. As will be discussed, fuel cells in general, and SOFCs in particular, can be used in the execution of every DOE strategy. With an additional requirement that the technology utilize existing fueling infrastructure, SOFCs stand out as a key cross cutting technology solution.
Table 1 DOE key strategy and energy technology applicability




DOE Key Strategies
Solar PV
Concentrated Solar
Wind
Geothermal
Batteries
Nuclear

Fuel

Cells






Stationary



 
Deploy Clean Electricity
X
X
X
X
 
X
X


 
Modernize the Grid
 
 
 
 
X
 
X


 
Increase Building and Industrial Efficiency
X
 
 
X
 
 
X



Transporation



 
Deploy Alternative Fuels
 
X
 
 
 
X
X


 
Progressively Electrify the Fleet
 
 
 
 
X
 
X


 
Increase Vehicle Efficiency
 
 
 
 
X
 
X




1.2 US fuel cell RD&D policy
Despite the applicability of fuel cells to each strategy and a historic presence in our energy technology RD&D portfolio, fuel cells appear to play no role and are not mentioned in DOE's Technology Review. The FY 2012 budget request cuts the fuel cell programs in research and development (R&D), data analysis, market transformation and manufacturing R&D, by $106 million, 65% of their 2010 budget. Almost one half of this cut, $49 million, is related to the SECA program, and in fact, zeros the program out.
The two primary DOE fuel cell RD&D programs are the Office of Fossil Energy's SECA program and Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy's (EERE) Hydrogen program. SECA exists to accelerate commercialization of fossil-fueled SOFCs, with current emphasis on large-scale stationary coal power plants. Previously, EERE's Hydrogen program mostly excluded SOFCs and focused on the use of hydrogen fueled proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) for transportation, small stationary and portable devices.2 With the 2012 budget request, the DOE has apparently rebranded the EERE Hydrogen Program as the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Program in an effort to create a more fuel cell technology neutral environment, although continuing to link fuel cells with hydrogen.
Despite the over $1 billion investment into EERE's Hydrogen Program, it is now universally recognized that we are still a decade or more from possessing a significant hydrogen refueling and distribution infrastructure. Serious technical and economic issues remain, and thus DOE's explanation for the 2012 Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program's budget reduction states:
“Hydrogen and fuel cell technologies are still part of the portfolio but will have an impact in the longer term”3
The President's call for the rapid electrification of the US transportation fleet, a DOE reliance on PEMFC's for transportation solutions and the recognition that our hydrogen infrastructure is a long-term and costly endeavor, seem to have left DOE with little choice but to shift its focus to hybrid and battery technology and away from PEMFCs. What remains unexplained is why SOFCs are included in this shift.
2. Solid oxide fuel cells and the solid state energy conversion alliance

Fuel
        cells directly convert a fuel's chemical energy to electrical energy (an electrochemical reaction) with the major focus to date being the use of hydrogen as a fuel. As such, fuel cell technology has become synonymous with hydrogen technology in the public perception and the DOE EERE Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Program. While the more common PEMFCs require hydrogen fueling, since they are based on proton conducting electrolytes, SOFCs are fuel flexible since the electrolyte transports an oxygen-ion that can oxidize essentially any fuel, from H2 to hydrocarbons to even carbon.
As shown in Fig. 2a, a SOFC consists of three major components: two porous electrodes (cathode and anode) separated by a solid electrolyte. At the cathode, O2 (from air) is reduced and the resulting oxygen ions diffuse through the solid electrolyte lattice. These ions react with fuel gases at the anode yielding heat, H2O and (in the case of hydrocarbon fuels) CO2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram SOFC with different magnification from a stack cell to anode and cathode microstructures. (b) Commercially developed portable (250 W) and transportation (5 kW) SOFCs, and larger scale stationary (250 kW and MW) SOFCs planned for commercial demonstration in 2013. 
Multiple cells are combined in series via interconnects, which provide both electrical contacts and gas channels between individual cells, creating a “stack”. This modular structure allows a wide range of power output, from portable power (∼100 W) and transportation (∼10 kW) to distributed generation (∼100 kW) and centralized power (>1 MW), all operating on currently available fuels, as indicated in Fig. 2b.
The most widely used SOFC electrolyte is yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) due to its relatively high oxygen-ion conductivity, and chemical and mechanical stability at high temperatures. Conventional SOFCs operate at high temperature allowing internal reforming of hydrocarbon fuels and without expensive precious metal catalysts (e.g., Pt). In addition to fuel flexibility, SOFCs are 45–65% efficient in the conversion of fuel to electricity4 unheard of by any other technology. Moreover, since SOFCs generate high-quality waste heat, in combined heat and power (CHP) applications total system efficiency can exceed 85%.5
2.1 SECA's role in SOFC technology development and cost reduction
Established in 1999 as a public-private partnership, the SECA program is charged with enabling the commercialization of environmentally friendly, cost effective and fuel flexible SOFC modules. The program has three major components: Industry Teams, Core Technology, and federal government oversight (and has been lauded by the Office of Management and Budget as leading the way in Government-industry partnerships). The Industry Team members currently include: FuelCell Energy, Versa Power Systems, United Technology Corporation, Delphi and Rolls Royce. Each team is responsible for their individual fuel cell design, manufacturing, and commercialization strategies. Core Technology (comprised primarily of universities and national labs) has focused on developing technological solutions to issues common to the Industry Teams. The result has been steady progress in increasing cell/stack power densities and reliability while simultaneously driving down operating temperature and costs.
Prior to SECA typical SOFCs had power densities of ≤ 0.2 W cm−2 and operating temperatures of ∼1000 °C. These operating temperatures required expensive ceramic (e.g., lanthanum chromate) interconnects which for planar geometries dominated the stack cost. Among the numerous SECA technological advances were the development of anode supported electrolyte cells (the resulting thinner electrolyte has significantly lower ohmic resistance) and advanced mixed ionic-electronic conducting cathode materials and microstructures. These have dramatically increased power density and brought temperatures down to the point where inexpensive ferritic steels can potentially be used for interconnects.
As an example, Delphi's 4th generation auxiliary power unit (APU),6 currently being field trialed, has an anode supported design with ferritic steel interconnects and achieves a power density of ∼0.5 W cm−2 at 700–800 °C.7 In contrast, Bloom Energy (which was not part of SECA program) is still using electrolyte supported cells for their distributed generation “Bloom Boxes” and have a reported power density of ∼0.2 W cm−2 at 900 °C,8,9 comparable to the pre-SECA SOFC performance. While Bloom uses a metal interconnect, their higher operating temperature requires a much more expensive high-Cr alloy composition and will also have higher BOP costs than SECA industry teams. It is also noteworthy, that the entire DOE SECA budget from 1999 through 2011 is ∼$500M essentially the same as reported for Bloom Energy alone.
As shown in Fig. 3, SECA's synergistic collaboration has driven projected SOFC stack costs from over $1,500/kW in 2000 to around $175/kW in 2010. These cost models, consistent with Delphi's results, use a projected power density of ∼0.5 W at operating temperatures of ∼700–800 °C.10,11 While SECA's cost reduction efforts have been significant, the rate of change in cost is projected to level off because of shift in focus to scaling up manufacturing of existing cell technology and addressing coal power plant integration requirements, rather than further power density improvements and related cost reductions.
 Fig. 3  
Fuel
            cell cost timeline showing reduction in SOFC stack cost after achieving annual production rate of 50,000 5 kW units/yr, and transition to coal development under SECA program;12 linear extrapolation of SECA cost reduction efforts without transitioning to coal; and EERE projections for PEMFC stack costs after achieving 500,000 units/yr.13 
2.2 Global recognition of the competitiveness of SOFC solutions
While the SECA program is currently focused on large-scale centralized coal power plants, the industry teams envision building market and manufacturing scale through a number of smaller-scale initial-product launches (Fig. 2b). These smaller scale applications, such as distributed generation (DG) and CHP residential applications, are the focus of international efforts. Japan's Toyota Motor Corporation and Aisin Seiki Company, LTD are participants in the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization's (NEDO) phase II pilot that is deploying 60 SOFC residential CHP systems as part of their plan to accelerate development during the next five years.14 Continued government incentives and support of domestic Japanese manufacturers, such as Panasonic, Toshiba and Eneos, have already led to the sale of thousands of residential CHP fuel cell systems.15
The Callux program was created by the German Ministry for Transport, Construction and Urban Development (BMVBS) to validate fuel cell heating systems for domestic residential use and has a budget of almost 100 million Euros. Technology project partners include Baxi Innotech (PEMFC), Hexis (SOFC) and Vaillant (SOFC). By January 2011 the program had already installed and operated 111 fuel cell CHP systems and will ramp up to over 800 by 2012, although BOP issues have caused some delay in installations.16,17
Similar to the US's SECA program, a European coalition, Cathode Subsystem Development and Optimization for SOFC-Systems (CATION) was formed by Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH-JU) to accelerate the market introduction of 250 kWe SOFC systems. Collaborators include: Wärtsilä, AVL, Topsoe Fuel Cell, Bosal Emission Control Systems, and CE.Si.S.P.18 Another coalition project, SOFC 600, is focused on lowering SOFC operating temperature to 600 °C in order to improve system life and lower manufacturing costs. The two major commercialization tracks are CHP and transportation APUs.
Ceres Power, a spin-off of SOFC 600 partner Imperial College, has developed a wall mounted SOFC that is capable of ∼600 °C operation and has started commercial field trials of these residential systems. British Gas has placed notational orders for a minimum of 37,500 systems.19 Fueling this effort are government incentives; in mid-2010 a feed-in-tariff was initiated for low-carbon residential power generation.15
3. Reducing SOFC cost through advances in power density
The two issues that have limited acceptance of fuel cells are reliance on a hydrogen infrastructure and cost. As previously mentioned SOFC fuel flexibility negates the first concern so here we address the second one, cost. Historically, PEMFCs have been considered to cost less than SOFCs as indicated by comparing the EERE/PEMFC and SECA/SOFC cost projections in Fig. 3. Both are DOE projections based on achieving volume manufacturing. However, the EERE projections assume 10X the manufacturing volume of SECA. Moreover, deployment of PEMFC systems requires not only the additional cost of an H2 infrastructure, but the cost of H2storage, whereas, SOFCs would run off conventional fuels with conventional storage.
Another difference between PEMFC and SOFC cost projections are the leveling off of costs beyond 2010. In the case of PEMFC, major cost reductions to date have been due to the reduction in precious metal (e.g., Pt) catalyst loading. This has resulted in a dramatic decrease in precious metal loading but further potential reductions are limited.
In the case of SOFCs primary cost reductions have been due to increases in power density. The recent TIAX's SOFCs manufacturing cost model found that material costs dominated stack costs11 and made power density the variable with the most impact. In SECA's Pathway Study an even more direct use20 of power density's impact on manufacturing costs was presented.21 The Fig. 3 SECA cost plateau is due to a freezing in of cell technology and shift in focus to coal utilization issues rather than any fundamental limit on achievable power density.
A simple linear extrapolation of SECA cost reductions (dashed line of Fig. 3) indicates a path toward lower SOFC stack costs ($44/kW) than PEMFC stack costs ($51/kW). Since SOFC stack costs are inversely proportional to power density10,11,21 the indicated reduction of stack cost from $175/kW to $44/kW could be acheived with a ∼4X increase in power density. Note, however, total system cost would also include BOP, which doesn't scale directly with power density.
The SECA cost projections are based on a power density of ∼0.5 W cm−2. Thus to achieve $44/kW would require stack power densities of ∼2 W cm−2. In fact ∼2 W cm−2 has already been achieved in the lab at the cell level with conventional SOFC materials for 800 °C operation22,23 and more recently with advanced materials down to 650 °C.24 While there are a number of scaling issues between laboratory cells and commercial stacks, one could argue that SOFCs have already demonstrated the potential to challenge PEMFCs costs and establish SOFCs in markets heretofore seen as more suitable for PEMFCs.
Moreover, the same cell advances that increase power density can also be used to lower operating temperature with the potential to further accelerate cost reduction. Lower operating temperature significantly expands the available interconnect, seal and BOP materials set. This can have a dramatic effect on cost since interconnects, and not the cell, are the bulk of material in planar SOFC stacks. In addition, lower operating temperature allows lower cost standardized components, reduces BOP failure rates,17,25 and allows the use of less expensive materials and manufacturing methods for seals, manifolds, and heat exchangers.5 The balancing of these two factors, higher power density and lower operating temperature, holds the potential to lower the cost of LT-SOFCs further below those for PEMFCs.
4. Expanding applications with lower-temperature solid oxide fuel cells
A major focus of the SECA program has been to lower operating temperature to an intermediate range of 700–800 °C for stationary applications, as a tradeoff between cost and performance while still allowing for internal reforming of hydrocarbon fuels (lower limit to avoid coking is ∼600 °C). While this temperature range is good for steady-state base-load operation, it severely limits applications that require transient operation (start-up from ambient temperature), and was in large part why PEMFCs were selected over SOFCs for transportation applications.
For SOFCs, polarization (or impedance) increases with decreasing temperature for a given cell material set thus decreasing power density and increasing the cell area necessary to achieve a desired system power. For example, an SOFC with a conventional YSZ electrolyte would exhibit a 100X increase in ohmic polarization by reducing operating temperature from 900 °C to 500 °C.26 Because resistance is directly linked to geometry, anode supported thin YSZ electrolytes have successfully reduced ohmic polarization at intermediate temperatures. However, further reduction of operating temperature to <650 °C would require the use of electrolyte thicknesses below 1 μm, which introduces significant manufacturing cost and mechanical stability issues.
Therefore, alternative higher conductivity electrolytes are necessary to further lower temperature. Moreover, use of alternative electrolytes also requires development of compatible electrode materials, and if the electrolyte impedance is no longer limiting cell performance then it is electrode polarization that limits cell performance.
The Ceres Power SOFC CHP system (mentioned above) operates at ∼600 °C through the use of a ceria based electrolyte and compatible electrodes. Similarly numerous other groups are developing lower temperature SOFCs based on alternative electrolytes and electrodes.27 Among these we have demonstrated the highest power density of ∼2 W cm−2 at 650 °C using a novel bi-layer ceria/bismuth oxide electrolyte.24,26
For transportation applications specific power (acceleration) and specific energy (range) are key performance metrics. For electrification of the fleet these performance metrics for energy storage devices (batteries) are typically compared in a “Ragone Plot” against EV, HEV, and PHEV goals, and an IC engine benchmark (Fig. 4).28 Using cell and interconnect thicknesses of 0.5 mm and 1.5 mm, the stack volumetric and gravimetric (specific power) power densities of our recently reported 2 W cm−2cell are ∼10 kW/litre and ∼3 kW kg−1, respectively.26 Therefore, if system parasitic losses are ignored our stack power density exceeds that of internal combustion (IC) engines. Clearly this is an oversimplification, but at least it indicates the potential to exceed any other storage technology on a specific power basis. Since both SOFCs and IC engines can be fueled by hydrocarbons, they share a comparable specific energy density. This is much greater than any of the batteries (or EV goals), and is also much greater than PEMFCs (indicated by “Fuel Cells” in Fig. 4) due to the lower specific energy density of H2. Moreover, while the specific energy densities of liquid fueled SOFCs and ICs are comparable, the factor of ∼3 higher efficiency of SOFCs in fact provides the opportunity of ∼3X further range (the more important metric for the vertical axis) than an IC engine on the same quantity of fuel.
 Fig. 4  
Ragone Plot: Specific energy vs. specific power28 adapted to show performance of recently reported SOFC.26 
Traditionally, the relatively long warm-up times and degradation caused by thermal cycling have been considered major weaknesses of SOFCs and represented significant impediments for their use in transportation applications. Several papers have been published illustrating methods for overcoming these temperature issues by utilizing continuous operating SOFCs as a range extender in a battery/fuel cell hybrid arrangement.29,30 Lower temperatures further open the possibility of matching SOFCs thermal cycling capabilities to the needs of the typical transportation mode's requirements.
As indicated above we have achieved sufficient specific power and energy density for transportation applications. In addition, we have developed electrolytes that have high enough conductivity to allow ∼300 °C operation31,32 if electrodes with sufficiently low polarization are developed. Further discussion of the technical advances necessary to achieve low-temperature operation is available in ref. 26. This would allow the integration of SOFCs into transportation as an effective range extender operating within our existing fueling infrastructure.
5. 
        SOFC applicability to DOE's 6 key strategies
Given the status of SOFC RD&D described above we now focus on the applicability of SOFCs to address each of the 6 key strategies identified in the DOE Quadrennial Technology Review (QTR). The unique attributes of SOFCs, high efficiency, high quality exhaust heat, and fueling flexibility, are shown to be central to DOE's mission. The improved characteristics of LT-SOFCs strengthen the argument in almost every strategy by both expanding the possibilities and lowering costs.
5.1 Stationary energy - deploy clean electricity
The underlying purpose of the three stationary strategies is to enable access to clean electricity while reducing emissions associated with traditional sources. Worldwide, electricity represents the fastest growing segment of energy usage.33 Over the next 24 years, the International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that global electricity usage will triple from a 1990 base. Two major trends will help to drive this increase. First, in 2008, 22% of the world's population, around 1.5 billion people, did not have access to electricity. The benefits associated with electricity will place increasing political demands on governments to provide electrification. Second, the electrification of the transportation fleet, whether caused by policy or shortages of conventional liquid fuel, will add significant demands to electrical production capability.
Today, 50% of the US's electricity is produced from coal and 20% from natural gas.1 Our large reserves, and current lack of economically competitive alternatives, suggest that a sizeable portion of our future electricity will continue to be derived from these two sources. Globally, the forecast for electricity generation provided by the IEA is modeled under three scenarios: 1) Current Policies, which assumes business as usual, 2) New Policies, which incorporates announced broad policy commitments and plans that effectively limit increases in global primary energy demand to 36% between 2008 and 2035, or 1.2% per year on average,35 and 3) 450 Scenario, which includes policies designed to lower CO2 to 450 ppm. Fig. 5 shows that in 2035, under the New Policy scenario, coal and natural gas are projected to fuel nearly one-half of global electricity generation. Even in the 450 Scenario, coal and natural gas are responsible for one-fourth of global generation. Recently, the IEA suggested that natural gas may comprise 50% of global energy use by 2035.36
 Fig. 5  - IEA Forecast Global Electricity Generation by source.34 
If electricity production remains dependent upon coal and natural gas, the sustainable use of these fuels and environmental emission reduction goals both require that we utilize these resources with the highest possible efficiency. While natural gas turbine technology has made significant progress and has efficiencies around 50%, coal technology still lags. Utilizing synthetic gas (syngas) derived from coal, SOFCs have potential efficiencies rivaling those of natural gas turbines. While many set a goal to eliminate our use of coal and natural gas, prudence suggests we ensure that their use is as efficient as possible until that goal is achieved.
DOE's QTR strategies address our continuing reliance on coal and natural gas only through Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) and do not include stationary fuel cells as a potential source of electrical generation.1 Instead, DOE focuses on nuclear, wind, concentrating solar and solar photovoltaic as the primary displacement sources of electricity. With the exception of nuclear, these technologies all suffer from low capacity factors and intermittency of operation. The large-scale integration of intermittent generation into the grid will require significant advances in energy storage and demand control technologies, technologies whose commercialization may not be as mature as that for fuel cells.

          SECA has been DOE's signature large-scale stationary fuel cell program until this budget request and has focused on using coal-derived syngas for centralized electricity generation. The June 2010 DOE Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technical Advisory Committee (FCTAC) progress report reflected that SECA's lab-scale 25 kWe SOFCs had completed 5,000 h of testing on simulated coal syngas, and factory cost estimates developed for a baseline 560 MW Integrated Gasification Fuel Cell Cycle (IGFC) power plant were ∼$400/kW (in 2002 dollars) for the SOFC power island and a $119/kW37SOFC stack cost.
DOE's 2011 IGFC Pathway Study “Analysis of Integrated Gasification Fuel Cell Plant Configurations” quantified the projected performance and cost benefits associated with the technology and made the following conclusions:
• Fuel to electricity efficiency (HHV) ranged between 40% and 51%;
• Raw water consumption was less than 50% of conventional fossil fuel power plants, ranging from 2.05 gpm/MW to 3.07 gpm/MW;
• CO2 emissions ranged from 1.3 kg/MWh to 2.5 kg/MWh;
• First year levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) ranged from $71.2/MWh to $96.3/MWh, and
• IGFC was potentially cost comparable to natural gas combined cycle without carbon capture and sequestration.21
As shown in Table 2, a new pulverized coal power plant with CCS has significantly lower efficiency and approximately double the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) as an IGFC power plant.21,38 The IGFC's CO2 emissions are almost three orders of magnitude below those of a pulverized coal plant without CCS, which range from 750 kg/MWh to over 1,000 kg/MWh.39 For all practical purposes, IGFC CO2 emissions are comparable to those of a pulverized coal plant with CCS. Thus, an IGFC's performance equals or exceeds every performance metric of a CCS coal plant.
Table 2 - Performance of IGFC against pulverized coal




Metric

                    IGFC
                  
Pulverized Coal w/CCS




Efficiency (HHV)
40–51%
28.40%


Raw water consumption (gpm/MW)
2.05–3.07
10.7



                    CO2 emissions (kg/MWhour)
1.3–2.5
∼0



                    LCOE ($/MWhour)
$71.2–$96.3
$150




Similarly, Adams and Barton described a process to replace natural gas turbines with SOFCs that resulted in 74% efficiency (HHV), zero atmospheric emissions, low water use, and an LCOE below existing natural gas combined cycle without carbon capture.40
Despite the clear advantages of SOFCs for large scale fossil fuel generated electricity, the proposed FY 2012 budget will delay the demonstration and testing of SOFC modules from 2013 to 2015 and suspend all new core technology efforts during FY 2012, adversely impacting the industry and R&D teams that have been assembled under the SECA program. Finally, this postponement will impact each of DOE's Stationary Energy strategies as SECA planned to enter the distributed generation (DG) and CHP markets following the 2013 demonstration.
5.2 Stationary energy - modernize the grid
Differences between the physical characteristics of new and traditional electric generation technologies impose significant issues on the grid's ability to function. A primary concern is the variability of electrical output from renewable resources such as wind and solar. The large-scale integration of these resources will require the ability to reversibly store energy and/or rapidly alter loads. Dispatchable DG will play an important role in the solution.
Challenges associated with modernizing the grid can be greatly reduced by leveling the variation between peak and trough loads, or smoothing the loads. The US's electrical grid was developed to facilitate access to electricity from centralized generation plants. Its design requires significant over capacity in order to handle loads that may occur for less than an hour in an entire year. The grid's daily and seasonal load patterns are fairly consistent and are primarily related to residential and commercial activity patterns as these sectors represent the majority of electricity usage. The peak of the peak electricity usage occurs during the summer when demand for interior space cooling is the highest. Daily residential patterns reflect demand concentrations during the morning and evening hours. Not surprisingly, peak hot water usage closely follows peak electricity usage.41
DOE readily acknowledges that DG systems will play a significant role in improving the grid's flexibility and performance.1 SOFCs are ideally suited for DG because they can operate with the existing natural gas infrastructure and, unlike gas turbines, SOFCs' high efficiency is less dependent on installation size and can be scaled down for distributed applications.42
Experimental work at the National Energy Technology Laboratory's (NETL's) Hybrid Performance project has shown that SOFC/gas turbine hybrid systems have strong load following capabilities while maintaining high system efficiency. The project has reported up to 69% peak to trough system operating range,43 quick recovery from a full load rejection and the ability to provide spinning reserves without parasitic drain on fuel supplies.44 Thus SOFC/turbine hybrids can play a major role in assisting the deployment of renewable generation into the grid. Moreover, LT-SOFC's would increase load following flexibility due to faster starts-ups and decreased thermal stresses.
In addition to DG, reversible SOFCs (RSOFCs) can be used for grid storage. RSOFCs can produce H2 by electrolysis from intermittent (e.g., wind and solar) and/or from base-load generation when electricity is not in demand, and when electricity is again needed the H2 is used to generate it. A major benefit of RSOFCs is that “combining the electrolysis and fuel cell into a single unit will cut capital costs in half”.45 DOE project, FC042 – “Advanced Materials for RSOFC Dual Operation with Low Degradation” is working towards integrating production of H2 with intermittent solar and wind electrical production to stabilize electricity production.46
5.3 Stationary energy - increase building and industrial efficiency
There are two distinct approaches to energy efficiency. The first is the conservation of energy by not using it in the first place. This is the major approach advocated by DOE in their focus on building design, energy management and building envelope and windows. Another approach is to reduce losses associated with the use of energy, such as the conversion of energy to electricity. In 2009, 68% of the energy used to create electricity was lost as waste heat.47 The use of SOFCs for electrical generation, particularly CHP, would result in a significant reduction of waste heat due to their higher efficiency. Just improving our electrical generation efficiency from 32% to 50% would have reduced our total nation's energy consumption around 15% in 2009 (almost 14 quads).
NREL's 2010 “Independent Review of Fuel Cell CHP technology Status and Potential” concluded that only SOFC based CHP systems were likely to meet the DOE 90% combined efficiency target.5 Similarly, the National Fuel Cell Research Center modeled an 87.5% efficiency for SOFCs while providing flexible peaking power to the grid44 and in 2009 Japan's New Energy Foundation program verified over 70% combined efficiency from SOFCs under actual load conditions.48
Due to adverse environmental impacts of most commercially used refrigerants, it is quite likely they will eventually be banned. More environmentally acceptable refrigerants have lower performance and will require technology development in vapor compression systems (VCS). Both factors strongly favor RD&D towards heat-activated cooling devices.49 NREL's independent review panel for fuel cell CHP called for DOE:
“‥ to formulate a long term (5-year) plan for research and development, scale-up, and field testing. To initially generate large order volume, the fuel cell units could be installed at national laboratories and government buildings.”
While CHP creates both usable heat and electricity, “trigeneration” creates usable heat, electricity, and cooling, from a single fuel source. The coupling of cooling, through absorption, adsorption or desiccant technologies, has the potential to significantly improve the overall efficiency of electricity production, and this is particularly true with LT-SOFCs. Since the fuel source is now providing three services; heating, cooling and electricity, capital costs can be spread over a much larger base.
In 2009, residential and commercial sectors consumed more than 75% of the generated electricity and just over one third of the natural gas used that year.47 The top four usage categories for these sectors were space heating (25%), lighting (19%), space cooling (12%), and water heating (11%).50 Thus, almost 50% of the two sectors' energy use is related to heating and cooling their interior or water. To accomplish these tasks requires a major part of the nation's electricity and one third of our natural gas.

          CHP and trigeneration can be deployed in both centralized and distributed environments. Currently 50% of Denmark's electricity is produced by mostly centralized CHP (8% in the US).44 Illustrated by the growing number of successful pilot applications around the globe, the best near-term opportunity for SOFCs may be in distributed CHP and/or trigeneration.
This single application addresses all three of DOE's Stationary Energy strategies and illustrates SOFCs' cross cutting capabilities. SOFCs produce a kWh of electricity from hydrocarbon fuel more efficiently and therefore have fewer emissions than traditional generation. The utilization of previously discarded waste heat, especially in distributed applications, to both heat and cool interior spaces aids in increasing building efficiency while helping to lower the grid's peak demands. Thus, a significant penetration of distributed SOFC trigeneration would lower summer peak demand, lower daily peak demand, provide a distributed base of manageable electricity generation, reduce our use of fossil fuels, and lower emissions.
The optimum characteristics for trigeneration are a heat source52 above 150 °C, and a consistent and single flow of heat, e.g. exhaust. The three best heat sources for trigeneration are turbines, high temperature PEMFCs, and SOFCs.49,51Fig. 6 shows the heat source technology and its temperature range. The efficiency of the process can be determined by finding the intersection of the needed temperature and the heat source's range. As an example, for a heat-activated device, such as a double effect chiller operating at 150 °C, SOFCs' high quality heat will enable about 45% of the fuel's energy to be utilized by the chiller, in addition to the already generated electricity.
 Fig. 6  Available waste heat energy as fraction of fuel energy at temperature.51 
LT-SOFCs are the ideal heat source for trigeneration as their lower temperatures remove the requirement for exotic and costly components and yet their temperature remains high enough to drive double or even triple effect chillers.51 Presently there are no commercially available micro-turbines (MT) under 25 kW nor are there commercially available HT-PEMFCs. Since LT-SOFCs are the ideal heat source for distributed trigeneration, a focus on LT-SOFCs RD&D seems warranted.
The key question: can LT-SOFCs and trigeneration become economically competitive? Numerous studies reflect SOFCs CHP's near cost competitiveness with conventional sources. In particular, a 2010 American Society of Mechanical Engineering (ASME) published paper, using an estimated cost of $2,268/kW, concluded that a SOFC powered CHP has life cycle costs comparable to conventionally generated electricity even without environment or beneficial distributed generation impacts. Since the paper did not address trigeneration, potential benefits associated with cooling would be additive.53
Clearly, the adoption of LT-SOFC CHP and trigeneration should be strongly advocated by DOE as a meaningful efficiency improvement for both residential and commercial users.
5.4 Transportation - deploy alternative fuels
The underlying purpose of DOE's three key transportation strategies is to reduce dependency on oil (energy security) while reducing emissions. One approach to achieve these goals is the deployment of alternative fuels, which presupposes that there will be devices that can utilize those fuels. While a goal is to find a sustainable “drop-in” fuel to replace gasoline and diesel, to date there has been limited production with the exception of ethanol. Much of our transportation fleet cannot operate with high blends of alcohol fuels. Moreover, IC engines are designed to be fuel specific (e.g., a diesel engine cannot operate effectively on gasoline and vice versa). In contrast SOFCs are fuel flexible, having the capability of utilizing all existing fuels (e.g., natural gas, gasoline, diesel) as well as all envisioned alternative fuels (e.g., H2, ethanol, biodiesel) with the appropriate pre-reformer. This fuel flexibility is critical to the deployment of alternative fuels that may, particularly for biofuels, be geographically dispersed (e.g., ethanol in the Midwest) since the consumer expects to be able to drive (and fill) their vehicle anywhere in the contiguous U.S.
In addition, SOFCs can be used in the production of alternative fuels. RSOFCs produce H2 from H2O in the electrolysis mode (as mentioned above for grid storage) and have already shown the ability to achieve the 2017 DOE fuel cell targeted goal of 75% efficiency for H2 production from electricity and water.46 While this efficiency is still low, and degradation issues remain, RSOFCs have significant potential in the production of H2 needed for alternative fuels. Similarly, SunFire, the developer of a process to generate renewable fuels from CO2 and H2O, has acquired Staxera, a German SOFC company, to gain access to SOFC technology for use in its process to create liquid fuels. The economic viability for Sunfire's process is dependent upon highly efficient electrolysis for the generation of H2, which both companies believe can be obtained via solid oxide electrolyzer cells (SOECs).54
Polygeneration energy systems take this one step further by converting conventional energy sources into multiple usable energy products, e.g., liquid fuels and electricity. This approach holds the potential to co-generate petroleum substitutes and electricity from abundant coal and natural gas resources, and its flexibility enables fuel/electricity production to follow demand. SOFCs are particularly suited to polygeneration due to their high electricity generation efficiency and their inherent ability to separate CO2. SOFCs are “carbon capture ready” since the anode exhaust stream is essentially pure CO2 and condensable H2O. Thus even using air as the oxidant, SOFCs can easily, and with little energy penalty, capture CO2. Adams and Barton modeled several polygeneration methods using both SOFCs and gas turbines as the electrical generation method and found that with carbon capture, SOFCs had total system efficiencies 10% higher than gas turbines and 2% to 4% higher without capture.55
5.5 Transportation - progressively electrify the fleet
DOE has claimed that partial electrification of our fleet can reduce domestic fuel consumption by 80 billion gallons annually (over 50% of usage) in 2035.1 The current degree of vehicle electrification varies from the Toyota Prius and Ford Escape parallel hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) with ICE and battery propulsion combination, to the Chevrolet Volt and Fisker Karma series plug-in HEVs (PHEVs) with ICE range extender, to the Nissan Leaf and Tesla 100% electric drive (EV) automobiles. However, a major public acceptance issue for EVs is “range anxiety” thus the earlier adoption of hybrids.
With hybrids, range is extended by consumption of a fuel, currently gasoline but potentially biofuels and one day H2. In fact, any fuel cell vehicle would be a hybrid, in most likely a series configuration, with a fuel cell (range extender)/battery combination providing power for the electric motor. Despite, DOE's recent de-emphasis of fuel cells and H2, numerous auto manufacturers plan to begin selling PEMFC powered vehicles as early as 2015.56 This change in DOE emphasis from fuel cells to batteries is due to concerns about the feasibility and timescale of building a national H2 fueling infrastructure. DOE's historic focus on PEMFCs, which cannot survive even trace amounts of CO in their fuel, can be linked to the common misconception that H2 is a prerequisite for all fuel cells. While DOE's decision to reduce RD&D for PEMFCs due to concerns about the hydrogen infrastructure may have some merit, scaling back SOFC RD&D for the same reason does not since they are not dependent upon H2 as a fuel.
SOFCs are already beginning to make an appearance in transportation solutions as evidenced by Delphi's diesel fuelled 5 kW SOFC APU for large trucks. This system is designed to allow electrical loads to be offloaded from the truck's primary diesel ICE, in effect a parallel hybrid configuration. Benefits include a 40%–50% improvement in fuel efficiency, low emissions and low noise. While Delphi is experiencing issues with the BOP, they are continuing their plans for full scale production of diesel fueled SOFCs for heavy-duty truck applications.25 The successful commercialization of APU's will lay the groundwork for future mobile applications.
Despite Delphi's APU progress, SOFCs have not been considered a promising technology as the primary transportation power source for two fundamental reasons. First, current high operating temperatures require a warm-up period that can be measured in hours, clearly not in alignment with the average US vehicle's usage patterns. Second, even with faster warm-up times, the SOFCs' high operating temperature causes significant thermal stress on the components when cycled on and off which can cause performance degradation and even system failure.
However in a series hybrid configuration, where primary power is provided by the batteries, operation of the range extender can be independent of driving cycle since it is only used to charge batteries, thus allowing for longer start-up times and less thermal cycles. In this mode SOFCs can perform as a range extender on existing fueling infrastructure thus addressing “range anxiety” and helping to electrify fleet.
Moreover, the improved thermal characteristics of LT-SOFCs greatly expand the possibility of their use in transportation applications. The significant improvement in power density effectively allows a trade-off between temperature and power, thus enabling the retention of an acceptable power level at lower temperatures, potentially down to 350 °C.26 If these efforts are even partially successful, they promise to reduce thermal stresses and degradation experienced by the system and will obviously reduce the time and energy needed to warm-up the system.
5.6 Transportation - increase vehicle efficiency
HEVs and PHEVs by their very nature provide a platform to increase vehicle efficiency. The question is what are the most efficient “well-to-wheels” methods to charge their batteries?
In the case of PHEVs, if the electricity is produced inefficiently from hydrocarbons (e.g., conventional coal plant) the combination of the coal power and the PHEV drive system holds little real efficiency, or emissions, gains compared to a gasoline fueled ICE hybrid.57 As discussed in Argonne National Laboratory's study on PHEV well-to-wheels efficiency and emissions, coal dependency for electrical generation could result in the PHEVs using more energy and emitting more greenhouse gases than conventional gasoline hybrids. Moreover, it is expected that PHEVs and EVs will utilize off-peak (night-time) electricity generation shifting more electrical generation to base-load coal fired plants. Since IGFC holds the promise of the highest coal to electricity efficiency SOFCs have a significant role to play in increasing vehicle “well-to-wheel” efficiency.
As a range extender in a series hybrid, IC engines are limited by Carnot efficiency to ∼20% (fuel energy to mechanical work)58 and have further efficiency losses in converting mechanical work to electricity via the generator. In contrast SOFC (direct fuel energy to electricity) efficiency is 45–65%,4 thus a 2–3X increase in efficiency compared to IC engines. However, these efficiency gains are offset in part by the energy required to heat the SOFC to operating temperature, thus the further need for LT-SOFCs.
With the highest potential efficiency, LT-SOFCs can be used to increase efficiency for both electric vehicles and vehicles powered by alternative fuels. These efficiency gains can be provided by supplying the vehicle's fuel, electricity or alternative, or by directly powering the vehicle.
Currently, the technical maturity of PHEV and ICE hybrid technology is significantly more advanced than LT-SOFC technology although the market penetration of PHEV into the light-duty US transportation fleet is only expected to reach 25% by 2020.57 Given this relatively long gestation period for the electrification of our transportation fleet, the US has a window of opportunity to develop LT-SOFCs as a source of primary power generation.
With the impact of electricity generation on EV and PHEV efficiency and emissions, the reliance upon base-load electricity for recharging and the time necessary to convert our fleet to electricity, the US is well served by ensuring that the efficiency and emission improvements of SOFCs are a significant portion of our electricity generation.
6. Conclusion
Even the most optimistic forecast does not suggest the elimination of fossil fuels in the foreseeable future. Absent drastic political and economic changes, the US's large coal and natural gas reserves will continue to be used as a primary energy resource. Therefore, the shared goals of resource conservation and emissions reduction, as well as plain common sense, demand that their use be as efficient as possible. Current SOFC technology has the highest efficiency and lowest emissions when using conventional fuels and can readily transition to alternative fuels as their fueling infrastructure is created.
Moreover, no other major energy technology is as versatile as SOFCs, which are able to play a meaningful role in each of DOE's six core strategies. Successful commercialization of APU, CHP, DG, and similar applications through SECA will lay the foundation for future innovation and cost reductions in SOFCs. Around the globe, meaningful pilots and commercialization activities are expanding in the use of SOFC driven CHP. Abandoning, or even delaying, investments into this cross cutting technology just as it is becoming commercially viable are not in our short or long term interests.
The near quadrupling of power density enabled by recent progress in the lab provides significant room for lowering SOFC operating temperature. Such temperatures dramatically expand applications and reduce cost, thus, fundamentally altering the fuel cell paradigm. LT-SOFCs provide the opportunity to obtain all of the anticipated fuel cell benefits without waiting for a H2 infrastructure.
DOE's full embracing of SOFCs, and extending it to include LT-SOFCs, has significant benefits beyond the more efficient and less polluting use of our natural resources. The restoration, or increase, of the fuel cell RD&D budget will protect our long-term billion dollar commitment to fuel cell technology, provide clarity to the public and stakeholders regarding our fuel cell vision, facilitate a promising technology on the cusp of commercialization and maintain the critical mass of talent that has been assembled with SECA and other promising commercial interests. All of these benefits can be seen as fundamental attributes for a successful national energy RD&D program.
Notes and references

Department of Energy Quadrennial Technology Review Framing Document, U.S. Department of Energy,  2011 Search PubMed .

Fuel Cells, U.S. Department of Energy Hydrogen Program, (http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/fuel_cells.html..) Search PubMed.

          S. Satyapal, Overview of Hydrogen & Fuel Cell Budget, U.S. Department of Energy Fuel Cell Technologies Program,  2011 Search PubMed .

          E G&G Technical Services, ed., Fuel Cell Handbook, 7th edn, U.S. Department of Energy Office of Fossil Energy,  2004. Search PubMed .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1–10 kW Stationary Combined Heat and Power Systems Status and Technical Potential,  2010 Search PubMed .
The Delphi APU technology was developed under SECA although the program was later shifted to the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE).

          G. Blake, Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Development for Transportation and Stationary Applications, 2010 Advance Energy Conference,  2010 Search PubMed .
P. Wray, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 2010, 89, 25–25 CAS .

          A. Maschietto and K. Kahler, Bloom Energy Server unveiled, Bloom Box not for the home just yet (http://www.mobilemag.com/2010/02/25/bloom-energy-server-unveiled-bloom-box-not-for-the-home-just-yet/).

          A. D. Little, Conceptual Design of POX/SOFC 5kW net System, Department of Energy National Energy Technology Laboratory,  2001 Search PubMed .

          E. J. Carlson, Y. Yang and C. Fulton, Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Manufacturing Cost Model: Simulating Relationships between Performance, Manufacturing, and Cost of Production, TIAX, LLC,  2004 Search PubMed .

          S. Vora, SECA Program Accomplishments and Future Challenges, 11th Annual SECA Workshop,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Reducing the Cost and Improving the Durability and Performance of Fuel Cells (http://www1.eere.energy.gov/hydrogenandfuelcells/accomplishments.html) Search PubMed.

          Green Car Congress, Toyota, Aisin to Provide Improved Residential SOFCs for 2010 Test Project,  2010 (http://www.greencarcongress.com/2010/09/tmcsofc-20100907.html) Search PubMed .

          The Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technical Advisory Committee, Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Commercialization and Technical Development Activity (2010 HTAC Annual Report),  2011 Search PubMed .

          Callux, Field Test of Residential Fuel Cells - Background & Activities,  2010 Search PubMed .

          S. Ramesohl, The German NIP lighthouse project callux Field Test of Residential Fuel Cells, 4th IPHE Workshop - Stationary FC, Tokyo,  2011 Search PubMed .

          FuelCellToday, European Project to Optimise Technology for Large SOFC Systems,  2011 (http://www.fuelcelltoday.com/online/news/articles/2011-04/EU-CATION-Project-SOFC) Search PubMed .

          CeresPower, Ceres Power commences residential CHP field trials in consumers' homes,  2011 Search PubMed .
From the Pathway Report: “Integrated blocks cost about 140 $/SOFC kW. With the power density being 400 mW/cm2, and assuming an inverter efficiency of 97 percent, the integrated blocks cost per cm2of active surface area is 140/1000 × 400/1000 × 0.97 = 0.054 $/cm2active surface area. This value is used to estimate the pressurized SOFC stack unit cost.”http://www.netl.doe.gov/energy-analyses/pubs/IGFC_FR_20110225.pdf.

          National Energy Technology Laboratory, Analysis of Integrated Gasification Fuel Cell Plant Configurations (DOE/NETL-2011-1482),  2011 Search PubMed .
A. V. Virkar, J. Chen, C. W. Tanner and J. W. Kim, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 131, 189–198 Search PubMed .
S. deSouza, S. J. Visco and L. C. DeJonghe, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 98, 57–61 Search PubMed .
J. S. Ahn, D. Pergolesi, M. A. Camaratta, H. Yoon, B. W. Lee, K. T. Lee, D. W. Jung, E. Traversa and E. D. Wachsman, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1504–1507 Search PubMed .

          D. Hennessy, Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Diesel Auxiliary Power Unit Demonstration, Delphi Corporation,  2011 Search PubMed .
E. Wachsman and K. T. Lee, Science, 2011 DOI:10.1126/science.1204090 .
Z. P. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 Search PubMed .

          V. Srinivasan, Batteries for Vehicular Applications, LBNL,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Zhu and R. J. Kee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 957–964 Search PubMed .
P. Aguiar, D. J. L. Brett and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 186–197 Search PubMed .
D. W. Jung, K. L. Duncan and E. D. Wachsman, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 355–363 Search PubMed .
S. Omar, E. D. Wachsman and J. C. Nino, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1890–1897 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, International Energy Outlook 2010,  2010 Search PubMed .

          F. Clemente, The Scale of Energy Needs from a Socioeconomic Perspective: The Role of Coal, the National Capital Area Chapter of US Association for Energy Economics,  2011 Search PubMed .

World Energy Outlook 2010, International Energy Agency,  2010 Search PubMed .

World Energy Outlook 2011 Special Report - Are we entering a golden age of gas?, International Energy Agency,  2011 Search PubMed .
The increased stack costs are associated with the much longer life (40,000 h versus 5,000 h) required for centralized power generation.

          J. Black, Cost and performance baseline for fossil energy plants, Volume1: Bituminous coal and natural gas to electricity, National Energy Technology Laboratory,  2010 Search PubMed .
G. Ordorica-Garcia, P. Douglas, E. Croiset and L. G. Zheng, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 47, 2250–2259 Search PubMed .
T. A. Adams and P. I. Barton, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1971–1983 Search PubMed .
C. M. Colson and M. H. Nehrir, IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., 2011, 26, 140–148 Search PubMed .
K. Nanaeda, F. Mueller, J. Brouwer and S. Samuelsen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3176–3185 Search PubMed .

          D. Tucker, E. Liese and R. Gemmen, Proc. ICEPAG2009, Newport Beach CA,  Feb. 2009, Paper No. ICEPAG2009–1021 Search PubMed .
D. Tucker, M. Shelton and A. Manivannan, The Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2009, Fall, 45–48 Search PubMed .

          R. J. Remick, Reversible Fuel Cells for Integrating Renewable Energy Systems, Renewable Resources for Fuel Cells Workshop,  2010 Search PubMed .

          E. Tang, M. Richards and R. Petri, Advanced Materials for RSOFC Dual Mode Operation with Low Degradation, 2011 DOE Hydrogen Program Review,  2011 Search PubMed .

          Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Esimated U.S. Energy Use in 2009,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Hosoi, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 10 Search PubMed .

          K. Gluesenkamp, Fuel Cell Waste Heat Resources, Small Autonomous Energy Systems Consortium,  2011 Search PubMed .

          J. Randolph and G. M. Masters, Energy for Sustainability - Technology, Planning, Policy, Island Press,  2008 Search PubMed .

          K. Gluesenkamp, R. Radermacher and Y. Hwang, High Efficiency Trigeneration Systems for Buildings, 2nd European Conference on Polygeneration, Tarragona, Spain,  2011 Search PubMed .
A working temperature near 150 °C allows for double effect chillers. If a working temperature can be obtained over 200 °C, then triple effect chillers can be utilized. A single effect chiller has a coefficient of performance (COP) around 0.6–0.7, a double effect chiller has a COP near 1.1 and a triple effect chiller's COP approaches 1.5. When comparing heat activated device's COP to conventional vapor compression systems (VCS) the VCS's COP must be multiplied by the net efficiency of the delivered electricity. Thus a VCS with a COP of 3 and a delivered efficiency of electricity of 33.33% would have a COP of 1.
R. J. Braun, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 031018–031018-15 Search PubMed .
Green Car Congress, SunFire acquiring staxera to support development of technology to generate synthetic fuels from renewable energy sources, water and CO2, (http://www.greencarcongress.com/2011/05/sunfire-20110523.html%3Futm_source%3Dfeedburner%26utm_medium%3Dfeed%26utm_campaign,  2011.
T. Adams and P. Barton, Fuel Processing Technology, 2011, 92, 11 Search PubMed .

          P. Whoriskey, Automakers promote hydrogen cars; Obama administration remains skeptical, The Washington Post,  2011 Search PubMed .

          A. Elgowainy, A. Burnham, M. Wang, J. Molburg and A. Rousseau, Well-to-Wheels Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Analysis of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, Argonne National Laboratory,  2009 Search PubMed .

          R.v. Basshuysen and F. Schafer, Internal Combustion Engine Handbook- Basics, Components, Systems, and Perspectives, Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc,  2004 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader impact

Fuel
            cells are the most efficient technology to convert chemical energy to electricity and thus could have a major impact on reducing fuel consumption and CO2 emissions. Hydrogen is an energy carrier, not an energy resource. Unfortunately, fuel cells have been linked perceptually and programatically to a hydrogen economy. Moreover, the tremendous infrastructural cost of creating the hydrogen economy has relegated fuel cells to a “future technology”. This perception has resulted in a drastic reduction in funding by the US Department of Energy in favor of vehicle electrification. In fact, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are fuel flexible, capable of operating on both conventional fuels (e.g., natural gas and gasoline) and future alternative fuels (e.g., H2 and biofuels). The primary technical challenge for SOFCs has been high operating temperature and its impact on cost, reliability, and (for transportation applications) start-up time. Significant reductions in operating temperature have been achieved over the last decade without sacrificing power density, thus, reducing cost, improving reliability, and putting SOFCs on the path toward near term commercial viability in a number of stationary power applications. Moreover, recent increases in power density and further temperature reductions have made transportation applications feasible. Thus it seems clear that SOFCs are an important part of a balanced energy RD&D portfolio, with or without a hydrogen infrastructure.


 	Fig. 1  Six key DOE energy strategies.1	 


Stationary

 	Deploy Clean Electricity	X	X	X	X	 	X	X
 	Modernize the Grid	 	 	 	 	X	 	X
 	Increase Building and Industrial Efficiency	X	 	 	X	 	 	X

Transporation

 	Deploy Alternative Fuels	 	X	 	 	 	X	X
 	Progressively Electrify the Fleet	 	 	 	 	X	 	X
 	Increase Vehicle Efficiency	 	 	 	 	X	 	X

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram SOFC with different magnification from a stack cell to anode and cathode microstructures. (b) Commercially developed portable (250 W) and transportation (5 kW) SOFCs, and larger scale stationary (250 kW and MW) SOFCs planned for commercial demonstration in 2013.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Fuel
            cell cost timeline showing reduction in SOFC stack cost after achieving annual production rate of 50,000 5 kW units/yr, and transition to coal development under SECA program;12 linear extrapolation of SECA cost reduction efforts without transitioning to coal; and EERE projections for PEMFC stack costs after achieving 500,000 units/yr.13	 

 	Fig. 4  
Ragone Plot: Specific energy vs. specific power28 adapted to show performance of recently reported SOFC.26	 

 	Fig. 5  - IEA Forecast Global Electricity Generation by source.34	 

Efficiency (HHV)	40–51%	28.40%
Raw water consumption (gpm/MW)	2.05–3.07	10.7

                    CO2 emissions (kg/MWhour)	1.3–2.5	∼0

                    LCOE ($/MWhour)	$71.2–$96.3	$150

 	Fig. 6  Available waste heat energy as fraction of fuel energy at temperature.51	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
