Nanohybrids from NiCoAl-LDH coupled with carbon for pseudocapacitors: understanding the role of nano-structured carbon   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR05477B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05477B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3097-3104Nanohybrids from NiCoAl-LDH coupled with carbon for pseudocapacitors: understanding the role of nano-structured carbon†

        
          
            Chang 
            Yu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Changtai 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Fan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jieshan 
            Qiu
          
        
      *
      Carbon Research Laboratory, Liaoning Key Lab for Energy Materials and Chemical Engineering, State Key Lab of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, P.R. China. E-mail: jqiu@dlut.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-411-84986080;   Tel: +86-411-84986024
Received 
      15th October 2013
    , Accepted 20th November 2013First published on 22nd November 2013AbstractTransition metal layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are one of the great potential electrode materials for pseudocapacitors. However, the aggregation and low conductivity of these metal compounds will constrain electrolyte ion and electron transfer and further affect their electrochemical performances. The nano-structured carbon coupled with the LDH matrix can act as an active component or conducting scaffold to enhance or improve the rate capacity and cycle life. Here, various nano-structured carbon species, including zero-dimensional carbon black (CB), one-dimensional carbon nanotubes (CNTs), two-dimensional reduced graphene oxide (RGO), and CNT/RGO composites were used to couple with the NiCoAl-LDHs to construct LDH–carbon nanohybrid electrodes for pseudocapacitors, and the role of the nanostructured carbon was investigated and discussed in terms of the pore structure of nanohybrids and electrical conductivity. The results show that all of the carbons can be well incorporated into the LDH nanosheets to form homogeneous nanohybrid materials. The pore structure properties and electrical conductivity of nanohybrids have statistically significant effects on the electrochemical performances of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids. Of the electrodes adopted, the nanohybrid electrode consisting of NiCoAl-LDHs, CNTs, and RGO exhibits excellent electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance as high as 1188 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 due to the synergistic effect of NiCoAl-LDHs, RGO, and CNTs, in which the RGO nanosheets are favorable for high specific surface area while the CNT has a fast electron transport path for enhancing the electrical conductivity of nanohybrids. This will shed a new light on the effect of nano-structured carbon within the electrode matrix on the electrochemical activity and open a new way for the carbon-related electrode configuration/design for supercapacitors, and other energy storage and conversion devices.
Introduction
Recently, energy storage/conversion devices have been intensely developed and have received an increasing interest due to the increasingly serious environmental issues and dwindling of fossil resources.1–4 Of these energy storage/conversion devices, the development of electrode materials with high capacity, rate capability and cycling performance is a key issue in the development and application of the devices.5–9 Nano-structured carbon materials as one of the promising electrodes or active materials for energy storage/conversion devices have been widely investigated and have exhibited the excellent performance due to their high specific surface area, high electrical conductivity, low cost, easy availability, nontoxic nature, and stability as well as the controllable structure and component.10–14 Similar results have also been confirmed and embodied in supercapacitors (SCs), as one of the most promising energy storage devices derived with a much higher power density and longer lifespan.15–19 For instance, various nano-structured carbon materials, such as activated carbon (AC), onion-like carbon (OLC), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene, are directly used as electrode materials for enhancing the electrochemical performance of electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs).20–23 In addition, these carbon species as the active components or conducting scaffolds were also coupled with pseudocapactive-type electrode materials that utilize fast and reversible electrochemical redox reactions in principle, to configure the hybridized materials for enhancing the electrochemical performance of the pseudocapacitors, such as RuO2–graphene,24 MnO2–CNT&graphene,25–28 Ni(OH)2–CNT&graphene,29,30 polypyrrole (PPy) or polyaniline (PANI)-CB&CNT&graphene.31–34 Compared with the EDLCs, the pseudocapacitors configured with nano-structured carbon/pseudocapactive-type electrode hybrid materials also exhibit higher specific capacitance and energy density.35,36
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are well-known anionic or hydrotalcite-like clays with the general chemical formula [M1−xII Mx2III]x+[An−]x/n·mH2O (ref. 37), in which MII and MIII are divalent and trivalent cations and An− is the interlayer anion.38–40 Recently, LDH containing transition metal element hybrids by coupling nano-structured carbon have been conceived to be one of the promising candidates for electrode materials of pseudocapacitors and exhibited excellent performance.41–43 Therein, the nano-structured carbon acts as an active component for increasing the electrochemical activity and/or as a conductive scaffold and framework for increasing the electrical conductivity and further dispersing LDHs to prevent them from agglomerating. Wang et al. reported a hybrid NiAl-LDH and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) material via a facile hydrothermal method, in which the incorporation of graphene into NiAl-LDH platelets could prevent the restacking of LDHs and improve the electrical conductivity, the electrolyte/electrode accessibility, and the capacitance of the nanohybrid electrode.43 Zhang and coworkers fabricated CoAl-LDH and RGO nanohybrids by a one-pot refluxing process, where CoAl-LDH lamellar crystallites gradually self-assemble on the graphene oxide (GO) and GO was simultaneously reduced to RGO during the refluxing procedure in the presence of urea.44 The as-prepared CoAl-LDH–RGO nanohybrids show excellent electrochemical properties at a high current density. Ahn et al. also made some efforts to synthesize the NiCo-hydroxide and CNT nanohybrids with more electroactive sites via a chemical bath deposition method,45 and these nanohybrids show enhanced capacitive performance and cycling stability because of the outstanding conductivity of CNTs. It is interesting that the potential window was expanded up to 1 V due to the synergic effect of the NiCo-hydroxide and CNTs. In our previous report, we have also successfully fabricated ternary-component NiCoAl-LDH and CNT nanohybrids by a facile yet simple urea precipitation method,42 and the electrochemical performances of NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets were enhanced by the incorporation of the high conductivity CNT into the sheet-shaped NiCoAl-LDH network.
With this information in mind, nano-structured carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene are efficient conductive scaffolds for enhancing the electrochemical performance of the LDH-derived pseudo-capacitive electrode materials. Nevertheless, how to further optimize the distribution of various nano-structured carbon species within the electrode matrix and have an insight into the role of nano-structured carbon within the electrode matrix need to be addressed. The relationship between carbon species present in the LDH matrix and the electrochemical performance is not clear. Here, various nano-structured carbon species including zero-dimensional carbon black (CB), one-dimensional CNTs, two-dimensional RGO, and CNT/RGO composites were directly coupled with ternary-component NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets to configure NiCoAl-LDH–carbon nanohybrids, aiming to investigate and compare the electrochemical effects of nano-structured carbon species on the nanohybrid electrodes. As expected, the nanohybrid electrode (LDH–CNT/RGO) consisting of CNT/RGO and NiCoAl-LDH displays the best electrochemical performance among the nanohybrids studied, which are mainly attributed to the fact that the incorporation of GO into the LDH matrix could prevent NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets from restacking during the reaction process and improve the specific surface area of the nanohybrids, meanwhile, the CNT as a conducting scaffold enhance the electrical conductivity of nanohybrids, which is favorable for fast transfer of electrons to the current collector.
Experimental
Surface modification of CNTs and preparation of GO
All reagents used in this work were of analytical grade and used without further purification. The surface of CNTs used in this work was modified by acid oxidation reported elsewhere,42 and for the detailed processes, please refer to the ESI.† GO was prepared from natural flake graphite by the modified Hummers' method.46 For a typical run, 5.0 g of graphite powder and 2.5 g of NaNO3 were mixed with 130 mL H2SO4 in an ice bath under vigorous stirring for 2 h. Then, 15.0 g of KMnO4 was slowly added into the system and the temperature of the mixture was kept below 10 °C in an ice bath under vigorous stirring for 2 h. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was heated to 35 °C and maintained at 35 °C for 1 h until it became pasty brownish, then 230 mL of deionized water was slowly added. The mixture was stirred at 98 °C for 30 min, then 40 mL of deionized water and 5–10 mL of 30 wt% H2O2 were added to the mixture to reduce the residual KMnO4, after which the color of the mixture changed to brilliant yellow, followed by repeated washings with deionized water to remove the acids and metal ions. The resulting solid was centrifuged and dried at 60 °C for 24 h, yielding the GO samples.
Preparation of NiCoAl-LDH–carbon nanohybrids
A typical procedure for preparing NiCoAl-LDH–carbon nanohybrids is as follows: 30 mg of carbon species such as CB, CNTs, GO or CNT/GO composites (mass ratio 2:1) dispersed in 250 mL of deionized water were ultrasonicated for 30 min. Then, NiCl2·6H2O, CoCl2·6H2O, AlCl3·6H2O (the metal ion molar ratio 1:1:1), and urea were dissolved in the above carbon dispersion solution to obtain a mixed solution with the total metal ion and urea concentrations of 15 and 35 mM, respectively. Subsequently, the ca. 250 mL of mixed solution was transferred into a three-necked round-bottom flask and refluxed at 100 °C under continuous magnetic stirring for 48 h. After filtering and washing with deionized water and ethanol several times, the resulting precipitant was dried at 80 °C in air overnight. The as-made samples are denoted as LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO. The amount of carbon species in LDH–carbon nanohybrids was calculated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (air, heating rate of 10 °C min−1).
Characterization
The crystalline structure of the samples was analyzed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the samples were measured at −196 °C using an ASAP 2020 (Micromeritics). Before adsorption, the samples were outgassed at 100 °C for 6 h under a vacuum of 10−6 Torr. Morphologies of the as-obtained products were examined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) and a transmission electron microscope. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) were used to study the surface properties and structures of the samples. The current–voltage (I–V) curves of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids were measured using the two probe method in a Keithley 2400.
Electrochemical measurement
The electrochemical properties of the samples were investigated in a three electrode system, in which the samples were used as the working electrode, a Hg/HgO electrode filled with 1 M KOH was used as the reference electrode, platinum foil was used as the counter electrode, and 6 M KOH solution was used as the electrolyte. The working electrode was fabricated by mixing the prepared samples with 15 wt% acetylene black and a 5 wt% polytetrafluorene-ethylene (PTFE) binder with the addition of a little amount of ethanol. Then the mixture was dried at 100 °C overnight in a vacuum. The prepared mixture was pressed onto nickel foam to make electrodes. Before the test, the working electrode was soaked in 6 M KOH for 12 h. In addition, the cyclic voltammograms (CV), the galvanostatic charge/discharge, and the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were recorded on a CHI 660D electrochemistry workstation.
Results and discussion
Microstructure characterizations
The typical XRD patterns of the nanohybrids made of NiCoAl-LDH and nanostructured carbon, including the LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, and LDH–RGO as well as LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids, are shown in Fig. 1a. It can be clearly seen that the characteristic reflections of (003), (006), (012), and (110) corresponding to two-dimensional hydrotalcite-like materials are present in each sample.47 And the basal spacing value (d003) of the LDH phase in LDH–carbon nanohybrids is approximately 0.765 nm, which is consistent with that of carbonate-intercalated LDH materials.30 It is also noted that for LDH–RGO and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids in the presence of GO, the diffraction peak at ca. 10.0° corresponding to GO (Fig. 1b) completely disappears after the reaction, demonstrating that the GO can be reduced in the presence of urea, which has been confirmed in the literature.48 The peak at ca. 26.3° that is indexed to the (002) plane of graphitic carbon (Fig. 1b) is also not observed. A possible reason for this is that the nano-structured carbon materials can be better incorporated into the NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets, which is further confirmed by the SEM and TEM images shown in Fig. 3 and 4.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids (a) and the nano-structured carbon species (b), and FT-IR spectra of LDH–carbon nanohybrids (c). 

Fig. 1c shows the FT-IR spectra of the as-prepared nanohybrids, in which it can be clearly seen that the broad peak centers at 3445 cm−1 due to the stretching vibration of hydroxyl groups of the inorganic layers and the interlayer water, accompanied by the peak at 1633 cm−1, is present in all the samples. The strong peaks at 1358 cm−1 are ascribed to the presence of intercalated CO32− anions, which is in agreement with the results of XRD shown in Fig. 1a. Other peaks below 800 cm−1 are assigned to metal–oxygen (M–O) stretching and bending modes in the hydrotalcite-like lattice.23,42
The compositions and the surface electronic states of the as-obtained single LDH nanosheets, LDH–RGO and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids were further investigated by XPS, and the detailed results are shown in Fig. 2 and S1 (ESI†). It can be clearly seen that the NiCoAl-LDHs are primarily composed of Ni, Co, Al, C, and O elements. The relative atom contents of Al, Ni, and Co in NiCoAl-LDHs were determined to be 3.93, 4.78, and 4.52% (Table S1, ESI†), respectively. And the molar ratio of Al, Ni, and Co in the LDH phase is calculated to be 1:1.2:1.1, being close to that in the reactant mixture (1:1:1). For the C1s XPS spectra of LDH–RGO (Fig. 2b) and LDH–CNT/RGO (Fig. 2c), the spectra can be fitted and divided into four peaks corresponding to different oxygen-containing functional groups: the aromatic linked carbon (CC, 284.6 eV); the C in oxygen single-bonded carbon bonds (C–O, 285.1 eV); the carbonyl carbon (CO, 286.3 eV), and the carboxylate carbon (O–CO, 288.1 eV).49 The percentage of the peak area at each binding energy listed in Table 1 indicates that the oxygen-containing functional groups are present in both samples because of the existing GO. Nevertheless, the amounts of those functional groups on the LDH–CNT/RGO surface are obviously lower in comparison with those of the LDH–RGO nanohybrids. Few amounts of functional groups may be favorable for increasing the electrical conductivity of LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids, which will further be discussed in the Electrochemical properties section.
 Fig. 2  XPS spectra of LDH–carbon nanohybrids (a), C1s spectra of LDH–RGO (b) and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (c). 
Table 1 Percentage (%) of the peak area at each binding energy in the XPS spectra of C1s




Binding energy
CC (284.4 eV)
C–O (285.1 eV)
CO (286.3 eV)
O–CO (288.1 eV)




LDH–RGO
51.6%
19.8%
16.9%
11.7%


LDH–CNT/RGO
70.4%
16.4%
5.4%
7.8%




In order to further examine the morphology and microstructure of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids derived from various nano-structured carbon species, the nanohybrids were characterized by FE-SEM, of which the detailed results are shown in Fig. 3 and S2 (ESI†). It can be clearly seen that all of the nano-structured carbon species (CB, CNT, RGO, and CNT/RGO) can be better incorporated into the NiCoAl-LDH consisting of crimped nanosheets (as indicated by arrows). Compared with LDH–CB and LDH–CNT nanohybrids, the obtained LDH–RGO and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids show looser structures to some degree due to the addition of GO into the reaction system, as seen in Fig. 3c and d. The loose structure would be favorable for increasing the surface area of the LDH nanohybrids, which will be confirmed by the N2 adsorption results shown in Table S2 (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of the LDH–CB (a), LDH–CNT (b), LDH–RGO (c), and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (d). 
The typical TEM images of LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids shown in Fig. 4 and S3 (ESI†) further exhibit that different nano-structured carbon species can be better incorporated into the crimped NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets, which is in agreement with the results of FE-SEM shown in Fig. 3a–d. For the LDH–RGO and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids in the presence of the GO (Fig. 4c and d), the LDH, RGO, or CNT/RGO interconnect with each other, forming a homogeneous nanostructure. In order to further distinguish RGO and NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets, LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids were examined by high resolution TEM (HR-TEM). Fig. 5a–c reveal that the RGO nanosheets are well distributed in the NiCoAl-LDH matrix (Fig. 5a and c), and an obviously distinguishing interface between the NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets and CNTs can also be observed (Fig. 5b and c), which further demonstrates that the CNT and RGO are well incorporated into the NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets to form the homogeneous nanohybrid materials.
 Fig. 4  TEM images of LDH–CB (a), LDH–CNT (b), LDH–RGO (c), and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (d). 
 Fig. 5  HR-TEM images of LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids. 
The nitrogen adsorption/desorption technique was used to measure the pore structure of LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids including specific surface area, pore volume, and pore size, and the corresponding results are presented in Fig. 6. The hysteresis loops can be seen for all of the samples (Fig. 6a), implying the mesoporous structure is present. The pore size distributions of the samples were calculated using the DFT method and are shown in Fig. 6b. It is clearly noted that hierarchical pores (micro-, meso- and macropores) are formed in LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids, and the amount of the pore slightly varies with the samples, especially in the mesopore and macropore regions. Such a hierarchical nanoarchitecture and increased pores are also favorable for the enhanced electrochemical performance and are highly desirable for pseudocapacitor electrode materials. It is also noted that of the nanohybrids available now, the specific surface area and pore volume follow the order of LDH–RGO > LDH–CNT/RGO > LDH–CB > LDH–CNT (Table S2, ESI†), that is to say, the GO is favorable for increasing the surface area and pore volume of the samples, which has also been confirmed in some studies.30,50 Such an enhanced value in pores will provide a possibility for highly efficient penetration of electrolytes into the surface of active materials, thus increasing the utilization of active materials.43,44
 Fig. 6  Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (a) and the corresponding pore size distribution (b) of the LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids. 
Electrochemical properties
The capacitive performances of LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge techniques in 6 M KOH solution. For further insights into the effect of carbon species on the electrochemical performance, the carbon content in all of the nanohybrids is kept at ca. 11% to some degree. For detailed information, please refer to Fig. S4 and Table S3 (ESI†). In Fig. 7a, it can be observed that all of the CV curves have similar shapes and exhibit a set of intense redox peaks, indicating that the specific capacitance is primarily attributed to the fast and reversible electrochemical redox reactions. The integral area of a CV curve is in proportion to the specific capacitance of the sample, according to the equation:C = ∫Idt/mΔVwhere I is the oxidation or reduction current, dt is the time differential, m indicates the mass of the active electrode material, and ΔV indicates the voltage range of one sweep segment. The integral area of the CV curve for LDH–CNT/RGO hybrids is the largest, demonstrating the highest specific capacitance. Fig. 7b and c show charge/discharge curves of LDH–carbon nanohybrids at current densities of 1 and 10 A g−1, in which the high charge/discharge coulombic efficiency is also observed. It is also noted that the charge/discharge time varies with the LDH–carbon nanohybrids at the same current density, and the LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids demonstrate a long charge/discharge time, implying the high specific capacitance. Similar results can be found at a high current density of 10 A g−1. According to the charge/discharge curves, the specific capacitance of electrodes are calculated and summarized in Fig. 7d. It can be clearly seen that of the nanohybrids measured, the LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids yield the highest specific capacitance of 1188 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and 850 F g−1 even at 10 A g−1 with a capacitance retention rate of 72%, exhibiting an excellent rate capability (Table S4, ESI†). Although the specific capacitance of LDH–CB nanohybrids is comparable to those of LDH–CNTs at a low current density, the specific capacitance quickly decreases to 501 F g−1 when the current density is increased to 10 A g−1. The capacitive retention rate of LDH–CB nanohybrids is only about 47%, which is obviously lower than that of LDH–CNT nanohybrids (54%). The reason for this would be that compared with the LDH–CB, the one-dimensional CNT in the LDH matrix can act as a conducting scaffold for fast charge transfer among the NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets, which has been confirmed by Dai's work.51 In the case of the LDH–RGO sample, the specific capacitance is the least at a constant current density, but exhibits ca. 47% of the capacitive retention rate, which is nearly equal to that of LDH–CB nanohybrids. This may be attributed to the fact that the low conductivity because of the oxygen-containing functional groups on the RGO surface results in low capacitance, while the improved abundant pore structures lead to good capacitive retention rates.
 Fig. 7  Electrochemical performance of the samples measured in 6 M KOH solution. (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, (b) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g−1, (c) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 10 A g−1, (d) the specific capacitance at different current densities, (e) Nyquist plots of impedance data, and (f) the cycling performances of the samples. 
The electrochemical performance of the nanohybrids was investigated by using the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 7e shows the impedance spectra of the LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids. The Nyquist plots of all electrodes exhibit a semicircle in the high frequency range, in which a relatively big semicircle observed from an electrode is indicative of high charge transfer resistance (Rct) that derives from the poor electrical conductivity of the electrode. It is interesting that an obvious difference can be observed on the Rct caused by the electrochemical redox reactions on the LDH–carbon nanohybrid surface. The values of Rct for LDH–RGO, LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrid electrodes are ca. 3.84, 1.36, 0.76, and 0.23 Ω, respectively. The reason for this is as follows. For LDH–RGO nanohybrids, the oxygen-containing functional groups that remain on the RGO surface (as shown in Table 1) may decrease the conductivity and result in a high charge transfer resistance, which has been proposed in the literature.52 For LDH–CNT nanohybrids, it has been confirmed that one-dimensional CNTs can be used as a conducting scaffold for fast charge transfer among the NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets.42,51,53 In the case of LDH–CB nanohybrids configured with zero-dimensional CB particles, it is hard to form an efficient and long charge transfer route, resulting in a relatively large charge-transfer resistance. This was also further confirmed by the measured electrical conductivity of LDH–carbon nanohybrids using the two probe method (Fig. S5, ESI†). In general, the low charge transfer resistance of the LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrid electrodes will be favorable for providing a convenient or fast pathway for the ion and electron transport, thus exhibiting the excellent electrochemical performance.
Furthermore, the electrochemical stability of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids at 6 A g−1 for 1000 cycles is shown in Fig. 7f. It is found that the capacitive retention rate is ca. 91% for LDH–CB, 90% for LDH–CNT, and 88% for LDH–RGO, respectively, while for LDH–CNT/RGO, no obvious change after 1000 cycles is observed.
From the aforementioned results, it is found that the LDH–carbon nanohybrids exhibit excellent specific capacitance, rate capability, and long cycle life over the entire cycle numbers. It is also noted that the capacitive performance varies with the carbon species to a great degree. Here, the capacitive retention rate of the nanohybrids was related to the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) and the pore volume (Vpore) of the nanohybrid electrode materials. The detailed results are presented in Fig. 8. It is found that the LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrid electrodes with high Vpore and low Rct exhibit the highest capacitive retention rate in comparison with the other nanohybrids, which is superior to the reported results in some studies.42,43,54 The reason for this can be attributed to the following two aspects: (1) the GO with a considerable amount of oxygen-containing functional groups can act as substrates or active sites to anchor the metal ions, thus being favorable for distributing NiCoAl-LDH nanosheets and preventing them from aggregating or restacking with each other; (2) the one-dimensional CNT with high conductivity as a conducting building or scaffold can further increase the electrical conductivity of the nanohybrids, thus promoting the fast charge transfer.
 Fig. 8  Correlation among the capacitive retention rate, charge-transfer resistance (Rct), and pore volume (Vpore). 
Conclusion
In summary, we have successfully fabricated a series of ternary-component NiCoAl-LDH nanosheet hybrids coupled with different nano-structured carbon species, and systematically investigated the effects of nano-structured carbon species on the pseudocapacitor performance. It has been found that the type of nano-structured carbon plays an important role in improving the electrochemical performance of the pseudocapacitive-type electrode materials, and of the nanostructured carbon species adopted, the LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids configured with CNT/RGO composites exhibit the excellent capacitive performance with better rate capability, and cycling stability, which may be attributed to the synergistic effect of NiCoAl-LDHs, RGO, and CNTs. It is known that the nano-structured carbon species, as one of the promising electrode materials for various related-energy devices such as lithium ion batteries, lithium air batteries, lithium sulfur batteries, solar cells, etc., are of great potential and superiority. Therefore, the present work will provide fundamental insights into the role of nano-structured carbon within the electrode matrix for supercapacitors on the electrochemical activity and direct carbon-related electrode configuration/design for supercapacitors, even other energy storage and conversion devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the NSFC (no. 21336001 and U1203292) and the Education Department of the Liaoning Province of China (T2013001).
References
R. F. Service, Science, 2006, 313, 902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72 RSC .
C. Yuan, L. Yang, L. Hou, L. Shen, X. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7883 CAS .
B. Wang, T. Zhu, H. B. Wu, R. Xu, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2145 RSC .
G. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1470 CAS .
T. M. Arruda, M. Heon, V. Presser, P. C. Hillesheim, S. Dai, Y. Gogotsi, S. V. Kalinin and N. Balke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 6, 225 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, K. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H. R. Jung, H. C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414 CAS .
J. Sun, H. Liu, X. Chen, D. G. Evans, W. Yang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N. H. Zhao, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Zhou, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
J. Zhu, M. Chen, H. Qu, Z. Luo, S. Wu, H. A. Colorado, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 194 CAS .
X. Fan, C. Yu, Z. Ling, J. Yang and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2104 CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 1094 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, P. S. Lee and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 6, 41 Search PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Shen, B. Gao, L. Hao, X. Lu, F. Zhang, B. Ding and C. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, S. J. Chang, H. W. Kang, C. P. Park, H. J. Kim, W. H. Hong, S. Lee and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4983 RSC .
W. Tang, Y. Y. Hou, X. J. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. S. Zhu, H. Sun, Y. B. Yue, Y. P. Wu, K. Zhu and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, S. Lu, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1067 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande and R. Holze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2446 CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fan, H. Wang, N. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2774 RSC .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185 CAS .
B. Mu, P. Liu and A. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Si, S. Ding, X. W. Lou and D. H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1271 RSC .
C. Yuan, J. Li, L. Hou, X. Zhang, L. Shen and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4592 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, T. Zhai, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938 CrossRef CAS .
V. Presser, L. Zhang, J. J. Niu, J. McDonough, C. Perez, H. Fong and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 423 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Williams and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3065 RSC .
X. Kong, J. Zhao, W. Shi, Y. Zhao, M. Shao, M. Wei, L. Wang and X. Duan, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 80, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Liang, X. Liu and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, G.-N. Zhu, C. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, Y. Y. Xia and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2242 CAS .
J. Yang, C. Yu, X. Fan, Z. Ling, J. Qiu and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1963 CAS .
Z. Gao, J. Wang, Z. Li, W. Yang, B. Wang, M. Hou, Y. He, Q. Liu, T. Mann, P. Yang, M. Zhang and L. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3509 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Shen, B. Gao, L. Hao, X. Lu, F. Zhang, B. Ding and C. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, K. Jang, S. w. Lee, S. Yu and H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21630 RSC .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Valente, M. Sánchez-Cantú, E. Lima and F. o. Figueras, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5809 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, L. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6391 CAS .
D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, G. Bozoklu, S. Park, M. Stoller, R. D. Piner, S. Stankovich, I. Jung, D. A. Field, C. A. Ventrice and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2009, 47, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, M. Gong, Y. Li, W. Chang, T. Mefford, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 917 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, W. Sun, G. Ning, T. Wei, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2632 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Li, H. Zhu, X. Zhu and J. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, L. Wang, D. Wang, C. Li and J. Jin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information available: FE-SEM images, TEM images, TGA curves, nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms, and the corresponding pore size distribution as well as the current–voltage (I–V) curves of LDH–carbon nanohybrids. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05477bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the LDH–carbon nanohybrids (a) and the nano-structured carbon species (b), and FT-IR spectra of LDH–carbon nanohybrids (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS spectra of LDH–carbon nanohybrids (a), C1s spectra of LDH–RGO (b) and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (c).	 

LDH–RGO	51.6%	19.8%	16.9%	11.7%
LDH–CNT/RGO	70.4%	16.4%	5.4%	7.8%

 	Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of the LDH–CB (a), LDH–CNT (b), LDH–RGO (c), and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (d).	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of LDH–CB (a), LDH–CNT (b), LDH–RGO (c), and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  HR-TEM images of LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids.	 

 	Fig. 6  Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (a) and the corresponding pore size distribution (b) of the LDH–CB, LDH–CNT, LDH–RGO, and LDH–CNT/RGO nanohybrids.	 
C = ∫Idt/mΔV

 	Fig. 7  Electrochemical performance of the samples measured in 6 M KOH solution. (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, (b) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g−1, (c) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 10 A g−1, (d) the specific capacitance at different current densities, (e) Nyquist plots of impedance data, and (f) the cycling performances of the samples.	 

 	Fig. 8  Correlation among the capacitive retention rate, charge-transfer resistance (Rct), and pore volume (Vpore).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information available: FE-SEM images, TEM images, TGA curves, nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms, and the corresponding pore size distribution as well as the current–voltage (I–V) curves of LDH–carbon nanohybrids. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05477b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
