Enhancing the stability of polymer solar cells by improving the conductivity of the nanostructured MoO 3 hole-transport layer   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP50994J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP50994J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6831-6841Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEnhancing the stability of polymer solar cells by improving the conductivity of the nanostructured MoO3 hole-transport layer†

        
          
            Naveen Kumar 
            Elumalai
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Amitaksha 
            Saha
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chellappan 
            Vijila
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Rajan 
            Jose
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Zhang 
            Jie
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Seeram 
            Ramakrishna
          
        
      a
aNational University of Singapore, Singapore 117576
bInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 3 Research Link, Singapore 117602. E-mail: c-vijila@imre.a-star.edu.sg
cNanyang Technological University, Singapore 639815
dUniversiti Malaysia Pahang, Kuantan, 26300 Pahang, Malaysia. E-mail: rjose@ump.edu.my
Received 
      7th March 2013
    , Accepted 7th March 2013First published on 12th March 2013AbstractThis article demonstrates improvements in the operational stability of organic solar cells (OSCs) by taking advantage of the relationship between oxygen stoichiometry and conductivity in nanostructured metal oxide semiconductors (n-MOS). OSCs in the inverted device configuration of ITO/Ca/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag were employed in the present study. A high degree of oxygen defects were introduced in the hole-conducting MoO3 layer by annealing the devices under vacuum (≥10−5 mbar) for nominal temperature (120 °C) and time (10 min). The above devices had much higher operational stability, when tested following the ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol, than control devices annealed conventionally, i.e., in nitrogen atmosphere. Employing current–voltage measurement as functions of temperature and photon flux, we show that the devices annealed under vacuum have a lesser density of traps than those annealed in nitrogen. The lesser trap density is shown to be beneficial in reducing the rate of electron recombination thereby increasing the operational stability of the corresponding device. A number of experiments were undertaken to show that the difference in the operation stability of the device results from the difference in conductivity of the nanostructured MoO3 hole transporting layer. The charge extraction by linear increasing voltage spectroscopy shows that charges are relaxed at the trap states in the device annealed in nitrogen whereas they are efficiently transported in the other device. We identify that building up of an interfacial potential barrier as a result of the charge relaxation at the trap states and the corresponding chemical changes in the devices annealed conventionally is the source of degradation of the device performance over time. To our knowledge, this is the first report that successfully overcomes hole-conductivity induced degradation in organic solar cells.
1. Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) as light weight-cum-flexible renewable energy devices have attracted much attention due to their many advantages including low cost and ease of manufacturing.1,2 In OSCs, upon photo excitation, excitons (bound electron–hole pairs) are formed in a photoactive layer composed of a percolating network of p-(acceptor) and n-type (donor) polymers. The excitons thus formed diffuse to the donor/acceptor interface where it dissociates into mobile carriers on account of the difference in Fermi energies between the p- and n-type materials. The separated carriers then move via their individual percolating pathways facilitated by the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) morphology, which are subsequently collected selectively with the appropriate choice of buffer layers, termed hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transport layer (ETL), for blocking electrons and holes from entering the opposite electrodes3,4 (Fig. 1). Although considerable photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) is achieved in OSCs by the proper choice of photoactive layer enabling high absorption cross-section5 as well as improving the charge transport and collection parameters,6 the stability of the device under long term operation is not elaborately addressed and still an elusive issue.7
 Fig. 1  Device architecture of (A) conventional normal device and (B) inverted device. 
Degradation of the device performance over time arises from poor atmospheric stability of the photoactive layer, charge accumulation at the photoactive layer–electrode interface, diffusion of metal ions from electrodes to the active layer, and morphological changes in the photoactive layer.7–13 Although several reports have addressed the atmospheric stability by physically encapsulating the device in transparent plastics to hinder permeation of reactive oxygen and moisture,14 this method does not prevent intrinsic reactions that occur inside the device. Therefore, improving the device stability before encapsulation is the primary issue to be solved.
A large number of stable conjugated polymers under atmospheric conditions are proposed to develop highly efficient and stable OSCs.5,15–17 Owing to their excellent hole and electron conducting properties as well as desirable absorption cross section besides atmospheric stability, the poly3-hexylthiophene (P3HT): l-3-methoxycarbonylpropyl-l-phenyl-6,6 methanofullerene (PCBM) conjugate has emerged as one of the popular choices to build high efficiency OSCs. Polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT):polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) and Aluminium (Al) are the commonly used HTL and ETL in the P3HT:PCBM OSCs, respectively (Fig. 1A). However, PEDOT:PSS is highly hygroscopic and acidic, which impose severe drawbacks on the device stability.18,19 Towards this end, metal oxide semiconductors (MOS), typically the p-type ones, such as nickel oxide (NiO),20 molybdenum trioxide (MoO3),21–24 vanadium pentoxide (V2O5),22 and tungsten oxide (WO3)25 with appropriate work function alignment are suggested to be the HTL in the P3HT:PCBM OSCs. On the other hand, low work function metals, such as Al, are readily oxidised when used as an ETL under the device operating conditions. Materials such as lithium fluoride (LiF),26 calcium (Ca),27,28 zinc oxide (ZnO),29,30 titanium oxide (TiOx)31,32 and caesium carbonate (Cs2CO3)33 are shown to have efficient ETL properties for the P3HT:PCBM based OSCs.
Alternatively, an inverted configuration, in which the direction of charge collection is reversed (Fig. 1B), is proposed to improve the device stability by replacing the low work function metals such as Al. In the inverted geometry, an indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate serves as the cathode (Fig. 1B), which otherwise was the anode (Fig. 1A) in the conventional geometry, and a high work function metal as the anode. The ITO is energetically favourable for collection of both holes and electrons; therefore, a thin buffer layer (∼1 nm) is developed onto ITO for selective electron collection in the inverted geometry. Frequently used electron buffer layers in the inverted geometry include TiOx,34 ZnO,35–37 Cs2CO3,38,39 LiF,26 and Ca.40 On the other hand, among the various transition metal oxides used as hole transporting layers, MoO3 has gained significant attention for improving device performance and stability in OSCs.36,41–43 Improvements in the PCE of an inverted BHJ solar cell employing thin layers of Ca (∼1–2 nm) as ETL and MoO3 as HTL have been reported.44 The MoO3 HTL reduces the charge recombination by suppressing the exciton quenching as well as the resistance at the photoactive layer/anode interface.45 Besides, the MoO3 HTL also serves as an optical spacer for improving the light absorption thereby enhancing the photocurrent.21,23,46 However, MoO3 is highly sensitive to oxygen and moisture; trace amounts of oxygen in a nitrogen-filled glove box, where the device is fabricated, are shown to have detrimental effects on its electronic levels thereby imposing severe drawbacks in the device stability.47
Generally, the hole transport in a nanostructured MoO3 layer occurs via the shallow defect states present in its band gap formed as a result of oxygen vacancies.48–50 These oxygen vacancies serve as n-type dopants and lead to Fermi-level pinning at the photoactive layer–MoO3 interface.51 The mechanism of this charge transfer process is shown in the Scheme 1, which shows that the holes are extracted by injection of electrons into the HOMO of the donor (P3HT). Subsequently, the holes transferred to MoO3 hop to the Ag electrode through the shallow defect states generated by the oxygen vacancies. On the other hand, the defect states are depleted for a more ordered MoO3 lattice with lesser density of oxygen vacancies thereby decreasing its hole-conductivity. Although a few reports have demonstrated improved stability using an MoO3 interlayer as HTL and ZnO as ETL in an inverted device geometry,52–54 the mechanism behind the processes improving the stability is not well explored.
 Scheme 1  Schematic showing the mechanism of hole transport across the Molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) interlayer. 
This study demonstrates that a larger density of oxygen defect states or shallow trap states can be generated in the nanostructured MoO3 layer by annealing a completed device under vacuum (≥10−5 mbar). The device annealed under vacuum showed higher stability, when tested under ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol,55 compared to a control device annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere. We show, based on current voltage measurements as a function of temperature and photon flux, that the device annealed under vacuum is characterized by high hole-conductivity and that the transport mainly occurs through the defect states in the conduction band. The processes occurring at the photoactive–MoO3 interfaces, carrier transport, trap states distribution, and the charge recombination mechanism have also been studied by photocurrent measurements as functions of temperature and photon flux and are reported herewith.
2. Experimental procedures
Solar cells with the device architecture ITO/Ca/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag were fabricated by vacuum depositing a thin Ca layer (1 nm) onto a pre-cleaned, pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates. Subsequently, a mixture of P3HT and PCBM dissolved in the ratio of 1:0.8 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution was spin coated on the ITO/Ca layer. The thickness of the blend layer was ∼200 nm. The film was then annealed at 120 °C for 10 minutes. The MoO3 layer of thickness ∼5 nm was then thermally evaporated on to the above film in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of ∼10−7 mbar. Finally, a silver (∼100 nm) electrode was deposited onto the MoO3 layer at a pressure of ∼10−5 mbar. The area of the devices was ∼0.1 cm2. One set of the devices was annealed at 120 °C for 10 minutes using a hotplate placed in a cryostat chamber at the pressure of ∼10−5 mbar (device V) and the other set in a nitrogen (O2 + H2O < 1 ppm) filled glove box (device N). The devices were then cooled to room temperature and underwent photocurrent measurements using a source meter (Keithley 2400, USA) at AM1.5G illumination employing a solar simulator (SAN-EI Electric XES-301S, Japan) under three conditions as follows. In the first condition, the photovoltaic parameters of the devices in a glove box were evaluated from current–voltage (I–V) measurements under AM 1.5G conditions. In the second condition, the stability of the devices was studied by keeping them out of the glove box with no encapsulation under ambient conditions for 30 days (700 h) following the ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol.55 The stability of the device was evaluated using I–V measurements at regular intervals (5 days) at room temperature at AM 1.5G under ambient conditions as recommended by the protocol. In the third condition, opto-electronic properties such as trap depth and distribution of the devices were evaluated using I–V measurements as a function of temperature (T ∼ 143–323 K) and illumination intensity (Φ ∼ 5–100 mW cm−2) by keeping them in a continuous helium flow cryostat maintained at a pressure of ∼10−5 mbar. A set of freshly prepared devices, both V and N types, were encapsulated in PET using a UV cured epoxy resin. White light intensity calibrated to ∼100 mW cm−2 using a fiber illuminator (Nikon, Japan) inside the cryostat was used as the illumination source.
The carrier mobility and its equilibrium concentrations in the devices were measured by charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (CELIV) measurements. CELIV studies were performed on freshly prepared devices which are encapsulated in order to avoid the errors during transient measurements which are highly sensitive to ambient conditions. The CELIV measurement set-up was composed of a pulse generator (SRS-DG535), a function generator (SRS-DG345) and a digital oscilloscope (AgilentInfinium1 GHz). The devices were encapsulated in a plastic encapsulant sealed with an epoxy resin for the CELIV measurements. The CELIV measurements were done in the dark by applying a linearly increasing voltage under reverse bias pulse with a slope of A = Vmax/tpulse. The voltage pulse width (tpulse) was fixed at 20 μs and the amplitude (Vmax) was varied from 0.5 to 3.5 V. Upon application of a reverse biased linearly increasing voltage pulse to the device, the resultant output has a rectangular-shaped transient with a plateau corresponding to the capacitor displacement current (j0) and the current (Δj) due to the equilibrium carriers from the photoactive layer. The mobility of the equilibrium charge carriers was calculated using the relation μ = 2d2/3Atmax2; where d is the film thickness and tmax is the time taken to reach the maximum extraction current and A is the rate of change of applied voltage for the extraction of charges.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 The I–V measurements and evaluation of device stability

Table 1 lists the photovoltaic parameters of the freshly prepared V and N devices measured in the glove box. Both devices showed practically similar PCEs initially when measured in the glove box, i.e., device V ∼ 3.46% and device N ∼ 3.26%. Fig. 2 shows the I–V characteristics of the two types of devices to evaluate the device stability as a function of time following the ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters, viz., PCE, JSC, VOC, and FF. Fig. 2 clearly indicates the effect of aging on the photovoltaic parameters during its long term operation. The PCE of the device V maintained ∼80% of its initial value for 30 days, which mainly resulted from a loss in JSC by 10% and VOC by 5%. No significant change in the FF, which is a measure of charge recombination in solar cells, was observed in this device. The device V showed an increase in stability by 10% compared to a previous study that used an inverted device in the ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag configuration53 for a similar duration. To our knowledge, this report is the first to show such high stability for the inverted device ITO/Ca/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag and is comparable to that achieved by Voroshazi et al.27 for the direct geometry that used MoO3 and Ca as buffer layers. On the other hand, the device N showed considerable decay on all of its photovoltaic parameters over a period of 30 days. The PCE of the device N decreased by 50%, which resulted from a ∼15% lowering in the JSC and VOC as well as a 30% lowering in FF. The nearly constant FF in the device V indicates suppression of the electron recombination rate in it. Therefore, although the PCE of both devices was similar initially, the annealing atmosphere has detrimental effects on the temporal stability.
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of the vacuum and non-vacuum annealed devices




Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Nitrogen annealed (N)
0.572
9.59
59
3.26


Vacuum annealed (V)
0.577
9.44
63.7
3.46




 Fig. 2  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device N (B) obtained at room temperature as a function of time in days. Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of time is shown for both devices. 
To understand the mechanism behind the difference in the stability of the two devices, I–V measurements as functions of Φ and T were carried out. Fig. 3 shows typical I–V curves of the two types of devices measured as a function of Φ at constant T (323 K) and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters. The PCE decreased steadily in a similar fashion for both devices. The JSC and VOC followed a similar trend to that of PCE for both devices. However, the FF of the device N decreased significantly (∼15%) with increase in the Φ whereas that of the device V remained comparatively a constant, i.e., charge recombination in the device N has a strong dependence on the flux of photons falling on it, the reason for which will be shown later in this article as accumulation of charges at the trap states of the nanostructured MoO3 layer, whereas the other device has only a nominal dependence.
 Fig. 3  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device (B) as a function of illumination intensity (Φ) at constant T (323 K). Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of Φ at T = 323 K is shown for both devices. 
Thus from the trends observed in Fig. 3, it follows that when the devices are subjected to ambient conditions of practical applications, i.e., with varied duration of operation and solar light intensity, the device V shows higher stability than the other. Particularly, the FF and hence the recombination rate drastically vary under the above conditions in the device N. In excitonic solar cells, including OSCs, one of the main sources of recombination is the difference in two characteristic times involved in the device, viz., the electron lifetime and the charge transport time. The mobile charges having exceedingly higher transport time for their collection than their lifetime undergo recombination. In semiconducting nanostructures, charge transport occurs via thermally activated hopping through the localized states or trap states at the bottom of its conduction band, the density of these trap states falls off exponentially in the band gap. Photoelectrons falling in the trap states are thermally energized by phonons thereby detrapping them to enable the charge transport.56,57 The depth of this trap distribution is a function of a number of parameters including Fermi energy, electron density of states, and phonon dispersion in the material.58,59 To determine the difference in the depth of the trap distribution in the two types of devices, comprehensive I–V measurements were carried out as a function of the photon flux falling on the devices.
3.2 Quantification of trap distribution

Fig. 4 shows typical I–V curves measured as a function of T at constant Φ (100 mW cm−2) for the devices annealed in the two conditions and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters. At constant Φ, the PCE, the JSC, and the FF increased steadily with temperature. The electrical conductivity (σ) of semiconductors generally increases with temperature, which accounts for the increase in the JSC. As j = neσ,(1)where n is the electron density, an increase in thermally induced carrier concentration (n) could also contribute to the increase in JSC. A larger σ further increases the charge mobility (μ), which eventually lowers the charge transport time. The collection efficiency is higher when the transport time is lower thereby increasing the FF as observed in Fig. 4F.
 Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device (B) as a function of temperature (T) at constant illumination intensity (100 mW cm−2). Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of T at Φ = 100 mW cm−2 is shown for both devices. 
Although eqn (1) generally explains the increase in JSC with temperature, a detailed mechanism involving the distribution of traps and its depth that contribute to the increased JSC is not contained in it. Towards this end, the depth of trap distribution (Δ) in the two types of devices was obtained from the temperature dependence of JSC as a function of illumination intensity. Fig. 5A and B show the variation of JSC as a function of temperature for the devices V and N, respectively. The JSC increased with temperature in both types of devices; however, the slope of the JSC–T curve is relatively smaller in the device V than the other. To explain the origin of the difference in the slopes, note that the charge mobility in semiconductors is thermally modified; i.e., as the temperature increases, the thermal phonons increase the charge mobility by providing the activation energy required for hopping from one localized state to another.56,57 Under steady state, i.e., with similar trapping and detrapping frequencies, the temperature does not alter the photocurrent generation for the same light intensity whereas it assists in increasing the carrier mobility by moving the charges across the band gap.60 However, if the distribution of the trap states is deep such that transport time exceeds the lifetime, the charges recombine thereby lowering the JSC,61 which explains the difference in the slopes of the JSC–T curve in the two types of devices. Thus, the Δ of the device V is expected to be lower than that of the device N. The magnitude of Δ could be evaluated from the dependence of JSC on T and Φ given by (2)Where Jo(Φ) is a pre-exponential factor that includes the density and mobility of photo-generated carriers as well as electric field and kB is the Boltzmann constant.60Fig. 6 (inset) shows the variation of Δ calculated from the ln J vs. 1/T curves as a function of Φ. Typically, the Δ is ∼8 and ∼21 meV at Φ = 100 mW cm−2 and T = 323 K for the devices V and N, respectively, i.e., the device V presents a Φ lower by a factor of nearly three than the other. In other words, traps are shallow in the device V and deep in the device N.
 Fig. 5  Variation of JSC as a function of temperature for the devices V (A) and N (B) respectively. 
 Fig. 6  Trap depth (Δ) in devices V and N calculated from ln J vs. 1/T curves. The inset shows the variation of trap depth (Δ) as a function of Φ. 
A direct influence of the difference in Δ on the device performance could be observed from the changes in their series resistances (RS), which could be calculated from the inverse slope of the I–V curve at VOC, at low temperatures (≤150 K). The regions in the I–V curve above VOC in Fig. 4A and B mark this difference clearly. A plot of RSvs. temperature (see ESI†) shows that the device V presents nearly 5-fold lower RS at ∼120 K than the other device. The origin of this difference will be discussed later in this article.
3.3 The cause of trap depth variation lies at the hole-transporting MoO3 layer
The device presented here has three functional layers, viz. the photoactive layer (P3HT:PCBM), HTL (MoO3), and ETL (Ag). To determine which of these functional layers has the largest contribution to the observed Δ, we have (i) measured the resistivity of the metal electrodes before and after annealing; (ii) studied the dependence of JSC on photon flux to observe whether the recombination in the photoactive layer is monomolecular or bimolecular; and (iii) studied the dependence of VOC on temperature to determine the contact resistance at the photoactive layer–MoO3 interface. The resistivity of the metal films before and after annealing remained the same thereby indicating that they do not have any contribution to the observed Δ. Although the active layers were annealed at 120 °C prior to the deposition of the MoO3 layer, a process which would eliminate structural disorders in them, the JSC–Φ graph of the devices V and N shows that the recombination is predominantly monomolecular in both type of devices even for high photon flux (see ESI† S1). These observations demonstrate that the variation in Δ lies at the hole-transporting MoO3 layer.
To further confirm the role of MoO3 on the Δ and subsequently the operational stability of the OSCs, we have examined the dependence of VOC on temperature for varying Φ. Assuming a Langevin-type recombination, the VOC of the OSCs follows the relation:62,63 (3)where Eg is the effective band gap, i.e., Eg = Eg, LUMO (Acceptor) − Eg, HOMO (Donor), NC is the effective density of states, e is elementary electronic charge, and n and p are the electron and hole densities, respectively. The VOC in BHJ OSCs approaches the Eg when the contacts are perfectly ohmic; i.e., when the contact allows carriers of one type to pass through and blocks the other (see ESI† S2). On the other hand, i.e., if the contacts are not ohmic, the VOC approaches the difference in the work function between the electrodes, which for the active layer combination chosen here is ∼0.6–0.65 V.64 For non-ohmic contacts, charge accumulation occurs at the photoactive layer–HTL interface thereby degrading the cell performance over time. Fig. 7A and B shows the dependence of VOC on temperature as a function of Φ for both devices. The VOC decreases linearly with increasing temperature for the entire Φ for the device V although a small step was observed at ∼200 K. The VOC of the device V obtained by extrapolating the VOC–T graph at T = 0 K, following eqn (3), is ∼0.7–0.75 V, which is much higher than the difference in work functions between the electrodes (0.6–0.6 V). Therefore, the VOC of the device V is determined by Eg thereby clearly establishing that the contact is perfectly ohmic in this device. On the other hand, for the device N, the VOC increases linearly until 173 K after which it drastically drops. The maximum VOC observed was ≤0.65 V for entire Φ; thereby clearly indicating that the HTL employing the MoO3 is no longer ohmic in the device N. This non-ohmicity is attributed to the interfacial barrier built up at the photoactive layer–HTL interface due to the deep trap states in the MoO3 film in the device N. As noted before, this non-ohmicity caused the RS of the device N to be higher at lower temperature.
 Fig. 7  Variation of VOC for both devices (V and N) as a function of temperature (T) for different illumination intensities (Φ). 
The Ca layer employed as the ETL when used in normal architecture could be oxidized to CaO on exposure to air. Primarily, Ca in the inverted geometry is aimed to minimize the work function of ITO. Moreover, in normal/conventional devices, the Ca layer is deposited adjacent to the contacts (Al, Ag) where it is more exposed to molecular oxygen through pin holes in the electrode and diffusion of water molecules in between the Al grains making it highly susceptible to degradation.28 Moreover, in the highly vulnerable conventional geometry used by Vorashazi et al.,19 the MoO3 retained the device stability by 80% with Ca layers (40 nm).27 In the inverted device architecture ITO/Ca/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag such diffusion of oxygen and water has to happen across the MoO3 and P3HT:PCBM layer first before reaching the Ca interlayer. Indirectly, it also proves the efficacy of the MoO3 interlayer in protecting the adjacent layers of our device. We note that the Ca layer would also create a small barrier at the Ca/PCBM interface. However, the electron injection barrier at the Ca/PCBM interface is shown to be ∼0.05–0.1 eV65 at low temperature (∼150 K), which is much lower than the VOC drop observed in the present case; thereby corroborating that the majority of the loss comes from the MoO3/Ag side.
Thus the differences in the VOC and RS between these devices clearly indicates that the observed variation in the Δ between the devices originates from the hole conducting MoO3 layer. As stated in the introduction section, efficient hole conductivity in the MoO3 is determined from the oxygen vacancies, which in this case is produced by annealing the device under vacuum. The shallow traps in the device V lead to efficient hole transport at the photoactive layer–HTL interface whereas the deep trap states in the device V lead to charge accumulation at the interface thereby creating a dipole. The interfacial dipole and the corresponding accumulated charges lead to an increase in the barrier height, and therefore, non-ohmic contact for holes. These inherent anomalies at the interface have direct consequences on the device performance even at room temperature over a period of time. Similar degradation-induced-lowering of hole transport efficiency is observed in non-ohmic MoO3 films for the photoactive layer composed of F8BT and PBTTT upon extended duration of operation.47 To our knowledge, this is the first report that successfully overcomes hole-conductivity induced degradation in OSCs.
3.4 Mechanism of improved stability in device V: CELIV measurements
The difference in the charge transport mechanism in these two devices due to difference in the Δ was studied by the CELIV technique. CELIV has emerged as a powerful technique in organic electronics for its efficacy in directly measuring the μ in materials enabling dispersive transport. In this technique, a linearly increasing voltage ramp or electric field is applied at one of the electrodes and the corresponding current transient is used to determine the μ and equilibrium carrier concentration n.66,67 Furthermore, CELIV also allows study of the relaxation of the charge carriers in the density of states (DOS),68 thereby enabling simultaneous measurement of time-dependent μ and n.

Fig. 8A shows the CELIV transients observed for the device V and N measured at 3 V. The μ and n were calculated from the CELIV transients and are shown in Fig. 8B. The μ of the device V (6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is nearly twice that of the other (3.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). The enhanced mobility in the device V is attributed to its three-fold lower Δ than the other device. On the other hand, a reversal in the magnitude of n was observed between the devices V and N. The n was ∼5 × 1015 and ∼1 × 1016 cm−3 for the devices V and N, respectively. The observed two-fold increase in the n suggests that the carriers in the device N are relaxed in its deeper trap states, whereas they are transported efficiently in the other device on account of its lower trap depth. The observed carrier build-up of space charges is expected to chemically degrade the active layer–MoO3 interface and deteriorate the device stability. Although a direct proof for the variation of oxygen content in MoO3 with time is not provided in this article, to our knowledge and as shown here, no other source could be linked to the enhanced charge mobility in the device V. Moreover, it is fairly obvious that a metal oxide annealed under vacuum would result in an oxygen deficient structure. Thus, the higher stability of the device V results from its enhanced hole-conducting properties which in turn resulted from the oxygen vacancies produced as a result of annealing under vacuum.
 Fig. 8  (a) Shows the CELIV transient observed for the device V. (b) Shows the mobility (μ) and equilibrium charge carrier concentration (n) in both devices. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have shown that the hole conductivity of nanostructured MoO3 could be enhanced by annealing a fully fabricated device under vacuum which has a dramatic influence on the stability of the device for long term operation. An inverted bulk heterojunction organic solar cell with device configuration ITO/Ca/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag annealed under vacuum retained over 80% of its PCE over a period of thirty days, whereas the PCE of a similar device annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere degraded over 50% under similar conditions. We have shown, based on the photocurrent measurements as a function of temperature and photon flux, that the devices annealed under vacuum are characterized by shallow traps originating from surface atomic states compared to a similar device annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere. Our experiments using the charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage showed that the charges are perfectly conducted in the device annealed under vacuum, whereas they are relaxed at the deep trap states in the other device. High hole-conductivity resulted at the photoactive–hole transport layer interface when the devices were annealed under vacuum, that resulted in a VOC that approached the ideal limits. On the other hand, a depleted hole-conductivity in the device annealed in nitrogen led to a build up of space charges at the electrode thereby making the contact non-ohmic and causing higher series resistance. In such cases, device performance decayed over time. Thus, the present study provides innovative ways to improve the stability of organic photovoltaic devices for long term operation.
Acknowledgements
Naveen Kumar acknowledges Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and Mechanical Engineering Department of National University of Singapore for research scholarship and facilities.
References
J. Xue, Perspectives on Organic Photovoltaics, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, All solution roll-to-roll processed polymer solar cells free from indium-tin-oxide and vacuum coating steps, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, Interface materials for organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2499 RSC .
R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi and N. Camaioni, The role of buffer layers in polymer solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 4, 285–310 Search PubMed .
P. Kumar and S. Chand, Recent progress and future aspects of organic solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 377–415 Search PubMed .
L. M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Recent progress in polymer solar cells: Manipulation of polymer: Fullerene morphology and the formation of efficient inverted polymer solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Stability of polymer solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nanoscale morphology of high-performance polymer solar cells, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawano and C. Adachi, Reduced initial degradation of bulk heterojunction organic solar cells by incorporation of stacked fullerene and lithium fluoride interlayers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053307 CrossRef .
K. Kawano and C. H. Adachi, Evaluating carrier accumulation in degraded bulk heterojunction organic solar cells by a Thermally stimulated current technique, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3934–3940 CrossRef CAS .
S. a. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, F. C. Krebs and K. O. Sylvester-Hvid, A compact multi-chamber setup for degradation and lifetime studies of organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1389–1397 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, H. Spanggaard, T. Danish and P. Centre, Significant Improvement of Polymer Solar Cell, Chem. Mater., 2005, 5235–5237 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Analysis of the failure mechanism for a stable organic photovoltaic during 10000 h of testing, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 697–712 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hermenau, S. Schubert, H. Klumbies, J. Fahlteich, L. Müller-Meskamp, K. Leo and M. Riede, The effect of barrier performance on the lifetime of small-molecule organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alstrup, K. Norrman, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Lifetimes of organic photovoltaics: Design and synthesis of single oligomer molecules in order to study chemical degradation mechanisms, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2777–2792 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. De Leeuw, M. M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown and R. E. F. Einerhand, Stability of n-type doped conducting polymers and consequences for polymeric microelectronic devices, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud, D. Gendron, S. Wakim, E. Blair, R. Neagu-Plesu, M. Belletête, G. Durocher, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, Toward a rational design of poly(2,7-carbazole) derivatives for solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 732–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Stability/degradation of polymer solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
E. Voroshazi, B. Verreet, T. Aernouts and P. Heremans, Long-term operational lifetime and degradation analysis of P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1303–1307 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, p-Type semiconducting nickel oxide as an efficiency-enhancing anode interfacial layer in polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, S. T. Tan, L. Ke, P. Liu, a. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Optimization of an inverted organic solar cell, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 985–991 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C. W. Chu and Y. Yang, Transition metal oxides as the buffer layer for polymer photovoltaic cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
D. W. Zhao, S. T. Tan, L. Ke, P. Liu, A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Solar Energy Materials & Solar Cells Optimization of an inverted organic solar cell, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 985–991 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi, D. Cheyns, P. Heremans and B. P. Rand, Solution-Processed MoO(3) Thin Films As a Hole-Injection Layer for Organic Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3244–3247 CAS .
M. Y. Chan, C. S. Lee, S. L. Lai, M. K. Fung, F. L. Wong, H. Y. Sun, K. M. Lau and S. T. Lee, Efficient organic photovoltaic devices using a combination of exciton blocking layer and anodic buffer layer, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094506 CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Effect of LiF/metal electrodes on the performance of plastic solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288–1290 CrossRef CAS .
E. Voroshazi, B. Verreet, A. Buri, R. Müller, D. Di Nuzzo and P. Heremans, Influence of cathode oxidation via the hole extraction layer in polymer:fullerene solar cells, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Degradation patterns in water and oxygen of an inverted polymer solar cell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, I. Barbu, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, The use of ZnO as optical spacer in polymer solar cells: Theoretical and experimental study, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113520 CrossRef .
H. L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek and A. K. Y. Jen, Self-assembled monolayer modified ZnO/metal bilayer cathodes for polymer/fullerene bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193313 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, New architecture for high-efficiency polymer photovoltaic cells using solution-based titanium oxide as an optical spacer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, S. H. Park, S. Cowan, M. H. Tong, S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Titanium suboxide as an optical spacer in polymer solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013302 CrossRef .
F. C. Chen, J. L. Wu, S. S. Yang, K. H. Hsieh and W. C. Chen, Cesium carbonate as a functional interlayer for polymer photovoltaic devices, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 103721 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. Ruan, X. Zhang, G. Xie, L. Shen, X. Kong, W. Dong, C. Liu and W. Chen, Performance improvement of inverted polymer solar cells with different top electrodes by introducing a MoO3 buffer layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193303 CrossRef .
S. Hau, H.-L. Yip and A. Jen, A Review on the Development of the Inverted Polymer Solar Cell Architecture, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 474–510 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, C. Y. Jiang, G. Q. Lo, D. W. Zhao and D. L. Kwong, An inverted organic solar cell employing a sol-gel derived ZnO electron selective layer and thermal evaporated MoO3 hole selective layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 221107 CrossRef .
S. a. Gevorgyan, A. J. Medford, E. Bundgaard, S. B. Sapkota, H.-F. Schleiermacher, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, A. Chafiq, M. Lira-Cantu, T. Swonke, M. Wagner, C. J. Brabec, O. Haillant, E. Voroshazi, T. Aernouts, R. Steim, J. a. Hauch, A. Elschner, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, A. Langzettel, D. Laird, M. T. Lloyd, T. Rath, E. Maier, G. Trimmel, M. Hermenau, T. Menke, K. Leo, R. Rösch, M. Seeland, H. Hoppe, T. J. Nagle, K. B. Burke, C. J. Fell, D. Vak, T. B. Singh, S. E. Watkins, Y. Galagan, A. Manor, E. a. Katz, T. Kim, K. Kim, P. M. Sommeling, W. J. H. Verhees, S. C. Veenstra, M. Riede, M. Greyson Christoforo, T. Currier, V. Shrotriya, G. Schwartz and F. C. Krebs, An inter-laboratory stability study of roll-to-roll coated flexible polymer solar modules, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1398–1416 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Efficient inverted polymer solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef .
H.-H. Liao, L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Highly efficient inverted polymer solar cell by low temperature annealing of Cs2CO3 interlayer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173303 CrossRef .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, D. W. Zhao, A. K. K. Kyaw and Y. N. Li, Low work function metal modified ITO as cathode for inverted polymer solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1618–1621 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, G. Fang, X. Fan, N. Liu, N. Sun, P. Qin, Q. Zheng, J. Wan and X. Zhao, Enhancing the short-circuit current and efficiency of organic solar cells using MoO3 and CuPc as buffer layers, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2914–2919 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-I. Lee, J.-H. Youn, M.-S. Ryu, J. Kim, H.-T. Moon and J. Jang, Highly efficient inverted poly(3-hexylthiophene): Methano-fullerene [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester bulk heterojunction solar cell with Cs2CO3 and MoO3, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanai, T. Matsushima and H. Murata, Improvement of stability for organic solar cells by using molybdenum trioxide buffer layer, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 537–540 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, P. Liu, X. W. Sun, S. T. Tan, L. Ke and A. K. K. Kyaw, An inverted organic solar cell with an ultrathin Ca electron-transporting layer and MoO3 hole-transporting layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 153304 CrossRef .
J. Subbiah, P. M. Beaujuge, K. R. Choudhury, S. Ellinger, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Combined effects of MoO3 interlayer and PC70BM on polymer photovoltaic device performance, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 955–958 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, P. Liu, X. W. Sun, S. T. Tan, L. Ke and A. K. K. Kyaw, An inverted organic solar cell with an ultrathin Ca electron-transporting layer and MoO3 hole-transporting layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 153304 CrossRef .
M. C. Gwinner, R. D. Pietro, Y. Vaynzof, K. J. Greenberg, P. K. H. Ho, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Doping of Organic Semiconductors Using Molybdenum Trioxide: a Quantitative Time-Dependent Electrical and Spectroscopic Study, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1432–1441 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Khilla, Z. M. Hanafi, B. S. Farag and A. Abu-el Saud, Transport properties of molybdenum trioxide and its suboxides, Thermochim. Acta, 1982, 54, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, L. C. Palilis, D. G. Georgiadou, P. Argitis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, I. Kostis, G. Papadimitropoulos, N. Konofaos, A. A. Iliadis and D. Davazoglou, Reduced molybdenum oxide as an efficient electron injection layer in polymer light-emitting diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 123301 CrossRef .
T. He and J. Yao, Photochromism of molybdenum oxide, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 125–143 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Kim, J. Subbiah, G. Sarasqueta, F. So, H. Ding and Y. Gao, The effect of molybdenum oxide interlayer on organic photovoltaic cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093304 CrossRef .
G. Teran-Escobar, D. M. Tanenbaum, E. Voroshazi, M. Hermenau, K. Norrman, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, M. Hösel, H. F. Dam, M. Jørgensen, S. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, U. Würfel, R. Andriessen, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoğlu, D. Germack, B. Andreasen, M. V. Madsen, E. Bundgaard, F. C. Krebs and M. Lira-Cantu, On the stability of a variety of organic photovoltaic devices by IPCE and in situ IPCE analyses–the ISOS-3 inter-laboratory collaboration, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11824–11845 RSC .
D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Hermenau, E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, M. Hösel, H. F. Dam, M. Jørgensen, S. a. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, U. Würfel, R. Andriessen, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoğlu, D. Germack, B. Andreasen, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, The ISOS-3 inter-laboratory collaboration focused on the stability of a variety of organic photovoltaic devices, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 882–882 RSC .
S. Y. Chiam, B. Dasgupta, D. Soler, M. Y. Leung, H. Liu, Z. E. Ooi, L. M. Wong, C. Y. Jiang, K. L. Chang and J. Zhang, Investigating the stability of defects in MoO3 and its role in organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, S. a. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz, D. S. Ginley, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, P. Morvillo, E. a. Katz, A. Elschner, O. Haillant, T. R. Currier, V. Shrotriya, M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. R. Kirov, G. Trimmel, T. Rath, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt, M. Lira-Cantu, D. Laird, C. McGuiness, S. Gowrisanker, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, J. Hauch, R. Steim, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, N. Espinosa, A. Urbina, G. Yaman-Uzunoglu, J.-B. Bonekamp, A. J. J. M. van Breemen, C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi and F. C. Krebs, Consensus stability testing protocols for organic photovoltaic materials and devices, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bässler, Charge Transport in Disordered Organic Photoconductors a Monte Carlo Simulation Study, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15–56 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. a. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Electron Transport in a Methanofullerene, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43–46 CrossRef CAS .
N. von Malm, J. Steiger, R. Schmechel and H. von Seggern, Trap engineering in organic hole transport materials, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 5559–5563 CrossRef CAS .
M. Graetzel, R. a. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Materials interface engineering for solution-processed photovoltaics, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. C. Hummelen, Effect of temperature and illumination on the electrical characteristics of polymer-fullerene bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Antoniadis, L. J. Rothberg, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, M. Yan, M. E. Galvin and M. A. Abkowitz, Enhanced carrier photogeneration by defects in conjugated polymers and its mechanism, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994, 50, 14911–14915 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Light intensity dependence of open-circuit voltage of polymer:fullerene solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509-3 CrossRef .
D. Cheyns, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, C. Deibel, S. Verlaak, B. P. Rand and J. Genoe, Analytical model for the open-circuit voltage and its associated resistance in organic planar heterojunction solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165332 CrossRef .
F. J. Zhang, D. W. Zhao, Z. L. Zhuo, H. Wang, Z. Xu and Y. S. Wang, Inverted small molecule organic solar cells with Ca modified ITO as cathode and MoO3 modified Ag as anode, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2416–2421 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kemerink, J. M. Kramer, H. H. P. Gommans and R. a. J. Janssen, Temperature-dependent built-in potential in organic semiconductor devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 192108–192108 CrossRef .
S. Tiwari and N. C. Greenham, Charge mobility measurement techniques in organic semiconductors, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2009, 41, 69–89 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, A. Mozer, G. Juska, A. Pivrikas, R. Osterbacka, A. Fuchsbauer and N. Sariciftci, Charge carrier mobility and lifetime versus composition of conjugated polymer/fullerene bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juška and R. Österbacka, A Review of Charge Transport and Recombination in Polymer/Fullerene, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 677–696 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. Variation of JSC of the devices as a function of irradiating power showing monomolecular recombination, schematic of the two source of open circuit voltage, and difference in series resistance of the devices as a function of temperature. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp50994jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Device architecture of (A) conventional normal device and (B) inverted device.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic showing the mechanism of hole transport across the Molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) interlayer.	 

Nitrogen annealed (N)	0.572	9.59	59	3.26
Vacuum annealed (V)	0.577	9.44	63.7	3.46

 	Fig. 2  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device N (B) obtained at room temperature as a function of time in days. Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of time is shown for both devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device (B) as a function of illumination intensity (Φ) at constant T (323 K). Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of Φ at T = 323 K is shown for both devices.	 
j = neσ,	(1)

 	Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of device V (A) and device (B) as a function of temperature (T) at constant illumination intensity (100 mW cm−2). Variation of efficiency (C), short circuit current (D), open circuit voltage (E) and fill factor (F) as a function of T at Φ = 100 mW cm−2 is shown for both devices.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Variation of JSC as a function of temperature for the devices V (A) and N (B) respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Trap depth (Δ) in devices V and N calculated from ln J vs. 1/T curves. The inset shows the variation of trap depth (Δ) as a function of Φ.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  Variation of VOC for both devices (V and N) as a function of temperature (T) for different illumination intensities (Φ).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Shows the CELIV transient observed for the device V. (b) Shows the mobility (μ) and equilibrium charge carrier concentration (n) in both devices.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. Variation of JSC of the devices as a function of irradiating power showing monomolecular recombination, schematic of the two source of open circuit voltage, and difference in series resistance of the devices as a function of temperature. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp50994j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
