Ultrasmall particles and nanocomposites: state of the art  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA43418D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA43418D
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22648-22682Ultrasmall particles and nanocomposites: state of the artOxana V. Kharissovaac, Boris I. Kharisov*bc, Victor Manuel Jiménez-Pérezb, Blanca Muñoz Floresb and Ubaldo Ortiz MéndezcaFacultad de Ciencias Físico-Matemáticas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, MexicobCiencias Químicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico. E-mail: bkhariss@mail.rucCIIDIT, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, MexicoReceived 4th July 2013, Accepted 14th August 2013First published on 16th August 2013AbstractSynthesis, properties, and applications of ultrasmall particles (USPs, size/diameter <10 nm), so-called “ultrasmall nanoparticles”, are reviewed. USPs mainly consist of nanoparticles (with or without functionalization) of metallic gold, as well as iron and gadolinium oxides, all of which have important biomedical applications. Several other elemental metals and non-metals, oxides, salts, a few polymers and coordination compounds have also been obtained as USPs. Their main applications include biomedical uses {Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) contract agents, virus inactivation, immunoassay labeling, etc.}, varieties of catalysis, hydrogen sorption, as magnetic devices, ultrasmall transistors, sensors for gases or biological objects, parts of solar cells and batteries, among others. Recent approaches, such as size-focusing methodology, for obtaining USPs and preventing their further agglomeration, are discussed.Oxana V. KharissovaDr Oxana V. Kharissova (born in 1969 in Ukraine, former USSR) is currently a Professor and Researcher at the UANL. Degrees: An MS in 1994, in crystallography from Moscow State University, Russia, and a PhD in Materials from the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, 2001, Mexico. Memberships: National Researchers System (Level I), Materials Research Society. She is the co-author of three books, 5 book chapters, 60 articles, and has filed two patents. Specialties: Nanotechnology (carbon nanotubes, nanometals, fullerenes), microwave irradiation and crystallography.Boris I. KharisovDr Boris I. Kharisov (born in Russia in 1964) is currently a Professor and Researcher at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (UANL). Degrees: An MS in 1986, in radiochemistry and a PhD in inorganic chemistry in 1993, from the Moscow State University, Russia; Dr Hab. in physical chemistry in 2006 from Rostov State University, Russia. He is the co-author of six books, 127 articles, five book chapters, and has filed two patents. Co-editor: three invited special issues of international journals. He is a member of the Editorial board of four journals. Specialties: coordination and inorganic chemistry, phthalocyanines, ultrasound, and nanotechnology.Victor Manuel Jiménez-PérezDr Victor Manuel Jiménez-Pérez was born in Tlaxcala (Mexico, 1974). He received his BSc (1998) in Chemistry at the Universidad Autonóma de Tlaxcala. In 2005, he received his PhD in Chemistry at the CINVESTAV under supervision of Prof. Rosalinda Contreras in the field of tin chemistry. After postdoctoral work in the Prof. Herbert Roesky's group at Universität Göttingen (2007), he joined as a full-professor in Chemistry Faculty at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. So far, he is the author of more than 20 publications. His research is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of luminescent and sensor organometallic compounds and “green” chemistry.Blanca Muñoz FloresDr Blanca Muñoz Flores (born in Tlaxcala, Mexico, 1976) studied Industrial Chemistry at the Universidad Autonóma de Tlaxcala (1999). She received her PhD in Organic Chemistry (2008) at the CINVESTAV-IPN under the direction of Prof. Norberto Farfán García. She moved to the Chemistry Faculty of the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (2009) as a full-professor. Presently, her research group is working on the design, synthesis, characterization and determination of nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of organic and organometallic compounds, as well as on nanoalloys. So far, she is the author of more than 10 research publications in leading scientific journals.Ubaldo Ortiz MéndezDr Ubaldo Ortiz-Mendez. Native of Durango, Mexico, Dr Ubaldo Ortiz-Méndez, is currently the Director of the Innovation, Research and Development Centre at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. His bachelor degree in Physics was granted by the UANL in 1981, and his PhD in Materials Engineering was granted by the Institut National des Sciences Appliqués INSA in 1984, in Lyon, France. Due to his work in research and publications, he has been awarded the UANL Research Award three times, in 1996, 2000 and 2001, also the State Government of Nuevo Leon has awarded him the TECNOS Award in 1994 and 2000, for several of his research studies. For his academic achievement the Education Board of the French Republic has given him the proclamation of Knight of the Order of Academic Palms in 2009. He is currently teaching at the UANL, where he has been for over 20 years.IntroductionIn most reports on ultrasmall particles (very frequently called “ultrasmall nanoparticles” in original research publications, although this is good-sounding oxymoron), their size is defined as less than 10 nm (more rarely less than 5 nm), although in a few publications such sizes as 30 and even 50 nm (standard non-ultrasmall nanoparticle size) were erroneously attributed as ultrasmall. A special interest is given to nanoparticles with approximately 20–40 metal atoms per cluster and sizes <2 nm (also referred as nanoclusters). The nanoparticles <10 nm possess a series of useful applications shown below, first of all in the nanomedicine area (in particular, as MRI agents). Thus, most nanomaterials, currently used for biomedical purposes are about 100 nm in size, which makes them ineffective at eradicating tumorigenic cells. To improve the situation, it is necessary to make them smaller, about the 10–30 nm range, in order to penetrate more deeply within tumors and enhance the therapeutic response. In case of ultrasmall metal oxide particles (undoped or doped with other metals), they have additional potential uses as catalysts in fine chemical synthesis, petroleum industry, environmental remediation, energy storage and as sensors. USPs can be also applied as parts of magnetic devices, solar cells and butteries, among a host of other uses shown below.Currently, no available generalization on ultrasmall particles in whole is reported, except a review1 dedicated to ultrasmall nanocrystals and particularly ultrasmall CdSe nanocrystals. In this review, we generalize and discuss synthesis, properties and applications of ultrasmall particles, their functionalized derivatives and composites, known up to date.Methods and approaches for obtaining ultrasmall nanoparticlesMethods for synthesis of ultrasmall particles and clusters are, in general, the same which have been applied for nanoparticle synthesis worldwide and generalized in a host of books and reviews in the last decade. The principal motif is not to allow the formed very small particles to be aggregated, with use of appropriate surfactants, dispersing in polymeric and other matrices, reducing time of synthesis procedures and temperature, etc. Frequently, classic wet chemistry techniques have been used, as well as those applying microwaves, hydro- and solvothermal conditions (in particular, their combination with microwave heating2), irradiation methods,3 among a large variety of others, noted throughout the text. Here in this section we emphasize some intriguing examples. Thus, classic laser pyrolysis is sometimes used to produce ultrasmall magnetic particles.4 The use of a liquid dispersing polyol medium to collect iron oxide nanoparticles prepared by laser pyrolysis produced a stabilized suspension of narrow size distribution particles of 2.5 ± 0.5 nm (Fig. 1). These particles do not require any further purification process, generally applied in liquid-phase methods. Irradiation methods of synthesis of materials and compounds, described in whole in a recent monograph,5 are also being applied for nanomaterials. Thus, ZnS nanoparticles were synthesized6 by γ-irradiation of aqueous solution containing Zn2+ and thiol (RSH). Monodispersed ultrasmall ZnS particles with 1.5 nm diameter, characterized by a band edge at 238 nm were produced at low doses. At higher doses, larger particles absorbing at λ > 260 nm were obtained. Fig. 1  Detail of the reaction area where the IR laser interacts with the gas reactants and the influence of the collection system to obtain larger aggregates (cellulose filter) or well-dispersed nanoparticles with sizes below 4 nm (polyol liquid solution) under similar experimental conditions. With permission of IOP Publishing (G. Martinez, A. Malumbres, R. Mallada, J. L. Hueso, S. Irusta, O. Bomati-Miguel and J. Santamaria, Use of a polyol liquid collection medium to obtain ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles by laser pyrolysis, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(42), 425605, ref. 4). A facile solvothermal approach (without N2 atmosphere or reflux conditions) was used7 to synthesize ultrasmall monodisperse magnetite (Fe3O4) particles (4–6 nm, varying reductant/solvent ratio) with precise size control of one nanometer, in which iron acetylacetonate [Fe(acac)3] acted as the iron source, n-octylamine as the reductant, and n-octanol as the solvent. The coordination effect on the control of structure/microstructure/texture, surface/interface, particle size, and morphology was also studied applying it to solvothermal conditions.8 Based on the principle of coordination chemistry, with some solution-based methods including solvothermal treatment and the thermolysis of metal complex precursors, a series of nanostructured rare earth compounds, in particular ultrasmall colloidal ceria particles, were prepared by elaborately controlling the synthetic parameters and reaction kinetics.The possibility to precisely control the number of gold atoms in a particle was recently opened, using a size-focusing methodology that was developed in the synthesis of a number of atomically monodisperse ultrasmall thiolate-stabilized gold particles (also called nanoclusters).9 The underlying principle of this size-focusing process is primarily related to the peculiar stability of certain sized Aun(SR)m nanoparticles, i.e., “survival of the robustest”, much like the natural law “survival of the fittest”. This universal size-focusing method, as expected by authors, serves ultimately to allow for preparing a full series of size-discrete, atomically monodisperse nanoparticles that span the size regimes of both nonplasmonic nanoclusters and plasmonic nanocrystals. Another similarly called (but having different sense) approach, thermodynamic size focusing method, was applied (Fig. 2) for fabrication of CdSe and CdSe/ZnS ultrasmall particles.10 The process included two essential steps; larger unstable NPs created by a thermal quenching process, followed by an isothermal heat treatment to reduce NP size. This approach, which avoided the difficulty of controlling the rapid growth of NPs in the initial growth stage and has fairly short time (∼1 h), provides an alternative way to obtain ultrasmall NPs. Fig. 3 shows its comparison with the conventional interruption method and low-temperature process (left images). In the interruption method, both the nucleation and crystal growth take place at higher temperature and the nucleation-growth less overlapped with each other because of a temperature/concentration drop, which suppresses the nucleation process. The authors mentioned that interruption method keeps the advantages of the hot injection, i.e., fairly short synthesis time and higher core crystallinity for NPs. In the low-temperature method, the reaction occurs at a lower rate and nanoparticles initially grown are either in a larger size distribution or in coexistence with large particles process. Fig. 2  Plausible mechanism of formation of QDs or NPs with a smaller size via control over a thermal quench-isothermal annealing process (thermodynamic size focusing). With permission of Springer (H.-S. Chen and R. V. Kumar, Growth of ultrasmall nanoparticles based on thermodynamic size focusing, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1207, 6 pp, ref. 10).  Fig. 3  Preparation of ultrasmall NPs or smaller QDs by three different synthesis approaches. With permission of Springer (H.-S. Chen and R. V. Kumar, Growth of ultrasmall nanoparticles based on thermodynamic size focusing, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1207, 6 pp, ref. 10). Ionic liquids with their interesting profiles of physical and chemical properties are safe media for the synthesis and dispersion of nanomaterials.11 As an example, ultrasmall Ag and Ru particles with a narrow size distribution were synthesized in ionic liquids using reductive, thermal or photochemical conditions. In addition, use of polymeric templating agents is sometimes useful to attain formation of stable ultrasmall particles. Thus, stable ultrasmall Au particles were synthesized in aqueous phase by using a tri-block copolymer (BMB) as a templating agent consisting of 2 PEG–methylacrylate chains (B blocks) anchored to a poly(methacrylic) moiety containing a trithiocarbonate unit (M block).12 The polymer was found to play a key role in determining the size and shape of Au particles, from fractal-like structures to monodisperse spherical particles with a mean diameter of ∼3 nm. Among other methods, we emphasize a novel approach of seeded emulsion polymerization, in which nanocrystals were used as seeds, was applied for obtaining small biocompatible polymer-coated nanocrystals (Fig. 4) with sizes close to ultrasmall region (>15 nm).13 Single encapsulated nanocrystals in ultrasmall nanobeads as well as clusters of nanocrystals can be obtained this way. Polysorbat-80 was used as surfactant. It consists of poly(ethylene glycol) chains, giving the particles outstanding biofunctional characteristics such as a minimization of unspecific interactions. To achieve highly uniform products, the formation was split into two simple steps, first the formation of the seed and second, seeded emulsion polymerization. Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of encapsulation by seeded emulsion polymerization: (A) nanocrystals and polysorbate-80 in THF; (1) injection into water; (B) seed structure; (2) addition of monomer; (C) swollen seed; (3) seeded emulsion polymerization; (D) nanocrystal covered with a polymeric shell. With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Kloust, E. Pöselt, S. Kappen, C. Schmidtke, A. Kornowski, W. Pauer, H.-U. Moritz and H. Weller, Ultrasmall Biocompatible Nanocomposites: A New Approach Using Seeded Emulsion Polymerization for the Encapsulation of Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7276–7281, ref. 13). Elemental metal nanoparticlesGold nanoparticlesElemental gold nanoparticles and especially their core–shell nanostructures with iron and its oxides are classic objects of nanotechnological research due to, in particular, medical applications (drug delivery), among many others. Many experimental reports have been dedicated to ultrasmall Au nanoparticles,14–16 whose some aspects were recently reviewed.17–20 When Au nanoparticles become extremely small (<2 nm in diameter), significant quantization occurs to the conduction band.21 These quantum-sized nanoparticles constitute a new class of nanomaterials and have received much attention in recent years. In particular, properties of fluorescent Au and Ag nanoclusters were generalized22 due to a significant interest because they provide the missing link between atom and nanoparticle behavior in metals. Composed of a few to a hundred atoms, their sizes are comparable to the Fermi wavelength of electrons, resulting in molecule-like properties including discrete electronic states and size-dependent fluorescence. Their main features include ultrasmall size, good biocompatibility and excellent photostability, making them ideal fluorescent labels for biological applications. Here we discuss only recent most representative examples of ultrasmall Au nanoparticles.The synthesis of gold nanoparticles has been carried out by a series of methods, contributing to further non-aggregation of the formed nanoparticles. The enhanced stability is a key property for the use of gold nanoparticles in many applications, so novel methods for their maintenance are needed. In this respect, monodispersed, highly stable ultrasmall gold nanoparticles (diameter < 10 nm) were prepared23 by optimized laser irradiation of gold nanoparticles synthesized via the “green” Frens method. Laser irradiated gold nanoparticles demonstrated significant improvement in colloidal stability as compared to similarly sized gold nanoparticles prepared by a purely chemical approach which involves the use of hazardous NaBH4. Among other approaches applied, we note a precursor continuous-supply strategy, applied24 for high-yield controllable synthesis of 0.9–3.3 nm Au nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution of 0.1–0.2 nm, using a weak reductant to slow down the reducing rate of AuCl(PPh3) precursor in ethanol. In addition, a mild route to the efficient r.t. whittling/etching of gold nanoparticles, characterized by use of the combination of weak oxidant and weak ligands and only entails the incorporation of three components water, THF, and CuBr2, was described for fabrication of 3 nm (in diameter) gold nanoparticles.25 Several difficulties were found to be related with reducing agents. Thus, the synthesis of ultrasmall (<5 nm) metallic nanocrystals is an interesting area with many applications in diverse fields, but is typically very challenging to accomplish in a microfluidics-based system due to the use of a strong gas-evolving reducing agent, aqueous sodium borohydride (NaBH4), which causes uncontrolled out-gassing and bubble formation, flow disruption and ultimately reactor failure.26 To avoid this problem, a stream of inert gas bubbles was injected into the channels that essentially capture the evolving gas from the reactive aqueous solution (Fig. 5), thereby preventing aqueous dissolved gas concentration from reaching the solubility threshold for bubble nucleation. The applicability of the method was demonstrated by synthesizing ultrasmall gold nanocrystals (<5 nm); the quality of nanocrystals thus synthesized was further demonstrated by their use in an off-chip synthesis of high-quality gold nanorods. Fig. 5  Synthesis of nanoparticles by a microfluidic system. With permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry (S. A. Khan and S. Duraiswamy, Controlling bubbles using bubbles-microfluidic synthesis of ultra-small gold nanocrystals with gas-evolving reducing agents, Lab Chip, 2012, 12(10), 1807–1812, ref. 26). Among other properties of formed Au ultrasmall nanoparticles, discussed throughout the text, we emphasize the fact that, being induced by biomolecules, spherical gold nanoparticles (3–5 nm) undergo a surprising fragmentation without extra energy input and are converted into ultrasmall particles (less than 1.5 nm), which is a direct result of electron transfer between gold nanoparticles and cysteine.27 For gold and other nanoparticles the effects of size are extremely important for their applications. For example, it was demonstrated that ultrasmall gold nanoparticles smaller than 10 nm display unique advantages over nanoparticles larger than 10 nm in terms of localization to, and penetration of, breast cancer cells, multicellular tumor spheroids, and tumors in mice.28 This was proved on the basis of Au@tiopronin nanoparticles having tunable sizes from 2 to 15 nm with identical surface coatings of tiopronin and charge. For monolayer cells, the smaller the Au@tiopronin NPs, the more AuNPs are found in each cell. In addition, the accumulation of Au NPs in the ex vivo tumor model was size-dependent: smaller AuNPs were able to penetrate deeply into tumor spheroids, whereas 15 nm nanoparticles were not. Particle structure, additionally to size, has considerable importance influencing on its properties. In this respect, we note an intriguing report29 on ultrasmall Au and O3 interaction, whose character is shown to be mainly governed by the particle structure. For borohydride sols of gold nanoparticles (sizes of ≈3 nm), which are characterized by metallic properties, this interaction is reduced to reversible adsorption of ozone on their surface. At the same time, ozone adsorption on “nonplasmon” Au particles (diameter of 2 nm) and a very defective structure results in their irreversible structural rearrangement and transition to a metallic state, which is accompanied by the appearance of a surface plasmon resonance. The authors finally established that nanoparticles of borohydride gold sols are more efficient as possible chemosensors of ozone than are larger particles synthesized by the citrate method.The initially formed gold nanoparticles (in particular, those functionalized) can be further converted to other nanostructures.30–32 Thus, in situ formation and assembly of ultrasmall gold nanoclusters at the oil/water interface was developed to assemble gold nanoclusters into well-defined nano-ribbon structures.33 The resulting nano-ribbons exhibited enhanced optical properties and larger Stokes's shift than those of random dispersed gold nanoclusters. A facile conversion (Fig. 6) of polydisperse Au nanoparticles (1–3.5 nm diameter) into well-defined monodisperse 25-atom (Au25) nanorods and nanospheres (Fig. 7) via one-phase and two-phase thiol etching, respectively, was also reported.34 This conversion process is unusual, as it converts polydisperse nanoparticles into well-defined, atomically monodisperse nanoparticles with precise control over particle shape. The Au25 particle shape can be conveniently controlled by using different types of thiol ligands. These ultrasmall Au25 nanoparticles do not support surface plasmons as do their larger counterparts such as Au nanocrystals. In a related report,35 various lower-weight clusters such as Au25(SC2H4C6H5)18 and Au38(SC2H4C6H5)24 were synthesized. More complex, truly monodisperse Au144(SCH2CH2Ph)60 nanoparticles were also prepared.36 Unlike their larger counterparts, Au nanocrystals (typically >2 nm) that are crystalline and show a prominent surface plasmon resonance band at ∼520 nm (for spherical particles), the Au144(SCH2CH2Ph)60 nanoparticles instead exhibited a stepwise, multiple-band absorption spectrum, indicating quantum confinement of electrons in the particle. Also, these ultrasmall nanoparticles do not adopt face-centered cubic structure as in Au nanocrystals or bulk gold. In addition, the controlled self-assembly of ∼2 nm gold NPs into 1D nanochain, 2D nanobelt and 3D nanocomet 2-phenylethanethiol-stabilized architectures (Fig. 8) by kinetically controlling the diffusion of ultrasmall gold NPs with anisotropic surfaces in solution was carried out.37 The process was presumed to allow selective ligand exchange with linkers at different binding sites on the NP surface, and results in “multivalent” interactions between NPs. Fig. 6  Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into atomically monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres via respective one-phase (a) and two-phase thiol etching (b). CH2Cl2 (or CHCl3) was used to dissolve the starting Au nanoparticles in both processes (a and b). With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Qian, M. Zhu, E. Lanni, Y. Zhu, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(41), 17599–17603, ref. 34).  Fig. 7  Two shapes of 25 gold atom (Au25) nanoparticles: (A) biicosahedral Au25 nanorods (side and end views); (B) two-shell Au25 nanospheres. With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Qian, M. Zhu, E. Lanni, Y. Zhu, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(41), 17599–17603, ref. 34).  Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of chain-like ensembles. Inset: a high-resolution TEM image of a chain. (b) TEM image of two crossed chains. The insets in (b) are aberration-corrected HRTEM images of the selected areas. (c) STEM image of network of chains. (d) and (e) TEM images of belts. (f) STEM image of belts. (g) TEM image of comet assemblies. (h) TEM image of a typical comet ensemble. The insets are magnified TEM images of different areas of a comet ensemble marked in (h). (i) STEM image of the comet-like assemblies. With permission of Springer (P.-p. Wang, Q. Yu, Y. Long, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Multivalent assembly of ultrasmall nanoparticles: one-, two- and three-dimensional architectures of 2 nm gold nanoparticles, Nano Res., 2012, 5(4), 283–291, ref. 37). Ultrasmall gold nanoparticles and clusters having distinct sizes can be functionalized by a host of other ligands, in addition to above mentioned thiolates. Thus, synthesis of ultrasmall gold nanoparticles with core diameter of 1.2 nm functionalized with hydrazide groups and their use in isolation/enrichment of N-glycosylated peptides were discussed.38 Hydrazide-functionalized gold nanoparticles showed excellent stability in biological samples and exhibited a large capacity for peptide capturing. The hydrazide-functionalized gold nanoparticles were utilized in the isolation of a real proteome complex, which showed that more than 90% of captured product was glycopeptide. Biocompatible ultrasmall polyethyleneimine (PEI)-capped AuNPs (PEI-AuNPs, of 8–12 nm average size) with limited agglomeration were prepared39 in aqueous solutions at r.t., which were based on the roles of PEI as a reductant and a stabilizer. A cell viability of 98% was obtained in the case of PEI-AuNPs, while PEI was cytotoxic. The PEI-AuNP is considered to be a potential candidate as a contrast agent for computed tomography. Additionally, an increase of the sensitivity of protein labeling using 1.4 nm gold nanoparticles and glutamate δ2 receptor (GluD2) from the postsynaptic membrane of the Purkinje cells was reached.40 The very small marker size of the particles reduces the steric hindrance between antibodies leading to a higher labeling efficiency of more than one subunit per single receptor molecule. The offered method ensures detection of an average of three subunits per GluD2 and often labels all four of them with 1.4 nm Au nanoparticles. In vitro study on the interaction of fluorescent Au nanoclusters with four different proteins revealed41 that the fluorescence of Au nanoclusters was significantly enhanced and concomitantly, their luminescence lifetime is prolonged. In addition, a robust approach to the size-selective and template-free synthesis of asymmetric functionalized ultrasmall (<4 nm) gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) stably anchored with a single amphiphilic triblock copolymer chain per NP was proposed.42 The AuNP hybrid amphiphilic triblock copolymers can spontaneously self-assemble into various morphologies, including hybrid micelles, (branching) rods, vesicles, and LCMs, in aqueous media (Fig. 9). Finally, the synthesis of ultrasmall, uniform 144-atom AuNPs protected by p-mercaptobenzoic acid followed by ligand exchange with glutathione was reported.43 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the template-free, size-selective fabrication of ultrasmall AuNPs (2.0–3.8 nm) anchored with a single triblock copolymer chain and the hierarchical self-assembly of the resulting AuNP hybrid amphiphilic triblock copolymers PEO–AuNP–PS in aqueous media. With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. Hu, T. Wu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Efficient Synthesis of Single Gold Nanoparticle Hybrid Amphiphilic Triblock Copolymers and Their Controlled Self-Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(18), 7624–7627, ref. 42). In addition to many biomedical applications, ultrasmall gold nanoparticles have been used in catalysis. Thus, gold nanoparticles ranging with size of several nanometers, selectively adsorbed on porous carbide-derived carbons, revealed catalytic activity, which was a size-dependent parameter of carbon-supported gold and the highest CO oxidation was identified for the smallest particles.44 The proposed method can be used for selective trapping of a variety of metal and nonmetal nanoparticles for catalytic and other applications. To prove this fact, a new mechanism for reactivity of multiply twinned gold nanoparticles resulting from their inherently strained structure provided a further explanation of the surprising catalytic activity of small gold nanoparticles.45 Density functional theory calculations of the resulting modified gold d-band states predicted significantly enhanced activity for carbon monoxide oxidation.Au/Fe (FexOy) core–shell nanoparticles is an enormous research area,46 in which ultrasmall sizes have also been discussed. Thus, GoldMag is a kind of bi-functional nanoparticle, composed of a gold nanoshell and an iron oxide core.47 GoldMag combines the antibody immobilization property of gold nanoshell with the superparamagnetic feature of the iron oxide core. Rabbit anti-mouse IgG was immobilized on the surface of GoldMag to synthesize GoldMag-IgG in a single-step process. MR imaging of different concentrations of GoldMag and GoldMag-IgG showed that 3 μg mL−1 of nanoparticles could significantly affect the MRI signal intensity of GRE T2*WI.Other metalsUltrasmall nanoparticles of other metals are considerably less represented in comparison with gold. Silver nanoparticles,48,49 whose large-scale synthesis was described,50 can be applied in catalysis or as antimicrobial agents (classic uses for Ag). Thus, the ultrasmall Ag nanoparticles supported on silica were prepared by facile method, based on the introduction of the functional monomer salicylaldimine Schiff base into a SiO2 matrix. For these ultrasmall silica-supported Ag nanoparticles, it was found that the catalytic oxidation of CO over the ultrasmall Ag nanoparticle catalysts was a strong size dependent reaction and the Ag particle size in a range of 3–5 nm was favorable for CO oxidation.51 In a related report,52 ultrasmall and well dispersed Ag nanoparticles were synthesized by mixing AgNO3 in PEI (polyethylenimine) solution. These silver nanoparticles had an antimicrobial activity in the aqueous solution at a concentration of >0.0105% by M.I.C. test. The authors suggested that the PEI/silver nanoparticles have potentials for development of wound dressings. Finally, a hybrid nanocomposite combining fluorescent dyes and ultrasmall (<3 nm) silver nanocrystals in a block copolymer micelle was studied,53 showing a modification of the exciton lifetime and the nonradiative energy transfer among the dyes. This behavior was absent in a control experiment with dyes whose energetic levels are far from the plasmonic resonance, establishing the plasmonic nature of the interaction.Ultrasmall copper nanoparticles have been synthesized by a series of different methods, in particular through a trace-level EDTA-assisted wet chemical route in which Cu(OH)2 colloid, KBH4 and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) were used as the Cu source, the reducing agent, and the protective agents, respectively.54 The Cu nanoparticles (average diameter of 4 nm) exhibited a spherical morphology with a narrow size distribution and a uniform shape. It was established that the presence of trace EDTA is indispensable for their preparation, since EDTA concentration directly influences the Cu nanoparticle size and uniformity: as EDTA concentration decreases, the size of the Cu nanoparticles decreases, whereas the uniformity increases. Cu nanoparticles (2 nm, Fig. 10) were also produced by N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine (TMPDA) reduction of aqueous Cu2+ on a hydrophobically immobilized sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS) surfactant template in the presence of sodium citrate at r.t.55 Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) acted as a scaffold controlling the size of the SDBS micelle, which in turn confines a limited number of copper ions near the nanotube surface. TMPDA reduction formed copper nanoparticles. For comparison, particles formed in the absence of the SWNT immobilizer ranged from 2 to 150 nm. Fig. 10  TEM image of ultrasmall copper nanoparticles including the selected area electron diffraction (inset). With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. J. Brege, C. E. Hamilton, C. A. Crouse and A. R. Barron, Ultrasmall Copper Nanoparticles from a Hydrophobically Immobilized Surfactant Template, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(6), 2239–2242, ref. 55). Additionally to wet chemical routes above, spherical copper nanoparticles with extremely narrow size distribution, cubic crystal structure and average particle size of 5.5 nm were fabricated by electroless copper deposition on a mesoporous silica support.56 These nanoparticles were found to be stable, without detectable oxidation or further agglomeration under ambient conditions even after months. Also, scant attention was paid to the easy to fabricate and simple millifluidic systems that could provide the required control as well as high throughput. Its result was a continuous flow synthesis of ultrasmall Cu nanoclusters (UCNCs) with exceptional colloidal stability.57 It was revealed by the authors that the as-prepared clusters were ∼1 nm, which are the smallest ever produced using a lab-on-a-chip platform. When supported on SiO2, they efficiently catalyzed C–H oxidation reactions, hitherto unknown to be catalyzed by Cu.In case of palladium, hydrogen sorption properties of its ultrasmall nanoparticles (2.5 nm) embedded in a mesoporous carbon template were determined and compared to those of the bulk system.58 It was established that downsizing the Pd particle size introduces significant modifications of the hydrogen sorption properties: (1) the total amount of stored hydrogen was found to be decreased compared to bulk Pd; (2) the hydrogenation of Pd nanoparticles induced a phase transformation from face cubic centered (fcc). to icosahedral structure. This phase transition was not encountered in bulk because the 5-fold symmetry is nontranslational. In a related study,59 spherical PdHx particles (diameter ∼2–3 nm), protected from sintering with a hydrogen-permeable carbon coating, were studied in the temperature and pressure range of 323 < T < 428 K and 0 < P < 10 bar. A significant change in the thermodynamic behavior of very small hydride nanoparticles was revealed that may be common to many other nano-scale metal hydride systems as well. More complex monodisperse SiO2@Pd-PAMAM core–shell microspheres containing SiO2 microsphere cores and PAMAM dendrimer-encapsulated Pd nanoparticle (Pd-PAMAM) shells were carefully studied.60 Pd nanoparticles within the cores of the SiO2-supported PAMAM dendrimers were synthesized by allowing Pd(II) ions to complex with the amine groups in the cores of the dendrimers and then reducing them into Pd(0) with NaBH4 (Fig. 11). TEM images showed the presence of Pd nanoparticles with average size of 1.56 ± 0.67 nm on the surface of the monodisperse SiO2@Pd-PAMAM core–shell microspheres. The SiO2@Pd-PAMAM core–shell microspheres were used as an easily recyclable catalyst for hydrogenation of various olefins, alkynes, keto and nitro groups, giving ∼100% conversion and high turnover numbers. Fig. 11  Synthesis of SiO2@Pd-PAMAM dendrimer core–shell microsphere catalysts. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A. V. Biradar, A. A. Biradar and T. Asefa, Silica-Dendrimer Core–Shell Microspheres with Encapsulated Ultrasmall Palladium Nanoparticles: Efficient and Easily Recyclable Heterogeneous Nanocatalysts, Langmuir, 2011, 27(23), 14408–14418, ref. 60). Functionalized carbon nanotubes were used to produce Pd-based hydrogenation catalysts. Thus, Pd/CNT with small (1–2 nm) Pd particles showed61 classical catalytic behavior in propyne hydrogenation, with high propene selectivity at moderate conversion levels and propane formation near full conversion. Pd/CNT with larger (∼15 nm) nanoparticles, however, was selective (88%) toward propene even at practically full propyne conversion. In addition, palladium can induce formation of Pt nanoparticles. Thus, p-phosphonic acid calix[4]arenes render high stability to exfoliated graphenes in water. These calix[4]arenes modified graphenes can be used as highly effective substrates to nucleate ultrasmall Pd nanoparticles, which in turn serve as galvanic reaction templates for the generation of high density 2D arrays of Pt nanoparticles.62Monodisperse ultrasmall platinum nanocrystals (sizes ranging from 1.73 to 3.54 nm) were synthesized in aqueous solution at r.t. with specifically selected peptide molecules as stabilizers.63 The peptide-stabilized Pt nanocrystals can remain dispersed well in water for months. The strong binding of peptides to the Pt nanocrystal surface was found to be reversible by either pH modulation or peptide photolysis. Charge storage characteristics of ultrasmall Pt nanoparticle embedded devices were characterized64 by capacitance–voltage measurements. Pt nanoparticle devices with sizes ranging from ∼0.7 to 1.34 nm and particle densities of ∼3.3–5.9 × 1012 cm−2 were embedded between atomic layer deposited and e-beam evaporated tunneling and blocking Al2O3 layers. These GaAs-based nonvolatile memory devices demonstrate maximum memory windows equivalent to 6.5 V. A strategy of “two-particle” lithography was proposed65 to generate 2D arrays of ring-shaped patterns. The process was based on two systems of particles, smaller cobalt nanoparticles (diameters less than 10 nm) and larger silica mesospheres (500 nm). The resulting well defined arrangements of magnetic nanoparticles were found to be important for commercial applications such as ultrasmall transistors, catalysts, magnetic devices, immunoassay labeling, and medical imaging. Stable iron nanoparticles were synthesized by the decomposition of {Fe(N[Si(CH3)3]2)2}2 under dihydrogen pressure.66 Those conditions led to a system of monodisperse and metallic nanoparticles which diameter was <2 nm and stabilized by HN[Si(CH3)3]2. The Mossbauer spectrum showed to be fitted by two contributions of metallic iron. In addition, a simple reaction between a mild reducing agent such as a trialkoxysilane and GeIV species such as Ge tetraalkoxides in a r.t. H2O–alcohol solution produced SiO2-coated ultrasmall (2–3 nm) amorphous germanium nanoparticles (na-Ge/SiO2).67 The formation of na-Ge proceeded extremely slowly and follows a first-order dependence on both H2O concentration and diameter of the na-Ge particles under the reaction conditions used. Annealing of the na-Ge/SiO2 powder under an inert atmosphere at 600 °C produced ultrasmall Ge nanocrystals (nc-Ge) embedded in amorphous SiO2 (nc-Ge/SiO2). Freestanding, colloidally stable nc-Ge is obtained by chemical etching of the encapsulating SiO2 matrix.Metal nanoalloys68 and intermetallicsMetal nanoalloys68 and intermetallics possess a considerable importance in modern nanotechnology. Their ultrasmall nanoparticles are represented by a few examples. Thus, ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles consisting of NiCo and FeNi alloys enclosed within graphitic shells (NiCo/G and FeNi/G, with mean particle sizes of 2.6 nm and 6.2 nm, respectively) were synthesized.69 Due to the enhancement of the thermal stability by the graphite shell, the graphite coated FeNi and NiCo were found to be stable under oxygen atmosphere up to 170 °C. The effectiveness of the graphite shell was confirmed by authors when unprotected bimetallic FeNi and NiCo were prepared and it was revealed that more than 60 at.% of the samples was oxygen due to the extensive oxidation of the bimetallic nanoparticles.Several reports are dedicated to ultrasmall FePt,70 CoPt and RhPt bimetallic nanoparticles. Thus, it was established71 that, unlike the generally assumed lower limit of ordering (3.5 nm), ultrasmall (<3 nm) FePt nanoparticles can be fully transformed to the L10 phase. The well-controlled and precise stoichiometry (Fe50 at.% Pt50 at.%) and the homogeneous composition of these particles both play a major role in their phase transformation. In a related report,72 discrete, homogenous and superparamagnetic at r.t. (mostly 2–4 nm) L10-ordered fct (face centered tetragonal) FePt nanoparticles encapsulated in well-graphitized thin carbon shells were prepared by a one-step solid-phase synthesis technique. These nanoparticles functionalized non-covalently by phospholipid-poly(ethylene)glycol show biocompatibility with the tested cells (mouse macrophage and mouse L929 fibroblasts cells) in all test concentrations (0.025–0.2 mg mL−1). Ultrasmall CoPt nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 1.3 nm (around 100 atoms) were deposited on a thin 5 nm self-supported amorphous carbon membrane.73 The local tuning of the size and density of CoPt NPs by means of ion irradiation could be used in magnetic data storage applications. Interesting catalytic behaviors of 1 nm RhPt bimetallic nanoparticles of different compounds on ethylene hydrogenation and CO oxidation were shown.74 In particular, CO oxidation rates over these ultrasmall 1 nm RhPt nanoparticles of different compositions exhibited a linear 20-fold increase from pure Pt to pure Rh. These results were attributed by authors to the unique surface properties of these 1 nm bimetallic particles, which demonstrate the great potential of controlling catalytic behavior in bimetallic nanoparticle systems via tuning the composition and size of nanoparticles with potential applications for nanoscale design of industrial catalysts.The rational synthesis of ultrasmall indium antimonide (InSb) nanowires down to 4.5 nm diameter was carried out75via a vapor–liquid–solid growth mechanism, where monodispersed gold colloids were used as a catalyst (Fig. 12). The growth was carried out in a home-built three-zone CVD system, which allows continuous tunability of respective indium and antimony vapor pressure via separate temperature control. InSb nanowires (Fig. 13) were single crystals elongating along the 〈111〉 direction, regardless of wire diameter. It was emphasized by the authors that successful growth of these nanowires is due to several key factors: (1) ability to adjust the temperature of the In and Sb sources (and thereby In and Sb vapor pressure) and the substrate separately, (2) use of monodispersed Au colloidal particles is indispensable for preparing nanowires with desired diameters; (3) to avoid the formation of oxide materials, it is critical to remove the residual oxygen and avoid air diffusion into the CVD system during synthesis. Fig. 12  Schematic shows the three-zone CVD for the growth of InSb nanowires, in which the source temperature and substrate temperature can be separately adjusted. The Sb powder and in ingot were used as precursor sources and placed into upstream zone A and B. Growth substrate coated with gold nanoparticles was placed in downstream zone C. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Yang, G. Wang, P. Slattery, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Ultrasmall Single-Crystal Indium Antimonide Nanowires, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2479–2482), ref. 75.  Fig. 13  SEM images of InSb nanowires grown on InSb(100) substrate using 30 nm gold nanoparticles as catalyst. The red arrows highlight the crystal base for the nanowire growth. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Yang, G. Wang, P. Slattery, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Ultrasmall Single-Crystal Indium Antimonide Nanowires, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2479–2482, ref. 75). Elemental non-metal nanoparticlesSurprisingly, we note relatively low number of reports dedicated to ultrasmall carbon nanoparticles, despite an evidently enormous quantity of achievements in the areas of CNTs, fullerenes and other carbon allotropes. Thus, CVD technique using an iron nitrate nonahydrate solution in i-PrOH was used to catalyze carbon nanoparticles formation on an oxidized silicon wafer.76,77 The process resulted in semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) (<0.7 nm in diameter, among the smallest SWCNTs diameters earlier reported) and more than 1 eV band gap energy. Among other important studies on ultrasmall CNTs, we note first principles calculation on their electronic structure and optical properties by using full potential linear APW (FP-LAPW) and pseudo-potential plane wave (PP-PW) methods,78 the electronic transport by using nonequilibrium Green's function method,79 strain-induced metal to semiconductor transition in CNTs,80 lattice parameter dependence of energy barriers of hydrogenation,81 complex electron–phonon driven lattice dynamics,82 tight-binding band structure calculations,83 hydrogenation84 and lithium-atom intercalation into ultrasmall diameter carbon nanotubes,85 low temperature ESR properties of ultrasmall (0.45 nm) double walled carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs) embedded in zeolite nanochannels,86 and complete ion rejection using carbon nanotube membranes comprising ultrasmall radii nanotubes.87 In case of other carbon allotropes, homogeneously fluorescent nanodiamonds were fabricated with high yields, yielding highly crystalline ultrasmall nanoparticles (<10 nm).88 The developed technique opened up avenues for the industrial cost-effective production of fluorescent nanodiamonds with well-controlled properties. Thermodynamic stability of nanodiamonds was studied89 and it was established that below 3 nm, nanodiamonds were verified to be more stable than graphite. The nanometer-sized curvature of nanodiamonds was found to be the physical origin of their stability.Various techniques have been applied for obtaining and characterization of silicon nanoparticles. Thus, P-doped Si nanocrystals (radius ≤2 nm) were synthesized by depositing an ultrathin (0.3 nm) P–SiO2 film close to each SiO layer of SiO/SiO2 multilayers.90 During annealing phosphorus atoms migrate into the Si-rich region. Phosphorus atoms segregate in the Si nanocrystal region and are incorporated in the silicon nanostructures. It was noted that the phosphorus level in the Si nanoclusters can be controlled by changing the P content in the P–SiO2 layer. In a related report,91 ultrasmall silicon nanoparticles (average size 2 nm) with narrow size distribution were prepared in a one step process by UV picosecond laser ablation of silicon bulk in liquid (water and toluene, Fig. 14), resulting from an in situ photofragmentation effect. It was shown that water-synthesized Si-NPs had blue–green photoluminescence emission characterized by signal modulation at a frequency of 673 cm−1 related to electron–phonon coupling, meanwhile the synthesis in toluene led to generation of Si-NPs embedded in the graphitic carbon–polymer composite which has intrinsic optical properties at the origin of the optical absorption and luminescence of the obtained colloidal solution. The luminescent properties of silicon nanoparticles were studied. Thus, suspensions of amorphous Si nanoparticles (size range of 1–3 nm; the most probable size is at 1.7 nm with a Gaussian fitting), uniformly dispersed in the solvents, were fabricated using electrochemical etching of amorphous Si films deposited on metallic Mo and subsequent ultrasonic treatment in H2O and CHCl3 solutions.92 It was established that for the CHCl3 suspension, with time the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum blueshifted as the excitation wavelength decreased, meanwhile for the H2O suspension, the PL spectrum initially showed blueshift with decreasing excitation wavelength and then remained unchanged in peak position when the excitation wavelength was <320 nm. This difference was attributed to different surface bonding structures of amorphous Si nanoparticles, induced by the solvents. Fig. 14  A schematic diagram of the experimental setup of laser ablation of Si target in solvents (water and toluene). Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry (R. Intartaglia, K. Bagga, A. Genovese, A. Athanassiou, R. Cingolani, A. Diaspro and F. Brandi, Influence of organic solvent on optical and structural properties of ultra-small silicon dots synthesized by UV laser ablation in liquid, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(44), 15406–15411), ref. 91. A series of calculation studies for ultrasmall silicon nanostructures were carried out. Thus, the phenomenological phonon confinement model (PCM) was validated93 for Si nanostructures on the sub-3 nm length scale. The ability of model to explain the presence of a background scattering spectrum implies the existence of a secondary population of extremely small (sub-nm), amorphous Si nanoclusters which are not visible in the X-TEM images. Also, the inclusion of an additional fitting parameter, which takes into account the observed peak shift, can be explained by a size-dependent interfacial stress that is minimized by the nanocluster/crystal growth. In addition, high level calculations of the optical gap and absorption spectrum of ultrasmall Si nanocrystals, with H and O passivation, were reported.94 Some of the details of the absorption and emission properties of the 1 nm Si nanoparticles can be efficiently described, as well as the effect of oxygen contamination on the optical properties of 1 nm nanoparticles and its possible contribution to their experimentally observed absorption and emission properties. As a representative application of silicon nanoparticles, we note that a nonenzyme glucose sensing material was prepared95 by incorporating ultrasmall (1–3 nm) Si nanoparticles in polyaniline, a conducting polymer, as a nano-composite material. When deposited on electrodes, the composite material with 3D loading of the nanoparticles showed a significantly enhanced amperometric response to glucose, compared to the nanoparticles deposited on bare electrodes and electrodes immobilized with the enzyme, glucose oxidase. Another use is that ultrasmall colloidal silicon nanoparticles behave as electrocatalysts for the oxidation of ethanol, methanol, and glucose.96 Curiously, an unexpected light dependence of the catalytic current was observed: a significant increase in the catalytic current was obtained when the catalysis was performed in the dark.In the case of Si compounds or nanocomposites with other elements, we note first the formation of colloidal Si/Ge semiconductor nanoparticles by electrochemical etching of Ge quantum dots (GEDOT), Si–Ge graded layers (GRADE) and Si–Ge multi-quantum well (MQW) structures (Fig. 15) which were prepared on Si wafers using low-pressure CVD (LPCVD).97 The Si/Ge nanoparticles obtained from GEDOT and GRADE structures, gave blue emissions, upon 250 and 300 nm UV excitations. The nanoparticles obtained from the MQW structure exhibited various color emissions (orange, blue, green and red) upon excitation with λ = 250, 360, 380 and 400 nm light. In addition, the formation of hemispherical β-FeSi2 nanodots (average size of ∼5 nm diameter) with an ultrahigh density (>1012 cm−2) by codeposition at disilicide stoichiometric deposition rates of Fe and Si on Si(111) substrates, covered with ultrathin SiO2 films, was studied.98 It was shown that the formed nanodots were strained with a main configuration of β-FeSi2 (110)/Si(111). Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the grown stack including alternating multilayers. (b) Cross-sectional TEM image of the heteroepitaxial layer (770 nm) grown on silicon. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier Science (S. Alkis, M. Ghaffari and A. K. Okyay, Synthesis of ultra-small Si/Ge semiconductor nano-particles using electrochemistry, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134(2–3), 616–622, ref. 97). Additionally to carbon and silicon, ultrasmall selenium nanoparticles were prepared through direct nanolization of gray selenium (one of the most widely used Se sources with very limited biocompatibility and bioactivity) by polyethylene glycol (PEG).99 It was suggested that the amphoteric properties of PEG and the coordination between oxygen and selenium atoms contributed to the formation of ultrasmall nanoparticles. PEG–SeNPs was found to exhibit stronger growth inhibition on drug-resistant hepatocellular carcinoma (R-HepG2) cells than on normal HepG2 cells. PEG–SeNPs may be a candidate for further evaluation as a chemotherapeutic agent for drug-resistant liver cancer and the strategy to use PEG200 as a surface decorator could be a highly efficient way to enhance the anticancer efficacy of nanomaterials.Nanostructures of iron oxidesGeneral information on iron-containing nanomaterialsIron-containing nanomaterials have attracted a great deal of interest due to their magnetic properties, allowing such applications as targeted drug delivery100,101 and other areas of nanomedicine. Some applications of iron-containing nanomaterials have been recently reviewed,102,103 showing their usefulness in catalysis,104 cell labeling105,106 and water treatment (remediation of pollutants and bacteria).107–109 Iron typically exists in the environment as iron(II) and iron(III) oxides.110 Iron oxides (iron oxide nanoparticles are also referred in several reports to as superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) although SPIONS have inducible magnetic properties),111,112 are one of the most important transition metal oxides of technological importance. Iron oxides is also a collective term for oxides, hydroxides and oxy-hydroxides composed of Fe(II) and/or Fe(III) cations and O2− and/or OH− anions. Sixteen pure phases of iron oxides, i.e., oxides, hydroxides or oxy-hydroxides are known to date. These are Fe(OH)3, Fe(OH)2, Fe5HO8·4H2O, Fe3O4, FeO, five polymorphs of FeOOH and four of Fe2O3. Characteristics of these oxide compounds include mostly the trivalent state of the iron, low solubility and brilliant colors. The main advantages of nanoiron among other nanomaterials are relatively low toxicity and biodegradability. In addition, iron is relatively cheap and a widespread material.113Among iron oxides (SPIONs), magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) are of a particular interest. Magnetite is an inverse spinel ferrite. The oxygen ions form a close-packed cubic lattice with the iron ions located at two different interstices between them, tetrahedral (A) sites and octahedral (B) sites. Chemically, magnetite/maghemite can be represented by the formula: Fe3+ [Fe2+1−yFe3+1−yFe3+1.67y0.33y]O4, where y = 0 stays for pure magnetite and y = 1 for pure maghemite (fully oxidized magnetite). In the temperature range from room to Curie temperature (Tc = 860 K) the A sites are populated by Fe3+ ions and the B sites are populated equally by Fe3+ and Fe2+ ions. That way, twice as many sites are populated with Fe3+ than with Fe2+ ions. Although a simple dehydration of lepidocrocite (γ-FeOOH) topotactically transforms into γ-Fe2O3, commercial manufacturing of maghemite follows the multistep process (1): (α and/or γ)-FeOOH (oxidation) → α-Fe2O3 (reduction) → Fe3O4 (controlled oxidation) → γ-Fe2O3(1)SPIONs typically consist of two components, an iron oxide core of one or more magnetic crystallites embedded in a coating. The SPIONs' core can be composed of magnetite (Fe3O4) and/or maghemite (γ-Fe2O3). The size of SPIONs makes an important contribution to their fate in organisms. Categories of SPIONs, based on their overall diameter (including iron oxide core and hydrated coating), are noted in the literature as oral or micron-sized SPIONs between 300 nm and 3.5 μm; standard or small SPIONs (SSPIONs) at approximately 60–150 nm; ultrasmall SPIONs (USPIONs) of approximately 10–50 nm; and monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticles (MION – a subset of USPIONs) of approximately 10–30 nm. MION are so named to underline the single crystal nature of their core. This is in contrast to SPIONs >50 nm that are comprised of multiple iron oxide crystals.114 SPIONs have much larger magnetic susceptibilities (compared with strictly paramagnetic materials) as the entire crystal aligns with the applied field due to its single crystal nature. Hence SPIONs are useful as contrast agents or for hyperthermic treatment of malignant tumors.115The current applications for SPIO nanoparticles are limited because these relatively large particles, with an average diameter of 80 nm, are rapidly internalized by the mononuclear phagocytic system of the liver and the spleen. However, as contrast agent, USPIO nanomaterials due to their much smaller size, do not accumulate in the reticuloendothelial system (RES) system as fast as their larger counterparts, therefore they present longer blood circulating times. It has observed that after USPIOs smaller than 10 nm are intravenously injected, they accumulate in lymph nodes, producing hypointense signals. Therefore, the USPIOs are potentially useful in detecting lymph node metastases.116 Indeed, USPIO have been introduced as a MRI contrast agent after the gadolinium chelates and appear to be currently a more relevant agent due to the high MR signal per unit of metal. The use of USPIO agents, Sinerem (Guerbet), has allowed for the direct visualization of macrophage infiltration of carotid atheroma in clinical study (Table 1).117,118 The surface coating of USPIO nanoparticles also influences their stability and cellular uptake by macrophages (vide infra). The USPIO, ferumoxytol is approved (2009) for iron-replacement therapy in patients with chronic renal failure and have not revealed significant toxicities.119,120
Table 1 List of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast agents

NameLaboratory developerSize/nmCoating agentIndicationT1/2Clinical dose/μmol Fe kg−1Relaxivity/mM−1 s−1Ferumoxtran-10 AMI-227 Combidex/SineremGuerbet AMAG Pharm. Inc.15–30Dextran T10, T1Lymph node, liver, angiography24–36 h45r1 = 9.9r2 = 65Ferumoxytol code 7228AMAG Pharm. Inc.30Polyglucose sorbitol carboxymethyl etherKidneyLong blood half-time, useful as blood pool agent18–74r1 = 15r2 = 89SH U 555 C SupravistBayer Schering Pharma AG21CarboxydextranAngiography6 h40r1 = 10.7r2 = 38Feruglose NC-100150 ClariscanGE-Healthcare20Pegylated starchLymph node, liver, perfusion, angiography6 h36n.a.VSOP-C184Ferropharm7Citrate, dextran, carboxydeztran or polyethyleneglycolAngiography0.6–1.3 h15–75r1 = 14r2 = 33.4Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticlesUltrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles have attracted attention in the last decade and the number of publications related with this material has increased (Fig. 16). USPIO nanoparticles have been designed mainly for biomedical application such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and drug delivery systems. To the best of our knowledge, the first study about of the evaluation of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) as a potential contrast agent was at the end of the 1980s, where the authors conformed that a single intravenous administration after 1 day of USPIOs allowed detection of lymph node metastases due to their unchanged relaxation time (T2) whereas the T2 of normal lymph nodes decreased from 74 ms to 30 ms.121 Fig. 16  Number of publications featuring the term “ultrasmall nanoparticles” in their topics (Source: ISI Web of Science, retrieved 18 December, 2012). Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles synthesis. Ultrasmall iron oxide nanoparticles have been synthesized by different synthetic methods such as coprecipitation (see Table 2), hydrothermal conditions, thermal decomposition,122,123 microemulsion,124 laser pyrolysis,125 polyol method, flocculation–redispersion, microwave,126 free-solvent,127 PVP method,128 and using natural products of vitamin C, green tea solution, green tea extracts of epigallocatechin gallate, and epicatechin.129 In the following, we try to present typical and recent examples for the discussions of each synthetic process.
Table 2 Some examples of chemical methods for the synthesis of iron-containing nanomaterials

Synthesis methodCore size/nmConditions/reactions or descriptionRef.Coprecipitation9A mixture of FeCl3 and FeCl2 was added dropwise to a mechanically stirred solution of NaOH within 5 min under an inert N2 atmosphere at 80 °C. The mixture was stirred for 20 min and subsequently cooled to ambient temperature. The sediment was separated by an external magnetic field, washed with deionized water, and dispersed into 100 mL of aqueous hydrochloric acid (0.01 M)130Coprecipitation6–7The coprecipitation mixture was comprised of FeCl2, FeCl3, and the mixture was slowly added to NaOH with shaking to yield the precipitate. The precipitate was separated by centrifugation and washes with deoxygenated water. The SPIO nanoparticles were modified by heating over 120 °C in water in an autoclave for 12 h to afford the USPIO nanoparticles131Hydrothermal conditions4Fe3O4 were synthesized by high temperature hydrolysis of chelated Fe2+ and Fe3+ diethylene glycol alkoxy complexes in a solution without using capping ligands or surfactants: [Fe(DEG)Cl2]2− + 2[Fe(DEG)Cl3]2− + 2H2O + 2OH− → Fe3O4 + 3H2DEG + 8Cl−132Microemulsion3–9Two separate microemulsions (ME1 and ME2) were prepared using each surfactant. The abbreviated terms B97, I520, and T100 refer to Brij-97, Igepal CO-520 and Triton X-100 surfactant containing microemulsions, respectively. ME1 contained the iron salts, FeSO4 and FeCl3, whereas ME2 contained base, either NaOH or NH4OH. All aqueous solutions were prepared with deoxygenated water (nitrogen purged). The microemulsion was then placed in an ultrasonicator with magnetic stirrer removed. ME2 was then added dropwise to ME1 using a glass syringe133Laser pyrolysis< 4Laser pyrolysis is one of the most convenient synthesis processes because it enables the production of nanoparticles in a continuous way with low cost and with no use of surfactants or hazardous additives. This method prevents the formation of aggregates and renders a uniform distribution of well dispersed ultrasmall nanoparticles (<4 nm) in a water-compatible solvent134Polyol method3–6Ultrasmall water-soluble Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized in diethylene glycol (DEG) via a facile one-pot reaction135Flocculation–redispersion5–8First, USPIO nanoparticles were synthesized and flocculated to form the large clusters through bridging effect of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) during coprecipitation process. Then the flocculated USPIO was separated and purified from the solution conveniently through magnetic sedimentation. Finally, USPIO in the clusters were released again and well dispersed through electrostatic repelling effect of citric acid with the aid of ultrasonication136The most common chemical method for synthesizing USPIO (Fe3O4) is coprecipitation of ferric and ferrous salts in an alkaline medium (eqn (2)), with or without surface complexing agents such as dextran or polyethylene glycol, or microemulsion techniques with small amounts of iron ions trapped inside surfactant bubbles in an oil medium.137,138 Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH− ⇌ Fe(OH)2 + 2Fe(OH)3 → Fe3O4 + 4H2O(2)Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles thinly coated with silica synthetized by coprecipitation was reported (Fig. 17).139 The authors found a rapid and economical synthesis of USPIOs with controlled thin coatings of silica with diameter of the nanoparticles of 20 nm. Indeed, the silica provides a negative surface charge in physiological pH and improves the biocompatibility. Hydrothermal technique is defined as any heterogeneous reaction in the presence of aqueous solvents or mineralizer under high pressure and temperature conditions. The particle size was controlled by using the starting solution containing lactate and sulfate ions at various concentrations, the particle size could be varied from 9.5 to 38.6 nm.140 On the other hand, size-controlled and coated magnetite nanoparticles with glucose and gluconic acid were synthesized by Sun et al. using iron(III) chloride. The particle size could be easily controlled in the range of 4–16 nm.141 Ultrasmall superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles (USIRONs, 5 nm, good crystallinity) were synthesized by an easily scalable chemical reduction of colloidal iron hydroxide under hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 18).142 Vitamin C, used as a chemical reducing agent, also served as a capping agent in the oxidized form (dehydroascorbic acid, DHAA) to impart nanoparticles with exceptional solubility and stability in water, PBS buffer and cell culture medium. The cell tests performed with primary human immune-competent cells confirmed the excellent biocompatibility of USIRONs. Hydrothermal dephosphorylation route for the synthesis of ultrasmall nucleotide-coated superparamagnetic γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles (∼5 nm) was demonstrated.143 The synthesized NPs show excellent thermal stability, water dispersion and biocompatibility, allowing possible applications for in vivo X-ray contrast agents. An organic solution phase decomposition route has been widely used in iron oxide NPs synthesis, and decomposition of Fe(cup)3 (cup = N-nitrosophenylhydroxylamine), Fe(acac)3 (acac = acetylacetonate), or Fe(CO)5 followed by oxidation can lead to high-quality monodispersed iron oxide NPs, which usually requires relatively higher temperatures and complicated operation. As an alternative method, the in situ reverse microemulsion synthesis is frequently used to generate a silica coating on the surfaces of iron oxide particles.144 This method generally leads to poorly crystalline magnetic cores and might require much effort to separate the core–shell nanoparticles from the large amount of surfactants associated with the microemulsion system. The presence of these surfactants may severely interfere with the medical and biological applications. However, Darbandi et al. recently reported the synthesis in high yield using the microemulsion route at room temperature of crystalline iron oxide nanoparticles with spinel structure and mean diameters of about 3, 6 and 9 nm.145 Laser pyrolysis is one of the most convenient synthetic methods because it enables the production of nanoparticles in a continuous way with low cost, no use of surfactants or hazardous additives, and the particles prepared usually are smaller and less crystalline than those prepared by other synthesis routes.146 Also the method prevents the formation of aggregates and renders a uniform distribution of well dispersed ultrasmall nanoparticles (<4 nm) in a water-compatible solvent. Thus, Veintemillas-Verdaguer et al.147 reported the synthesis by laser pyrolysis of iron oxide and acid-treated iron oxide nanomaterials (Fig. 19) where the authors found a significant enhancement in the colloidal properties, such as smaller aggregate sizes in aqueous media and increased surface charge densities, through a series of partial dissolution–recrystallization steps. Even microwave (MW) heating has been proven to be a very original technology for nanoparticles synthesis.148 Up to date, still there are very few reports about the synthesis of USPIO with this technique. Osborne et al.149 reported a rapid, straightforward microwave-assisted synthesis of superparamagnetic dextran-coated iron oxide nanoparticles. Thus, nanoparticles were produced in two hydrodynamic sizes with differing core morphologies by a two-step or single-step process. A striking benefit of these methods is the ability to obtain swift and consistent results. A solvent-free approach was reported for the synthesis of maghemite NPs by an isothermal oxidation of iron(II) acetate treated by initial grinding leading to quasi-monodisperse (15–20 nm) NPs.150 Probably the most recent synthetic methods are the polyol and flocculation–redispersion method. The polyol method is an efficient and versatile chemical synthesis of water dispersible nanoparticles with well-defined shapes and controlled sizes.151,152 Polyol can act as a solvent to dissolve inorganic compounds due to their high dielectric constants, and offers a wide operating-temperature range for preparing inorganic nanoparticles. It can act as a reducing agent, control particle growth, and prevent interparticle aggregation.153 The new flocculation–redispersion method to synthesize and purify the USPIO nanoparticles coated with carboxyl dextran (Fig. 20) derivative consists of three steps. First, nanoparticles were synthesized and flocculated to form large clusters through bridging effect of polyvinyl alcohol during coprecipitation process. Then the flocculated USPIO was separated and purified from the solution through magnetic sedimentation and finally, USPIO in the clusters were released again and well dispersed through electrostatic repelling effect of citric acid with the aid of ultrasonication (Fig. 21A). The USPIO nanoparticles were almost spherical and relatively uniform in size, ranging from 5 to 8 nm. The hydrodynamic size distribution by HPPS is shown in Fig. 21B, the average hydrodynamic size of USPIO being 25 nm. The most essential parameters that the contrast agents have to satisfy are the particle size, particle size distribution, crystallinity degree, and phase purity, and therefore the sol–gel process is not very suitable for producing MRI contrast agents.154 Fig. 17  TEM using a JEOL 4000EX of (A) synthesized ∼175 nm silica beads embedded with USPIOs, (B) USPIOs coated with ∼10 nm-thick shells of silica, and (C) USPIOs coated with ∼2.5 nm thick shells of silica. With permission of IOP Publishing (A. Bumb, M. W. Brechbiel, P. L. Choyke, L. Fugger, A. Eggeman, D. Prabhakaran, J. Hutchinson and P. J. Dobson, Synthesis and characterization of ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles thinly coated with silica, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 335601, ref. 139).  Fig. 18  Top line: schematic representation of the preparation of USIRONs. Bottom line from left to right: 3D structures for vitamin C (3), DHAA (4), and the interaction between the iron oxide NPs and the capping agent (5). Gray, red, and green balls correspond to the carbon atoms, oxygen atoms, and iron oxide NPs, respectively. With permission of the American Chemical Society (L.-S. Xiao, J. T. Li, D. F. Brougham, E. K. Fox, N. Feliu, A. Bushmelev, A. Schmidt, N. Mertens, F. Kiessling and M. Valldor, Water-soluble superparamagnetic magnetite nanoparticles with biocompatible coating for enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6315–6324, ref. 142).  Fig. 19  HR-TEM and TEM images of the laser pyrolysis sample before (L) and after (L-AT) acid treatment. On the upper part, discernible lattice fringes were used to determine the iron oxide phase. On the right, the log–normal fit of both the particle size distributions and the hydrodynamic diameter in water of both samples are shown. With permission of the American Chemical Society (R. Costo, V. Bello, C. Robic, M. Port, J. F. Marco, M. P. Morales and S. Veintemillas-Verdager, Ultrasmall Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications: Improving the Colloidal and Magnetic Properties, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 178–185, ref. 134).  Fig. 20  The main process of the flocculation–redispersion precipitation method. With permission of Elsevier Science (C.-M. Cheng, G. Kou, X.-L. Wang, S.-H. Wang, H.-C. Gu and Y.-J. Guo, Synthesis of carboxyl superparamagnetic ultrasmall iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles by a novel flocculation–redispersion process, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2663–2669, ref. 136).  Fig. 21  HRTEM image of the re-dispersed USPIO (A) size distribution of USPIO nanoparticles in water from HPPS (B), the average hydrodynamic size of USPIO being 25 nm. With permission of Elsevier Science (C.-M. Cheng, G. Kou, X.-L. Wang, S.-H. Wang, H.-C. Gu and Y.-J. Guo, Synthesis of carboxyl superparamagnetic ultrasmall iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles by a novel flocculation–redispersion process, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2663–2669, ref. 136). Time relaxation. The principal aim of contrast agent application in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a shortening of the relaxation times such as longitudinal (T1) and the transverse (T2) which characterize the two independent physical processes of proton relaxation. The efficiency of a contrast agent is usually described as its relaxivity r1 or r2, respectively, which is, the ability to shorten the relaxation time per millimole of the contrast agent. The contrast agents are classified as positive and negative. Positive contrast agents cause a reduction in the T1 relaxation time (increased signal intensity on T1 weighted images) and at the same time provide moderate impact on T2, thus generating a bright image. Negative contrast agents on the other hand mainly shorten the transverse relaxation time T2 (appearing predominantly dark on MRI) and lead to signal reduction, that is, a dark image. Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (USPIOs) are considered as negative contrast agent who can be used for MR lymphography and a good advantage of these nanoparticles is the low long-term toxicity. Recently, Weller et al.155 reported a potential MR T1 contrast agent based on very small PEGylated iron oxide nanoparticles (core sizes of 4 and 6 nm), where the size of the crystalline core provide suitable relaxometric properties and a dense and optimized PEG coating provides high stability and low cytotoxicity. Therefore, they were able to synthesize an iron oxide based T1 contrast agent with a robust PEG coating providing the smallest r2/r1 ratio of 2.4 at 1.41 T (clinical fields) reported so far for PEG coated superparamagnetic nanoparticles. The r1 relaxivity (7.3 mM−1 s−1) that is approximately two times higher compared to conventional Magnevist (Gd-DTPA) as a typical T1 contrast agent based on gadolinium as a clinical standard.However, the efficient delivery of nanomaterials to specific targets for in vivo biomedical imaging is hindered by rapid sequestration by the reticuloendothelial system and consequent short circulation times. Based on that a new stealth PEG polymer conjugate containing a terminal 1,1-bisphosphonate (BP) group for strong and stable binding to the surface of ultrasmall-superparamagnetic oxide nanomaterials (USPIOs) has been reported.156 The new nanoparticles, PEG(5)-BP-USPIOs are stable in water or saline for at least 7 months and display a near-zero ζ-potential at neutral pH. The relaxivities (r1 and r2) were measured at 3 T, revealing a high r1 (9.5 mM−1 s−1) and low r2/r1 ratio (2.97), making these USPIOs attractive as T1-weighted MRI contrast agents at high magnetic fields. The strong T1-effect was demonstrated in vivo, revealing that PEG(5)-BP-USPIOs remain in the bloodstream and enhance its signal 6-fold, allowing the visualization of blood vessels and vascular organs with high spatial definition. Additionally, the relaxivity values allowed to inject a dose 4 times lower than with other USPIOs.An interesting example of use of ultralow (≤10 mT) and ultrahigh magnetic fields (14.1 T) was reported. Thus, the USPIOs were synthesized (core size of 6 nm) where T1 and T2 were investigated at ultralow (212 μT for T2 and 10 mT for T1) and at 14.1 T with different iron concentrations. At all of the fields, there is a linear relationship between the inverse of relaxation times and the iron concentration. The spin–spin relaxivity (r2) at 14.1 T was found to be much larger than that value of the ultralow field. At ultralow field, however, the spin-lattice relaxivity (r1) is larger than the r1 at ultrahigh field.157Other oxidesSilica nanoparticles are generally used as a matrix for encapsulation/supporting varieties of nanoparticles, in particular ultrasmall NPs, for example ceria.158 However, ultrasmall SiO2 Nps alone are very rare. The one-pot synthesis of PEGylated mesoporous silica nanoparticles with a single pore, tunable sizes around 9 nm and narrow size distributions that can be labeled with near-IR dye Cy5.5, was reported.159 Particle synthesis was performed near r.t. (30 °C) in aqueous solution in the presence of hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as structure directing agent, with tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) as silica source, and ammonia as base catalyst. PEG–silane was added directly into the synthesis batch to quench particle formation. The possibility to distinguish an “inside” and “outside” may render these particles an interesting subject for further studies in sensing, drug delivery, and theranostics applications.In case of titanium dioxide, one of the hottest materials160,161 in nanotechnology, ultrasmall and highly soluble (with excellent dispersibility in EtOH and Me3COH) anatase nanoparticles (∼3 nm) were synthesized from TiCl4 using Me3COH as a reaction medium.162 Microwave heating was found to enhance the crystallinity of the nanoparticles and to shorten the reaction time to <1 h at temperatures ≥50 °C. It was shown that a solution of particles after synthesis can be directly used for preparation of mesoporous films (surface areas of up to 300 m2 g−1) without the need for particle separation. In case of water solubility, a success has also been reached: biocompatible TiO2 nanoparticles containing a functional NH2 group or coated with mercaptosuccinic acid which are easily dispersible in water, were synthesized.163 The authors showed that it is possible to exchange the stearic acid from presynthesized fatty acid-coated anatase 5 nm nanoparticles (Fig. 22) with a range of organic ligands {C6H5COOH, o-C6H4(COOH)2, (CH3)3C–O–C(O)NH–CH2COOH, (CH3)3C–O–C(O)NH–CH(CH2COOH)(COOH), HOOC–CH(SH)CH2COOH} with no change in the size or morphology. These nanoparticles, after further functionalization, could be used for medical imaging or to carry cytotoxic radionuclides for radioimmunotherapy where ultrasmall nanoparticles will be essential for rapid renal clearance. A facile and scalable synthesis method was developed164 for flower-like TiO2–graphene nanostructured composites as high-performance anode materials for Li-ion batteries, using tetrabutyl titanate and oxalic acid as precursors (reaction (3)) with further calcination (Fig. 23). Full cell measurement using the TiO2–graphene as the anode material and spinel LiMnO2 as the cathode material exhibited good high-rate performance and cycling stability, indicating that the TiO2–graphene nanocomposite has a practical application potential in advanced Li-ion batteries. In addition, similar composites can be used as photoanode materials: studying the effect of nanostructure of graphene-composited TiO2 on the performance of dye-sensitized solar cells, it was shown that the ultrasmall 2 nm TiO2–graphene composite based photoanode exhibited the highest power conversion efficiency of 7.25% in comparison with 12 nm nanoparticles and nanorods.165 Ti(OC4H9)4 + H2C2O4 + 2H2O → Ti(OH)2C2O4 + 4C4H9OH(3) Fig. 22  Exchange of steric acid from presynthesized fatty acid-coated anatase 5 nm nanoparticles with organic ligands. With permission of Springer (R. W. Cheyne, T. A. D. Smith, L. Trembleau and A. C. McLaughlin, Synthesis and characterisation of biologically compatible TiO2 nanoparticles, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6(1), 423, 6 pp, ref. 163).  Fig. 23  Illustration of the preparation processes and growth mechanisms of TiO2-based nanocomposites. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, Scalable Synthesis of TiO2–Graphene Nanostructured Composite with High Rate Performance for Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(12), 11035–11043, ref. 164). The decomposition of metal (Ti, Zr, Sn) alkoxides at 250 °C in a solution of tetradecene and dodecylamine resulted166 in the formation of ultrasmall (1–2 nm) oxide nanoparticles with unusual structural properties: high-pressure orthorhombic phase (SnO2), which is converted to stable cassiterite at 350 °C; partially crystallized ZrO2 nanoparticles; mainly amorphous TiO2 nanoparticles. The two latter samples displayed phase stability reversal over a broad range of temperatures. In other conditions, dielectric thin films were fabricated167 using dispersions of ultrasmall ZrO2 and BaTiO3 nanoparticles with a low-temperature processing, including formation of highly crystalline nanoparticles, their further transformation to dispersions through chemical modification of their surface, and final fabrication of homogeneous and densely-packed dielectric thin films. In case of lanthanide ion doping of ZrO2, inorganic oxide bioprobes based on sub-5 nm amine-functionalized tetragonal ZrO2–Ln3+ (Ln = Eu, Tb) nanoparticles were synthesized168via a facile solvothermal method and ligand exchange and applied as a sensitive time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) bioprobe to detect avidin with a record-low detection limit of 3.0 nM. The oxide nanoparticles also exhibited specific recognition (Fig. 24) of cancer cells overexpressed with urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR, an important marker of tumor biology and metastasis) and thus may have great potentials in targeted bioimaging. These achievements may allow open up new avenues for the exploration of Ln3+-doped oxide-based NPs in versatile bioapplications such as TR biodetection and bioimaging. Fig. 24  Schematic illustration showing the specific recognition of ZrO2:Tb-ATF NPs to H1299 cancer cells with uPAR high expression. With permission of the American Chemical Society (Y. Liu, S. Zhou, D. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Huang, H. Zhu, E. Ma and X. Chen, Amine-Functionalized Lanthanide-Doped Zirconia Nanoparticles: Optical Spectroscopy, Time-Resolved Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Biodetection, and Targeted Imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(36), 15083–15090, ref. 168). Returning to SnO2, which is the most widely investigated metal oxide material for gas detection,169 we note that its use is limited by such disadvantages as the large resistance and high operating temperatures, which could be avoided by hybridization with nanostructured carbon. Thus, ultrasmall SnO2 nanoparticles (1–3 nm) were uniformly coated onto bundles of SWCNTs by a surfactant-assisted solid-state reaction approach. Compared to the pure carbon tubes gas sensors, the nanocomposite gas sensor responds to NO2 in low concentrations with good linearity, high sensitivity, and fast recovery, while working at a relatively low temperature. In addition, classic indium tin oxide (ITO), used in a host of applications in the nanotechnology, can be prepared in the form of nanostructured transparent conducting ITO materials starting from ultrasmall indium tin hydroxide nanoparticles.170 To reach this, a strategy for preparation of nanosized, nearly spherical and highly dispersible nanoparticles of indium tin hydroxide (“nano-hydroxides”) was applied, which can be assembled into regular mesoporous architectures directed by a commercially available Pluronic polymer. Thus assembled structures can be easily transformed into conducting crystalline mesoporous ITO films by a mild heat treatment at 300 °C. The ITO films can accommodate large amounts of redox-active molecules and serve as efficient conducting electrodes with a very high surface area. The authors believe that the nano-hydroxides can become universal building blocks for the fabrication of crystalline ITO materials with arbitrary nano-morphologies.Distinct TiO2 nanostructures are known as a supports for other nanoparticles, in particular ultrasmall ones. Thus, ultrasmall Cu2O nanoparticles (1.5–3 nm) were loaded on TiO2 nanosheets with {001} facets exposed through a one-pot hydrothermal reaction.171 Caused by the electron transfer from Cu2O to TiO2, Cu2O/TiO2 nanosheets showed excellent visible-light activity, about 3 times that of N-doped TiO2 nanosheets with {001} facets exposed. The Ti:Cu = 30:1 (at. ratio) sample revealed the best activity due to its balance in light harvest and electron transfer rate in the degradation of phenol under visible light. Other non-f-metals are represented by a few examples, having important applications. Thus, ZnO nanoparticles with high surface areas and ultrasmall particle sizes have dramatically enhanced efficiency and capacity of virus inactivation, which cannot be achieved by their bulk counterparts.172 Such ZnO nanoparticles coated on glass fiber substrates were found to be extremely powerful viruicidal materials. Ultrasmall MnO particles were synthesized and coated with thiolated molecules (DMSA) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Fig. 25) to allow enhanced cell labeling properties and colloidal stability,173 as well as the fabrication of individual ultrasmall nanoparticles of MnO (USPMnO) and nanoaggregates of the same material (SPMnO). HT-1080 cancer cells incubated with the contrast agents were clearly visualized in MRI for Mn contents >1.1 pg Mn per cell. A higher signal per cell was found for SPMnO-labeled compared with USPMnO-labeled cells, due to the higher relaxometric properties of the agglomerates. In addition, microwave-synthesized suspension of ultrasmall (d ∼ 2 nm) MoOx nanoparticles in n-butanol was studied in detail in respect of its in situ oxidation (Fig. 26).174 It was found, among other results, that short time (≤3 h) reactions at r.t. with sufficiently high (≥0.1 M) concentration of H2O2 resulted in ≤1 nm MoOx nanoparticles with high work function and almost entirely MoO3 properties which are desirable for HTL material in OPV devices. Finally, a one-pot, two-precursor synthesis route to obtain <2 nm WOx nanoparticles in which a polyoxometalate salt was decomposed thermally in a high-boiling organic solvent oleylamine, was described.175 Carrying out the synthesis in the presence of organic oxidant trimethylamine N-oxide led to smaller WOx NPs (1.0 ± 0.4 nm), whereas the reductant 1,12-dodecanediol led to WOx nanorods (4 ± 1 nm × 20 ± 5 nm). These results allowed control the size and shape of transition metal oxide NPs, which will be especially useful in catalysis. Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the different nanoparticle systems on MnO basis; TEM images of (b) MnO–oleate, (c) MnODMSA (SPMnO) and (d) MnO–DMSA–PEG (USPMnO, after alkalinization). (DMSA = meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid). With permission of the American Chemical Society (M. Letourneau, M. Tremblay, L. Faucher, D. Rojas, P. Chevallier, Y. Gossuin, J. Lagueux, M.-A. Fortin, MnO-Labeled Cells: Positive Contrast Enhancement in MRI, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116(44), 13228–13238, ref. 173).  Fig. 26  Schematic of microwave synthesis and chemical oxidation of MoOx nanoparticles. A mixture of molybdenum oxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butanol was placed in a microwave reactor (CEM Discover) and heated using 2.45 GHz radiation. When heated at 200 °C for 15 min, MoAcAc reacted, forming a brown suspension of nanoparticles. Chemical oxidation of the nanoparticle suspension with 0.1 M H2O2 for 24 h yielded a blue suspension of nanoparticles. With permission of Hindawi Publishing Corporation (Y.-J. Lee, D. Barrera, K. Luo, J. W. P. Hsu, In situ chemical oxidation of ultrasmall MoOx nanoparticles in suspensions, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 195761, 5 pp), ref. 174. A much larger number of ultrasmall nanoparticles is known for lanthanide oxides, especially for gadolinium.176,177 As an example of use of lanthanide oxides for MRI purposes, a facile one-pot synthesis of D-glucuronic acid-coated ultrasmall Ln2O3 (Ln = Eu, Gd, Dy, Ho, and Er) nanoparticles was presented.178 The D-glucuronic acid-coated ultrasmall Dy2O3 nanoparticle showed the highest r2 relaxivity among studied nanoparticles. Its performance as a T2 MRI contrast agent was proved in vivo through its 3 T T2 MR images of a mouse, showing that it can be further exploited for the rational design of a new T2 MRI contrast agent at high MR fields. Gadolinium oxide, an important contrast agent, possessing paramagnetic properties, is commercially used in approximately 45% of all MRI analyses. Among a series of reports179,180 on its use, we note only the most representative. It is known that conventional Gd2O3 nanocrystal synthesis techniques, and subsequent polyethylene glycol (PEG) grafting procedures are usually time-consuming and recovery losses are also limitative. To optimize these processes, a fast and efficient one-pot Gd2O3 synthesis181 technique was described that provides PEGylated nanoparticles of very small size (mean diameter = 1.3 nm). Readily coated with PEG, the particles are colloidally stable in aqueous media and provide high longitudinal relaxivities and small r2/r1 ratios (r1 = 14.2 mM−1 s−1 at 60 MHz; r2/r1 = 1.20), ideal for T1-weighted MRI. F98 brain cancer cells (glioblastoma multiforme) were labeled with the contrast agent (Fig. 27) and implanted in vivo (mice brains). The labeled cells appeared positively contrasted at least 48 h after implantation. Fig. 27  Use of PEG–Gd2O3 ultrasmall nanoparticles. With permission of the American Chemical Society (L. Faucher, M. Tremblay, J. Lagueux, Y. Gossuin, M.-A. Fortin, Rapid Synthesis of PEGylated Ultrasmall Gadolinium Oxide Nanoparticles for Cell Labeling and Tracking with MRI, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(9), 4506–4515), ref. 181. Phosphate molecules were used as an alternative to silanes or carboxylic acids, to graft PEG at the surface of ultrasmall Gd2O3 NPs (2–3 nm diameter).182 Both Gd2O3 thin films (Fig. 28) and nanoparticles (Fig. 29) were successively treated with the phosphate-based polymer. Strong attachment of PEG–phosphate at the surface of Gd2O3, forming a protective layer on the nanoparticles, was detected. The stability in aqueous solution, the relaxometric properties, and the MRI signal of PEG–phosphate-covered Gd2O3 particles were also better than those from non-PEGylated nanoparticles. Among other gadolinium-based ultrasmall nanoparticles, we note a novel agent (GBN-4Si/Gd), shown in Fig. 30, which was able to accumulate in orthotopic 9L tumors until 24 h after intravenous injection, and demonstrated favorable in vivo kinetics.183 Fig. 28  Illustration of the most probable reaction mechanism between phosphate groups and Gd2O3 thin films. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A.-A. Guay-Begin, P. Chevallier, L. Faucher, S. Turgeon, M.-A. Fortin, Surface Modification of Gadolinium Oxide Thin Films and Nanoparticles using Poly(ethylene glycol)-Phosphate, Langmuir, 2012, 28(1), 774–782), ref. 182.  Fig. 29  Illustration of the most probable reaction mechanism between PEG–phosphate and Gd2O3 nanoparticles. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A.-A. Guay-Begin, P. Chevallier, L. Faucher, S. Turgeon, M.-A. Fortin, Surface Modification of Gadolinium Oxide Thin Films and Nanoparticles using Poly(ethylene glycol)-Phosphate, Langmuir, 2012, 28(1), 774–782), ref. 182.  Fig. 30  Structural depiction of gadolinium-based nanoparticles (GBN) (a) and core size distribution (b) obtained by HRTEM. With permission of SAGE Publications (I. Miladi, G. Le Duc, D. Kryza, A. Berniard, P. Mowat, S. Roux, J. Taleb, P. Bonazza, P. Perriat, F. Lux, O. Tillement, C. Billotey, M. Janier, Biodistribution of ultra small gadolinium-based nanoparticles as theranostic agent: Application to brain tumors, J. Biomater. Appl., 2012, in press), ref. 183. Combinations with other metal oxides (d- or f-element oxides) have also been practiced. Thus, ultrasmall Gd2O3 nanoparticles (1–2 nm in diameter), which are surface-doped with manganese oxide (MnO) (abbreviated as Gd2O3@MnO), were further coated184 with hydrophilic biocompatible lactobionic acid. In vitro tests of the sample solution indicated clear dose-dependent contrast enhancements in both T1 and T2 map images, showing that the nanoparticles may be used as both T1 and T2 MRI contrast agents. Coating with the same acid was carried out in case of gadolinium–europium oxide nanoparticles (average particle diameter of 1.75 nm and an average hydrodynamic diameter of 4.16 nm),185 used for the same applications.Other lanthanide oxides have been very rarely prepared as ultrasmall nanoparticles due to lesser number of applications, for example ceria NPs of generally about 2 nm of size. Thus, ultrasmall ceria nanoparticles of sizes <2 nm stable at 500 °C were encapsulated in the channels of mesoporous silica by employing the method involving modifying non-ionic polymer templates with ionic surfactants to enhance anchoring of metal ion precursors.186 Further silica wall formation around the template ensures isolation of the nanoparticles exclusively within the channels after template removal by heat treatment. Alternatively, monodisperse 2.3 nm CeO2 nanoparticles were synthesized by simple ammonia precipitation of cerium nitrate (eqn (4)) in a mixed glycol–water solvent and phase transferred into nonpolar solvents.187 Cerium oxide crystal surfaces were passivated with oleic acid by reflux under ambient pressure conditions. It was established that the colloidal particles in hydrocarbon solvent were indeed monocrystalline with one crystallite per particle, monodispersed with a narrow size distribution. Ultrasmall (2.5 ± 0.2 nm), water dispersible ceria nanoparticles were also synthesized directly in ethylenediamine (EN) (eqn (5)) that served as a catalyst as well as capping agent.188 Larger particles could be obtained by solvothermal synthesis keeping other parameters identical. The formation of valence state engineered (a mixed valence state of Ce3+ and Ce4+, whose ratio could be tuned by varying the solvothermal synthesis temperature and solvent composition by introducing water along with EN) ceria nanoparticles was confirmed. The antioxidant property of the ceria NPs was shown to be controlled by the oxygen vacancy level in the nanocrystals. It was proposed that the antioxidant property of ceria NPs is due to the presence of mentioned mixed valence states (Ce3+ and Ce4+) on the NPs' surface. In addition, it was observed that the ultrasmall ceria nanoparticles having mixed valence state prevent photobleaching of organic dyes by scavenging free radicals. 2Ce(NO3)3 + 0.5O2 → 2CeO2·nH2O + 6NO3− + (3 − 2n)H2O(4) Ce(NO3)3·6H2O (in EN) → Ce(OH)3 + CeO2(5)The water-soluble D-glucuronic acid coated ultrasmall Eu2O3 nanoparticles with particle diameters 1–3 nm and with a hydrodynamic diameter of 4.71 nm were synthesized in one-pot solution phase reaction.189 They showed a strong fluorescence in the red region, a high photostability, a narrow bandwidth, and non-toxicity up to 0.5 mM Eu, which is suitable for a high performance fluorescent imaging agent. This was proved by authors in in vitro intracellular imaging of DU 145 cells and in vivo imaging of a digestive system of a small animal Caenorhabditis elegans. Another strategy for the synthesis of ultrasmall Eu2O3 nanoparticle-functionalized hollow silica nanospheres was offered by using a functional cross-linked organic/inorganic hybrid core, which can be obtained simply through successive spontaneous reactions in water.190 In case of dysprosium nanomaterials, they are found to possess a decent r2 but a negligible r1 arising from L + S state 4f-electrons in Dy(III) ion (6H15/2).191 Their r2 will also further increase with increasing applied field because of unsaturated magnetization at r.t. So, MR imaging of the synthesized D-glucuronic acid coated ultrasmall dysprosium oxide nanoparticles (dav = 3.2 nm) and dysprosium hydroxide nanorods (20 × 300 nm) were investigated. Among other suggested results and possible applications, D-glucuronic acid coated ultrasmall dysprosium oxide nanoparticles with renal excretion can be a potential candidate as a sensitive T2 MRI contrast agent at MR field greater than 3 T. For the ultra-fine structure of the superconductive films of YBa2Cu3O7−x (YBCO) with the BaZrO3 (BZO) additives on the LaAlO3 (LAO) substrates, numerous edge dislocations were found around the nanoparticles of the BaxY1−xZrOy (BYZO) compound.192 With an increase in the particle size of >10 nm, the number of their surrounding dislocations decreased. Possible influence of super-small nanoparticles and larger ‘nanorods’ on the stability of the superconductive properties of YBCO films in the external magnetic field was discussed.Metal salt nanoparticlesUltrasmall nanoparticles of metal salts are not widespread in comparison, for instance, those for iron oxides. Mainly, they have been obtained for some metal (Cd, Zn, Gd) chalcogenides/quantum dots (such as CdSe193) and fluorides, among other rare examples. Thus, ultrasmall colloidal CdS and CdSe quantum dots (∼2 nm) with narrow size distributions of 10% were synthesized and stabilized by polyethylenimine.194,195 Their structured absorption bands with excitonic maxima and the broad-band efficient photoluminescence were revealed in a visible spectral range. Both colloids were found to exhibit the high electrocatalytic activity in the potential range of hydrogen evolution. The PEI-stabilized CdS nanoparticles showed a structured absorption band with the first excitonic maximum at 3.5 eV and broad-band luminescence with quantum yields of 12–14% in H2O, 18–20% in EtOH (80 vol%), and up to 60–70% in solid PEI films at r.t. Excellent stability of solid PEI films incorporating CdS nanoparticles toward UV illumination and reductive character of the CdS nanoparticle photocorrosion in aqueous solutions were confirmed. In case of CdSe nanoparticle surface modification with P-containing ligands, the blue shifting emission from CdSe nanocrystals (<1.7 nm), for which the surface ligands play the dominant role in the emission properties, was attributed196 to the increased electronegativity of shorter chain length, varying the phosphonic acid ligand. The quantum yield of these nanocrystals can be enhanced by increasing the chain length of the ligand. Surprisingly, the energy changes are shown to correlate with the electronegativity of the phosphonic acid ligands. One advantage of the electronegativity effect is that it allows for the fine tuning of the white-light emission from these nanocrystals.For mixed-anion cadmium chalcogenide nanoparticles, vibration spectrums of ultrasmall (∼1.8 nm) colloidal nanoparticles CdSxSe1−x were studied197 by resonant combination light scattering method. Difference in shape and spectral band position of longitudinal optical vibrations when compared with spectrum of some larger sized (>2 nm) nanoparticles was explained by dominance of surface atoms when their fraction is more than 50%. CdTe/CdS core small/shell thick quantum dots with tunable near-IR fluorescence were directly synthesized in aqueous phase.198 These QDs possessed bright fluorescence, excellent photostability and good biocompatibility, being applicable for biological imaging, demonstrated with the in vivo active tumor targeting of nude mice.ZnS quantum dots with Fe3+ as a dopant (Zn1−xFexS nanocrystals with cubic zinc blend structure, having particle diameters of 1.7 nm) were precipitated from aqueous solution in the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol as a capping agent at r.t.199 It was shown that, in the case of iron doped ZnS nanoparticles, the emission band of pure ZnS nanoparticles at 427 nm shifts to 442 nm with appearance of a new sharp emission band around 532 nm. The authors confirmed that the fluorescence quenching of bovine serum albumin (BSA) by these quantum dots is mainly a result of the formation of QDs–BSA complex in solution. In addition, high-crystalline 0D, 1D and 2D ultrasmall Bi2Te3 nanocrystals were prepared using a solvothermal method.200 Samples synthesized at 35 °C possessed a dominant morphology of 0D nanoparticles or 1D nanorods, while samples fabricated at >75 °C possessed a dominant morphology of 2D nanoplates. The 2D nanoplates showed similar Raman features as few-quintuple-thick Bi2Te3 layers, while the 0D and 1D nanostructures showed a blue-shifted A1g2 mode and a much stronger A1u mode. Also, the effect of PbSe quantum dot size on the performance of Schottky solar cells made in an ITO/PEDOT/PbSe/Al structure, varying the PbSe nanoparticle diameter 1–3 nm, was studied.201 In case of lanthanides, synthesis202 of ultrasmall Gd2S3:Eu3+ nanoparticles and their surface modification with “cytosine”, a nucleobase in DNA/RNA led to nanoparticles with orthorhombic (Pnma) crystal symmetry with excellent magnetic and luminescent characters simultaneously. Their in vitro studies showed better accumulation of blood platelets with cytosine modified nanoparticles as compared to unmodified samples, making them a potential candidate for platelet isolation from the plasma for different applications and studies.A few reports are dedicated to oxygen-containing salts. Thus, delafossite CuCrO2 nanocrystals with a typical size of 15 nm × 5 nm, and a high surface area of 87.86 m2 g−1, thermally stable up to 400 °C, were hydrothermally synthesized.203 The screen-printed CuCrO2 films sintered at different temperatures and under different atmospheres presented different optical transmittances, tunable BET surface areas, dye adsorbing amounts, and tunable hole transport rates and hole recombination kinetics, which allowed the optimization of the performance of p-type dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) based on CuCrO2 photocathodes. A series of intriguing effects were observed in case of CoFe2O4, in particular enormous size effect on the ordering transition temperature in its nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 1 to 9 nm, synthesized via the decomposition of stoichiometric quantities of Fe(acac)3 and Co(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetonate) in high boiling point solvents, diphenyl and dibenzyl ether.204 A bimodal particle size distribution centered at 3 nm and around 6 nm for “small” and “large” particles, respectively, was shown. The measured ordering temperature was found to be only 8.5 K, which is 50 times smaller than the Curie temperature of the bulk material. Just below the ordering temperature, these particles are magnetically fully blocked, presenting an interesting case where both the paramagnetic to ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic transition and blocking temperature occur at the same low temperature value. Based upon the reported data, the authors suggested that this low temperature magnetic transition is related to the interplay of surface effects and the increase of the lattice parameter. For the same compound, the Monte Carlo simulation technique was employed205 to study the aging effect on the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) magnetization curves of ultrasmall nanoparticles (mean size ∼3 nm) embedded in a Si matrix. The applied simulations showed that the spin-glass like disorder at the surface affects the magnetic properties to the extent that they exhibit aging effect: the low temperature ZFC magnetization depends on the time spent before applying the magnetic field at a temperature at which most of the surface moments are frozen. Finally, through the PO43− groups regularly arranged on its sugar-phosphate backbone, DNA was used to direct the growth of a network structure of ultrasmall FePO4 nanoparticles on double-wall carbon nanotubes.206 The resulting structure achieved nearly 100% theoretical storage capacity for the FePO4 active component as a cathode in lithium-ion batteries.Relatively high number of reports is dedicated to simple and double lanthanide fluorides, such as NaYF4207,208 or NaGdF4.209,210 Thus, uniform, ultrasmall-sized and well-water-dispersible LaF3 nanoparticles (spherical and monodisperse, about 3 nm in size) doped with trivalent rare earth (M) ions (Eu3+ or Tb3+) were synthesized by a low-temperature route.211 1,2,4,5-Benzenetetracarboxylic acid (BA) as sensitizer was bonded to the NPs surface, which can sensitize the emission of M3+ in the LaF3 nanoparticles. Due to the dual protection of BA and inorganic matrixes (LaF3), BA-LaF3:M3+ (M = Eu or Tb) nanoparticles were found to have longer excited state lifetimes than LaF3:M3+ (M = Eu or Tb) nanoparticles as well as lanthanide coordination polymers of BA. In a related report,212 the lanthanide-doped ultrasmall upconversion YF3 (3.7 nm) nanocrystals with modulated and enhanced multicolor output are ideal for a variety of in vitro and in vivo biological imaging applications. For the case of spherical and monodisperse spherical and monodisperse nanoparticles and core–shell structures (NaYF4:20%Yb3+–NaGdF4:2%Tm3+),213 the up-conversion luminescence was found to be strongly influenced by the nanoparticle size, internal structure and spatial distribution of active Tm3+ ions. Significant fluorescence rise and decay time lengthening of the 1G4 excited energy level of Tm3+ ions in these core–shell nanoparticles were revealed. In addition, ultrasmall doped NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles (Fig. 31) were crystallized214 in hexagonal structure with high crystallinity. Finally, related ultrasmall multifunctional KGdF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ nanoparticles with near-IR to near-IR upconversion were also prepared.215 Their average sizes (KGdF4:Tm3+ 2%, Yb3+ 20% core-only and KGdF4:Tm3+ 2%, Yb3+ 20%/KGdF4 core–shell nanoparticles) were found to be ∼3.7 nm and ∼7.4 nm, respectively, which fall within the reported optimal sizes (<10 nm) for bioimaging probes. The magnetic mass susceptibility and magnetization of the ultra-small core-only and core–shell nanoparticles were determined and found to be close to those of large nanoparticles (26 and 50 nm) used for magnetic resonance imaging and bio-separation. Fig. 31  TEM images of NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ synthesized in solvent mixtures of OA/ODE (a) 6 mL/15 mL, (b) 8 mL/12 mL, (c) 10 mL/10 mL, and (d) 14 mL/6 mL at different reaction times. The scale bar is 20 nm (ODE = 1-octadecene, OA = oleic acid). With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. Ryu, H.-Y. Park, K. Kim, H. Kim, J. H. Yoo, M. Kang, K. Im, R. Grailhe and R. Song, Facile Synthesis of Ultrasmall and Hexagonal NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ Nanoparticles with Magnetic and Upconversion Imaging Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21077–21082), ref. 214. Other ultrasmall nanoparticlesA few coordination compounds were found to exist in the form of ultrasmall nanoparticles, all in chitosan support. Thus, MRI studies for 3–4 nm magneto-luminescent cyano-bridged coordination polymer nanoparticles Ln0.33Gdx/[Mo(CN)8]3− (Ln = Eu (x = 0.34), Tb (x = 0.35)) enwrapped by a natural biocompatible polymer chitosan, showed216r1p and r2p relaxivities slightly higher than or comparable to those of the commercial paramagnetic compounds Gd-DTPA or Omniscan. The in vitro studies performed on these nanoparticles showed that they may be internalized into human cancer and normal cells and well detected by fluorescence at the single cell level. Another example is 3D coordination polymer [Fe(pyrazine){Ni(CN)4}], whose monodisperse nanoparticles (4 nm), obtained in biopolymer chitosan beads matrix,217 exhibited spin crossover phenomenon with hysteresis.In case of polymers, the chitosan, mentioned above as supporting agent for metal-complex nanoparticles, was also found218 alone in small sizes (10–20 nm), close to the ultrasmall area. The chitosan polymer may be crosslinked and may also be tagged with a fluorescent or a radio-opaque compound, a paramagnetic ion, a ligand specific for a predeterminated biologic target, a drug, and combinations. In addition, ultrasmall (7 nm) polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) nanoparticles by the metal-free crosslinking of PMMA-precursor chains were prepared219 by reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization. Also, 4 nm poly(styrene) nanoparticles were also obtained220 and studied in model systems of soft nanocomposites.Applications of ultrasmall nanoparticlesMost of synthesized ultrasmall nanoparticles have obtained useful applications, discussed and emphasized in the sections above. Here we would like to underline the most frequent and important uses of nanoparticles alone and their functionalized derivatives or composites. Catalytic processes, where metal non-nanostructures generally find classic applications (for example, Pt, Pd, Rh, etc.), are a major field of attention for ultrasmall metal clusters and particles. Thus, ultrasmall silver nanoparticles are very active and selective for propylene epoxidation; small platinum clusters are especially active and selective for propane oxidative dehydrogenation:221 also, ultrafine subnanometer platinum clusters, prepared using a spherical macromolecular template (a phenylazomethine dendrimer, offering control of the number of metal complexes in an assembly through stepwise complexation, allowing the complexes to accumulate in discrete nano-cages) with no disorder in molecular weight or structure, as a result of exceptionally small particle size, exhibited very high catalytic activity for the four-electron reduction of oxygen molecules.222 Ultra-small palladium(0) particles (less than 1 nm) on magnetic nanoparticle supports, prepared using immobilized auxiliaries as stabilizing ligands, were found to be active as catalysts for Suzuki cross-coupling and Heck reactions giving isolated yields of 83 and 56%, respectively.223 In addition, the catalyst can be easily separated using a magnet and reused several times with sustained activity.Gold nanoparticles, the cornerstone of metal ultrasmall NPs in respect of number of their studies and applications, especially in the catalysis area, have unique physico-chemical properties, such as ultrasmall size, large surface area to mass ratio, and high surface reactivity, presence of surface plasmon resonance bands, biocompatibility and ease of surface functionalization.224 Deposited on TiO2 support, sub-1 nm Au nanoparticles exhibited a remarkable photocatalytic activity for both liquid and gas-phase oxidation reactions, which have a significant potential for environmental applications.225 Thus, the NO2 conversion on such catalysts was 6 times higher as compared to that of unmodified catalysts. Atomically monodisperse Au25(SR)18 (R = CH2CH2Ph) nanoparticles were explored as a stereoselective catalyst (a complete (∼100%) stereoselectivity was obtained) for hydrogenation of cyclic ketone.226 Bovine serum albumin (BSA) stabilized Au clusters exhibited highly intrinsic peroxidase-like activity.227 Because of ultrasmall size, good stability and high biocompatibility in aqueous solution comparing with other kinds of nanoparticles as peroxidase mimetics, such as Fe3O4, FeS or graphene oxide, they are more adaptable for bioanalysis. BSA–Au clusters were used to catalyze the oxidation of a peroxidase substrate 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) by H2O2 to the oxidized colored product, and which provides a colorimetric detection of H2O2. Also, ultrasmall (2.7 nm) gold nanoparticles conjugated to doxorubicin (Au-Dox) were found to be up to 20-fold more cytotoxic to B16 melanoma cells than the equivalent concentration of doxorubicin alone, and act up to six times more quickly.228 Interestingly, the Dox-sensitive cells showed a slightly decreased sensitivity to Au-Dox relative to Dox alone, whereas the Dox-resistant cells are not resistant to Au-Dox. In addition, in vivo and ex vivo imaging studies showed that the ultrasmall NIR Au nanoclusters (2.7 nm) were able to be highly accumulated in the tumor areas, thanks to the enhanced permeability and retention effects,229 thus being very promising contrast imaging agents for in vivo fluorescence tumor imaging.Frequently, ultrasmall NPs can carry out those functions, which have not been detected for their larger forms (non-ultrasmall NPs or bulk states). Thus, when supported on silica, ultrasmall copper nanoclusters (1 nm) were found to efficiently catalyze C–H oxidation reactions, hitherto unknown to be catalyzed by Cu (see section above on copper nanoparticles). Multifunctional biocompatible materials on the basis of FeCo/graphitic carbon shell (FeCo/GC) nanocrystals (4–5 nm in diameter) with ultrahigh magnetization serve as an integrated system for combined drug delivery, near-IR (NIR) photothermal therapy, and magnetic resonance imaging in vitro.230 In particular, highly efficient loading of doxorubicin (DOX) by π-stacking on the graphitic shell to afford FeCo/GC-DOX complexes and pH-sensitive DOX release from the particles was shown. In addition, enhanced intracellular drug delivery by FeCo/GC-DOX under 20 min of NIR laser (808 nm) induced hyperthermia to 43 °C, resulting in a significant increase of FeCo/GC-DOX toxicity toward breast cancer cells. Highly exfoliated, graphene-like MoS2 and ultrasmall Mg nanoparticles with an average diameter of 2.5 nm, used in a combination of G-MoS2 cathode and N–Mg anode, achieved a high operating voltage of 1.8 V and a first discharge capacity of 170 mA h g−1, of which 95% is kept after 50 discharge–charge cycles, representing itself as one of the most successful configurations for rechargeable Mg batteries.231 Similar electrochemical applications and their optimizations can be attained for Si nanoparticles. Thus, a composite material formed by dispersing ultrasmall silicon nanoparticles in polyaniline was used as the electrode material for supercapacitors.232 It was proved that the nanoparticles give rise to double-layer capacitance while polyaniline produces pseudocapacitance. The capacitor showed the enhanced capacitance and good device stability during 1000 charging–discharging cycles. Also, ultrasmall colloidal Si nanoparticles behave as electrocatalysts for the oxidation of EtOH, MeOH, and glucose.233 The onset potential and the catalytic strength were found to be dependent on the particle size. Using the particles as the anode catalyst, a prototype hybrid biofuel cell was constructed, showing an increased catalytic activity. It appeared to that the robustness of the silicon particles resulted in higher cell stability which is of importance to the long-term performance of a biofuel cell.234Among oxides, ultrasmall iron nanostructures (iron oxide and ferrite nanoparticles235) undoubtedly are the most important, mainly due to their MRI applications as contrast agents. In particular, the development of lymphotropic contrast agents is of a permanent interest. Ferumoxtran-10 is one such MRI lymphotropic contrast agent that consists of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron-oxide based nanoparticles targeted at the reticuloendothelial system.236 Ferumoxtran-10-enhanced MRI offers higher diagnostic precision than unenhanced MRI and is sensitive and specific for the detection of lymph-node metastases, especially in malignant diseases of the abdomen and pelvis. To improve the delivery of drugs or transplanted cells, targeted magnetic cell delivery may, due to a localized magnetic field, promote the accumulation of magnetically labeled cells or magnetic nanoparticle carrying drugs in the targeted area. Alternatively, systemic ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle administration utilizes their preferential uptake by monocytes/macrophages for magnetic resonance visualization of the inflammatory response after stroke or other central nervous system disorders.237 Among other applications of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, we note the report238 discussing their coating with dextran, starch or bisphosphonate exposing carboxylate groups and biomedical uses, not only related with magnetic properties, and the information on ultrasmall particles of iron oxide as peroxidase for immunohistochemical detection.239Uses of other oxides, except for Gd2O3 (see section above), are rare. Ultrasmall, monodisperse nanoparticles of silicon dioxide with at least one antigen attached to their surface can be used for the immunoprophylaxis or immunotherapy of cancer.240 Porous In2O3 films, composed of polycrystalline In2O3 nanowires with ultrasmall nanocrystals (<10 nm) and a high density of ultra-fine nanopores (1.6–3.1 nm), showed very high sensitivity and good reproducibility towards ethanol gas, which were 10–20 times higher than for In2O3 octahedra and commercial SnO2 thick films.241 The response/recovery speeds of these porous In2O3 films were found to be also 5–6 times higher than for In2O3 octahedra, SnO2 nanobelts, and commercial SnO2 thick films. Such metal oxide flexible films could replace their traditional thick film counterparts, not only in gas sensors but also in other functional devices, such as batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, etc. Ultrasmall gadolinium oxide nanoparticles (Gd2O3) have been used to provide “positive” contrast effects in magnetic resonance imaging, and are being considered for molecular and cellular imaging applications, despite aggregation considerations.242 In addition to oxides, quantum dots/semiconductor nanoparticles, described in the section above, can be used in nanophotocatalysis.243Conclusions and future outlookThe whole area of ultrasmall nanoparticles, nanocrystals and nanocomposites is at the beginning of its development and obviously cannot be considered yet as one of hottest topics in nanotechnology (such as, for instance, graphene or carbon nanotubes fields): the overall number of reports is currently slightly more than 500. The major part of these publications is dedicated to ultrasmall metallic gold, iron oxides, and gadolinium oxide nanoparticles, i.e. relatively hot topics, having mainly biomedical applications; the remainder corresponds to other inorganic compounds described above. Contribution of organic compounds as individual ultrasmall nanoparticles is practically unknown: organic matter is used here only for functionalization of ultrasmall metal (and other) nanoparticles.Synthesis methods for ultrasmall nanoparticles require atomic precision as nearly every atom directly contributes to the desired property.1 Several approaches have been developed for prevent further agglomeration of primary nanoparticles or even to decrease their sizes. In comparison with “standard” particle sizes in nanotechnology (20–50 nm), ultrasmall nanoparticles (formally <10 nm and especially <2 nm) contain a relatively small number of atoms, so their properties and related applications could be distinct. At this ultrasmall size, the majority of the nanoparticle atoms are at the surface, leading to the surface structures and the local chemical environment enhancing or dominating the physical/optical properties.1 Hence, their synthesis is really a more complicated than the obtaining conventional-size nanoparticles. However, observing the growing number of reports in the last two years, we expect that the area of ultrasmall nanoparticles is likely to be a rapidly developing field of nanoscience and nanotechnology.AbbreviationsAcacAcetylacetonateAPWAugmented-plane waveBA1,2,4,5-Benzenetetracarboxylic acidBSABovine serum albuminCNTCarbon nanotubeCVDChemical vapor depositionDMSAmeso-2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acidDNADeoxyribonucleic acidDoxDoxorubicinDSSCDye sensitized solar cellDWCNTDouble walled carbon nanotubeEDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acidENEthylenediamineESRElectron spin resonanceFP-APWFull-potential linearised augmented-plane waveFRETFluorescence resonance energy transferGEDOTGermanium quantum dotIRInfraredITOIndium tin oxideMIONMonocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticleMQWMulti-quantum wellMRIMagnetic Resonance ImagingMWMicrowaveNIRNear infraredPAMAMPoly(amido amine)PEGPoly(ethylene glycol)PCMPhonon confinement modelPEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)PEIPolyethyleneiminePLPhotoluminescencePMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidoneQDQuantum dotRAFTReversible addition fragmentation chain transferRESReticuloendothelial systemRNARibonucleic acidSDBSSodium dodecylbenzenesulfonateSPIONSuperparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticleSWNTSingle-walled carbon nanotubeTEMTransmission electron microscopyTHFTetrahydrofuraneTMB3,3,5,5-TetramethylbenzidineTMPDAN,N,N′,N′-Tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamineUCNCUltrasmall Cu nanoclusterUSPsUltrasmall particlesuPARUrokinase plasminogen activator receptorUSPIONUltrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticleUVUltravioletVSOPVery small superparamagnetic iron oxide particleZFCZero-Field-CooledReferencesJ. R. McBride, A. D. Dukes, III, M. A. Schreuder and S. J. Rosenthal, On ultrasmall nanocrystals, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 498(1–3), 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova and U. Ortiz Méndez, Microwave Hydrothermal and Solvothermal Processing of Materials and Compounds, in The Development and Application of Microwave Heating, ed. W. Cao, ISBN: 978-953-51-0835-1, InTech,  2012,  DOI:10.5772/45626, http://www.intechopen.com/books/the-development-and-application-of-microwave-heating/microwave-hydrothermal-and-solvothermal-processing-of-materials-and-compounds.B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova and U. Ortiz MendezRadiation-assisted synthesis of composites, materials, compounds, and nanostructures, in Wiley Encyclopedia of Composites, ed. L. Nicolais and A. Borzacchiello, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ,  2012, 5 Volume Set, 2nd edn, pp. 2569–2594 Search PubMed .G. Martinez, A. Malumbres, R. Mallada, J. L. Hueso, S. Irusta, O. Bomati-Miguel and J. Santamaria, Use of a polyol liquid collection medium to obtain ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles by laser pyrolysis, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(42), 425605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova and U. Ortiz-Méndez, Radiation Synthesis of Materials and Compounds, CRC Press,  2013, 586 pp Search PubMed .A. H. Souici, N. Keghouche, J. A. Delaire, H. Remita and M. Mostafavi, Radiolytic synthesis and optical properties of ultra-small stabilized ZnS nanoparticles, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422(1–3), 25–29 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tian, B. Yu, X. Li and K. Li, Facile solvothermal synthesis of monodisperse Fe3O4 nanocrystals with precise size control of one nanometre as potential MRI contrast agents, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(8), 2476–2481 RSC .W. Feng, L.-D. Sun, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Synthesis and assembly of rare earth nanostructures directed by the principle of coordination chemistry in solution-based process, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254(9–10), 1038–1053 CrossRef CAS .R. Jin, H. Qian, Z. n. Wu, Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, A. Mohanty and N. Garg, Size Focusing: A Methodology for Synthesizing Atomically Precise Gold Nanoclusters, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(19), 2903–2910 CrossRef CAS .H.-S. Chen and R. V. Kumar, Growth of ultrasmall nanoparticles based on thermodynamic size focusing, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1207 CrossRef  , 6 pages.T. F. Beyersdorff, F. M. Stiemke and T. J. S. Schubert, Ionic liquids as novel dispersing agents for nanoparticles: synthesis and stabilization of nanomaterials – safe-to-handle dispersions, Nanotech Conference & Expo 2012: An Interdisciplinary Integrative Forum on Nanotechnology, Microtechnology, Biotechnology and Cleantechnology, Santa Clara, CA, United States, June 18–21, 2012, ed. M. Laudon and B. Romanowicz,  2012, vol. 3, pp. 595–598 Search PubMed .E. Falletta, F. Ridi, E. Fratini, C. Vannucci, P. Canton, S. Bianchi, V. Castelvetro and P. o. Baglioni, A tri-block copolymer templated synthesis of gold nanostructures, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 357(1), 88–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Kloust, E. Pöselt, S. Kappen, C. Schmidtke, A. Kornowski, W. Pauer, H.-U. Moritz and H. Weller, Ultrasmall Biocompatible Nanocomposites: A New Approach Using Seeded Emulsion Polymerization for the Encapsulation of Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7276–7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Jahnen-Dechent, Molecularly Stabilised Ultrasmall Gold Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization and Bioactivity, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(14), 6224–6242 RSC .A. Leifert, Y. Pan, A. Kinkeldey, F. Schiefer, J. Setzler, O. Scheel, H. Lichtenbeld, G. Schmid, W. Wenzel, W. Jahnen-Dechent and U. Simon, Differential hERG ion channel activity of ultrasmall gold nanoparticles, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110(20), 8004–8009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Cai, B. Jia, Z. Shi and M. Gu, Near-field light concentration of ultra-small metallic nanoparticles for absorption enhancement in a-Si solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 093107 CrossRef .R. Jin, Quantum sized, thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters, Nanoscale, 2010, 2(3), 343–362 RSC .C. R. Patra, R. Bhattacharya, D. Mukhopadhyay and P. Mukherjee, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62, 346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. C. Dreaden, M. A. Mackey, X. Huang, B. Kangy and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3391 RSC .A. Leifert, Y. Pan-Bartnek, U. Simona and W. Jahnen-Dechent, Molecularly stabilised ultrasmall gold nanoparticles: synthesis, characterization and bioactivity, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6224–6242 RSC .H. Qian, M. Zhu, Z. Wu and R. Jin, Quantum Sized Gold Nanoclusters with Atomic Precision, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45(9), 1470–1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Shang, S. Dong and G. U. Nienhaus, Ultra-small fluorescent metal nanoclusters: synthesis and biological applications, Nano Today, 2011, 6(4), 401–418 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, D. Riabinina, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Significant stability enhancement of gold colloids via nanosecond laser irradiation, Adv. Sci. Lett., 2011, 4(1), 59–64 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, S. Liu, T. Yao, Z. Sun, Z. Jiang, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, Y. Jiang and Z. Xie, et al., Controllable synthesis of gold nanoparticles with ultra-small size and high mono-dispersity via continuous supplement of precursor, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41(38), 11725–11730 RSC .Z. Lu, X. Shu, K. Zhang and J. Zhu, A mild route to the whittling of gold nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(30), 12950–12953 CAS .S. A. Khan and S. Duraiswamy, Controlling bubbles using bubbles-microfluidic synthesis of ultra-small gold nanocrystals with gas-evolving reducing agents, Lab Chip, 2012, 12(10), 1807–1812 RSC .T. Wang, X. Hu and S. Dong, The fragmentation of gold nanoparticles induced by small biomolecules, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4625–4627 RSC .K. Huang, H. Ma, J. Liu, S. Huo, A. Kumar, T. Wei, X. Zhang, S. Jin, Y. Gan and P. C. Wang, et al., Size-Dependent Localization and Penetration of Ultrasmall Gold Nanoparticles in Cancer Cells, Multicellular Spheroids, and Tumors In Vivo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(5), 4483–4493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. A. Morozov, B. G. Ershov, E. V. Abkhalimov, O. V. Dement'eva, M. A. Filippenko, V. M. Rudoy and V. I. Roldughin, The effect of ozone on plasmon absorption of gold hydrosols. Quasi-metal and metal nanoparticles, Colloid J., 2012, 74(4), 502–509 CrossRef CAS .O. V. Kharissova, B. I. Kharisov, T. Hernández García and U. Ortiz Méndez, A review on less-common nanostructures, Synth. React. Inorg., Met.-Org., Nano-Met. Chem., 2009, 39(10), 662–684 CAS .O. V. Kharissova and B. I. Kharisov, Less-common nanostructures in the forms of vegetation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49(22), 11142–11169 CrossRef CAS .B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova and U. Ortiz-Mendez, Handbook of Less-Common Nanostructures, CRC Press,  March 19, 2012, 856 pp Search PubMed .F. K. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and C. He, In situ formation and ordered assembly of gold nanoclusters to nano-ribbons at the oil/water interface, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(39), 15167–15170 RSC .H. Qian, M. Zhu, E. Lanni, Y. Zhu, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(41), 17599–17603 CAS .P. R. Nimmala, Au38 and Au40 synthesis. Abstracts, Joint 66th Southwest and 62nd Southeast Regional Meeting of the American Chemical Society, New Orleans, LA, United States, December 1–4, 2010, SESW-746(2010).H. Qian and R. Jin, Controlling Nanoparticles with Atomic Precision: The Case of Au144(SCH2CH2Ph)60, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(12), 4083–4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P.-p. Wang, Q. Yu, Y. Long, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Multivalent assembly of ultrasmall nanoparticles: One-, two-, and three-dimensional architectures of 2 nm gold nanoparticles, Nano Res., 2012, 5(4), 283–291 CrossRef CAS .T. H. Tran, S. Y. Park, H. Lee, S. Park, B. Kim, O.-H. Kim, B.-c. Oh, D. Lee and H. Lee, Ultrasmall gold nanoparticles for highly specific isolation/enrichment of N-linked glycosylated peptides, Analyst, 2012, 137(4), 991–998 RSC .E. J. Kim, J. H. Yeum, H. D. Ghim, S. G. Lee, G. H. Lee, H. J. Lee, S. I. Han and J. H. Choi, Ultrasmall polyethyleneimine-gold nanoparticles with high stability, Polymer, 2011, 35(2), 161–165 CAS .A. R. Loukanov and H. Gagov, High-resolution subunit detection of glutamate receptor by ultrasmall gold nanoparticles, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2012, 75(9), 1159–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Shang, S. Brandholt, F. Stockmar, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns and G. U. Nienhaus, Effect of Protein Adsorption on the Fluorescence of Ultrasmall Gold Nanoclusters, Small, 2012, 8(5), 661–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Hu, T. Wu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Efficient Synthesis of Single Gold Nanoparticle Hybrid Amphiphilic Triblock Copolymers and Their Controlled Self-Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(18), 7624–7627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. A. Sousa, J. T. Morgan, P. H. Brown, A. Adams, P. Mudiyanselage, G. Zhang, C. J. Ackerson, M. J. Kruhlak and R. D. Leapman, Synthesis, Characterization, and Direct Intracellular Imaging of Ultrasmall and Uniform Glutathione-Coated Gold Nanoparticles, Small, 2012, 8(14), 2277–2286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. J. Niu, V. Presser, C. J. Karwacki and Y. Gogotsi, Ultrasmall gold nanoparticles with the size controlled by the pores of carbide-derived carbon, Mater. Express, 2011, 1(4), 259–266 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Walsh, K. Yoshida, A. Kuwabara, M. L. Pay, P. L. Gai and E. D. Boyes, On the Structural Origin of the Catalytic Properties of Inherently Strained Ultrasmall Decahedral Gold Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(4), 2027–2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova, M. José Yacamán and U. Ortiz Mendez, State of the art of the bi- and trimetallic nanoparticles on the basis of gold and iron, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 3(2), 81–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, L. Zou, D. Zhang, X. Pang, H. Yang and Y. Xu, GoldMag nanoparticles with core/shell structure: characterization and application in MR molecular imaging, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13(9), 3867–3876 CrossRef CAS .J. Park, S. G. Kwon, S. W. Jun, B. H. Kim and T. Hyeon, Large-Scale Synthesis of Ultra-Small-Sized Silver Nanoparticles, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13(10), 2540–2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , S2540.Q. Lin and Z. Sun, Study on optical properties of aggregated ultra-small metal nanoparticles, Optik, 2011, 122(12), 1031–1036 CrossRef CAS .P. Jinkyung, K. S. Gu, J. S. Woojoo, K. B. Hyo and H. Taeghwan, Large-scale synthesis of ultra-small-sized silver nanoparticles, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13(10), 2540–2543 CrossRef PubMed .L. Yu, Y. Shi, Z. Zhao, H. Yin, Y. Wei, J. Liu, W. Kang, T. Jiang and A. Wang, Ultrasmall silver nanoparticles supported on silica and their catalytic performances for carbon monoxide oxidation, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12(7), 616–620 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Lee, M. A. Do, E. J. Kim, J. H. Yeum, H. D. Ghim and J. H. Choi, Novel synthesis of ultra-small silver nanoparticles with high antimicrobial activity, Adv. Mater. Res., 2008, 47–50(Pt. 2, Multi-Functional Materials and Structures), 1080–1083 CrossRef CAS .G. Raino, T. Stoferle, C. Park, H.-C. Kim, T. Topuria, P. M. Rice, I.-J. Chin, R. D. Miller and R. F. Mahrt, Plasmonic Nanohybrid with Ultrasmall Ag Nanoparticles and Fluorescent Dyes, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(5), 3536–3541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Cheng, H. Zhong, J. Xu, X. Chu, Y. Song, M. Xu and H. Huang, Facile fabrication of ultrasmall and uniform copper nanoparticles, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65(19–20), 3005–3008 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Brege, C. E. Hamilton, C. A. Crouse and A. R. Barron, Ultrasmall Copper Nanoparticles from a Hydrophobically Immobilized Surfactant Template, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(6), 2239–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. T. Tsai, J. M. Cordoba, E. M. Johansson, M. A. Ballem and M. Oden, Silica SBA-15 template assisted synthesis of ultrasmall and homogeneously sized copper nanoparticles, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11(4), 3493–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Biswas, J. T. Miller, Y. Li, K. Nandakumar and C. S. S. R. Kumar, Developing a Millifluidic Platform for the Synthesis of Ultrasmall Nanoclusters: Ultrasmall Copper Nanoclusters as a Case Study, Small, 2012, 8(5), 688–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Zlotea, F. Cuevas, V. Paul-Boncour, E. Leroy, P. Dibandjo, R. Gadiou, C. Vix-Guterl and M. Latroche, Size-Dependent Hydrogen Sorption in Ultrasmall Pd Clusters Embedded in a Mesoporous Carbon Template, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(22), 7720–7729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. G. Narehood, S. Kishore, H. Goto, J. H. Adair, J. A. Nelson, H. R. Gutierrez and P. C. Eklund, X-ray diffraction and H-storage in ultra-small palladium particles, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34(2), 952–960 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Biradar, A. A. Biradar and T. Asefa, Silica-Dendrimer Core–Shell Microspheres with Encapsulated Ultrasmall Palladium Nanoparticles: Efficient and Easily Recyclable Heterogeneous Nanocatalysts, Langmuir, 2011, 27(23), 14408–14418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Bauer, R. Schoch, L. Shao, B. Zhang, A. Knop-Gericke, M. Willinger, R. Schloegl and D. Teschner, Structure–Activity Studies on Highly Active Palladium Hydrogenation Catalysts by X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(42), 22375–22385 CAS .J. Zou, A. D. Martin, B. Zdyrko, I. Luzinov, C. L. Raston and K. S. Iyer, Pd-induced ordering of 2D Pt nanoarrays on phosphonated calix[4]arenes stabilised graphenes, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(18), 5193–5195 RSC .Y. Li, G. P. Whyburn and Y. Huang, Specific peptide regulated synthesis of ultrasmall platinum nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(44), 15998–15999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. C. Jeff, Jr, M. Yun, B. Ramalingam, B. Lee, V. Misra, G. Triplett and S. Gangopadhyay, Charge storage characteristics of ultra-small Pt nanoparticle embedded GaAs based non-volatile memory, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99(7), 072104 CrossRef .S. Verberne-Sutton, J.-R. Li, X.-M. Lin and J. C. Garno, Nanostructures of Cobalt Nanoparticles Produced with “Two-Particle” Lithography. Abstracts, 60thSoutheast Regional Meeting of the American Chemical Society, Nashville, TN, USA, November 12–15, 2008, SERM-337(2008).L.-M. Lacroix, S. Lachaize, A. Falqui, T. Blon, J. Carrey, M. Respaud, F. Dumestre, C. Amiens, O. Margeat and B. Chaudret, et al., Ultrasmall iron nanoparticles: effect of size reduction on anisotropy and magnetization, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103(7, Pt. 2), 07D521 Search PubMed .O. Dag, E. J. Henderson and G. A. Ozin, Synthesis of Nanoamorphous Germanium and Its Transformation to Nanocrystalline Germanium, Small, 2012, 8(6), 921–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Muñoz-Flores, B. Kharisov, V. Jiménez-Pérez, P. Elizondo Martinez and S. Lopez, Recent Advances in the Synthesis and Main Applications of Metallic Nanoalloys, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50(13), 7705–7721 CrossRef .M. Castrillon, A. Mayoral, C. Magen, J. G. Meier, C. Marquina, S. Irusta and J. Santamaria, Synthesis and characterization of ultra-small magnetic FeNi/G and NiCo/G nanoparticles, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(8), 085601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. Kazakova, V. Panchal, J. Gallop, P. See, D. C. Cox, M. Spasova and L. F. Cohen, Ultrasmall particle detection using a submicron Hall sensor, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107(9, Pt. 2), 09E708 CrossRef .M. Delalande, M. J.-F. Guinel, L. F. Allard, A. Delattre, R. Le Bris, Y. Samson, P. Bayle-Guillemaud and P. Reiss, L10 Ordering of Ultrasmall FePt Nanoparticles Revealed by TEM In Situ Annealing, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(12), 6866–6872 CAS .C. N. He and N. Q. Zhao, One-step solid-phase synthesis of ultrasmall homogeneous face-centered tetragonal FePt nanoparticles encapsulated in thin carbon shells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(4), 1297–1304 RSC .J. Penuelas, A. Ouerghi, C. Andreazza-Vignolle, J. Gierak, E. Bourhis, P. Andreazza, J. Kiermaier and T. Sauvage, Local tuning of CoPt nanoparticle size and density with a focused ion beam nanowriter, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(42), 425304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Huang, Y. Li, J. N. Kuhn, C.-K. Tsung and G. A. Somorjai, CO oxidation and ethylene hydrogenation over one nanometer bimetallic RhPt particles. Abstracts of Papers, 237th ACS National Meeting, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, March 22–26, 2009, PHYS-412(2009).X. Yang, G. Wang, P. Slattery, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Ultrasmall Single-Crystal Indium Antimonide Nanowires, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2479–2482 CAS .N. Arjmandi, P. Sasanpour and B. Rashidian, CVD synthesis of small-diameter single-walled carbon nanotubes on silicon, arXiv.org, e-Print Archive, Condensed Matter, arXiv:1207.3555v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall], 1–9,  2012.N. Arjmandi, P. Sasanpour and B. Rashidian, CVD synthesis of small-diameter single-walled carbon nanotubes on silicon, Sci. Iran., Trans. D, 2009, 16(1), 61–64 CAS .D. V. Fakhrabad, T. Movlarooy and N. Shahtahmassebi, Density functional theory study of ultrasmall diameter (2,2) boron nitride, silicon carbide, and carbon nanotubes, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2012, 249(5), 1027–1032 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Tan, H. J. Liu, Y. W. Wen, H. Y. Lv, L. Pan, J. Shi and X. F. Tang, Thermoelectric Properties of Ultrasmall Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(44), 21996–22001 CAS .H. Fang, R.-Z. Wang, M. Yan, S.-Y. Chen and B. Wang, Strain-induced metal to semiconductor transition in ultra-small diameter single-wall carbon nanotubes, Phys. Lett. A, 2011, 375(8), 1200–1204 CrossRef CAS .R. Scipioni and T. Ohno, Lattice parameter dependence of energy barriers of hydrogenation of ultra small carbon nanotubes, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 492(4–6), 263–265 CrossRef CAS .K.-P. Bohnen, R. Heid and C. T. Chan, Complex electron-phonon driven lattice dynamics in ultrasmall-radius (5,0) carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77(23), 235407 CrossRef .A. N. Ribeiro and C. A. Macedo, Anisotropic tight-binding model applied to zigzag ultra-small nanotubes, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2010, 74(4), 527–533 CrossRef CAS .R. Scipioni, M. Boero and T. Ohno, Hydrogenation of ultrasmall carbon nanotubes: A first principle study, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 480(4–6), 215–219 CrossRef CAS .A. Udomvech and T. Kerdcharoen, Theoretical investigation of lithium-atom insertion into ultra-small diameter carbon nanotubes, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2008, 52(5), 1350–1354 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Rao, A. Stesmans, J. V. Noyen, P. Jacobs and B. Sels, Electron spin resonance investigation of ultra-small double walled carbon nanotubes embedded in zeolite nanochannels, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23(45), 455801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Chan and J. M. Hill, Modeling on ion rejection using membranes comprising ultra-small radii carbon nanotubes, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2012, 85(2), 56 CrossRef  , 7 pp.J.-P. Boudou, P. A. Curmi, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, P. Aubert, M. Sennour, G. Balasubramanian, R. Reuter, A. Thorel and E. Gaffet, High yield fabrication of fluorescent nanodiamonds, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(23), 235602 CrossRef PubMed .C. Wang, J. Chen, G. Yang and N. Xu, Thermodynamic stability and ultrasmall-size effect of nanodiamonds, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44(45), 7414–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Perego, C. Bonafos and M. Fanciulli, Phosphorus doping of ultra-small silicon nanocrystals, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21(2), 025602 CrossRef PubMed .R. Intartaglia, K. Bagga, A. Genovese, A. Athanassiou, R. Cingolani, A. Diaspro and F. Brandi, Influence of organic solvent on optical and structural properties of ultra-small silicon dots synthesized by UV laser ablation in liquid, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(44), 15406–15411 RSC .Y. Xie, X. L. Wu, T. Qiu, P. K. Chu and G. G. Siu, Luminescence properties of ultrasmall amorphous Si nanoparticles with sizes smaller than 2 nm, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 304(2), 476–480 CrossRef CAS .I. F. Crowe, M. P. Halsall, O. Hulko, A. P. Knights, R. M. Gwilliam, M. Wojdak and A. J. Kenyon, Probing the phonon confinement in ultrasmall silicon nanocrystals reveals a size-dependent surface energy, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109(8), 083534 CrossRef .C. S. Garoufalis and A. D. Zdetsis, Optical properties of ultra small Si nanoparticles: potential role of surface reconstruction and oxygen contamination, J. Math. Chem., 2009, 46(3), 952–961 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, A silicon nanoparticle-based polymeric nano-composite material for glucose sensing, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 657(1–2), 172–175 CrossRef CAS .Y. Choi, G. Wang, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, Electro-oxidation of organic fuels catalyzed by ultrasmall silicon nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 164103 CrossRef .S. Alkis, M. Ghaffari and A. K. Okyay, Synthesis of ultra-small Si/Ge semiconductor nano-particles using electrochemistry, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134(2–3), 616–622 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nakamura, Y. Nagadomi, S.-P. Cho, N. Tanaka and M. Ichikawa, Formation of ultrahigh density and ultrasmall coherent β-FeSi2 nanodots on Si (111) substrates using Si and Fe codeposition method, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100(4), 044313 CrossRef .S. Zheng, X. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Xie, Y.-S. Wong, W. Zheng and T. Chen, PEG-nanolized ultrasmall selenium nanoparticles overcome drug resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells through induction of mitochondria dysfunction, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 3939–3949 CAS .B. Chertok, B. A. Moffat, A. E. David, F. Yu, C. Bergemann, B. D. Ross and V. C. Yang, Iron oxide nanoparticles as a drug delivery vehicle for MRI monitored magnetic targeting of brain tumors, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L.-H. Shen, J.-F. Bao, D. Wang, Y.-X. Wang, Z.-W. Chen, L. Ren, X. Zhou, X.-B. Ke, M. Chen and A.-Q. Yang, One-step synthesis of monodisperse, water-soluble ultra-small Fe3O4 nanoparticles for potential bio-application, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(5), 2133–2141 RSC .C. S. S. R. Kumar, Magnetic Nanomaterials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2009, 648 pp Search PubMed .L. An-Hui, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Magnetic Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Protection, Functionalization, and Application, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef PubMed .V. Kelsen, B. Wendt, S. Werkmeister, K. Junge, M. Beller and B. Chaudret, The use of ultrasmall iron(0) nanoparticles as catalysts for the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated C–C bonds, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3416–3418 RSC .S. Shanehsazzadeh, M. A. Oghabian, B. J. Allen, M. Amanlou, A. Masoudi and F. J. Daha, Evaluating the effect of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for a long-term magnetic cell labeling, J. Med. Phys., 2013, 38(1), 34–40 CrossRef PubMed .A. B. Mathiasen, L. Hansen, T. Friis, C. Thomsen, K. Bhakoo and J. Kastrup, Optimal Labeling Dose, Labeling Time, and Magnetic Resonance Imaging Detection Limits of Ultrasmall Superparamagnetic Iron-Oxide Nanoparticle Labeled Mesenchymal Stromal Cells, Stem Cells Int., 2013, 353105 Search PubMed  , 10 pp.K. Watlington, Emerging Nanotechnologies for Site Remediation and Wastewater Treatment, Report for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response Office of Superfund Remediation and Technology Innovation, Technology Innovation and Field Services Division, Washington, D. C,  2005, p. 47 Search PubMed .T. E. Cloete, M. B. Michele de Kwaadsteniet and J. M. López-Romero, Nanotechnology in Water Treatment. Applications, Caister Academic Press,  2010, 196 pp Search PubMed .B. Tansel, New Technologies for Water and Wastewater Treatment: A Survey of Recent Patents, Recent Pat. Chem. Eng., 2010, 1, 17–26 CrossRef .X. Q. Li, D. W. Elliott and W. Zhang, Zero-Valent Iron Nanoparticles for Abatement of Environmental Pollutants: Materials and Engineering Aspects, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2006, 31, 111–122 CrossRef CAS .M. Hofmann-Amtenbrink, B. von Rechenberg and H. Hofmann. Superparamagnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications, in Nanostructured Materials for Biomedical Applications, Transworld Research Network, Kerala, India,  2009 Search PubMed .M. Mahmoudi, M. A. Sahraian, M. A. Shokrgozar and S. Laurent, Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: promises for diagnosis and treatment of multiple sclerosis, ACS Chem. Neurosci., 2011, 2, 118–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. L. Huber, Iron nanoparticles, in Dekker Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ed. J. A. Schwarz, C. I. Contescu and K. Putyera, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL,  2008, vol. 3, p. 1681 Search PubMed .C. F. Geraldes and S. Laurent, Classification and basic properties of contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2009, 4, 1–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. W. Jun, J. W. Seo and J. Cheon, Nanoscaling laws of magnetic nanoparticles and their applicabilities in biomedical sciences, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 179–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. G. Harisinghani, J. Barentsz, P. F. Hahn, W. M. Deserno, S. Tabatabaei, C. H. van de Kaa, J. de la Rosette and R. Weissleder, Noninvasive detection of clinically occult lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer, N. Engl. J. Med., 2003, 348, 2491–2499 CrossRef PubMed .R. A. Trivedi, C. Mallawarachi, J. M. U-King-Im, M. J. Graves, J. Horsley, M. J. Goddard, A. Brown, L. Wang, P. J. Kirkpatrick, J. Brown and J. H. Gillard, Identifying inflamed carotid plaques using in vivo USPIO-enhanced MR imaging to label plaque macrophages, Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol., 2006, 26, 1601–1606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Tang, S. P. Howarth, S. R. Miller, R. Trivedi, M. J. Graves, J. M. U-King-Im, Z. Y. Li, A. P. Brown, P. J. Kirkpatrick, M. E. Gaunt and J. H. Gillard, Assessment of inflammatory burden contralateral to the symptomatic carotid stenosis using high-resolution ultrasmall, superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced MRI, Stroke, 2006, 37, 2266–2270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. L. Muldoon, P. G. Tratnyek, P. M. Jacobs, N. D. Doolittle, G. A. Christoforidis, J. A. Frank, M. Lindau, P. R. Lockman, S. P. Manninger, Y. Qiang, A. M. Spence, S. I. Stupp and E. A. Zhang, Imaging and nanomedicine for diagnosis and therapy in the central nervous system: report of the eleventh annual Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption Consortium meeting, Am. J. Neuroradiol., 2006, 27, 715–721 CAS .E. A. Neuwelt, C. G. Varallyay, S. Manninger, D. Solymosi, M. Haluska, M. A. Hunt, G. Nesbit, A. Stevens, M. Jerosch-Herold, P. M. Jacobs and J. M. Hoffman, The potential of ferumoxytol nanoparticle magnetic resonance imaging, perfusion, and angiography in central nervous system malignancy: a pilot study, Neurosurgery, 2007, 60, 601–611 CrossRef PubMed .R. Weissleder, G. Elizondo, J. Wittenberg, A. S. Lee, L. Josephson and T. J. Brady, Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide: an intravenous contrast agent for assessing lymph nodes with MR imaging, Radiology, 1990, 175, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Hu, L. Wei, Z. Zhou, Y. Ran, Z. Li and M. Gao, Preparation of Biocompatible Magnetite Nanocrystals for InVivo Magnetic Resonance Detection of Cancer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2553–2556 CrossRef CAS .Y.-W. Jun, Y.-M. Huh, J. S. Choi, J.-H. Lee, H.-T. Song, S. Kim, S. Yoon, K.-S. Kim, J.-S. Shin, J.-S. Suh and J. Cheon, Nanoscale size effect of magnetic nanocrystals and their utilization for cancer diagnosis via magnetic resonance imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5732–5733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Darbandi, F. Stromberg, J. Landers, N. Reckers, B. Sanyal, W. Keune and H. Wende, Nanoscale size effect on surface spin canting in iron oxide nanoparticles synthesized by the microemulsion method, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 195001 CrossRef  , 11 pp.G. Martínez, A. Malumbres, R. Mallada, J. L. Hueso, S. Irusta, O. Bomatí-Miguel and J. Santamaría, Use of a polyol liquid collection medium to obtain ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles by laser pyrolysis, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 425605 CrossRef PubMed .E. A. Osborne, T. M. Atkins, D. A. Gilbert, S. M. Kauzlarich, K. Liu and A. Y. Louie, Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Dextran-Coated Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for MRI, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 215602 CrossRef PubMed .K. Kluchova, R. Zboril, J. Tucek, M. Pecova, L. Zajoncova, I. Safarik, M. Mashlan, I. Markova, D. Jancik, M. Sebela, H. Bartonkova, V. Bellesi, P. Novak and D. Petridis, Superparamagnetic maghemite nanoparticles from solid-state synthesis – their functionalization towards peroral MRI contrast agent and magnetic carrier for trypsin immobilization, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2855–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-A. Park, Y. Chang, B.-H. Park, S.-T. Woo, H.-J. Song and J.-H. Kim, New Synthesis Method of Ultrasmall Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Using Polyvinylpyrrolidone, Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med., 2006, 14, 1820 Search PubMed .L. Xiao, Green Nanochemistry: Synthesis and Surface Functionalization of Tin and Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Gas Sensing, Imaging (MRI) and Cellular Uptake Applications, 167 Seiten, Dissertation, Universität Köln,  2012, Softcover, A5, ISBN 9783843908030 .C. Zhang, B. Wängler, B. Morgenstern, H. Zentgraf, M. Eisenhut, H. Untenecker, R. Krüger, R. Huss, C. Seliger, W. Semmler and F. Kiessling, Silica- and alkoxysilane-coated ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide particles: a promising tool to label cells for magnetic resonance imaging, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-X. J. Wang, T. Quercy-Jouvet, H.-H. Wang, A.-W. Li, C.-P. Chak, S. Xuan, L. Shi, D.-F. Wang, S.-F. Lee, P.-C. Leung, C. B. S. Lau, K.-P. Fung and K. C.-F. Leung, Efficacy and Durability in Direct Labeling of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Using Ultrasmall Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles with Organosilica, Dextran, and PEG Coatings, Materials, 2011, 4, 703–715 CrossRef CAS .G. Goloverda, B. Jackson, C. Kidd and V. Kolesnichenko, Synthesis of ultrasmall magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles and study of their colloid and surface chemistry, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 1372–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Santra, R. Tapec, N. Theodoropoulou, J. Dobson, A. Hebard and W. Tan, Synthesis and characterization of silica-coated iron oxide nanoparticles in microemulsion: The effect of nonionic surfactants, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2900–2906 CrossRef CAS .R. Costo, V. Bello, C. Robic, M. Port, J. F. Marco, M. P. Morales and S. Veintemillas-Verdager, Ultrasmall Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications: Improving the Colloidal and Magnetic Properties, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 178–185 CrossRef PubMed .F. Hu, K. W. MacRenaris, E. A. Waters, T. Liang, E. A. Schultz-Sikma, A. L. Eckermann and T. J. Meade, Ultrasmall, Water-Soluble Magnetite Nanoparticles with High Relaxivity for Magnetic Resonance Imaging, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20855 CAS .C.-M. Cheng, G. Kou, X.-L. Wang, S.-H. Wang, H.-C. Gu and Y.-J. Guo, Synthesis of carboxyl superparamagnetic ultrasmall iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles by a novel flocculation–redispersion process, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2663–2669 CrossRef CAS .V. Hartman, L. J. Wilson and M. G. Rosenblum, Detecting and Treating Cancer with Nanotechnology, Mol. Diagn. Ther., 2012, 12, 1–14 CrossRef .S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. Vander Elst and R. N. Muller, Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, stabilization, vectorization, physicochemical characterizations, and biological applications, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Bumb, M. W. Brechbiel, P. L. Choyke, L. Fugger, A. Eggeman, D. Prabhakaran, J. Hutchinson and P. J. Dobson, Synthesis and characterization of ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles thinly coated with silica, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 335601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Mizutani, T. Iwasaki, S. Watano, T. Yanagida and T. Kawai, Size control of magnetite nanoparticles in hydrothermal synthesis by coexistence of lactate and sulfate ions, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 801–806 CrossRef .X. Sun, C. Zheng, F. Zhang, Y. Yang, G. Wu, A. Yu and N. Guan, Size-Controlled Synthesis of Magnetite (Fe3O4) Nanoparticles Coated with Glucose and Gluconic Acid from a Single Fe(III) Precursor by a Sucrose Bifunctional Hydrothermal Method, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16002–16008 CAS .L.-S. Xiao, J.-T. Li, D. F. Brougham, E. K. Fox, N. Feliu, A. Bushmelev, A. Schmidt, N. Mertens, F. Kiessling and M. Valldor, Water-soluble superparamagnetic magnetite nanoparticles with biocompatible coating for enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6315–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Gao, H. Wu, Y. Zhang, T. Luo, L. Feng, P. Huang, M. He and D. Cui, Synthesis of ultrasmall nucleotide-functionalized superparamagnetic γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4810–4813 RSC .S. Santra, R. Tapec, N. Theodoropoulou, J. Dobson, A. Hebard and W. Tan, Synthesis and characterization of silica-coated iron oxide nanoparticles in microemulsion: the effect of nonionic surfactants, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2900–2906 CrossRef CAS .M. Darbandi, F. Stromberg, J. Landers, N. Reckers, B. Sanyal, W. Keune and H. Wende, Nanoscale size effect on surface spin canting in iron oxide nanoparticles synthesized by the microemulsion method, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 195001 CrossRef .S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, M. Del Puerto Morales, O. Bomati-Miguel, C. Bautista, X. Zhao, P. Bonville, R. P. De Alejo, J. Ruiz-Cabello, M. Santos, F. J. Tendillo-Cortijo and J. Ferreiros, Colloidal dispersions of maghemite nanoparticles produced by laser pyrolysis with application as NMR contrast agents, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2004, 37, 2054–2059 CrossRef CAS .R. Costo, V. Bello, C. Robic, M. Port, J. F. Marco, M. P. Morales and S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, Ultrasmall Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications: Improving the Colloidal and Magnetic Properties, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 178–185 CrossRef PubMed .S. C. Motshekga, S. K. Pillai, S. Sinha Ray, K. Jalama and R. W. M. Krause, Recent Trends in the Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles Supported on Carbon Nanotubes and Their Applications, J. Nanomater., 2012, 1, 15 Search PubMed .E. A. Osborne, T. M. Atkins, D. A. Gilbert, S. M. Kauzlarich, K. Liu and A. Y. Louie, Rapid Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Dextran-Coated Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for MRI, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 215602 CrossRef PubMed .K. Kluchova, R. Zboril, J. Tucek, M. Pecova, L. Zajoncova, I. Safarik, M. Mashlan, I. Markova, D. Jancik, M. Sebela, H. Bartonkova, V. Bellesi, P. Novak and D. Petridis, Superparamagnetic maghemite nanoparticles from solid-state synthesis – their functionalization towards peroral MRI contrast agent and magnetic carrier for trypsin immobilization, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2855–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wan, W. Cai, J. Meng and E. Liu, Monodisperse water-soluble magnetite nanoparticles prepared by polyol process for high-performance magnetic resonance imaging, Chem. Commun., 2007, 5004–5006 RSC .X. Jia, D. Chen, X. Jiao and S. Zhai, Environmentally-friendly preparation of water-dispersible magnetite nanoparticles, Chem. Commun., 2009, 968–970 RSC .S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, stabilization, vectorization, physicochemical characterizations, and biological applications, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Xu, H. B. Yang, W. Y. Fu, K. Du, Y. M. Sui, J. J. Chen, Y. Zeng, M. H. Li and G. Zou, Preparation and magnetic properties of magnetite nanoparticles by sol–gel method, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2007, 309, 307–311 CrossRef CAS .U. I. Tromsdorf, O. T. Bruns, S. C. Salmen, U. Beisiegel and H. Weller, A highly effective, nontoxic T1 MR contrast agent based on ultrasmall PEGylated iron oxide nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4434–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Sandiford, A. Phinikaridou, A. Protti, L. K. Meszaros, X. Cui, Y. Yan, G. Frodsham, P. A. Williamson, N. Gaddum, R. M. Botnar, P. J. Blower, M. A. Green and R. T. M. de Rosales, Bisphosphonate-anchored PEGylation and radiolabeling of superparamagnetic iron oxide: long-circulating nanoparticles for in vivo multimodal (T1 MRI-SPECT) imaging, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(1), 500–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Wang, H. Dong, V. Pacheco, D. Willbold, Y. Zhang, A. Offenhaeusser, R. Hartmann, T. E. Weirich, P. Ma and H.-J. Krause, Relaxation behavior study of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles at ultralow and ultrahigh magnetic fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 14789–14793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Ghosh, C. P. Jijil and R. N. Devi, In situ encapsulation of ultra small ceria nanoparticles stable at high temperatures in the channels of mesoporous silica, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 155, 215–219 CrossRef CAS .K. Ma, H. Sai and U. Wiesner, Ultrasmall Sub-10 nm Near-Infrared Fluorescent Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(32), 13180–13183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kaniyankandyl, S. Verma, J. A. Mondal, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, Evidence of Multiple Electron Injection and Slow Back Electron Transfer in Alizarin-Sensitized Ultrasmall TiO2 Particles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(9), 3593–3599 CAS .S. Wang, J. Kurepa and J. A. Smalle, Ultra-small TiO2 nanoparticles disrupt microtubular networks in Arabidopsis thaliana, Plant, Cell Environ., 2011, 34(5), 811–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Szeifert, J. M. Feckl, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, Y. Liu, V. Kalousek, J. Rathousky and T. Bein, Ultrasmall Titania Nanocrystals and Their Direct Assembly into Mesoporous Structures Showing Fast Lithium Insertion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(36), 12605–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. W. Cheyne, T. A. D. Smith, L. Trembleau and A. C. McLaughlin, Synthesis and characterisation of biologically compatible TiO2 nanoparticles, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6(1), 423 CrossRef PubMed  , 6 pp.X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, Scalable Synthesis of TiO2–Graphene Nanostructured Composite with High Rate Performance for Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(12), 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. He, G. Guai, J. Liu, C. Guo, J. S. C. Loo, C. M. Li and T. T. Y. Tan, Nanostructure control of graphene-composited TiO2 by a one-step solvothermal approach for high performance dye-sensitized solar cells, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(11), 4613–4616 RSC .M. Epifani, J. Arbiol, E. Pellicer, N. Sergent, T. Pagnier and J. R. Morante, Synthesis and structural properties of ultra-small oxide (TiO2, ZrO2, SnO2) nanoparticles prepared by decomposition of metal alkoxides, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 809–815 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Cheema, D. Taroata, G. Schmid and G. Garnweitner, Synthesis and dispersion of ultra-small binary and ternary metal oxide nanoparticles for dielectric thin films, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2011, 1303 Search PubMed  , Symposium Y, Nanomaterials Integration for Electronics, Energy and Sensing.Y. Liu, S. Zhou, D. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Huang, H. Zhu, E. Ma and X. Chen, Amine-Functionalized Lanthanide-Doped Zirconia Nanoparticles: Optical Spectroscopy, Time-Resolved Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Biodetection, and Targeted Imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(36), 15083–15090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Lu, A. Ma, S. Yang and K. M. Ng, Surfactant assisted solid-state synthesis and gas sensor application of a SWCNT/SnO2 nanocomposite material, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7(4/5), 1589–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, G. Stefanic, J. Rathousky, O. Hayden, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, Assembly of mesoporous indium tin oxide electrodes from nano-hydroxide building blocks, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3(7), 2367–2374 RSC .L. Liu, X. Gu, C. Sun, H. Li, Y. Deng, F. Gao and L. Dong, In situ loading of ultra-small Cu2O particles on TiO2 nanosheets to enhance the visible-light photoactivity, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(20), 6351–6359 RSC .X. Li, L. A. Gutierrez, T. H. Nguyen, M. Plewa and J. Economy, ZnO nanoparticles coated on fiberglass as viricidal materials. Abstracts of Papers, 239th ACS National Meeting, San Francisco, CA, United States, March 21–25, 2010, POLY-301(2010).M. Letourneau, M. Tremblay, L. Faucher, D. Rojas, P. Chevallier, Y. Gossuin, J. Lagueux and M.-A. Fortin, MnO-Labeled Cells: Positive Contrast Enhancement in MRI, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116(44), 13228–13238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-J. Lee, D. Barrera, K. Luo and J. W. P. Hsu, In situ chemical oxidation of ultrasmall MoOx nanoparticles in suspensions, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 195761 Search PubMed  , 5 pp.N. Soultanidis, W. Zhou, C. J. Kiely and M. S. Wong, Solvothermal Synthesis of Ultrasmall Tungsten Oxide Nanoparticles, Langmuir, 2012, 28(51), 17771–17777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Mignot, C. Truillet, F. Lux, L. Sancey and C. Louis, et al., Top-Down Synthesis Route to Ultrasmall Multifunctional Gd-Based Silica Nanoparticles for Theranostic Applications, Chemistry, 2013, 19(19), 6122–6136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zhu, F. Liu, L. Ma, D. Liu and Z. Wang, Nanoparticle-Based Systems for T1-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging Contrast Agents, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 10591–10607 CrossRef PubMed .K. Kattel, J. Y. Park, W. Xu, H. G. Kim, E. J. Lee, B. A. Bony, W. C. Heo, J. J. Lee, S. Jin and J. S. Baeck, et al., A Facile Synthesis, In vitro and In vivo MR Studies of D-Glucuronic Acid-Coated Ultrasmall Ln2O3 (Ln = Eu, Gd, Dy, Ho, and Er) Nanoparticles as a New Potential MRI Contrast Agent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(9), 3325–3334 CAS .F. Lux, A. Mignot, P. Mowat, C. Louis, S. Dufort, C. Bernhard, F. Denat, F. Boschetti, C. Brunet and R. Antoine, et al., Ultrasmall Rigid Particles as Multimodal Probes for Medical Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(51), 12299–12303 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , S12299.L. Faucher, A.-A. Guay-Begin, J. Lagueux, M.-F. Cote, E. Petitclerc and M.-A. Fortin, Ultra-small gadolinium oxide nanoparticles to image brain cancer cells in vivo with MRI, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2011, 6(4), 209–218 CAS .L. Faucher, M. Tremblay, J. Lagueux, Y. Gossuin and M.-A. Fortin, Rapid Synthesis of PEGylated Ultrasmall Gadolinium Oxide Nanoparticles for Cell Labeling and Tracking with MRI, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(9), 4506–4515 CAS .A.-A. Guay-Begin, P. Chevallier, L. Faucher, S. Turgeon and M.-A. Fortin, Surface Modification of Gadolinium Oxide Thin Films and Nanoparticles using Poly(ethylene glycol)-Phosphate, Langmuir, 2012, 28(1), 774–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Miladi, G. Le Duc, D. Kryza, A. Berniard, P. Mowat, S. Roux, J. Taleb, P. Bonazza, P. Perriat, F. Lux, O. Tillement, C. Billotey and M. Janier, Biodistribution of ultra small gadolinium-based nanoparticles as theranostic agent: Application to brain tumors, J. Biomater. Appl., 2012, 28(3), 385–394 CrossRef PubMed .E. S. Choi, J. Y. Park, M. J. Baek, W. Xu, K. Kattel, J. H. Kim, J. J. Lee, Y. Chang, T. J. Kim and J. E. Bae, et al., Water-soluble ultra-small manganese oxide surface-doped gadolinium oxide (Gd2O3@MnO) nanoparticles for MRI contrast agent, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 4555–4560 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, J. Y. Park, K. Kattel, B. A. Bony, W. C. Heo, S. Jin, J. W. Park, Y. Chang, J. Y. Do and K. S. Chae, et al., A T1, T2 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-fluorescent imaging (FI) by using ultrasmall mixed gadolinium–europium oxide nanoparticles, New J. Chem., 2012, 36(11), 2361–2367 RSC .S. Ghosh, C. P. Jijil and R. N. Devi, In situ encapsulation of ultra small ceria nanoparticles stable at high temperatures in the channels of mesoporous silica, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 155, 215–219 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Sreeremya, K. M. Thulasi, A. Krishnan and S. Ghosh, A Novel Aqueous Route To Fabricate Ultrasmall Monodisperse Lipophilic Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51(1), 318–326 CrossRef CAS .S. Kar, C. Patel and S. Santra, Direct Room Temperature Synthesis of Valence State Engineered Ultra-Small Ceria Nanoparticles: Investigation on the Role of Ethylenediamine as a Capping Agent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(12), 4862–4867 CAS .K. Kattel, J. Y. Park, W. Xu, H. G. Kim, E. J. Lee, B. A. Bony, W. C. Heo, Y. Chang, T. J. Kim and J. Y. Do, et al., Water-soluble ultrasmall Eu2O3 nanoparticles as a fluorescent imaging agent: In vitro and in vivo studies, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 394, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, T. Cui, F. Cui, Y. Zhang, D. Li and Z. Zhang, Facile access to ultrasmall Eu2O3 nanoparticle-functionalized hollow silica nanospheres based on the spontaneous formation and decomposition of a cross-linked organic/inorganic hybrid core, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(22), 6329–6331 RSC .K. Kattel, J. Y. Park, W. Xu, H. G. Kim, E. J. Lee, B. A. Bony, W. C. Heo, S. Jin, J. S. Baeck and Y. Chang, et al., Paramagnetic dysprosium oxide nanoparticles and dysprosium hydroxide nanorods as T2 MRI contrast agents, Biomaterials, 2012, 33(11), 3254–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. L. Svechnikov, V. S. Flis and V. M. Pan, BaxY1−xZrOy nanoparticles in superconductive YBa2Cu3O7−x films, Metallofiz. Noveishie Tekhnol., 2009, 31(4), 463–471 CAS .X. Yang, A. S. Masadeh, J. R. McBride, E. S. Božin, S. J. Rosenthal and S. J. L. Billinge, Confirmation of disordered structure of ultrasmall CdSe nanoparticles from X-ray atomic pair distribution function analysis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8480–8486 RSC .O. E. Rayevska, G. Y. Grodzyuk, V. M. Dzhagan, O. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy, V. F. Plyusnin, V. P. Grivin and M. Y. Valakh, Synthesis and Characterization of White-Emitting CdS Quantum Dots Stabilized with Polyethylenimine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(51), 22478–22486 CAS .A. E. Raevskaya, G. Y. Grodzyuk, A. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy, E. A. Streltsov, P. V. Chulkin, S. M. Rabchynski and G. A. Ragoisha, Optical and electrochemical properties of CdS and CdSe quantum dots stabilized by polyethylenimine, Physics, Chemistry and Applications of Nanostructures: Reviews and Short Notes, Proceedings of [the] International Conference NANOMEETING-2011, Minsk, Belarus, May 24–27, 2011, ed. V. E. Borisenko,  2011, pp. 337–340 Search PubMed .M. A. Schreuder, J. R. McBride, A. D. Dukes, J. A. Sammons and S. J. Rosenthal, Control of Surface State Emission via Phosphonic Acid Modulation in Ultrasmall CdSe Nanocrystals: The Role of Ligand Electronegativity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(19), 8169–8176 CAS .N. N. Mel'nik, T. N. Zavaritskaya, I. V. Kucherenko, O. S. Plyashechnik, M. Y. Valakh, V. N. Dzhagan and A. E. Raevskaya, Resonant combination light scattering on ultrafine CdSxSe1−x colloid particles, Kratk. Soobshch. Fiz., 2011, 30–37 Search PubMed .L.-N. Chen, J. Wang, W.-T. Li and H.-Y. Han, Aqueous one-pot synthesis of bright and ultrasmall CdTe/CdS near-infrared-emitting quantum dots and their application for tumor targeting in vivo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(41), 4971–4973 RSC .O. Khani, H. R. Rajabi, M. H. Yousefi, A. A. Khosravi, M. Jannesari and M. Shamsipur, Synthesis and characterizations of ultra-small ZnS and Zn1−xFexS quantum dots in aqueous media and spectroscopic study of their interactions with bovine serum albumin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2011, 79(2), 361–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Chen, Q. Zhao and X. Ruan, Facile synthesis of ultra-small Bi2Te3 nanoparticles, nanorods and nanoplates and their morphology-dependent Raman spectroscopy, Mater. Lett., 2012, 82, 112–115 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma, S. L. Swisher, T. Ewers, J. Engel, V. E. Ferry, H. A. Atwater and A. P. Alivisatos, Photovoltaic Performance of Ultrasmall PbSe Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(10), 8140–8147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. K. Dutta, P. K. Sharma and A. C. Pandey, DNA base (cytosine) modified/capped ultrasmall Gd2S3:Eu3+ gadofluoroprobes for platelet isolation, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97(25), 253702 CrossRef .D. Xiong, Z. Xu, X. Zeng, W. Zhang, W. Chen, X. Xu, M. Wang and Y.-B. Cheng, Hydrothermal synthesis of ultrasmall CuCrO2 nanocrystal alternatives to NiO nanoparticles in efficient p-type dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(47), 24760–24768 RSC .V. Lopez-Dominguez, J. M. Hernandez, J. Tejada and R. F. Ziolo, Colossal reduction in Curie temperature due to finite-size effects in CoFe2O4 nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25(1), 6–11 CrossRef CAS .K. N. Trohidou, M. Vasilakaki, D. Peddis and D. Fiorani, Memory effects in ultra-small CoFe2O4 nanoparticles, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2012, 48(4), 1305–1308 CrossRef CAS .C. X. Guo, Y. Q. Shen, Z. L. Dong, X. D. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, DNA-directed growth of FePO4 nanostructures on carbon nanotubes to achieve nearly 100% theoretical capacity for lithium-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(5), 6919–6922 CAS .A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Wawrzynczyk, A. Gagor, L. Kepinski, M. Kurnatowska, L. Krajczyk, M. Nyk, M. Samoc and W. Strek, Giant enhancement of
upconversion in ultra-small Er3+/Yb3+:NaYF4 nanoparticles via laser annealing, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(14), 145705 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , S145705.D. Wawrzynczyk, A. Bednarkiewicz, M. Nyk, W. Strek and M. Samoc, Ligand-dependent luminescence of ultra-small Eu3+-doped NaYF4 nanoparticles, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15(6), 1707 CrossRef PubMed .N. J. J. Johnson, W. Oakden, G. J. Stanisz, R. S. Prosser and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Size-Tunable, Ultrasmall NaGdF4 Nanoparticles: Insights into their T1 MRI Contrast Enhancement, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23(21), 4877–4877 CrossRef CAS .N. J. J. Johnson, W. Oakden, G. J. Stanisz, R. S. Prosser and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Size-Tunable, Ultrasmall NaGdF4 Nanoparticles: Insights into Their T1 MRI Contrast Enhancement, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23(16), 3714–3722 CrossRef CAS .S. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Hou, Z. Cheng, P. Ma and J. Lin, Enhanced emission of ultra-small-sized LaF3:RE3+ (RE = Eu, Tb) nanoparticles through 1,2,4,5-benzenetetracarboxylic acid sensitization, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(18), 5619–5626 RSC .G. Chen, H. Qiu, R. Fan, S. Hao, S. Tan, C. Yang and G. Han, Lanthanide-doped ultrasmall yttrium fluoride nanoparticles with enhanced multicolor upconversion photoluminescence, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(38), 20190–20196 RSC .D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Nyk, A. Bednarkiewicz, W. Strek and M. Samoc, A comparison of morphology, structure and optical properties of ultrasmall, small and core–shell up-converting NaYF4/NaGdF4 nanocrystals co-doped with Tm3+ and Yb3+ ions, J. Lumin., 2013, 133, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .J. Ryu, H.-Y. Park, K. Kim, H. Kim, J. H. Yoo, M. Kang, K. Im, R. Grailhe and R. Song, Facile Synthesis of Ultrasmall and Hexagonal NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ Nanoparticles with Magnetic and Upconversion Imaging Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21077–21082 CAS .H.-T. Wong, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, H. L. W. Chan, J. Hao and J. A. Capobianco, Water dispersible ultra-small multifunctional KGdF4: Tm3+, Yb3+ nanoparticles with near-infrared to near-infrared upconversion, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(41), 16589–16596 RSC .E. Chelebaeva, J. Larionova, Y. Guari, R. A. S. Ferreira, L. D. Carlos, A. A. Trifonov, T. Kalaivani, A. Lascialfari, C. Guerin and K. Molvinger, et al., Nanoscale coordination polymers exhibiting luminescence properties and NMR relaxivity, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(3), 1200–1210 RSC .J. Larionova, L. Salmon, Y. Guari, A. Tokarev, K. Molvinger, G. Molnar and A. Bousseksou, Towards the ultimate size limit of the memory effect in spin-crossover solids, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(43), 8236–8240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Swadeshmukui and T. Padmavathy, Ultrasmall chitosan nanoparticles for bioimaging agents, PCT Int. Appl., WO 2009009469,  2009 .L. Buruaga and J. A. Pomposo, Metal-free polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) nanoparticles by enamine “click” chemistry at room temperature, Polymers, 2011, 3(4), 1673–1683 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Pomposo, A. R. de Luzuriaga, I. Garcia, A. Etxeberria and J. Colmenero, A Nanotechnology Pathway to Arresting Phase Separation in Soft Nanocomposites, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32(7), 573–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. A. Curtiss, J. Greeley, F. Mehmood, P. Redfern, P. Zapol and S. Vajda, First principles studies of subnanometer effects on catalytic activity and selectivity, Prepr. Symp. – Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2011, 56(2), 360–361 CAS .Y. Zhu, S. C. Peng, A. Emi, Z. Su, Monalisa and R. A. Kemp, Supported ultra small palladium on magnetic nanoparticles used as catalysts for Suzuki cross-coupling and Heck reactions, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349(11+12), 1917–1922 CAS .Y. Kimihisa, I. Takane, C. Wang-Jae, E. Osamu, K. Hideaki, T. Masahiro and S. Atsunori, Size-specific catalytic activity of platinum clusters enhances oxygen reduction reactions, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1(5), 397–402 CrossRef PubMed .C. R. Patra, R. Bhattacharya, D. Mukhopadhyay and P. Mukherjee, Fabrication of gold nanoparticles for targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62(3), 346–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhao, G. Ramakrishnan, D. Su, R. Rieger, A. Koller and A. Orlov, Novel photocatalytic applications of sub-nanometer gold particles for environmental liquid and gas phase reactions, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104(3–4), 239–244 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, C. Gayathri, H. Qian, R. R. Gil and R. Jin, Exploring stereoselectivity of Au25 nanoparticle catalyst for hydrogenation of cyclic ketone, J. Catal., 2010, 271(2), 155–160 CrossRef CAS .X.-X. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Shan and Q.-M. Huang, BSA-stabilized Au clusters as peroxidase mimetics for use in xanthine detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26(8), 3614–3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhang, H. Chibli, R. Mielke and J. Nadeau, Ultrasmall Gold-Doxorubicin Conjugates Rapidly Kill Apoptosis-Resistant Cancer Cells, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22(2), 235–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wu, X. He, K. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou and Z. Qing, Ultrasmall near-infrared gold nanoclusters for tumor fluorescence imaging in vivo, Nanoscale, 2010, 2(10), 2244–2249 RSC .S. P. Sherlock, S. M. Tabakman, L. Xie and H. Dai, Photothermally Enhanced Drug Delivery by Ultrasmall Multifunctional FeCo/Graphitic Shell Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(2), 1505–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liang, R. Feng, S. Yang, H. Ma, J. Liang and J. Chen, Rechargeable Mg batteries with graphene-like MoS2 cathode and ultrasmall Mg nanoparticle anode, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(5), 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Liu, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, Supercapacitor electrodes based on polyaniline-silicon nanoparticle composite, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(12), 3956–3959 CrossRef CAS .Y. Choi, G. Wang, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, Electro-oxidation of organic fuels catalyzed by ultra-small silicon nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(16), 164103 CrossRef .Y. Choi, G. Wang, M. H. Nayfeh and S.-T. Yau, A hybrid biofuel cell based on electrooxidation of glucose using ultra-small silicon nanoparticles, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24(10), 3103–3107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Hu and Y. S. Zhao, Inorganic nanoparticle-based T1 and T1/T2 magnetic resonance contrast probes, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(20), 6235–6243 RSC .T. Islam and M. G. Harisinghani, Overview of nanoparticle use in cancer imaging, Cancer Biomarkers, 2009, 5(2), 61–67 CAS .S. Kubinova and E. Sykova, Nanotechnologies for treatment of stroke and spinal cord injury, Nanomedicine and the Nervous System, ed. C. R. Martin, V. R. Preedy and R. J. Hunter,  2012, pp. 209–227 Search PubMed .C. Burtea, S. Laurent, I. Mahieu, L. Larbanoix, A. Roch, M. Port, O. Rousseaux, S. Ballet, O. Murariu and G. Toubeau, et al., In vitro biomedical applications of functionalized iron oxide nanoparticles, including those not related to magnetic properties, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2011, 6(4), 236–250 CAS .Y. Wu, M. Song, Z. Xin, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, S. Li and N. Gu, Ultra-small particles of iron oxide as peroxidase for immunohistochemical detection, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22(22), 225703 CrossRef PubMed .M. Weigandt, A. Hanefeld, A. Kuebelbeck and G. Larbig, Silicon dioxide nanoparticles and their use for vaccination, PCT Int. Appl., WO 2010006753,  2010 .J. Liu, Z.-P. Guo, K.-X. Zhu, W.-J. Wang, C.-F. Zhang and X.-L. Chen, Highly porous metal oxide polycrystalline nanowire films with superior performance in gas sensors, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(30), 11412–11417 RSC .L. Faucher, Y. Gossuin, A. Hocq and M.-A. Fortin, Impact of agglomeration on the relaxometric properties of paramagnetic ultra-small gadolinium oxide nanoparticles, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22(29), 295103 CrossRef PubMed  , S295103.O. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy, A. I. Kryukov and V. D. Pokhodenko, Semiconductor nanoparticles in photocatalysis: the present status and perspectives, Nanoparticles, ed. A. E. Kestell and G. T. DeLorey,  2010, pp. 79–148 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Oxana V. Kharissova	Dr Oxana V. Kharissova (born in 1969 in Ukraine, former USSR) is currently a Professor and Researcher at the UANL. Degrees: An MS in 1994, in crystallography from Moscow State University, Russia, and a PhD in Materials from the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, 2001, Mexico. Memberships: National Researchers System (Level I), Materials Research Society. She is the co-author of three books, 5 book chapters, 60 articles, and has filed two patents. Specialties: Nanotechnology (carbon nanotubes, nanometals, fullerenes), microwave irradiation and crystallography.
Boris I. Kharisov	Dr Boris I. Kharisov (born in Russia in 1964) is currently a Professor and Researcher at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (UANL). Degrees: An MS in 1986, in radiochemistry and a PhD in inorganic chemistry in 1993, from the Moscow State University, Russia; Dr Hab. in physical chemistry in 2006 from Rostov State University, Russia. He is the co-author of six books, 127 articles, five book chapters, and has filed two patents. Co-editor: three invited special issues of international journals. He is a member of the Editorial board of four journals. Specialties: coordination and inorganic chemistry, phthalocyanines, ultrasound, and nanotechnology.
Victor Manuel Jiménez-Pérez	Dr Victor Manuel Jiménez-Pérez was born in Tlaxcala (Mexico, 1974). He received his BSc (1998) in Chemistry at the Universidad Autonóma de Tlaxcala. In 2005, he received his PhD in Chemistry at the CINVESTAV under supervision of Prof. Rosalinda Contreras in the field of tin chemistry. After postdoctoral work in the Prof. Herbert Roesky's group at Universität Göttingen (2007), he joined as a full-professor in Chemistry Faculty at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. So far, he is the author of more than 20 publications. His research is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of luminescent and sensor organometallic compounds and “green” chemistry.
Blanca Muñoz Flores	Dr Blanca Muñoz Flores (born in Tlaxcala, Mexico, 1976) studied Industrial Chemistry at the Universidad Autonóma de Tlaxcala (1999). She received her PhD in Organic Chemistry (2008) at the CINVESTAV-IPN under the direction of Prof. Norberto Farfán García. She moved to the Chemistry Faculty of the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (2009) as a full-professor. Presently, her research group is working on the design, synthesis, characterization and determination of nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of organic and organometallic compounds, as well as on nanoalloys. So far, she is the author of more than 10 research publications in leading scientific journals.
Ubaldo Ortiz Méndez	Dr Ubaldo Ortiz-Mendez. Native of Durango, Mexico, Dr Ubaldo Ortiz-Méndez, is currently the Director of the Innovation, Research and Development Centre at the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. His bachelor degree in Physics was granted by the UANL in 1981, and his PhD in Materials Engineering was granted by the Institut National des Sciences Appliqués INSA in 1984, in Lyon, France. Due to his work in research and publications, he has been awarded the UANL Research Award three times, in 1996, 2000 and 2001, also the State Government of Nuevo Leon has awarded him the TECNOS Award in 1994 and 2000, for several of his research studies. For his academic achievement the Education Board of the French Republic has given him the proclamation of Knight of the Order of Academic Palms in 2009. He is currently teaching at the UANL, where he has been for over 20 years.

 	Fig. 1  Detail of the reaction area where the IR laser interacts with the gas reactants and the influence of the collection system to obtain larger aggregates (cellulose filter) or well-dispersed nanoparticles with sizes below 4 nm (polyol liquid solution) under similar experimental conditions. With permission of IOP Publishing (G. Martinez, A. Malumbres, R. Mallada, J. L. Hueso, S. Irusta, O. Bomati-Miguel and J. Santamaria, Use of a polyol liquid collection medium to obtain ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles by laser pyrolysis, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(42), 425605, ref. 4).	 

 	Fig. 2  Plausible mechanism of formation of QDs or NPs with a smaller size via control over a thermal quench-isothermal annealing process (thermodynamic size focusing). With permission of Springer (H.-S. Chen and R. V. Kumar, Growth of ultrasmall nanoparticles based on thermodynamic size focusing, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1207, 6 pp, ref. 10).	 

 	Fig. 3  Preparation of ultrasmall NPs or smaller QDs by three different synthesis approaches. With permission of Springer (H.-S. Chen and R. V. Kumar, Growth of ultrasmall nanoparticles based on thermodynamic size focusing, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1207, 6 pp, ref. 10).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of encapsulation by seeded emulsion polymerization: (A) nanocrystals and polysorbate-80 in THF; (1) injection into water; (B) seed structure; (2) addition of monomer; (C) swollen seed; (3) seeded emulsion polymerization; (D) nanocrystal covered with a polymeric shell. With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Kloust, E. Pöselt, S. Kappen, C. Schmidtke, A. Kornowski, W. Pauer, H.-U. Moritz and H. Weller, Ultrasmall Biocompatible Nanocomposites: A New Approach Using Seeded Emulsion Polymerization for the Encapsulation of Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7276–7281, ref. 13).	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of nanoparticles by a microfluidic system. With permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry (S. A. Khan and S. Duraiswamy, Controlling bubbles using bubbles-microfluidic synthesis of ultra-small gold nanocrystals with gas-evolving reducing agents, Lab Chip, 2012, 12(10), 1807–1812, ref. 26).	 

 	Fig. 6  Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into atomically monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres via respective one-phase (a) and two-phase thiol etching (b). CH2Cl2 (or CHCl3) was used to dissolve the starting Au nanoparticles in both processes (a and b). With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Qian, M. Zhu, E. Lanni, Y. Zhu, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(41), 17599–17603, ref. 34).	 

 	Fig. 7  Two shapes of 25 gold atom (Au25) nanoparticles: (A) biicosahedral Au25 nanorods (side and end views); (B) two-shell Au25 nanospheres. With permission of the American Chemical Society (H. Qian, M. Zhu, E. Lanni, Y. Zhu, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 nanorods and nanospheres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(41), 17599–17603, ref. 34).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of chain-like ensembles. Inset: a high-resolution TEM image of a chain. (b) TEM image of two crossed chains. The insets in (b) are aberration-corrected HRTEM images of the selected areas. (c) STEM image of network of chains. (d) and (e) TEM images of belts. (f) STEM image of belts. (g) TEM image of comet assemblies. (h) TEM image of a typical comet ensemble. The insets are magnified TEM images of different areas of a comet ensemble marked in (h). (i) STEM image of the comet-like assemblies. With permission of Springer (P.-p. Wang, Q. Yu, Y. Long, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Multivalent assembly of ultrasmall nanoparticles: one-, two- and three-dimensional architectures of 2 nm gold nanoparticles, Nano Res., 2012, 5(4), 283–291, ref. 37).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the template-free, size-selective fabrication of ultrasmall AuNPs (2.0–3.8 nm) anchored with a single triblock copolymer chain and the hierarchical self-assembly of the resulting AuNP hybrid amphiphilic triblock copolymers PEO–AuNP–PS in aqueous media. With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. Hu, T. Wu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Efficient Synthesis of Single Gold Nanoparticle Hybrid Amphiphilic Triblock Copolymers and Their Controlled Self-Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(18), 7624–7627, ref. 42).	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM image of ultrasmall copper nanoparticles including the selected area electron diffraction (inset). With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. J. Brege, C. E. Hamilton, C. A. Crouse and A. R. Barron, Ultrasmall Copper Nanoparticles from a Hydrophobically Immobilized Surfactant Template, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(6), 2239–2242, ref. 55).	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of SiO2@Pd-PAMAM dendrimer core–shell microsphere catalysts. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A. V. Biradar, A. A. Biradar and T. Asefa, Silica-Dendrimer Core–Shell Microspheres with Encapsulated Ultrasmall Palladium Nanoparticles: Efficient and Easily Recyclable Heterogeneous Nanocatalysts, Langmuir, 2011, 27(23), 14408–14418, ref. 60).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic shows the three-zone CVD for the growth of InSb nanowires, in which the source temperature and substrate temperature can be separately adjusted. The Sb powder and in ingot were used as precursor sources and placed into upstream zone A and B. Growth substrate coated with gold nanoparticles was placed in downstream zone C. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Yang, G. Wang, P. Slattery, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Ultrasmall Single-Crystal Indium Antimonide Nanowires, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2479–2482), ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of InSb nanowires grown on InSb(100) substrate using 30 nm gold nanoparticles as catalyst. The red arrows highlight the crystal base for the nanowire growth. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Yang, G. Wang, P. Slattery, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Ultrasmall Single-Crystal Indium Antimonide Nanowires, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2479–2482, ref. 75).	 

 	Fig. 14  A schematic diagram of the experimental setup of laser ablation of Si target in solvents (water and toluene). Reproduced with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry (R. Intartaglia, K. Bagga, A. Genovese, A. Athanassiou, R. Cingolani, A. Diaspro and F. Brandi, Influence of organic solvent on optical and structural properties of ultra-small silicon dots synthesized by UV laser ablation in liquid, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(44), 15406–15411), ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the grown stack including alternating multilayers. (b) Cross-sectional TEM image of the heteroepitaxial layer (770 nm) grown on silicon. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier Science (S. Alkis, M. Ghaffari and A. K. Okyay, Synthesis of ultra-small Si/Ge semiconductor nano-particles using electrochemistry, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134(2–3), 616–622, ref. 97).	 
(α and/or γ)-FeOOH (oxidation) → α-Fe2O3 (reduction) → Fe3O4 (controlled oxidation) → γ-Fe2O3	(1)

Ferumoxtran-10 AMI-227 Combidex/Sinerem	Guerbet AMAG Pharm. Inc.	15–30	Dextran T10, T1	Lymph node, liver, angiography	24–36 h	45	r1 = 9.9
r2 = 65
Ferumoxytol code 7228	AMAG Pharm. Inc.	30	Polyglucose sorbitol carboxymethyl ether	Kidney	Long blood half-time, useful as blood pool agent	18–74	r1 = 15
r2 = 89
SH U 555 C Supravist	Bayer Schering Pharma AG	21	Carboxydextran	Angiography	6 h	40	r1 = 10.7
r2 = 38
Feruglose NC-100150 Clariscan	GE-Healthcare	20	Pegylated starch	Lymph node, liver, perfusion, angiography	6 h	36	n.a.
VSOP-C184	Ferropharm	7	Citrate, dextran, carboxydeztran or polyethyleneglycol	Angiography	0.6–1.3 h	15–75	r1 = 14
r2 = 33.4

 	Fig. 16  Number of publications featuring the term “ultrasmall nanoparticles” in their topics (Source: ISI Web of Science, retrieved 18 December, 2012).	 

Coprecipitation	9	A mixture of FeCl3 and FeCl2 was added dropwise to a mechanically stirred solution of NaOH within 5 min under an inert N2 atmosphere at 80 °C. The mixture was stirred for 20 min and subsequently cooled to ambient temperature. The sediment was separated by an external magnetic field, washed with deionized water, and dispersed into 100 mL of aqueous hydrochloric acid (0.01 M)	130
Coprecipitation	6–7	The coprecipitation mixture was comprised of FeCl2, FeCl3, and the mixture was slowly added to NaOH with shaking to yield the precipitate. The precipitate was separated by centrifugation and washes with deoxygenated water. The SPIO nanoparticles were modified by heating over 120 °C in water in an autoclave for 12 h to afford the USPIO nanoparticles	131
Hydrothermal conditions	4	Fe3O4 were synthesized by high temperature hydrolysis of chelated Fe2+ and Fe3+ diethylene glycol alkoxy complexes in a solution without using capping ligands or surfactants: [Fe(DEG)Cl2]2− + 2[Fe(DEG)Cl3]2− + 2H2O + 2OH− → Fe3O4 + 3H2DEG + 8Cl−	132
Microemulsion	3–9	Two separate microemulsions (ME1 and ME2) were prepared using each surfactant. The abbreviated terms B97, I520, and T100 refer to Brij-97, Igepal CO-520 and Triton X-100 surfactant containing microemulsions, respectively. ME1 contained the iron salts, FeSO4 and FeCl3, whereas ME2 contained base, either NaOH or NH4OH. All aqueous solutions were prepared with deoxygenated water (nitrogen purged). The microemulsion was then placed in an ultrasonicator with magnetic stirrer removed. ME2 was then added dropwise to ME1 using a glass syringe	133
Laser pyrolysis	< 4	Laser pyrolysis is one of the most convenient synthesis processes because it enables the production of nanoparticles in a continuous way with low cost and with no use of surfactants or hazardous additives. This method prevents the formation of aggregates and renders a uniform distribution of well dispersed ultrasmall nanoparticles (<4 nm) in a water-compatible solvent	134
Polyol method	3–6	Ultrasmall water-soluble Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized in diethylene glycol (DEG) via a facile one-pot reaction	135
Flocculation–redispersion	5–8	First, USPIO nanoparticles were synthesized and flocculated to form the large clusters through bridging effect of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) during coprecipitation process. Then the flocculated USPIO was separated and purified from the solution conveniently through magnetic sedimentation. Finally, USPIO in the clusters were released again and well dispersed through electrostatic repelling effect of citric acid with the aid of ultrasonication	136
Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH− ⇌ Fe(OH)2 + 2Fe(OH)3 → Fe3O4 + 4H2O	(2)

 	Fig. 17  TEM using a JEOL 4000EX of (A) synthesized ∼175 nm silica beads embedded with USPIOs, (B) USPIOs coated with ∼10 nm-thick shells of silica, and (C) USPIOs coated with ∼2.5 nm thick shells of silica. With permission of IOP Publishing (A. Bumb, M. W. Brechbiel, P. L. Choyke, L. Fugger, A. Eggeman, D. Prabhakaran, J. Hutchinson and P. J. Dobson, Synthesis and characterization of ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles thinly coated with silica, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 335601, ref. 139).	 

 	Fig. 18  Top line: schematic representation of the preparation of USIRONs. Bottom line from left to right: 3D structures for vitamin C (3), DHAA (4), and the interaction between the iron oxide NPs and the capping agent (5). Gray, red, and green balls correspond to the carbon atoms, oxygen atoms, and iron oxide NPs, respectively. With permission of the American Chemical Society (L.-S. Xiao, J. T. Li, D. F. Brougham, E. K. Fox, N. Feliu, A. Bushmelev, A. Schmidt, N. Mertens, F. Kiessling and M. Valldor, Water-soluble superparamagnetic magnetite nanoparticles with biocompatible coating for enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6315–6324, ref. 142).	 

 	Fig. 19  HR-TEM and TEM images of the laser pyrolysis sample before (L) and after (L-AT) acid treatment. On the upper part, discernible lattice fringes were used to determine the iron oxide phase. On the right, the log–normal fit of both the particle size distributions and the hydrodynamic diameter in water of both samples are shown. With permission of the American Chemical Society (R. Costo, V. Bello, C. Robic, M. Port, J. F. Marco, M. P. Morales and S. Veintemillas-Verdager, Ultrasmall Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications: Improving the Colloidal and Magnetic Properties, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 178–185, ref. 134).	 

 	Fig. 20  The main process of the flocculation–redispersion precipitation method. With permission of Elsevier Science (C.-M. Cheng, G. Kou, X.-L. Wang, S.-H. Wang, H.-C. Gu and Y.-J. Guo, Synthesis of carboxyl superparamagnetic ultrasmall iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles by a novel flocculation–redispersion process, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2663–2669, ref. 136).	 

 	Fig. 21  HRTEM image of the re-dispersed USPIO (A) size distribution of USPIO nanoparticles in water from HPPS (B), the average hydrodynamic size of USPIO being 25 nm. With permission of Elsevier Science (C.-M. Cheng, G. Kou, X.-L. Wang, S.-H. Wang, H.-C. Gu and Y.-J. Guo, Synthesis of carboxyl superparamagnetic ultrasmall iron oxide (USPIO) nanoparticles by a novel flocculation–redispersion process, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2663–2669, ref. 136).	 
Ti(OC4H9)4 + H2C2O4 + 2H2O → Ti(OH)2C2O4 + 4C4H9OH	(3)

 	Fig. 22  Exchange of steric acid from presynthesized fatty acid-coated anatase 5 nm nanoparticles with organic ligands. With permission of Springer (R. W. Cheyne, T. A. D. Smith, L. Trembleau and A. C. McLaughlin, Synthesis and characterisation of biologically compatible TiO2 nanoparticles, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6(1), 423, 6 pp, ref. 163).	 

 	Fig. 23  Illustration of the preparation processes and growth mechanisms of TiO2-based nanocomposites. With permission of the American Chemical Society (X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, Scalable Synthesis of TiO2–Graphene Nanostructured Composite with High Rate Performance for Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(12), 11035–11043, ref. 164).	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration showing the specific recognition of ZrO2:Tb-ATF NPs to H1299 cancer cells with uPAR high expression. With permission of the American Chemical Society (Y. Liu, S. Zhou, D. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Huang, H. Zhu, E. Ma and X. Chen, Amine-Functionalized Lanthanide-Doped Zirconia Nanoparticles: Optical Spectroscopy, Time-Resolved Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Biodetection, and Targeted Imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(36), 15083–15090, ref. 168).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the different nanoparticle systems on MnO basis; TEM images of (b) MnO–oleate, (c) MnODMSA (SPMnO) and (d) MnO–DMSA–PEG (USPMnO, after alkalinization). (DMSA = meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid). With permission of the American Chemical Society (M. Letourneau, M. Tremblay, L. Faucher, D. Rojas, P. Chevallier, Y. Gossuin, J. Lagueux, M.-A. Fortin, MnO-Labeled Cells: Positive Contrast Enhancement in MRI, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116(44), 13228–13238, ref. 173).	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of microwave synthesis and chemical oxidation of MoOx nanoparticles. A mixture of molybdenum oxide bis(acetylacetonate) in n-butanol was placed in a microwave reactor (CEM Discover) and heated using 2.45 GHz radiation. When heated at 200 °C for 15 min, MoAcAc reacted, forming a brown suspension of nanoparticles. Chemical oxidation of the nanoparticle suspension with 0.1 M H2O2 for 24 h yielded a blue suspension of nanoparticles. With permission of Hindawi Publishing Corporation (Y.-J. Lee, D. Barrera, K. Luo, J. W. P. Hsu, In situ chemical oxidation of ultrasmall MoOx nanoparticles in suspensions, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 195761, 5 pp), ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 27  Use of PEG–Gd2O3 ultrasmall nanoparticles. With permission of the American Chemical Society (L. Faucher, M. Tremblay, J. Lagueux, Y. Gossuin, M.-A. Fortin, Rapid Synthesis of PEGylated Ultrasmall Gadolinium Oxide Nanoparticles for Cell Labeling and Tracking with MRI, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(9), 4506–4515), ref. 181.	 

 	Fig. 28  Illustration of the most probable reaction mechanism between phosphate groups and Gd2O3 thin films. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A.-A. Guay-Begin, P. Chevallier, L. Faucher, S. Turgeon, M.-A. Fortin, Surface Modification of Gadolinium Oxide Thin Films and Nanoparticles using Poly(ethylene glycol)-Phosphate, Langmuir, 2012, 28(1), 774–782), ref. 182.	 

 	Fig. 29  Illustration of the most probable reaction mechanism between PEG–phosphate and Gd2O3 nanoparticles. With permission of the American Chemical Society (A.-A. Guay-Begin, P. Chevallier, L. Faucher, S. Turgeon, M.-A. Fortin, Surface Modification of Gadolinium Oxide Thin Films and Nanoparticles using Poly(ethylene glycol)-Phosphate, Langmuir, 2012, 28(1), 774–782), ref. 182.	 

 	Fig. 30  Structural depiction of gadolinium-based nanoparticles (GBN) (a) and core size distribution (b) obtained by HRTEM. With permission of SAGE Publications (I. Miladi, G. Le Duc, D. Kryza, A. Berniard, P. Mowat, S. Roux, J. Taleb, P. Bonazza, P. Perriat, F. Lux, O. Tillement, C. Billotey, M. Janier, Biodistribution of ultra small gadolinium-based nanoparticles as theranostic agent: Application to brain tumors, J. Biomater. Appl., 2012, in press), ref. 183.	 
2Ce(NO3)3 + 0.5O2 → 2CeO2·nH2O + 6NO3− + (3 − 2n)H2O	(4)
Ce(NO3)3·6H2O (in EN) → Ce(OH)3 + CeO2	(5)

 	Fig. 31  TEM images of NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ synthesized in solvent mixtures of OA/ODE (a) 6 mL/15 mL, (b) 8 mL/12 mL, (c) 10 mL/10 mL, and (d) 14 mL/6 mL at different reaction times. The scale bar is 20 nm (ODE = 1-octadecene, OA = oleic acid). With permission of the American Chemical Society (J. Ryu, H.-Y. Park, K. Kim, H. Kim, J. H. Yoo, M. Kang, K. Im, R. Grailhe and R. Song, Facile Synthesis of Ultrasmall and Hexagonal NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ Nanoparticles with Magnetic and Upconversion Imaging Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21077–21082), ref. 214.	 
Acac	Acetylacetonate
APW	Augmented-plane wave
BA	1,2,4,5-Benzenetetracarboxylic acid
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
DMSA	meso-2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acid
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
Dox	Doxorubicin
DSSC	Dye sensitized solar cell
DWCNT	Double walled carbon nanotube
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EN	Ethylenediamine
ESR	Electron spin resonance
FP-APW	Full-potential linearised augmented-plane wave
FRET	Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
GEDOT	Germanium quantum dot
IR	Infrared
ITO	Indium tin oxide
MION	Monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticle
MQW	Multi-quantum well
MRI	Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MW	Microwave
NIR	Near infrared
PAMAM	Poly(amido amine)
PEG	Poly(ethylene glycol)
PCM	Phonon confinement model
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PEI	Polyethyleneimine
PL	Photoluminescence
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
QD	Quantum dot
RAFT	Reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer
RES	Reticuloendothelial system
RNA	Ribonucleic acid
SDBS	Sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate
SPION	Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle
SWNT	Single-walled carbon nanotube
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
THF	Tetrahydrofurane
TMB	3,3,5,5-Tetramethylbenzidine
TMPDA	N,N,N′,N′-Tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine
UCNC	Ultrasmall Cu nanocluster
USPs	Ultrasmall particles
uPAR	Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor
USPION	Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle
UV	Ultraviolet
VSOP	Very small superparamagnetic iron oxide particle
ZFC	Zero-Field-Cooled

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
