Comprehensive view on recent developments in hydrogen evolution using MoS 2 on a Si photocathode: from electronic to electrochemical aspects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA10791C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10791C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3767-3785Comprehensive view on recent developments in hydrogen evolution using MoS2 on a Si photocathode: from electronic to electrochemical aspects

        
          
            Anirudha 
            Jena
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chih-Jung 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ho 
            Chang
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Shu-Fen 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Ru-Shi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: rsliu@ntu.edu.tw
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Graduate Institute of Manufacturing Technology National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei 10608, Taiwan. E-mail: f10381@ntut.edu.tw
cDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei 116, Taiwan. E-mail: sfhu.hu@ntnu.edu.tw
Received 
      5th November 2020
    , Accepted 22nd December 2020First published on 23rd December 2020AbstractThe generation of clean energy is necessary for future technological developments. The utilization of solar illumination to produce H2 from water electrolysis is an alternative route to address the issue. However, the reaction is a thermodynamically uphill task. Furthermore, designing a photocathode, which can use most of the incident radiation for the photoelectrochemical (PEC) reaction, plays an important role. Surface-modified p-Si can be an economically viable option. The sluggish electro-kinetics on the Si surface has been rectified with coatings of cocatalyst materials. In the current review, we have discussed the possible modifications performed on the p-Si surface to reduce the loss due to reflection and coating of the cocatalyst, e.g. MoS2 on p-Si to improve H2 evolution. The facile charge carrier kinetics at the electrode–electrolyte interface has also been discussed. The development of cocatalysts has been focused on our previous experience for two decades. From surface plasmon resonance to heteroatom doping, that is, intentional defect formation and heterostructure design, we have included a comprehensive discussion on cocatalysts. The energetics of single atom replacement and its implications for efficiency has been included. This review gives insights into the currently emerging cocatalyst design for PEC water splitting. In this regard, the review presents insights into the phase transformation in MoS2 during the PEC process using operando techniques. A discussion on the effect of single atom replacement in the inactive basal-MoS2 plane has been included.Anirudha JenaDr Anirudha Jena is working as a Research Assistant Professor in the Graduate Institute of Manufacturing Technology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taiwan. He has received his Ph.D. degree from Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India in 2013. His current research is focused on the development of materials for all-solid-state batteries including Li-ion and Li-air.Chih-Jung ChenDr Chih-Jung Chen received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 2012 and 2016 at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taiwan. His current research interests include the synthesis of materials applied in energy conversion and energy storage.Ho ChangProf. Ho Chang is a Professor at the Graduate Institute of Manufacturing Technology, National Taipei University of Technology (NTUT), Taiwan. Prof. Chang has received Ph.D. from NTUT in 2004. Before joining NTUT, Prof. Chang worked as a Lecturer at NTUT from 1992. His current research is focused on functional nano-fluid and nanoparticles preparation, dye-sensitized solar cells, efficient thermoelectric generators, energy storage applications.Shu-Fen HuProf. S. F. Hu is a Professor at the Department of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU), Taiwan. She has obtained her Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in 1995. Prior to her joining NTNU, Prof. Hu worked as a researcher at National Nano Device Laboratory, Taiwan. Her area of interest includes Nano-electronics, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, and Materials for energy storage applications.Ru-Shi LiuProf. Ru-Shi Liu is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, NTU. He has obtained two Ph.D. degrees in chemistry; from National Tsing Hua University in 1990 and University of Cambridge in 1992. Prior to joining NTU, Prof. Liu worked at Materials Research Laboratories, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Taiwan till 1985. His research interests are light-conversion-to-light, light-conversion-to-energy, nanomaterials for drug delivery.
1. Introduction
The increasing demand for clean energy has led to research on developing an affordable and cost-effective approach for energy harvesting. Although the photovoltaic systems can convert solar fuel into energy, economic affordability remains a concern. Solar-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) reactions provide enormous scope to produce hydrogen and oxygen by splitting water into its components.1 The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency has been optimized with various means. The target of STH conversion efficiency of 25% and H2 of $5.30 per kg can be achieved by introducing efficient catalysts.2 The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) for H2 production is a half-reaction in overall water splitting, the other being the oxygen evolution reaction. The utilization of H2 as fuel has several advantages over other energy storage systems, including high energy density, carbon-free emission, and light packaging, which enables a longer drive.3 In comparison with other chemical-based fuels, the per mass chemical energy of hydrogen is 142 MJ kg−1, which is about three times that of other fuels.4 Hydrogen fuel cell-based electric vehicles can achieve life cycle and cost balancing with gasoline-based engines by 2030.5 Hence, hydrogen generation will address the issue of dwindling fossil fuels cost-effectively. In a typical PEC cell, water oxidation and reduction occur at the anode and cathode surfaces, respectively. However, the overall reaction is a thermodynamically acclivitous task because the standard free energy change during the reaction ΔG° is 237.2 kJ mol−1, which is 1.23 eV per electron, and H2 evolution is a two-electron process. A schematic of PEC water splitting is shown in Fig. 1a. Catalyzed PEC water splitting facilitates the formation of electron–hole pairs on illumination, and the photo-excited electron reduces H+ to H2. In practice, the catalyst must possess a bandgap between 1.6 and 2.4 eV, that is, with sufficient overpotential for the overall reaction.6 The two electrodes in a PEC cell, that is, the photocathode and photoanode separated by a membrane, carry out both the half-cell reactions. During operation, the water reduction catalyst (WRC) reduces the adsorbed species to facilitate H2 gas release from the cathodic compartment, and the water oxidation catalyst (WOC) promotes the release of oxygen from the anodic compartment through water oxidation.7,8 Several electrocatalysts have been investigated to produce H2 from the electrolysis of water. The PEC process is driven by the charge carriers, that is, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs in both compartments. The WOC in the photoanode is responsible for the reduction of the kinetic overpotential for water oxidation (ηo), and in the photocathodic compartment, the WRC minimizes the overpotential for water reduction (ηR).9
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the working of a PEC water electrolytic cell explaining the oxidation and reduction half-reactions. The efficiency of the catalyst depends on the positioning of the energy levels.;9 reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, 2019 (b) step-wise illustration of the HER process on the catalyst surface following the Heyrovsky or Tafel route after the Volmer step. 
The evolution of H2 during the HER follows several step-wise routes of the catalytic process. In an acidic medium, the hydrated proton (H3O+) from the aqueous electrolyte receives electrons and leaves adsorbed hydrogen (H*) on the catalyst surface (Volmer step), which reacts with the proton to liberate H2 (Volmer–Heyrovsky step). The reaction steps are shown in eqn (1) and (2) and schematically in Fig. 1b. In an alternate route, two adsorbed hydrogens are combined on the catalyst surface to produce H2 (Volmer–Tafel route), as shown in Fig. 1b and eqn (3).10 In contrast, in neutral and basic media, H2O provides the adsorbed hydrogens for H2 evolution. In a nutshell, the adsorption or desorption of hydrogen can be the rate-limiting step. Hence, the catalytic adsorption of hydrogen is the key step in the process. Considering that the Volmer step involves the one-electron reduction of a hydrated proton to form surface-adsorbed H*, catalysts with the free energy of hydrogen adsorption close to zero facilitate the evolution of H2. In neutral and basic media, water dissociation and hydroxide desorption occur in the Volmer step. H3O+ + e− → H* (Volmer step)(1) H* + H3O+ + e− → H2 (Heyrovsky step)(2) H* + H* → H2 (Tafel step)(3)
The overall reaction involving the splitting of water into its components follows an endothermic path (inset of Fig. 2). Liu and co-workers investigated efficient co-catalyst materials as both photoanodes and photocathodes for more than a decade.11–17 A year-wise schematic representation of catalysts for water oxidation and reduction from 2010 to 2020 by Liu and coworkers is shown in Fig. 2. Various strategies have been implemented by the group, from sensitizing the photoelectrodes with quantum dots (QDs) to intentional vacancy creation with heteroatom doping to improve the photocurrent. CdSe QDs improved the photocurrent density of ZnO nanorods (NRs) six-fold by injecting electrons from the CdSe conduction band (CB) to the ZnO CB.18 A dramatic improvement in the photocurrent from ZnO NRs has been achieved by coating with an InP sensitizer.19 The increase of the photocurrent up to 108% has been attributed to the multi-bandgap sensitization of InP/ZnO spanning from VIS to UV wavelengths. The coupling of the sensitizer InP with the c-axis of ZnO leads to improvement in the photo-response. Hot electrons from the plasmonic materials can overcome the Schottky barrier with a semiconductor, thereby improving the photocurrent under illumination. The optimized coating of the Au layer on semiconducting ZnO injects hot electrons into the conduction band through the Schottky barrier and improves the photocurrent.20 The effect of plasmonic electron injection into a semiconductor has been further improved by incorporating upconversion (UCN) nanoparticles. Chen et al. introduced Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped with NaYF4 as UCN nanoparticles to improve the efficiency of the PEC cell in CdTe QD-sensitized ZnO NR photoanodes.21 Given the UCN, the absorption range extends to the NIR range. UNC modified with Au nanoparticles enhances the emission because of upconversion and the rate of gas evolution. Further improvements have been conducted with CdTe-sensitized ZnO by doping nitrogen in ZnO which narrows down the ZnO bandgap, enabling unidirectional transport of electrons.22 A dramatic improvement of 300% in the photocurrent can be attributed to the increase in the coordination number of Zn–N, facilitating charge transportation. The development of co-catalysts for the photocathode is equally important for the PEC HER process. Liu and co-workers used various surface-textured Si materials as the photocathode for improving the photocurrent density (Fig. 2). Chen et al. modified the flat Si surface to Si MWs to reduce the loss because of reflection.23 An optimized concentration of Ag nanoparticles on Si MWs improves the interfacial charge transportation at Ag/Si by reducing the electron–hole recombination. Apart from metallic nanoparticles, other co-catalysts, for example, semi-metallic CoSe2, facilitate the transportation of charge carriers, thereby improving the photocurrent density.24 This result allows possible inclusion of non-precious co-catalysts for PEC water splitting. The formation of the oxide layer during PEC measurements is inevitable. Coating a thin layer of TiO2 on Si MWs improves not only the photocurrent but also the stability.25 The electronic properties of CoSx co-catalysts have been modified by doping P. Vacancies created because of P-doping helps in the adsorption of hydrogen on the photocathode surface, thereby improving the photocurrent.26 MoS2, a two-dimensional metal di-chalcogenide (TMD), has shown high activity in PEC reactions. Doping P in MoS2 creates S vacancies that lead to a change in hydrogen affinity on the catalyst surface. Using X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, Chen et al. showed 84% retention of photocurrent in P-doped MoS2 on Si MPs with the TiO2 passivation layer.27 P-Doping facilitates the formation of Mo-edge active sites for the HER. The insertion of phosphorus in MoWS coated on p-Si with a TiO2 buffer layer accelerates the HER activity.28 Numerous sulfur vacancies generated via the P–O-bonded MoWS cocatalyst retain 83.8% catalytic activity. Apart from single doping, dual doping of metallic cobalt and nonmetallic phosphorus shows enhancement in the photocurrent because of the activation of the MoS2 basal plane.29 In a nutshell, Liu and coworkers covered a wide range of catalyst materials coated with various cocatalysts both as the photocathode and photoanode to drive the overall water splitting. Hence, the review continues with the recent developments in catalysts for the HER with a focus on MoS2 and interfacial phenomena.
 Fig. 2  Strategies to develop co-catalyst materials for photoanode and photocathode over the last decade according to Liu and co-workers. From band engineering to facilitating hot electron injection into semiconductor CB to creating vacancies to adsorb H; the photocurrent density improves with such modifications. 
Several developments in TMDs, particularly MoS2 and WS2, lead to efficient electrodes in batteries as photocathodes for H2 generation, because of their unique layered nature and interaction with light.30 A 300 nm film absorbs 95% of light with an optical absorption higher than 107 m−1 over the visible range.31 Such unique light–TMD interaction is due to the layered structure and orbital character of Mo and W. The MoS2 and WS2 layer framework constitutes triatomic stacks of S atoms among metals held by van der Waals forces. The indirect bandgap of bulk MoS2 and WS2 ranges between 1.1 and 1.4 eV, which transforms into a direct bandgap of ∼2.0 eV for WS2 and ∼1.9 eV for MoS2 for monolayers.32 Given their high surface-to-volume ratio with numerous catalytically active edge sites, the illumination-driven PEC performance of these layered materials requires serious attention. The edge sites are catalytically more active than the basal plane. Hence, several modifications have been performed to enhance the catalytic performance of the basal sites by incorporating dopants and preparing composites with reduced graphene oxide.33 Besides, the valence band edges of monolayer MoS2 and WS2 are held above the water oxidation potential, whereas the bulk counterpart is incapable of PEC performance.34,35 The application of MoS2 and WS2 begins a new era of making heterostructures, for example, MoS2–WS2, as their unique electronic and optical properties change significantly because of the formation of the heterostructure.36 The MoS2–WS2 heterostructures not only enhance the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes but also improve the H2 evolution efficiency compared with that of pristine MoS2 and WS2.37 In the current review article, we are focusing on the strategies to improve the PEC performance of layered materials as cocatalysts on the Si photocathode for the HER process. A comprehensive analysis of the various strategic modifications is included.
Though there have been many studies on the PEC performance of various catalysts, the current review gathers the real mechanistic studies on HER performance with recent research using operando techniques. In particular, in the case of MoS2, the phase transformation between 2H and 1T during HER cycles is still unclear. Several operando techniques have been used to investigate the proton insertion and desertion from the MoS2 layers. Again, the edge or plane activity in MoS2 type materials needs deeper exploration. Though the Mo-edge has been considered the most active site for the HER process, the superior activity of 1T and amorphous MoS2 is still unclear. The basal plane of MoS2 which remains inactive towards the HER process due to steric factors shows higher activity with single-atom insertion.38 Herein, the role of single atom substitution whether for catalyzing or promoting the HER process is ill-defined. Hence the improvements in HER activity on the basal plane have attracted further research to reveal the underlying mechanism. At the same time, the Si photocathode has been the base for PEC reactions for decades. However, surface texturing to minimize the loss due to reflection, interface stabilization to avoid surface oxidation, and effective doping to improve the conductivity remain a challenge. Hence in the current review, we have explored the possible solutions for these issues to prepare Si as the most suitable photocathode and utilize its intrinsic solar absorption properties.
2. Strategies to improve PEC splitting of water to produce hydrogen gas
Several semiconducting catalysts have been studied to carry out the HER efficiently. Oxides, oxy-nitrides, perovskites, sulfides, and photovoltaic materials are widely used catalysts used for the HER.39–43 Earth-abundant materials such as Si with a bandgap of 1.12 eV absorb in a wide range from the solar spectrum. Moreover, the conduction band edge of p-Si is negative compared with the H+ reduction potential, thereby ideally driving the HER.8 However, the planar Si surface is poor in light-harvesting, and the Si material has a maximum photocurrent density of 44 mA cm−2.44 Furthermore, sluggish interfacial charge–transfer kinetics at the p-Si/electrolyte interface restricts bias-free reduction of H+ in the PEC cell even under 1 sun illumination. Hence, various structural approaches have been followed to increase the photocurrent and faster kinetics by the Si-photocathode, for example, micro-Si wires (Si-MWi), Si-micro-pyramids (Si-MPy), Si-micro walls (Si-MWl), Si-micropillars (Si-MPi), and Si nanobelts.45–48 Additional co-catalyst layers on p-Si have been investigated to hasten the kinetics of proton reduction.26,49 Co2P drop cast on inverted Si pyramids shows high photocurrent and stable performance.50 The photocurrent remains at approximately −13.3 mA cm−2 for the amorphous P-doped cobalt sulfide deposited on p-Si micro-pyramids with a 10 nm passivation layer (TiO2) even after 1 h of chronoamperometry.51 In the center of Fig. 3, a schematic of various surface-modified Si photo-absorbers is shown that can reduce reflection and increase the area to solar exposure and lead to higher catalyst loading. Strategic improvements used to improve the photocurrent density include modification of the photocathode with co-catalyst materials include engineering their chemical and structural characteristics. Modifying metal chalcogenides and nano-sized materials, creating vacant sites for ionic/electronic hopping, and activating basal or edges are the possible routes to improving the photocurrent density. One of the issues in the low efficiency of the photocathodes is the interfacial charge–transfer resistance between Si and the co-catalyst. A suitable buffer layer of nm thickness can address this issue. The mechanism of photocurrent generation under illumination and transport of the electrons to split water into hydrogen largely depends on the nature of the catalyst materials. The vacancy-mediated process has been used to improve the photocurrent density in layered materials. The formation of solid solutions among co-catalyst materials can alter the orbital character and allow free transport of electrons.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the strategies used for the development of the photocathode and the mechanism thereof to improve the photocurrent density. The core refers to various surface modifications of Si, for example, micron-size pyramid, wire, wall, and pillar, followed by strategic improvements in interfaces and catalysts. The outer layer presents the factors driving the HER process; the discussion in the article follows the leveling. 
2.1. Use of Si as the photocathode
Si with a diamond cubic lattice covalently coordinated to four Si atoms has a bond strength of 226 kJ mol−1.52 Other substrates considered for the photovoltaic industry, e.g. TiO2, CdSe, and CdS with a bandgap of 3.0, 1.7 eV and 2.4 eV, respectively, are ruled out because of their higher bandgaps.53 The oxide of Cu, Cu2O with a bandgap in the range of 1.9 to 2.2 eV, requires a higher driving force for the HER process.54 Although III–V semiconducting photocathodes, e.g. GaP, exhibit large photovoltage, the higher cost and lower charge separation ability limit its application. Huang et al. reviewed varieties of photocathodes for efficient hydrogen evolution.55 Si has been selected as the photocathode because of its suitable band alignment to produce H2 under illumination (Fig. 4a inset). However, strong reflection from the planar Si surface is a major limitation for the PEC performance.56 Generating the charge carriers and transportation for reaction with a low possibility of recombination are the requirements for Si as an efficient photocathode. Although low-dimensional Si materials are important due to their numerous active sites and charge carriers, the surface defects and recombination of charge carriers lead to photoluminescence.57 Moreover, surface passivation has a detrimental effect on catalytic activity. The low photovoltage at the Si/H2O junction confines the energy conversion ability. Hence modifying the p-Si to n+p-Si, raise the photovoltage due to band bending at the n+/p interface.48 The buried junction n+p-Si with an insulated layer under acidic conditions can form a 3.1 eV barrier which can block the electron transport.58 Surface oxidation of the Si/H2O junction induces instability at the interface. Esposito et al. used the growth of a metal-insulator-semiconductor coating to facilitate solar-driven hydrogen production.59 The H2 evolution using the Pt/Ti/SiO2/p-Si photocathode through the insulating SiO2 surface is due to the photogenerated electrons collected over a wide range through the electrolyte-induced inversion layer and evolution of H2 assisted by the H2 spillover. Other strategic improvements include surface treatment of the Si to trap the light and improve H2 production efficiency.60 As shown in Fig. 4a, multiple light scattering increases the optical penetration depth, thereby improving the harvesting efficiency.61 PEC performance on single crystalline Si has been improved with intentional surface modification, such as Si microwires, Si inverted pyramids, and Si micropillars. Several electrocatalysts have been tested on various surface-modified Si photocathodes to improve HER kinetics.62–65 Cocatalyst materials are used on p-Si to avoid recombination of the charge carriers due to the low bandgap in Si. Cocatalysts of various classes including metallic and semiconducting have been used to improve the PEC performance at the Si/electrolyte interface.66 In the case of the overall water splitting process, a suitable alignment of the photocathode reduction potential and photoanode oxidation potential is necessary.67 The cocatalyst helps in widening the charge separation gap and hence facilitates H2 desorption. The intrinsic catalytic activity is strongly controlled by the metallicity and binding sites of the catalyst. The improved metallic character of the Ni-based catalyst reduces the adsorption energy and the subsequent shift of the d-orbital facilitates water dissociation.68 Lee et al. reported a comparative analysis of nickel selenide in an orthorhombic, cubic, and hexagonal phase as bifunctional catalysts for water splitting on Si nanowire arrays.69 The cocatalyst samples were obtained by dipping the Si substrate in the precursor solution and annealing under the flow of Se powder. The samples were labelled NS-1 with the orthorhombic phase as the major phase with a small fraction of cubic c-NiSe2. The NS-2 contains cubic c-NiSe2 and NS-3 contains purely hexagonal h-NiSe. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of NS-1 show homogeneously elongated Si NWs with a length of approximately 4 μm (Fig. 4b). The enlarged view of the SEM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images further indicates the modified surface of the Si NWs with 5–30 nm particles coated conformally. The core level X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of all the three cocatalysts indicates that the o-NiSe2 has a high metallic character, and the surface is less prone to oxidation (Fig. 4c). The I–V curves using bare p-Si NWs, NS-1, NS-2, or NS-3 as photocathodes under solar irradiation are shown in Fig. 4d with 2 s on/off cycles. The NS-1 electrode results in a stable photocurrent of approximately 6.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V compared with NS-2 and NS-3. The NS-1 shows an overall photocurrent degradation of merely 3% over 120 min. The gas evolution analysis shows a high fraction of H2 (Fig. 4e). The electrochemical impedance analysis shows sluggish charge–transfer kinetics of bare p-Si (Fig. 4f and g). Furthermore, the low charge–transfer resistance of NS-1 may be due to the metallic o-NiSe2 nanocrystals, which result in significantly high carrier concentrations.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the interaction between the incident light and textured Si, (band alignment in p-Si under illumination), reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2011 (b) NS-1 cocatalyst deposited on p-Si shown in the SEM and HRTEM images, schematic of the overall water splitting on the NiSe2 surface, (c) XPS profile of Ni 2p showing the presence of metallic Ni. Electrochemical analysis using 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) for bare p-Si NWs and NS samples as photocathodes, (d) change in current density (mA cm−2) vs. potential (V vs. RHE) at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, (e) photocurrent stability (upper panel) and gas evolution (H2 and O2−) with time for NS-1 cocatalyst (lower panel), Nyquist plots of all cocatalyst samples coated on p-Si under (f) dark and (g) light irradiation.69 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society 2018. 
2.2. Incorporation of the buffer layer
Although the single-crystal Si has more charge carriers than the polycrystalline counterpart, the polycrystalline Si has been given more importance for practical applications because of its cost-effectiveness.70 However, surface recombination of the photo-generated charges in polycrystalline Si because of the high surface state density reduces the H2 conversion efficiency.71 Besides, the surface oxidation of Si deteriorates the performance. A surface passivation layer has been proven to be effective in suppressing the charge recombination in polycrystalline Si coating. The introduction of the passivation layer between the semiconducting polycrystalline Si and cocatalyst can tune the performance of the photocathode by lowering the overpotential or suppressing the charge recombination, thereby shifting the onset potential. The photocathode/passivation layer/catalyst configuration prevents electrolyte penetration into the semiconductor, thereby improving the stability. Moreover, introducing the passivation layer in a particular oxide passivation layer alleviates the dangling bonds on the surface of semiconductors that act as trapping sites for charge recombination. The passivation layer therein slightly elevates the junction barrier height to prevent carrier transfer. The metal oxide passivation layers such as SiO2, AlOx, TiOx, TaOx, and HfOx are widely studied interlayers for protecting the Si photocathode.59,72,73 In a typical situation of protecting the photocathode, n-type metal oxide coatings are beneficial as the separated electrons in a buried junction migrate to the solid/liquid interface through the conduction band.74
Jung et al. used ALD-coated TiO2 to study the PEC performance of nanocrystalline NiOx on p-Si.75 A comparative effect of SiOx and TiOx has been presented using NiOx as a catalyst on p-Si. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image (Fig. 5a) of the heterojunction NiOx/TiOx/Si photocathode configuration shows the stacks of crystalline and amorphous sections. The nanocrystalline NiOx thin films on amorphous TiOx are stacked on crystalline Si with thin SiOx. The Voc (Fig. 5b) shows improved results with the thickness of TiOx and reaches 0.9 V vs. RHE, outmatching the highest value of Si in photovoltaics (0.75 V) because of the pseudocapacitive NiOx/Si junction. As shown in Fig. 5c, suppressing the hole transfer with thickness leads to an increase in the electrochemical potential and Voc. In the pseudocapacitive junction of PEC cells, the Voc is a result of electrochemical potential irrespective of the photovoltage Vph. As shown schematically in Fig. 5d, the accumulation of charge through Si in NiOx is due to the minority carrier (electron), and the hole transfer is controlled via the thickness of the TiOx layer.
 Fig. 5  (a) HRTEM images of NiOx/TiOx/Si photocathode showing the amorphous layers on crystalline Si substrate, (b) variation of Voc with a thickness of TiOx using LSV, (c) variation of Voc with a thickness of TiOx and SiO2 layer derived from LSV (d) schematic of the enhancement of Voc with TiOx coating that blocks the diffusion of holes, (e) plot of Voc with varying thicknesses of TiOx and SiO2, (f) LSV recorded using Si photocathodes with varying thicknesses of TiOx and SiO2 insulators.75 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society 2020. 
A constant photocurrent of −10 mA cm−2 is used to carry out chronoamperometric measurements in 1 M KOH as the electrolyte to compare the stability of NiOx/TiOx/Si and NiOx/SiO2/Si samples (Fig. 5e). In the initial 2 h of testing, NiOx activation, that is the transformation of the NiOx surface into the Ni(OH)2 phase, increases the potential levels of TiOx and SiO2. This finding in turn ameliorates the open-circuit potential and charge–transfer kinetics. The good corrosion resistance behavior of TiOx can be observed after 3 h, by which the potential level of SiO2 decreases because of the dissolution of SiO2 in the alkaline electrolyte. By contrast, TiOx shows stable operation for 10 h because of its densely packed coating. The superior performance of the TiOx sample has been investigated further by LSV (Fig. 5f). Choi et al. reported that a coating of a thin Al2O3 layer can not only protect the oxidation of nano-sized Si but also help in suppressing reflection and passivating the trapping states on the surface.76 The ultra-thin layer of Al2O3 allows electron transfer via tunneling and reduces the loss because of the reflection of its intermediate refractive index between Si and air.
3. Materials and the route to improve the PEC performance of Si photocathodes
3.1. Pumping electrons into the CB of semiconductors
Several co-catalysts have been introduced on the Si photocathode to reduce the energy barrier for the HER and enhance the faradaic efficiency. The co-catalyst has been selected based on the activity and the plausible route to reduce the energy barrier. Au nanoparticles with an average size of 30 nm show an increase in the absorption and scattering cross-section.77 This finding is due to the collective oscillation of electrons boosting the local electromagnetic field. The plasmon-enhanced injection of hot electrons into the semiconductors enhances the photocatalytic activity. The hot electrons are generated because of either the internal conduction band transitions or interband transition between the conduction band and d-orbitals. The electrons placed at high energy levels cross the Schottky barrier to enhance the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 6a).78 Dunklin et al. studied the long-lived photoinduced absorption in TMDs covalently bonded to Au nanoparticles.79 As shown schematically in Fig. 6b, the distribution of hot-hole energy spans over 2 eV below Ef, whereas the hot electron is within hundreds of meV. The hot holes from Au can transfer to MoS2 and WS2 as the Au plasmonic hot holes are ∼10 times more energetic than the hot electrons. Cui et al. reported a facile strategy to design Cu1.75S–Au@S–MoS2, a Pt-free non-precious co-catalyst with numerous active MoS2 edge sites that can absorb a range of sun illumination.80 The hole diffusion from Cu1.75S to Au leads to thermal equilibrium at the Au/Cu1.75S interface. The low overpotential of 195 mV at 200 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1 achieved by Cu1.75S–Au@S–MoS2 under solar illumination is mostly attributed to the MoS2 edge sites. As shown in Fig. 6c, the plasmon-enhanced electron injection from Cu1.75S–Au to MoS2 is reflected in the increase in the photocurrent. Zhang et al. used a unique design to fabricate photocathodes using a TiO2/Au nanoring (AuNR)/Si nanohole (SiNH) hetero-nanostructure (HN).81 The novel design exposes a large area for the PEC reaction. Good HER performance of the photocathode can be observed with a positive shift in onset potential when TiO2 is introduced on AuNR/Si (Fig. 6d). Given the formation of ohmic contact between the p-SiNH and Au, the electrons can easily migrate through the interface, thereby improving the photogenerated current. Concurrently, the introduction of TiO2 increases the dark and light current because of the Schottky junction formed between AuNRs and TiO2. This Schottky junction suppress the charge recombination and alleviates the interfacial charge transportation. The overall mechanism of this unique photocathode can be explained in Fig. 6e. The hot electron generated with the illumination of AuNRs crosses the Schottky barrier with TiO2, thereby facilitating the PEC HER process.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the hot electron injection from plasmonic materials to the textured photocathode; (b) Au/MoSe2 interfacial charge transport via inter and intra-band transition;79 reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2020 (c) pathway for the plasmon-enhanced electrochemical HER using Cu1.75S–Au@MoS2 under illumination;80 reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, 2020 (d) positive shift in onset potential of SiNH, TiO2/SiNH, AuNR/SiNH, and TiO2/AuNR/SiNH arrays with or without light illumination in a solution of 0.5 M H2SO4;81 and (e) charge carrier transport in the TiO2/AuNR/SiNH hetero-nanostructure reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2019. 
3.2. MoS2 co-catalyst on the silicon photocathode
Among all the layered materials, TMDs, particularly MoS2 with a S–Mo–S-layered structure, exhibit two active sites for the adsorption of hydrogen. The STH conversion efficiency is the measure for the semiconductor to be implemented in the PEC system. A semiconductor with a bandgap of 1.6 eV can achieve STH up to 30%. The use of a III–V group semiconducting catalyst can achieve 12.4%. However, due to the cost factor, these materials are ruled out from commercialization.2 On the other hand, MoS2 integrated over a Si photocathode offers a cheaper solution. A MoS2 single-layer with a bandgap of 1.8 eV can absorb wavelengths shorter than 689 nm and in the bulk, it is 1.23 eV i.e. an absorption wavelength shorter than 1008 nm. Hence, the single-layer and the bulk MoS2 can absorb 50% and 75% of the full solar spectrum, respectively.82 With a favorable bandgap alignment with Si, the MoS2/Si-heterojunction photocathode achieved a half cell STH conversion efficiency of 5.57% under AM 1.5 G illumination with a maximum photocurrent density of 36.33 mA cm−2 and an onset potential of 0.5 V vs. RHE with stability up to 10 h of continuous reaction time. Further improvements have been carried out in a tandem device using MoS2 thin films for unassisted water splitting with pn-GaInAsP/pn-GaAs (III–V). A ηSTH value of about 6.1% is reported for the MoS2/III–V device with stability for 12 h.83 Given the high exposure, the edge sites are prone to adsorbing more hydrogen resulting in the basal plane being inert for catalysis. The moderate hydrogen binding energy edge sites terminated with Mo show the best HER performance.84 The H-binding and releasing affinity of octahedral coordinated MoS2 (1T-MoS2) leads to enhanced HER activity in comparison with the trigonal coordinated 2H-MoS2 and rhombohedral 3R-MoS2. However, the intrinsic mechanism is yet to be explored. The barrier offered by the interlayers in 2D materials interferes with the catalytic activity. A facile passage of electrons from the current collector to the active sites crossing the interlayer barrier induces the HER. Jiang et al. fabricated MoS2 nanoscrolls with a twisted bilayer having moiré superlattice as an efficient catalyst in the HER.85 Twisting the moiré superlattice by θ ≈ 7.3° improves the charge–transfer kinetics and HER efficiency. Using a variation in the thickness of MoS2, Xu et al. designed mono/di/tri-types of active sites, for example, the edge of sheets, stepped terminated surfaces, and terraces on the basal plane.86 The kinetics of the HER process have been studied using DFT analysis on the basal (002), (100), and (103) edge surfaces.87 Considering the initial H-adsorption in the Volmer step and subsequent desorption in the Heyrovsky and Tafel steps, the theoretical results indicate that the basal plane activity for the HER passes through the Volmer–Heyrovsky route. By contrast, at the edge of the active sites, the Volmer–Heyrovsky and Volmer–Tafel routes are the favorable routes, wherein the H-desorption step from the Mo-edge site is crucial. The Mo-edge shows HER activity, and the bridging S in Si-rich amorphous MoS2 results in a high activity of the bridging S sites.88
Wu et al. showed a plausible route for the HER activity using operando XAS analysis in combination with core level and valence level electronic structure models.89 A comparative study of 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2, and amorphous MoS2 (Am-MoS2) reveals a change in the Mo–Mo and Mo–S bond length during the HER process and determines the activity of the catalyst. As shown in the LSV curves, the 1T and Am-MoS2 display higher current densities in comparison with the 2H samples (Fig. 7a). However, based on the stability data of the samples, the catalytic activity of the 1T-MoS2 decays after the initial constant profile with the Am-MoS2 (Fig. 7b). The underlying mechanism of such decay in the performance of the 1T-MoS2 has been probed using operando Mo K-edge XAS measurements in the dry state and under different set potentials. As shown in Fig. 7c–e, the operando X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) plot for the Mo K-edge, the signature features of 2H-MoS2 are absent before the stability test in 1T-MoS2, and a-MoS2 indicates varying coordination spheres of Mo in the three catalysts. However, after the stability test, the reappearance of 2H-MoS2 features in 1T-MoS2 indicates the instability of the catalyst under prolonged measurements. This observation implies a continuous conversion of 1T-MoS2 to 2H-MoS2. In contrast, the Am-MoS2 has a stable structure before and after the HER test (Fig. 7d). The fitted X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) profile from the operando data to the Mo–S and Mo–Mo shell for all the three catalysts in the dry state and at set potentials of −0.3 V and +0.3 V is shown in Fig. 7d–f with the fitted part marked in grey. As reported by the authors, the fitted parameters display a small change in the coordination number and bond distance for the Mo–Mo and Mo–S shell, and the distance between Mo–S and Mo–Mo implies the overall structural stability of the 2H-MoS2 under all applied experimental conditions. In contrast, the 1T-MoS2 shortens the Mo–S bond, indicating structural instability. The shortening of the Mo–Mo and Mo–S bond has been proven from the density functional measurements, wherein the differences in the Gibbs free energy of H adsorption has been observed. As shown in Fig. 7g–i, the Mo–Mo and Mo–S bond are shortened from the conversion of the 2H to the 1T phase. Given the dynamic structural changes of MoS2 during the HER test, the authors have extended the analysis to understand the changes in the electronic structure by partial density of state measurements. From the Fermi level crossing for 1T and 2H-MoS2 in Fig. 7j and k, a clear metallic 1T and semiconducting 2H-MoS2 are observed from Mo 3d orbitals. This metallicity of the 1T phase leads to good intrinsic electronic conductivity. Although the electronic structure remains unaltered with the adsorption of H, the fading HER activity may be due to the coupling between the H s orbital with Mo d and S p orbitals.
 Fig. 7  (a) LSV curves of 2H, 1T, and Am-MoS2 recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 for LSV (corrected by uncompensated resistance); (b) chronopotentiometric measurement (V–t) recorded in 0.1 M of H2SO4 electrolyte at a constant current density of 3 mA cm−2, operando XANES spectra under different conditions; (c) 2H-MoS2, (d) 1T-MoS2, and (e) Am-MoS2; (f–h) Mo K-edge FT EXAFS (k2-weighted) of (f) 2H-MoS2, (g) 1T-MoS2, and (h) Am-MoS2 cocatalyst under operando electrochemical conditions with the grey part using R-range for fitting; (i) the structural conversion of 2H and 1T MoS2, normalized partial density of states of (j) 2H-MoS2 and (k) 1T-MoS2.89 This is an open-access article. 
3.3. Engineering active sites of MoS2 by doping
Although MoS2 has been rediscovered recently, the bulk MoS2 is catalytically ineffective, whereas the edge sites are active for H-binding. Tsai et al. investigated a series of dopants on MoS2 to improve the edge site activity.90 The basis for their DFT study is to estimate the free energy of hydrogen adsorption on the Mo or S-edge sites. The dopants in MoS2 can effectively change the hydrogen adsorption free energy on the exposed edge sites. A strong dopant–sulfur bond leads to a weak hydrogen–sulfur link at the edge site. Fig. 8a shows a thermo-neutral ΔGH and its effect on the exposed edge sites. Of the 14 doped structures with ΔGH matching the S-edge (Pt, Ni, Ru, Rh, Co, Fe, Mn, Ta, V, Nb, Cr, Os, Ir, and Re), six structures (Ru, Rh, Co, Fe, Mn, and Ta) have a ΔGH closer to the undoped MoS2 Mo-edge. As reported by Kibsgaard et al., the S-sites are more labile for doping than the Mo-sites.91 Hence, a fraction of the S-edge is doped in the case of targeted Mo-edge site doping. Dopants not only tune the edge sites for hydrogen adsorption but activate the inert basal plane of MoS2. As shown schematically in Fig. 8b, along with the unsaturated edge sites, H2 evolution is prompted via basal activation. The H2 evolution in the HER process is strongly related to the H-adsorption free energy on the catalyst surface. Ideal catalysts exhibit a free energy of adsorption close to zero. Heteroatom doping induces structural and electronic changes in MoS2, for example, Co-doping in MoS2 decreases the ΔGH from 0.18 eV to 0.10 eV.92 The Co atom replaces the Mo atom, leaving unsaturated S atoms exposed.93 An optimized Co-doping in MoS2 forms abundant defect sites and simultaneously activates the inert basal plane for H-adsorption.94 Mosconi et al. studied the mechanism of Ni-doped MoS2 in alkaline and acidic media using different loading of Ni.95 Under alkaline conditions, the Ni-doping minimizes the barrier for dissociation of water and facilitates the desorption of OH−. In the case of Ni-doped MoS2, the Ni–OH bonding is weaker than Mo–OH, which is better for desorption. The Heyrovsky step is accelerated because of an increase in the electron cloud of Mo by Ni-doping and facilely adsorbed H desorption. As shown in Fig. 8c, the NiSx sites are catalytically more active than the Ni–Mo–S in an alkaline medium. In contrast, the Ni–Mo–S sites are more active in an acidic medium than the NiSx sites. The unsaturated S formed because of the relaxed Ni–Mo–S configuration in the acidic medium accelerates the proton adsorption. Kwon et al. modified the MoS2 thin film with the introduction of P to lower the onset potential and enhance the photocurrent density.96 The polarization curve (Fig. 8d) shifts towards the anodic direction with a change in the dopant ratio. At an S/P ratio of 0.33, the electrode shows an optimized onset potential with a 0.63 V shift with regard to bare Si with a photocurrent density of 33.13 mA cm−2. A higher S/P ratio than 0.33 results in a cathodic shift of the onset potential. In addition, the applied-bias photon-to-current efficiency calculated for the photoelectrode with a S/P ratio of 0.33 is 2.8%, which is close to that of noble metal catalysts. The improved PEC performance of the photoelectrode with an optimized S/P ratio of 0.33 is related to the structural transition of the 2D MoS2 to 3D P-doped MoS2, wherein the interlayer van der Waals force disappears with the substitution of P on S sites. The interfacial charge–transfer becomes easy as P-doping induces the semiconductor to metal transition in MoS2. At an S/P ratio of 0.33, the charge–transfer is the lowest, and the photocurrent density is high. Furthermore, a zero optical band gap for the catalyst reaffirms the metallic nature of the S:MoP (S/P = 0.33) catalyst. The energy band diagram in Fig. 8e demonstrates barrier-free charge transportation through the interface for the photo-generated electrons.
 Fig. 8  (a) Exposing the S and Mo-edge in MoS2 with various dopants based on the adsorption free energy for hydrogen ΔGH;90 reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 (b) activating the inert basal plane of the MoS2 with appropriate doping; (c) schematic representation of the proton adsorption in basic and acidic media using Ni-doped MoS2 catalyst;95 this is an open-access article (d) PEC performance and LSV curves of P-doped and undoped MoS2 catalyst on Si;96 (e) schematic of the S:MoP heterojunction (S/P = 0.33) formed along with the energy band diagram of the photocathode reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
Defect-mediated vacancy generation results in extra active sites for H-adsorption. Ma et al. used a two-step hydrothermal route to synthesize C–MoS2−x@CdS core–shell nanocomposites.97 The carbon-mediated process induces the reduction of Mo4+ to Mo3+, thereby generating surface S-vacancies. As per their DFT calculation, the electron density on the Mo atom increases because of the S-vacancies, thereby enhancing the photo-generated electron formation. The effect of P-doping in MoS2 was further studied by Ren et al., wherein the defect-rich catalysts shift the onset potential to lower values.98 The DFT results show a decrease in the H-adsorption free energy associated with the P-doped MoS2 catalyst. External dopants are not always beneficial for the improvement of HER kinetics. Unsuitable dopants have a negative performance in MoS2. Urbanova et al. compared ORR and HER activity by doping Ti, V, Mn, and Fe in MoS2 and WS2.99 Using DFT, they confirmed the lowering of the overpotential in the HER compared with the pristine samples.
The modification of catalysts with suitable alloys can improve the photocurrent generation by optimizing the energy band levels. For example, the Se insertion in MoS2 can inflect the d band of Mo and tune the HER activity. Gong et al. varied the Se/S ratio with Mo and proved the shift in ΔGH of the Mo–S shifted from 80 meV to −140 meV for Mo–Se.100–102 The optimized ratio tunes the ΔGH to the thermoneutral condition and improves the HER. Extending the alloying strategies in TMDs to a quaternary alloy with a formula of MoxW1−x(SySe1−y)2 can improve the HER activity by optimizing x and y.103 Wang et al. calculated the optimized W alloy in Mo1−xWxS2 to replace Mo.104 The ΔGH becomes close to zero with a composition of Mo0.5W0.5S2 with 25% H coverage.
3.4. Improvement in the interfacial charge–transfer by heterostructure formation
The charge–transfer through the MoS2 interface during the PEC HER process can be ameliorated by coupling with materials having similar PEC properties. For example, the MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure lowers the valence and conduction levels, thereby reducing the potential barrier.105 The built-in electric field created by the heterojunction formation can separate the holes–electrons, thereby suppressing their recombination. The band offset can be controlled by optimizing the interlayer contact composition. Wang et al. studied the PEC effect on the interlayer configuration using ITO/MoS2/WS2 and ITO/WS2/MoS2 samples.106 The interlayer charge–transfer remains unchanged, although the stacking configuration is changed. However, variation occurs on changing the excitation to either 532 or 635 nm. Interlayer recombination of electrons in MoS2 with holes in WS2 occurs under 532 nm excitation in the ITO/WS2/MoS2 sample. Such recombination is suppressed under 635 nm excitation. Hence, the heterojunction and source of illumination affect the PEC performance. A heterostructure of MoS2 with topological semimetals, for example, CoMoP2, provides a conducting path for charge carriers during the PEC process.107 S-Vacancies in the basal plane are promoted by lowering the barrier for H2S formation during H–S interaction. Although S-vacancies serve as the active site for the HER, the formation of such vacancies is driven by thermodynamic and kinetic factors.108 In contrast, S-vacancies created on CoMoP2 are more stable than those created on MoS2. The Gibbs free energy calculated for H2S, which is the desulfurization step, involves a two-proton and electron process. This desulfurization creates S-vacancies (Fig. 9a). The ΔG for H2S decreases from 0.83 eV for MoS2 to 0.08 eV for MoS2/CoMoP2. Hence, the MoS2/CoMoP2 heterostructure is capable of removing H2S and creating enough S-vacancies. A 10-fold increment in the photocurrent density has been observed in a bulk heterojunction MoS2–WS2 photoelectrode.109 In this heterojunction between MoS2–WS2, a type II band alignment between WS2 and MoS2 leads to the dissociation of excitons, positioning holes in the valence band of the WS2 monolayers, whereas electrons pass through the MoS2 conduction band. Chemical bath deposition (CBD), an easy and low-cost methodology, has been used to prepare the MoS2 thin films on FTO substrates, and the W film has been deposited using RF magnetron sputtering.110 The schematic of the MoS2–WS2 heterostructure is shown in Fig. 9b. Interfacial charge–transfer resistance restricts the flow of photocurrent between the substrate and catalyst. As shown in Fig. 9c, the fitted Nyquist plots result in low charge–transfer resistance (Rct) in the case of CBD MoS2 (20 min)–WS2, MoS2 (40 min)–WS2, MoS2, and WS2, which are 2.6, 3.7, 4.3, and 11.5 Ω, respectively. These low Rct values refer to fast charge transportation at the electrode–electrolyte interface and with a cumulative effect from the edge enriched with sulfur active sites and lead to an improved HER activity. Fig. 9d shows the electrocatalytic activities of MoS2, WS2, MoS2 (20 min)–WS2, and MoS2 (40 min)–WS2 films toward the HER evaluated by iR-corrected LSV using a graphite rod as the counter electrode.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the creation of S-vacancies with H2S removal in the MoS2 basal plane, enabling the inactive basal plane in the HER active sites;107 reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2019 (b) schematic of CBD-prepared MoS2 with an RF-sputtered WS2 heterostructure. Electrochemical performance: (c) electrochemical impedance spectra, (d) LSV curves with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1, and (e) Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves.110 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2018 (f) cross-sectional high-resolution TEM image of the multi-staggered MWW′/p-Si thin film with native oxide of ∼3.5 nm, (g) LSV plots, (h) EIS spectra, and (i) IPCE spectra of mono-layer and multi-layered/p-Si photocathodes.111 This is an open-access article. 
The overpotential calculated for the cell containing the heterojunction electrodes, MoS2 (20 min)–WS2 and MoS2 (40 min)–WS2, is 129 and 137 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 9e). In contrast, pristine electrodes of MoS2 and WS2 result in a poor HER activity and high overpotentials of 151 and 175 mV, respectively, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The salient HER activity of MoS2–WS2 heterostructures may be ascribed to the combined activity of the spherical MoS2 QD grains with WS2 nanograins. Numerous edge active sites are created by the defect-rich MoS2–WS2 heterostructure, and given the disordered stacking between the sputtered WS2 on CBD MoS2, the efficiency of electron transfer among electrodes and underlying FTO electrodes is improved. Apart from the bi-junction heterostructure catalyst, the fabrication of a multi-junction catalyst is a challenge. Seo et al. fabricated stacked MoS2/WS2/WSe2 on p-Si using a pulsed-laser deposition (PLD) technique.111 The in-built electric field at the p-Si/TMD heterojunction because of the staggering gap (type-II band) results in a positive shift in the onset potential. Hence, the continuation of such a heterojunction to a dual or multi-staggered interface improves the transportation of the photogenerated carriers. Fig. 9f shows the HRTEM image of the stacked layers of MoS2/WS2/WSe2 on p-Si grown via PLD. The clear lattice fringes for the individual layers infer the suitable band alignment for the staggered configuration. The PEC performances of the individual WSe2, WS2, and MoS2 layers and MoS2/WSe2 (MW') and MoS2/WS2/WSe2 (MWW') stacked layers using different pulses in PLD are compared (Fig. 9g). The onset potential shows a positive shift in the order of MoS2 > WS2 > WSe2 > MW′ > MWW′ and low overpotential. With the optimized heterostructure content, the photocurrent density reaches −11.45 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. The onset and saturation currents are closely dependent on the mono or multi-staggered junction on the photoelectrodes. Multi-staggering facilitates electron transfer and blocks the holes effectively compared to the monolayer. The semicircle in the Nyquist plot (Fig. 9h) demonstrates the improved photocurrent generation by the multi-staggered junction photocathode. The fitted Randles circuit parameters follow a decrease in the Rct from MoS2 > WS2 >WSe2 > MW′ > MWW′ because of the band alignment at the multi-staggered junction. The formation of the multi-layered heterojunction reduces the interfacial dangling bonds, thereby allowing facile charge transfer. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the PEC cell is a measure of its potential to convert the incident illumination to photogenerated current. As shown in Fig. 9i, the multi-staggered photoelectrode exhibits superior efficiency compared to the mono-layer electrode. The IPCE of the mono-layer and multi-layered photoelectrode shows an increase within the visible-light region in the order of MoS2 > WS2 > WSe2 > MW′ > MWW′, validating the results from LSV and EIS again.
Incorporation of single-atom (SA) arrays on a layered photocathode are important in creating highly active sites for the HER. SA cobalt is implanted on distorted 1T MoS2 (SA Co-D 1T MoS2) catalysts using an assembly/leaching process.112 As shown in Fig. 10a, the MoS2 basal plane retains more of the SA Co than the defect or edge sites. An impregnable contact is found between the MoS2 and Co nanodisks, leading to the formation of heterostructures. Hence, no Co nanocrystal is formed after the electrochemical stripping. As shown in the HRTEM images, which show the induction of disorder in MoS2 when bonding with Co atoms, high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) confirmed that Co atoms were dispersed uniformly with phase transition of MoS2 (Fig. 10b). A clear atomically isolated Co species on the distorted 1T MoS2 matrix can be observed. XAS measurements, that is, XANES and EXAFS, are used to investigate the coordination environment of SA-Co dispersed on 1T MoS2. The EXAFS and XANES spectra are shown in Fig. 10c and d, respectively. The presence of exclusive Co–S linkages on the distorted 1T MoS2 layer can be confirmed from the single strong shell in the R-space of the EXAFS spectrum at 1.79 Å (Fig. 10c). Using the SA Co-D 1T MoS2 as a model, each Co atom above the center Mo atom is connected with three sulfur atoms. The XANES spectrum has been simulated and is presented as dotted lines in Fig. 10d. Two primary energy features at 7710 (pre-edge) and 7718 eV (white line) in the fitting results for SA Co-D 1T MoS2 with a Co concentration of 3.70% indicate that the Co atom is right on the top of the Mo atom other than any replacement of the Mo atom. In a nutshell, in the SA Co-D 1T MoS2 sample, the single Co atom is sitting on the Mo layer and is coordinated to three adjacent S atoms. The HER activities of the catalysts are studied in a 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. The distorted 1T MoS2 modified by 3.54% single-atom Co results in a low onset overpotential of approximately 42 mV (Fig. 10e). The catalytic activity has been further evaluated using the Tafel slope of the electrode, which is 32 mV dec−1 (Fig. 10f) and is close to that of commercial Pt/C (30 mV dec−1). Considering the low Tafel slope value, the Tafel desorption step is the rate-determining step in the HER process.113 The catalytic activity of the Co SA modified to clusters or the nanoparticle form and its incorporation on the 1T MoS2 show inferior HER catalysis. A summarized list of the PEC performance using the Si photocathode protected by the MoS2 cocatalyst is presented in Table 1.83,114–122 A very narrow timeline of four years has been selected to emphasize the recent developments in the use of MoS2 and Si.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of implantation of single-atom Co on distorted 1T MoS2, (b) the junction formed between distorted 1T MoS2 with Co SA insertion (dark cyan) and 2H MoS2 (wine) recorded using aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. HRTEM and EELS spectra are shown in the inset (scale bar: 1 nm), (c) the Co K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of distorted 1T MoS2 with Co SA implantation and bulk cobalt foil, (d) XANES of SA Co-D 1T MoS2 and fitted curve for Co K-edge, (e) polarization curves of SA Co-D 1T MoS2 in 0.5 M H2SO4, (f) Tafel plots for the catalysts.112 This is an open-access article. 
Table 1 A comparative review of the PEC performance by MoS2 on various surface modified Si photocathode




Strategies to improve the PEC performance
Representative samples
Improvement analysis
Parameters
Ref.



V
onset


J
mA cm−2





Olled interlayer MoS2 coating on n+p-Si
(i) MoS2/Mo/MoxSi/Si
Silicide, oxide interlayer
(i) +0.28
16.5–19.0

114



(ii) MoS2/MoxO/MoxSi/SiO2/Si
(ii) +0.31
15.3–18.5


Role of ALD coating and post-sulfurization parameters of MoS2/Si in PEC performances
MoS2/Si
Control over ALD parameters alter crystallinity, edge site density, stoichiometry, and morphology of MoS2
+0.25
31

115



Buffer layer inclusion between MoS2 catalyst and n+p-Si with ∼2 nm Al2O3
MoS2/Al2O3/n+p-Si
The buffer Al2O3 acts as both a protective and passivation layer for Si surface during MoS2 deposition
0.4
35.6

116



Direct growth of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on SiNWs by one-step chemical vapor deposition
SiNWs/MoS2
MoS2 on the SiNWs protect the photocathode during the PEC process
+0.26
−16.5

117



Defect free GaN sandwiched between MoS2 and Si
MoSx@GaN NWs/Si
Unique electronic interaction and geometric matching between MoS2 and GaN
+0.4
40

118



Direct formation of mixed-phase (1T and 2H) MoS2 layers on Si as a photocathode via ALD
p-Si/SiOx/MoS2
Mixed 1T and 2H homojunction passivates light absorber and surface states and functions as a monolithic structure for effective charge transport within MoS2
0.35
30

119



Nanoscale MoS2 film functions both as an effective protection layer and excellent hydrogen evolution catalyst for GaInP2 photocathodes
(i) pn+-GaInP2/MoS2, (ii) pn+-GaInP2/PtRu
Stabilization of III–V semiconductors by MoS2
0.91
13 (100 h)

120



0.83
15 (6 h)


Stable unassisted water splitting for nearly 12 h
MoS2/GaInAsP/GaAs/Si tandem device
Quaternary GaInAsP top cell stabilizes and paired with a low bandgap semiconductor improve device efficiency
0.50 vs. RuO2
−12.8

83



Bottom-up CVD growth of vertical heterostructures of MoS2 on Si photocathode
MoS2/graphene/SiO2/Si
Excited charge across the film surface has a short route to move around the interface
−0.8
−0.23

121



MoS2–WS2 composite decorated on a Si micropillar photo absorber is used as a cocatalyst
(i) MoS2–WS2 (1:1)/Si, (ii) TiO2/MoS2–WS2 (1:1)/Si
A high hole concentration of unoccupied electronic states in MoS2 could promote to accept of large amounts of carriers from the
(i) +0.14
(i) −25.9 (10 h)

122



(ii) −17.6 (16 h)




4. Remarks and outlook
The current review aims to discuss the catalytic activity of various photocathodes toward the HER process. The flat surface of Si is modified by surface engineering, thereby reducing the loss because of reflection. The synthesis of TMDs and subsequent incorporation of adatoms into the exfoliated layers to create active sites are discussed. The striking co-catalyst modifications for efficient HER in the future may be the SA and plasmon enhancement because these routes produce numerous photogenerated charge carriers. The inactiveness of the MoS2 basal plane toward the HER is caused by its orbital orientation. The steric hindrance of the Mo 4dz2 orbital and misalignment of the S 3p(x,y) block the adsorption of the water molecule.123 Hence, the intrinsic catalytic activity of MoS2 can be improved by switching the orientation of orbitals in the basal plane. In contrast, the inclusion of atoms with lower-lying p orbitals than S will empty the S p-orbital and facilitate the adsorption of water. Replacement of the atomic site from the continuous chain of catalyst materials induces a change in the coordination environment (Fig. 11a). This change in atoms causes changes in the partial electron distribution at the Fermi level and alters the structural stability and catalytic activity (Fig. 11b).124 The relative position of the active atomic site and the photocathode significantly influence the electron distribution. Any change in the distribution of electrons in the Fermi level alters the chemisorption. The binding of the metal catalyst on the supporting surface is directed by the thermodynamic factors. An exothermic binding metal atom diffuses less into the supporting surface. Hence, matching the free energy of the catalyst and photoelectrode is important to avoid agglomeration and incorporate the single-atom catalyst. Extended study on the energy levels of catalysts infers the position of the Fermi level and regulates the degree of adsorbing molecules. As discussed by Santos et al., the density of states broadens after solvation.125 Hence, the catalyst with the d band matches the Fermi level and interacts with the valence band of the reactant, resulting in high catalytic activity. Furthermore, lowering the transition state energy level helps in the desorption of H2. The free energy of hydrogen adsorption, ΔGH, has been tuned close to zero with single-atom Co insertion in the MoS2.126 The calculated ΔGH (Fig. 11d) for the basal plane of 2H MoS2 decreases from 2.1 eV to 1.5 eV for the basal plane of 1T MoS2. A significant lowering in the ΔGH value for 1T MoS2 is observed upon doping of the Co atom on the Mo top site (0.12 eV). The Co atom sitting on the top of the Mo site forms a hybridized orbital between Mo 4dz2 and Co 3dz2, which can enhance the binding energy and stabilize the Co atom. Apart from the Co–Mo bond, Co–S bonding is found either in the vacant or S atom on the top site. The hybridized orbitals dz2 of Mo and Co span the Fermi level, thereby facilitating the charge transfer at the active sites. The electrolyte dependent change in the local structure in the basal plane of MoS2 provides elaborate reaction pathways. Pattengale et al. with the help of in situ XAS provided the dynamics of charge transportation and evolution of basal 1T-MoS2 with Ni single atoms.38 A clear distinction between 2H and 1T-MoS2 can be drawn from the EXAFS wherein the second shell in 2H is absent with a single Mo–Mo peak in 1T-MoS2. Under acidic conditions, the single Ni atom preserves its +2 state upon replacing the Mo site. Upon changing the medium to an alkaline one, enhancement in the Ni–O peak with shortening of the Ni–S peak suggests a local structure alignment with evolution of oxides. Hence further operando analysis is required to reveal the underlying mechanism of protonation in MoS2 during the HER process.
 Fig. 11  (a) Single-atom replacement changing the spatial arrangement of orbitals; (b and c) structural stability and chemical activity with corresponding electron population;124 reprinted with permission from Elsevier (d) shift in the Gibbs free energy for Co-1T-MoS2, 1T-MoS2, and 2H-MoS2 for HER; and (e) hybridized dz2 of Co and Mo atomic orbitals.126 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2020. 
Apart from the addition of a single-dopant atom in the MoS2 layers, the subtraction of a single atom can create single vacant sites that can enhance the HER performance. Systematic control over the etching parameters, for example, temperature, time, and etchant composition can lead to intentional vacancy creation from single atom sites.127 The single S-vacancy shows superior HER activity compared to the agglomerated S-vacancies. The electron from the vacant S sites flows toward Mo, leaving the S sites electron deficient. The electron-rich Mo centers attract H atoms on the MoS2 surface.
The plasmon-induced generation of non-thermal charge carriers drives the photocurrent generation in PEC cells. The generation of non-thermal hot electrons is influenced by the shape of plasmonic nanocrystals.128 In the case of a traditional photosensitizer in contact with a semiconductor, the electrons from the sensitizer discrete energy level transfer to the semiconductor continuum (Fig. 12a). Given the thermalization of the charge carriers, a part of the photosensitizer-absorbed energy is lost (ΔE). In the case of nanoparticle-induced localized surface plasmon resonance, the continuum of metal nanoparticles absorbs the illumination.129 The collective oscillation of the plasmons creates a non-thermal distribution of electron–hole pairs (Fig. 12b). The energy and concentration of these non-thermal electrons are influenced by the shape of nanostructures.130 Given the numerous charge carriers, such as non-thermal electrons generated by the plasmons, which pass through the semiconductor, the thermodynamic driving force ΔVc (Fig. 12c) exceeds ΔVa (Fig. 12a). The various applications of these thermal and nonthermal carriers, for example, photodetectors, photovoltaics, and photo-induced electrochemical reactions, were reviewed by Tang et al.131 The review covers the whole process of hot carrier generation for transportation and absorption.
 Fig. 12  Interfacial carrier transfer (a) passage of electrons from sensitizer to semiconductor upon illumination; (b) absorption of visible light in metal nanoparticles, wherein the relaxation in the conservation of momentum leads to a rate of absorption with an increase in plasmon resonance; (c) the electron transfer from the continuum in the plasmonic metal to semiconductor leading to an increase in non-thermal carrier population.131 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2018. 
Despite the PEC splitting of water to generate H2 as a clean option for energy, several challenges remain unaddressed. Though tremendous efforts to minimize CO2 emissions have been made, the concentration still increases by ∼0.5 ppm yearly.132 About 80% of the global demand for power of 18 TW comes from the burning of fossil fuels which is the major cause of such a rise in CO2. Hence, the PEC route which is a noncarbon emission option for energy needs to address the challenge. Efficient doping strategies are required to improve the sluggish electrokinetics of the Si photocathode. The charge transfer kinetics at the interface needs serious attention to stabilize the electrode/electrolyte interface and minimize the surface oxidation. Concurrently, the MoS2 coated over p-Si is a reasonable solution due to its low cost and aligned band structure. As discussed in the review, the edge site and basal plane activity determine the effectiveness of the catalyst. In the longer run, to improve the photocatalytic activity of the Si/MoS2 photoelectrode, interface modification with buried junction formation, controlled layer thickness, defect concentration and conductivity needs detailed study. The change in the phase of MoS2 as discussed in the review is the least studied issue. Using operando techniques a concrete solution can be obtained.
5. Conclusions
The current review provides an updated discussion in the development of hydrogen generation and its implication in the future. Efficient PEC performance lies in the cell components i.e. the electrodes and catalysts. The cost factor for the development of the PEC components lead to choose earth abundant materials like MoS2 as the cocatalyst coated on Si photocathode. The surface to interfacial modification of p-Si and electrolytes has been discussed. In light of our previous experience in photoanodes and photocathodes, the current review discusses the use of buffer layers to improve charge–transfer kinetics at the interface. The formation of single and multiple-site vacancies activates the inert basal plane of MoS2. Hydrogen evolution promotes the inactivated sites because of the high electron density. Further, heterostructures formed at the interface between MoS2 form a type II band alignment leading to improved carrier generation. Finally, the use of a single atom as a catalytic site is discussed.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (contract numbers: MOST 109-2113-M-002-020-MY3, MOST 109-2112-M-003-011, MOST 107-2113-M-002-008-MY3, and MOST 106-2112-M-003-007-MY3).
References
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
T. Degnan, Focus Catal., 2015, 2015, 1–2 Search PubMed .
M. A. Pellow, C. J. M. Emmott, C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1938–1952 RSC .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Offer, D. Howey, M. Contestabile, R. Clague and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 24–29 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
C. Wang, X. Shao, J. Pan, J. Hu and X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118435 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1835–1845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hua, H.-H. Sun, F. Xu and J.-G. Wang, Rare Met., 2020, 39, 335–351 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, M. L. Tseng, P. C. Wu, C. M. Chang, L. C. Cheng, H. W. Huang, T. S. Chan, D. W. Huang, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Small, 2013, 9, 2926–2936 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, C. C. Wu, W. S. Chang, K. H. Chen, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee and D. P. Tsai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 742–747 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, P.-T. Chen, M. Basu, K. C. Yang, Y. R. Lu, C. L. Dong, C. G. Ma, C. C. Shen, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23466–23476 RSC .
T. H. Lu, C. J. Chen, M. Basu, C. G. Ma and R. S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17012–17015 RSC .
M. Basu, Z. W. Zhang, C. J. Chen, T. H. Lu, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26690–26696 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, K. C. Yang, C. W. Liu, Y. R. Lu, C. L. Dong, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 422–432 CrossRef CAS .
V. Veeramani, H. C. Yu, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17280–17286 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Y. N. Chouhan, S. F. Hu, J. H. Huang, C. W. Tsai, R. S. Liu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1430 CrossRef .
G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C. J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu, T.-S. Chan, J. F. Lee, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362–7372 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chen, H. M. Chen, C. J. Chen and R. S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7917–7919 RSC .
C. K. Chen, Y. P. Shen, H. M. Chen, C. J. Chen, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee and R. S. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 2014, 773–779 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, M. G. Chen, C. K. Chen, P. C. Wu, P. T. Chen, M. Basu, S. F. Hu, D. P. Tsai and R. S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 549–552 RSC .
M. Basu, Z. W. Zhang, C. J. Chen, P. T. Chen, K. C. Yang, C. G. Ma, C. C. Lin, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6211–6216 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bazri, Y. C. Lin, T. H. Lu, C. J. Chen, E. Kowsari, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1488–1496 RSC .
C. J. Chen, C.-W. Liu, K. C. Yang, L. C. Yin, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37142–37149 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, V. Veeramani, Y. H. Wu, A. Jena, L. C. Yin, H. Chang, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118259 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pichaimuthu, C. J. Chen, C. H. Chen, Y.-T. Chen, C. Su, D. H. Wei and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 41515–41526 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pichaimuthu, A. Jena, H. Chang, C. Su and R. S. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 6902–6909 RSC .
Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23577–23603 RSC .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Samadi, N. Sarikhani, M. Zirak, H. Zhang, H.-L. Zhang and A. Z. Moshfegh, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 90–204 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C. L. Dong, R. S. Liu, C. P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh, K. Mathew, H. L. Zhuang and R. G. Hennig, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
K. Chen, X. Wan, J. Wen, W. Xie, Z. Kang, X. Zeng, H. Chen and J.-B. Xu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9868–9876 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, S. Dong, C. Lu, C. Yu, Y. Ou, L. Luo, J. Sun and J. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 389–399 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pattengale, Y. Huang, X. Yan, S. Yang, S. Younan, W. Hu, Z. Li, S. Lee, X. Pan, J. Gu and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Tay, H. Kaneko, S. Y. Chiam, S. Lie, Q. Zheng, B. Wu, S. S. Hadke, Z. Su, P. S. Bassi, D. Bishop, T. C. Sum, T. Minegishi, J. Barber, K. Domen and L. H. Wong, Joule, 2018, 2, 537–548 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 84 CrossRef .
K.-H. Ye, Z. Wang, H. Li, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and W. Mai, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, D. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang, M.-S. J. T. Balogun and Y. Tong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6051–6060 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
K.-Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, Y. Hu and S.-T. Lee, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 75–97 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Bao, R. Ferreira, E. Paz, D. C. Leitao, A. Silva, S. Cardoso, P. P. Freitas and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2097–2101 RSC .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830–22837 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vanka, E. Arca, S. Cheng, K. Sun, G. A. Botton, G. Teeter and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6530–6537 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Thalluri, B. Wei, K. Welter, R. Thomas, V. Smirnov, L. Qiao, Z. Wang, F. Finger and L. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1755–1762 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, C. W. Liu, K. C. Yang, L. C. Yin, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37142–37149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Neergaard Waltenburg and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 1589–1673 CrossRef .
S. Chandrasekaran, T. Nann and N. H. Voelcker, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 308–322 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 486 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, Z. Ye and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15824–15837 RSC .
C.-K. Ku, P.-H. Wu, C.-C. Chung, C.-C. Chen, K.-J. Tsai, H.-M. Chen, Y.-C. Chang, C.-H. Chuang, C.-Y. Wei, C.-Y. Wen, T.-Y. Lin, H.-L. Chen, Y.-S. Wang, Z.-Y. Lee, J.-R. Chang, C.-W. Luo, D.-Y. Wang, B. J. Hwang and C.-W. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901022 CrossRef .
A. A. Lapkin, V. M. Boddu, G. N. Aliev, B. Goller, S. Polisski and D. Kovalev, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 136, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2158–2181 RSC .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, Z. Mi and M. Shen, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A51–A80 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Ma, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 96–116 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. Li, H. Sun, J. Chen, D. Wang and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 19007–19016 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, P. Wen, D. S. Itanze, M. W. Kim, S. Adhikari, C. Lu, L. Jiang, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900813 CrossRef .
L. Meng, J. He, W. Tian, M. Wang, R. Long and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902135 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, Z. Mi and M. Shen, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A51–A80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, T. Xiong, M. S. J. T. Balogun, Y. Huang, D. Adekoya, S. Zhang and Y. Tong, Mater. Today Phys., 2020, 15, 100267 CrossRef .
S. Lee, S. Cha, Y. Myung, K. Park, I. H. Kwak, I. S. Kwon, J. Seo, S. A. Lim, E. H. Cha and J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33198–33204 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
T. Wang, S. Liu, H. Li, C. Li, Z. Luo and J. Gong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5510–5515 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Jung, D. Woong Kim, D.-H. Kim, T. Joo Park, R. B. Wehrspohn and J.-H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 9132 CrossRef .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
J.-Y. Jung, D. W. Kim, T. J. Park and J.-H. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1046–1053 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Choi, J.-Y. Jung, M.-J. Park, J.-W. Song, J.-H. Lee and J. H. Bang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2928–2933 RSC .
B. Bouabadi, M. Aggour, H. J. Lewerenz and M. Lublow, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47, 457–466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dunklin, A. H. Rose, H. Zhang, E. M. Miller and J. van de Lagemaat, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, R. Jiang, W. Lu, S. Xu and L. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602235 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, Z. Hao, X. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Cui, C. Yuan and H. Ge, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3654–3661 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joe, H. Yang, C. Bae and H. Shin, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 149 CrossRef .
M. Ben-Naim, R. J. Britto, C. W. Aldridge, R. Mow, M. A. Steiner, A. C. Nielander, L. A. King, D. J. Friedman, T. G. Deutsch, J. L. Young and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2631–2640 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Zhou, Y. Tan, B. Yang, Z. Cheng, Z. Shen and J. Jia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 473, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, W. Zhou, A. Hong, M. Guo, X. Luo and C. Yuan, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2830–2835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, J. Xu, Y.-Z. Liu, Y. Hua, Z. Duan, Y. Wang, A. Neville and X. Gao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8974–8984 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, G. Liu, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Ricardez-Sandoval, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 498, 143869 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lee, S. Lee, G.-S. Kang, Y.-K. Lee, G. G. Park, D. C. Lee and H.-I. Joh, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117995 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, A. Longo, N. Y. Dzade, A. Sharma, M. M. R. M. Hendrix, A. A. Bol, N. H. de Leeuw, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4383–4389 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 246–253 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, A. Tuxen, K. G. Knudsen, M. Brorson, H. Topsøe, E. Lægsgaard, J. V. Lauritsen and F. Besenbacher, J. Catal., 2010, 272, 195–203 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
J. V. Lauritsen, J. Kibsgaard, G. H. Olesen, P. G. Moses, B. Hinnemann, S. Helveg, J. K. Nørskov, B. S. Clausen, H. Topsøe, E. Lægsgaard and F. Besenbacher, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 220–233 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, K. Du, Z. Li, M. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Sun, X. Zhang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27242–27253 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mosconi, P. Till, L. Calvillo, T. Kosmala, D. Garoli, D. Debellis, A. Martucci, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, Surfaces, 2019, 2, 531–545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 RSC .
Y. Ma, G. Hai, D. G. Atinafu, W. Dong, R. Li, C. Hou and G. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 569, 89–100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, F. Yang, R. Chen, P. Ren and Y. Wang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1493–1499 RSC .
V. Urbanová, P. Lazar, N. Antonatos, Z. Sofer, M. Otyepka and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20383–20392 CrossRef .
Q. Gong, L. Cheng, C. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Feng, H. Ye, M. Zeng, L. Xie, Z. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2213–2219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Dou, C. C. Kaun, Q. Kuang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 360–364 RSC .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(15), 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, S. Sheng, H. Ye, N. Han, L. Cheng and Y. Li, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 576–582 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Ouyang, G. Zou, C. Sun, J. Hu, X. Xiao and L. Gao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9529–9536 CrossRef CAS .
K. Si, J. Ma, C. Lu, Y. Zhou, C. He, D. Yang, X. Wang and X. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145082 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Tahir, H. Chen and J. B. Sambur, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 9084–9094 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. Fu, J. Wu, J. Rao, S.-C. Liou, X. Xu, B. Shao, K. Liu, E. Liu, N. Kumar, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, J. Gooth, G. Auffermann, Y. Sun, C. Felser and B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Sensoy, D. Vinichenko, W. Chen, C. M. Friend and E. Kaxiras, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 014106 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Pesci, M. S. Sokolikova, C. Grotta, P. C. Sherrell, F. Reale, K. Sharda, N. Ni, P. Palczynski and C. Mattevi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4990–4998 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, K. Akbar, L. Truong, A. Kathalingam, S.-H. Chun, J. Jung, H. J. Park and H.-S. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8400–8409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seo, S. Kim, H. Choi, J. Lee, H. Yoon, G. Piao, J.-C. Park, Y. Jung, J. Song, S. Y. Jeong, H. Park and S. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900301 CrossRef .
K. Qi, X. Cui, L. Gu, S. Yu, X. Fan, M. Luo, S. Xu, N. Li, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Gong, F. Lv, K. Wang, H. Huang, W. Zhang, S. Guo, W. Zheng and P. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231 CrossRef .
H.-W. Liang, S. Brüller, R. Dong, J. Zhang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7992 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. King, T. R. Hellstern, J. Park, R. Sinclair and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36792–36798 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oh, J. B. Kim, J. T. Song, J. Oh and S.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3304–3310 RSC .
R. Fan, J. Mao, Z. Yin, J. Jie, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. Zheng and M. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, J. Xiang, Q. Zhou, S. Su, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Jin, L. Nian, R. Nözel, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3518–3525 RSC .
J. Xiao, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, N. Xu and S. Deng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 60 CrossRef .
J. Joe, C. Bae, E. Kim, T. A. Ho, H. Yang, J. H. Park and H. Shin, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 580 CrossRef .
R. J. Britto, J. L. Young, Y. Yang, M. A. Steiner, D. T. LaFehr, D. J. Friedman, M. Beard, T. G. Deutsch and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16821–16832 RSC .
N. N. Rosman, R. Mohamad Yunus, L. Jeffery Minggu, K. Arifin, M. B. Kassim and M. A. Mohamed, Nanotechnology, 2020, 32, 035705 CrossRef .
C. J. Chen, C. Y. Yeh, C. H. Chen, A. Jena, D. H. Wei, H. Chang, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54671–54682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, E. Song, W. Qiu, X. Zhao, Y. Zhou, J. Liu and W. Zhang, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2019, 29, 256–264 CrossRef CAS .
E. Santos, P. Quaino and W. Schmickler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11224–11233 RSC .
W. Qiao, W. Xu, X. Xu, L. Wu, S. Yan and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2315–2322 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Si, Q. Zhang, J. Wu, L. Gao, X. Wei, Y. Sun, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, K. Ammarah, L. Gu, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4298–4308 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, C. J. Chen, C. L. Dong, X. T. Kong, A. O. Govorov, R. S. Liu and N. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7117–7126 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 178, 9–36 RSC .
X. Wu, E. S. Thrall, H. Liu, M. Steigerwald and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12896–12899 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, C. J. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Bright, G. Meng, R. S. Liu and N. Wu, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 220901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 2020, 48, 2865–2874 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Anirudha Jena	Dr Anirudha Jena is working as a Research Assistant Professor in the Graduate Institute of Manufacturing Technology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taiwan. He has received his Ph.D. degree from Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India in 2013. His current research is focused on the development of materials for all-solid-state batteries including Li-ion and Li-air.
Chih-Jung Chen	Dr Chih-Jung Chen received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 2012 and 2016 at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taiwan. His current research interests include the synthesis of materials applied in energy conversion and energy storage.
Ho Chang	Prof. Ho Chang is a Professor at the Graduate Institute of Manufacturing Technology, National Taipei University of Technology (NTUT), Taiwan. Prof. Chang has received Ph.D. from NTUT in 2004. Before joining NTUT, Prof. Chang worked as a Lecturer at NTUT from 1992. His current research is focused on functional nano-fluid and nanoparticles preparation, dye-sensitized solar cells, efficient thermoelectric generators, energy storage applications.
Shu-Fen Hu	Prof. S. F. Hu is a Professor at the Department of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU), Taiwan. She has obtained her Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in 1995. Prior to her joining NTNU, Prof. Hu worked as a researcher at National Nano Device Laboratory, Taiwan. Her area of interest includes Nano-electronics, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, and Materials for energy storage applications.
Ru-Shi Liu	Prof. Ru-Shi Liu is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, NTU. He has obtained two Ph.D. degrees in chemistry; from National Tsing Hua University in 1990 and University of Cambridge in 1992. Prior to joining NTU, Prof. Liu worked at Materials Research Laboratories, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Taiwan till 1985. His research interests are light-conversion-to-light, light-conversion-to-energy, nanomaterials for drug delivery.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the working of a PEC water electrolytic cell explaining the oxidation and reduction half-reactions. The efficiency of the catalyst depends on the positioning of the energy levels.;9 reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, 2019 (b) step-wise illustration of the HER process on the catalyst surface following the Heyrovsky or Tafel route after the Volmer step.	 
H3O+ + e− → H* (Volmer step)	(1)
H* + H3O+ + e− → H2 (Heyrovsky step)	(2)
H* + H* → H2 (Tafel step)	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Strategies to develop co-catalyst materials for photoanode and photocathode over the last decade according to Liu and co-workers. From band engineering to facilitating hot electron injection into semiconductor CB to creating vacancies to adsorb H; the photocurrent density improves with such modifications.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the strategies used for the development of the photocathode and the mechanism thereof to improve the photocurrent density. The core refers to various surface modifications of Si, for example, micron-size pyramid, wire, wall, and pillar, followed by strategic improvements in interfaces and catalysts. The outer layer presents the factors driving the HER process; the discussion in the article follows the leveling.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the interaction between the incident light and textured Si, (band alignment in p-Si under illumination), reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2011 (b) NS-1 cocatalyst deposited on p-Si shown in the SEM and HRTEM images, schematic of the overall water splitting on the NiSe2 surface, (c) XPS profile of Ni 2p showing the presence of metallic Ni. Electrochemical analysis using 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) for bare p-Si NWs and NS samples as photocathodes, (d) change in current density (mA cm−2) vs. potential (V vs. RHE) at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, (e) photocurrent stability (upper panel) and gas evolution (H2 and O2−) with time for NS-1 cocatalyst (lower panel), Nyquist plots of all cocatalyst samples coated on p-Si under (f) dark and (g) light irradiation.69 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) HRTEM images of NiOx/TiOx/Si photocathode showing the amorphous layers on crystalline Si substrate, (b) variation of Voc with a thickness of TiOx using LSV, (c) variation of Voc with a thickness of TiOx and SiO2 layer derived from LSV (d) schematic of the enhancement of Voc with TiOx coating that blocks the diffusion of holes, (e) plot of Voc with varying thicknesses of TiOx and SiO2, (f) LSV recorded using Si photocathodes with varying thicknesses of TiOx and SiO2 insulators.75 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the hot electron injection from plasmonic materials to the textured photocathode; (b) Au/MoSe2 interfacial charge transport via inter and intra-band transition;79 reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2020 (c) pathway for the plasmon-enhanced electrochemical HER using Cu1.75S–Au@MoS2 under illumination;80 reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, 2020 (d) positive shift in onset potential of SiNH, TiO2/SiNH, AuNR/SiNH, and TiO2/AuNR/SiNH arrays with or without light illumination in a solution of 0.5 M H2SO4;81 and (e) charge carrier transport in the TiO2/AuNR/SiNH hetero-nanostructure reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) LSV curves of 2H, 1T, and Am-MoS2 recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 for LSV (corrected by uncompensated resistance); (b) chronopotentiometric measurement (V–t) recorded in 0.1 M of H2SO4 electrolyte at a constant current density of 3 mA cm−2, operando XANES spectra under different conditions; (c) 2H-MoS2, (d) 1T-MoS2, and (e) Am-MoS2; (f–h) Mo K-edge FT EXAFS (k2-weighted) of (f) 2H-MoS2, (g) 1T-MoS2, and (h) Am-MoS2 cocatalyst under operando electrochemical conditions with the grey part using R-range for fitting; (i) the structural conversion of 2H and 1T MoS2, normalized partial density of states of (j) 2H-MoS2 and (k) 1T-MoS2.89 This is an open-access article.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Exposing the S and Mo-edge in MoS2 with various dopants based on the adsorption free energy for hydrogen ΔGH;90 reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2014 (b) activating the inert basal plane of the MoS2 with appropriate doping; (c) schematic representation of the proton adsorption in basic and acidic media using Ni-doped MoS2 catalyst;95 this is an open-access article (d) PEC performance and LSV curves of P-doped and undoped MoS2 catalyst on Si;96 (e) schematic of the S:MoP heterojunction (S/P = 0.33) formed along with the energy band diagram of the photocathode reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the creation of S-vacancies with H2S removal in the MoS2 basal plane, enabling the inactive basal plane in the HER active sites;107 reprinted with permission from Elsevier, 2019 (b) schematic of CBD-prepared MoS2 with an RF-sputtered WS2 heterostructure. Electrochemical performance: (c) electrochemical impedance spectra, (d) LSV curves with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1, and (e) Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves.110 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, 2018 (f) cross-sectional high-resolution TEM image of the multi-staggered MWW′/p-Si thin film with native oxide of ∼3.5 nm, (g) LSV plots, (h) EIS spectra, and (i) IPCE spectra of mono-layer and multi-layered/p-Si photocathodes.111 This is an open-access article.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of implantation of single-atom Co on distorted 1T MoS2, (b) the junction formed between distorted 1T MoS2 with Co SA insertion (dark cyan) and 2H MoS2 (wine) recorded using aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. HRTEM and EELS spectra are shown in the inset (scale bar: 1 nm), (c) the Co K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of distorted 1T MoS2 with Co SA implantation and bulk cobalt foil, (d) XANES of SA Co-D 1T MoS2 and fitted curve for Co K-edge, (e) polarization curves of SA Co-D 1T MoS2 in 0.5 M H2SO4, (f) Tafel plots for the catalysts.112 This is an open-access article.	 


Olled interlayer MoS2 coating on n+p-Si	(i) MoS2/Mo/MoxSi/Si	Silicide, oxide interlayer	(i) +0.28	16.5–19.0	
114

(ii) MoS2/MoxO/MoxSi/SiO2/Si	(ii) +0.31	15.3–18.5
Role of ALD coating and post-sulfurization parameters of MoS2/Si in PEC performances	MoS2/Si	Control over ALD parameters alter crystallinity, edge site density, stoichiometry, and morphology of MoS2	+0.25	31	
115

Buffer layer inclusion between MoS2 catalyst and n+p-Si with ∼2 nm Al2O3	MoS2/Al2O3/n+p-Si	The buffer Al2O3 acts as both a protective and passivation layer for Si surface during MoS2 deposition	0.4	35.6	
116

Direct growth of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on SiNWs by one-step chemical vapor deposition	SiNWs/MoS2	MoS2 on the SiNWs protect the photocathode during the PEC process	+0.26	−16.5	
117

Defect free GaN sandwiched between MoS2 and Si	MoSx@GaN NWs/Si	Unique electronic interaction and geometric matching between MoS2 and GaN	+0.4	40	
118

Direct formation of mixed-phase (1T and 2H) MoS2 layers on Si as a photocathode via ALD	p-Si/SiOx/MoS2	Mixed 1T and 2H homojunction passivates light absorber and surface states and functions as a monolithic structure for effective charge transport within MoS2	0.35	30	
119

Nanoscale MoS2 film functions both as an effective protection layer and excellent hydrogen evolution catalyst for GaInP2 photocathodes	(i) pn+-GaInP2/MoS2, (ii) pn+-GaInP2/PtRu	Stabilization of III–V semiconductors by MoS2	0.91	13 (100 h)	
120

0.83	15 (6 h)
Stable unassisted water splitting for nearly 12 h	MoS2/GaInAsP/GaAs/Si tandem device	Quaternary GaInAsP top cell stabilizes and paired with a low bandgap semiconductor improve device efficiency	0.50 vs. RuO2	−12.8	
83

Bottom-up CVD growth of vertical heterostructures of MoS2 on Si photocathode	MoS2/graphene/SiO2/Si	Excited charge across the film surface has a short route to move around the interface	−0.8	−0.23	
121

MoS2–WS2 composite decorated on a Si micropillar photo absorber is used as a cocatalyst	(i) MoS2–WS2 (1:1)/Si, (ii) TiO2/MoS2–WS2 (1:1)/Si	A high hole concentration of unoccupied electronic states in MoS2 could promote to accept of large amounts of carriers from the	(i) +0.14	(i) −25.9 (10 h)	
122

(ii) −17.6 (16 h)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Single-atom replacement changing the spatial arrangement of orbitals; (b and c) structural stability and chemical activity with corresponding electron population;124 reprinted with permission from Elsevier (d) shift in the Gibbs free energy for Co-1T-MoS2, 1T-MoS2, and 2H-MoS2 for HER; and (e) hybridized dz2 of Co and Mo atomic orbitals.126 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  Interfacial carrier transfer (a) passage of electrons from sensitizer to semiconductor upon illumination; (b) absorption of visible light in metal nanoparticles, wherein the relaxation in the conservation of momentum leads to a rate of absorption with an increase in plasmon resonance; (c) the electron transfer from the continuum in the plasmonic metal to semiconductor leading to an increase in non-thermal carrier population.131 Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society, 2018.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
