Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B507308C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B507308C
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 763-802Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometryJeffrey R. Bacona, Kathryn L. Lingeb and Luc Van VaeckcaThe Macaulay Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, UK AB15 8QHbNERC ICP Facility, School of Earth Sciences and Geography, Kingston University, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, UK KT1 2EEcMicro- and Trace Analysis Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Wilrijk, BelgiumReceived 23rd May 2005First published on 23rd June 2005Contents1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1. Reviews1.2. AMS systems1.3. Instrumentation1.4. Developments in radiocarbon analysis1.5. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbon2. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)3. Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)4. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)4.1. Reviews4.2. Instrumentation4.3. Fundamental studies4.4. Quantification5. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)5.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentation5.2. Interferences5.3. Sample introduction5.4. Speciation5.5. Analytical methodology5.6. Isotope ratio measurement6. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)6.1. Instrumentation6.2. Fundamental studies6.3. Analytical methodology7. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)8. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)8.1. Instrumentation8.2. Fundamental studies8.3. Analytical methodology8.4. Quantitative analysis8.5. Single and multi-dimensional analysis8.6. Static SIMS (S-SIMS)8.7. Surface and subsurface analysis with S-SIMS and SIMS9. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)9.1. Instrumentation9.2. Fundamental study9.3. Depth profiling9.4. Imaging10. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)10.1. Review10.2. Instrumentation10.3. Analytical methodology10.4. Sample preparation11. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)11.1. Reviews11.2. Instrumentation11.3. Analytical methodology11.4. Sample preparation12. Other methods12.1. Noble gas mass spectrometry12.2. Matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization (MALDI)12.3. Chemical ionization13. Appendix: Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis Update is part of a series of annual reviews which cover the various aspects of analytical atomic spectrometry. John Williams has contributed to the ICP-MS section of all 17 of the reviews since the inception of the series in 1988 but is unable to continue to do so. We wish to acknowledge his valuable contribution over the years and to thank him for his efforts. We welcome Kathryn Linge to the writing team in John’s place. This year’s review follows the same format as last year’s1 but there has been some re-ordering of the sections to reflect the growing importance of ESMS and GC-EIMS for speciation analysis. Although an attempt is made to consider all relevant refereed papers, conference abstracts, reports, book chapters and patents for inclusion in this review, the content of the review is highly selective. The selection of papers is based on criteria applied to focus sharply on the most significant developments in instrumentation and methodology or improved understanding of the fundamental phenomena involved in the MS process. The increasing importance of speciation and the blurring of boundaries between atomic and molecular MS require a high degree of judgement to be made in considering papers for inclusion. The main criterion for selecting speciation papers was that the work should involve or be intended for the study of natural systems. For example, the study of synthetic metal clusters is generally not included, whereas the determination of organometallic compounds in environmental samples is. Applications of atomic MS in other areas are not covered in this Update and readers are referred to the Updates on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials,2 Environmental Analysis3 and Clinical and Biological Materials, Food and Beverages.4 Throughout this review, the term molecular ion will be restricted to denote only the positive or negative radical ion formed by removal or capture, respectively, of an electron. In contrast, addition of a proton or cation to a neutral molecule gives a molecular adduct ion. Deprotonated molecules are considered as fragments. Although reproducibility or precision is a key figure of merit in MS, there is no agreed format for quoting it. The reader can assume that values of precision given in this Update as a percentage correspond to the RSD unless otherwise specified. For isotope ratios, however, values of precision are generally given as the SD of a permil value. It is a widespread phenomenon that analytical techniques in general, and MS in particular, spawn a large number of abbreviations and acronyms. A glossary of all abbreviations used in this Update appears at the end of the review. Most abbreviations are not defined in the text but those which are unlikely to be commonly known are defined in the text when used first and again in the glossary.1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)The period covered by this review saw the publication of a large number of papers on AMS, in particular in two substantial volumes of papers presented at major international conferences on AMS5 and radiocarbon.6 These papers covered all aspects of AMS developments and can be recommended for the overview they gave on the current status of the technique.1.1. ReviewsThe review of recent developments by Suter7 gave a concise yet clear insight into key innovations, in particular the development of a new generation of small AMS facilities operating at terminal voltages below 1 MV. The basic differences between the new and conventional methods, the fundamental physics and the potential of the new instruments were discussed. The review considered all aspects of analysis, including sample preparation, ion injection, acceleration and detection. Although the potential of these instruments is considerably greater than was considered possible just a few years ago, large instruments (>6 MV) are still required for determination of isotopes which suffer from strong isobaric interference (36Cl, 60Fe, 53Mn, 59Ni, 32S, 99Tc). An indication of how this new generation of instruments differs from the larger instruments is that it was claimed that they could be operated by staff with no long-term training or experience in accelerator technology.Currie’s8 excellent comprehensive review of radiocarbon dating covered all aspects of measurement, including historical development of the procedure starting from the initial discovery by Libby in 1952, through the introduction of AMS in 1977 to the present day. A diverse range of applications was discussed in some detail. Van der Plicht9 described the development of radiocarbon calibration and concluded that no calibration curve could be recommended beyond about 25000 years BP until discrepancies were resolved.The applications review of Fifield10 considered emerging trends and the underlying science in a wide range of applications, including rapid landscape-evolution, calibration of the radiocarbon time scale, compound-specific studies, tracing of nuclear discharges and the search for extraterrestrial isotopes. The increasing sophistication of such applications became possible by incremental improvements, in particular in ion source output, system transmission and automation. The excellent review by Tripp and Hedges11,12 on the CSIA of organic materials in archaeological research included very little instrumental detail but concentrated on the use of carbon or nitrogen isotopic composition in a very wide range of applications. These procedures featured either GC or LC separation of individual compounds for analysis by either AMS or SIRMS. Jull et al.13 highlighted selected geological, paleoclimatic and archaeological applications which demonstrated the use of 10Be and 14C in dating studies. Reedy14 reported that the measurement of several cosmogenic radionuclides in a meteorite helped to unravel the recent history of the sample in detail. The high sensitivity of AMS allowed measurements to be made on samples which were either very small, for example, inclusions, small micrometeorites or very small samples from rare lunar or Martian meteorites, or had very low levels of activity. The review by Skipperud and Oughton15 discussed the role of AMS in dating, tracing and source identification studies of marine samples. The advances in biomedical and pharmacological applications, the principal drivers behind the development of low energy and compact AMS instruments, were highlighted in the reviews of Lappin and Garner16 and White and Brown.17 It was considered that current developments aimed at increasing sample throughput by coupling AMS instruments to chromatographic separation systems would lead to an increased use of the technique.1.2. AMS systemsThe increased use of AMS is highlighted by the considerable number of new instruments that have been installed. The new generation of compact, low-energy systems for radiocarbon analysis are typified by the three production 500 kV instruments recently commissioned.18–20 Relatively high (100–125 μA)
					12C− currents were achieved in the ion source of the first instrument through use of cryogenic pumping to improve the ion source vacuum and the use of a semi-spherically shaped ionizer for better focus.20 The ion optics of the second instrument were simple with no slits in the beamline. The reported background was rather high but, nevertheless, single cathode 14C dating of young samples (<15000 years BP) was possible with an error of just ±30 years.19 Use of large cryopumps and the incorporation of ion source improvements in the third instrument gave a 12C− ion current of 120–170 μA.18 The limitations of small AMS systems using only singly charged ions was demonstrated by the appearance of a background due to charge-exchange tails from 14N beams. These beams were derived from N-containing cluster ions produced near the entrance of the accelerator. An additional source of background was the scattering of 13C in the high energy magnet. These limitations are the trade-off for low cost and simplicity on this new type of instrument. A new low-energy 1 MV system was designed to meet the two main criteria for routine biomedical applications, namely it was compact (3.5 m long ×1.5 m high × 1.0 m wide) and was compatible with on-line sample introduction into a gas ion source.21 Although the original goal of measuring isotope ratios of 1 × 10−11 had not yet been achieved, it was considered possible with some minor modifications.Commercial low energy systems with accelerating voltages as low as 500 kV still retain some of the complexity of conventional high energy systems in that the acceleration tubes, high voltage terminal and stripping unit must still be placed in gas-insulated pressure tanks. The development of ultra-low-energy accelerator systems with acceleration voltages of only 100–300 kV has made it possible to introduce new and simpler design concepts. A radiocarbon dating mini-system was based on an acceleration unit with a vacuum-insulated high-voltage terminal.22 In addition, commercially available power supplies were used to generate the acceleration voltage. A feature of the system was its small size of only 3 × 2 m. The design of the gas stripper, mounted inside the high-voltage terminal, had to take into account the large angular beam acceptance, the required high gas density and the need for good vacuum conditions. Only the acceleration unit had, in fact, been constructed but initial results and modelling calculations suggested that the performance of the new instrument would be competitive with conventional AMS radiocarbon dating systems. A prototype, open-air insulated, 300 kV system gave a precision of <5‰ for measurement of the 14C ∶
					12C ratio.23 Although most systems use tandem acceleration, this system incorporated a new device, the single stage accelerator. Singly charged ions were accelerated, stripped and detected without further acceleration. Although the 12C and 13C beams were only measured at the low energy Faraday cup, thereby limiting precision, the design was considered suitable for applications with modest precision (5%) requirements. Further details have been given of the 100 kV system dedicated to the depth profiling of 3H in carbon samples.24 It was necessary to replace the original 15° analysing magnet with a double-focussing 90° magnet to reduce the level of interference.Several new instruments with conventional 3–5 MV accelerators have been built.25–29 Routine precisions of ±27 years could be achieved on the Oxford instrument from single measurements on samples from the last 2000 years.25 The importance of sample pretreatment was highlighted, both in terms of removing contaminants and the bias introduced by the processes themselves. Samples to be analysed on the Jena instrument were prepared using an EA.27 Up to 7 combustion cycles without any sample were needed between soil samples (20–50 mg) in order to lower the background carbon level to below 10−4 of that of samples. The new 5 MV system at East Kilbride (Scotland) gave a precision of <0.3% for modern samples which, together with low background levels, resulted in a 14C dating limit of 51000 years.30 Although the system was tested initially for radiocarbon analysis, it was intended that procedures would be developed for a range of radionuclides including 10Be, 36Cl and 129I.New AMS systems are usually dedicated instruments but the addition of AMS lines to nuclear particle accelerators continues to be reported. Such adaptations can be less than ideal as performance is a compromise for the different ion sources, but an advantage is that very high energy beams can be utilized, thereby making such systems best suited to the AMS analysis of heavy nuclides. An extensive upgrade programme and several technical developments, including a new dedicated AMS ion source and a new electrostatic deflector to merge the AMS beam line with the original line, were implemented at the Weizmann Institute (Israel) facility in order to meet current AMS requirements.31 The AMS line added to the existing 3 MV accelerator at Bhubaneswar (India) gave an accuracy for 14C ∶
					12C ratios of 1% but had not yet been used for the analysis of “real” samples.32 The 5 MV accelerator at the University of Helsinki has been adapted for AMS radiocarbon analysis by adding a sputter ion source, an ESA in both low- and high-energy beamlines, a recirculating gas stripper and off-axis Faraday cups behind the analyzing magnet.33 In addition, the beam optics were optimized and computer control of the accelerator system introduced.Upgrades of existing AMS systems can involve a complete rebuild of the high-energy section to provide new beam lines. A new line at the JAERI (Japan) facilty34 incorporated a TOF detector and was optimized for measurement of 129I. Using sequential injection into the accelerator, the 129I ∶
					127I ratios in high-purity AgI samples were measured with a LOD of <10−13 and a precision of <2%. The goal of developing a high sensitivity, high throughput system for the measurement of actinide concentrations and isotope ratios has been achieved through a series of modifications made to the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory instrument.35 Mass resolution and interference rejection were improved by relocating the analysing magnet image slits downstream and installing an ESA. As a result, the measurement background was reduced significantly and background levels of <0.5 × 106 atoms for 237Np and an LOD of ∼105 atoms for 236U could be achieved. The high-energy analyser of the 3 MV system at the Vienna facility has also been rebuilt for the analysis of heavy ions, principally by installing a HR ESA after the analyser magnet.36 Successful measurement of 182Hf, 244Pu and 236U was reported. In addition, the new configuration improved the analysis of low mass elements, e.g., 26Al, by reducing significantly the instrumental background. These results demonstrated that a tandem accelerator with a 3 MV terminal voltage was sufficient for detection of all nuclides unaffected by stable isobaric interferences.Most AMS systems are unique in design and capability and undergo an almost continuous series of technical modifications and upgrades, details of which are presented in facility reports. Installation of a second stripper downstream of the beam-analysing magnet of the Kyoto system reduced the background and resulted in a significantly improved accuracy of radiocarbon measurement.37 Modifications to the beam optics, charging system and voltage control system of the Kyushu accelerator increased the transmission of 12C− ions to 48% when using a terminal voltage of 6 MV and a 7 μg cm−2 carbon foil as stripper.38 Incremental technical modifications to the ANTARES facility (Australia) resulted in an overall improvement in performance to provide 14C data routinely with a precision of 0.4% and 26Al and 10Be data with a 2–3% precision.39 An in-tank electrostatic quadrupole doublet gave efficient focussing of heavy ions into the actinide beam line. Replacement of a conventional einzel lens with an electrostatic quadrupole triplet lens at the entrance to the accelerator tank improved the acceptance range of the injector system without compromising transmission. Improvements to the TEAMS system (Washington, DC) to give full radiocarbon capability included combining a mechanical chopper and electrostatic beam switch to produce a tunable notch mass filter, high-speed log-amps for tuning with pulsed beams and low noise Faraday cups for measuring low beam currents.40 A new Cs-ionizer together with use of niobium instead of silver as the target matrix, increased the BeO− ion current from 1 to 3 μA on the Tokyo instrument.41 The detector of the Tono Geoscience Center (Japan) AMS system, originally unable to separate efficiently 10B from 10Be, was improved by mounting, in front of the ionization chamber, a nitrogen absorber with 2.2 μm thick Havar windows.42 Further suppression of 10B background was still required, however, for high sensitivity measurements. A two-fold reduction of system background to 0.04 amol 14C per mg C resulted from increased pumping capacity near the high voltage terminal of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 1 MV AMS system.43 This system was also used to measure 3H ∶
					1H ratios of (4 ± 1)
					× 10−16 in mg-sized water samples. Modifications to the low-energy (600 kV) system at Zurich resulted in transmissions of multiply charged ions (26Al, 10Be, 41Ca, 129I and Pu) as high as those achieved with a 6 MV accelerator but further attention was required to reduce background levels and increase mass resolution.44 Although a TOF spectrometer placed ahead of the silicon detector gave independent velocity measurements, its low efficiency (20%) precluded routine use. Changes reported for the Seoul facility included an EA to reduce C background and a new design of water pretreatment line.45The complexity of AMS systems and the high investment required in their construction has resulted in computer simulation taking a key role in the design and improvement of systems. Ion-optical calculations, carried out for the whole 5 MV Helsinki system, consisted of separate calculations for the injector, accelerator and high-energy beam line.46 Although the calculations, based solely on ion optics, forecast an almost 100% transmission, in reality only 50% was achieved. This indicated considerable beam losses due probably to collision of ions with residual gas and possibly also to beam line misalignment. Simulation by a ray tracing method using the “TURTLE” code predicted the suitability of the 3 MV Seoul system for the separation of Al and Be isotopes from their respective isobars.47 The design of a new high-intensity Cs-ion source and sample changer was based on current best practice for the two parts and followed modelling of various aspects of the ion optics.48 Simulations were performed for the trajectories of Cs+ ions emitted from the surface of the spherical ionizer and for the secondary ion trajectories.1.3. InstrumentationConsiderable attention continues to be given to the development of gas ion sources, in particular for on-line coupling to chromatographic systems for radiocarbon and biomedical applications. A previously tested microwave plasma ion source for introduction into a plasma discharge of small samples (several μmol of CO2 entrained in an Ar carrier gas) has now been coupled to a 2.5 MV AMS system.49 Negative C ion currents of up to 20 μA were obtained with a CO2 flow rate of 200 μl min−1 and a magnesium vapour charge-exchange canal inserted immediately after the ion source. A dedicated ion-beam injector with an angular acceptance higher than that in the current system was being constructed to give higher transmitted currents. A combustion device for direct injection of CO2 into the ion source was also under construction. The gas ion source at the University of Oxford has been rebuilt so that CO2 samples in a continuous flow of He could be introduced directly into the ion source.50 This source was used for the on-line coupling of GC to the AMS system using a GC-SIRMS combustion interface and Nafion™ drier. This system was considered ideal for those studies involving just a few μg of sample and where a precision of ∼10% was sufficient. A gas-fed source using a filament-driven plasma, confined by a multicusp-magnet arrangement, has been built and tested but ion beams had not yet been extracted for analysis.51On-line introduction of biological specimens into the AMS source should reduce cross-contamination, decrease analysis time and provide greater compatibility with robotics. The MIT group has investigated the use of laser-induced sample combustion, in which liquid samples (urine and blood plasma) were added to a copper oxide matrix and heated with an IR laser to induce combustion.52 Although all aspects of the technique would benefit from further development, there appeared to be no obvious barriers to producing a fully functioning system having the sensitivity required by biomedical applications. The same group tested three different sample delivery systems (GC, CO2-laser-induced combustion and pyrolysis 3H interfaces) for the direct introduction of gaseous samples into the ion source with the aim of increasing throughput and improving performance.53 The on-line detection of 14C in labelled compounds was demonstrated for the first time using the GC interface. An adaptation of the laser-induced interface in which eluent was applied continuously to a moving bed of catalyst allowed HPLC to be coupled directly to the ion source. A prototype of the 3H interface, in which samples were injected into a wall-coated open tubular reactor and the reaction products transported in a stream of He, was also built. The new sources were considered suitable for biomedical applications but not for radiocarbon dating because of the relatively low output and the restricted measurement time.The direct coupling of an EA to a hybrid ion source
					(gas and solid targets) has been investigated as a means of increasing sample throughput.54 The incompatibility between the He flow rate delivered by the EA (100 ml min−1) and the optimum acceptable by the gas ion source (0.1 ml min−1) was overcome by cryogenically trapping the CO2 delivered by the EA and subsequently releasing it in a controlled manner into a 0.1 ml min−1 flow of He. The CO2–He mixture was fed through a tube directly to the cathode of the source in which a titanium insert reduced the CO2 to C and O. The C− ions were produced by Cs sputtering. The ion beam current was optimized at a He flow rate of ≤0.2 ml min−1, a Cs oven temperature of 140 °C, an ionizer electric power of 140 W and a CO2 flow rate of 0.002 ml min−1
					(equivalent to 1.06 μg C min−1). Further improvements to the trapping and release procedure were considered necessary for achieving a constant and controllable CO2 flow rate, the variability of which was the main limitation of the current system.A major disadvantage of some ion sources is the lack of provision for in situ servicing and the need to dismount the source for even minor maintenance. Southon and Santos55 described source modifications for improved serviceability and increased beam current. The modifications allowed the entire source body, or the sample changer plus isolation valve, to be rolled back for servicing with almost all of the electrical, pneumatic and cooling connections still in place. The source cleaning operation could be completed by one person in only 2 h. Various changes to the source components, including a small relocation of the sample wheel, resulted in a 120–170 μA C− ion current stable for 2–3 weeks and a precision of 2–5‰ for 14C measurements.In a sequential injection system, isotopes are injected one after the other using a cycled injection voltage, a process often referred to as “bouncing”. The key to the optimization of the High Voltage Engineering Europa “bouncing” set-up and electronics was the use of a high cycling frequency (100 Hz) to suppress the influence of source output fluctuations.56 Adverse effects of the bouncer voltage switching on the ion beam were eliminated by a fast beam-blanking unit, which both stopped the beam unless the measurement conditions were stable and controlled the injection periods of the different isotopes with ns resolution. Gating of the Faraday cup to synchronize current measurement with the injection period avoided background currents resulting from the injection of other isotopes. The new set-up allowed radiocarbon to be measured with a precision of <1‰. A new design of injector installed on the 3 MV Lund (Sweden) accelerator system improved separation between masses considerably in comparison with the injector used previously.57 The new injector had a 90° electrostatic energy analyser and a 90° magnetic mass analyser and its use was demonstrated for the separation of 26Mg from 26Al.The trend towards low-energy AMS systems, which produce ions with low charge states, has set limitations on isotopic abundance sensitivity and the suppression of polyatomic isobars. The technique of laser photodetachment spectrometry, although not yet applied specifically to AMS, has considerable potential for improving ionization selectivity.58 In this technique, a beam of negative ions and a laser beam are merged in a collinear geometry and the wavelength of the laser tuned across the photodetachment threshold region. Because of the large differential Doppler shifts associated with the fast moving ions of different masses, it is possible to detach selectively ions of certain isotopes while leaving others unaffected. The new laser technique could provide additional selectivity by suppressing isotopic and polyatomic isobars in low-energy AMS. As an example, it should be possible to deplete 12C− and 13C− ions in the beam without affecting the 14C− ions.The numerous sources of error in AMS continue to receive attention. Background beams are usually relatively weak but they can have a serious effect on measurements in which the beam of interest has a very low intensity. Fernández Niello et al.59 compared experimental yields of different spurious beams with those predicted by a theoretical model and were able to identify the collision of the projectiles with residual N2 molecules in the accelerator as the source of the spurious beams. Berkovits et al.60 evaluated the errors derived from magnet saturation and the use of a pilot beam to set up the AMS system. In the latter procedure, the tuning of an accelerator for a low-abundance ion is based on tuning an abundant-isotope pilot beam and scaling to the trajectory of the low-abundance ion. The authors demonstrated that this could introduce considerable error and that correction was necessary. Use of a correlated compound-binomial model by Bogen et al.61 in the measurement of Pu-isotope ratios revealed that the observed measurement errors were nearly all attributable to counting noise.The increased use of low-energy systems requires the introduction of new and effective means for suppression of isobaric interferences. Doupé
					et al.62 considered several approaches based on the resonant and near-resonant reactions between negative ions and neutral atoms or molecules to remove the isobar. It was considered that low-energy AMS could be extended to a greater number of rare isotopes by using a combination of techniques for isobar suppression.Developments of detector systems have focused primarily on improved detection in low-energy systems. The performance of a gas ionization detector was enhanced considerably for the detection of low-energy heavy nuclides by using thin (50 nm) silicon nitride entrance windows which gave much lower total energy loss than conventional plastic entrance windows.63 It was possible to detect 1 MeV Pu ions, which would be stopped in plastic windows, with a resolution of ∼30%
					(FWHM). Highly uniform and ultra-thin (0.6–1.5 μg cm−2) diamond-like carbon foils have potential as secondary-electron emitting foils in TOF detection of heavy ions.64 In addition, use of the foils as strippers in the dedicated 100 kV 3H system was demonstrated. In order to understand the operation of a gas-filled magnet in detail and to find optimum operating conditions, a Monte Carlo simulation of ion beam optics was performed using 33–45 MeV 36Cl ions.65 Optimum conditions for isobar separation were established as a gas pressure of 2–3 Torr, a bending radius of 60 cm, an initial ion energy of 38 MeV and a deflection angle of 150–180°. A new projectile X-ray detection system installed at the Beijing facility has been used to measure the half-lives of 75Se and 78Se and to analyse the intensity and composition of 64Cu radioactive nuclear beams.66Several new detectors for AMS have been reported. A natural-diamond-based detector (NDD) was evaluated for detection of 13C, 180Hf and 238U in the 12–38 MeV energy range.67,68 It consisted of a diamond (0.01–1 mm thick) metallized on both sides with high-voltage bias electrodes to collect the charge carriers (electrons and holes) produced by ionizing particles. Although initial measurements of energy resolution, stability and radiation hardness indicated the suitability of the detector for heavy ion AMS, some technical problems remained. The small physical size, unexpected high energy losses in the entrance window and the low electrical strength of the assembly were identified as the main limitations of the detector. During initial irradiation, the NDD exhibited a significantly enhanced energy resolution—the so-called “pumping effect”. In contrast, the high electrical resistance of the diamond could lead to accumulated space charge and a reduction in pulse height during irradiation. The thickness of the dead layer on the surface of the detector was close to the penetration range of the ions used and needed to be reduced. Arrays of detectors were considered a means of overcoming the limited efficiency of the detector which gave a count rate just 8% of that of a silicon detector in the same position. Calorimetric low-temperature detectors, which consist of sapphire absorbers and superconducting transition edge thermometers operating at T
					≈ 1.5 K, have been used in AMS for the first time.69 High sensitivity resulting from low background and increased detector efficiency allowed a 236U ∶
					238U ratio of 6.5 × 10−12 in a natural uranium sample to be determined. This was the smallest such ratio ever measured. The choice of gas, gas pressure and flight length were important parameters for optimizing the resolution of a gas-filled TOF detector for isobar identification in low-energy AMS measurements.70 The specific energy losses of isobars such as 36Cl and 36S were different in the gas and resulted in different changes in velocity and TOF. The agreement between experimental and calculated values for the distance between the 36Cl and 36S peaks was poorer than expected and needed further investigation. An increase in energy straggling deteriorated the time resolution for long flight paths.1.4. Developments in radiocarbon analysisAn understanding of the various sources of error in radiocarbon analysis is required to improve precision. Uncertainty can be attributed to counting statistics, fractionation, contamination and limited instrumental precision, e.g. of Faraday cups. Steier et al.71 systematically investigated the dependence of precision on system tuning and stability, isotopic fractionation, beam current, space charge effects, sputter target geometry and cratering. No single effect, but rather the combination of many effects, was shown to limit precision. A novelty of the study was the use of the three stable O isotopes as a proxy for the C isotopes because the higher beam currents simplified detection and gave faster analyses. In addition, the almost constant 16O ∶
					18O ratio in terrestrial materials made analysis insensitive to contamination, so allowing fractionation effects to be studied independently of contamination. Improvements in analytical procedures resulted in a measurement precision of ±20 14C years.An investigation into three possible sources of mass fractionation in a system using sequential injection concluded that only the influence of beam intensity was significant.72 A change in the 14C ∶
					12C ratio, and to a lesser extent in the 13C ∶
					12C ratio, with increasing beam intensity was attributed to space charge effects. Use of the 13C ∶
					12C ratio for dating instead of the 14C ∶
					12C ratio was suggested. The influence of the accelerating/decelerating gaps in front of and after the bouncing magnet and of changes in ion trajectories of the three C isotopes during bouncing could be neglected. In a similar investigation, Nadeau et al.73 found that in their system a horizontal displacement of the 13C beam relative to the 12C and 14C beams limited the maximum current intensity that could be used without 13C ∶
					12C fractionation. This effect changed the 14C ∶
					12C ratio with current intensity because the 13C3− ion beam was used to stabilize the accelerator voltage.Attempts have been made to establish the ultimate limit for AMS radiocarbon analysis. Whereas measurement of 14C ∶
					12C ratios of 1 × 10−16 is adequate for most dating purposes, the ability to measure a ratio of 1 × 10−19 is necessary for the study of 140000 year old underground hydrocarbons. Studies on the factors that limit the ratio that can be measured concluded that there is no basic mass spectrometric limit.74Different approaches have been taken for improving the graphitization of small samples. A new graphite reactor, designed for low contamination by modern carbon during the graphitization of samples containing ≤100 μg C, was successfully used by Uchida et al.75 to reduce background to ∼0.1 μg C so that 14C ∶
					12C ratios of the order of 10−16 could be measured, corresponding to 60000 years. The observed isotopic fractionation appeared to be a function of ion current. Measured 14C ∶
					12C ratios in small samples were significantly lower than ratios measured in 1 mg samples. This effect was compensated for by using the same weight for both standard and samples. Hua et al.76 optimized activation of the iron catalyst for reaction rate and yield. The chosen reaction involved 500 mbar O2 at 450 °C for 0.5 h followed by 750 mbar H2 at 600 °C for 1 h. Analysis of samples containing as little as 10 μg C was possible if a correction was made for the background C incorporated during sample processing (0.61 ± 0.10 μg).Several new graphitization lines have been reported. In contrast to typical systems which use copper oxide in the combustion of solid samples, the system of Park and Lee77 used high-purity O2 for combustion of liquid (30–40 μl) or gaseous samples. Measures taken to ensure safety in the use of highly reactive O2 gas included maintaining a low system pressure (1 bar) and using 20–25 cm long quartz reaction tubes when treating larger quantities of samples. Ertl and Spitzy78 developed a new, low-temperature sealed-tube technique for the combustion of organic carbon in gaseous, liquid and solid samples prior to subsequent off-line isotope analysis. Complete oxidation was achieved in 24 h at <500 °C with potassium peroxodisulfate and silver permanganate as oxidants in the combustion of large pieces of quartz substrate on which airborne particulate matter had been collected. Endo et al.79 designed special, large combustion tubes (30 cm long, 30 mm id with a 9 mm id neck to allow the tubes to be sealed) to take increased amounts of substrate and reactants. The optimum combustion temperature was 850 °C. Major improvements were required in the sample preparation of fine aeorosol particles.80 Using a two-step heating apparatus, the organic carbon and elemental carbon fractions in the particles were transformed into CO2 in a stream of O2 at 340 and 650 °C, respectively, and reduced to filamentous carbon using manganese in the presence of cobalt. The new system at Lecce (Italy)81 consisted of two separate lines, one for production of CO2 and the other for graphitization, and included a new unit for cracking open the tubes containing CO2. A new automated graphitization system at the Zurich facility was built to increase capacity to over 1200 targets per year.82Other aspects of the preparation of graphite targets have received attention. Many types of sample require acid–alkali–acid (AAA) washing prior to analysis. The use of fluoroplastic components in an automated AAA system resulted in negligible contamination during preparation and was therefore particularly suitable for samples containing low levels of carbon.83 The use of Mg(ClO4)2 desiccant instead of cryogenic traps to remove water generated in the reduction of CO2 was convenient and reliable for those analyses not requiring precision better than 0.3% or backgrounds better than 53000 years.84 It was not recommended, however, in other cases because of shifts in measured isotope ratios caused probably by release of modern CO2 trapped in the desiccant. In order to reduce memory effect and background, the gas chromatograph in an EA–cryogenic trap system was replaced with chemical traps.85 The new procedure gave precision (0.5%) and background (>50000 years) similar to those achieved by sealed tube combustion. However, a background contamination problem, probably derived from the tin cups used in combustion, restricted its use to samples containing at least 1 mg C. Grootes et al.86 regularly analysed two fractions for each sample (the chemically cleaned sample and the contaminant removed in the cleaning process) in order to assess the degree of contamination and, therefore, the reliability of the 14C age obtained. Contamination was considered to be absent if both fractions gave the same age.A previously developed procedure for the compound-specific radiocarbon analysis of PAH has been modified to incorporate a HPLC step in order to extend the method to the analysis of PAH in the complex organic matrices of environmental samples.87 The PAH were extracted and purified using three types of column chromatography, HPLC and preparative capillary GC. The strength of the procedure was demonstrated by the analysis of sediment samples. The PAH in the sediments were derived mainly from fossil fuel combustion but phenanthrene received a greater contribution from biomass burning than did the alkylphenanthrenes.Improvements to high-precision calibration of radiocarbon dating continue to be sought. High-precision AMS 14C measurements have been made on a new high-altitude tree-ring chronology of stone pines covering the time period 3500–3000 BC.88 A calibration curve with a typical uncertainty (1σ) of ±20 14C years was established, which generally gave good agreement with the INTCAL98 calibration. Small offsets in certain sections of the curve were attributed to possible seasonal effects of the delayed growing season at high altitude.The selective oxidation of CO in air samples with I2O5 requires prior removal of CO2. An alternative preparation method for the measurement of atmospheric14CO concentrations was based on a combination of cryogenic trapping and GC separation followed by combustion to CO2 for analysis.89A method for the extraction of14C from quartz was based on the resistive heating of samples to ∼1100 °C in the presence of LiBO2 to dissolve the quartz and liberate any C present.90 The C was oxidized to CO2 in an O2 atmosphere during extraction and trapped cryogenically. Although the method provided a low system blank and 100% recovery of CO2, the results obtained appeared to be unreliable in that they did not agree with results obtained using a very similar system in a laboratory with a reputation for providing good data.Issues raised by the radiocarbon dating of iron artefacts continue to be investigated. Enami et al.91 showed that the C in iron products was derived entirely from the C of the fuel used in the smelting and refining that produced the artefact and that any previous C signature in re-worked iron was replaced. Both a prototype C extraction system based on combustion in a rf induction furnace and a chemical extraction method using CuCl2 solution were used successfully and gave a background 14C age of ∼44000 years. The extraction procedure of Hüls et al.92 involved combustion (1000 °C, 24 h) of the artefact in a sealed quartz tube with CuxO (CuxO ∶ Fe > 5) as an oxygen donor. Incomplete yield did not affect the measured 14C concentration and radiocarbon age. Scharf et al.93 addressed the issue of the low C content of iron artefacts which can result in sample sizes too large for combustion systems. They found either direct sputtering of unprocessed iron samples or chemical extraction (2 M HCl, 85 °C) to be suitable for overcoming this problem. However, direct sputtering could only be used for samples with >1% C, because of the low sputter ion current generated. The authors highlighted the need for very careful cleaning of the artefact before extraction of C and stated that any machining of the artefacts should be avoided because of the high risk of contamination from the tools used.A vacuum sample processing line was set up for the determination of radiocarbon in small marine samples.94 Pure N2 was used as carrier gas to strip CO2 from 500 ml sea-water samples that had been poisoned with HgCl2 and acidified with 5 ml of concentrated HCl. Recovery was better than 95 ± 5%. Freeze-dried biota samples were combusted with copper oxide at 900 °C and the CO2 produced was reduced to graphite. Although the latter procedure took about 8 h, it had the advantage of not producing water as a by-product.Tisnérat-Laborde et al.95 presented full details of a procedure for the extraction of C from bone samples, based on the reaction between amino acids and ninhydrin. Comparison with established methods showed that the procedure was reliable and gave accurate dates up to 45000 years BP for ≥500 μg C. Contamination with modern carbon, possibly introduced with the ninhydrin, limited the measurable age to 50000 years BP for samples containing ≥1500 μg C. Higham et al.96 investigated the contamination of small bone samples during preparation by using both a simple collagen extraction method and isolation of filtered gelatine from individual rat bones. Although contamination was detected, it was considered to influence the resultant dates only slightly. The large discrepancy between the dates obtained in this study and those obtained for the same samples in a previous study were said to cast doubt on the earlier results.Two methods for the pretreatment of insect remains provided acceptable results for samples dated previously.97 The first method, involving an acid wash to remove carbonate, was simple but required further validation using other samples. The second method involved a harsher reaction to remove the protein component and isolated only polymeric chitin. Although the yield needed to be improved before it could be used routinely, the second procedure was considered to hold promise as a purification method for heavily contaminated samples.Radiocarbon dating using pollen concentrates consistently gave older age estimates for organic and inorganic deposits in a peat bog than dating using organic residues or combined pollen and organic residues.98 This indicated the unreliability of using organic residue fractions which could be contaminated with younger plant material or humic acids. High-purity concentrates of sporomorphs (pollen and spores) have been used to overcome the problem of very low concentrations of organic matter and carbonates in lake sediments.99 Non-sporomorph organic matter was removed by chemical treatment, micro-sieving and heavy liquid separation.1.5. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbonAlthough radiocarbon analysis has remained the prime application of AMS, considerable effort continues to be made to develop methodologies for the determination of other long-lived radionuclides. The development of 3H AMS improved the reconstruction of 3H exposure concentrations from environmental measurements.100 Although the current quantification limit was inadequate for determining natural environmental variations in 3H concentrations, it was expected to be sufficient for studies assessing possible health effects of chronic environmental exposure to 3H.In contrast to 7Be, there are no standardized sample preparation methods for10Be. Priller et al.101 presented two methods for the recovery of 10Be from atmospheric particulates on filters. One was based on cation exchange separation and the other on precipitation as Be(OH)2. The co-precipitation method of Stone et al.102 for producing Ag–Al2O3 and Ag–BeO aggregates for 26Al and 10Be analyses, respectively, offered a rapid alternative to the conventional mixing of oxides with silver or copper powders. The uniform dispersal of oxide grains in the conductive silver matrix allowed samples containing <0.25 mg of Be to be analysed. In comparison with the analysis of Nb–BeO mixtures, longer analysis times were required for the co-precipitated targets because of the lower intensity ion beam produced, but these were compensated for by shorter preparation times. The procedure of Liu et al.,103 involving EDTA complexation and ion exchange chromatography to separate Be from Al in loess samples, gave a satisfactory BeO− ion current. However, further improvements to the procedure were required to reduce background introduced during the sample preparation.Use of BeF2targets instead of conventional BeO targets was predicted to reduce the intensity of isobaric 10B2+ ions by about five orders of magnitude.104 Tests revealed the existence of a weak beam of BF− ions, consistent with theoretical predictions that BF− exists only in a metastable excited state. An additional advantage of using BeF− rather than BeO− ions is that F has only one isotope, thereby making measurement of isotope ratios much simpler. Methods for the preparation of BeF2 from real samples still required development. Because of the highly hygroscopic nature of BeF2, exclusion of water vapour was the main precaution required in the procedure of Wacker et al.105 for the preparation of BeF2 targets from standard solutions and rock digests. A low-energy AMS system with a gas-ionization detector could be used to detect 10Be+ ions with an energy of 0.8 MeV or 10Be2+ ions with an energy of 1.4 MeV. Whereas the use of singly charged ions gave higher transmission, use of doubly charged ions gave better separation. Although analysis using the low-energy system held some promise for the measurement of 10Be, it could not compete with analyses possible at larger facilities.An investigation into the measurement of10Be with a compact AMS system using conventional BeO targets focussed primarily on the detection system.106 The 10B interference was suppressed by three orders of magnitude through use of a passive dE/dx foil technique (a stack of seven carbon foils, 20 μg cm−2 total, placed between the high-energy analysing magnet and the electrostatic deflector) and by a further five orders of magnitude with a gas ionization chamber installed at the end of the AMS line. The low overall transmission of 1–2% resulted primarily from beam losses due to energy straggling and from charge state yield in the post-stripping foils.The conventional preparation of targets for 10Be analysis involves the addition of 9Be as carrier. The AMS determination of natural 10Be ∶
					9Be ratios has been reported for the first time following direct measurement of10Be in samples without addition of carrier.107 A purified Be solution was deposited on a stainless steel wafer, the hydrophilic nature of which gave even dispersion of the solution. The analytical set-up differed from routine 10Be AMS measurement only in the use of a SIMS (focussed Cs+ ion beam, 600 nA, 100 μm spot diameter) ion source. The secondary ion currents produced were about three orders of magnitude smaller than those produced by high-current sources in conventional systems but they allowed measurements to be made for longer. Measurement of 10Be ∶
					9Be ratios of the order of 10−10, in samples containing 100 ng Be and with a precision of ∼10%, was a considerable achievement.Depth profiling of humidity in silica has been achieved on a 3 MV AMS system equipped with a conventional silicon detector.108 Scanning the sample mechanically by two off-axis disks rotating with different frequencies produced a nearly cylindrical sputter crater instead of the common bell-shaped crater. In addition, electronic gating was used to collect signals only when the primary beam passed the centre of the crater. Because AMS discriminates between isobaric atomic and polyatomic ions, depth profiles of both 18O− and 18O1H− ions could be investigated by measuring 18O4+ or 1H+ ions. Considerable improvements were still required to achieve the depth resolution possible with TOF-SIMS.The measurement of26Al usually involves preparation of Al2O3 targets because of their ease of preparation and stability. In an investigation into the use of several compounds as targets, Flarend et al.109 found that AlN had potential for increasing the sensitivity and precision of analysis at low Al concentrations. The ion beam produced from AlN was at least five times higher than that produced from Al2O3 but, rather curiously, depended on exposure of the AlN target to air prior to analysis. Some contamination with air was beneficial but too much reduced the beam intensity and introduced beam instability. The production of a 5 μA current of Al− would be advantageous for the low-energy determination of 26Al−. Arazi et al.110 investigated the use of AlO− ions rather than the commonly used Al− ions because the production of 26AlO− ions was 25 times greater than that of 26Al− ions. This had the disadvantage, however, of the co-production of 26MgO− ions. Combination of chemical separation of Al from Mg, based on precipitation, and the use of a gas-filled magnet achieved the suppression of Mg required to measure 26Al ∶ Al ratios of ∼10−15. Smaller ratios were measured, using Al2O3 as targets and injected 26Al− ions, by Pavicevic et al.111 in the first reported determination of 26Al produced in situ in quartz samples. An international interlaboratory comparison revealed that bias existed between laboratories even though the results obtained from the different laboratories did not differ statistically.112 The need for CRM was highlighted.The measurement of36Cl in environmental samples has been improved through the use of a new cation exchange method for sample preparation.113 The new method, which reduced processing time to 6 h and gave a recovery of ∼90%, lowered the concentration of sulfate sufficiently to allow 36Cl ∶ Cl ratios as low as 10−13–10−14 to be measured. In comparison, Freeman et al.114 achieved a 36Cl ∶ Cl background ratio of 4 × 10−15 through the use of efficient foil stripping to Cl7+ ions in a 5 MV system. An ID procedure developed for determining both total Cl and 36Cl concentrations in the same sample has been applied to the analysis of calcareous rocks.115 The 37Cl ∶
					35Cl ratio, used to determine total concentration, was measured successfully on the low-energy side of the accelerator system.The radionuclide 39Ar, produced in the atmosphere by cosmic rays, has an isotopic abundance of 8.1 × 10−16. Measurement of the 39Ar ∶
					40Ar ratio is a technical challenge, not only because 1 l of ocean water contains only ∼6500 atoms of 39Ar (producing a beam current measured in atoms per minute) but also because Ar forms only positive ions so the ubiquitous presence of 39K hampers analysis. The first successful AMS measurements of 39Ar in ocean water have been achieved through use of an ECR positive ion source equipped with a special quartz liner to reduce 39K background levels, development of a gas handling system for small volume Ar samples, use of 39Ar8+ ions accelerated to 232 MeV and separation of 39Ar from 39K in a gas-filled spectrograph.116,117 Intriguingly, two ECR sources were used. One was used for setting up the system with a 78Kr16+ pilot beam whereas the second, uncontaminated, source was used for analysis. The experimental set-up allowed 40Ar8+ beam intensities five times higher than previously possible to be used without swamping the detector with 39K. The beam intensity corresponded to a 39Ar count rate of 40 counts h−1 at the natural level.Interference from 41K in the measurement of41Ca is usually avoided by injection of CaH3− ions. Sample preparation is, however, complicated and requires a closed system. Raisbeck et al.118 demonstrated that it was possible to get a LOD for 41Ca ∶ Ca of 1 × 10−11 by using CaF2 samples and suggested that this procedure could be used for most analyses. Preparation of CaH2 samples would still be required when LOD down to 1 × 10−13 were needed. Dong et al.119 described the design and operation of a special apparatus for the preparation of CaH2. The overall recovery of Ca was >90% following reduction of CaO by Zr in a distillation apparatus and heating of the Ca metal in an atmosphere of H2.Rugel et al.120 developed procedures for measuring very low levels of63Ni in order to quantify 63Ni from sources other than atom-bomb-induced ones. Use of a dedicated Cs sputter ion source with a 63Cu background 100 times smaller than that of other sources contributed to an isobaric suppression of about 5 × 109 and allowed 63Ni ∶ Ni ratios as low as 2 × 10−14 to be measured in copper samples that were unexposed to neutron fluxes.The principal aim of improvements made to sample preparation and AMS methodology for99Tc were to minimize levels of 99Ru in order to achieve detection of as little as 0.2–2 pg 99Tc in 0.25 l of sea-water with 10% precision.121 Use of a highly selective TEVA™ ion exchange resin gave efficient separation of Ru and Tc. An aluminium target matrix was used because it had a considerably lower Ru concentration than other potential matrices such as iron, gold or silver. A gas ionization detector was designed specifically for optimum separation of 99Ru and 99Tc.Use of a simple and rapid carrier-free procedure for the extraction of I from 100 ml sea-water samples led to significant reduction in cross-contamination in the ion source when using a carrier.122 This development makes 129I, derived from nuclear fuel reprocessing operations, attractive as a marine tracer.The two main prerequisites for the AMS measurement of182Hf, a long-lived radionuclide of particular interest for studying the early history of the solar system, are high mass resolution to resolve the stable neighbouring isotopes and good separation from the abundant isobar 182W. An LOD of ∼10−11 was achieved for 182Hf ∶ Hf by injecting HfF5− ions, use of which reduced the 182W intensity 6000-fold.123 The overall efficiency of the procedure was improved by optimization of the sputter and ionization yields of HfF5− ions, the stripping yield from HfF5− to Hf4+ and the detector efficiency. Use of O2 instead of Ar as the stripper gas increased the stripper yield more than two-fold.The long-lived radionuclide244Pu in terrestrial geological archives is a potential record of recent and nearby supernovae. Winkler et al.124 achieved a sensitivity of 3 × 10−6 counts per 244Pu atom in the sputter target prepared from artificial samples but encountered severe limitations in the analysis of sediments because of high background count rates caused by 195Pt4+. Fifield et al.125 demonstrated that Pu isotopes could be detected with high sensitivity (LOD of 1.4 × 106 atoms for 244Pu) using a low-energy system with 300 kV accelerating voltage. The analysis of “real” samples was not, however, demonstrated. The separation of Pu3+ ions from interfering Dy2+ ions with 2/3 the energy was made possible by using a gas ionization detector fitted with an ultra-thin (50 nm) silicon nitride window. Wallner et al.126 were able to measure a 244Pu surface density of ∼4000 atoms cm−2 in a deep sea ferromanganese crust by applying efficient chemical extraction of Pu from kg-sized samples and a high-energy (12.5 MV accelerating voltage, Pu11+ ions of 150 MeV) AMS procedure optimized for ultra-low background analysis. This corresponded to a terrestrial input of ∼3 × 104 atoms cm−2 during the period (1–14)
					× 106 years ago. The absolute LOD of <1 fg Pu in environmental samples was competitive with that achievable by either TIMS or ICP-MS yet AMS had fewer interference, memory or matrix effects than ICP-MS.127Trace element AMS (TEAMS) is a combination of AMS and SIMS in which molecular interferences are removed by breaking the molecules in an accelerator. The high cost and complexity of TEAMS make the technique complimentary to SIMS for those cases where interferences cannot be resolved by SIMS. As TEAMS requires negative ions, SIMS is better suited for those elements with no or very low electron affinity. Mitchell et al.128 investigated the depth profiles of Al, C, H, O and Si implanted in gallium nitride substrate by using a 3 MV accelerator and gas-ionization detector. The LOD for 27Al, 12C and 18O were 6 × 1016, 7 × 1017 and 7 × 1017 atoms cm−3, respectively. Maden et al.129 were able to measure Ir concentrations of 0.1 ng g−1 in sedimentary layers with a lateral resolution of ∼100 μm. The main molecular interference, 133Cs28Si16O2−, was destroyed when 193Ir− was stripped to form 193Ir9+ ions.The use of internationally calibrated and certified RM is a fundamental feature of any analytical procedure. Scott et al.130 reviewed the development of RM for radiocarbon analysis and considered the future requirements for such materials within the 14C AMS community. The review covered the historical development of standardization of radiocarbon analysis, issues in the selection of RM including sample material and homogeneity and previous intercomparison exercises. It was concluded that for the dating of old samples there is a particular need for organic materials that are 14C-free. Preparation of a series of six new 26Al AMS RM (26Al ∶ Al in the range 7.444 × 10−11–4.99 × 10−13) responded to the need for primary standards in AMS facilities.131 The standards were prepared by dilution of the highly concentrated 26Al SRM (NIST SRM4229) for use as primary standards in AMS facilities.2. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)In spite of its poor sensitivity, ESMS is finding increasing use in speciation analysis because it provides the structural information not available with other detectors. Several reviews highlighted this role of ESMS. The excellent review of Ray et al.132 on state-of-the-art speciation analysis using plasma-source MS was principally on the use of ICP-MS but also included a substantial section on ESMS. Instrumentation was considered in detail together with the advantages and drawbacks associated with the technique. The problems associated with interpretation of complex spectra, quantification, matrix effects and poor sensitivity were highlighted. Current trends discussed included the parallel use of ICP-MS and ESMS for simultaneous analysis of the same chromatographic eluent and the development of a novel dual-source ICP/ES-TOFMS system. The review by Rosen and Hieftje133 from the same research group was focussed in particular on speciation applications of ICP-MS and ESMS. A useful discussion of current instrumentation was included for both techniques. The review of Collins134 was specifically on the use of RP-HPLC, SEC, ion-exchange chromatography and CE to separate complexes of metals with low-molecular-weight organic acids for MS detection. The combination of chromatographic separation with MS detection for the study of As metabolism in humans and the interaction of As with proteins was reviewed by Le et al.135McSheehy and Mester136 reported the use of high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry
				(FAIMS) to overcome problems caused by poor S/N in the detection of minor organoarsenic metabolites at trace level. Gas phase ions generated by a conventional ES source were directed into the FAIMS device, which consisted of two concentric cylindrical metal plates (electrodes) with a curtain gas flowing in the same direction as the ions. The outer electrode was maintained at a constant offset voltage whereas an asymmetric waveform was applied to the inner electrode. During a high-voltage period, the electric field induced ion motion. A compensation voltage, applied to offset the drift of ions towards an electrode, was compound dependent and so scanning this voltage separated a mixture of ions and reduced the background signal. Parameters of the FAIMS device that had to be optimized for each species included gas flow, the ratio of He ∶ N2 in the carrier gas, the separation between inner and outer electrodes, the high-voltage component of the waveform, the outer electrode voltage and the compensation voltage. Although the peak intensity for AsC+ was 70% lower with the FAIMS device than without, use of the device improved the S/N 20-fold and allowed arsenocholine and tetramethylarsonium ion in three biological CRM to be identified successfully. In its current state, the technique was limited by the requirement to know the analyte m/z prior to analysis because SIM was needed during the scan of the compensation voltage.The advantages of using parallel ICP-MS and ESMS for simultaneous on-line detection have been highlighted by several studies. The dangers inherent in using ICP-MS alone for speciation work were highlighted effectively by Hansen et al.,137 who used a system in which the flow from an HPLC column was split in the ratio 1 ∶ 4 with the larger proportion going to the ESMS detector. They demonstrated that the product of a reaction commonly used to synthesize dimethylarsinous standards was in fact dimethylarsinothioic acid. The implication of this finding was that previous studies, in which the synthesized standards had not been characterized, had actually misidentified the major arsenic metabolite in urine. The workers considered that attention should be focussed on arsinothioyl compounds in the study of chronic As toxicity. Hansen et al.138 used the same analytical system to demonstrate for the first time the presence of arsinothioyl sugars in natural systems. It was considered that the inability of standard analytical procedures to resolve and identify sulfur-containing As metabolites has led to an underestimation of these compounds in nature. Jensen et al.139 found that a parallel ESMS and ICP-MS system was more effective than ICP-MS alone for the study of the metabolic fate of 2-, 3- and 4-iodobenzoic acids in rats. In their system, the HPLC flow (1 ml min−1) was split 5 ∶ 1 with 250 μl min−1 diverted to a triple quadrupole ESMS system and 50 μl min−1 to an ICP-MS detector.A robust and simple in-source protein oxidation procedure, used in combination with RP-HPLC-ESMS, gave information on the molecular mass of the ligand in MT complexes without the need for post-column sample dilution.140 Prior to analysis, a CsI solution (10 mg l−1) was introduced into the ES source by direct infusion (5 μl min−1) for 30 min to absorb Cs on the ES capillary. Although two MT isoforms in fish liver could be identified, the poor sensitivity of ESMS did not allow the lower concentrations in fish kidney to be detected. In addition, it was not possible to distinguish between Cu and Zn complexes.The main drawback of the use of GC methods for the determination of organotin compounds is the need for extensive work-up, including extraction, clean-up and derivatization. Banoub et al.141 investigated the use of ESMS to measure, without the need for derivatization or excessive manipulation, seven polar organotin compounds in methanolic extracts of environmental CRM. The extracts were introduced directly into the ES source in a CF (100 μl min−1) of methanol–water (3 ∶ 2) and the compounds quantified using low-energy CID and diagnostic fragmentation of precursor ions. All the compounds except MBT were successfully identified in the positive ionization mode. Introduction of methanol solution containing a catalytic amount of triethylamine resulted in characteristic spectra for MBT in the negative ionization mode. The simple and efficient procedure required only ∼2 h for sample extraction and work-up and allowed a throughput of 36 injections h−1 to be made. The major inconvenience was the need to monitor different precursor–product ion transitions for the compounds, each of which required a different focus voltage and collision energy. Consequently, multiple injections for each analyte were necessary. The absolute LOD for TBT chloride was ∼1 pg Sn in the absence of matrix interferences.The most widely used application of ESMS for organometallic speciation is the determination of Se in biological matrices yet this can be a particular challenge because of the very low total Se concentration and the unavailability of CRM for Se species. In this context, the structural information provided by ESMS is vital to successful analysis although the poor sensitivity remains a limitation. Because sample pre-treatment is critical for successful ESMS analysis, Díaz Huerta et al.142 investigated the use of two sample preparation procedures for the analysis of selenocompounds in rat urine. The methods consisted of the removal of the saline matrix by either crown ether or methanolic extraction prior to SEC and RP-HPLC separation. Crown ether extraction was unsuccessful because of the high salinity of rat urine; methanolic extraction was successful only for rats that had received selenomethionine supplements. Basal levels of the Se compounds could not be detected by either method. The use of methanolic extraction and a CE final separation stage allowed Bendahl and Gammelgaard143 to identify two of the three minor metabolites isolated from human urine. The third metabolite had the characteristic Se pattern around m/z 285 but it was not possible to determine the structure on the basis of the information available. One of the identified compounds (Se-methylselenogalactosamine) appeared to be one of the main metabolites in basal samples from individuals who had not received Se supplements. For the structural analysis of Se species present at low concentrations in yeast digests, an efficient sample cleanup method based on accelerated solvent extraction was developed.144 When compared with the sonication method previously reported, this new method had clear advantages in terms of automation and sample throughput. The presence in yeast of Se-methylselenocysteine, believed to be converted in humans to an anti-carcinogenic metabolite, was reported for the first time. Although Braga et al.145 were able to characterize synthesized selenotrisulfides of glutathione, cysteine and homocysteins, the concentrations of these compounds in rat liver were too low to be detectable.The identification of Se species from fragmentation patterns has been highlighted as being necessary for successful analysis. The two major Se metabolites in the roots of Brassica juncea were identified using CID of selected ions but the two minor metabolites could not be detected.146 In an in vitro study on the gastrointestinal digestion of yeast, SIM by itself was insufficient for molecular identification.147 Detection of the product ions was considered essential for successful identification. Because the use of a normal analytical HPLC column would have led to loss of 60% of the eluent flow (0.8 ml min−1), the sensitivity of the ESMS procedure was enhanced through use of a narrow-bore HPLC column, which allowed all the eluent (0.16 ml min−1) to be sent to the mass spectrometer. Not only the major compound (selenomethionine) in the digests but also two minor degradation products could be identified. An unknown compound present in Allium fistulosum
				(green onions) was identified as γ-glutamyl-Se-methylselenocysteine by fragmentation of selected ions in an ES ion trap instrument.148The use of ESMS in the speciation of organoarsenic compounds continues to grow. Francesconi and Pergantis149 used SIM to search for 5′-dimethylarsinoyladenosine present at trace levels (20 μg As l−1) in a crude extract of clam kidney. The use of three precursor–ion to product–ion transitions, chosen to provide maximum selectivity, gave an LOD of 0.3 μg As l−1. The study of Kato et al.150 demonstrated that all seven As compounds found widely in biological systems (arsenate, monomethylarsenoic acid, dimethylarsinic acid, arsenobetaine, trimethylarsine oxide, arsenocholine and tetramethylarsonium ion) can be systematically analysed using LC coupled to a single quadrupole ESMS instrument. Analysis of three types of fish sauce showed that arsenobetaine present in the raw materials was converted to dimethylarsinic acid during fermentation but not to the toxic arsenate form. The first reported study of the binding of As to MT (extracted from seaweed) showed that five As3+ atoms bound to the protein in a structure far more open than that for divalent metal ions.151 The presence of the protonated mass (M + H)+ and of two daughter ions for each compound in HPLC-ES-MS/MS spectra unambiguously identified dimethylarsinic acid, methylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinoylethanol in urine samples.1523. Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)Since its invention in 1989, SPME has been widely adopted as a very simple and efficient solvent-free sample preparation method. The excellent review on SPME by Vas and Vékey153
				(213 references) can be thoroughly recommended as a comprehensive introduction to the technique and its applications. The review presented the analytical characteristics (coating materials, extraction procedure, desorption, derivatization and quantitation) and variants of the technique and described MS applications in various fields of analytical chemistry, including environmental applications, food chemistry, hair analysis and breath analysis. The SPME technique was considered to be ideally suited to MS applications as the combination provided simple and efficient sample preparation with versatile and sensitive detection. The current development of a wide range of selective, sensitive and stable fibres with low background levels was considered to extend further the scope of MS applications.A simple and rapid multielement speciation method was developed with the ultimate goal of simultaneous determination of seven organometallic compounds of Hg, Pb and Sn in natural water samples.154 The method consisted of in situ aqueous phase ethylation with sodium tetraethylborate, simultaneous headspace SPME of the derivatives and GC-EIMS analysis. Optimization of the SPME fibre coating, extraction time (30 min) and extraction temperature (20 °C) resulted in LOD of a few ng l−1, linearity over three orders of magnitude (50 ng l−1–250 μg l−1) and 3–20% precision for all the compounds measured. The extraction yield using a mixed fibre-coating of divinylbenzene–carboxen–PDMS was much higher than that obtained for a PDMS coating alone. Although the LOD were one order of magnitude poorer than those obtained by a GC-ICP-MS procedure, GC-EIMS was considered cheaper and more widely available with the added advantage of providing structural information.The GC-EIMS procedure is widely used for the determination of organotin compounds in environmental samples. Centineo et al.155 developed an ID procedure for the rapid, precise and accurate speciation of butyltin compounds. The measurement of isotope ratios was based on the M−29 ions (loss of an ethyl group) which, although less abundant than the M−114 fragment ions, better reflected the natural tin pattern. Isotope ratio precision was sensitive to the dwell time on each peak and was optimum (0.6–1.8%) for a dwell time of 10 ms. The lack of mass fractionation in the analysis was a notable advantage over ICP-MS procedures. Particular attention has been given to the derivatization reaction required for GC separation. Following a comparison of ethylation and phenylation for the derivatization of butyltin compounds, Won et al.156 chose ethylation because the reaction was faster with greater yield and produced fewer side products. Shioji et al.,157 on the other hand, selected 4-fluorophenylation over ethylation for the derivatization of TBT and TPT because it gave a better LOD for TBT (0.35 ng l−1 in sea-water compared with 6.3 ng l−1 using ethylation) and better reproducibility (11% at 10 ng l−1). The LOD for TPT were, however, 2.9 and 0.85 ng l−1 using 4-fluorophenylation and ethylation, respectively. A feature of the procedure was the use of SDME in which a μl-sized drop of solvent on the tip of a microsyringe was immersed directly into a stirred aqueous sample solution. As SDME does not use relatively expensive coated fibres, the technique is cheaper to use than SPME. Because the SDME LOD of 3 ng l−1 for TBT was poorer than that of SPME (1 ng l−1), Colombini et al.158 concluded that SDME was better suited as a screening tool for butyltin compounds. A new marine sediment CRM (NMIJ CRM 7301-a) has been certified as containing (as Sn) 0.011 ± 0.004 mg kg−1 TBT, 0.056 ± 0.006 mg kg−1 DBT and 0.058 ± 0.013 mg kg−1 MBT.159A procedure for the determination of methyl- and inorganic Hg in fish involved microwave digestion (3.5 min at 15–30 W, 2.5 min at 45 W or 1.5 min at 60–70 W) with 25% aqueous tetramethylammonium hydroxide solution, addition of 20 mM cupric ion, adjustment to pH 5, ethylation, extraction into heptane and GC-EIMS analysis.160 The recoveries were 92.3–96.1% and 93.6–95.5% for methyl- and inorganic Hg, respectively, and the LOD were 10 pg (as Hg) for both compounds. Muñoz et al.161 investigated the use of C60 fullerene as an effective sorbent material in a CF procedure for the extraction and derivatization of inorganic Hg and organomercury compounds in water samples. The analytes were sorbed at pH 4.5 as diethyldithiocarbamate complexes on to a C60 column and subsequently eluted and derivatized with sodium tetrapropylborate in ethyl acetate. The LOD (as Hg) for Hg2+, methylmercury and ethylmercury were 1.0, 1.5 and 1.5 ng l−1, respectively, for 50 ml samples. The precision was 7% at the 50 ng l−1 level. No interferences from other metal ions were encountered. The C60 fullerene was considered superior to the conventional sorbent RP-C18 because of its large specific surface area and its better sorption capacity.A fast and effective method suitable for the determination of selenomethionine and selenocysteine in food supplements was based on ethyl chloroformate derivatization of the selenoamino acids.162 The extraction procedure had to be optimized for individual samples. Whereas water at 50 °C in an ultrasonic bath gave the highest efficiency for extraction from selenized yeast samples, HCl at room temperature gave the best extraction from yeast-free samples. The calibration graphs were linear over the ranges 5–80 and 4–60 μg ml−1 and the LOD were 2.26 and 2.89 μg ml−1 for selenomethionine and selenocysteine, respectively. A rapid and precise (0.6%) species-specific ID method for the simultaneous determination of methionine and selenomethionine in yeast was based on reflux (16 h) with 4 M methanesulfonic acid, derivatization with methyl chloroformate, extraction into chloroform and GC-EIMS analysis.163 When a 1 ml extract (derived from 0.25 g of sample) was used for derivatization, the LOD for methionine and selenomethionine were 3.4 and 1.0 μg g−1, respectively. Use of this species-specific ID procedure to compare 14 extraction methods applied to the same yeast sample revealed significant differences in measured methionine and selenomethionine concentrations.164 Reflux digestion with 4 M methanesulfonic acid again gave the most efficient extraction. In comparison, recoveries from enzymatic methods of hydrolysis were poor and expensive because of the large amounts (>100 mg) of enzyme required. Meija and Caruso165 discussed approaches for the deconvolution of complex isotope patterns in the mass spectra of selenium-containing compounds. The deconvolution of the dimethyl diselenide spectrum was demonstrated for both intensity domain and mass domain approaches.Choice of 1,1,1-trifluoropenta-2,4-dione as derivatizing agent for the SPME-GC determination of Cr in sea-water was based on its quantitative reaction, sufficient volatility and thermal stability and inertness to undesirable side reactions.166 After the aqueous phase derivatization, a PDMS-coated SPME fibre was immersed in the liquid phase (25 min) to extract the Cr and then introduced into the GC inlet port for desorption (250 °C, 3 min). The three detection systems (ECD, EIMS, ICP-MS) compared for the determination of Cr all gave LOD in the range 0.011–0.015 ng ml−1, but the ECD was prone to interferences which compromised accuracy.4. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)4.1. ReviewsA survey paper with 335 references on the analytical use of rf GD sources covered fundamental physics, instrumentation, methodological aspects and applications.167 The declining level of research and lack of commercial instruments made the reviewers pessimistic about the future of rf GDMS in comparison with that of rf GD-OES. The majority of reports dealt with quantitative analysis of bulk samples. The small number of analyte ions that could be monitored during a single burn, even when using quadrupole analysers, hampered depth profiling but the use of TOF instruments held significant potential. The ability to control the analyte fragmentation was seen as a major asset for speciation studies and polymer applications. In their 129-reference review, Pisonero et al.168 were more optimistic about the future of rf GDMS analysis because it was rapid and direct, independent of the sample conductivity, and produced good LOD. The discussion highlighted the practical advantages of rf GDMS in comparison with SIMS. No rf GDMS instrumentation has yet been made commercially available because of the technical problems involved in designing a robust system.In their study on the dc GDMS analysis of environmental samples contaminated with radionuclides, Betti et al.169 paid particular attention to the source modifications required for mounting radioactive samples in a glove box. Procedures for quantitative determinations and, in particular, the applicability of RSF to different matrices were addressed. The use of a tantalum secondary cathode, acting as an oxygen getter, was advocated for reducing the formation of polyatomic species. The method was considered to be competitive with TIMS for the determination of the isotopic composition of matrix elements.Marcus170 discussed the use of CID in plasma source MS as a powerful alternative to carrying out chemical pre-treatment to remove interfering isobars, which are the predominant limitation in trace analysis. The cost and complexity of HR instruments further motivated exploration of the potential benefits of CID. The dissociation of polyatomic species into atomic ions eliminated the need for prior knowledge of possible interferences.4.2. InstrumentationIn an instrument for the direct analysis of flat, non-conducting samples, a rf GD source developed in-house was coupled to a commercial on-axis TOFMS instrument.171 External sample cooling was important for maintaining a stable GD. Operation of an electrically floating rf GD source with a Ar flow rate of 800 ml min−1 and a power of 20 W resulted in the build-up of a positive bias (typically 35 V). This improved the ion signal intensities recorded from conducting samples. Use of a flat exit electrode instead of a conically shaped electrode improved the Ni+ and Sn+ ion intensities by a factor of 4 and 2.2, respectively. The deviations between measured and expected Sn isotope ratios improved from 10–20% to a few %. The mass resolution at m/z 208, however, deteriorated from ∼1100 to 600.Space-charge effects confine the dynamic range of GD-FTMS and have hampered its development. To overcome this, Zientek and Eyler172 investigated the use of an ocotopole guide to preselect ions in a dc GD-FTMS instrument fitted with an external ion source. The low rf frequency octopole acted as high-pass mass filter and was mounted between the ion transport optics and the source, which had a pin-type coaxial cathode. Ion accumulation over a period of between 3 and 8 s improved the analyte signal intensities by a factor of 10–100 and allowed 116Sn+ ions to be detected from a NIST SRM 1104 (brass, 0.43% Sn) with a S/N of >10.Newman and Mason173 used GC coupled to the low-power fast-flow dc GD source for the quantitative analysis of halogenated hydrocarbons. The high Ar flow rate pushed the extended plasma away from the collisionally activated cathode fall region and collection of ions from the plasma boundary minimized the contribution of discharge gas ions such as Ar+ and ArH+. The design of the interface avoided electrical field distortion in the GD region and the fast-flow principle minimized chromatographic peak broadening and source contamination. The LOD of bromobenzene was 0.6 and 0.9 pg using atomic and molecule-specific ion detection, respectively.Knippel et al.174 developed software for signal and data processing in rf GD TOFMS. The new software enabled the user to rapidly perform routine tasks such as mass calibration and smoothing to eliminate spurious spikes in the mass spectrum. A time-offset feature accounted for incorrect triggering of the time scale due to electronic noise. Additional subroutines calculated the flight time, mass resolution and KE of ions.4.3. Fundamental studiesIn an investigation into the characteristics of the afterglow plasma, biasing the sampling cone relative to the anode in the fast-flow GD source allowed physical and chemical properties of the plasma to be studied independently from the main ionization region of the cathode fall.175 The relationships between the cone current and bias, the discharge voltage, gas flow rate, the Cu+ ion signal intensity from a copper sample and KE distributions were systematically measured. The data suggested the plasma contained large quantities of Rydberg atoms (those with states very close to or above the first ionization level) from the discharge gas and sputtered analyte. Auger de-excitation of the Rydberg gas was proposed as the dominant ionization mechanism. A subsequent study dealt with the effects of adding H2 downstream of the active discharge region, on the signal intensities detected from flat and pin-type copper and steel cathodes.176 The effect of H2, added at concentrations up to 10%
					(v/v), on the signal intensity was analyte-dependent. For instance, the Cu+ ion intensity increased 12 times with H2 concentrations of 2–4%, whereas Nb+ ion detection was suppressed for all H2 concentrations. The results were consistent with the proposed ionization mechanism.In order to improve the speciation capabilities of GDMS, Li et al.177 investigated the temporal and spatial variations of the internal energy (IE) distributions in ms-pulsed rf GD-TOFMS using tungsten hexcarbonyl as a “thermometer molecule”. By measuring ion signals at different heights and time intervals after the start of the GD pulse, it was possible to demonstrate the existence of distinct IE distributions in the discharge breakdown, steady state and post-pulse periods. Specifically, the IE in the plasma ignition regime (15–24 eV) was consistent with extensive fragmentation to atomic ions. The increased contribution of low IE ions in the steady state favoured structural fragmentation. The IE after the pulse were <9 eV and resulted in strong molecular ion detection. Significant spatial variations in the IE distribution were seen in the plateau regime.4.4. QuantificationBarnes et al.178 used a μs-pulsed GD source and a compact Mattauch–Herzog mass analyser for the determination of Ca and K in copper and iron. Higher instantaneous power could be applied with less sample heating in comparison with dc GDMS. In spite of the time-resolved ion collection, a burn-in time of 30 min was required to remove the interference of 40ArH+ ions from the 41K+ ion signal. The estimated LOD of 45 for Ca and 50 μg g−1 for K should be improved through use of a modified ion source.A particle beam interface was used to couple IC with dc GDMS for the quantitative speciation of organic and inorganic arsenic compounds.179 Arsenobetaine, arsenic(III) chloride and dimethylarsenic acid (DMA) yielded intense signals from atomic ions, molecular ions and/or structural fragments. The signal intensities increased linearly with injected amounts of between 0.5 ng and 50 μg. The precision was 2–3% while the estimated LOD of DMA was 90 and 0.8 ng in the speciation and atomic ion detection modes, respectively.The use of copper metallization for ultra-large scale integrated (ULSI) circuits has the advantage of lower bulk resistivity and higher resistance to electromigration than those of aluminium and aluminium-alloys. Lim et al.180 used dc GDMS and a discharge voltage reduced to 0.5 kV for the determination of trace impurities in copper films on silicon. Use of aluminium foil to make electrical contact with the surface layer avoided dependence of the signal intensities on the thickness of the non-conducting substrate. An integration time of 15 s per isotope allowed up to 64 isotopes to be measured at five different depths before the 800 nm thick films were exhausted. Most elements could be measured with LOD in the order of 1–10 ng g−1. The surface concentrations of C and O in the thin films could be measured by application of the working conditions optimized for a copper bulk sample. The sharp increase in the Si signal before reaching the copper/silicon interface indicated that the crater bottom was not completely flat.In a search for a cost-effective alternative to HR GDMS for the analysis of superalloys used in advanced aero-engines, Shekhar et al.181 used dc GDMS with a quadrupole analyser to determine trace impurities in nickel. The RSF were determined using NIST SRM 1761 and 1762 (low steel alloys). Interferences in GDMS prevented the accurate determination of Fe, Ga, Mn and P but the measured concentrations for B, Bi, Cu and Pb of between 1 and 10 μg g−1 agreed to within 5% with those obtained from wet chemical analysis and ICP-AES. Additional trace elements in the 1–10 pg g−1 concentration range were detectable with GDMS. Another publication dealt with the determination of major and trace elements in Zr–Nb alloys widely used in nuclear technology.182 In spite of the substantially different matrix composition from that of the Zr alloy used to determine RSF, results for NIST SRM 1236, 1237, 1238 and 1239 (Zr alloy) agreed well with the certified values. Precision was 0.05, 1 and 10% for elements with concentrations in the %, μg g−1 and ng g−1 ranges, respectively.5. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)5.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentationDespite the relative maturity of ICP-MS, fundamental studies and instrument development continues. These have focussed on improving our understanding of plasma ion generation, and developing new instrument designs to overcome interference and precision limitations. With the ultimate aim of developing ICP-MS capable of simultaneous detection of the entire mass range, a novel charge-sensitive-detector array, the focal plane camera (FPC), has been coupled to a Mattauch–Herzog MS instrument with an ICP ion source.183 The FPC employed an array of 31 gold Faraday cups, each with its own charge integrating circuit, to give simultaneous detection over a range of 15 m/z. The LOD with the FPC (0.08–20 pg ml−1 for 32 elements across the mass range) were ∼2–5 times poorer than those obtained with a single-channel EM but the FPC had better isotope ratio accuracy and precision and significantly less mass bias at high m/z. A linear dynamic range over 7 orders of magnitude resulted from varying the integration period. The system has been coupled to LA,184 GC185 and HPLC186 sample introduction. Transient signals from single shots of a Nd:YAG (λ
					= 266 nm) laser were collected with a resolution of ∼4 ms, fully describing the initial sharp peak caused by the ablation process and the long, low intensity tail from the washout of ablated particles. The LOD was calculated for both continuous operation (tens to hundreds of ng g−1) and single shot analysis (<1 pg). For the measurement of isotope ratios, simultaneous detection eliminated noise from the ablation process to give a precision <1% RSD, even when signals for individual isotopes only had a precision of >15%. Increasing the integration period to 1 h further improved isotope ratio precision to <0.02% RSD, when precision was limited by counting statistics. Simultaneous detection also gave more precise analysis of GC and HPLC chromatograms and completely avoided spectral skew, which occurs in scanning systems if the time required to scan a mass spectrum is not significantly less than the duration of the transient signal. The HPLC-ICP-MS system successfully separated As and Se species and was also used to eliminate oxide interferences in REE determinations, producing absolute LOD between 2 pg (Er and Yb) and 26 pg (Ce). Absolute LOD for GC-ICP-MS analyses were 34–850 fg for organometallic species and 0.87–4.9 pg for halogenated hydrocarbons. It was claimed that simultaneous detection should increase the theoretical number of peaks that could be detected in a given time period, i.e., chromatographic peak capacity. However, this increased capacity was not explicitly demonstrated.Hayashi et al.187 reported in a Japanese language paper the testing of several sample introduction techniques with a low pressure He-plasma ICP-MS instrument, developed to overcome isobaric interferences caused by Ar in conventional ICP-MS. Because solvent loading from conventional pneumatic nebulization was too high for the He-ICP, ultrasonic nebulization and desolvation, ETV on a tungsten filament, HG and LA were compared. A commercial USN fitted with vibrating metal mesh (Ni–Pd alloy) was connected to a desolvation unit consisting of a tube heated at 200 °C and a condenser. The dry aerosol was then passed through a PTFE capillary (250 μm id). Further described in a separate paper in English, the desolvating USN removed about 90% of solvent and resulted in a stable signal.188 No contamination from the Ni–Pd mesh was detected. Although signal intensity increased with increasing capillary id, ICP quenching from gas overloading occurred for id >250 μm. Halide LOD, particularly that of F−, improved because the ionization energy of He is higher than that of Ar. Elements normally affected by Ar-based interferences, e.g., As, Cr, Fe and Se, also had improved LOD. Analysis of JAC CRM 0031 (river water) and BCR CRM 397 (human hair) using either the desolvating nebulizer or ETV gave accurate analysis for As, Cr, Cu, Fe and Pb in the former, and for As, Cd, Cr, Fe, Mn, Mo, Pb and Se in the latter. Two further publications by Hayashi and colleagues, in Japanese, described LA coupling to the He-plasma ICP-MS. Good calibration lines were produced for C, P, S and Si in steels when 57Fe+ was used to correct for signal variation due to variable ablation.189 Analysis of JSS CRM 512-2 (steel chips) and JSS CRM 513-2 (steel chips) for C, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, P, S and Si showed good agreement with certified values, with RSD typically <10%. The LA-ICP-MS with low pressure He-ICP was also used to analyse aluminium powder dispersed 1 ∶ 1 in glycerol.190 Spiking glycerol with In as an internal standard allowed the variations in sample ablation volume to be corrected. Calibration solutions were prepared from high-purity alumina, trace metals and In in glycerol. The LOD of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn and Ni were <1 μg g−1. The proposed method was successfully applied to the analysis of alumina samples of between 99% and 99.995% purity.Holliday and Beauchemin191 have argued in a review of the spatial profiling of analyte signal intensities in ICP
					(both Ar gas and Ar–H2 or Ar–N2 mixed gas) that comprehensive monitoring of the axial distribution of the oxide fraction MO+
					∶
					(M+
					+ MO+) should be included in routine quality protocols in order to distinguish interferences generated within the ICP from those originating within the sampling interface. Although the majority of spatial profiling research for ICP-MS had been devoted to optimization of the sampling position as a function of rf power and nebulizer gas flow rate, more detailed information was available. Axial profiling provided information on the energy and time needed to form a given ion, while radial profiling yielded a valuable insight into the predominant ionization mechanism(s).A laser-excited fluorescence system was used to demonstrate that ion maps generated by scanning the ICP across the sampling cone did not represent ion distributions in an unperturbed plasma.192 Spatial distributions of ions were recorded immediately upstream from the sampling cone and at 2, 5 and 10 mm downstream for numerous plasma positions. The sampling cone narrowed the spatial ion distribution and suppressed the ion signal compared with those measured in the ICP. Because analyte ions were concentrated on the axis defined by the sampler and skimmer cones, they passed through the skimmer with higher efficiency than the bulk gas.A Cu–Ni laminated sampling cone gave a superior long term signal for solutions containing significant NaCl concentration to the standard manufacturer’s cone.193a This was particularly the case for high mass elements like Pb and U. The Cu–Ni cone had sharper orifice edges and enhanced thermal characteristics due to its copper core. Whereas the signal intensities with the standard cone were on average 30–40% higher for the elements measured (Ba, Be, Ce, Co, In, Li, Ni, Pb, U), the precision and production of refractory oxides and doubly charged ions relative to analyte ions were similar for both cones. The Cu–Ni cone suffered less Na-induced signal suppression for a NaCl concentration of 500 μg ml−1. As a result, stability over 5 h was superior to that of the standard cone.5.2. InterferencesThe review by Koppenaal et al.193b on the current status of cell ICP-MS included an overview of the development history of both collision and reaction cells. Consideration of the main features of commercially available cell ICP-MS instruments focussed on the selection of an appropriate gas for different multipole ion guides. Discussion of the general aspects of ion–molecule chemistry and commonly used reactions (charge transfer and atom addition) considered both thermodynamic and kinetic limitations. Adequate comparison of different interferent reduction schemes would have to account for differences in analyte signal loss. Methods to determine whether analyte losses occurred because of non-reactive scattering or reactive processes were identified as requiring further investigation. Recent applications employing cell ICP-MS were summarized.Hattendorf and Günther194 compared kinetic energy discrimination (KED) and bandpass tuning for the suppression of potentially interfering products formed by ion–molecule reactions in a dynamic reaction cell (DRC) ICP-MS instrument. Specifically, they studied La, Sc, Th and Y oxide formation by reaction with oxygen impurities in several non-reactive gases. For both methods, oxide formation increased with increasing m/z of precursor ions. Both KED and bandpass tuning suppressed in-cell generated ScO+ and YO+. However, LaO+ and, to a greater extent, ThO+ could not be eliminated without significantly compromising elemental sensitivity. Bandpass tuning reduced the abundance of cell-produced ions more effectively than KED and gave five times better elemental sensitivity. It was postulated that this resulted from a significant overlap in KE between the precursor and product ions, which limited the effectiveness of KED for cell-generated ions. In contrast, He gas collision cell (CC) ICP-MS with KED preserved the multielement capability of ICP-MS without forming additional interfering product ions.195 It was demonstrated that Ar- and S-based polyatomic interferences could be eliminated simultaneously using He and a single set of operating conditions by employing KED between the CC and the quadrupole. Compared with the standard mode without cell gas, the He mode improved the recoveries of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Ti, V and Zn, spiked at 5 ng ml−1, from a synthetic matrix containing up to 1% H2SO4, HCl and butan-1-ol. The analysis of urine and blood serum samples gave results within the range of target concentrations when calibrated using simple, non matrix-matched calibration standards. The results suggested that an inert collision gas was more suitable for the analysis of complex and variable sample matrices when prior knowledge of potential interfering species was lacking.The reaction gases C2H4, CO2 and NO were assessed for the resolution of Pu+from Am+and U+interferences using a DRC-ICP-MS instrument.196 The study focussed on the reaction of the gases with 243Am, 242Pu, and 238U, and assumed that other Am, Pu and U isotopes would have the same reaction rates. Uranium reacted well with all three gases with reaction rates in the order CO2 > NO > C2H4. Oxidation by CO2 and NO produced simpler reaction spectra than when C2H4 was used and did not increase production of 238U1H+. Americium was largely unreactive with all three gases, although an enhanced 243Am+ signal was seen at all flow rates due to collisional focussing. Plutonium did not react with C2H4 and CO2 but had a reaction rate with NO about one third that of U. As a demonstration of the efficiency of the use of CO2, Pu at a concentration of 10 pg ml−1 was measured in the presence of 10 μg ml−1 U. Despite the presence of U at a concentration six orders of magnitude higher than that of Pu, the LOD for all Pu isotopes were <2 pg ml−1 using a true gas flow of 0.75 ml min−1. However, the presence of unidentified interferences needed further investigation. The suggestion that the difference in reaction rates of Am and Pu with NO could be used to resolve isobars of these elements was not demonstrated. The elimination of U interferences on Pu was also achieved using NH3 as a reaction gas for DRC-ICP-MS.197 Oxygen showed similar reactivity with 242Pu and 238U: however, NH3 reacted selectively with 238U+ without loss of 242Pu+. The formation of 238U1H+ decreased as NH3 flow rates were increased, presumably due to increased scattering in the cell and further reaction with NH3. The method was tested by measuring Pu isotopes (10 pg ml−1) in excess U (10 ng ml−1) in water and urine. Comparison of counts between the standard (no reaction gas) and DRC modes demonstrated that the latter reduced the 238U+ signal by five orders of magnitude and gave LOD for all Pu isotopes of <0.2 pg ml−1. However, the accuracy of Pu isotopic determinations was not stated. It was noted that other isobaric interferences, such as 208Pb14N21H4+, needed to be considered in the analysis of real samples.Only a few studies investigating interference removal by methods other than collision or reaction cells were reported. Resolution of isobaric interference was demonstrated using signal deconvolution.165 A Gaussian function was used to determine the magnitude of interference peaks, based on the observed peak broadening and the exact mass of each component. The method required medium mass resolution in order to quantify the extent of peak broadening properly.5.3. Sample introduction5.3.1. Laser ablation. On-line ID calibration was used for the analysis of platinum nanoclusters using a LA-ICP-MS system with a micro-concentric nebulizer and membrane desolvation.198 Data were collected for three different modes: the isotope enriched tracer solution alone, the ablated material alone and the combined tracer solution with ablated material. Mass bias was not explicitly measured but a correction was included in the formula used to derive element concentrations in the solid. Using Cu as an internal standard to correct for changes in signal due to the LA, it was possible to obtain a steady signal for single spot analyses over 300 s. Only quasi-equilibrium was achieved between isotopes in the tracer and sample, demonstrated by the poorer measurement precision for combined tracer and samples (6.8%) than for tracer alone (3.4%). Data for both nanoclusters and NIST SRM 681 (platinum metal) gave results which agreed, within uncertainty, with those obtained by solution analysis calibrated by standard addition. The LOD of 6 and 90 ng g−1 for Ag and Pb, respectively, were improved when HR sector field (SF) ICP-MS was used instead of quadrupole ICP-MS.Studies on the mechanisms (laser-induced, ionization, transport) which cause elemental fractionation in LA-ICP-MS continued. Femtosecond LA of brass samples produced ultra-fine aerosols in the size range of tens of nm in which the total Cu ∶ Zn ratio corresponded to the composition of the bulk material.199 However, ablation above 10 J cm−2 resulted in the formation of aerosols with Cu ∶ Zn ratios different from those in the bulk composition. Nanosecond ablation of the same brass samples favoured formation of particles in the μm range, the composition of which strongly departed from the stoichiometry of the bulk sample. As well as having altered Cu ∶ Zn ratios, aerosols containing larger particles could also be affected by size-dependent losses during transport and incomplete vaporization and ionization. Elemental fractionation in glass samples when using a Nd:YAG (λ
						= 266 nm) laser has been quantified using both the fractionation index (a measure of time-dependent variation in elemental ratios during a single ablation) and evolution of U ∶ Th with time.200 The fractionation index for 32 elements in NIST SRM 610 and 612 (trace elements in glass), and NIST SRM 1831 (soda lime glass) was generally between 0.8 and 1.2, suggesting that minimal fractionation occurred. In contrast, changes in U ∶ Th ratios pointed to elemental fractionation in the first 10 s of an ablation. There was no systematic difference between concentrations measured by LA- and bulk solution ICP-MS if data from the first 10 s were not used.The particle diameter below which full vaporization and ionization occurred was demonstrated to lie between 90–150 nm for glass particles.201 Using a recently developed particle separation device, the upper limit of the range was determined by successively removing the larger particles from an aerosol created by Nd:YAG (λ
						= 266 nm) LA of NIST SRM 610. The decrease in signal intensity was not proportional to the decrease in volume, indicating incomplete ionization of particles with diameters >150 nm. Particles with diameters <150 nm could not be removed by the particle separation device so the lower limit of the range was determined by single hole drilling experiments in which the majority of aerosol particles had diameters of <90 nm after the first 100 ablation pulses. The signal intensities and particle volumes were consistent with complete ionization of all particles. Increasing plasma rf power from 1300 to 1600 W did not, within the accuracy of the study, increase the upper limit for full particle ionization. As ICP-MS response was used as the evaluation parameter, vaporization and ionization limits were not distinguishable. A further study related laser-ablated particle size to particle elemental composition.202 Three size fractions from an aerosol (whole aerosol, <340 nm and <125 nm), produced by scanning a Nd:YAG (λ
						= 266 nm) laser on NIST SRM 610, were collected, digested and analysed by solution ICP-MS for 42 elements. Compared with the whole aerosol data, volatile elements (e.g. Ag, Bi, Cu, Pb, Tl, Zn) were enriched relative to Ca by up to 90% in the <125 nm aerosol fraction. A corresponding decrease in the concentration of those elements in larger particles supported the conclusion that the laser impact changed the elemental composition of large and small particles. Direct analysis of the three size fractions by ICP-MS demonstrated further fractionation from incomplete vaporization and ionization of large particles in the plasma. However, the total transportable aerosols produced using different laser wavelengths (193 and 266 nm) and gas environments (Ar or He) showed little deviation in overall stoichiometry compared with the original sample, within the uncertainty of the measurements. The only exceptions were Be, Cd and Fe for all lasers and gases. It was recommended that large particles should not be removed to reduce analysis noise as this could change the overall aerosol stoichiometry.A comparison of fs- and ns-pulsed LA
						(λ
						= 266 nm) showed the former to give better performance for the analysis of NIST SRM 625–629 (zinc alloy) and NIST SRM 1737–1741 (zinc aluminium alloy).203 Ablation with fs laser pulses improved both the sensitivity for 208Pb by a factor of 10–100 and the linearity of the calibration line. Nanosecond ablation produced an offset between data from the two different alloy series, indicating that the signal was matrix-dependent. Use of the data from both alloys for calibration of fs ablation improved both the accuracy and the linear dynamic range for Pb.A laser with high ablation rate gave precision and sensitivity improved by about two orders of magnitude when compared with a commercial Nd:YAG (λ
						= 213 nm) laser for LA-ID-ICP-MS.204 Although the accuracy was similar for both systems for the determination of Cu, Fe, Pb, and Zn between 1–104
						μg g−1, the high ablation rate laser was better for concentrations <1 μg g−1.Transport processes and their effects on temporal signal distribution for LA-ICP-MS in single shot mode were modelled by Gäckle and Merten.205 The dispersion function describing the signal depended on transport time in the centre of the transport tube, the tube volume and the relationship between carrier gas flow rate and ablation chamber volume. Parameters were calculated from experimental signal responses. The equations describing the signal shape successfully standardized signals from different systems to give quantitative optimization of the ablation chamber and transport tube. A complete integral of the transient signal was generated from a limited number of measurement points using the model. The model could also be used to monitor system performance, identify the flow regime inside the ablation chamber and detect anomalous signal distributions that would otherwise lead to systematic errors.A signal smoothing device, devised for improved LA-ICP-MS precision, consisted of a stabilizer (either baffle- or cyclonic-type) placed immediately after the LA chamber.206 The variation of 238U+ intensity in time profiles from a single spot ablation improved from 30% without a stabilizer to 4% or 5.6% with the baffle or cyclonic stabilizer, respectively. Signal intensities were, however, 15–20% lower, suggesting that the stabilizer acted as a particle filter. The low signal resulted in significantly poorer measurements of the U–Pb age in a zircon compared with those obtained by other LA-ICP-MS and TIMS analyses. However, a stabilizer may prove useful in certain applications where small ablation pit size and low repetition rate are important. No preference for stabilizer design was given.The depth profiling of ZrTiN coatings on a high speed steel substrate has been optimized with respect to cell volume and crater diameter.207 An ArF* excimer (λ
						= 193 nm) LA system with homogenized beam produced single spot ablations at a frequency of 1 Hz. Signal noise with a 1.5 cm3 volume ablation cell was higher than with a 20 cm3 cell, probably as a result of insufficient damping of ablation fluctuations. An optimum crater diameter of 20–40 μm gave steady-state signals for pure coating and pure substrate away from the interface region. The ablation rate decreased with increasing crater diameter. The best depth resolution of 0.6 μm was obtained for a crater diameter of 20 μm.In the analysis of polyacrylamide gels at high spatial resolution, reproducible ablation was achieved at low (∼400 μJ) laser power.208 Analysis of 64-spot sampling grids indicated that the majority of signal variation was due to instability of laser pulse energy rather than gel heterogeneity. Internal standardization was tested by preparing dual-layer gel sheets, in which an internal standard gel was affixed under the analyte gel. This required a higher laser power (∼800 μJ) for reproducible penetration of the internal standard gel. Although the Ba signal most closely tracked variations in laser energy and produced the most precise analyte to internal standard ratios, Ba was unsuitable as an internal standard because of its high and variable abundance in sediments and soils. While In was chosen as an alternative, it did not improve short-term measurement precision and In correction for long term drift has yet to be tested. The gels were considered to have potential for the calibration of those LA-ICP-MS analyses, for example biological samples ablated under low laser power, for which calibration using NIST SRM 610–614 glasses was unsuitable.5.3.2. Nebulization. Developments in sample introduction to ICP-MS by nebulization largely involve decreasing the plasma solvent load and optimizing the signal from low sample flow rates. A novel demountable DIHEN had a removable solution capillary that could be replaced in the event of clogging or melting.209 An adjustment vernier allowed the capillary to be positioned precisely with respect to the nebulizer tip. Increasing nebulizer gas flow rate from 0.2 to 1 l min−1 increased the proportion of fine droplets (≤8 μm) from <50% to 80%. However, the narrower droplet velocity distribution and lower droplet velocities at 0.2 l min−1 gave better overall signal sensitivity and precision. Element signals were ∼2.4 times greater for the demountable DIHEN than for a conventional DIHEN. Precisions were similar with both nebulizers. At low sample flow rates, e.g., 5 rather than 85 μl min−1, the signal for the demountable DIHEN was reduced by up to 19-fold, compared with 56-fold for the conventional DIHEN. Oxide formation was similar for both nebulizers at 5 μl min−1, but approximately two times lower for the demountable DIHEN at 85 μl min−1. Nebulizer clogging was not observed, even during analysis of 1 ∶ 5 diluted urine.An integrated microflow concentric nebulizer and single pass, low volume spray chamber demonstrated fewer memory effects than systems fitted with a conventional double pass spray chamber.210 Matrix effects also were reduced significantly across the mass range for a 10-fold diluted sample of NRCC CRM NASS-5 (sea-water). The signal using the integrated system was suppressed by only 10–20% when compared with the response for ultra-pure water, whereas it was suppressed to 30–60% when a V-groove low-flow Babbington nebulizer and double pass spray chamber were used. However, signal intensity, precision and overall LOD in the integrated system were poorer than with the Babbington nebulizer. The integrated system produced lower oxide ratios compared with a DIHEN because less water vapour was transported to the plasma. The signal produced by the integrated system might be improved through more efficient evacuation of condensation, perhaps by sloping the spray chamber. The low dead volume and low flow rate of the integrated system suited the analysis of transient signals and low-flow applications, such as HPLC, in which matrix suppression may be expected.Three new pneumatic micronebulizers, a commercially available tetrafluoroethylene-perfluoroalkyl vinyl ether copolymer (PFA) nebulizer, a glass prototype designed for high solids (HSM) and another polymeric prototype, have been compared with the widely used micromist and high efficiency (HEN) nebulizers.211 Tertiary-aerosol-droplet size-distributions were monitored whilst each nebulizer was connected to a cyclonic spray chamber. There was no significant difference in the mean aerosol droplet size, indicating that the spray chamber was more important than the nebulizer type in determining the quality of the tertiary aerosol. However, for both the HEN and PFA, a greater total mass of aerosol left the spray chamber, presumably because a finer primary aerosol was generated. The HSM demonstrated the lowest mass transport to the plasma. Overall, the HEN and PFA provided the best signal and LOD. However, the HEN required much higher gas back pressure (7 bar) than the PFA (3 bar), suggesting that the pre-filming effect operating in the PFA made more efficient use of gas KE. The formation of doubly charged and oxide ions did not change significantly as a function of nebulizer, nor did recovery. The HSM was unsuitable for solutions of low total-dissolved-solids at low flow rates (tens of μl min−1).A low-flow, parallel-path nebulizer has been evaluated for microseparation using either CE or HPLC with ICP-MS detection.212 With the nebulizer coupled to a cooled cyclonic spray chamber, the 59Co signal was optimized for make-up solution flow rate and concentration, and nebulizer gas flow rate. The 59Co signal increased when the make up solution contained methanol with an optimum concentration of 20% delivered at 15 μl min−1. This concentration was far greater than the gradient applied during a typical HPLC separation and therefore ‘overwhelmed’ any transient effects that may have otherwise been seen. A mixture of four cobalamin species and the corrinoid analogue cobinamide dicyanide were successfully separated by both the CE and HPLC systems.Further testing of aerosol desolvation by microwave interaction demonstrated fundamental limitations.213 Experiments performed with and without microwave operation (2.45 GHz) showed no significant difference in transport efficiency, suggesting that the primary mechanism for transport was conductive heating of droplets rather than their interaction with microwaves. A numerical model using Mie theory, which describes light scattering by homogenous spheres, demonstrated that a droplet diameter of 0.5 cm would be necessary to achieve significant reduction in mass. Such droplets would be about 1000 times larger than those in an aerosol formed by a typical liquid sample introduction system.5.3.3. Thermal vaporization. On-line microdialysis was developed for the continuous monitoring of trace concentrations of Cu, Mn, Pb and Zn using FI and ETV-ICP-MS.214 Evaluation of three matrix modifiers (NH4NO3, NH4H2PO4 and Pd) for the efficient removal of the NaCl matrix of the dialysate revealed that the addition of NH4H2PO4 produced a relatively involatile sodium polyphosphate species that caused severe spectral interference for 66Zn. Ammonium nitrate converted both Na and Cl to species that vaporized at a lower temperature. However, in the presence of pure NH4NO3, Pb and Zn pyrolysis occurred at a lower temperature than that for the optimum removal of NaCl (1000 °C). Addition of Pd elevated both Pb and Zn pyrolysis temperature to 1200 °C. The temporal resolution of the proposed system was limited by low perfusion rates to 12 min but the LOD for Cu, Mn, Pb and Zn were 0.15, 1.13, 3.13 and 2.20 ng ml−1, respectively. Precision was <15% at 10 ng ml−1 analyte ions.A cooling finger has been incorporated into a previously developed sample introduction device for the hot extraction of I from soils or sediments and subsequent determination of 127I and 129I by CC-ICP-MS.215 Use of the cooling finger narrowed peaks and improved S/N for transient signals for I released from sediments with O2 at 1000 °C. In addition, any I that evaporated from the sample was enriched in the finger. Use of the finger alone, without any further sample preparation, improved the LOD for 129I from 30 to 0.4 pg g−1. The 129I ∶
						127I ratio (5.3 × 10−7) measured for NIST SRM 4357 (ocean sediment) agreed with the certified value (4.45 × 10−7).The combination of SDME with low temperature ETV has been used to determine Be, Cd, Co and Pd at trace concentrations in biological samples.216 Benzoylacetone was used as both the extractant and ETV modifier, allowing Be and Co to be vaporized quantitatively with no memory effect at an atomization temperature of 900 °C, rather than the conventional 2500 °C. Instrumental LOD were 0.019, 0.048, 0.124 and 0.056 ng ml−1 for Be, Cd, Co and Pd, respectively. Additionally, use of CF microextraction reduced the overall LOD by two orders of magnitude to 0.072, 0.16, 0.56 and 0.83 pg ml−1 Be, Cd, Co and Pd, respectively. Whereas Be, Cd and Co all had enrichment factors of 200, that of Pd (70) was significantly lower. Analysis of GBW CRM 09101 (human hair) and GBW CRM 09103 (lyophilized human urine) gave results in good agreement with the certified values of Be, Cd, and Co. The precision (n
						= 8) was 11–16%.5.3.4. Chemical vapour generation. Hydride generation ICP-MS is usually associated with the determination of a well defined suite of elements (As, Bi, Ge, Sb, Sn, Te). Nevertheless, investigations into the determination of transition and noble metals (Ag, As, Au, Cd, Co, Cu, Hg, Ir, In, Mn, Ni, Pb, Pd, Pt, Rh, Sb, Se, Ti, Tl, Zn) by HG-ICP-MS continue.217 All elements produced some signal upon reaction with sodium tetrahydroborate(III) but a comparison with conventional ICP-MS was not carried out. It is most probable that HG-ICP-MS does not hold any real benefit for most of these elements. However, it is possible that the HG of PGE elements, e.g., Pd, Pt, Rh, may be a means of interference removal that merits further investigation.5.4. SpeciationMany of the new developments in speciation analysis using ICP-MS concern improvement of separation methods rather than optimization of ICP-MS detection. Only papers which report significant ICP-MS development have been included in this review.A novel double-T interface for coupling CE to ICP-MS has been described.218 Unlike the single-T interface, the new device has a flow-controlling valve to minimize suction and avoid analyte dilution. The most stable flow rate was achieved when the nebulizer was self-aspirating, giving an RSD (n
					= 10) of <5%. A comparison of Co and Zn determination using both the single- and double-T interfaces showed that the double-T interface gave superior precision (RSD of <2% and <15% for CE migration time and signal, respectively). A linear response was obtained for Ce, La and Nd determined using the double-T interface.Coupling a microfluidic-chip-based electrophoresis system with ICP-MS significantly reduced separation time compared with conventional CE-ICP-MS.219 The chip consisted of a separation channel (8 cm long, 100 μm wide and 20 μm deep) etched into a glass base plate. Hydrodynamic sample injection was accomplished by FI through an externally controlled gravity pump and a three-way valve. The chip separated CrIII and CrVI, CuII and Cu(EDTA)2− in acidic solutions within 30 s. Speciation of AsIII and AsV, on the other hand, was achieved using an alkaline buffer.The enhancement or suppression of analyte signal in the presence of methanol or acetone has been related to their volatility and concentration as well as elemental mass and IP.220 Signal enhancement at low concentrations was attributed to the amount of carbon in the plasma rather than the effect of differing functional groups. Significant signal enhancement for 75As and 78Se suggested that a charge transfer reaction was occurring between positively charged carbon species and these elements. A slightly reduced oxide yield in the presence of methanol was insufficient to account for the signal enhancement. The decrease in signal enhancement with increasing isotope mass was attributed to a spatial shift of the zone of maximum ion density in the plasma and the ensuing changes in sampler extraction efficiency. The higher volatility of acetone produced a heavier plasma solvent load than methanol and consequently suppressed the analyte signal to a greater degree. Methanol concentrations >3% also suppressed signal by plasma cooling.A triple spike has been used for the quantification of butyltin compounds by GC-ID-ICP-MS.221 The spike solution contained MBT, DBT and TBT, each enriched with a different Sn isotope. Mathematical correction of degradation reactions that could occur during sample pre-treatment allowed all three butyltin compounds to be quantified accurately. The equations derived also produced yields for the six possible degradation reactions. Although measured MBT concentrations were slightly higher than the certified values for BCR CRM 477 (mussel tissue), measured DBT and TBT concentrations agreed well with the certified values. Calculation of butyltin degradation factors for different microwave-assisted extraction conditions confirmed a previously determined stepwise degradation mechanism.222Precise and accurate calibration of HPLC-ICP-MS by ID is limited to those species for which isotope-enriched species are available. Simple and weighted linear regression, and measurement of the baseline and one standard, were used to assess calibration of transient signals by external inorganic standards.223 A model, which accounted for the main sources of uncertainty (signal measurement, sample flow rate and injection volume) in FI-ICP-MS and HPLC-ICP-MS, was developed to estimate peak area uncertainties and the statistical weights used in weighted linear regression. Both the signal intensity and injector volume contributed to measurement uncertainty. The weighted linear calibration was accurate for element concentrations over four orders of magnitude but simple linear calibration could only be applied over 1–2 orders of magnitude. The double-point calibration was only accurate when the sample concentrations were within an order of magnitude of that of the standard. Matrix matching and column recovery should not be ignored when considering overall accuracy.A sensitive and highly selective method has been developed for the simultaneous determination of Br, Cl, I, P, and S in a wide range of pesticides.224 The GC system was optimized for separation efficiency and short run times and coupled via a commercially available interface to an ICP-MS instrument equipped with an on-axis CC. Instrument settings were optimized for high element (79Br, 35Cl, 127I, 31P and 32S) sensitivity and minimum background, particularly for 31P+ and 32S+, which were most affected by polyatomic interferences. Dry plasma conditions and the near absence of interfering matrix from the GC sample introduction meant measured backgrounds were generally low but a He flow of 2.5 ml min−1 in the CC further reduced backgrounds at m/z
					= 31 and 32. Addition of He or N2 to the plasma gas increased the signal, but N2 increased the background signal at m/z
					= 31 by forming polyatomic ions, e.g., 14N16O1H+, and therefore it was not used. Pesticides could be identified from the very accurate retention time and the elemental composition of each chromatographic peak. Precision of the average retention time and the peak area were better than 0.8% and 8%, respectively. The LOD for the different pesticides ranged from sub pg ml−1 to low ng ml−1.5.5. Analytical methodologyThe analysis of single particles in colloid bearing solutions by ICP-MS has been demonstrated for both ThO2225 and ZrO2.226 The ion ‘flash’ produced when a particle entered the torch was related to particle size or the proportion of element in the colloid phase, whereas the frequency of flashes was a function of particle concentration. Detection of particles of about 80 nm (∼10 fg) in ThO2 colloids and about 70 nm in ZrO2 colloids was possible by measuring the 232Th+ and 90Zr+ signals, respectively. A colloid concentration of 103 ml−1 could be measured, based on the detection of just one particle during the 20 s scan.A micro-emulsion of petrol and 34S-enriched aqueous spike allowed ID calibration in the DIHEN-ICP-MS determination of S in petrol.227 High resolution SF-ICP-MS was employed at a resolution of M/ΔM
					= 4000 to separate interferences from analytes. Nebulizer gas flow rate and rf power were optimized for signal intensity and the precision of the 32S ∶
					34S isotope ratio. Careful positioning of the DIHEN tip along the plasma’s central axis produced the best signal intensity and mass bias. Emulsions containing large droplets resulted in an unstable signal. Results for the analysis of micro-emulsions of BCR CRM 107 (gasoil with 1% sulfur) and BCR CRM 672 (gasoil with 0.02% sulfur) were in good agreement with the certified values and results obtained by sample digestion and analysis using a conventional micro-concentric PFA nebulizer and Scott-type spray chamber. It was suggested that the short preparation time for micro-emulsions meant DIHEN-ICP-MS was suitable for routine analysis.5.6. Isotope ratio measurementA review of the use of ICP-MS in stable isotope studies discussed the isotope ratio precision obtainable for samples such as blood, urine and faeces, and the incorporation of that precision into overall experimental uncertainty budgets.228 The most suitable ICP-MS technique in human nutritional studies (quadrupole ICP-MS with or without CC or DRC, SF-ICP-MS, MC-ICP-MS or TOF-ICP-MS) was dependent on the stable isotope being studied. A review of high precision stable isotope ratio measurements focused on the use of MC-ICP-MS because of the high ionization efficiency of the Ar-ICP and high sample throughput.229 The mathematical treatment of mass-dependent isotopic variations was described and used to identify possible pitfalls in separating instrumental mass bias from naturally occurring mass-dependent isotopic variation.The acquisition of precise and accurate isotopic data by MC-ICP-MS requires a good understanding of both mass-dependent and mass-independent fractionation processes. A theoretical framework for overcoming most of the analytical limitations for highly precise and accurate isotopic ratios has been presented.230 Mass-dependent fractionation was described by a unifying phenomenological theory, which accounted for mass bias correction by both sample–standard bracketing (SSB) and internal normalization. Mass-independent fractionation and its effect on ratio accuracy were discussed with reference to the concept of cup efficiencies, normally calibrated with an appropriate standard. A new method for the accurate calculation of isotopic ratios from dynamic measurements was successfully applied to Nd and Pb. The strategy involved the repetitive calibration of cup efficiencies and the rigorous assessment of mass bias combined with SSB. Within this strategy, it was confirmed that the assumption of identical mass bias for neighbouring elements (notably Pb and T1, and Lu and Yb) was both incorrect and unnecessary. Other potential pitfalls, such as the consequence of peak shape, correlations introduced by counting statistics and the effect of memory on double-spike methods, were discussed. The danger of using SSB without adequate chemical purification of the analyte was also discussed. Pooling runs to improve precision was found to be acceptable provided the pooled measurements were part of a single population.A study of HR SF-ICP-MS has identified some of the processes contributing to instrumental mass bias.231 Supersonic expansion of the ion beam behind the sampler significantly favoured heavier isotopes. This was demonstrated by 10B enrichment on the sampler cone and 11B enrichment on the skimmer cone. Furthermore, grounding the capacitive discharge system to enhance sensitivity enriched 11B on the skimmer a further four-fold. Measurement of Fe, Tl and Zn isotope ratios in material leached from used extraction lenses showed that lighter isotope depletion was linearly proportional to the isotope mass ratio. This would be consistent with a space-charge effect. However, the fact that isotopically heavy deposits, e.g. Tl, were found on the lenses pointed to a significant widening of the ion beam in the field-free region behind the skimmer. This has implications for impaired ion transmission, particularly for lighter isotopes. The magnitude of mass bias for a wide range of elements (B, Ce, Cu, Fe, Hf, Li, Ni, Re and Sb) in MC-ICP-MS was affected by both nebulizer gas flow rate and sampling depth. Mathematical analysis revealed that the heavier isotopes of all studied elements had higher intensities closer to the torch injector. Thus, in-plasma processes also contributed to the degree and temporal stability of mass bias. Tuning for maximum intensity on only one isotope may result in sampling a region where slight plasma instabilities cause substantial variations in mass bias.Six different mathematical models (linear law, power law, exponential law, Russell equation, common analyte internal standardization and polynomial function) have been evaluated for mass bias correction for a HR SF-ICP-MS instrument.232 The isotopic composition of a natural abundance Hg solution was measured while testing Ir, Os and Tl as internal standards. The accuracy of each mass bias correction model was assessed by calculating the relative difference of measured values from IUPAC Hg isotopic abundances. The most accurate ratios were achieved when mass bias was corrected using the polynomial function whilst incorporating Ir, Os and Tl as internal standards. Mass bias correction using Tl as the internal standard for the power law, exponential law and Russell equation was better than when either Ir or Os was used. The reason why Tl may be more suitable for mass bias correction in these models was not discussed.Mass bias correction using either SSB or internal standardization (designated empirical external normalization, or EEN) has been compared for Cu and Zn isotope ratio measurements on two different commercial MC-ICP-MS instruments.233 High precision SSB correction of isotopes required mass bias stability and removal of matrix components to avoid matrix-related mass discrimination effects. In contrast, EEN automatically accounted for matrix-related mass discrimination effects and required a degree of mass bias instability for precise results. Although EEN yielded high precision 65Cu ∶
					63Cu and 66Zn ∶
					64Zn data, an unidentified source of systematic signal drift affected ratios incorporating the 67Zn and 68Zn isotopes. The three-fold deterioration in precision, relative to static measurements, observed when analyte and spike ratios were measured sequentially suggested that mass bias could drift within the timescale of a single integration (5 s). Over nine months, both the SSB and EEN corrections gave reproducibility <0.07‰
					(2σ) for 65Cu ∶
					63Cu and 66Zn ∶
					64Zn ratios measured in pure Cu and Zn reagents. This would be sufficient for resolving mass-dependent isotopic variability in natural and anthropogenic materials but has yet to be demonstrated.Mass bias correction using the relationship between the66Zn ∶64Zn and65Cu ∶63Cu isotope ratios has been investigated for MC-ICP-MS.234 Addition of Sr to mixed Cu–Zn standard solutions generated extreme variations in mass bias that allowed the empirical mass bias relationship between Cu and Zn to be defined precisely. However, this relationship could vary significantly and needed to be determined for each analytical session. The need for care in the choice of matrix addition was also demonstrated, as the presence of some matrix elements, e.g. Fe, led to degraded mass-bias correlations. Insufficient removal of matrix Fe and Ti seriously compromised measured isotope ratios, emphasising the importance of clean chemistry. The empirical mass bias relationship was also dependent on the Cu ∶ Zn ratio in the solution, in particular when hard ion extraction was employed. It was suggested that sample introduction with a desolvating membrane caused the large unexpected shift in mass bias of standards, perhaps due to variations in Cu oxidation state. This shift could be avoided by passing standards through the same ion exchange procedure as was used to purify samples.A comparison of TIMS (positive and negative ionization) and MC-ICP-MS for the measurement of B isotope ratios used synthetic samples with a range of known δ11B values.235 To ensure consistency, SSB with NIST SRM 951 (boric acid) was used to correct mass bias for both TIMS and MC-ICP-MS measurements. Despite showing the greater mass bias (7–70%), MC-ICP-MS measurements were more precise than TIMS measurements. Both methods gave statistically identical data so δ11B values from different studies should be consistent and comparable.Thirlwall and Anczkiewicz236 have demonstrated that the secular drift in normalized multidynamic MC-ICP-MS measurements of Hf, Nd, Pb and Yb isotope ratios was significantly less over more than two years than that in static ratios calculated from the same analytical data. A general power law with an exponent of −0.63 produced accurate isotope ratios for Yb and for two of three sets of Nd data. General power law normalization, however, did not reduce secular variation in multidynamic ratios.The effect of oxidation state on measured mass bias has been investigated for the case when sample introduction desolvation was used with MC-ICP-MS.237 Measurements on NIST SRM 981 (natural lead isotopic standard) mixed with Tl from single element stock solutions produced poor Pb isotope precision and accuracy, large ε205Tl variations ranging from −3.9 to +30.1, and large variations in the observed Pb ∶ Tl intensity. The poor precision and accuracy resulted from variable oxidation of Tl+ to Tl3+ in the presence of Pb and solar UV radiation. When freshly mixed (<1 h) Pb–Tl solutions were measured, precise isotopic ratios were obtained for Pb and for Tl (ε205Tl = 1.5 ± 0.8, 2σ) and Pb ∶ Tl intensity ratios corresponded to the mixing ratios of the prepared solutions. This aging effect was not seen when samples were measured using a wet plasma, although overall precision was poorer. The observed ε205Tl variations in the Tl3+ bearing solutions dominantly resulted from mass-dependent differential diffusion of Tl during desolvation. These experiments suggest that great care must be exercised during isotopic analyses of systems utilizing elements for mass-bias correction that readily undergo redox reactions under laboratory conditions.The use of two SSB procedures resulted in improved234U ∶238U ratio precision from 1 to 0.1‰.238 In one procedure 238U and 235U ion currents were measured in Faraday cups, while the lower abundance 234U ion current was counted on an EM. The Faraday-EM gain was monitored by measurement of 234U ∶
					238U in the standard, whereas the contribution of 238U tailing to the 234U signal was determined by linear interpolation of baseline zeroes at half-mass. The external reproducibility (2σ) achieved on measurements of 40 cycles, each of 5 s duration, was 0.9 and 1.1‰ for in-house uraninite and coral standards, respectively. The precision for both the uraninite and coral was further improved to 0.6‰ by integrating three measurement blocks into a single measurement of 120 cycles to minimize scatter in the data and improve counting statistics. In the other procedure, all three isotopes were measured in Faraday cups. The intense ion current of 238U was measured by replacing the standard 1011
					Ω Faraday cup resistor with a 109
					Ω resistor. In this case, tailing was corrected by normalizing all three isotopes with the bracketing standard, it being assumed that standard and sample had identical tailing behaviour. The long-term reproducibility was 0.31 and 0.38‰ for in-house uraninite and coral standards, respectively. Integration of three measurement blocks again improved reproducibility for both uraninite (0.14‰) and coral (0.3‰). Although the second procedure was faster and gave more precise results, it required modification of the 238U Faraday cup, consumed a greater mass of sample (400–650 ng U per analysis compared with 120 ng for the first method) and needed removal of the matrix to minimize tailing effects of 238U.Transient signals
					(30–60 s) have been used to determine precise Nd and U isotope ratios using an HPLC-MC-ICP-MS system.239 Uncorrected 143Nd ∶
					146Nd ratios measured following either HPLC separation (α-hydroxyisobutyric acid matrix) or FI (5% HNO3 matrix) exhibited matrix-dependent mass discrimination. By measuring individual ratios for each point in the transient peak, it was possible to demonstrate that the lowest point-to-point fluctuation occurred at the peak top, as predicted by counting statistics. The lack of systematic changes in isotope ratio on the edges of the peak suggested that there was limited on-column mass discrimination. Comparison of isotope ratios obtained using FI and HPLC also confirmed that the major contribution to mass discrimination came from the MC-ICP-MS instrument rather than the chromatographic separation. Isotope precision was within one order of magnitude of that obtained from a constant signal.Use of cold plasma conditions (400 W rf power rather than 1250 W) limited the formation of 40Ar+ ions and made the precise measurement of44Ca ∶40Ca ratios possible by MC-ICP-MS.240 Of all potential polyatomic interferences, only 24Mg16O+ and 23Na16O1H+ were present at significant levels. Operation at M/ΔM
					= 450 ensured a flat topped peak but required the 40Ca+ ion intensity to be measured at 0.02 m/z towards the low mass side of the peak to minimize the effect of interferences. Repeated measurements of NIST SRM 915a (calcium carbonate) over 8 weeks gave a reproducibility of 0.14% RSD. This performance was comparable to that of TIMS but the ICP-MS method had the advantages of simpler sample preparation and greater sample throughput.A systematic characterization and quantification of spectral interferences between m/z = 63–70 in the measurement of Cu and Zn isotope ratios highlighted the importance of removing matrix components prior to analysis.241 Use of nickel sampling and skimmer cones gave rise to significant instrumental Ni backgrounds, which could be reduced through the use of a platinum-tipped sampling cone. The Ni background, however, did not account for all the peak contribution at m/z
					= 64, indicating that a further interference was present at this mass. High resolution mass scans identified plasma-based 40Ar12C16O+ and 40Ar14N14N+interferences at m/z
					= 68 and 40Ar14N16O+ at m/z
					= 70. The use of aerosol desolvation reduced the 40Ar14N16O+ intensity ten-fold but no corresponding reduction in 40Ar12C16O+ or 40Ar14N14N+ intensities occurred, suggesting that atmospheric N2 and CO2 were the dominant causes of these interferences. A HNO3 matrix produced a relatively interference-free spectrum, but some acid related species at m/z
					= 64 and 66 (probably 1H214N16O3+ and 1H214N18O16O2+, respectively) were observed with a wet plasma. None of these species was observed when an Ar-bled hexapole CC was used to reduce molecular interferences through ion–molecule reactions. Comparison of results obtained on two commercially available instruments demonstrated that instrumental design features influence the formation and persistence of interfering species. Switching from solution nebulization to aerosol desolvation, for example, enhanced formation of argide and doubly charged species and depressed the formation of oxides and hydroxide ions.High resolution (M/ΔM
					∼ 9000) separated all polyatomic interferences on 54Fe, 56Fe and 57Fe except 56Fe1H+ and thereby made possible the precise measurement of Fe isotopes in purified natural samples.242 Purification of basalt and paleosol samples was required to minimize the effect of matrix on mass bias and remove interfering elements, e.g., 54Cr+. Comparison of mass bias correction by either SSB or use of an internal Cu spike demonstrated that the internal spike provided better reproducibility. Logarithmic plots of 56Fe ∶
					54Fe against 57Fe ∶
					54Fe were used to choose the most appropriate empirical mass bias correction law, which was shown to be consistent over time by the constant linear trend in mass bias for both samples and standards. However, the presence of unresolved 56Fe1H+ may have affected the slope so the correction law could not be determined conclusively. The mass bias spread for the samples analysed was greater than that of IRMM CRM 014 (elemental iron), even after purification.To minimize isobaric interferences in the precise and accurate determination of Te isotope compositions in geological samples and meteorites, Te was separated from the sample matrix using a two-stage LC procedure preceded, in the case of iron meteorites, by a solvent-extraction step.243 Data acquisition was performed by static collection of all isotopes in a single measurement sequence, with normalization to either the 125Te ∶
					128Te or 124Te ∶
					128Te ratios. Precision was better by a factor of 10–100 for the 122Te ∶
					128Te–130Te ∶
					128Te ratios, and by a factor of four for the 120Te ∶
					128Te ratio, than published results for meteorite samples obtained by TIMS analysis.6. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)This section covers the one-step laser irradiation–ionization of solids. The increasing use of lasers for the post-ionization of neutrals generated by laser-beam irradiation or primary-ion-bombardment of solids is treated in the section on SNMS. Because the aim of RIMS is typically different from that of solid state analysis with focused laser or ion beams, publications dealing with the ionization of atomic beams or gas-phase neutrals under resonant conditions are dealt with separately from SNMS in the section on RIMS. Laser microprobe mass spectrometry (LMMS) refers to the use of a focused laser with a spot diameter on the sample of <5 μm. The application of LMMS to suspended particles in combination with TOF analysis is called aerosol-TOF LMMS (aTOF LMMS). Laser ionization using irradiation spot sizes on the sample with a diameter >5 μm is denoted as laser plasma ionization. The nominal pulse duration is denoted by the symbol τ.6.1. InstrumentationThe coupling of an ion trap and TOFMS for the LMMS analysis of μm-sized particles allowed Klunder et al.244 to detect trace contaminants such as Ag, Sb and Sn in lead with a mass resolution of 1500 and LOD in the pg to fg range. The sample was irradiated (λ
					= 354 nm) inside the ion trap. The in-sample reproducibility of the atomic ion signals was <2%. Apart from collecting ions during and after the laser pulse, the ion trap reduced the KE distribution width of the ion bunch before its injection into the TOFMS and allowed detection to be improved by selective ejection and/or ion accumulation from multiple laser shots.6.2. Fundamental studiesRumianowski and Dygdala245 investigated the KE distributions of Mn+(n
						= 1–3) ions, generated from cold-pressed Pb and Se powders by irradiation with an XeCl excimer laser (λ
					= 308 nm, τ
					= 20 ns). A fluence of 5 J cm−2 was applied to a 1 mm2 sample area. Orthogonal ion extraction into a TOFMS instrument at a distance of 15 mm above the target resulted in Sen+ cluster ion distributions with n
					≤ 6 and a maximum intensity with n
					= 4. In contrast, ion collection at a distance of 25 mm above the sample yielded additional Sen+ ions with n
					≤ 13 and another second intensity maximum for Se12+ clusters. The main ion signals detected from lead targets were due to Pb2+ and Pb4+ ions. The average KE of Sen+ and Pb2+ ions were in the range 10–12 eV except that for Se2+ ions which was anomalously high at 20 eV.The lifetime of the ions and the dependence of mass resolution on the laser power in laser plasma ionization TOFMS was studied using irradiation (λ
					= 512 nm, τ
					= 8 ns, spot diameter 0.5–2 mm) of gadolinium plate, a gadolinium coating on stainless steel and NIST SRM C-1248 (Ni–Cu alloy).246 The threshold laser energy for ion generation was typically two orders of magnitude lower than that required for LIBS experiments. Application of high laser power densities severely deteriorated the mass resolution through space-charge effects and broadening of the KE distribution. Lifetimes in excess of 0.4 μs were observed for ions generated near the sample surface.6.3. Analytical methodologyJoseph et al.247 used a laser plasma ionization TOFMS instrument, developed in-house, for the determination of the B-isotope ratio in boron carbide. A Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (λ
					= 532 nm) was used. The measured 10B ∶
					11B isotope ratios required correction for non-linearity effects in the multichannel plate detector. Taking TIMS data as reference, isotope ratios measured by laser TOFMS were accurate to within 1%, provided that optimal laser power density was applied to the sample. The method was considered to be a cost-effective alternative to TIMS for routine determinations of B isotopic composition in nuclear control rod materials.Molecular speciation of organoselenium compounds in human urine, with LOD at the 100 pg level, which corresponds to ppb levels in the biological sample, was based on the measurement of several intense adduct ion signals, the m/z values of which were measured to within 5 ppm.248 Specifically, an aliquot of 1 μl of urine sample was deposited on an active carbon substrate covered with silica. Ions were generated using a pulsed nitrogen laser (λ
					= 337 nm) and measured using TOFMS. Spot-to-spot variations typically remained within 10–20%.The molecular form of the gas phase species generated by ETV was determined using TOFMS and ionization by a dye laser (λ
					= 219 and 240 nm) or a frequency quadrupled Nd:YAG laser (λ
					= 266 nm).249 Upon heating H2SO4 or MgSO4 and irradiating at a λ of 219 nm, S+ and SO2+ ions were observed whereas only SO2+ ions were seen using a λ of 266 nm. Vaporization of sulfur yielded signals of S+ and S2+ at λ of 219 and 266 nm. Considering the absorption of pure sulfur, it was concluded that the laser fragmentation caused breakdown of SOx into S+ and prevented speciation of the gas phase components. In contrast, identical mass spectra were obtained during ETV of chloride matrices at λ of 219 and 240 nm. Signals from MCl+, M2Cl+, M+, and M2+ ions (M = metal) were observed for sodium, potassium and caesium chloride, while (MxOy)+, M2OCl+, MCl+ and MCl2+ ions were detected for calcium and strontium chloride. The study demonstrated the feasibility of this approach for identifying the molecules responsible for UV absorption in ETV-AAS.Owega et al.250 demonstrated the importance of data processing in aTOF LMMS. The compositional variations of suspended aerosols in Toronto analysed over an 11 month period were characterized by recording positive and negative ion mass spectra for each individual particle. The instrument also determined the aerodynamic diameter of the analysed particle. More than 16300 positive-ion mass spectra were classified using an artificial-neural-network approach, called adaptive resonance theory (ART2a). Back trajectory analysis of the air masses sampled allowed the origin of two unusual contributions to be associated with a forest fire event in Canada and aerosol generation in Africa. In a subsequent study on urban particles with a aerodynamic diameter of <2.5 μm, the use of ART2a-classification followed by positive matrix factorization led to the identification of no less than nine distinct emission sources.251 Lake et al.252 dealt with the challenge of sulfate speciation in suspended ambient aerosol particles using aTOF LMMS and ART2a. The analysis of sulfate particles required combination of the characteristic signals in the positive and negative ion detection modes. The data from single size-selected particles with aerodynamic diameter between 45 nm and 1.25 μm were first sorted according to the presence of SOx− ion signals and additionally classified by ART2a-analysis of the positive ion mass spectra. On the other hand, a separate treatment of the positive ion spectra allowed the presence or absence of specific metals to be associated with the group of sulfate or sulfate-free particles. Particle types strongly correlated with sulfate were nitrate, organic carbon/nitrate and vanadium, whereas aerosols with high carbon, potassium or sodium levels showed only weak sulfate concentrations.7. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)A 34-reference review of ultra-trace analysis and isotope measurements by Trautmann et al.253 addressed the use of RIMS for long-lived radioisotopes. The introduction of easy-to-use solid state and diode lasers systems largely simplified instrumentation without compromising isobaric suppression and overall efficiency. Analytical figures of merit included LOD as low as 106 atoms, an isotopic selectivity of 5 × 1012 and a precision within 1% for isotope measurements taking no longer than 1 h. The potential of RIMS was highlighted by several examples including the quantitative analysis of radiotoxic Pu isotopes, measurement of 89Sr ∶
				90Sr isotope ratios in various environmental samples and determination of 41Ca in nuclear reactor components and biomedical samples.The unsuitability of copper-vapour laser pumped dye systems for routine analysis of actinides motivated Gruning et al.254 to develop a solid state laser system for ultra-trace determinations of Pu in environmental samples. A powerful and user-friendly Nd:YAG-pumped titanium–sapphire laser system allowed an efficient three-step scheme (λ
				= 420.76, 847.28 and 767.53 nm) to be applied. Investigation of the Pu isotope shifts showed that only the first two steps required isotope-specific tuning of the lasers, whereas the third step could be achieved with the same λ for all isotopes.255 Saturation was achieved with powers of 2, 30 and 400 mW for the successive transitions. All the Pu isotope ratios to 244Pu (except 241Pu ∶
				244Pu) measured for NIST SRM 966 (plutonium) were within 5–10% of the certified values. The overall efficiency of 10−5 allowed a LOD of 2 × 106 Pu atoms to be achieved for single isotope measurements.Pibida et al.256 optimized measurement of 135Cs ∶137Cs isotope ratios in nuclear fuel burn-up samples and sediments. Aqueous samples were vaporized by ETV and the Cs isotopes detected by a quadrupole mass analyser using an extended cavity diode laser (λ
				= 852 nm) and an argon ion laser (λ
				= 488 nm) for single-resonance excitation and photo-ionization, respectively. The optical selectivity for 135Cs and 137Cs relative to 133Cs exceeded two orders of magnitude. Optimization of the chemical pretreatment and ETV parameters yielded an overall efficiency of 5 × 10−7 for standard 133Cs solutions and nuclear fuel burn-up samples, spiked with known activities of 137Cs. The measured isotope ratios agreed to within 1.5% with those using a TIMS procedure.8. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)The bombardment of a sample with primary ions in the 1–25 keV range causes the development of a collision cascade over a distance of several tens of nm below the surface. Along its trajectory the projectile imparts sufficient energy to the lattice to break all intermolecular forces and to move individual atoms from their initial positions in the lattice. The generation of the analytically used secondary ions is believed to occur through the recoil of momentum towards the surface. Extensive atom relocation destroys the molecular structures in the subsurface but the ultra-fast penetration of the projectiles through the surface layer allows molecules in the upper (few) monolayer(s) to remain intact. Static SIMS (S-SIMS) limits sputtering to a fraction of the upper monolayer, allowing the contribution of ions specific to the molecular form of the element to be maximized. Speciation and organic surface analysis forms the major application while depth profiling is incompatible with the principle of S-SIMS. This review restricts the acronym SIMS to the dynamic mode using continuous sputtering for the erosion of subsequent layers and depth profiling of elements. As TOFMS is beneficial in dynamic and static experiments, explicit distinction is made between TOF SIMS and TOF S-SIMS. The incidence angles, mentioned throughout this section, are expressed as the angle between the beam and the normal to the sample surface. Unless otherwise specified, the surface roughness is referred to by the root mean square (rms) parameter.8.1. InstrumentationThe use of a Cs primary ion beam is beneficial for improving the secondary ion yield while other primary ion bombardment guns or conditions (energy, incidence angle) are desirable for optimal depth resolution. Development of a column delivering a collimated beam of Cs neutrals allowed the Cs surface concentration to be optimized independently from the sputter conditions.257 Evaporation of high purity metallic caesium instead of caesium chromate avoided contamination problems. Depending on the temperature of the reservoir, the Cs deposition rate was between 0.05 and 0.35 nm s−1 with variations of <2% over a period of 1 h. The diameter of the beam on the sample was 7–9 mm. An adjustable mounting of the gun on the main manifold allowed distance and incidence angle to be optimized.258 Using the new column in conjunction with Ga+ primary ion bombardment showed that the Cs concentrations at the surface depended only on the characteristics of the analysed material and the ratio of the erosion rate to the deposition rate.A new compact plasma source with Penning geometry and a discharge volume of ∼0.25 cm3 delivered ∼1 mA of 5 keV Ar+, H−, O− ions through a 0.6 mm diameter exit aperture.259 The angular beam intensity of O− beams increased linearly with the current density. Ion-optical calculations for a three-lens system predicted the feasibility of achieving sub-100 nm spots for O− beam currents of as high as 10 pA.A novel approach for the generation of polyatomic ions used EI of sublimated metal clusters such as the Os3(CO)12 and Ir4(CO)12 complexes.260 The peak intensity distributions of Os3(CO)n+
					(n
					= 0–12) and lr4(CO)n+
					(n
					= 0–12) ions showed a maximum at n
					= 7, allowing projectiles to be generated with m/z of ∼800 and 1000, respectively. A high intensity cluster ion source for Arn+ projectiles (average n
					= 2000) used supersonic expansion of high-pressure gas and EI after removal of residual uncondensed gas.261 The resulting beam contained Arn+ clusters with n between a few hundreds and a few thousands. Acceleration of Ar2000+ projectiles to 20 keV led to an ultra-low impact energy of 10 eV per impinging atom. The beam diameter on the sample was <1 mm and the current density 10 μA cm−2. Metals and semiconductors could be sputtered with etch rates of 1–10 nm min−1. The primary ion beam current as well as the secondary ion intensities from silicon increased linearly with the accelerating voltage. The ratio of secondary to primary ion beam currents was already 1 at a low energy of 6 keV.Field distortions near the edges of the mask in current specimen holders hamper the analysis of mm-sized semiconductor devices. Therefore, Barozzi et al.262 constructed an improved holder for small samples using a stainless steel mask as thin as 0.4 mm and laser cut windows of 1.8 × 1.8 mm2. Silicon wafers implanted with 1 and 5 keV B were depth profiled with O2+ projectiles (impact energy of 0.5 and 3 keV, respectively) at an incidence angle of 60°. Results obtained by rastering areas of about 200 × 200 μm2, both in the central position and at 300 μm from the mask in the new sample holder, agreed with those recorded centrally with a conventional sample holder. The integrated areas under the depth profile and the depth of the sputtered crater could be measured with precisions of <3 and <0.2%, respectively, regardless of whether the position in the centre or near the mask edge was analysed in the new holder.Improved software was developed for the on-line determination of the crater depth in multilayer samples by a laser interferometer.263 In the commercial version, the depth was derived directly from the phase shift between laser beams reflected by the sputtered and un-sputtered surface. However, reflections on shallow interfaces in the crater bottom surface could severely compromise the depth calibration. Therefore, the phase shift measurement was modelled for samples with multiple interfaces in layers with known refractory index and absorption factor. The resulting data allowed experimental laser interferometer readings for multilayer structures to be converted correctly to depth measurements.Simulation software for interactive ion trajectory and Monte Carlo calculations allowed the effects of sample charging and topography on the ion transmission in HR SIMS to be studied.264 Monte Carlo simulations generated energy and angular distributions of the emitted secondary ions. The dependence of transmission on the integrated angular and energy distribution calculated for >100000 ions explained a significant part of the experimentally observed isotope discrimination. The software could be also used to optimize instrumental design features.The coupling of a reflector TOF SIMS instrument with a FTMS analyser allowed surface imaging and high mass resolution measurements on selected ions to be combined.265 Secondary ions generated by a 25 keV Ga+ primary ion gun with spot diameter of 100 nm were first injected into the TOFMS instrument with an ion reflector and annular detector for imaging. The use of time-delayed ion extraction improved the mass resolution to 10000 (FWHM). By reducing the potential on the perforated back plate of the reflector, the ions were transferred into an rf-only quadrupole for non-mass-selective transmission into a hexapole collision and accumulation cell, from where the ions were finally injected into the FTMS cell. A lateral resolution of 50 nm was feasible in the imaging of a cross-sectioned silver epoxy layer on aluminium over an area of 500 × 500 μm2. The mass resolution of 30000, possible by FTMS detection of the ions generated from a 50 μm sample spot, should improve through use of new ion optics.8.2. Fundamental studiesSeveral studies on the sputtering and secondary ion formation by Cs+primary ion bombardment were published by van der Heide and co-workers. The retention of Cs in silicon as a function of the impact energy (1–5 keV) and the incidence angle (40–80°) was studied using RBS and XPS for the determination of the Cs concentrations implanted during SIMS analysis.266 Self-sputtering and Cs+ scattering were evaluated by computer simulation. The variations in the SIMS-induced Cs surface concentrations depended on the sputter rate variations (ΔSY) according to a 1/(ΔSY
					+ 1) function, except when self-sputtering or scattering became important. Specifically, Cs+ ion scattering increased with decreasing primary ion energy and increasing impact angle. Self-sputtering increased with increasing incident energy. Subsequent studies used 1 keV Cs+ bombardment at an incidence angle of 60°. A good correlation was found between the experimentally determined work function and the emission in the transient regime of Si+ and Si− ions from uniformly doped n- and p-type silicon wafers.267 The data were consistent with the electron-tunnelling model. The role of resonance charge transfer and Auger processes was studied for Al+, Al−, Al2+ and Cs+ secondary ion emission from polycrystalline aluminium.268 Consistent with the electron tunnelling model, Al+ and Al− ion intensities increased with the substrate work function while the correlation of the Al2+ ion intensity with the Auger signal reflected a process initiated by surface excitation. Secondary ion intensities, substrate composition, work functions, valence band spectra and 1 keV Xe+-induced Auger emissions were measured for H-terminated silicon(100) wafers without native oxide and for 30 nm silicon dioxide films on silicon.269 The intensities of O−, Si−, and Si2− secondary ions from silicon increased and those of Si+ and Cs+ secondary ions decreased as a function of the Cs+ primary ion dose as a result of the Cs-induced reduction of the work function. Similar intensity variations noted for silicon dioxide resulted from the development of sub-band states. These observations pointed to the occurrence of resonance charge transfer. The absence of substantial matrix effects for Cs+ secondary ion emission in the initial stage of sputtering was attributed to Auger de-excitation. At later stages of analysis, increased electron tunnelling resulted in increased matrix effects for silicon. This was not the case for silicon dioxide.The KE distributions of MCsn+
					(n
					= 0,1,2) ions emitted from aluminium, copper and silver were measured as a function of the Cs+ primary ion energy between 1 and 5 keV.270 Use of a triple quadrupole instrument with ESA allowed ions of 0.05–12 eV to be transmitted with a resolution of 0.003–0.77 eV. The incidence angle of the Cs+ ion beam was 22.5°. The KE distributions of the MCs2+ clusters were narrower and peaked at lower energy than those of M+ ions. The dependence of the KE distributions on the primary ion beam energy showed that both the surface binding energy and work function changed with the Cs surface concentration. The integrated yields of M+, MCs+ and MCs2+ ions depended exponentially on the work functions. The slower increase of the MCs2+ ion emission relative to that of MCs+ ions at high impact energy indicated that the formation of MCs2+ ions occurred through recombination of M− and two Cs+ ions and generation of MCs+ ions from a neutral M and a Cs+ ion.Using in situ deposition of caesium neutrals, Wirtz and Migeon271 studied the dependence of the ionization probabilities for atomic matrix ions and Cs+secondary ions on the work function shifts, measured from the energy shifts of the KE distributions for Cs+ secondary ions. The use of aluminium, silicon and nickel samples allowed work functions in the range of 4.28–5.15 eV to be addressed. The KE distributions were measured at different neutral Cs deposition and Cs+ primary ion erosion rates. The work function curve for the aluminium target showed the typical trend for a metallic sample, with a maximum Cs-induced shift of −2.34 eV. A continuous decrease of the work function was observed for silicon and nickel samples but no minimum was reached because the Cs coverage was insufficient. The data were consistent with the electron tunnelling model.Because the KE distributions of GaxN−, CsxN−and GaxN+cluster ions generated from 100 keV14N-doped GaAs contained no high-energy tail typical of recombination processes, direct emission was proposed as the predominant mechanism for the generation of “impurity-matrix” clusters.272 Use of 11.5 keV Cs+ primary ions and detection of Ga2N− secondary ions resulted in the best LOD whereas 2.5 keV Cs+ primary ion impact and CsN+ secondary ion detection yielded the best depth resolution with a decay length of 2.9 nm.Long-lived doubly charged diatomic ions only survive when covalent bonding is stronger than the intense Coulomb repulsion. In a study of their formation, Mo22+ secondary ions were produced using Ar+ ion bombardment of molybdenum at high current density.273 The ion optics were tuned for extraction of ions at a distance of ∼150 μm above the sample. Strikingly, Xe+ projectiles did not produce Mo22+ ions. The small difference between the IP of Ar and Xe ruled out the formation of Mo22+ ions through processes such as: collisions with energetic secondary electrons, sputtered particles or residual gas phase components; delayed or collision fragmentation of sputtered clusters; or Auger decay of sputtered core-excited Mo2*. It was shown that Mo22+ ions originated from a resonant charge transfer between incoming Ar+ ions and sputtered Mo2+ ions in low energy gas-phase collisions. The production of SiH2+ and AlH2+ secondary ions during Ar+ ion sputtering of a hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer on aluminium increased by a factor of ∼100 when the silicon or aluminium surface was flooded with toluene at a pressure of 10−5 Torr.274 The KE distributions of SiH2+ ions reflected ion formation at or near the sputtered surface. Auger shake-off decay of Si2p core-excited molecules of SiH* with a lifetime of 50 fs was proposed as the most likely mechanism.The enhancement of sputter yields by oxygen flooding during the bombardment of silicon with Ar+ primary ions was studied using 18O-implanted silicon, which allowed the 16O-related signals to be associated with the oxygen introduced from the flooding gas.275 The silicon sputter yield decreased by a factor of up to 3 with increasing flood pressure while positive and negative secondary ion yields increased. As a result, the useful ion yield of Si+ increased non-linearly with the atom fraction of surface oxygen. The data could be fitted quantitatively with the microscopic statistical model, which assumed that Si+ ion formation depended only on the number of oxygen atoms coordinated to the ejected silicon atom.With the computational power now available and developments in the theory, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have become an invaluable tool for understanding sputtering processes. However, Thijsse et al.276 warned about the pitfalls of modelling arising from the choice of the potential function for describing the atomic interactions. This became evident during the simulation of transient and steady state sputtering of silicon(001) by Ar+ primary ions with primary ion energy and incidence angle in the range of 50–500 eV and 0–45°, respectively. Several commonly used potential functions were inadequate for simulating the observed effects. Various asymmetric structure units needed to be considered to fit the potentials and the cut off range had to include at least two neighbouring units.In the MD simulations of the sputtering of metals by C60+and Ga+primary ions with various beam energies and incidence angles, calculations for a lattice with 39 layers of 4270 atoms, corresponding to a sample volume of about 17 × 17 × 9 nm, allowed edge effects to be minimized.277 Whereas Ga+ projectiles penetrated deep into the sample, C60+ primary ions dissociated upon impact and most of the carbon was scattered back. Numerous superimposed cascades disordered the lattice in a shallow volume close to the surface, leading to particle ejection from the resulting dense liquid-like region. The generation of pressure waves caused the formation of craters, the diameter of which doubled when the impact energy increased from 5 to 15 keV. However, the depth of the craters increased by only 30%. Beam-induced layer mixing was confined to the crater volume. Unlike under Ga+ ion bombardment, sputtering yields with C60+ projectiles decreased for impact angles >15°.The use of depth resolution functions (DRF) requires adequate calculation methods for predicting the distribution of implanted ions. In spite of the interest in materials with high dielectric constant (high-k), no simulations have been carried out because the Monte Carlo methods are inadequate and MD calculations require a proper electronic stopping model. Use of an electronic stopping model with the single electron radius as the only free parameter has been explored for modelling the implantation of B, As and P in hafnium dioxide.278 There was excellent agreement between predicted and experimental depth profiles for implantation energies of 5–40 keV and doses of 1015 atoms cm−2. The single electron radius of 0.0800 nm, determined as the fitting parameter in the model, correlated well with the value (0.0816 nm) calculated from the specific gravity, molecular weight and valence electron numbers.8.3. Analytical methodologyIn an original method for charge neutralization during depth profiling of bulk samples, the sample was coated with gold and a 2–5 keV electron beam was directed onto a 0.6–1.5 mm diameter zone located several hundred μm from the sputtered area.279 Electron-hole pairs were created in the insulator under the gold and adjacent to the analysed spot, thereby creating a leakage path for the charges in the rastered area. The method yielded excellent neutralization for bulk insulators such as glass, silica, alumina, and lithium niobate sputtered with O2+ ions at a rate >2 nm s−1. Pivovarov et al.280 fortuitously discovered a new procedure for aligning the normal incidence electron gun to give optimal charge compensation. The method was based on the generation of significant matrix ion currents from Si, SiC or GaAs surfaces for several minutes after Cs+ ion bombardment. The process was tentatively explained by the sputtering of the sample by ions generated through the electron gun-induced EI of gas phase species in the region between the sample and immersion lens.The dependence of the useful secondary ion yield on the ratio of the Ga+ primary ion beam erosion to the neutral caesium deposition rates was studied for aluminium, silicon and nickel samples using 23.5 keV Ga+ primary ions at an impact angle of 54° and detection of MCsx+ ions.281,282 The optimal generation of AlCs2+ ions required a higher ratio of deposition to erosion rate than that of AlCs+ ions. The caesium surface concentration and the useful yields of MCsx+ ions depended only on the ratio between the erosion and deposition rates. This opened important possibilities for ultra-shallow depth profiling as it allowed the Cs deposition rate to be adjusted to a given erosion rate for optimal secondary ion detection.The quantification of residual and surface C on wafers has been performed using thermal desorption-GC-MS to measure volatile C and TOF SIMS depth profiling to measure the non-volatile C left behind after high temperature processing.283 The wafers were covered with a polysilicon layer and bombarded with 10 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60°. Concentrations were calculated using RSF obtained from C-implanted silicon. A point-by-point normalization of the 12C− ion intensity to that of 30Si− accounted for the transient increase of secondary ion intensities at the silicon/oxide interface. The LOD of SIMS for C was <1012 atoms cm−2.The enhancement of positive ion yields through the use of backfilling with trichlorotrifluoroethane and tetrachloroethylene, in combination with 8 keV Ar+ primary ions, provided an alternative to the inefficient oxygen bombardment or oxygen backfilling for elements such as Ag, Mo and Nb, which form weak oxide bonds.284 Compared with oxygen flooding, trichlorotrifluoroethane backfilling improved the ion yields of elements such as Cr, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ti, V and Zr by factors of 1.5–10 but decreased those of Al, Cu and Fe. No difference was seen for Si and Ni. The sputter rate with the halo-hydrocarbon backfilling was almost twice that with oxygen flooding.The performances of different SIMS instruments for the isotopic measurement of U-containing environmental particles
					(0.5–5 μm diameter) were compared through the analysis of a range of samples.285 Despite the similar instrument design and the use of standardized operating conditions, the practical sensitivity and useful yield in nine laboratories differed by a factor of up to 8. The most likely explanation for the deviations was considered to be the uncertainty on the primary ion beam current and the inadequate control of the primary beam diameter, raster size, energy and exit slits. The use of standard samples on a daily or weekly basis was advocated.Although the short-term (<1 day)
					reproducibility of the RSF for As and B in silicon were <1%, over a period of several weeks they deteriorated to ∼3 and 5% for As (Cs+ primary ions) and B (O2+ primary ions), respectively.286 The most likely explanation for the poor long-term reproducibility was considered to be variations in the actual beam current over long periods.Sample cooling during the depth profiling of In-implanted silicon wafers using 5 keV O2+ projectiles at an incidence angle of 44° in a HR instrument was needed to achieve the reproducibility and accuracy obtained using 5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60° and a quadrupole mass analyser.287 Without cooling, use of a lower incidence angle in HR analysis than in quadrupole analysis would have resulted in an increased oxygen surface concentration. This would have produced thermal segregation of dopants.Imaging a bevelled sample surface has been shown to be useful for determining the depth distribution of elements in samples with a rough surface.288 Samples consisted of a Si/CoSi2 bilayer (thicknesses of 100 and 120 nm, respectively) and a multilayer of Pb(Zr–Ti)O3/Ir/ZrN (layer thicknesses of 100, 200 and 75 nm, respectively) on a silicon wafer with rough surface. The top layer was chemically etched to increase roughness. The layers were mechanically bevelled and polished at an angle of ∼0.5°. In situ implantation of Cs or O at doses of 1016–1017 atoms cm−2 before imaging analysis improved the detection of elements with low secondary ion yields under Ga+ primary ion bombardment. In contrast to conventional analysis, which produced layer-mixing over a distance of about 50 nm, imaging of the bevelled sample revealed the actual multilayer structure with a lateral resolution of 0.5 μm corresponding to a depth resolution of about 4 nm.The dependence of atomic ion imaging on surface hydrocarbon deposition was studied by the analysis of eyeball tissue.289 Areas with high intensity hydrocarbon signals generally produced low ion counts for atomic ion signals. However, long exposure to the primary ion beam reduced the hydrocarbon ion intensities and increased those of atomic ions. Hence, comparison of the ion images taken at low magnification with short exposure times and those obtained at high magnification with long exposure times revealed the distributions of both elements and organic components.Responding to the need for a flat surface CRM for the determination of lateral resolution down to the nm range, cross sections of epitaxially grown layers of AlxGa1−xAs and InxGa1−xAs on a GaAs substrate were prepared.290 The dimensions of the strips were between 0.4 and 500 nm wide. The combination of gratings, narrow strips and sharp edges facilitated the calibration of the lateral resolution and the optimization of instrument settings.The use of thin silicon films with multiple As-doped δ-layers allowed transient Si sputtering effects in shallow junction depth profiling to be corrected.291 Specifically, the sample consisted of 5 δ-layers within a distance of 90 nm and covered by a 10 nm layer of amorphous silicon. The position and areal density of the As δ-doped layers were verified by HR TEM and medium-energy ion scattering spectrometry (MEIS). The films allowed the depth scale shift in the surface transient region to be determined for given bombardment conditions.8.4. Quantitative analysisThe accuracy of As quantification in ultra-shallow junctions by SIMS was investigated by comparison with TXRF data obtained using a synchrotron beamline.292 The SIMS analysis used 1 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° and detection of SiAs− ions. Using the SIMS depth profiles to model the dependence of the fluorescence on the incidence angle in TXRF, absolute quantification by fundamental parameters became feasible. The implanted doses determined by SIMS were within 20–30% of those obtained by TXRF, no matter which method of normalization was used.Matrix effects in quantitative depth profiling of ultra-shallow As distributions in the vicinity of the silicon oxide/silicon interface were studied using silicon wafers with a 11 nm thick oxide layer.293 The wafers were implanted with As using different projected ranges to localize the dopant distribution in the oxide layer, at, or just beyond, the interface with silicon. Use of 500 eV Cs+ bombardment and point-by-point normalization of the AsS− signal intensity to that of 28Si− ions reduced the difference between the RSF for As in silicon and in silicon dioxide but only to a still disappointing factor of 3. Büyüklimanli et al.294 investigated the depth profiling of silicon implanted with ultra-low-energy As ions. Although the peak concentration of As occurred in the silicon dioxide layer, the depth distribution had a long tail inside the silicon matrix. The large variations in ion yield for AsSi− and Si2− ions across the interface were accounted for by point-by-point normalization of the AsSi− to the Si2− signal intensities. Adequate RSF for the interface region were derived by linear interpolation of the RSF for silicon and silicon dioxide using the O− signal to estimate the local oxygen concentration. The results agreed well with the simulated data (TRIM code) while the total As dose measured by SIMS was within 25% of that found by RBS.The determination of N in 2.5 nm thin HFSiOxfilms, deposited on silicon with a 1 nm thick silicon dioxide layer and subjected to a post-nitridation step, was optimized by the use of 0.5 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of ∼70° and point-by-point normalization of the CsN+ signals to those of CsO+.295 The depth profiles measured with SIMS agreed well with those obtained by HR RBS and the N-concentrations in the range of 3–15% obtained in SIMS with a single RSF correlated well to those determined by XPS.A methodology for the quantitative depth profiling of C-doped SiGe structures as small as 300
					×
					300 μm was developed296 using Si84.2Ge15.8 doped with C at doses of 9 × 1020 or 2 × 1019 atoms cm−3. Depth profiles were obtained by rastering 0.5 or 1 keV Cs+ primary ion beams over a 200 × 200 μm2 area at incidence angles of 25 and 50°, respectively. The exponential decay length was 1.27 and 2.37 nm for 0.5 and 1 keV Cs+ ion bombardment, respectively. The use of incidence angles of <60° avoided sputter-induced development of roughness. For 1 keV Cs+ bombardment, the 70Ge ∶
					30Si− signal intensity ratio correlated linearly with the Ge ∶ Si concentration ratio. Dividing the RSF of C relative to Si by the silicon fraction kept the RSF variations to less than a few % in the Ge concentration range up to 30%.Distinction between the contributions from the ion implantation process and SIMS artefacts to the depth resolution was made by depth profiling a stacked sample of B δ-doped layers in silicon with distances of 1–15 nm between the B-layers.297 The surfaces of two identical B δ-doped silicon layers on a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) were joined together back-to-back so that each δ-layer could be depth profiled in both the “front-side” and “back-side” modes. The resulting Gaussian broadening parameter indicated that the implantation process caused 10% dissymmetry in the concentration slopes.Slodzian298 considered the design and tuning of the ion optics and unwanted weak magnetic fields as possible sources of instrumental mass fractionation (IMF) in isotope ratio measurements. In addition, the problems related to ion counting with EM and stabilization of the electrical potential during the analysis of insulating samples were discussed. Schumacher et al.299 improved their experimental procedures in order to control the variability of the IMF and the drift of the EM gain in MC magnetic sector analysis. The dispersion of isotopes by parasitic magnetic fields required beam centering through the different apertures for each new spot to be analysed. Drift in the EM gain was caused by the incident ion rates used in previous experiments and therefore affected each detector in the MC differently. When a suitable correction was applied, precisions of 2 and 0.1–0.2‰
					(SD) were obtained for the 28Si ∶
					30Si and 16O ∶
					18O isotope ratios, respectively. Slodzian et al.300 investigated the effects of the quasi-simultaneous arrival of ions on isotopic composition measurements. Experimentally determined 34S ∶
					32S and 28Si ∶
					30Si isotope ratios showed Poisson statistics to be inadequate so new correction formulae were developed.The C and N stable isotope ratios in cultured cells were measured using a 25 keV Cs+ primary ion beam focused to a spot with diameter of ∼2 μm on the sample.301 The magnetic sector instrument featured a transmission of 70% for 12C14N− ions at a mass resolution of 10000. The secondary ions 12C−, 13C−, 12C14N− and 12C15N− were counted in different detectors after removal of interfering ions by deflector plates. The precision of 3% for the isotope ratio measurements was essentially controlled by the ion count rate. Amongst several peak-fitting methods tested for resolving isobaric interferences of Al− and 13C14N− on the 12C15N− signal in TOF SIMS, the exponentially modified Gaussian model performed best except at low levels of 15N levels in the presence of aluminium and brought the agreement between TOF SIMS and SIRMS results to 5%.302 The TOF SIMS analysis was performed with 15 keV Ga+ primary ions, using a dose of 6 × 1014 ions cm−2 to eliminate interferences from hydrocarbon ions.A high-transmission HR ion microprobe was used for the determination of the 37Cl ∶35Cl isotope ratios in natural glasses with a 10–20 μm lateral resolution.303 Under optimized conditions, the overall precision was <1.5‰
					(2σ) for replicate analysis of homogeneous glass RM containing 100–200 μg g−1 of total Cl. Similar precision was feasible for the direct determination of 37Cl ∶
					35Cl isotope ratios in 1 μl samples of natural fluids containing only μg quantities of Cl. A subsequent study dealt with calibration of the IMF as a function of the sample composition.304 In addition to a natural rhyolite glass, eight synthetic aluminosilicate glasses, ranging from mafic to felsic composition, were fused from natural and synthetic rock powders. Analysis by SIRMS yielded reference values for δ37Cl, while EPXMA and FTIR were used to measure major element and volatile component concentrations in the glasses, respectively. Although the absolute difference in IMF between basalt and rhyolite glasses exceeded 10‰, the IMF correlated linearly with a linear combination of the oxide contents in weight % determined with EPXMA. The resulting reproducibility of δ37Cl in a large range of silicate glasses was better than ±1‰
					(2σ).Compston305 measured the Pb+
					∶ UO2+ ion intensity ratios instead of Pb+
					∶ U+ ratios in an improved method for U–Pb dating of zircons. Additionally, the correlation between UO+, UO+ and UO2+ ion signals was used as a direct empirical measure for the reproducibility of isotope ratios. The resulting age uncertainty facilitated identification of outliers and detection of age groups that related to geological effects. Fletcher et al.306 improved calibration of U–Pb and Th–Pb dating in μm-size crystals by using the 206Pb ∶ UOn+ and 208Pb ∶ ThOn+ intensity ratios instead of the Pb ∶ U and Pb ∶ Th ratios to account for matrix effects due to U, Th and REE. The independent ages from the two isotopic ratios provided an internal check of concordance in situations where local perturbations were likely to occur. The Pb ∶ U and Pb ∶ Th ratios measured by SIMS and TIMS agreed to within 1–2%. Gibson et al.307 demonstrated the use of sensitive HR ion microprobe analysis for the in situ dating of different age domains in monazite crystals that would cause misleading results in conventional dating methods. Ion imaging revealed that these zones could be localized by using the Y+ secondary ions.Esaka et al.308 used three RM to develop a method for the determination of Pb isotope ratios in μm-sized environmental particles. The samples were mounted on glassy carbon and Pb-containing particles, identified by EPXMA, were analysed using a 15 keV O2+ ion beam (spot diameter of 50 μm), a mass resolution of 1000 and energy filtering to discriminate against hydride contributions. The RSD for the 207Pb ∶
					206Pb and 208Pb ∶
					206Pb isotope ratios of <1.6%, allowed distinction to be made between these Pb ratios in all three RM.8.5. Single and multi-dimensional analysis8.5.1. Depth profiling. Semiconductor applications increasingly require device characterization with a depth resolution as good as 1 nm. Liu and Wee309 investigated the use of sample rotation and oxygen flooding for ultra-shallow depth profiling of δ-doped silicon samples with 0.5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 56°. Analysis of a BN δ-doped silicon multilayer using oxygen flooding and sample rotation yielded a decay length of 0.7–0.8 nm at a depth of 110 nm. However, sample rotation without oxygen flooding gave the best depth resolution for a Ge δ-doped silicon sample covered with a 150 nm thick silicon layer. Segregation effects caused loss of depth resolution when oxygen flooding was applied. The rms roughness parameter determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) improved from 2.9 nm to 0.16 or 0.21 nm with oxygen flooding or sample rotation, respectively.A MEIS study310 of the sputter damage in silicon bombarded with low-energy O2+ and Ar+ ions showed damage over a depth range of only 0.5–0.6 nm when 500 eV projectiles impacted at an incidence angle of 80°. The findings were backed up by MD simulations that estimated a thickness of 0.5 nm for the damaged layer. Additionally, depth profiles of a Ga δ-doped layer in silicon obtained using 650 eV O2 ions at an incidence angle of 75° showed a trailing edge decay length of 0.9 nm. This was consistent with the measured damaged layer thickness.Fares et al.311 studied the formation of sputtering-induced topography in Si(100) and 10° disoriented Si(100) using 5.5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 42°. Depth profiles of matrix ions showed in both cases that a marked change in intensity occurred at a depth of about 2.5 μm. This indicated the onset of roughening, which was confirmed by the rms roughness parameter. Examination of the crater bottom by AFM showed no significant difference in frequency and orientation of the facets in both samples. Iacob et al.312 investigated the topography induced by low energy Cs+ bombardment of monocrystalline silicon containing a native oxide layer, a B-δ-doped silicon multilayer system and a 10 nm thick layer of silicon oxynitride on silicon. Examination of the crater bottom using AFM showed minimal ripple formation and roughness development for 1 keV Cs+ ion bombardment at an incidence angle of 78°. However, use of this incidence angle caused the apparent depth of the deepest layer to shift 5 nm towards the surface in comparison with use of a 68° incidence angle. Lau et al.313 found that in the depth profiling of Si/Si0.8Ge0.2 stacks with nominal layer thickness of 20 and 15 nm, respectively, the increasing width and decreasing amplitude of the Ge+ profile with depth reflected the role of roughening which could be reasonably well described by the mixing–roughness–information depth (MRI) model. The derived roughness was close but systematically different from that observed with AFM as a result of the mixing length straggling, interface roughness and AFM tip geometry effects.The use of low-energy Cs+ sputtering, oxygen flooding and detection of the As− or P− secondary ions has been proposed for the quantitative depth profiling of As and P in ultra-shallow implants.314 Silicon implanted with 2 keV As and B ions was sputtered using a Cs+ ion beam with energy between 250 and 500 eV and an incidence angle of 50°. Both oxygen and argon backfilling were tested. Use of oxygen flooding at a low pressure (<5 × 10−7 mbar) improved the ion yield by a factor of 10 and eliminated the ion yield variations at the oxide/silicon interface. There was no apparent loss of depth resolution due to surface roughening over the first nm.Bolorizadeh et al.315 exploited NRA of 31P to calibrate the total concentrations of ultra-shallow P implants in silicon. Silicon(100) wafers, implanted with 1–30 keV 31P ions at fluences of 1013–1015 cm−2, were analysed by TOF SIMS in the dual beam mode using 1 keV Cs+ and 25 keV Ga+ ion beams for sputtering and analysis, respectively. The 28Si31P− ion intensities were obtained by correcting the peak intensity for the constant isobaric contributions from 29Si30Si− and 28Si30SiH− ions. The data showed good correlation between the P content and the implant fluence over two orders of magnitude with no evidence of self-sputtering.A similar calibration, this time using the 11B(p,α)8Be reaction and NRA, was used for the ultra-shallow depth profiling of B in silicon.316 A B δ-like layer with thickness of ∼0.4 nm was deposited on silicon using electron-gun evaporation to prevent the penetration of B into the substrate. Oxygen bombardment and flooding was applied with a primary ion energy of between 250 and 1000 eV. The experimental profiles were well described by exponential-like distributions with decay lengths that depended linearly on the primary ion energy. Transient sputtering caused the leading slope to be steeper than the tail and required correction of depth scale and yield. Liu et al.317 studied the factors affecting depth resolution in the analysis of BN δ-doped silicon using 0.5 and 1 keV O2+ primary ion bombardment at an incidence angle of 56° with or without oxygen flooding and sample rotation. Bombardment with 0.5 keV O2+ ions caused the early onset of surface roughening that degraded the depth resolution from a depth of 40–50 nm onwards. Oxygen flooding or sample rotation improved the depth resolution at a distance of 110 nm from the initial surface from 1.0 to 0.7–0.8 nm and increased the dynamic range from 5 × 102 to 6 × 103–3 × 104. Only five layers could be detected for the sample with 3 nm interlayer distance when 1 keV O2+ ion bombardment was used whereas all the layers could be resolved by using 0.5 keV projectiles.Adequate DRF functions for front-side depth profiling of ultra-shallow dopant profiles were derived by combining both front-side and back-side depth profile information.318 The junction depth derived from deconvoluted front-side profiles of B-implanted silicon agreed to within 0.3 nm with the back-side results provided that the O2+ primary ion impact energy was <500 eV.Silicon samples containing 11 evenly spaced Ge δ-doped layers could be profiled with ultra-high depth resolution through the use of O2+ primary ions at a 45° incidence angle.319 Using 158 eV O2+ primary ions, a decay length of 0.97 nm per decade (distance corresponding to a decrease of the signal by a factor 10) and a FWHM of 1.1 nm were obtained for the deepest δ-layer at a depth of 34 nm, while the signals of Si+ and SiO+ ions showed a transient regime over only 0.17 nm. Beam-induced surface roughening was minimal with a rms parameter of 0.15 nm at a depth of 80 nm.The depth profiling of high-k materials is becoming increasingly important for the production of ultra-shallow junctions in micro-electronic devices but represents a major analytical challenge. For instance, SiON films are used to suppress the penetration of B from the gate electrode and therefore are useful as interface films between the high-k dielectrics and the silicon substrate. Sameshima et al.320 combined front-side and back-side depth profiling to determine the B and N distribution in SiON films as thin as 3–4 nm. Use of the BCs2+
						∶ SiCs2+ signal intensity ratio overcame matrix effects except at the silicon/SiON interface. Specifically, the front-side profiles yielded a higher apparent B concentration than the back-side data, pointing to ion yield changes and transients across the layer interfaces. Nieveen et al.321 investigated the anomalously long tail seen during depth profiling of Hf in HfO2/SiON high-k film stacks on silicon. Regardless of the sputter beam conditions used, Hf was detected throughout the film with significant tailing into the substrate. A decay length of ∼10 nm per decade for both reactive and inert sputter beams, regardless of the impact energy, was inconsistent with ion-beam-induced mixing. Subsequent XPS analysis revealed formation of suboxides in the films and transformation of HfO2 into metallic Hf in the silicon substrate over a depth range corresponding to the tail. Studies of HfSixOy films showed that changes in chemical state depended on the film stoichiometry.Owing to the strong tendency of preferential sputtering, depth scale calibration in high-k materials requires particular attention. Dual-beam TOF SIMS depth profiling of ZrO2 and HfO2 films on silicon (using 500 eV Cs+ and 25 keV Ga+ projectiles for sputtering and analysis, respectively) revealed a linear correlation of the integrated SiO2− profile with the thickness determined by HR TEM, even though the sputter rate of ZrO2 was significantly lower than that of HfO2.322 The intercepts on the ordinate corresponding to 1.2 nm for ZrO2 and 2.2 nm for HfO2 could be related to the preferential sputtering of oxygen. Once the Hf or Zr had been consumed, the SiO2 stoichiometry returned to its steady state for extremely thin layers. In the depth profiling of a multilayer system consisting of strontium titanium oxide (STO)
						(thickness 14.8–0.8 nm) and 24.5 nm thick lanthanum barium magnesium oxide (LBMO) layers, the use of 250 eV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° gave optimum depth resolution, dynamic range, atomic mixing and surface roughening.323 A depth resolution of 2 nm per decade and peak width of 2 nm (FWHM) was achieved. A new depth calibration procedure, developed to account for the changes in erosion rate, used the measured LBMO fraction in the eroded material to interpolate the sputter rates of bulk STO and LBMO. Thereby, the deviation between apparent and nominal depths improved from 8 to 4 nm at a distance of 67 nm under the initial surface.Depth profiling of Zn in semiconductor materials of Ga and the group V elements was optimized by using 14.5 keV O2+ primary ion bombardment and detection of the ZnGa+ secondary ions.324 Use of this system improved the LOD for Zn in GaSb by a factor of 6 when compared with the use of Cs+ projectiles and detection of ZnCs+ ions. Depth profiles of Si in AlGaAs/GaAs epilayers could be deconvoluted without RM.325 The atomic level abruptness of the Al concentration at the interface was confirmed to be within 0.5 nm using thickness fringe-field TEM. The DRF derived from the Al profile using 2 keV Cs+ bombardment and detection of AlAs− ions allowed the true Si distribution to be calculated from the AsSi− signals. The use of AlAs− secondary ions was preferred over that of MCs+ ions for the determination of the DRF because of the perfect linear correlation between their intensity and mole fractions. The deconvolution improved the decay length of the Si profile by ∼33%.Depth resolution was best when using Cs+ projectiles and MCs+ detection for the high-resolution depth profiling of multi- or single-quantum well structures with GaN, AlxGa1−xN and InxGa1−xN layers.326 The FWHM were 5.8 and 8.5 nm at ion energies of 0.5 and 1.25 keV, respectively. The MCs+
						∶ M+ signal intensity ratio was 0.15, 1.1, 0.4 and 0.8 for M = Al, Ga, In and Mg, respectively. Moreover, the roughness rms parameter of 1.5 nm obtained under Cs+ ion bombardment was considerably better than the 5.1 nm obtained under bombardment with O2+ projectiles. Biasing the target potential drastically reduced the large intensity variations seen for C−, O−, Si−, SiH− and SiN− secondary ions near the interface during the analysis of ∼100 nm thick silicon nitride films using 1 keV Cs+ ion bombardment, charge neutralization by electron flooding and mass analysis with a quadrupole.327 The applied bias voltage had to be adapted to the breakdown properties of the layer under study.The use of carbon- or nitrogen-ion implantation into titanium nitride coatings or stainless steel is an important method for improving hardness and wear resistance of metals. In a study of 4 μm thick TiN films on steel, implanted with 10 keV C+ ions, the intensity of the 46Ti− matrix ions (generated with 5.5 keV O2+ ion bombardment at an incidence angle of 42°) decreased by 40% in the first few nm of the depth profile.328 By contrast, use of 14.4 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 25° yielded a linear dependence of the crater depth on the sputter time for samples implanted with <3 × 1017 ions cm−2. The experimental depth distribution agreed well with that predicted using the PROFILE code. The ratio of the integrated area under the C profile to that of the Ti signal correlated linearly with the fluence in this range. This linearity was lost at higher doses because of the formation of C–C bonds revealed by XPS data. Gazestani et al.329 developed a procedure for the correction of depth profiles of stainless steel after implantation with 30 keV N ions at doses of 1 × 1017–1 × 1018 ions cm−2. Differences between the predicted N-distribution (TRIM code) and experimental depth profiles, obtained using 15 keV Cs+ primary ions and N− secondary ion detection, were due to the presence of N2+ in the implantation beam. Linear combination of TRIM data for 15 and 30 keV implantation yielded adequate estimates of the fraction of N2+ relative to that of N+ ions.The increasing interest in the use of copper interconnects in place of aluminium motivated Li330 to optimize the quantitative depth profiling of impurities in copper films using 10.5 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 21°. The sample consisted of a stack containing a 0.8–1 μm thick copper film, a 10–30 nm thin barrier layer (TiSiN and TaN) and a 200 nm thick oxide layer. Whereas H−, C−, Cl−, K+ and Na+ ions could be measured at low-to-medium mass resolution, the S− and P− ions required a higher resolving power of 4000. Nitrogen was detected as NCs2+ secondary ions to optimize sensitivity. The impact energy had to be adjusted to the film thickness. Detection using MCs2+ ions was preferred for all elements in films as thin as 20 nm.Use of polycrystalline copper–indium–gallium–diselenide thin films as solar cells requires that no elements diffuse into the films from the glass or flexible substrate through molybdenum back contacts. A correction method accounting for recoil and atomic cascade mixing was based on both front-side and back-side depth profiling of the two-layered thin films.331 As recoil mixing was anisotropic and element-dependent, the width of the depth profile became broader or narrower depending on the relative direction of the concentration gradient and sputtering. After correction for this effect, the remaining distortion of the depth profile due to the isotropic and element-independent atomic mixing was corrected using the Mo profile at the interface, known to exhibit a step function.Perego et al.332 used TOF SIMS in the dual-beam depth profiling mode (1 keV Cs+ and 25 keV Ga+ projectiles for sputtering and analysis, respectively) to determine the distance between silicon nanocrystals in thin silicon dioxide layers and the interface with the silicon substrate. A linear time-to-depth conversion was used to determine the tunnelling distance from the depth difference between the Sin− peak and the 30Si− signals. Angle-resolved HR XPS data confirmed the correlation between the Sin− signals and the amount of non-oxidized silicon. Although the SIMS results agreed within 10% with the tunnelling distances measured using HR TEM on cross sections, there was a systematic underestimation of the distance by SIMS which was explained by the higher sputter rate for pure silicon than for silicon dioxide.8.5.2. Imaging and 3-D analysis. The 50 nm lateral resolution offered by the scanning ion microprobe developed at the Chicago University has been exploited for the imaging of complex biological systems. Examples of application included studies of the binding of Mg2+ to chromosomal structures,333 the sub-cellular localization of Al and In in rat kidney tissue sections334 and the distribution of 44Ca in labelled mammalian cells.335 In the determination of 44 Ca, interference by SiO+ ions from the silicon substrate was removed by presputtering. In a separate study, Smith et al.336 demonstrated the feasibility of sub-cellular imaging of Gd isotopes in human glioblastoma cells treated with a Gd-containing agent.Lamperti et al.337 used a focused ion beam for the nanoscale imaging of thin films with a lateral resolution of 50 nm. Images of F− from fluorinated carbon films over an area of 40 × 40 μm showed that the size differences in the F-rich zones depended on the F-content of the gas plasma used for film preparation. The zone formation correlated to the carbon cross-linking in the film. Imaging the Al+, Ti+ and TiO+ secondary ions generated by nano-structured titanium oxide showed that the film roughness was determined by the presence of isolated 5–7 μm particles on the top of a surface coating normally containing only 2 μm particles. In a subsequent study, images of CoO− and C2− ions from cobalt-porous carbon-nanocomposite thin films (Co–ns-C) in silicon showed that the distribution of C at low concentrations was homogeneous over the surface whereas the subsurface contained cobalt oxide free from C.338In order to avoid the beam-induced artefacts which hamper quantitative depth profiling, the imaging of As in microtomed human hair was performed using a 16 keV Cs+ primary ion beam which gave a lateral resolution of 100 and 200 nm for the major elements and trace elements, respectively.339 The measured As levels in the medulla, the cortex and the cuticle of hair could be used to distinguish between different routes of exposure to As such as ingestion or surface deposition.The carcinogeneity of diesel exhaust particles increases in the presence of transition elements such as Fe. Tomiyasu et al.340 developed a characterization strategy for complex urban-air particulates. It was shown by using EPXMA and field emission SEM that many iron particles adsorbed smaller environmental particles on their surface. Analysis by TOF SIMS, using a 25 keV Ga+ primary ion beam with a spot diameter of 300 nm, was required to reveal that most of these particles on the iron core were carbonaceous in nature.Despite the promising progress made in previous years, very few papers on 3-D analysis have been published recently. Krecar et al.341 investigated the distribution of B in sintered-powder metallurgical steels as a function of the grain size of the added ferroboron and the use of Ar, H2 or N2 as a protective atmosphere. The 3-D distributions were reconstructed over a volume of 150 × 150 × 5 μm. In one of the few reported 3-D analyses of biological material, the changes in chemical composition during the cell division of mitotic cells were determined using 5.5 keV O2+ primary ions in the stigmatic mode.342 Ions could be imaged with a lateral resolution of 0.5 μm. Human glioblastoma cells were grown on silicon chips and cryogenically prepared using a sandwich freeze-fracture method. Analysis of tumor cells revealed an unusually low concentration of Ca in the metaphase spindle, which contrasted with the accumulation of Ca in normal cells.8.6. Static SIMS (S-SIMS)8.6.1. Fundamental studies. A comprehensive study of a wide range of inorganic analytes led to the first systematic characterization of mass spectral features in the molecular speciation analysis of surface layers and micro-objects.343 Trends in the generation of atomic ions, structural fragments, molecular ions and adduct ions of the analyte neutrals were related to fundamental S-SIMS processes and to the chemical or structural properties of the analytes. Guidelines were produced for predicting the mass spectra of any analyte on the basis of the chemistry of the analyte, the formation of oxide-type neutrals from oxy-salts and the effect of redox processes in the selvedge.The innovative use of coincidence mass spectrometry for nano-scale analysis was further explored.344 Because the impact area of a single primary ion on the sample had a diameter of 10 nm, recording the secondary ions separately for each projectile impact allowed solids to be characterized with a lateral resolution better than the beam diameter. A prerequisite for this analysis was the use of polyatomic projectiles such as 22 keV Au3+ primary ions to optimize the secondary ion yield. Up to 3 × 106 single impact mass spectra were classified according to the number of secondary ions produced per impact or to the presence of specific ions. In addition to molecular speciation, distinction between the crystalline and gel state could be made for the residue of an α-zircon-phosphate suspension spotted on stainless steel. This approach was also used for the analysis of catalyst systems consisting of Ag nanoparticles (20–30 nm diameter) on alumina–silicate structures and Cs as a promoting agent.345 Mass spectra selected with Ag peaks also contained signals from Cs and contaminants of the Ag particles, whereas those with Cs peaks also contained signals for elemental ions with intensity ratios about the same as those in the unfiltered mass spectra. Hence, the Cs distribution over the catalyst surface was relatively homogeneous. Use of particle and interaction areas with diameters of 30 and 10 nm, respectively, allowed the fraction of mixed impacts, i.e., those hitting both the nano-particles and the substrate, to be estimated to within about 10%.8.6.2. Analytical methodology. Multivariate statistical techniques such as PCA and other factor analysis methods can be of great help in extracting analytically useful knowledge from the huge data sets and complex peak patterns that are typical of S-SIMS. Full exploitation of multivariate data processing requires the specific nature of the noise to be considered. Keenan and Kotula346 developed an optimal data scaling by accounting for the Poission statistics. As observed noise was primarily due to the counting statistics, the direct relationship between a Poisson variable and its uncertainty allowed the error covariance to be estimated from the dataset itself. The weighting actually involved transformation of the dataset into a space where the error was no longer dependent on the magnitude of the signal. Application to a data file containing a full mass spectrum per pixel showed that PCA of the weighted data improved identification of the chemically significant contributions.347 The method was superior to standard PCA with respect to noise rejection and robustness.A powerful multivariate statistical analysis toolkit AXSIA
						(Automated eXpert Spectrum Image Analysis), originally developed for EDX spectrometry, has been used to process TOF S-SIMS data.348 Basically, this toolkit determined the minimum number of analytes needed to describe the chemical information contained in complex mass spectra or images. The software took into account intuitive expertise and the use of full spectral signatures for each compound improved the S/N. Different examples demonstrated how the efficient statistical aggregation of the chemical information allowed small and unexpected features to be detected without user intervention.349A series of PCA-based multivariate tools for spectrum and image analysis allowed significant differences between spectra to be assessed and could assist decision-making in common univariate interpretive tasks.350 Data pre-treatment such as weighting and post-treatment features such as confidence ellipses on score cluster plots were implemented. Image interpretation could be improved by the use of PCA to reduce topographic effects. Comparison of complex spectra was facilitated through extraction of sub-spectra from raw files and subsequent PCA of the sub-spectra. The use of PCA techniques in an industrial analytical laboratory, where sample throughput and multi-user operation were of prime interest and prior knowledge of the identity of surface species was often lacking, revealed subtle spectral differences or chemically different areas in images.351 An example of application involved the analysis of steel samples with poor adhesion to metal-bonding additives due to the presence of fatty acids and S-containing compounds.The intensities of structural ions in the quantitative speciation analysis of Co- and Ni-containing micro-corrosion products on magnetic recording discs, using TOF S-SIMS with 15 keV Ga+ primary ions, correlated linearly with the concentrations determined with XPS.352 Use of molecular adducts (CoOH+ or NiOH+) or atomic ions gave LOD of 100 and 1 μg g−1, respectively.8.6.3. Imaging. The combination of molecular speciation and imaging of surface components has been used to analyse acid-leached sphalerite minerals.353 The intensities of the Fe and Zn atomic ions as a function of the Fe content and the leaching time confirmed the finding obtained by XPS that Zn diffused from the mineral to the S-enriched interface with the solution. The formation of polysulfides was revealed by the presence of signals due to Sn
						(n
						= 1–5). Images of molecular fragments at μm resolution showed the build up of polysulfides in specific regions depending on the Fe and Zn concentrations in the corresponding surface layer. In a study of Co/ZrO2 catalysts, use of 25 keV Ga+ primary ions allowed the distribution of the components to be visualized by means of both atomic ions and molecular fragments with a lateral resolution as good as 100 nm.354 In this way, the dependence of the dispersion, agglomeration and composition of the active phase on the preparation conditions of the catalyst could be delineated. Quantitative use of ion intensity ratios such as CoOH+
						∶ Zr+, CoO2+
						∶ CoO+ and CoO3+
						∶ CoO+ allowed the oxidation state of Co to be correlated to the temperature.Despite the occurrence of matrix effects, results obtained for the quantitative TOF SIMS imaging of cancer cell cultures agreed well with those obtained by LPI SNMS.355 The atomic ion images for human melanoma cells incubated with a drug containing 10B showed high contrast and a lateral resolution at the sub-cellular level. The RSF for K+ and Na+ were determined using dextran standards containing different amounts of sodium or potassium chloride. The K ∶ Na ratios measured by SIMS agreed to within 7% with those found by LPI SNMS. The 10B concentrations detected by TOF S-SIMS and LPI SNMS were linearly correlated between 50 and 2000 μg g−1, thereby showing the absence of matrix effects for the secondary ions in TOF SIMS, at least in this case.8.7. Surface and subsurface analysis with S-SIMS and SIMSMolecular speciation at the surface in combination with ultra-shallow depth profiling was exploited in a study of nickel phosphorus samples.356 Molecular (adduct) ions and structural fragments revealed the presence of nickel in the form of oxide, hydroxide, phosphate and phosphite at the surface. Ions such as PO3− and NiO− could be used for depth profiling, although the thickness of the superficial nickel oxide and the underlying layer of nickel phosphate or phosphite layer was only ∼1 nm.In the 3-D analysis of individual sea salt particles
					(1–3 μm diameter) using successive imaging with 25 keV Ga+ primary ions, the erosion rate of particles (0.55 nm s−1) was surprisingly high in comparison with that (0.014 nm s−1) obtained for a crystalline bulk sample.357 Analysis of NaCl particles before and after exposure to hydroxyl radicals and of mixed particles of CaClO3, NaCl and NaOH led to the discovery of an unrecognised buffering mechanism in the uptake and oxidation of SO2 in sea salt particles.9. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)9.1. InstrumentationThe design of the last commercial electron gas SNMS instrument produced dates back to the mid-1980s. Responding to the need for a technically updated system, Jozrick et al.358 developed a so-called INA-X prototype featuring a modified plasma chamber with a coil inside the UHV vessel. Optimized rf coupling allowed a high plasma density to be obtained at low power input. Analysis was performed with a quadrupole analyser coupled to new ion optics incorporating a 45° energy analyser. The choice of a 30° ion extraction angle was based on the angular distributions obtained when plasma sputtering with 140 eV Ar+ ions was applied for optimal depth resolution. Peak intensities obtained in the analysis of a steel RM correlated linearly with the concentrations of major elements and trace impurities at the 100 μg g−1 level. The noise level was as low as 2 cps. Use of 150 eV Ar+ ion bombardment at a current density of 2.8 mA cm−2 allowed an 80 nm thick Ge layer on silicon to be depth profiled with a resolution of 2.6 nm and an erosion rate of 1.3 nm s−1.The material science division at the Argonne National Laboratory intends to develop a versatile instrument for LPI SNMS with high lateral resolution using primary ion or laser microbeam sputtering of solids. Initially, advanced algorithms were developed to simulate complex ion optical systems.359 Software for calculating large sets of ion trajectories was complemented with routines that used initial emission data from the sample to generate coordinates, KE and emission angles of neutrals in the post-ionization volume. The calculation of 500000 photo-ion trajectories accounted for space-charge effects. Additional software converted the massive data set into easy-to-handle results such as the time and spatial distribution of ions in different planes of the mass spectrometer. Subsequently, new ion optics allowed the primary ion beam to impinge perpendicularly on the sample, secondary ions to be swept out of the LPI zone and ion extraction to be optimized.360 Deflectors directed secondary electrons to a separate detector. Calculations predicted that the sputtered fraction in the LPI volume and the overall transmission would be as high as 43 and >95%, respectively, allowing useful yields of up to 30% to be achieved. Experimental evaluation of the instrument showed that the Schwarzschild microscope fitted provided a resolution of 0.5 μm, although laser focusing to such small spots was not demonstrated.361 The Ar+ and Ga+ primary ion beams produced spots on the sample with diameters of a few μm and 50 nm, respectively. Laser desorption and single photon LPI gave a mass resolution of 1500 (FWHM) for Mo+ ions. The discrepancy between the experimentally determined useful yield of 5% and the predicted value of 30% was simply assigned to the fact that the saturation conditions in LPI were not yet achieved. The software proved useful for optimizing the instrument operation, for example by tuning voltages, and identifying misalignments in the ion optical elements.3629.2. Fundamental studyGhalab and Wucher363 investigated the formation of ionic and neutral clusters from polycrystalline indium bombarded with 10 keV Ar+ or SFm+
					(m
					= 1–5) projectiles at an incidence angle of 45°. Single-photon ionization (λ
					= 193 nm) at a power density of 2 × 107 W cm−2 was applied to the neutrals. The independence of the signal intensity from laser pulse energy fluctuations reflected saturation conditions. The sputtering yield of LPI-generated Inm+ ions using SFm+ projectiles was substantially higher than that using Ar+ projectiles, and increased linearly with m and n. Interestingly, the increase in the secondary ion signals exceeded that of post-ionized neutrals when SFm+ projectiles were used instead of Ar+ ions.9.3. Depth profilingThe potential of a new 20 keV C60+primary ion beam source and fs LPI
					(λ
					= 800 nm) for the depth profiling of multilayer films has been demonstrated.364 Specifically, the 20 keV C60+ ion beam was used in the dc mode to sputter the surface for depth profiling while spectra were collected using 20 keV C60+ or Ga+ projectile beams. Alternating layers of Cr and Ni with thicknesses of 53 and 66 nm, respectively, on silicon were consecutively sputtered with a C60+ ion dose of 8 × 1012 ions cm−2, while analysis was performed with a low dose of 1010 ions cm−2. The depth resolution of 8.7 nm at the first interface did not deteriorate over the nine interfaces. The observation that directly emitted secondary ions preserved molecular information during the depth profiling of a barium arachidate film opened up possibilities for molecular speciation in the subsurface. The same group also compared sputtering with 25 keV Ga+ or 10–20 keV C60+ projectiles for depth profiling of multilayers.365 The apparent depth was unaffected by the C60+ ion energy, provided that the sputter yield was corrected. However, lowering the projectile energy from 20 to 10 keV degraded the depth resolution from 11 to 15 nm at a depth of 400 nm. Only the first two layers could be distinguished with Ga+ ions. The surface roughness rms parameter for the crater bottom remained virtually unchanged from that (7 nm) for the initial surface under C60+ primary ion bombardment but it increased to 35 nm when Ga+ projectiles were used. Simulations showed that the escape depth determined the ultimate depth resolution with polyatomic projectiles while the ion energy affected only the crater diameter, not the penetration depth.The core-shell structure of traffic soot particles has been investigated using SNMS with an Ar plasma gas source and an accelerating voltage of 0.4 kV.366 The neutrals were post-ionized by EI and mass separated with a quadrupole instrument. Size-selected particles collected on indium foil at different distances from a busy road were profiled to a depth of 600 nm. The particles with a size of <100 nm sampled close to the highway consisted mainly of carbon and organic hydrogen and were therefore comparable to the soot from a diesel engine. The N, O and S levels increased with increasing particle size due to the presence of ammonium sulfate in the <30 nm thick surface layer. A similar (NH4)2SO4 shell covered all the soot particles sampled further away from the highway.9.4. ImagingThe implementation of a LPI system on a current TOF-SIMS instrument gave unique experimental capabilities for HR imaging in biological samples in order to study bio-mineralization.367 Primary osteoblast-like cells cultured on silicon were cryo-fixed, freeze-fractured, and freeze-dried. Samples were sputtered with a 30 keV Ga+ primary ion beam focused to a spot diameter of 200 nm while an excimer laser (λ
					= 193 nm, pulse energy 15 mJ, spot diameter 150 μm) performed LPI of the neutrals produced. Images of Ca+, K+, P+ and Si+ ions featured a sub-μm lateral resolution. The secondary electrons were shown to be extremely useful for visualising the morphology of the analysed region. The extra-cellular enrichment of K in the vicinity of single osteoblasts during the initial stages of mineralization confirmed the current hypothesis about apatite formation. Subsequent experiments focused on the role of matrix proteins in the mineralization process.368 The feasibility of distinguishing between fibronectin and collagen by using the characteristic fragmentation patterns in combination with the high quality imaging was seen to give LPI-SNMS a promising future in the field of molecular biology.Monitoring the selective delivery of 10B in cancerous cells by new drugs requires analytical tools capable of quantitative subcellular imaging. In an investigation into the B-distribution in human melanoma cells and glioblastoma xenografts grown in mice, images of elements and structural fragment ions from the cell membranes were obtained with high sensitivity and sub-cellular resolution.369 The K and Na concentrations were quantified using a dextran standard loaded with different concentrations of the metals. Topography effects in LPI SNMS were significantly less than those in SIMS.10. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)10.1. ReviewThe review by Tripp and Hedges11 can be recommended as an excellent insight into the CSIA of archaeological materials. It focusses primarily on the chromatographic procedures used to separate the individual compounds for either AMS or SIRMS analysis and gives examples of the information that can be provided by the analysis of biomolecules (fatty acids, proteins, amino acids, carbohydrates) recovered from archaeological samples. Although continued development is required before the procedures can be considered routine, CSIA has already proved itself a powerful approach to such studies.10.2. InstrumentationA new interface for the on-line coupling of HPLC and SIRMS was based on the continuous oxidation by ammonium peroxodisulfate at 100 °C of organic samples in an aqueous stream and removal of the CO2 formed into a stream of He through a gas-exchange membrane.370 In contrast to the operation of other LC-MS interfaces, the liquid phase was not vaporized and so inorganic buffers had no influence on interface operation nor did they accumulate in the interface. The whole process introduced no isotopic fractionation and gave accurate and reproducible C isotope ratios (δ13C =
					−10.26 ± 0.2‰, n
					= 3, for a sucrose sample with an expected value of −10.4‰) on as little as 400 ng of the sample. The interface gave a constant δ13C value over the range 0.3–3 μg benzoic acid. Examples were given of the analysis of amino acids, carbohydrates and drugs eluted from various types of HPLC column. The technique was suitable for the analysis of compounds of high molecular weight, high polarity and low vapour pressure and was therefore considered to be complementary to GC-combustion-SIRMS.High-resolution measurements of the variability of δ13C within a tree ring could provide a link to short-term climatic events and metabolic processes. A new and rapid method for on-line determination of δ13C in tree rings with high lateral resolution involved LA-combustion-GC-SIRMS.371 Sample material was extracted every 6 min from a tree core using a UV laser (frequency-quadrupled Nd:YAG; λ
					= 266 nm; 40 μm spot diameter) and the ablated wood dust combusted at 700 °C. The CO2 produced was separated from other gaseous products by GC and then analysed by SIRMS. Between 25 and 40% of the 0.02 mg wood material ablated passed through the system and was available for isotope analysis. A conservative estimate of precision was ±0.24‰ but there was a small yet significant offset of +0.14‰ to results when compared with those obtained by an EA-SIRMS method. The new procedure had the advantage, however, of avoiding time-consuming sample preparation and the associated risk of contamination. In addition, the wood cores remained intact and could be used for further analyses. A drift over six months in the values obtained for an internal standard was attributed to a source of fractionation, yet to be identified. Although it was considered feasible to measure δ18O using this new procedure, substantial changes to the interface would be required.10.3. Analytical methodologyA complicating factor in the isotopic analysis of atmospheric CO2 is the presence of N2O, which gives rise to mass overlap. One of the factors used in the correction algorithm is the IER. Two studies on the effect of N2O on the measured isotopic composition of atmospheric CO2 have been reported. Ghosh and Brand372 introduced clean CO2 and N2O samples into the ion source to establish the IER of the pure gases as a function of ionization conditions. They then introduced artificial mixtures with varying proportions of the two gases to measure the variability of IER in the mixtures. The key finding was that the IER varied with electron energy in the mass spectrometer and would therefore vary from one instrument to another. Although optimization of the IER improved precision for δ13C and δ18O measurements by 0.02 and 0.04‰, respectively, the effect on the final data was small. The remaining error in IER of ∼3% corresponded to an uncertainty of ±0.007‰ in corrected δ13C data. Sirignano et al.373 also used synthetic mixtures of CO2 and N2O to establish correction factors. Their investigations showed no evidence of possible secondary effects such as the influence of N2O on cross-contamination between sample and standard gases. The recommendation from both studies was that an accurate N2O correction required the IER to be determined carefully for each instrument and each set of operating conditions.Memory effects are a common theme in the CF isotope analysis of water samples. The method of Gehre et al.374 was based on simple injection (0.5–1 μl) using a state-of-the-art autosampler and high-temperature (>1325 °C) reduction by carbon in a He carrier stream. Particular attention was paid to reducing the memory effect from residual water by modifying two commercially available EA units to avoid any spilling over of evaporating water. In one, the glassy carbon reactor was redesigned and the gas flow redirected so that water vapour came into contact with no surface other than the glassy carbon. Reduction of sample-to-sample memory from 5–8 to ∼1% resulted in precisions of <1 and 0.1‰ for δ2H and δ18O, respectively. Similar precisions were obtained for the second unit by electropolishing the injector metal sleeve. Complete reduction was only obtained above 1325 °C but increasing production of a CO background limited the usable temperature to 1450 °C. The similar system of Franz and Röckmann375 for the analysis of much smaller atmospheric water samples (120 nl) allowed δ2H, δ17O and δ18O to be measured in a single sample but with the poorer precisions of 7, 1.3 and 0.7‰, respectively. Oxygen analysis was performed first by reacting the water sample with CoF3 in a nickel tube at 370 °C and then switching the system to hydrogen analysis following reduction of the water sample at 1050 °C by carbon on a nickel surface. The wide and asymmetric sample peaks that resulted from release of water from the trap by heating were the limit on precision. Memory effects also limited the performance, in particular for oxygen, and remained to be resolved. Richelle et al.376 developed a high-throughput procedure for the simultaneous determination of 2H and 18O enrichment in water samples (200 nl) isolated from blood (200 μl). In contrast to the other studies, water samples were reduced at 1450 °C to produce CO and H2 and the ion beams at m/z 2, 3, 28 and 29 were integrated simultaneously over time. In order to avoid memory effects, which could be pronounced when analyzing samples with a wide range of enrichments, each sample was analysed five times and only the last three results used. Reproducibility was 4.8 for δ2H and 0.62‰ for δ18O, and analysis of CRM gave results in close agreement with the certified values.The comparative ease and simplicity of analysis using CF SIRMS systems has been exploited for a range of applications. Ghandi et al.377 developed an EA-SIRMS method for the 13C analysis of dissolved organic carbon that is faster and more cost effective than the commonly used high-temperature sealed-tube combustion method. Stream water samples (150–200 ml containing 20 μmol C) were concentrated by rotary evaporation, acidified to remove dissolved inorganic carbon and dried in silver cups prior to analysis. The δ13C values measured for natural abundance standards and samples were within 0.03‰ of those obtained by the high-temperature method. The system of Ishimura et al.378 for the analysis of individual foraminiferal shells consisted of a microvolume CaCO3 decomposition tube, a stainless steel CO2 purification vacuum line, a He-purged CO2 purification line, GC and CF-SIRMS. It was possible to determine δ13C and δ18O to within ±0.10 and ±0.18‰, respectively, within a 4 h reaction time and 30 min analysis time. The sample size of as little as 0.2 μg of CaCO3 was considerably lower than the mg amounts required by traditional methodology and allowed individual foraminifera to be analysed. McDuffee et al.379 used a novel moving-wire sample introduction system for the rapid determination of 13C in bulk samples of plant wax n-alkanes extracted from sediment samples. Extensive sample preparation was required to produce n-alkanes free of interfering components.A novel procedure for the determination of the carbon isotopic composition of homologous C2–C10dicarboxylic acids in aerosols involved dibutyl ester derivatization and capillary GC-combustion-SIRMS.380 The δ13C values for individual carboxylic acids were calculated from the values for butan-1-ol and the butyl ester derivative using a mass balance equation. The accuracy was <0.8‰ for all the acids. The reproducibility of replicate analyses (n
					= 8) was in the range 0.10–0.21‰ and depended on the species. Whereas aliphatic di-acids had a wide range of δ13C values in aerosol and snow samples, indicating different sources or the effect of transformation processes in the atmosphere, the narrow range of values for phthalic acid indicated a more specific source.The PSIA of N2O is based on the measurement of NO+ fragment ions produced from N2O in the ion source. Isotopic scrambling, which occurs in the ion source, must be taken into account so reference gas calibration is critical. The calibration method of Kaiser et al.,381 which avoided gravimetric, manometric or volumetric preparation of calibrated gas mixtures, involved addition of different amounts of pure 15N2O to the N2O reference gas and measurement of the N2O+ and NO+ ions for the mixtures as well as the reference gas. The underlying theoretical framework, described in detail, accounted fully for the formation of the scrambled ions and allowed an overall uncertainty of ±0.9‰
					(1σ) to be achieved. For the method to work, average O2 and N2 isotope ratios of the unknown N samples were needed so the method depended critically on the absolute isotope ratios of the primary RM, air–N2 and VSMOW. Significant differences between the values measured in this study for the terminal nitrogen atom (1δ15N =
					−16.2 ± 1.1‰) and the central nitrogen atom (2δ15N =
					−29.6 ± 1.1‰) in free troposphere N2O and those reported previously were attributed to differences in reference gas calibration. Ogawa and Toshida382 used PSIA to investigate kinetic isotope effects during the thermal decomposition and reduction of N2O. In both destruction reactions, the central N atom became enriched in 15N and the O atom became enriched in 18O.The on-line CF determination of S isotope ratios has the major advantage over off-line chemical pretreatments of requiring substantially less sample (10 g instead of kg amounts) but it also minimizes the occurrence of analytical artefacts. The new procedure of Baublys et al.383 for the simultaneous determination of δ33S and δ34S gave measurement precision and accuracy of better than ±0.3‰ in an analysis time of 5 min per sample. The EA had two reactor tubes, one containing copper wire and the other quartz chips. The traditional W2O5 packing was not included. In the procedure of Fox et al.384 for determining δ34S in water-soluble sulfate in soil, samples were applied to an adsorbent in tin cups and mixed with V2O5 as oxygen donor. Replicate analyses (n
					= 5) of RM gave a precision in the range ±0.25–0.31‰. The smallest deviation from expected values was obtained for a sample containing 10–30 μg S.The CF-SIRMS determination of δ37Cl in environmental samples did not require off-line preparative cryogenic separation or GC isolation of CH3Cl from iodomethane, thereby significantly reducing costs and the potential for isotopic fractionation during gas handling and clean-up.385 Pure AgCl was quantitatively prepared from the total Cl in water samples, inorganic salts and biological samples and was reacted with iodomethane in sealed glass vials (10 ml) to produce CH3Cl gas. Headspace gas (150–700 μl) from the reaction vial was injected into the GC system, in which CH3Cl was resolved from residual iodomethane. Isotope analysis was performed using an optimized collector geometry with two Faraday cups at m/z 52 and 50 in addition to the standard triple collector array. The δ37Cl values were calculated by measurement of CH3Cl at m/z 52 and 50 and by comparison with the values for a pulse of reference gas (calibrated to standard mean ocean chloride). Repeatability (n
					= 10) was ±0.06‰ for 40 μl pure gas. The smallest sample analysed contained 0.2 μmol Cl.A simple algorithm for the calculation of isotopic composition in GC-combustion-SIRMS had the advantage of automatically removing background contributions to the peaks, thereby avoiding user subjectivity in placing the baseline.386 The algorithm, which modelled the peak shape of minor ions from that of the major ions, was tested both under ideal conditions with fully resolved peaks and a well-defined baseline and under more commonly encountered conditions where some degree of peak overlap existed. In comparison with the commercial software supplied by the instrument manufacturer, the algorithm produced superior results in the ideal situation but only the same performance for real samples.10.4. Sample preparationFully automated reduction systems supplied by instrument manufacturers tend to be very expensive. Practical aspects investigated for a simple, manually operated, on-line Cr reduction system for the measurement of δ2H in natural waters included configuration of the reaction tube, reproducibility, effective methods for rapid reaction, memory effect and salt effects.387 In the reduction system, which could be attached to a conventional instrument at low cost, a mixture of chromium powder (16 g) and quartz glass sand (2 g) was placed in the middle of a quartz glass reaction tube. The sand facilitated smooth gas flow inside the tube for rapid and complete reduction. The optimum volume of water samples injected into the furnace was 2 μl. A minimum reaction time of 12 min was required for fresh chromium powder but 15–20 min was needed for used powder which had to be replaced after reduction of 100–150 samples. A reproducibility (n
					= 44) of ±0.5‰ was obtained throughout the life of the chromium powder. Salt solutions should be analysed in duplicate because of poorer reproducibility. Memory effects were observed and up to five flush runs, depending on the difference in δ2H between consecutive samples, were required before satisfactory and stable values could be obtained.The ability to determine δ13C values in very low concentrations (μg l−1) of chlorinated ethenes is critical for determining the maximum extent of contaminant biodegradation in plumes. This has been achieved through use of a GC-combustion-SIRMS instrument modified to include a headspace extraction system and a cryogenic trap.388 Continuous extraction of the headspace above an 80 ml aqueous solution containing 40 g NaCl, added to increase solution ionic strength, into He gas, together with cryogenic trapping, gave accurate and reproducible δ13C values for trichloroethene and cis-1,2-dichloroethene at concentrations of 50–75 μg l−1. The LOQ for more volatile compounds were expected to be in the tens of μg l−1 range.An analytical procedure for the quantitative determination of neutral and acidic lipid biomarkers in particulate and sediment samples involved solvent extraction to separate neutral and acidic compounds followed by HPLC to isolate four classes of neutral compounds: aliphatic hydrocarbons; aromatic hydrocarbons; ketones; sterols and fatty alcohols.389 The absence of isotopic fractionation in the sample preparation made the method suitable for CSIA. Derivatization of standards of known isotopic composition allowed corrections to be made for the isotopic change introduced by the derivatization for GC analysis. Sterols, fatty acids and fatty alcohols were analysed in marine particulate material and PAH in sediment samples.The differentiation between synthetic and endogenous steroids in the control of steroid misuse in sport is an analytical challenge. A GC-combustion-SIRMS procedure was developed for the analysis of urinary androstenol, 5β-pregnane-3α,20α-diol (5βP) and four testosterone metabolites.390 Administration of pregnenolone significantly affected the δ13C values of 5βP but much less so those of androstenol. Therefore, the differences between the δ13C values of the two compounds could be an indication of pregnenolone administration. The within-assay and between-assay precisions fell in the ranges 0.16–0.29‰ and 0.16–0.59‰, respectively.Free cholesterol was separated from plasma by TLC and then injected into the reactor of an EA-SIRMS system to produce CO and H2 gases for isotope analysis.391 No significant isotopic fractionation occurred during the sample preparation process. The within-assay and between-assay precisions for the measurement of δ2H were ±4.6 and ±6.1‰, respectively.Little is known about the δ13C composition of monosaccharides, which represent the largest carbon reservoir in the biosphere. Derivatization of these compounds for GC-combustion-SIRMS analysis introduces carbon and requires a large isotopic correction to be made. Gross and Glaser392 investigated derivatization with MBA as only 0.3–0.8 carbon atoms were added per sugar carbon atom, whereas 2.2–2.7 were added by the commonly used preparation of TMS derivatives. Although the analytical precision of both methods was ∼±0.3‰, the MBA method was ∼2‰ more accurate than the TMS method. With respect to peak identity and separation, the MBA method was superior to other derivatization procedures for monosaccharides as all monosaccharides gave only one peak and each peak represented only one monosaccharide. The method was sensitive to the MBA ∶ monosaccharide ratio (optimum 4.5 mg ∶ 100 μg), in particular for soil samples (2.5–4.5 mg MBA for 7–8 mg TOC). A higher proportion of MBA produced significantly smaller peaks for the hexoses, whereas less MBA produced small peaks for all other compounds.11. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)11.1. ReviewsZircon U–Th–Pb geochronology using ID-TIMS is an extremely powerful technique for resolving the chronology of geological events in the Earth. The U–Pb system alone can potentially resolve events on a sub-million year scale throughout the entire 4.5 × 109 years of the Earth’s history. The excellent review by Parrish and Noble393 provided a comprehensive introduction to the technique. Description of the various TIMS methods included comments on their strengths and weaknesses and highlighted major advances in a historical context. Although the article discussed TIMS methodology and zircon analysis in some detail, the principal emphasis was on discussion of numerous applications.Analyses traditionally associated with TIMS have, in recent years, become feasible using SF-ICP-MS instruments with MC detector arrays. The performance of the latter instruments is frequently assessed by comparison with TIMS analysis, yet the strong advantages of ICP-MS could potentially render TIMS a superfluous technique. In a critical evaluation of TIMS and MC-ICP-MS performance, Walczyk394 concluded that the initial promise of the latter technique has yet to be fully realized and that TIMS will remain as the reference technique for isotope ratio measurements unless proper quality control protocols are established for MC-ICP-MS measurements. Whereas some perceived advantages of ICP-MS, such as simpler sample preparation, were in reality not substantial, problems of isotopic fractionation and systematic bias were greater in ICP-MS than TIMS.11.2. InstrumentationDetails presented for a novel switching controller of filament temperature included both the fundamental concept and the circuit description.395 The circuit was a four-wire stabilizer of the average filament voltage which enhanced temperature stability and had a low power consumption. The small relative temperature variation of ∼10−4 meant that a filament temperature of 600 °C could be controlled to within 0.37 °C in the analysis of K.The precision attainable for small samples using MC arrays is limited by the noise level of the Faraday cup detectors commonly used. Development of a special MC set-up of miniaturized MIC, identical in size to and interchangeable with the standard Faraday cups in a commercial instrument, has continued.396 Nine Faraday cups plus eight MIC channels were installed simultaneously in the collector array with either type of detector at any position. The mass dispersion of the variable MC array was such that the U isotopes could be measured on the high m/z side together with all Pb isotopes and Hg on the low m/z side with unit mass separation. Although the MIC have been the subject of at least two conference presentations, published details of the performance characteristics are still awaited.11.3. Analytical methodologyThe usual approach for reducing isobaric interference in both positive and negative ionization B analysis is to remove NO3− and organic matter from the sample prior to analysis because these induce formation in the ion source of CNO− and Cs2CNO+, which are isobaric with the BO2− and Cs2BO2+ ions, respectively. Discrepancies between the results obtained by positive and negative ionization procedures are accounted for by the use of nitrate-containing promoters in negative ionization TIMS. Boron, itself, acts as an activator and induces the generation of Cs2CNO+ from CsNO3 in the ion source. Use of 1% H3PO4 as an ionization depressor effectively eliminated these isobaric interferences.397 This simplified the pre-treatment of samples as the nitrate and organic matter did not have to be removed completely. The optimum volume of 1% H3PO4
					(μl) for complete elimination of the isobaric interference was 0.56 × the mass of NO3−
					(μg).Sealed-tube combustion for Cl isotope analysis has been used in several different applications. In the robust and quantitative method of Howard and Vocke398 for the separation, purification and analysis of Cl in fossil fuels using ID-TIMS, samples were digested in Carius tubes in the presence of HNO3, AgNO3 and a 37Cl spike. The closed system allowed complete equilibration between sample and spike to be reached. The evolved Cl was trapped as AgCl within the Carius tube and was subsequently purified for isotope analysis. A wide-aperture thin-lens source was modified for use with negative ions both by placing magnets in the shield plate to deflect electrons produced at the filament and by applying 54 V to the first lens plate to prevent electrons from charging up the lens and deflecting the ion beam. The two side filaments of a triple rhenium configuration were each loaded with 4–6 μg of Cl. The LOD in the negative ionization mode was 0.3 μg Cl and the precision was 0.2%
					(RSD). Holmstrand et al.399 obtained high and reliable yields by combusting samples for 2 h with CuO in sealed tubes at 630 °C as part of the sample preparation for the determination of δ37Cl in chlorinated organic compounds. Purified sample (3 μg Cl in 1 μl H2O) was mixed with graphite slurry (containing 65 μg of graphite) and loaded on to single tantalum wire filaments for positive ion analysis. The precision of 0.46‰ for <85 nmol liberated Cl (<3 μg) made possible a substantial reduction of the sample size requirement from that of the SIRMS method.Copper isotope analysis has been performed using a new technique based on the formation of Cu(CN)2− ions.400 Samples (5–10 μg Cu) were loaded as aqueous CuCl2 solution, together with 40 μg Zn (as ZnCl2) and 100 μg NaCN, on to the ionization filament of a rhenium double-filament. Ion beam currents of (1–2)
					× 10−11 A were obtained at ionization and evaporation filament temperatures of 930 and ∼350 °C, respectively. The method was used to show that dephytinization of a cereal-based complementary food increased Zn absorption in adults but had no apparent effect on Cu absorption, thereby confirming that phytic acid is not an inhibitor of Cu absorption in humans.In the total evaporation procedure, isotope fractionation effects are effectively eliminated by simultaneously integrating each isotope signal until the sample is exhausted. In the negative ionization measurement of Re isotope ratios, Suzuki et al.401 had to pay particular consideration to the Re background in the ion source resulting from the use of rhenium filaments in previous analyses. Not only the filament holders but also the sample turret and the filament loading devices caused background and could only be used if they had not previously been used for rhenium filaments. The 187Re ∶
					185Re ratio measured in 0.05–1 ng of a natural Re RM (1.6755 ± 0.0014; 2σ, n
					= 28) compared well with the IUPAC value of 1.6740 ± 0.0011 and was more precise than the value (1.6772 ± 0.0037; 2σ, n
					= 34) obtained in the authors’ laboratory using conventional negative ionization TIMS analysis. Yokoyama and Nakamura402 used a new separation procedure, involving sequential chromatographic separation on four different columns, in the precise and accurate determination of Ra abundance and isotope ratio. Use of the total evaporation technique overcame previously observed mass fractionation problems. The reproducibility for a sample with a 228Ra ∶
					226Ra ratio of ∼1.1 ranged from 0.2–0.9%
					(2σ) for 170–2 fg loaded Ra. The analytical uncertainties (2σ) of 0.3–0.6 and 1–1.5% for the determination of 226Ra and 226Ra ∶
					228Ra, respectively, in silicate rock samples were 2–3 times better than previously published TIMS data.As part of a detailed investigation into the causes of drift in the MC-ICP-MS multidynamic isotope analysis of Hf, Nd, Pb and Yb, Thirlwall and Anczkiewicz236 also reported the TIMS multidynamic analysis of Nd and Yb and presented the first TIMS multidynamic determination of all the non-radiogenic Nd isotope ratios. New high-precision TIMS reference values were presented for the 142Nd ∶
					144Nd, 143Nd ∶
					144Nd, 145Nd ∶
					144Nd, 148Nd ∶
					144Nd, 150Nd ∶
					144Nd, 170Yb ∶
					172Yb, 171Yb ∶
					172Yb, 173Yb ∶
					172Yb and 176Yb ∶
					172Yb ratios.Small sample sizes in Pb isotope analysis increase the uncertainty on the minor 204Pb isotope substantially and the precision on ratios involving 204Pb becomes worse. For this reason, the routine determination of isotope ratios of small amounts of Pb (<5 ng) has not previously been possible. The “two double spike” method of Pb analysis developed by Kuritani and Nakamura403 gave accurate and precise isotopic analysis of extremely small amounts of Pb (<3 ng). Two different types of double spike, one containing 205Pb and 204Pb and the other containing 207Pb and 204Pb, were used to improve the uncertainty on the measured 204Pb intensity and to correct mass fractionation, respectively. The conventional double-spike procedure requires two runs for each unknown sample, one with and one without the double spike. The new procedure also uses two runs but one of the two spikes is added in each run. The external precision of 0.02%
					(2σ) obtained for the 208Pb ∶
					204Pb ratio in replicate analyses of 1.5 ng of NIST SRM 981 (common lead) was ∼60% better than that of the conventional double-spike method. The new procedure was suitable for lead isotope analysis of small samples (<5 ng Pb) but had no advantage for the analysis of larger samples, for which measurement of 204Pb was not a problem.The U–Pb dating of single monazite crystals provides a useful approach for unravelling complex geological histories but it requires in situ analyses with high spatial resolution in order to distinguish both the various age domains at the crystal scale and the textural relationships between the monazites and their host minerals. The procedure of Paquette et al.404 involved characterization of the monazite grains in thin sections using EMA, extraction of monazites from the thin section by microdrilling and ID-TIMS dating of the extracted monazites. This approach combined the high spatial resolution of EMA with the good precision of TIMS. Strengths of the procedure included the fact that both EMA and ID-TIMS data were obtained for the same grains and that only the drilled parts of the thin sections were destroyed.The ultra-trace amount of 236U in anthropogenic U is produced by neutron capture of 235U in nuclear industrial processes and therefore can be used as an environmental marker of U derived from nuclear reactors. Sahoo et al.405 developed a procedure for the measurement of 236U using an instrument equipped with a WARP energy filter. The U was isolated from soil samples by a combination of anion-exchange and UTEVA™ extraction chromatographies followed by a second anion-exchange step to remove organic residues introduced by the UTEVA™ column. The extracted U was analysed using a triple rhenium-filament procedure on an instrument with nine new bucket-type Faraday collectors and a Daly ion-counting system detector positioned behind the axial Faraday and WARP energy filter. A factor of 0.22% per u was applied to correct for mass fractionation. All U ratios had a 2σ measurement precision of <0.2% but the procedure LOD of 1.2 × 10−10 for the 236U ∶
					238U ratio was insufficient to measure background levels. Therefore the procedure was considered most suited currently for the study of contaminated sites.11.4. Sample preparationOne limitation on the isotopic analysis of Ru is interference caused by Mo. A procedure for the extraction of Ru from geological samples, based on aqua regia dissolution and distillation, was suitable for the quantitative recovery of small amounts (few tens of pg) from samples with large Mo concentrations.406 The procedure was based on the production and distillation of volatile RuO4 under strongly oxidizing conditions and trapping in HCl–ethanol (1 ∶ 1) under reducing conditions. The blanks for this technique (4 ± 2 pg) were much lower than those for the fire assay and sodium peroxide fusion digestion techniques. Unlike microdistillation, the procedure separated Ru from Mo and thus removed the main source of isobaric interference.The determination of226Ra by TIMS requires the recovery of a very high-purity Ra fraction because traces of Ba or Ca inhibit the ionization of Ra. The initial step of a highly efficient separation of Ra from the sample matrix involved precipitation of MnO2 which adsorbed the Ra and removed it from the matrix.407 Subsequent steps involved separation and purification on two columns of cation-exchange resin and one of Sr-Spec™ absorbent. The method was particularly relevant for the analysis of CaCO3 and water samples for which conventional chromatographic separation methods do not provide sufficiently pure Ra for analysis. The reproducibility and accuracy of 0.55% obtained for 250 fg 226Ra isolated from a coral matrix opened up new possibilities for the 226Ra dating of Holocene marine and continental carbonates. In comparison with the 10–20 l of sea-water required for conventional counting methods, only 200 ml (10 fg 226Ra) were required by the TIMS method to give a precision of ±2.3%.The principal requirement of a procedure for the recovery of the uranium-series nuclides from ice samples was stabilization of the elements in solution during sample melting and filtration without reaction with particulate matter present in the ice. Goldstein et al.408 used EDTA to stabilize the nuclides and achieved high recoveries of Ba, Pa, Th and U without dissolution of particulate matter. Ice samples were melted directly under a heat lamp and the solution maintained at pH 8–9 prior to analysis using conventional spiking and chromatographic techniques.12. Other methods12.1. Noble gas mass spectrometryA new technique for the extraction of He from groundwaters for isotope analysis was based on equilibrium partitioning between a gas phase (host gas, high-purity N2) and a liquid phase (the water sample).409 Glass flasks containing the water sample were filled with N2 gas, sealed and then shaken for 10 min. An aliquot of the separated gas phase was removed for MS analysis. Because of the detrimental effect of Ne on He isotope analysis, Ne was completely adsorbed on a cryogenic charcoal trap during the purification process. It was possible to determine low He and Ne concentrations and 3He ∶
					4He ratios in the same aliquot of dissolved gas using the same instrument. The proposed method would be a useful tool in the determination of 3He ∶
					4He ratios in groundwater systems when free gases are not available or are too dangerous to collect. By increasing sample size from 30 to 500 ml, Eaton et al.410 could increase the throughput of groundwater samples dated by the 3He in-growth method. The larger volumes of water accumulated enough 3He in 14–20 days to allow the 3H concentration in water samples to be determined accurately.A method for the determination of Ne concentrations in water involved addition of a 22Ne spike to the evacuated sample flask prior to sample collection.411 In comparison with the use of copper tubes, the use of glass flasks for water sampling, with flushing of air from the system using CO2, greatly reduced the chance of contamination. Dissolved gases were extracted from the water by headspace equilibration and then processed cryogenically to remove interferences. Mass fractionation in the quadrupole mass spectrometer was accounted for by frequent determination of 22Ne ∶
					20Ne in air. The precision was ±0.13% and the accuracy ±0.18%. The use of ID analysis eliminated the need to de-gas the sample completely and also corrected for drift in instrument sensitivity but required accurate determination of mass fractionation.Use of a 180° magnetic sector and five Faraday cup detectors rendered peak switching unnecessary for 40Ar ∶39Ar dating analyses.412 In comparison with the commonly used single collector analysis, the new approach gave better stability during data acquisition. The Faraday cup efficiencies, which could be considered a limitation of MC analysis, were highly reproducible. Analytical error was as low as 0.1% for so-called “well-behaved” samples.12.2. Matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization (MALDI)The limited success of ESMS for the detection of Se-containing compounds, due to insufficient ionization or suppression effects in complex matrices, prompted Ruiz Encinar et al.413 to investigate the use of MALDI for the identification of non-peptide species in selenized yeast. The only technique available for characterizing the structure of molecules using MALDI has been PSD but an emerging alternative is the “collision damping interface” in which ions produced in the MALDI source are cooled prior to selection and fragmentation using orthogonal injection TOFMS. The attraction of the new approach was that the ion source and analyser were decoupled. Disadvantages were the increased complexity of mass spectra compared with those obtained using PSD, production of artefact ions and poorer sensitivity. The mass accuracy of the orthogonal system with CID was, however, 20 times better than that obtained using PSD. It was considered that MALDI offered a competitive performance to ES analysis owing to its capacity for handling small quantities of complex or minimally purified samples.12.3. Chemical ionizationA German standard method for the determination of inorganic bromide in cereals has been modified by replacing the ECD with negative chemical ionization MS using methane as the ionization gas.414 The LOD of 0.1 μg g−1 was a factor of 50 better than that obtained with the ECD. Furthermore, the characteristic isotopic pattern at m/z 79 and 81 provided positive evidence of the presence of Br.13. Appendix: Glossary of termsAAAAcid–alkali–acidAESAtomic emission spectrometryAFMAtomic force microscopyAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryamuAtomic mass unitARTAdaptive resonance theoryaTOFAerosol time-of-flightBCRBureau Communautaire de ReférenceBPBefore PresentCCCollision cellCECapillary electrophoresisCFContinuous flowCIDCollision induced dissociationcpscounts per secondCRMCertified Reference MaterialCSIACompound-specific isotope analysisDBTDibutyltindcdirect currentDIHENDirect injection high efficiency nebulizerDINDirect injection nebulizerDMADimethylarsenic acidDRCDynamic reaction cellDRFDepth resolution functionEAElemental analyserECDElectron capture detectorECRElectron cyclotron resonanceEDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acidEDXEnergy dispersive X-rayEENEmpirical external normalizationEIElectron ionizationEIMSElectron ionization mass spectrometryEMElectron multiplierEMAElectron microprobe analysisEPXMAElectron probe X-ray microanalysisESElectrosprayESAElectrostatic analyserESMSElectrospray mass spectrometryETVElectrothermal vaporizationFAIMSHigh-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometryFIFlow injectionFPCFocal plane cameraFTIRFourier transform infraredFTMSFourier transform mass spectrometryFWHMFull width at half maximumGBWNational Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)GCGas chromatographyGDGlow dischargeGDMSGlow discharge mass spectrometryGD-OESGlow discharge optical emission spectrometryHENHigh efficiency nebulizerHGHydride generationHPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographyHRHigh resolutionHSMHigh solids micronebulizerHVEEHigh Voltage Engineering EuropaICIon chromatographyICPInductively coupled plasmaICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryidInternal diameterIDIsotope dilutionIEInternal energyIERIonization efficiency ratioIMFInstrumental mass fractionationIPIonization potentialIRInfraredIRMMInstitute of Reference Materials and MeasurementsIUPACInternational Union of Pure and Applied ChemistryJACJapan Society for Analytical ChemistryJSSIron and Steel Institute of JapanKEKinetic energyKEDKinetic energy discriminationLALaser ablationLBMOLanthanum barium magnesium oxideLCLiquid chromatographyLEXESLow energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopyLIBSLaser-induced breakdown spectroscopyLIMSLaser ionization mass spectrometryLMMSLaser microprobe mass spectrometryLODLimit of detectionLOQLimit of quantificationLPILaser post-ionizationMALDIMatrix-assisted laser-desorption ionizationMBAMethylboronic acidMBTMonobutyltinMCMultiple collectorMDMolecular dynamicsMEISMedium energy ion scattering spectrometryMICMultiple ion countersMITMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyMSMass spectrometryMTMetallothioneinm/zmass-to-charge ratioNDDNatural diamond-based detectorNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNMIJNational Metrological Institute of JapanNRANuclear reaction analysisNRCCNational Research Council of CanadaPAHPolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbonsPCAPrincipal components analysisPDMSPolydimethylsiloxanePFAPerfluoroalkylPMNPolymeric micronebulizerPSDPost-source decayPTFEPolytetrafluoroethyleneRBSRutherford backscattering spectrometryREERare earth elementsrfradiofrequencyRIMSResonance ionization mass spectrometryRMReference materialrmsroot mean squareRPReversed phaseRSDRelative standard deviationRSFRelative sensitivity factorSDStandard deviationSDMESingle drop microextractionSECSize exclusion chromatographySEMScanning electron microscopySFSector fieldSIMSelected ion monitoringSIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySIRMSStable isotope ratio mass spectrometryS/NSignal-to-noise ratioSNMSSputtered neutrals mass spectrometrySPMESolid phase microextractionSRMStandard Reference MaterialS-SIMSStatic secondary ion mass spectrometrySSBSample standard bracketingSTOStrontium titanium oxideTBTTributyltinTEAMSTrace element accelerator mass spectrometryTEMTransmission electron microscopyTIMSThermal ionization mass spectrometryTLCThin layer chromatographyTMSTrimethylsilylTOFTime-of-flightTOFMSTime-of-flight mass spectrometryTPTTriphenyltinTXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescenceULSIUltra-large scale integratedUSNUltrasonic nebulizerUVUltravioletVSMOWVienna Standard Mean Ocean WaterWARPWide aperture retardation potentialXPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopyYAGYttrium aluminium garnet3-DThree dimensional5βP5β-pregnane-3α, 20α-diolλWavelengthτPulse duration14. ReferencesJ. R. Bacon, J. C. Greenwood, L. Van Vaeck and J. G. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 1020 RSC .A. Fisher, P. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. N. Nelms and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1567 RSC .O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 130 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 323 RSC .Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B,  2004, 223–224 Search PubMed.Radiocarbon,  2004, 46(1) Search PubMed.M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–224, 139 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Currie, J. Res. Nat. Inst. Stand. Technol., 2004, 109(2), 185 Search PubMed .J. van der Plicht, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 353 CrossRef .L. K. Fifield, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 401 CrossRef .J. A. Tripp and R. E. M. Hedges, LC-GC Eur., 2004, 17(6), 358 CAS .J. A. Tripp and R. E. M. Hedges, LC-GC North Am., 2004, 22(11), 1098 CAS .A. J. T. Jull, G. S. Burr, L. R. McHargue, T. E. Lange, N. A. Lifton, J. W. Beck, D. J. Donahue and D. Lal, Global Planet. Change, 2004, 41(3–4), 309 Search PubMed .R. C. Reedy, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 587 CrossRef .L. Skipperud and D. H. Oughton, Environ. Int., 2004, 30(6), 815 CrossRef CAS .G. Lappin and R. C. Garner, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 356 CrossRef CAS .I. N. H. White and K. Brown, Trends Pharmac. Sci., 2004, 25(8), 442 Search PubMed .J. Southon, G. Santos, K. Druffel-Rodriguez, E. Druffel, S. Trumbore, X. M. Xu, S. Griffin, S. Ali and M. Mazon, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 41 CAS .T. Goslar, J. Czernik and E. Goslar, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 5 CrossRef .M. L. Roberts, R. A. Culp, D. K. Dvoracek, G. W. L. Hodgins, M. P. Neary and J. E. Noakes, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 1 CrossRef .R. G. Liberman, B. J. Hughey, P. L. Skipper, J. S. Wishnok, R. E. Klinkowstein, R. E. Shefer and S. R. Tannenbaum, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 82 CrossRef .H.-A. Synal, M. Döbeli, S. Jacob, M. Stocker and M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 339 CrossRef .J. B. Schroeder, T. M. Hauser, G. M. Klody and G. A. Norton, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 1 CAS .M. Friedrich, W. Pilz, N. Bekris, M. Glugla, M. Kiisk and V. Liechtenstein, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 21 CrossRef .C. Bronk Ramsey, T. Higham and P. Leach, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 17 .S. Freeman, P. Bishop, C. Bryant, G. Cook, A. Fallick, D. Harkness, S. Metcalfe, M. Scott, R. Scott and M. Summerfield, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 31 CrossRef .A. Steinhof, G. Adamiec, G. Gleixner, G. J. van Klinken and T. Wagner, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 51 CAS .L. Calcagnile, G. Quarta and M. D’Elia, Appl. Phys., Sect. A, 2004, 79(2), 289 Search PubMed .L. Calcagnile, G. Quarta, M. D’Elia, A. Rizzo, A. Gottdang, M. Klein and D. J. W. Mous, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 16 CrossRef .S. Xu, R. Anderson, C. Bryant, G. T. Cook, A. Dougans, S. Freeman, P. Naysmith, C. Schnabel and E. M. Scott, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 59 CAS .D. Berkovits, M. Paul, Y. Ben-Dov, C. Bordeanu, S. Ghelberg, O. Heber, M. Hass, Y. Shahar and G. Verri, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 161 CrossRef .D. P. Mahapatra, A. K. Behera, K. Gopalan, S. Chakraborty, K. Dutta and B. L. K. Somayajulu, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 26 CrossRef .P. Tikkanen, V. Palonen, H. Jungner and J. Keinonen, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 35 CrossRef .T. Suzuki, T. Aramaki, T. Kitamura and O. Togawa, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 87 CrossRef .T. A. Brown, A. A. Marchetti, R. E. Martinelli, C. C. Cox, J. P. Knezovich and T. F. Hamilton, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 788 CrossRef .P. Steier, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, C. Vockenhuber and S. Winkler, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 67 CrossRef .M. Nakamura, Y. Tazawa, H. Matsumoto, M. Hirose, K. Ogino and T. Nakanishi, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 62 CrossRef .S. Mitarai, Y. Kanegae, K. Tanaka, H. Morikawa, T. Maeda, T. Noro and S. Morinobu, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 135 CrossRef .D. Fink, M. Hotchkis, Q. Hua, G. Jacobsen, A. M. Smith, U. Zoppi, D. Child, C. Mifsud, H. van der Gaast, A. Williams and M. Williams, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 109 CrossRef .D. L. Knies, K. S. Grabowski, C. Cetina, G. K. Hubler, M. Getaneh and S. J. Tumey, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 72 CrossRef .H. Matsuzaki, C. Nakano, H. Yamashita, Y. Maejima, Y. Miyairi, S. Wakasa and K. Horiuchi, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 92 CrossRef .S. Itoh, M. Abe, M. Watanabe, S. Nakai, H. Touyama and S. Xu, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 100 CrossRef .T. J. Ognibene, G. Bench, T. A. Brown and J. S. Vogel, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 12 CrossRef .M. Stocker, R. Bertschinger, M. Döbeli, M. Grajcar, S. Jacob, J. Scheer, M. Suter and H.-A. Synal, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 104 CrossRef .J. C. Kim, M. Youn, I. C. Kim, J. H. Park, Y. M. Song, J. Kang and H. R. Choi, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 44 CrossRef .V. Palonen, P. Tikkanen and J. Keinonen, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 227 CrossRef .C. C. Yun, C. S. Lee, M. Youn and J. C. Kim, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 89 CAS .G. S. Jackson, D. Elmore, M. Caffee, K. A. Mueller, B. De Bonte, P. Muzikar and B. Alexander, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 155 CrossRef .R. J. Schneider, S.-W. Kim, K. F. von Reden, J. M. Hayes, J. S. C. Wills, V. S. Griffin, A. L. Sessions and S. Sylva, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 149 CrossRef .C. Bronk Ramsey, P. Ditchfield and M. Humm, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 25 .S. J. Tumey, A. C. Mignerey, K. S. Grabowski, D. L. Knies and D. Leonhardt, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75(5), 1910 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Liberman, S. R. Tannenbaum, B. J. Hughey, R. E. Shefer, R. E. Klinkowstein, C. Prakash, S. P. Harriman and P. L. Skipper, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(2), 328 CrossRef CAS .P. L. Skipper, B. J. Hughey, R. G. Liberman, M. H. Choi, J. S. Wishnok, R. E. Klinkowstein, R. E. Shefer and S. R. Tannenbaum, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 740 CrossRef .T. Uhl, W. Kretschmer, W. Luppold and A. Scharf, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 65 CAS .J. R. Southon and G. M. Santos, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 33 CAS .M. Klein, D. J. W. Mous and A. Gottdang, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 77 CAS .M. Faarinen, S. Bazhal, U. Falkengren-Grerup, R. Hellborg, M. Kiisk, C. E. Magnusson, P. Persson, G. Skog and K. Stenström, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 130 CrossRef .J. Sandström, P. Andersson, K. Fritioff, D. Hanstorp, R. Thomas, D. J. Pegg and K. Wendt, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 217(3), 513 CrossRef .J. O. Fernández Niello, A. Arazi, O. A. Capurro, D. Abriola, A. M. J. Ferrero, L. Gladkis, R. G. Liberman, G. V. Martí, A. J. Pacheco, M. Ramírez and J. E. Testoni, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 242 CrossRef .D. Berkovits, Y. Ben-Dov, I. Berkovits, C. Bordeanu and M. Paul, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 233 CrossRef .K. T. Bogen, A. A. Marchetti and T. A. Brown, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 209 CrossRef .J. P. Doupé, A. E. Litherland, I. Tomski and X.-L. Zhao, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 323 CrossRef .M. Döbeli, C. Kottler, M. Stocker, S. Weinmann, H.-A. Synal, M. Grajcar and M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 415 CrossRef .V. K. Liechtenstein, T. M. Ivkova, E. D. Olshanski, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, P. Steier, C. Vockenhuber, R. Repnow, R. von Hahn, M. Friedrich and U. Kreissig, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 521(1), 197 CrossRef CAS .V. Alfimov and G. Possnert, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 180 CrossRef .H. Ming, J. Shan, S. S. Jiang, S. Y. Wu and G. Gang, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 78 .V. K. Liechtenstein, N. V. Eremin, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. A. Paskhalov, A. Priller, P. Steier, C. Vockenhuber and S. Winkler, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 521(1), 203 CrossRef CAS .P. Steier, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, V. Liechtenstein, A. Priller, C. Vockenhuber and S. Winkler, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 205 CrossRef .S. Kraft, V. Andrianov, A. Bleile, P. Egelhof, R. Golser, A. Kiseleva, O. Kiselev, W. Kutschera, J. P. Meier, A. Priller, A. Shrivastava, P. Steier and C. Vockenhuber, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 63 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Ruan, Y. J. Guan, M. He, K. J. Dong, Y. F. Zheng, S. Y. Wu, S. Jiang, W. M. Wu, K. X. Liu and B. X. Han, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 172 CrossRef .P. Steier, F. Dellinger, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, W. Rom and E. M. Wild, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 5 CAS .G. Quarta, M. D’Elia and L. Calcagnile, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 217(4), 644 CrossRef CAS .M.-J. Nadeau, A. E. Litherland, A. Rieck and P. M. Grootes, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 346 CrossRef .M.-J. Nadeau, H. W. Lee, A. E. Litherland, K. H. Purser and X.-L. Zhao, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 328 CrossRef .M. Uchida, Y. Shibata, M. Yoneda, T. Kobayashi and M. Morita, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 313 CrossRef .Q. Hua, U. Zoppi, A. A. Williams and A. M. Smith, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 284 CrossRef .J. H. Park and C. S. Lee, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 141 CAS .S. Ertl and A. Spitzy, Isotop. Environ. Health Stud., 2004, 40(2), 163 Search PubMed .M. Endo, N. Yamamoto, J. Yoshinaga, Y. Yanagisawa, O. Endo, S. Goto, M. Yoneda, Y. Shibata and M. Morita, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(36), 6263 CrossRef CAS .S. Szidat, T. M. Jenk, H. W. Gäggeler, H.-A. Synal, I. Hajdas, G. Bonani and M. Saurer, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 829 CrossRef .M. D’Elia, L. Calcagnile, G. Quarta, C. Sanapo, M. Laudisa, U. Toma and A. Rizzo, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 278 CrossRef .I. Hajdas, G. Bonani, H. Thut, G. Leone, R. Pfenninger and C. Maden, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 267 CrossRef .M. Sakamoto, A. Kodaira and M. Imamura, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 298 CrossRef .G. M. Santos, J. R. Southon, K. C. Druffel-Rodriguez, S. Griffin and M. Mazon, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 165 CAS .M. Yoneda, Y. Shibata, A. Tanaka, T. Uehiro, M. Morita, M. Uchida, T. Kobayashi, C. Kobayashi, R. Suzuki, K. Miyamoto, B. Hancock, C. Dibden and J. S. Edmonds, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 116 CrossRef .P. M. Grootes, M.-J. Nadeau and A. Rieck, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 55 CrossRef .H. Kanke, M. Uchida, T. Okuda, M. Yoneda, H. Takada, Y. Shibata and M. Morita, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 545 CrossRef .F. Dellinger, W. Kutschera, K. Nicolussi, P. Schiessling, P. Steier and E. M. Wild, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(2), 969 CAS .J. Moriizumi, A. Goto and T. Iida, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 511 CrossRef .P. Naysmith, G. T. Cook, W. M. Phillips, N. A. Lifton and R. Anderson, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 201 CAS .H. Enami, T. Nakamura, H. Oda, T. Yamada and T. Tsukamoto, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 219 CAS .C. M. Hüls, P. M. Grootes, M.-J. Nadeau, F. Bruhn, P. Hasselberg and H. Erlenkeuser, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 709 CrossRef .A. Scharf, W. Kretschmer, G. Morgenroth, T. Uhl, K. Kritzler, K. Hunger and E. Pernicka, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 175 CAS .L. L. W. Kwong, P. P. Povinec and A. J. T. Jull, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 133 CAS .N. Tisnérat-Laborde, H. Valladas, E. Kaltnecker and M. Arnold, Radiocarbon, 2003, 45(3), 409 CAS .T. F. G. Higham, R. E. M. Hedges, A. J. Anderson, C. Bronk Ramsey and B. Fankhauser, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 207 CAS .J. A. Tripp, T. F. G. Higham and R. E. M. Hedges, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 147 CAS .M. J. Vandergoes and C. A. Prior, Radiocarbon, 2003, 45(3), 479 .N. Piotrowska, A. Bluszcz, D. Demske, W. Granoszewski and G. Heumann, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 181 CAS .A. H. Love, J. R. Hunt, J. S. Vogel and J. P. Knezovich, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(2), 198 CrossRef CAS .A. Priller, M. Berger, H. W. Gäggeler, E. Gerasopoulos, P. W. Kubik, C. Schnabel, L. Tobler, E.-M. Wild, P. Zanis and C. Zerefos, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 601 CrossRef .J. Stone, K. Fifield, J. Beer, M. Vonmoos, C. Obrist, M. Grajcar, P. Kubik, R. Muscheler, R. Finkel and M. Caffee, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 272 CrossRef .K. X. Liu, H. L. Gao, L. P. Zhou, F. Xu, S. X. Peng, J. L. Yuan and Z. Y. Guo, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 168 CrossRef .X.-L. Zhao, A. E. Litherland, J. P. Doupé and W. E. Kieser, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 199 CrossRef .L. Wacker, M. Grajcar, S. Ivy-Ochs, P. W. Kubik and M. Suter, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 83 CAS .M. Grajcar, M. Döbeli, P. W. Kubik, C. Maden, M. Suter and H.-A. Synal, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 190 CrossRef .C. Maden, M. Dbeli, P. W. Kubik, M. Frank and A. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 247 CrossRef .W. Pilz, M. Friedrich, K.-H. Heinig, B. Schmidt and J. von Borany, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 459 CrossRef .R. Flarend, M. E. Hasan and C. S. Reed, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 263 CrossRef .A. Arazi, T. Faestermann, J. O. Fernández Niello, D. Frischke, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, H. J. Maier, E. Richter, G. Rugel and A. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 259 CrossRef .M. K. Pavicevic, E. M. Wild, G. Amthauer, M. Berger, B. Boev, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, T. Prohaska and I. Steffan, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 660 CrossRef .S. Merchel and W. Bremser, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 393 CrossRef .S. S. Jiang, Y. X. Lin and H. Y. Zhang, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 318 CrossRef .S. Freeman, S. Xu, C. Schnabel, A. Dougans, A. Tait, R. Kitchen, G. Klody, R. Loger, T. Pollock, J. Schroeder and M. Sundquist, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 195 CrossRef .S. Ivy-Ochs, H.-A. Synal, C. Roth and M. Schaller, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 623 CrossRef .M. Gaelens, M. Loiselet, G. Ryckewaert, R. C. Pardo, R. H. Scott, R. Vondrasek, P. Collon and W. Kutschera, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75(5), 1916 CrossRef CAS .P. Collon, M. Bichler, J. Caggiano, L. DeWayne Cecil, Y. El Masri, R. Golser, C. L. Jiang, A. Heinz, D. Henderson, W. Kutschera, B. E. Lehmann, P. Leleux, H. H. Loosli, R. C. Pardo, M. Paul, K. E. Rehm, P. Schlosser, R. H. Scott, W. M. Smethie Jr and R. Vondrasek, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 428 CrossRef .G. M. Raisbeck, F. Yiou, C. Eymas and J. Lestringuez, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 40 CrossRef .K. J. Dong, M. He, S. Y. Wu, D. F. Yue, Q. B. You, Y. W. Bao, Y. J. Guan, Y. F. Zheng, X. Y. Yin, H. J. Wang, G. Q. Li, Y. Y. Yang, G. J. Xu, Y. M. Hu and S. Jiang, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2004, 21(1), 51 CrossRef .G. Rugel, A. Arazi, K. L. Carroll, T. Faestermann, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, A. A. Marchetti, R. E. Martinelli, J. E. McAninch, W. Ruhm, T. Straume, A. Wallner and C. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 776 CrossRef .L. Wacker, L. K. Fifield and S. G. Tims, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 185 CrossRef .F. Yiou, G. Raisbeck and H. Imbaud, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 412 CrossRef .C. Vockenhuber, M. Bichler, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, P. Steier and S. Winkler, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 823 CrossRef .S. Winkler, I. Ahmad, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, K. A. Orlandini, M. Paul, A. Priller, P. Steier, A. Valenta and C. Vockenhuber, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 817 CrossRef .L. K. Fifield, H.-A. Synal and M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 802 CrossRef .C. Wallner, T. Faestermann, U. Gerstmann, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, C. Lierse and G. Rugel, New Astron. Rev., 2004, 48(1–4), 145 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Oughton, L. Skipperud, L. K. Fifield, R. G. Cresswell, B. Salbu and P. Day, Appl. Rad. Isotop., 2004, 61(2–3), 249 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Mitchell, G. V. R. Prasad, P. Pelicon, E. B. Smith and F. D. McDaniel, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 455 CrossRef .C. Maden, M. Döbeli, B. Hofmann and M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 176 CrossRef .E. M. Scott, E. Boaretto, C. Bryant, G. T. Cook, S. Gulliksen, D. D. Harkness, J. Heinemeier, E. McGee, P. Naysmith, G. Possnert, H. van der Plicht and M. van Strydonck, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 382 CrossRef .K. Nishiizumi, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 388 CrossRef .S. J. Ray, F. Andrade, G. Gamez, D. McClenathan, D. Rogers, G. Schilling, W. Wetzel and G. M. Hieftje, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1050(1), 3 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Rosen and G. M. Hieftje, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 135 CrossRef .R. N. Collins, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1059(1–2), 1 CrossRef CAS .X. C. Le, X. F. Lu and X.-F. Li, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(1), 26A CAS .S. McSheehy and Z. Mester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 373 RSC .H. R. Hansen, A. Raab, M. Jaspars, B. F. Milne and J. Feldmann, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2004, 17(8), 1086 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Hansen, M. Jaspars and J. Feldmann, Analyst, 2004, 129(11), 1058 RSC .B. P. Jensen, C. J. Smith, C. Bailey, C. Rodgers, I. D. Wilson and J. K. Nicholson, J. Chromatogr. B, 2004, 809(2), 279 CrossRef CAS .H. Goenaga Infante, F. Cuyckens, K. Van Campenhout, R. Blust, M. Claeys, L. Van Vaeck and F. C. Adams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 159 RSC .J. H. Banoub, J. Miller-Banoub, G. V. Sheppard and H. J. Hodder, Spectroscopy, 2004, 18(1), 95 Search PubMed .V. Díaz Huerta, J. Szpunar, R. Lobinski, M. L. Fernández Sánchez and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1471 RSC .L. Bendahl and B. Gammelgaard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 950 RSC .H. Goenaga Infante, G. O’Connor, M. Rayman, R. Wahlen, J. Entwisle, P. Norris, R. Hearn and T. Catterick, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1529 RSC .P. Braga, M. Montes-Bayón, J. Alvarez, J. M. López and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1128 RSC .D. N. Papadopoulou, G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, N. C. Tsirliganis and J. A. Stratis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 505(1), 173 CrossRef CAS .E. Dumont, F. Vanhaecke and R. Cornelis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(3), 504 CrossRef CAS .M. Shah, S. S. Kannamkumarath, J. C. A. Wuilloud, R. G. Wuilloud and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 381 RSC .K. A. Francesconi and S. A. Pergantis, Analyst, 2004, 129(5), 398 RSC .A. Kato, Y. Nagashima and K. Shiomi, Fish. Sci., 2004, 70(4), 695 Search PubMed .M. E. Merrifield, T. Ngu and M. J. Stillman, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2004, 324(1), 127 CrossRef CAS .M. Van Hulle, C. Zhang, B. Schotte, L. Mees, F. Vanhaecke, R. Vanholder, X. R. Zhang and R. Cornelis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 58 RSC .G. Vas and K. Vékey, J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 39(3), 233 CrossRef CAS .G. Centineo, E. Blanco González and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1034(1–2), 191 CrossRef CAS .G. Centineo, P. Rodríguez-González, E. Blanco González, J. I. García Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 39(5), 485 CrossRef CAS .Y. Won, P. G. Jung, M. Chung, B. Kim, Y. Yim, H.-Y. So and Y. S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2004, 25(10), 1508 CAS .H. Shioji, S. Tsunoi, H. Harino and M. Tanaka, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1048(1), 81 CrossRef CAS .V. Colombini, C. Bancon-Montigny, L. Yang, P. Maxwell, R. E. Sturgeon and Z. Mester, Talanta, 2004, 63(3), 555 CrossRef CAS .K. Inagaki, A. Takatsu, T. Watanabe, T. Kuroiwa, Y. Aoyagi and K. Okamoto, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(5), 1265 CrossRef CAS .S.-S. Chen, S.-S. Chou and D.-F. Hwang, J. Food Drug Anal., 2004, 12(2), 175 Search PubMed .J. Muñoz, M. Gallego and M. Valcárcel, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1055(1–2), 185 CrossRef CAS .B. Iscioglu and E. Henden, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 505(1), 101 CrossRef .L. Yang, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(17), 5149 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon, S. McSheehy and Z. Mester, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1055(1–2), 177 CrossRef CAS .J. Meija and J. A. Caruso, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15(5), 654 CrossRef CAS .L. Abrankó, L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon, P. Fodor and Z. Mester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1098 RSC .M. R. Winchester and R. Payling, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(5), 607 CrossRef .J. Pisonero, J. M. Costa, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(1), 17 CAS .M. Betti and L. A. de las Heras, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1359 CrossRef .R. K. Marcus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 591 RSC .J. Pisonero, J. M. Costa, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 658 CAS .K. D. Zientek and J. R. Eyler, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1513 RSC .K. Newman and R. S. Mason, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1134 RSC .B. C. Knippel, C. W. Padgett and R. K. Marcus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(3), 375 CrossRef .R. S. Mason, D. R. Williams, I. P. Mortimer, D. J. Mitchell and K. Newman, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1177 RSC .K. Newman, R. S. Mason, D. R. Williams and I. P. Mortimer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1192 RSC .L. Li, J. T. Millay, J. P. Turner and F. L. King, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15(1), 87 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Barnes IV, O. A. Grøn and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1564 RSC .J. L. Venzie, W. C. Davis and R. K. Marcus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1309 RSC .J. W. Lim, K. Mimura and A. Isshiki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 227(1–4), 300 CrossRef CAS .R. Shekhar, J. Arunachalam, N. Das and A. M. Srirama Murthy, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(5), 203 CAS .R. Shekhar, J. Arunachalam, G. R. Krishna, H. R. Ravindra and B. Gopalan, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(4), 157 CAS .J. H. Barnes IV, G. D. Schilling, R. Sperline, M. B. Denton, E. T. Young, C. J. Barinaga, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(9), 2531 CrossRef .J. H. Barnes IV, G. D. Schilling, G. M. Hieftje, R. P. Sperline, M. B. Denton, C. J. Barinaga and D. W. Koppenaal, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15(6), 769 CAS .J. H. Barnes IV, G. D. Schilling, R. P. Sperline, M. B. Denton, E. T. Young, C. J. Barinaga, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 751 RSC .J. H. Barnes IV, G. D. Schilling, S. F. Stone, R. P. Sperline, M. B. Denton, E. T. Young, C. J. Barinaga, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 227 CrossRef CAS .H. Hayashi and M. Hiraide, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(8), 793 CrossRef CAS .H. Hayashi, S. Furuzawa, T. Tanaka and M. Hiraide, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 773 RSC .H. Hayashi, T. Nagayasu, S. Furuzawa and M. Hiraide, Tetsu To Hagane—J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2004, 90(1), 17 Search PubMed .T. Nagayasu, H. Hayashi and M. Hiraide, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(9), 993 CrossRef CAS .A. E. Holliday and D. Beauchemin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(3), 291 CrossRef .J. H. Macedone, A. A. Mills and P. B. Farnsworth, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(4), 463 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) E. Colas, M. Valiente and I. Brenner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 282 RSC ; 
  (b) D. W. Koppenaal, G. C. Eiden and C. J. Barinaga, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 561 RSC .B. Hattendorf and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 600 RSC .E. McCurdy and G. Woods, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 607 RSC .S. D. Tanner, C.-S. Li, V. Vais, V. I. Baranov and D. R. Bandura, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(11), 3042 CrossRef CAS .V. Vais, C. S. Li and J. Cornett, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 235 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Becker, C. Pickhardt and W. Pompe, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 237(1), 13 CrossRef CAS .J. Koch, A. von Bohlen, R. Hergenröder and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 267 RSC .T. Trejos and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(5), 1236 CrossRef CAS .H.-R. Kuhn, M. Guillong and D. Günther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(4), 1069 CrossRef CAS .H.-R. Kuhn and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1158 RSC .J. González, C. Y. Liu, X. L. Mao and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1165 RSC .S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1501 RSC .M. Gäckle and D. Merten, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(12), 1893 CrossRef .A. Tunheng and T. Hirata, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 932 RSC .V. Kanický, H.-R. Kuhn and D. Guenther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 218 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Warnken, Z. Hao and W. Davison, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(20), 6077 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Westphal, K. Kahen, W. F. Rutkowski, B. W. Acon and A. Montaser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(3), 353 CrossRef .W. R. L. Cairns, C. Barbante, G. Capodaglio, P. Cescon, A. Gambaro and A. Eastgate, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 286 RSC .S. E. Maestre, J. L. Todolí and J. M. Mermet, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(5–6), 888 CrossRef .E. G. Yanes and N. J. Miller-Ihli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(6), 883 CrossRef .K. O. Douglass, N. Fitzgerald, B. J. Ingebrethsen and J. E. Tyson, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 261 CrossRef .Y.-C. Sun and M.-C. Ho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1504 RSC .A. V. Izmer, S. F. Boulyga, M. V. Zoriy and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1278 RSC .L.-B. Xia, B. Hu, Z.-C. Jiang, Y.-L. Wu and Y. Liang, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(10), 2910 CrossRef CAS .Y.-L. Feng, R. E. Sturgeon and J. W. Lam, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1435 RSC .J.-Z. Kang, T.-C. Duan, J. Liu, H.-T. Chen and X.-J. Zeng, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 32(2), 262 CAS .Q. J. Song, G. M. Greenway and T. McCreedy, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 883 RSC .Z.-C. Hu, S.-H. Hu, S. Gao, Y.-S. Liu and S.-L. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1463 CrossRef .P. Rodriguez-González, J. R. Encinar, J. I. Garcia Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 685 RSC .P. Rodriguez-González, J. I. Garcia Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 767 RSC .F. Laborda, J. Medrano and J. R. Castillo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(6), 857 CrossRef .D. Pröfrock, P. Leonhard, S. Wilbur and A. Prange, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 623 RSC .C. Degueldre and P.-Y. Favarger, Talanta, 2004, 62(5), 1051 CrossRef CAS .C. Degueldre, P.-Y. Favarger and C. Bitea, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 518(1–2), 137 CrossRef CAS .J. Heilmann, S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 190 CrossRef CAS .S. Stürup, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 273 CrossRef CAS .F. Albarède and B. Beard, in Geochemistry of Non-Traditional Stable Isotopes,  2004, vol. 55, p. 113 Search PubMed .F. Albarède, P. Telouk, J. Blichert-Toft, M. Boyet, A. Agranier and B. Nelson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(12), 2725 CrossRef CAS .H. Andrén, I. Rodushkin, A. Stenberg, D. Malinovsky and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1217 RSC .L. Yang and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1452 RSC .T. F. D. Mason, D. J. Weiss, M. Horstwood, R. R. Parrish, S. S. Russell, E. Mullane and B. J. Coles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 218 RSC .C. Archer and D. Vance, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 656 RSC .J. K. Aggarwal, K. Mezger, E. Pernicka and A. Meixner, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 232(3), 259 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Thirlwall and R. Anczkiewicz, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 235(1), 59 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Kamenov, P. A. Mueller and M. R. Perfit, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1262 RSC .M. B. Andersen, C. H. Stirling, E.-K. Potter and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 237(2–3), 107 CrossRef CAS .I. Günther-Leopold, B. Wernli, Z. Kopajtic and D. Günther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 241 CrossRef CAS .J. Fietzke, A. Eisenhauer, N. Gussone, B. Bock, V. Liebetrau, T. F. Nägler, H. J. Spero, J. Bijma and C. Dullo, Chem. Geol., 2004, 206(1–2), 11 CrossRef CAS .T. F. D. Mason, D. J. Weiss, M. Horstwood, R. R. Parrish, S. S. Russell, E. Mullane and B. J. Coles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 209 RSC .G. L. Arnold, S. Weyer and A. D. Anbar, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(2), 322 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Fehr, M. Rehkämper and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 232(1), 83 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Klunder, P. M. Grant, B. D. Andresen and R. E. Russo, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(5), 1249 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Rumianowski and R. S. Dygdala, Vacuum, 2004, 76(4), 501 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Garcia, R. J. Rodriguez, R. Martinez, C. Fernandez, A. Fernandez and R. Payling, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 235(1–2), 97 CrossRef CAS .M. Joseph, N. Sivakumar, P. Manoravi and R. Balasubramanian, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(2), 231 CrossRef CAS .T. T. Hoang, Y. F. Chen, S. W. May and R. F. Browner, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(7), 2062 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Raseleka and H. G. C. Human, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 899 RSC .S. Owega, G. J. Evans, R. E. Jervis, M. Fila, R. D’Souza and B. U. Z. Khan, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(33), 5545 CrossRef CAS .S. Owega, B. U. Z. Khan, R. D’Souza, G. J. Evans, M. Fila and R. E. Jervis, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(21), 5712 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Lake, M. P. Tolocka, M. V. Johnston and A. S. Wexler, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(31), 5311 CrossRef CAS .N. Trautmann, G. Passler and K. D. A. Wendt, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 348 CrossRef CAS .C. Grüning, G. Huber, P. Klopp, J. V. Kratz, P. Kunz, G. Passler, N. Trautmann, A. Waldek and K. Wendt, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 235(2), 171 CrossRef CAS .P. Kunz, G. Huber, G. Passler and N. Trautmann, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2004, 29(2), 183 Search PubMed .L. Pibida, C. A. McMahon and B. A. Bushaw, Appl. Rad. Isotop., 2004, 60(2–4), 567 CrossRef CAS .T. Wirtz and H. N. Migeon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 940 CrossRef .T. Wirtz and H. N. Migeon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 222(1–4), 186 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Guharay, S. Douglass and J. Orloff, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 926 CrossRef .T. Mizota, H. Nonaka, T. Fujimoto, A. Kurokawa and S. Ichimura, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 945 CrossRef .J. Matsuo, C. Okubo, T. Seki, T. Aoki, N. Toyoda and I. Yamada, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 463 CrossRef .M. Barozzi, D. Giubertoni, M. Sbetti, M. Anderle and M. Bersani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 959 CrossRef .A. Merkulov, O. Merkulova, E. de Chambost and M. Schuhmacher, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 954 CrossRef .J. Lörincík, K. Franzreb and P. Williams, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 921 .S. Maharrey, R. Bastasz, R. Behrens, A. Highley, S. Hoffer, G. Kruppa and J. Whaley, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 972 CrossRef .P. A. W. van der Heide, C. Lupu, A. Kutana and J. W. Rabalais, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 90 CrossRef .P. A. W. van der Heide, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 97 CrossRef .P. A. W. van der Heide, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 86 CrossRef .P. A. W. van der Heide, Surf. Sci., 2004, 555(1–3), 193 CrossRef CAS .S. Sarkar, P. Chakraborty and H. Gnaser, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 70(19) Search PubMed  , DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.70.195427.T. Wirtz and H. N. Migeon, Surf. Sci., 2004, 561(2–3), 200 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Guryanov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 817 CrossRef .K. Franzreb, R. C. Sobers, J. Lörincík and P. Williams, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120(17), 7983 CrossRef CAS .K. Franzreb, R. C. Sobers, J. Lörincík and P. Williams, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 82 CrossRef .K. Franzreb, J. Lörincík and P. Williams, Surf. Sci., 2004, 573(2), 291 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Thijsse, T. P. C. Klaver and E. F. C. Haddeman, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 29 CrossRef .Z. Postawa, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 22 CrossRef .H. H. Ji, M. Yu, H. Shi, X. K. Shi, R. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Y. Zhang, K. Suzuki and H. Oka, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(4), 537 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Pivovarov, F. A. Stevie and D. P. Griffis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 786 CrossRef .A. Pivovarov, C. Gu, F. Stevie and D. Griffis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 781 CrossRef .T. Wirtz and H. N. Migeon, Surf. Sci., 2004, 557(1–3), 57 CrossRef CAS .T. Wirtz and H. N. Migeon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 743 CrossRef .M. Beebe, J. Bennett, J. Barnett, A. Berlin and T. Yoshinaka, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 716 CrossRef .P. H. Chi and G. Gillen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 127 CrossRef .G. Tamborini, D. L. Donohue, F. G. Rüdenauer and M. Betti, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 203 RSC .M. Barozzi, D. Giubertoni, A. Anderle and A. Bersani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 768 CrossRef .C. Blackmer-Krasinski and W. R. Morinville, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 738 CrossRef .S. Seki, H. Tamura, S. Horita and N. Ito, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 896 CrossRef CAS .K. Takaya, M. Okabe, M. Sawataishi and T. Yoshida, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 502 CrossRef .M. Senoner, T. Wirth, W. Unger, W. Österle, I. Kaiander, R. L. Sellin and D. Bimberg, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(10), 1423 CrossRef CAS .D. W. Moon, H. I. Lee, H. K. Kim, K. J. Kim, H. K. Shon, J. Y. Won, J. C. Lee and F. Toujou, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2004, 22(1), 323 CrossRef CAS .G. Pepponi, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, N. Zoeger, K. Luening, P. Pianetta, D. Giubertoni, M. Barozzi and M. Bersani, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1243 CrossRef .M. Barozzi, D. Giubertoni, M. Anderle and A. Bersani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 632 CrossRef .T. H. Büyüklimanli, J. W. Marino and S. W. Novak, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 636 CrossRef .T. Yamamoto, T. Miyamoto and A. Karen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 561 CrossRef .M. Juhel and F. Laugier, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 698 CrossRef .F. Laugier, J. M. Hartmann, H. Moriceau, P. Holliger, R. Truche and J. C. Dupuy, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 668 CrossRef .G. Slodzian, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 3 CrossRef .M. Schuhmacher, F. Fernandes and E. de Chambost, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 878 CrossRef .G. Slodzian, F. Hillion, F. J. Stadermann and E. Zinner, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 874 CrossRef .R. Peteranderl and C. Lechene, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15(4), 478 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Cliff, D. J. Gaspar, P. J. Bottomley and D. D. Myrold, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 912 CrossRef .G. D. Layne, A. Godon, J. D. Webster and W. Bach, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 277 CrossRef CAS .A. Godon, J. D. Webster, G. D. Layne and F. Pineau, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 291 CrossRef CAS .W. Compston, J. Geol. Soc., 2004, 161, 223 Search PubMed .I. R. Fletcher, N. J. McNaughton, J. A. Aleinikoff, B. Rasmussen and S. L. Kamo, Chem. Geol., 2004, 209(3–4), 295 CrossRef CAS .H. D. Gibson, S. D. Carr, R. L. Brown and M. A. Hamilton, Chem. Geol., 2004, 211(3–4), 237 CrossRef CAS .F. Esaka, K. Watanabe, M. Magara and S. Usuda, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(2), 103 CrossRef CAS .R. Liu and A. T. S. Wee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 653 CrossRef .H. I. Lee, H. K. Kim, K. J. Kim, D. W. Moon, H. K. Shon, H. C. Shin and H. J. Kang, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(3), 259 CrossRef CAS .B. Fares, B. Gautier, N. Baboux, G. Prudon, P. Holliger and J. C. Dupuy, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 678 CrossRef .E. Iacob, M. Bersani, A. Lui, D. Giubertoni, M. Barozzi and M. Anderle, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 238(1–4), 24 CrossRef CAS .G. S. Lau, E. S. Tok, R. Liu, A. T. S. Wee and J. Zhang, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 215(1–2), 76 CrossRef CAS .A. Merkulov, E. de Chambost, M. Schuhmacher and P. Peres, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 640 CrossRef .M. A. Bolorizadeh, S. Ruffell, I. V. Mitchell and R. Gwilliam, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 225(3), 345 CrossRef CAS .L. Shao, J. R. Liu, C. Wang, K. B. Ma, J. M. Zhang, J. Chen, D. Tang, S. Patel and W. K. Chu, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 303 CrossRef .R. Liu, A. T. S. Wee, D. H. Shen and H. Takenaka, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(2), 172 CrossRef CAS .M. Tomita, C. Hongo, M. Suzuki, M. Takenaka and A. Murakoshi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2004, 22(1), 317 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Jiang, J. Lerma, D. Sieloff, J. J. Lee, S. Backer, S. Bagchi and J. Conner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2004, 22(2), 630 CrossRef CAS .J. Sameshima, R. Maeda, K. Yamada, A. Karen and S. Yamada, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 614 CrossRef .W. Nieveen, B. W. Schueler, G. Goodman, P. Schnabel, J. Moskito, I. Mowat and G. Chao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 556 CrossRef .S. Ferrari, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 609 CrossRef .U. Ehrke, A. Sears, L. Alff and D. Reisinger, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 598 CrossRef .K. D. Yu and A. P. Kovarsky, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 826 CrossRef .Y. Kawashima, T. Ide, S. Aoyagi and M. Kudo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 800 CrossRef .M. Kachan, J. Hunter, D. Kouzminov, A. Pivovarov, J. Gu, F. Stevie and D. Griffis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 684 CrossRef .T. Hasegawa, T. Date, A. Karen and A. Masuda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 725 CrossRef .D. Mello, L. Mirenghi, R. Falcone and C. Esposito, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(3), 376 CrossRef CAS .S. Haji Hossseini Gazestani, M. Gholipour Shahraki, M. R. Hantehzadeh, M. Ghoranneviss and A. Shokouhy, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 237(1–4), 332 CrossRef .Y. P. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 796 CrossRef .G. Bilger, P. O. Grabitz and A. Strohm, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 804 CrossRef .M. Perego, S. Ferrari, M. Fanciulli, G. Ben Assayag, C. Bonafos, M. Carrada and A. Claverie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 813 CrossRef .P. L. Strissel, R. Strick, K. L. Gavrilov and R. Levi-Setti, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 485 CrossRef .P. Galle, R. Levi-Setti, A. Lamperti, K. Bourahla and F. Escaig, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 475 CrossRef .R. Levi-Setti, K. L. Gavrilov, P. L. Strissel and R. Strick, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 479 CrossRef .D. R. Smith, D. R. Lorey and S. Chandra, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 457 CrossRef .A. Lamperti, C. E. Bottani, P. M. Ossi and R. Levi-Setti, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2004, 180–81, 323 CrossRef .A. Lamperti, K. L. Garvilov, R. Levi-Setti, G. Bongiorno, M. Blomqvist, P. M. Ossi and C. E. Bottani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 859 CrossRef .J. N. Audinot, S. Schneider, M. Yegles, P. Hallegot, R. Wennig and H. N. Migeon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 490 CrossRef .B. Tomiyasu, K. Suzuki, T. Gotoh, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 515 CrossRef .D. Krecar, V. Vassileva, H. Danninger and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 605 CAS .S. Chandra, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 467 CrossRef .R. Van Ham, L. Van Vaeck, F. C. Adams and A. Adriaens, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(9), 2609 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Rickman, S. V. Verkhoturov, S. Balderas, N. Bestaoui, A. Clearfield and E. A. Schweikert, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 106 CrossRef .S. V. Verkhoturov, R. D. Rickman, S. Balderas and E. A. Schweikert, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 113 CrossRef .M. R. Keenan and P. G. Kotula, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 240 CrossRef .M. R. Keenan and P. G. Kotula, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(3), 203 CrossRef CAS .J. A. T. Ohlhausen, M. R. Keenan, P. G. Kotula and D. E. Peebles, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 230 CrossRef .V. S. Smentkowski, J. A. Ohlhausen, P. G. Kotula and M. R. Keenan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 245 CrossRef .S. J. Pachuta, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 217 CrossRef .M. L. Pacholski, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 235 CrossRef .R. Ji, T. Liew and T. C. Chong, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2004, 40(4), 3192 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Weisener, R. S. C. Smart and A. R. Gerson, Int. J. Min. Process., 2004, 74(1–4), 239 Search PubMed .J. Grams, J. Góralski and T. Paryjczak, Surf. Sci., 2004, 549(1), L21 CrossRef CAS .M. Fartmann, C. Kriegeskotte, S. Dambach, A. Wittig, W. Sauerwein and H. F. Arlinghaus, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 428 CrossRef .B. C. Zhang, G. Barth, H. K. Liu and S. Chang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 868 CrossRef .D. J. Gaspar, A. Laskin, W. Wang, S. W. Hunt and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 520 CrossRef .J. Jorzick, J. Lösch, M. Kopnarski and H. Oechsner, Appl. Phys., Sect. A, 2004, 78(5), 655 Search PubMed .I. V. Veryovkin, C. Y. Chen, W. F. Calaway, M. J. Pellin and T. Lee, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 519(1–2), 345 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway and M. J. Pellin, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 519(1–2), 353 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway, J. F. Moore, M. J. Pellin and D. S. Burnett, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 473 CrossRef .I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway and M. J. Pellin, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 519(1–2), 363 CrossRef CAS .S. Ghalab and A. Wucher, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(3), 264 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Sostarecz, S. Sun, C. Szakal, A. Wucher and N. Winograd, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 179 CrossRef .S. Sun, C. Szakal, T. Roll, P. Mazarov, A. Wucher and N. Winograd, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(10), 1367 CrossRef CAS .J. Goschnick, C. Natzeck and M. Sommer, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 857 CrossRef CAS .S. Dambach, M. Fartmann, C. Kriegeskotte, C. Brüning, H. P. Wiesmann, D. Lipinsky and F. Arlinghaus, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 506 CrossRef .S. Dambach, M. Fartmann, C. Kriegeskotte, C. Brüning, S. Hellweg, H. P. Wiesmann, D. Lipinsky and H. F. Arlinghaus, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 711 CrossRef CAS .H. F. Arlinghaus, M. Fartmann, C. Kriegeskotte, S. Dambach, A. Wittig, W. Sauerwein and D. Lipinsky, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 698 CrossRef CAS .M. Krummen, A. W. Hilkert, D. Juchelka, A. Duhr, H.-J. Schlüter and R. Pesch, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(19), 2260 CrossRef CAS .B. Schulze, C. Wirth, P. Linke, W. A. Brand, I. Kuhlmann, V. Horna and E.-D. Schulze, Tree Phys., 2004, 24(11), 1193 Search PubMed .P. Ghosh and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(16), 1830 CrossRef .C. Sirignano, R. E. M. Neubert and H. A. J. Meijer, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(16), 1839 CrossRef .M. Gehre, H. Geilmann, J. Richter, R. A. Werner and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(22), 2650 CrossRef CAS .P. Franz and T. Röckmann, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(13), 1429 CrossRef CAS .M. Richelle, C. Darimont, C. Piguet-Welsch and L. B. Fay, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(7), 795 CrossRef CAS .H. Gandhi, T. N. Wiegner, P. H. Ostrom, L. A. Kaplan and N. E. Ostrom, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(8), 903 CrossRef CAS .T. Ishimura, U. Tsunogai and T. Gamo, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(23), 2883 CrossRef CAS .K. E. McDuffee, T. I. Eglinton, A. L. Sessions, S. Sylva, T. Wagner and J. M. Hayes, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2004, 5 Search PubMed  , art. no. Q10004.K. Kawamura and T. Watanabe, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(19), 5762 CrossRef CAS .J. Kaiser, S. Park, K. A. Boering, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, A. Hilkert and T. Röckmann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 256 CrossRef CAS .M. Ogawa and N. Yoshida, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2004, 109(D19) Search PubMed  , DOI: 10.1029/2004JD004652.K. A. Baublys, S. D. Golding, E. Young and B. S. Kamber, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(22), 2765 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Fox, F.-J. Zhao and S. P. McGrath, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(5), 323 CrossRef CAS .L. I. Wassenaar and G. Koehler, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(21), 6384 CrossRef CAS .L. J. C. Bluck and W. A. Coward, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2004, 15(2), N21 CrossRef CAS .T. Itai and M. Kusakabe, Geochem. J., 2004, 38(5), 435 CAS .P. L. Morrill, G. Lacrampe-Couloume and B. Sherwood Lollar, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(6), 595 CrossRef CAS .I. Tolosa and S. de Mora, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1045(1–2), 71 CrossRef CAS .C. Saudan, N. Baume, P. Mangin and M. Saugy, J. Chromatogr. B, 2004, 810(1), 157 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Godin, M. Richelle, S. Metairon and L. B. Fay, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(3), 325 CrossRef CAS .S. Gross and B. Glaser, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 18(22), 2753 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Parrish and S. R. Noble in Zircon, eds. J. M. Hanchar and P. W. O. Hoskin, Mineralogical Society of America and Geochemical Society,  2003, vol. 53, p. 183 Search PubMed .T. Walczyk, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(2), 229 CrossRef CAS .S. Halas, P. Mackiewicz and T. Durakiewicz, Vacuum, 2004, 73(2), 291 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Schwieters, C. Bouman, D. Tuttas and M. Wieser, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(11), A60 .H. Z. Wei, Y. K. Xiao, A. Sun, C. G. Zhang and S. Z. Li, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 235(2), 187 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Howard and R. D. Vocke Jr., J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1423 RSC .H. Holmstrand, P. Andersson and O. Gustafsson, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(8), 2336 CrossRef CAS .I. Egli, L. Davidsson, C. Zeder, T. Walczyk and R. Hurrell, J. Nutr., 2004, 134(5), 1077 CAS .K. Suzuki, Y. Miyata and N. Kanazawa, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 235(1), 97 CrossRef CAS .T. Yokoyama and E. Nakamura, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 717 RSC .T. Kuritani and E. Nakamura, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1464 RSC .J.-L. Paquette, P. Goncalves, B. Devouard and C. Nicollet, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 2004, 147(1), 110 Search PubMed .S. K. Sahoo, Y. Nakamura, K. Shiraishi and A. Masuda, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(12), 919 CrossRef CAS .C. V. Ly and H. Hidaka, Geochem. J., 2004, 38(5), 485 CAS .B. Ghaleb, E. Pons-Branchu and P. Deschamps, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 906 RSC .S. J. Goldstein, M. I. Murrell, K. Nishiizumi and A. J. Nunn, Chem. Geol., 2004, 204(1–2), 125 CrossRef CAS .S. Inguaggiato and A. Rizzo, Appl. Geochem., 2004, 19(5), 665 CrossRef CAS .G. F. Eaton, G. B. Hudson and J. E. Moran in Radioanalytical Methods in Interdisciplinary Research, American Chemical Society,  2004, vol. 868, p. 235 Search PubMed .R. C. Hamme and S. R. Emerson, Mar. Chem., 2004, 91(1–4), 53 CrossRef CAS .E. Coulie, X. Quidelleur, J. C. Lefevre and P. Y. Gillot, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2004, 5 Search PubMed  , art. no. Q11010.J. Ruiz Encinar, A. Polatajko, J. Szpunar and R. Lobinski, Analyst, 2004, 129(9), 846 RSC .W. Bergmüller, B. Kettner and B. Kramhöller, Dtsch. Lebensm.-Rundsch., 2004, 100(4), 129 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:
AAA	Acid–alkali–acid
AES	Atomic emission spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
amu	Atomic mass unit
ART	Adaptive resonance theory
aTOF	Aerosol time-of-flight
BCR	Bureau Communautaire de Reférence
BP	Before Present
CC	Collision cell
CE	Capillary electrophoresis
CF	Continuous flow
CID	Collision induced dissociation
cps	counts per second
CRM	Certified Reference Material
CSIA	Compound-specific isotope analysis
DBT	Dibutyltin
dc	direct current
DIHEN	Direct injection high efficiency nebulizer
DIN	Direct injection nebulizer
DMA	Dimethylarsenic acid
DRC	Dynamic reaction cell
DRF	Depth resolution function
EA	Elemental analyser
ECD	Electron capture detector
ECR	Electron cyclotron resonance
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray
EEN	Empirical external normalization
EI	Electron ionization
EIMS	Electron ionization mass spectrometry
EM	Electron multiplier
EMA	Electron microprobe analysis
EPXMA	Electron probe X-ray microanalysis
ES	Electrospray
ESA	Electrostatic analyser
ESMS	Electrospray mass spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporization
FAIMS	High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry
FI	Flow injection
FPC	Focal plane camera
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
FTMS	Fourier transform mass spectrometry
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
GBW	National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GDMS	Glow discharge mass spectrometry
GD-OES	Glow discharge optical emission spectrometry
HEN	High efficiency nebulizer
HG	Hydride generation
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HR	High resolution
HSM	High solids micronebulizer
HVEE	High Voltage Engineering Europa
IC	Ion chromatography
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
id	Internal diameter
ID	Isotope dilution
IE	Internal energy
IER	Ionization efficiency ratio
IMF	Instrumental mass fractionation
IP	Ionization potential
IR	Infrared
IRMM	Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements
IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
JAC	Japan Society for Analytical Chemistry
JSS	Iron and Steel Institute of Japan
KE	Kinetic energy
KED	Kinetic energy discrimination
LA	Laser ablation
LBMO	Lanthanum barium magnesium oxide
LC	Liquid chromatography
LEXES	Low energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopy
LIBS	Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIMS	Laser ionization mass spectrometry
LMMS	Laser microprobe mass spectrometry
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantification
LPI	Laser post-ionization
MALDI	Matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization
MBA	Methylboronic acid
MBT	Monobutyltin
MC	Multiple collector
MD	Molecular dynamics
MEIS	Medium energy ion scattering spectrometry
MIC	Multiple ion counters
MIT	Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MS	Mass spectrometry
MT	Metallothionein
m/z	mass-to-charge ratio
NDD	Natural diamond-based detector
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMIJ	National Metrological Institute of Japan
NRA	Nuclear reaction analysis
NRCC	National Research Council of Canada
PAH	Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
PCA	Principal components analysis
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PFA	Perfluoroalkyl
PMN	Polymeric micronebulizer
PSD	Post-source decay
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REE	Rare earth elements
rf	radiofrequency
RIMS	Resonance ionization mass spectrometry
RM	Reference material
rms	root mean square
RP	Reversed phase
RSD	Relative standard deviation
RSF	Relative sensitivity factor
SD	Standard deviation
SDME	Single drop microextraction
SEC	Size exclusion chromatography
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIM	Selected ion monitoring
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SIRMS	Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry
S/N	Signal-to-noise ratio
SNMS	Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard Reference Material
S-SIMS	Static secondary ion mass spectrometry
SSB	Sample standard bracketing
STO	Strontium titanium oxide
TBT	Tributyltin
TEAMS	Trace element accelerator mass spectrometry
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TLC	Thin layer chromatography
TMS	Trimethylsilyl
TOF	Time-of-flight
TOFMS	Time-of-flight mass spectrometry
TPT	Triphenyltin
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
ULSI	Ultra-large scale integrated
USN	Ultrasonic nebulizer
UV	Ultraviolet
VSMOW	Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water
WARP	Wide aperture retardation potential
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
YAG	Yttrium aluminium garnet
3-D	Three dimensional
5βP	5β-pregnane-3α, 20α-diol
λ	Wavelength
τ	Pulse duration

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
