Energy transfer in (PEA) 2 FA n−1 Pb n Br 3n+1 quasi-2D perovskites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC00422K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00422K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4782-4791Energy transfer in (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 quasi-2D perovskites

        
          
            Džiugas 
            Litvinas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ramūnas 
            Aleksiejūnas
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Patrik 
            Ščajev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Paulius 
            Baronas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vaiva 
            Soriūtė
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuanjiang 
            Qin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Takashi 
            Fujihara
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Toshinori 
            Matsushima
          
        
      def, 
      
        
          
            Chihaya 
            Adachi
          
        
      def and 

        
          
            Saulius 
            Juršėnas
          
        
      a
aInstitute of Photonics and Nanotechnology, Faculty of Physics, Vilnius University, Sauletekio Ave. 3, LT-10257, Vilnius, Lithuania. E-mail: ramunas.aleksiejunas@ff.vu.lt
bState Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Science, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun 130022, China
cInnovative Organic Device Laboratory, Institute of Systems, Information Technologies and Nanotechnologies (ISIT), Fukuoka Industry-Academia Symphonicity (FiaS) 2-110, 4-1 Kyudai-shinmachi, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0388, Japan
dInternational Institute for Carbon-Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
eCenter for Organic Photonics and Electronics Research (OPERA), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
fAdachi Molecular Exciton Engineering Project, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), ERATO, 744 Motooka, Nishi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
Received 
      28th January 2021
    , Accepted 12th March 2021First published on 26th March 2021AbstractQuasi-two dimensional perovskites demonstrate unique excitonic properties due to their multilayer structure making them attractive for various optoelectronic applications. However, the thickness of individual perovskite sheets in wet cast quasi-2D layers tends to randomly fluctuate giving rise to a specific type of disorder, which impacts on the carrier dynamics and is rather complex and remains understudied. Here, we present a study of carrier transport in Ruddlesden–Popper type (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 layers of order n from one to four, and in the bulk FAPbBr3 layer. We use a light induced transient grating technique to measure the carrier diffusion coefficient directly, and the transient absorption via photoluminescence to investigate the energy relaxation pathways. We observe two distinct energy transfer processes on different time scales. Fast energy funnelling in thicker (n ≥ 3) layers is observed up to 10 ps after excitation; we attribute this to short-distance transfer of excitons to neighbouring perovskite sheets of higher order. On the longer timescale of hundreds of picoseconds, carrier in-plane transport is governed by exciton diffusion in n = 1 and 2 layers and by free carrier plasma in thicker ones. Within the carrier density range of (0.5–4) × 1019 cm−3, the exciton diffusion coefficient in n = 1, 2 increases slowly from 1 to 2.8 cm2 s−1, whereas in thicker layers the dependence is much stronger and the diffusivity grows from 0.09 to 1.9 cm2 s−1. We explain these dependencies by a higher structural order in the thinner samples and the stronger localization of carriers in thicker ones. Also, amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) is observed in thicker (n ≥ 3) layers in electron–hole plasma, as evidenced by the typical ASE line redshift upon excitation.
1 Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have been studied intensively as an alternative to three-dimensional (3D) ABX3 type perovskites for light-harvesting and light-emitting devices.1–3 The main attractiveness of 2D perovskites lies in their much higher environmental and photo stability compared with their 3D counterparts.4,5 Also, the possibility of replacing toxic Pb by Sn in single layer perovskites has been demonstrated.6 2D perovskite solar cells with a conversion efficiency above 12%7 or mixed structures of 2D/3D perovskites with an efficiency above 18%8 have been demonstrated with a much improved resilience to environmental influence. In the last few years, 2D perovskites have also advanced significantly in light emission applications. The efficiency of 2D perovskite-based LEDs has already reached 20%,3 and stable CW lasing has been demonstrated in 2D lead halide-based quasi-2D perovskite films.9 Also, these materials show a number of unique properties that make them interesting for fundamental studies. Perhaps the most important one is the very strong quantum and dielectric confinement of charge carriers leading to exciton binding energies as high as 490 meV.10 The dielectric confinement is defined by the dielectric constant of organic molecules that make spacers between the sheets of perovskite octahedra; this provides considerable scope for controlling the excitonic properties by selecting different organic cation molecules.11 Strongly bound excitons do not dissociate at relevant temperatures and carrier densities, thus an excitonic nature of optical and electrical properties is prominent.1,12 However, all these novel properties of 2D perovskites come together with even higher complexity. For instance, additional disorder arises from the intermixing of layers of slightly different thicknesses.
The most popular Ruddlesden–Popper type 2D perovskites can be described by the general chemical formula (RNH3)2An−1MnX3n+1, where RNH3 is a large cation that serves as a barrier between quantum wells, A is a monovalent organic cation, M is a divalent metal cation, X is a halide anion, and n is the number of [MX6]4− octahedral layers within a single quantum well. Here, n is often referred to as the order of the perovskite layer and is one of the main parameters that define the layer properties; e.g., the perovskites with n ≥ 2 are not strictly two-dimensional and thus are called quasi-2D perovskites. One important trait of wet-cast quasi-2D perovskite layers is that they consist of many spacer-separated sheets of slightly different thicknesses (and orders) fluctuating around some average value 〈n〉.13 Different carrier confinement in neighbouring sheets results in a varying potential landscape, which gives rise to fast energy transfer (funnelling) from thinner to thicker perovskite sheets in quasi-2D perovskite layers.14,15
Carrier transport properties are known to be of crucial importance for the performance of perovskite devices;16,17 therefore, it is imperative to understand how this complex potential landscape impacts the carrier transport in quasi-2D perovskites. The diffusion coefficient (D) is a parameter well suited to quantifying the efficiency of carrier transport in a material. D is also a key factor for defining the efficiency of optoelectronic semiconductor devices like solar cells or LEDs, and is seen as a parameter in drift–diffusion equations used for the modelling of LEDs and diodes. Carrier transport has been studied extensively in 3D perovskites (see e.g. a perspective paper by Herz18); in particular, it has been shown that a fluctuating potential landscape causes carrier localization effects that limit the proportionality between the carrier diffusivity and the mobility, resulting in a strong dependence of D on the carrier density N.19–21 Carrier transport in quasi-2D perovskite layers is expected to become even more complex. This point can be illustrated by the large distribution of reported D values. For example, Zhou et al. obtained D values of 53.6 cm2 s−1 for exfoliated (BA)2PbI4 nano-platelets using the local time-resolved photoluminescence technique.22 On the other hand, Seitz et al. obtained D = 0.19 cm2 s−1 in (PEA)2PbI4 by transient photoluminescence measurements.23 Transient terahertz spectroscopy provided a carrier mobility of μ = 17.4 cm2 (V s)−1, which results in D = 0.45 cm2 s−1 at room temperature.24 While this discrepancy in values may be related to different measurement methods, it is also very likely that carrier transport is sensitive to the varying potential landscape. This assumption is confirmed by finding that changing the spacer molecule changes the D value (measured under the same conditions and using the same technique) by an order of magnitude.23 Therefore, it is imperative to find out which processes govern carrier transport in these materials.
Here, we address this problem by investigating carrier transport and its relation to energy funnelling in quasi-2D (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 layers of order n = 1, 2, 3 and 4 (by labelling the order with n we have in mind an average order, as discussed). (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 is a promising 2D perovskite for green-emitting LEDs, where efficiencies above 18% have already been demonstrated.25 We employ the light induced transient grating (LITG) technique to measure D as a function of the carrier density in the layers in all-optical way. This method is attractive as it allows the direct determination of the diffusion coefficient and the lifetime of carriers without the need for electrical contacts.26 Among other advantages, we would like to draw attention to the possibility of precise calibration of the carrier density N under optical excitation from the material absorption coefficient, which in turn enables the measurement of D(N) up to very high excitations relevant for high power light-emitting devices. Due to these reasons, LITG has been used for diffusion coefficient measurements in bulk perovskite crystals and thick layers, by our group and others alike.20,21,27–30 In this work, we combine this technique with transient photoluminescence (TPL) and absorption (TA) measurements to analyze the energy and carrier transport in highly excited quasi-2D perovskite layers at high excitations near the threshold of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE). We observe the energy transfer on two different time scales: one within the first picosecond and the second within hundreds of picoseconds. We provide experimental evidence confirming that the fast process is related to exciton transition to higher n perovskite sheets where excitons dissociate either because of high carrier densities, or under influence of grain boundaries. We show that the latter process is crucial for ASE emergence. The slower transport process is related to lateral charge diffusion within the sheets. We observe a different dependence of D(N) on n from those reported for iodide quasi-2D perovskites, where diffusivity is higher in thinner samples. We discuss these results in a framework of different disorder of the layers that governs the carrier dynamics in the samples.
2 Experimental
2.1 Materials
Samples were fabricated by spin coating on quartz substrates. Before use, the substrates were first cleaned by ultrasonication and then irradiated by UV light. The precursor solution was made by dissolving formamidinium bromide (FABr), lead(II) bromide (PbBr2) and phenethylammonium bromide (PEABr2) in dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO). The resulting solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter, then cast on a substrate spinning at a rate of 6000 rpm over the course of 30 s. The solution was allowed to crystallize at room temperature forming a perovskite layer. In addition, the layers were encapsulated to protect them from ambient oxygen and humidity. The resulting stoichiometric formula of the nanolayers present in the samples was (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1.
2.2 Techniques
The main results of this paper have been obtained by using three time-resolved measurement techniques: transient absorption, photoluminescence, and light-induced transient grating. All described measurements were performed at room temperature.
Transient absorption measurements were performed using the setup made by ‘Light Conversion’. The pulses from the Yb:KGW laser “PHAROS” (190 fs, 1030 nm) were split 95%/5% to form the pump and probe pulses. The wavelength of the pump pulses was fine-tuned within 350–370 nm using the “ORPHEUS” optical parametric amplifier and the “LYRA” second harmonic generator. The intensity of the pump beam was controlled using a gradient mirror. These pulses were directed into the “Harpia” module (a dedicated setup for TA experiments). For probing, the remaining 5% of the fundamental pulse at 1030 nm was passed through a mechanical delay stage and focused on a deionised water cuvette to create spectrally-broad (approximately from 380 nm to 1.3 μm) pulses. The pump and probe pulses were crossed on the sample's surface and the transmitted probe beam was recorded using a CCD linear Si detector (“Hamamatsu”) coupled to a monochromator (“Andor”). The pump beam intensity incident on a sample was estimated as I0 = P/πfr2, where P is the average power of the pump beam, f is the repetition rate, and r is the radius of the pump beam spot on the sample measured at the 1/e2 intensity level of a Gaussian beam profile. The measured beam size was r = 240 ± 5 μm. Such a setup allowed for observation of light-induced absorption changes within the wide spectral range, which can be quantified by the wavelength and time-dependent optical density (OD), defined as a ratio of transmitted intensities with the pump closed and opened: (1)In the measurements, the detector noise level was accounted for by subtracting the detector readings with all beams blocked. The negative and positive TA signals at a given wavelength defined by eqn (1) correspond to induced bleaching or induced absorption, respectively.
For time-resolved photoluminescence measurements we used the same laser system with the same beam parameters. The photoluminescence was collected in back-scattering geometry; the scattered pump light was filtered with an optical filter. The PL signal was measured using a “Hamamatsu C9300” streak camera with a 25 ps time resolution, synchronized with the laser.
Light-induced transient grating measurements were carried out using a Nd:YLF PL2243 (“Ekspla”) laser, emitting 8 ps duration pulses at a 10 Hz repetition rate in 1053 nm fundamental harmonics. The pulse's third harmonics at λE = 351 nm and fundamental harmonics at λP = 1053 nm were used for sample excitation and probing, respectively. We note that all investigated samples are transparent to 1053 nm light, which allows for probing of the entire photoexcited depth of a sample. The intensities of the incident pump pulses (I0), transmitted through the sample (IT), and diffracted (ID) pulses were monitored using Si photodetectors.
In the LITG technique, a spatially-periodical light field is used to excite a sample (hence the diffraction grating), by contrast to a conventional pump–probe where the sample is excited by a beam with a Gaussian profile. Therefore, both carrier recombination and lateral carrier diffusion contribute to the LITG signal decay with time.26Fig. 1 illustrates the creation of a transient diffraction grating in a sample. The period of the grating Λ is defined by an angle between the two interfering pump beams Θ and λE; the grating period can be varied in an experiment by varying the angle. In our LITG setup, we use several transmission diffraction gratings (or holographic beam splitters, HBS) with the maximized outputs to ±1 diffraction orders. The HBS splits the pump beam into two coherent parts, which then are projected onto the sample's surface using an f1//f1 + f2//f2 telescope. In this setup, the period of the light field on the sample is defined by the period of the HBS and the magnification of the telescope f2/f1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of LITG measurement. 
The periodic light field generates the nonequilibrium carriers with a periodic lateral distribution. When probed far from the electronic resonances (which is the case in perovskites for the 1053 nm probe), the diffraction grating is mainly produced by refractive index modulation by free electron–hole pairs. The probe beam is partially diffracted on this grating, splitting into the “diffracted” and “transmitted” beams. The amplitude of the transient diffraction grating can be characterized using the diffraction efficiency η which is defined as the ratio of the diffracted and transmitted part intensities, η = ID/IT. The decay time constant τG of such a grating can be defined as an instantaneous time constant of exponential decay: (2)where d is the thickness of photoexcited material, neh is the refractive index change due to a single electron–hole pair, N(t) is the density of carriers at time t, N0 is the density of photoexcited carriers at the end of the pump pulse, λP is the wavelength of probe beam, and τG is the decay time constant of the transient grating decay. N0 can be evaluated as N0 = αI0/hν, where α is the absorption coefficient of the sample and hν is the pump photon energy.

Fig. 2(a) shows the first 150 ps of LITG decay transients recorded in the bulk 3D sample (dots) at three different diffraction grading periods Λ and the corresponding fits to eqn (2). The grating decay time τG decreases as Λ decreases, due to the growing contribution of carrier diffusion to the transient grating decay. The partial contributions of the carrier lifetime τ and diffusive lifetime τD are accounted for by summing the reciprocals: (3)where D is the diffusion coefficient of the charge carriers. Eqn (3) shows that two material parameters – the carrier lifetime and the diffusion coefficient – can be obtained from a linear fit of τG−1 = f(Λ−2), as is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The measurement error for τ and D is defined from the standard deviation of the linear fit.
 Fig. 2  (a) LITG transients recorded at three different grating periods Λ in the 3D sample. (b) The dependence of τG−1 on Λ−2 used to extract the diffusion coefficient D and carrier lifetime τ, according to eqn (3). 
We note that for free carriers LITG provides an ambipolar diffusion coefficient Da, which describes the collective movement of electrons and holes interacting via the Dember electric field:26 (4)where, Ne(h) is electron (hole) density, and De(h) is the electron (hole) diffusion coefficient. If one type of carrier has a significantly smaller diffusivity D1 ≪ D2, then eqn (4) leads to Da ≈ 2D1, provided that both types of carrier are photogenerated in equal carrier densities. Further in the text we omit the subscript and use the notation D, but one has to remember that diffusivity in free carrier plasma is of ambipolar type.
In the analysis of the LITG results we make two assumptions. First, we determine D and τ from the initial parts of the LITG decay kinetics, within the first 100 ps. By doing so, we assume that the carrier lifetime is longer than this value and, therefore, the photoexcited carrier density does not deviate much from N0. This allows for more accurate dependencies on the carrier density, in contrast to the situation when LITG decay transients are fitted at longer delays. Second, we assume that index changes induced by either electron–hole plasma or excitons are of similar magnitude. To justify this assumption, we refer to the excitonic dielectric function formula derived by Chemla and Miller:31 (5)where ω is the light frequency, ε0 is the permittivity of a vacuum, Ω2 = 4πNe2/ε0μ is the frequency that measures the exciton density (in turn, N is the particle density and μ is the reduced mass), γ is the phenomenological damping constant, and Δ is the energy difference between the ground state and the excited states, which can be roughly approximated by the exciton binding energy. Under our experimental conditions, the probe quantum energy is 1.18 eV, while the reported exciton binding energy even in n = 1 quasi-2D layers is about 400 meV,32 which allows for the approximation ω2 ≫ Δ2. In such a case, eqn (5) becomes similar to the dielectric function of free electron–hole pairs, except for the 2/3 multiplier of Ω in the denominator:31 (6)
3 Results and discussion
To determine the dependence of the diffusion coefficient on the photoexcited carrier density D(N), we perform LITG measurements at various excitations in the quasi-2D layers of order n = 1–4 as well as in the 3D sample; the results are shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Ambipolar diffusion coefficient D as a function of the photoexcited carrier density N in the (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 layers of different order n. 
A clear distinction between n = 1, 2 and n ≥ 3 layers can be seen, both for D values and the dependence on the carrier density D(N). At low carrier densities (e.g. 5 × 1018 cm−3), D for n = 1, 2 samples reach 0.8–0.9 cm2 s−1, while in n ≥ 3 it is as low as 0.1–0.2 cm2 s−1. While D(N) increases with excitation in all samples, the growth rate is considerably faster for n ≥ 3 layers. Based on our previous model of carrier transport in highly excited perovskites,20,21 one can conclude that diffusion in the thinnest layers experiences a smaller influence from carrier localization or trapping compared with that in the thicker layers. One distinction between these two groups of samples is that in n = 1 or 2, layers of quantum confinement and, thus, exciton binding energy should be much higher; therefore, one could expect that exciton transport prevails in thinner layers, while in the thicker ones a mixture of excitons and free carriers coexists. This assumption is confirmed by time resolved PL and TA measurements, as is discussed further. This implies that exciton diffusion is more efficient due the smaller impact of localization. The existence of exciton trapping and the related decrease in mobility was indeed confirmed by Seitz et al. in the (PEA)2PbI4 2D perovskite.23 The higher mobility of excitons in thinner 2D layers also agrees with theoretical calculations by Kumavat et al., where the carrier mobility in 2D CH3NH3PbI3 layer is predicted to be 16 times higher than that in the bulk material.33 On the other hand, the dependence of D on N seen in Fig. 3 is opposite to that reported by Deng et al., where a clear increase in D with N was obtained in (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1.34 In this latter work it was speculated that the dielectric constant increases with the thickness of the inorganic layer (i.e. with N) increasing the screening of the Coulomb interaction between the excitons and charged impurities and, thus, decreasing the scattering rate. Also, Motti et al. reported a 25% lower carrier mobility in 2D (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 compared with the 3D perovskite.24 A comparison of these results suggests that exciton mobility is extremely sensitive to material properties such as the chemical composition, impurity density, structure etc., and can fluctuate a lot from sample to sample. On the other hand, the high D in our samples proves that a high diffusivity can be achieved in 2D layers, which is a crucial requirement for devices.
To investigate the potential landscape formed by the random formation of different order perovskite sheets in our samples, we measured the stationary absorption and photoluminescence spectra (Fig. 4). Comparison of these spectra provides useful information on the energy relaxation pathways: whereas the absorption spectra peaks indicate all available electronic states within the investigated spectral region, the PL spectral peaks show the states to which energy relaxation takes place and from where excitons (or free carriers) recombine radiatively. We begin with the absorption spectrum of the 3D sample, which is typical for a bulk semiconductor. It is composed of a partially overlapping excitonic peak and a bulk interband absorption band that can be fitted to the Elliot model:35 (7)where pcv is the interband transition momentum element, Efex is the exciton binding energy, Efex,s = E(bulk)g − Efex/s2 is the spectroscopic position of the exciton level s, and Γ = 28 meV is the phonon induced broadening. The fit to this model is shown by the dashed line in Fig. 4(a). The fitting parameters were the bandgap E(bulk)g = 2.378 ± 0.004 eV and the exciton binding energy Efex = 45 ± 2 meV. We note that these values are higher than the reported bandgap energy 2.27–2.3 eV36 and exciton binding energy 22 meV,37 probably due to large spectral broadening of the exciton peak at room temperature.35
 Fig. 4  Spectra of the time-integrated absorption (a) and photoluminescence (b) in the (PEA)2(FA)n−1PbnBr3n+1 perovskite layers of different dimensions n. Dashed vertical lines mark the positions of excitonic absorption peaks. 
While the absorption spectra of thin n = 1 and n = 2 quasi-2D layers are dominated by a single excitonic peak of the corresponding order at 3.07 eV for n = 1 or 2.85 eV for n = 2, the spectra in thicker layers reveal a mixture of several phases.1 So, the absorption spectrum of the n = 3 sample contains a small excitonic peak at 2.65 eV of the n = 3 layer, together with stronger excitonic contributions from n = 1 and n = 2 phases. Similarly in the n = 4 sample, a very small n = 4 excitonic peak at 2.53 eV coexists with the n = 3 and n = 2 peaks. Exciton absorption peaks in n ≥ 2 layers seem to be superimposed with 3D-like interband absorption bands, possibly indicating the existence of 3D perovskite domains. We also note that “native” excitonic peaks in the n = 3 and n = 4 samples are much weaker than those of lower order inclusions. The explanation can be two-fold: either the amount of higher order domains exceeds that of the lower order domains in these layers, or the exciton population is decreased in higher order domains. The latter is possible if rapid exciton dissociation at abundant domain boundaries is taken into account.38,39 In addition, the active grain boundaries were also shown to result in a strong localization of holes,39 which would contribute to the localization-governed D(N) dependence seen in the thicker layers, as discussed above.
The time-integrated PL spectra recorded at low excitation (3.35 μJ cm−2 at 350 nm) show the energy funnelling from thinner to thicker quasi-2D perovskites. In the n = 1 sample, the PL spectrum shows a single excitonic emission peak, red shifted by 38 meV from the absorption peak due to light reabsorption. In the n = 2 layer, however, apart from the exciton peak at 2.82 eV a broader band not visible in the absorption spectrum appears at 2.9 eV. Going to even thicker layers, the contribution of exciton luminescence becomes negligible if compared with the broad band at around 2.3 eV. For example, the excitonic peaks at 3.04 eV (n = 1), 2.82 eV (n = 2), and a very weak one at 2.57 eV (n = 3) are present in n = 3 PL spectrum, but they are much smaller than the broad band at 2.3 eV. These facts show that, starting from n = 2, quasi-2D samples contain a mixture of phases including higher order or 3D domains and energy relaxation towards lower energy states is rather effective.
To investigate the energy transfer pathways in greater detail, we perform measurements of transient absorption in the layers. TA spectra contain information about occupancy changes in all electronic states, in contrast to PL measurements which observe radiative transitions only. The TA setup also provides the best possible time resolution; therefore, it became the established method to study fast excitonic processes in quasi-2D perovskites.15,40Fig. 5 shows the evolution of differential absorption spectra at low excitations in the quasi-2D samples. In the layers n = 1 and n = 2, the TA spectra are dominated by single derivative-like features at 3.06 or 2.85 eV, respectively (Fig. 5(a and b)). The TA signal of such a shape is typical for excitons in all semiconductors: it is caused by a blue shift of exciton absorption due to multiparticle screening of the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes.40,41 In the n = 1 sample, no other significantly large signals exist apart from the exciton peak (a short-lived feature at ∼2.8 eV is of unclear origin, though its spectral position coincides with the exciton in the n = 2 layer), which confirms the excitonic nature of carrier dynamics in this layer. Within the first several hundred femtoseconds after photoexcitation, a broadening of this line can be seen, which is presumably due to multiparticle exciton interactions. At delays longer than 1 ps, the broadening disappears and the absorption bleaching dynamics can be described by two-component decay, with characteristic time constants of 12 ps and 600 ps; exciton dynamics in the n = 2 layer are qualitatively similar. The faster component is likely to be caused by fast nonradiative exciton recombination; the presence of such recombination is reflected in the low quantum yield of the layers, as is discussed later on.
 Fig. 5  Colour maps of the differential absorption evolution in quasi-2D layers of different order n = 1, 2, 3 and 4 (indicated in the figures) at a relatively low excitation I0 = 25.5 μJ cm−2 by 350 nm laser pulses. Vertical dashed lines show the spectral positions of exciton absorptions in the layers of respective order. 
The TA spectra from thicker n ≥ 3 layers are composed of multiple components at the spectral positions of the excitons in domains of different order and of electron–hole plasma. Thus, right after the excitation in the n = 3 layer the exciton components corresponding to n = 1, 2 and 3 phases are visible at 3.06, 2.85, and 2.63 eV, respectively. Whereas the evolution of the two higher energy peaks resembles that in the thinner layers, the exciton at 2.63 eV in the n = 3 phase exists up to only 1 ps and disappears giving rise to broad and long lived band at 2.41 eV (Fig. 5(c)). Similarly, the lowest exciton at 2.51 eV in n = 4 evolves into the band at 2.37 eV, although the energy transfer is slower and lasts up to ∼10 ps (Fig. 5(d)).
The fast dissociation of excitons in the lowest energy phases raises the question as to the nature of this process. One might consider a possibility that excitons reach the boundaries of domains by lateral in-plain diffusion and dissociate there; however, keeping in mind the very short time of these processes this explanation seems unlikely. For instance, n = 3 excitons within their lifetime of 1 ps could diffuse only  nm, if a diffusion coefficient D = 0.2 cm2 s−1 is assumed (see Fig. 3). The typical size of the grains in 2D perovskites have dimensions exceeding the micrometer scale.42 Another possibility is fast carrier movement via ballistic transport, which has been reported in perovskites and other quantum structures.43,44 However, the ballistic transport occurs on the time scale of hundreds of femtoseconds, but the LITG results clearly show the non-ballistic diffusion taking place on the much longer timescale of hundreds of picoseconds. Another possible mechanism is that excitons are transferred to neighbouring sheets of higher order and, thus, lower exciton energy via Förster resonance energy transfer.45 Proppe et al. demonstrated by ultrafast TA measurements and numerical modelling that Förster transfer between sheets is likely as the separation between them is only few nanometers (defined by the ligand molecule size) and a typical timescale for such a process is on the scale of tens of femtoseconds.15 Even more, the speed of such a transfer depends strongly on the distance between the initial and final states and, thus, on the disorder in a particular sample (the mutual orientation of domains and sheets), which would explain the different time scales of exciton dissociation in the n = 3 and n = 4 samples. Such an internal disorder and complex structure of crystallites in 2D perovskites has also been confirmed by polarized Raman microspectroscopy.42
Finally, to understand the nature of the lowest energy spectrally broad TA band, we perform time-resolved photoluminescence measurements. The results are illustrated in Fig. 6, where the top row shows the spectra and the bottom row shows the temporal traces at the PL peak spectral positions, as indicated in the figures. Similarly as in the absorption measurements, the results can be interpreted within the framework of the gradual transition from pure excitonic recombination in the n = 1 sample to the dominant band-to-band recombination of free electron–hole plasma in the 3D layers. In the n = 1 layer, a single peak appears at 3.03 eV and this position does not change with excitation. It has been observed that free excitons in inorganic semiconductors tend to blue shift with excitation due to screening of the Coulomb interaction;46 the absence of such a shift in perovskites has been interpreted as a signature of exciton localization.40 The PL decay transient recorded at the PL peak for n = 1 is comprises of two components, the fast and slow ones (we note that the fast component in the TRPL traces is not the same as the one observed in TA for higher order samples – the latter was one order of magnitude faster). The dependence of the fast component decay time on the photoexcited carrier density is shown in Fig. 7(a). While the ratio between the amplitudes of fast and slow components changes with excitation, the decay time of the fast decay changes only slowly and remains approximately constant for the slower decay (340 ± 50 ps). A decay time that is independent of excitation at high densities is typical for excitonic recombination owing to the fact that for excitons the spatial overlap of the electron and hole wave functions does not depend on the carrier density.47 Similarly as in the TA transients, the fast decay component represents the onset of fast non-radiative recombination. The behaviour of the excitonic peak at 2.82 eV in n = 2 is similar, but an additional band at 2.35 eV appears; the same band is also seen in the n = 3 sample.
 Fig. 6  (a–d) PL spectra integrated within the first nanosecond after excitation and (e–h) temporal traces of PL decay at indicated spectral positions. The curves for different excitations are depicted by different colours as indicated in the legends for each sample. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Decay time of the fast PL decay component (see Fig. 6) as a function of the photoexcited carrier density. Note that the decay time for n = 1 or 2 layers represents the decay of the excitonic line, while for n ≥ 3 this represents the decay of electron–hole plasma. (b) Photoluminescence quantum yield as a function of excitation. 
A new spectral component of ASE at 2.33 eV emerges in the sample n = 3 above the threshold excitation of 52.8 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 6(c)). ASE is also manifested by the appearance of a very fast component in the PL transients where the decay time is shorter than the laser pulse duration. No ASE signature was observed for the thinner n = 1 or 2 layers. The ASE peak appears on the low energy side of the spontaneous PL band and is red shifted with excitation due to band gap renormalization. The red shift of a PL component with carrier density in highly excited semiconductor cannot be explained by excitonic emission, but is rather typical for electron–hole plasma and is well known in inorganic semiconductors.48 Also, the character of the fast decay dependence on the excitation changes rapidly in the n = 3 sample and becomes typical for bimolecular recombination in free carrier plasma. Based on this, we assume that the low energy band that serves as an acceptor for energy funnelling seen in the TA spectra (Fig. 5) is caused by free electron–hole plasma rather than excitons. This is feasible if it is borne in mind that with the increasing order n the exciton binding energy rapidly drops and at densities as high as those seen in our study (where above 5 × 1018 cm−3 the Mott density can be reached).
The ASE contribution becomes stronger and the threshold drops to 19–20 μJ cm−2 in the n = 4 and 3D samples, as can also be seen from the quantum yield dependence on excitation, depicted in Fig. 7. The increase in the ASE threshold in lower order quasi-2D perovskites is consistent with the results reported for (PEA)2MA(n−1)PbnI3n+1 layers49 and apparently represents fundamental processes in charge dynamics rather than dependence of the ASE threshold on the sample thickness (we note that the 3D layer with the lowest ASE threshold was also the thinnest). The ASE threshold dependence in quasi-2D (PEA)2Csn−1PbnBr3n+1 perovskite layers of different order n was investigated by Cui et al., where ASE was also observed only for the layers with n ≥ 3.50 The absence of ASE in thinner layers was attributed to the lack of energy transfer to lower energy states, which does not allow for the formation of population inversion required for lasing. Our results confirm this conclusion, but we also would like to draw attention to the fact that strong light reabsorption at the exciton spectral position drastically increases the ASE threshold and opposes lasing.
It is informative to analyze the decay time of the fast component measured at the dominant PL peak (it is the excitonic peak in the thin layers and the band-to-band recombination band in the thick ones) together with the PL quantum yield at various excitations (Fig. 7(b)). As it was discussed, the decay time constant in the thin (n = 1, 2) samples decreases with carrier density only slightly and remains in the range of 50–100 ps for carrier densities from 1017 to 1019 cm−3, due to the excitonic nature of recombination. By contrast, the decay time of free carriers in the thicker layers is much longer at low densities (300–500 ps) and decreases roughly linearly with the carrier density, confirming the contribution of band-to-band recombination in electron–hole plasma;51 the sudden drop in lifetime marks the onset of very fast ASE process. However, the noticeably different lifetime in these two groups of samples does not result in a significantly different quantum efficiency below the ASE threshold; by contrast, the quantum yield is very similar in all samples. On the other hand, the quantum yield significantly jumps for excitations above the ASE threshold. The presented experimental results can be interpreted by the following qualitative picture. In the thinnest layers, carrier dynamics taking place on the time scale of tens and hundreds picoseconds are governed by excitons. They are mobile in the plane of quasi-2D perovskite, but also suffer from efficient nonradiative recombination. It is possible that these two facts also indicate causation, in the sense that faster diffusion coefficient facilitates nonradiative recombination at remote defect sites, e.g. triplet states.9 In the thicker layers, the diffusivity is small at low carrier densities, indicating the strong influence of carrier localization. Since the lifetime is much longer but the quantum yield is similar to n = 1 or 2 layers, it is feasible that both nonradiative and radiative recombination processes are inhibited in n ≥ 3 samples due to the spatial separation of electrons and holes, probably as a result of the action of grain boundaries as suggested by Zhang et al.39 On the other hand, the quantum yield significantly jumps above the ASE threshold, as ASE is a very fast radiative process in degenerate electron–hole plasma that overcomes the contribution of slower nonradiative recombination pathways. Our result confirms that fast energy funnelling is an essential requirement for ASE to occur in quasi-2D perovskite layers.
4 Conclusions
A concerted application of LITG, TRPL, and TA techniques has revealed the energy relaxation pathways of different time scales in highly excited quasi-2D (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 layers. In the thinner layers n = 1 and 2, we observe diffusion and recombination in the excitonic system, whereas in thicker layers n ≥ 3 the excitons dissociate due to very fast (<10 ps) energy funnelling to thicker layers where the dynamics in electron–hole plasma dominate. We observe no rapid enhancement of diffusion coefficient during the funnelling, which proves that it occurs over small distances only and supports the mechanism of Förster resonance energy transfer between the neighbouring perovskite sheets of different order. In all layers, we observe the growth of diffusivity with excitation, but the growth rate differs in thin and thick samples. We observe a significantly higher diffusion coefficient of exciton transport in n = 1 or 2 order samples: e.g., at lower excitations it exceeds that in thicker samples by roughly one order of magnitude (1 cm2 s−1vs. 0.1 cm2 s−1). The diffusion coefficient dependence on carrier density in n ≥ 3 layers strongly resembles carrier transport in bulk perovskites with a strong impact of carrier localization/trapping. The observed dependence of the diffusion coefficient on the layer thickness agrees with theoretical predictions, but is in contrast with some other reports. This discrepancy can stem from different chemical composition of our samples, in agreement with the high sensitivity of 2D perovskite transport to the structural properties of the particular layers. Finally, we show that amplified stimulated emission appears only in electron–hole plasma and not in excitons, presumably due to strong light reabsorption. This illustrates that structural disorder and a mixture of different order quasi-2D perovskite layers can be beneficial for light emitting devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Vilnius University team acknowledges the financial support provided by Research Council of Lithuania under the project No. S-MIP-17-71. Additionally, this work was supported by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), ERATO, Adachi Molecular Exciton Engineering Project (grant number JPMJER1305).
References
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Sum, M. Righetto and S. S. Lim, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 130901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, M. Wang, Z. Zang, X. Tang and L. Fang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, R. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Miao, W. L. Tan, X. Jiao, H. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Zou, Y. Wang, M. Yang, C. Yi, N. Wang, F. Gao, C. R. McNeill, T. Qin, J. Wang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804771 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Qin, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, C. Zhao, T. Matsushima, D. Zhang, T. Fujihara and C. Adachi, Nature, 2020, 585, 53–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Kondo, T. Umebayashi, K. Asai and K. Ema, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045312 CrossRef .
D. B. Straus and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1434–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Marongiu, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12006–12018 RSC .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, M. H. Elkins, O. Voznyy, R. D. Pensack, F. Zapata, L. V. Besteiro, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, P. Todorovic, S. O. Kelley, A. O. Govorov, S. K. Gray, I. Infante, E. H. Sargent and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 419–426 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, H. Wang, W. Li, X. Hu, K. Sun and Z. Zang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26421–26428 RSC .
M. Wang, W. Li, H. Wang, K. Yang, X. Hu, K. Sun, S. Lu and Z. Zang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000604 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3175 RSC .
P. Ščajev, R. Aleksiejūnas, S. Miasojedovas, S. Nargelas, M. Inoue, C. Qin, T. Matsushima, C. Adachi and S. Juršėnas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21600–21609 CrossRef .
P. Ščajev, C. Qin, R. Aleksiejūnas, P. Baronas, S. Miasojedovas, T. Fujihara, T. Matsushima, C. Adachi and S. Juršėnas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3167–3172 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, W. Chen, S. Yang, Q. Ou, Z. Gan, Q. Bao, B. Jia and X. Wen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26384–26390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seitz, A. J. Magdaleno, N. Alcázar-Cano, M. Meléndez, T. J. Lubbers, S. W. Walraven, S. Pakdel, E. Prada, R. Delgado-Buscalioni and F. Prins, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Motti, T. Crothers, R. Yang, Y. Cao, R. Li, M. B. Johnston, J. Wang and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3953–3960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. Meng, P. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 570 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. J. Eichler, P. Gunter and D. W. Pohl, Laser-Induced Dynamic Grattings, Springer-Verlag, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .
D. Webber, C. Clegg, A. W. Mason, S. A. March, I. G. Hill and K. C. Hall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 121905 CrossRef .
D. H. Arias, D. T. Moore, J. van de Lagemaat and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5710–5717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ščajev, D. Litvinas, V. Soriūtė, G. Kreiza, S. Stanionytė and S. Juršėnas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 23838–23844 CrossRef .
P. Ščajev, R. Aleksiejūnas, P. Baronas, D. Litvinas, M. Kolenda, C. Qin, T. Fujihara, T. Matsushima, C. Adachi and S. Juršėnas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 19275–19281 CrossRef .
D. S. Chemla and D. A. B. Miller, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B, 1985, 2, 1155 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Passarelli, C. M. Mauck, S. W. Winslow, C. F. Perkinson, J. C. Bard, H. Sai, K. W. Williams, A. Narayanan, D. J. Fairfield, M. P. Hendricks, W. A. Tisdale and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 672–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kumavat, Y. Sonvane, D. Singh and S. K. Gupta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5231–5239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, E. Shi, L. Yuan, L. Jin, L. Dou and L. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mannino, I. Deretzis, E. Smecca, A. La Magna, A. Alberti, D. Ceratti and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2490–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. Tse-Wei Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
J.-C. Blancon, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, C. M. M. Soe, K. Appavoo, M. Y. Sfeir, S. Tretiak, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2017, 355, 1288–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, W.-H. Fang, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15557–15566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu and M. T. Trinh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14714–14721 CrossRef CAS .
N. Peyghambarian, H. M. Gibbs, J. L. Jewell, A. Antonetti, A. Migus, D. Hulin and A. Mysyrowicz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 2433–2436 CrossRef CAS .
S. Toda, N. Yanagita, E. Jokar, E. W.-G. Diau and S. Shigeto, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3871–3876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sung, C. Schnedermann, L. Ni, A. Sadhanala, R. Y. S. Chen, C. Cho, L. Priest, J. M. Lim, H.-K. Kim, B. Monserrat, P. Kukura and A. Rao, Nat. Phys., 2020, 16, 171–176 Search PubMed .
P. Gong, Y.-Y. Yang, W.-D. Ma, X.-Y. Fang, X.-L. Jing, Y.-H. Jia and M.-S. Cao, Phys. E, 2021, 128, 114578 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, D. Seyitliyev, S. Stuard, J. Mendes, Q. Dong, X. Fu, Y.-A. Chen, S. He, X. Yi, L. Zhu, C.-H. Chang, H. Ade, K. Gundogdu and F. So, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wachter, M. Maute, H. Kalt, I. Galbraith, C. Sieh, T. Meier and S. W. Koch, Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 314, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, R. Butté, A. Dussaigne, N. Grandjean, B. Deveaud and G. Jacopin, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 195411 CrossRef .
G. Tränkle, E. Lach, A. Forchel, F. Scholz, C. Ell, H. Haug, G. Weimann, G. Griffiths, H. Kroemer and S. Subbanna, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 6712–6714 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Leyden, T. Matsushima, C. Qin, S. Ruan, H. Ye and C. Adachi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 15030–15036 RSC .
M. Cui, C. Qin, Y. Jiang, M. Yuan, L. Xu, D. Song, Y. Jiang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5734–5740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Manger, M. B. Rowley, Y. Fu, A. K. Foote, M. T. Rea, S. L. Wood, S. Jin, J. C. Wright and R. H. Goldsmith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1062–1071 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of LITG measurement.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) LITG transients recorded at three different grating periods Λ in the 3D sample. (b) The dependence of τG−1 on Λ−2 used to extract the diffusion coefficient D and carrier lifetime τ, according to eqn (3).	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Ambipolar diffusion coefficient D as a function of the photoexcited carrier density N in the (PEA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 layers of different order n.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Spectra of the time-integrated absorption (a) and photoluminescence (b) in the (PEA)2(FA)n−1PbnBr3n+1 perovskite layers of different dimensions n. Dashed vertical lines mark the positions of excitonic absorption peaks.	 

 	Fig. 5  Colour maps of the differential absorption evolution in quasi-2D layers of different order n = 1, 2, 3 and 4 (indicated in the figures) at a relatively low excitation I0 = 25.5 μJ cm−2 by 350 nm laser pulses. Vertical dashed lines show the spectral positions of exciton absorptions in the layers of respective order.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–d) PL spectra integrated within the first nanosecond after excitation and (e–h) temporal traces of PL decay at indicated spectral positions. The curves for different excitations are depicted by different colours as indicated in the legends for each sample.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Decay time of the fast PL decay component (see Fig. 6) as a function of the photoexcited carrier density. Note that the decay time for n = 1 or 2 layers represents the decay of the excitonic line, while for n ≥ 3 this represents the decay of electron–hole plasma. (b) Photoluminescence quantum yield as a function of excitation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
