Perovskite-based photodetectors: materials and devices  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00896H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00896H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5204-5236Perovskite-based photodetectors: materials and devices

        
          
            Huan 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dong Ha 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03760, Korea. E-mail: dhkim@ewha.ac.kr
Received 
      10th December 2016
    First published on 10th August 2017AbstractWhile the field of perovskite-based optoelectronics has mostly been dominated by photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and transistors, semiconducting properties peculiar to perovskites make them interesting candidates for innovative and disruptive applications in light signal detection. Perovskites combine effective light absorption in the broadband range with good photo-generation yield and high charge carrier mobility, a combination that provides promising potential for exploiting sensitive and fast photodetectors that are targeted for image sensing, optical communication, environmental monitoring or chemical/biological detection. Currently, organic–inorganic hybrid and all-inorganic halide perovskites with controlled morphologies of polycrystalline thin films, nano-particles/wires/sheets, and bulk single crystals have shown key figure-of-merit features in terms of their responsivity, detectivity, noise equivalent power, linear dynamic range, and response speed. The sensing region has been covered from ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) to gamma photons based on two- or three-terminal device architectures. Diverse photoactive materials and devices with superior optoelectronic performances have stimulated attention from researchers in multidisciplinary areas. In this review, we provide a comprehensive overview of the recent progress of perovskite-based photodetectors focusing on versatile compositions, structures, and morphologies of constituent materials, and diverse device architectures toward the superior performance metrics. Combining the advantages of both organic semiconductors (facile solution processability) and inorganic semiconductors (high charge carrier mobility), perovskites are expected to replace commercial silicon for future photodetection applications.
Huan Wang
Huan Wang obtained his PhD degree in the College of Chemistry from Jilin University in 2011. His doctoral research on “Optoelectronic functional organic crystals toward laser applications” was carried out under Prof. Yuguang Ma's supervision. Then, he joined Intel Corporation as a process engineer, and subsequently, Northeast Petroleum University as an assistant professor. From 2015, he worked as a research professor in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University under the guidance of Prof. Dong Ha Kim. His current research interests focus on developing high-performance stable photodetectors based on organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
Dong Ha Kim
Prof. Dong Ha Kim received his PhD degree in the Department of Fiber and Polymer Science at Seoul National University (2000). He worked as a postdoctor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. Then, he assumed a faculty position in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2006). His research interests include development of hybrid nanostructures for energy storage and conversion, environmental remediation, memory devices, display devices, and theragnosis. He has authored 145 SCI publications and holds 29 Korean and 2 US patents.
1. Introduction
A photodetector is a device for detecting and measuring the properties of light via the photoelectric effect, which usually manifests as a photocurrent. Nowadays, photoelectric conversion on photodetectors is attracting increasing interest in both academic and industrial domains in a wide range of applications including image sensing, optical communication, environmental monitoring, and chemical/biological detection.1–5 A semiconductor material is essential to absorb the incident photons and generate electron–hole pairs upon photoexcitation. A built-in or applied electric field is also necessary to separate the electrons and holes to produce an electric current. The predominant photodetectors are made of inorganic semiconductors. In particular, GaN-, Si-, and InGaAs-based photodetectors are used for the three important ultraviolet (0.25–0.4 μm), visible (0.45–0.8 μm), and near-infrared (0.9–1.7 μm) sub-bands, respectively. While photodetector fabrication processes and technologies have become mature and reliable, their complex and expensive manufacture, mechanical inflexibility, and high driving voltage have limited their spread to, compatibility with, and versatility for broad applications and new technologies. In the past few years, solution-processable optoelectronic materials, such as organic materials, nanomaterials, and nanocomposites, have shown promise as active layers in simple, low-cost, flexible, and large-area photodetectors.6–14 However, further improvement in their photodetection performance is hindered by their poor charge carrier mobilities. Recently, it has been demonstrated that halide perovskites, which combine high charge carrier mobility, effective light absorption, and facile solution processability, are also suitable candidates for high-performance photodetectors.15–17
From early on, organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers have been considered for photovoltaic cells.18 By building on pioneering advances in mesoscopic dye-sensitized solar cells, researchers have greatly increased the efficiency of perovskite photovoltaics from about 3% to over 20% and now to 22.1% in just six years.19,20 These significant improvements are attributed to breakthroughs in perovskite film formation, chemical composition, and optimized hole/electron transport matetrials.21–26 A close follow-up of the solar cell development shows that the light-emitting properties of perovskite semiconductors have been reinvigorated, including that in light-emitting diodes and lasers. Although organometal halide perovskites have advantages of high color purity and tunable bandgap, the inherently low exciton binding energy results in small electron–hole capture rates for radiative recombination, limiting the development of high-efficiency perovskite LEDs.27 Therefore, ultrathin perovskite layers and/or small perovskite grain size have been employed to spatially confine electrons and holes to promote bimolecular radiative recombination.28–31 Stoichiometry-tuned reduced-dimensionality perovskites have recently been shown to possess higher exciton binding energies, derived from self-organized multiple quantum well structures, and may show promise in light-emitting applications.32 The external quantum efficiency of reduced-dimensionality perovskite LEDs can be as high as 8.8%, 10.4%, and 11.7%, by incorporating different bulky cations of phenylethylammonium, n-butylammonium, and 1-naphthylmethylammonium, respectively.33–35 Together with the demonstration of efficient electroluminescence and low-threshold optically pumped lasing, hope has been renewed in the use of organometal halide perovskites to achieve solution-processed electrically driven lasing, in which the lasing threshold can be as low as 0.2–0.3 μJ cm−2 integrated with a vertical Fabry–Pérot cavity and distributed-feedback cavity; further, the evaluated threshold current may be within 5 kA cm−2.36–41 Based on the remarkable achievements of diverse perovskites in photovoltaic and light-emitting areas, recent reviews have addressed the state-of-the-art progress of their applications in solar cells,42–45 light-emitting and lasing devices,46–48 or across-the-board optoelectronic devices.49–52 However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has yet presented a comprehensive overview of critical issues in perovskite-based photodetectors, including photoactive material compositions, structures and morphologies, and device architectures that dictate the figures of merit, such as responsivity, detectivity, noise equivalent power, linear dynamic range, and response speed.
Therefore, in this study, we review recent advancements in perovskite-based photodetectors, focusing on the photodetection performance of versatile halide perovskites (organic–inorganic hybrid and all inorganic compositions) and integrated perovskite–semiconductor heterojunction materials in two-terminal devices (photodiodes and photoconductors) and three-terminal devices (phototransistors). We first briefly introduce the chemical and physical properties of halide perovskites, pointing to their advantages in sensitive and fast photodetectors, and in particular, highlight the fundamentals of charge photo-generation. We then summarize the key figure-of-merit parameters that are used to characterize photodetectors. After that, we focus on various photoactive perovskite materials that are currently of interest, including their chemical composition and structure, morphological evolution, methodology of synthesis, and spectral response characteristics. According to the photodetector category (photodiodes, photoconductors, and phototransistors), we discuss and summarize their operation mechanism and photodetection performance. For photodiodes, we further survey the interfacial engineering on performance improvement. We finally give a brief outlook on the current challenges of perovskite-based photodetectors, and suggest some strategies to enhance their long-term stability and photosensitivity, especially in the near-infrared wavelength region, for photodetection applications.
2. Charge photo-generation in perovskites and performance characterization in photodetectors
Typical three-dimensional (3D) perovskites are a large family of compounds that share the same chemical formula ABX3, where A and B are cations of dissimilar sizes and X is an anion. When inorganic halides (I−, Br−, Cl−) are employed as anions (X), the photophysical properties can be tuned through varying halide components to achieve different spectral responses. Generally, monovalent organic moieties, Cs or Rb cations, divalent metal cations, and halide anions are introduced on the A-, B-, and X-sites, respectively. The ABX3 hybrid perovskite structure is formed by a 3D network, with the organic A-site cations occupying the cavity between four adjacent corner-sharing BX6 metal halide octahedra. Their crystallographic stability and probable structure can be deduced by considering the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) and the octahedral factor (μ).53–55 Here, t is based on the ionic radii (r) of A, B, and X, the constituents in t = (rA + rX)/(21/2[rB + rX]), and μ is defined as rB/rX. For halide perovskites, empirically, 0.813 ≤ t ≤ 1.107 and 0.442 ≤ μ ≤ 0.895.54–56 If t lies in the narrower range 0.89–1.0, the cubic structure is likely, which provides optimum electronic properties, due to a high degree of ionic bonding. If A cation is small, or B cation is large, lower t gives less symmetric tetragonal or orthorhombic structures (Fig. 1a).57 Despite these constraints, transitions between such structures on heating are common for any given perovskite, with the high-temperature phase generally being cubic.58 For most extensively investigated methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3), given r (CH3NH3+ = 0.18 nm, Pb2+ = 0.132 nm, I− = 0.206 nm),59t suggests that CH3NH3PbI3 forms a tetragonal structure, which is consistent with single-crystal data finding CH3NH3PbI3 in the tetragonal space group I4cm at room temperature.60 A transition to an orthorhombic phase has been observed at −113 °C.61,62 This is of no practical concern because such low temperature is not experienced in terrestrial environments. As the temperature and thermal energy increase, a transition from tetragonal to cubic symmetry occurs at around 54 °C.63,64 Although this is well within the operational window of devices that potentially affects their performance, the phase transition is slow and reversible, and thus, seems not to be problematic for photoelectric-conversion applications.65–67
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structures of orthorhombic and tetragonal phases of CH3NH3PbX3. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) Transient absorption signals for CH3NH3PbI3 orthorhombic and tetragonal phases. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
In perovskites, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs in the photon absorption process can exist as free charges or excitons, closely related to the exciton binding energy (Eb). Current studies suggest that the free charge and exciton dynamics of the tetragonal and orthorhombic phases are significantly different. The tetragonal phase with very small Eb is comprised primarily of free charges, while the orthorhombic phase with relatively large Eb is comprised of both free charges and excitons (Fig. 1b).68 Taking CH3NH3PbI3 for example, the Eb of the low-temperature orthorhombic phase is only 16 meV and that of the room-temperature tetragonal phase has been predicted to be as small as 2 meV (lower than the thermal energy of ∼25 meV at room temperature), via magneto-absorption or time-resolved spectroscopy.27,69–71 Due to the small Eb, the excited-state properties of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are closer to those of inorganic semiconductors (e.g., Eb of Si, 15.0 meV), rather than organic semiconductors (Eb ∼ 0.3 eV).72 Thus, the non-excitonic nature with the spontaneous electron–hole separation contributes to low bimolecular recombination and high-mobility ambipolar charge transport, resulting in a very impressive performance of photosensing devices such as photodetectors and solar cells.
According to the operation mechanisms of the most widely adopted device architectures, perovskite photodetectors can be mainly categorized as photodiodes, photoconductors, and phototransistors. More details are discussed in the later sections. Here, the key figure-of-merit parameters used to characterize photodetectors can be summarized as follows:
(1) Responsivity (R): it is defined as the ratio of photocurrent to incident-light intensity, which indicates how efficiently a photodetector responds to an optical signal. It is expressed as  where Jph is the photocurrent and Llight is the incident-light intensity. Since R is proportional to the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the photodetector that evaluates the conversion rate from photons to electrons/holes, it can also be expressed as  where λ is the incident-light wavelength, q is the absolute value of electron charge, h is the Planck constant, and c is the speed of light.
(2) Detectivity (D*): it characterizes the weakest level of light that the device can detect, which is determined by the responsivity and noise of the photodetector. D* is given by  where A is the effective area of the photodetector, Δf is the electrical bandwidth, and in is the noise current. There are three contributions to noise that limit D*: the shot noise from dark current, Johnson noise, and thermal fluctuation “flicker” noise.6,73 On the premise of the shot noise being commonly assumed to be the dominant contribution, the expression of D* becomes  where Jd is the dark current.
(3) Noise equivalent power (NEP): it is defined as the signal optical power yielding a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) equal to 1, representing the minimum impinging optical power that a photodetector can distinguish from the noise. A smaller NEP indicates that the device can detect weaker light. It is equal to the reciprocal of D* and can be written as  
(4) Linear dynamic range (LDR): it describes an illumination intensity range within which the current response of the photodetector scales linearly with the light intensity. It is commonly expressed in a logarithmic scale as  where Jupper is the current value at which the response of the device deviates from linearity and Jlower is the lower resolution limit. For practical applications, it is desirable to have a large LDR for a photodetector that can detect both weak and strong light. However, if its behavior is well characterized, the device can also be operated outside LDR.
(5) Response speed: it is characterized by the rise time (τr) and fall time (τf) of its response to an optical signal, defined as the time between 10% and 90% of the maximum photocurrent. It is strongly related to the charge transport and collection, which means a small electrode spacing (charge carrier path length) benefits fast response, while ensuring sufficient light absorption and small leakage current.
3. Photoresponsive perovskite materials
In this section, we survey the diverse perovskite materials that are currently used for photodetection, including their chemical composition and structure, morphological evolution, methodology of synthesis, and spectral response characteristics.
3.1 Chemical compositions and structures
For 3D halide perovskites (ABX3, X = I−, Br−, Cl−), when small organic molecules (e.g., CH3NH3+, CH(NH2)2+) are employed as monovalent A cations, the materials possess an organic–inorganic hybrid structure. So far, the typical CH3NH3PbI3,17,74,75 CH3NH3PbBr3,16,76 CH3NH3PbCl3,77–79 CH3NH3PbI3−xClx,15,80 CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx, and CH3NH3PbBr3−xIx81–84 have been extensively studied in the field of photodetectors. Notably, mixed halide perovskites have improved stability in air, compared to single halide perovskites. Furthermore, substituting CH3NH3+ with CH(NH2)2+ (formamidinium) can create a broader optical absorption band, besides offering the greater stability of hybrid perovskites.85 Replacing the organic cation (e.g., CH3NH3+) with an inorganic cation (e.g., Cs+) can offer the perovskite system extra thermal stability.86 In further device applications, colloidal nanocrystals of all-inorganic perovskites can be considered for solution processing.87–89
In contrast to 3D halide perovskites, layered halide perovskites have the general formula of (RNH3)2An−1BnX3n+1, where R is a long-chain alkyl or aromatic group (e.g., phenylethylammonium, n-butylammonium) and n is the number of metal cation layers between the two layers of organic chains. Layered halide perovskites are usually atom-thick sheets of metal halides arranged with strict crystallographic stacking and separated by long organic ligands, in which the adjacent layers are stacked together by weak van der Waals forces. The thickness and optoelectronic properties of layered halide perovskites can be tuned by changing their n values: n = 1, pure two-dimensional (2D) layered with a formula of (RNH3)2BX4; n = ∞, 3D ABX3 structure; and n = defined integer, reduced-dimensionality (quasi-2D) layered structure. More recently, 2D and quais-2D perovskites have attracted attention for photoelectric-conversion applications, due to their increased robustness to moisture, compared to their 3D counterparts.32,90,91 However, photodetectors based on these layered-structure perovskites are paid less attention because their self-organized quantum well structures limit the fast migration of charge carriers with increasing bimolecular recombination.92,93
When perovskites are combined with some 2D layered materials, including graphene and its derivatives, transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as molybdenum disulfide, molybdenum diselenide, tungsten disulfide, and tungsten diselenide, to form the heterojunction, unprecedented performance can be achieved, such as ultrahigh EQE and R.94–101 In these heterostructured systems, perovskites are usually considered to be the light-harvesting materials and 2D layered materials are constructed for the charge-transport channel of photodetectors. Their detailed operation mechanisms will be discussed in the following section. Furthermore, introducing wide-bandgap ZnO or TiO2 nanostructures, PbS quantum dots, or narrow-bandgap conjugated polymers into perovskites can significantly improve the device performance for ultraviolet or near-infrared light detection.102–107
3.2 Morphological evolutions
Polycrystalline films and single crystals are the two main forms of perovskites. For film formation, a fine control over the crystallization process is critical to engineer the film morphology, such as the uniformity and surface coverage, which essentially determine the device performance. Because photodetectors operate under a similar principle to that of solar cells that absorb incident photons to produce free electrons and holes, contributing to the electrical current, the morphological optimization avenues for the preparation of high-quality perovskite films with less defects (pinholes and grain boundaries) can follow the relatively developed techniques for solar cells. Compared to perovskite polycrystalline films suffering from morphological disorder, perovskite single crystals exhibit the advantages of low trap density, low intrinsic carrier concentration, high mobility, and long diffusion length, which make the material ideal for simultaneously realizing rapid and sensitive photodetection. From 3D large-sized crystals, 2D nanosheets, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires, to zero-dimensional quantum dots, versatile perovskite single crystals with excellent structural and photoelectric properties hold huge promise for high-performance photodetectors. Next, according to the morphological category of perovskites used in photodetectors, we turn to summarize their preparation methodologies and spectral response characteristics.

3.2.1 Polycrystalline films. 
Some universal strategies, such as thermal annealing, solvent annealing, atmospheric control, solvent engineering, chemical vapor deposition, vacuum flash-assisted solution processing, and the use of additives, have been successfully employed to yield high-quality peroveskite films for photovoltaic applications.108–115 These strategies are also generally applicable to perovskite film photodetectors. With respect to solar cells, the target of photodetectors is the delivery of a photocurrent signal, rather than that of electric power, to a load. Thus, uniform and dense perovskite layers with less pinholes and grain boundaries benefit the charge photo-generation, transport, and/or collection. Considering the relatively developed techniques of film preparation, we briefly choose some representative examples combined with the present research of perovskite-based photodetectors (Table 1).
Table 1 Perovskites and/or hybrid materials used for photodetection




Material
Morphology
Preparation methodology
Sensing light wavelengtha
Ref.





a Device photoresponse to the wavelength of light reported in their respective research.





CH3NH3PbI3
Polycrystalline films
One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone (solvent); dried in air naturally (film)
310–780 nm

74



CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Polycrystalline films
One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in air at 100 °C (film)
300–800 nm

15



CH3NH3PbI3
Polycrystalline films
Vapor-assisted solution process: PbI2 in DMF; dried at 110 °C (as-deposited film); annealed in CH3NH3I vapor at 150 °C
400–800 nm

17



CH3NH3PbI3
Polycrystalline films
Two-step solution process: PbI2 in DMF; hot spin-coated and dried at 70 °C; CH3NH3I in 2-propanol; annealed at 105 °C (film)
300–800 nm

155



CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Polycrystalline films
One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in N2 at 90 °C (film)
254 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

156



CH3NH3PbI3
Polycrystalline films
One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in N2 at 90 °C (film)
X-ray (8 keV)

157



CH3NH3PbI3
Polycrystalline films
One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone and DMSO (7:3 v/v, mixed solvent); toluene drop-casting on the spinning “wet” film; annealed at 70 °C
300–800 nm

158




(1) CH3NH3PbIxBr3−x + rhodamine B
(2) CH3NH3PbIxBr3−x + PEIE
(3) PbIxBr2−x + PEIE

Polycrystalline films

One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone (solvent) for (1);
DMF (solvent) for (2); treated in CH3NH3Br 2-propanol solution;
DMF (solvent) for (3); annealed in N2 at 100 °C (all above films)


(1) 600–700 nm (red)
(2) 500–600 nm (green)
(3) 400–500 nm (blue)


159



CH3NH3PbCl3
Bulk crystals
Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 50 °C for 48 h
365 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

78



CH3NH3PbBr3
Bulk crystals
Antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization: DMF (solvent); dichloromethane (antisolvent); ∼48 h growth
380–600 nm

16



CH3NH3PbBr3
Bulk crystals
Antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization: DMF (solvent); dichloromethane (antisolvent); ∼48 h growth
X-ray (50 keV)

160



CH3NH3PbI3
Bulk crystals
Cooling-induced crystallization: temperature of growth solution from 100 °C to 57 °C; 15 days growth
275–790 nm

119



CH(NH2)2PbI3
Bulk crystals
Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 100–105 °C for 3 h
380 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

120



CsPbBr3
Bulk crystals
Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 110 °C for ∼12 h

410–570 nm
Gamma (γ) photons (59.6 keV)


121



CH3NH3Pb(BrxI1−x)3
Bulk crystals
Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at ∼95 °C for 48 h
405–710 nm

161




CH(NH2)2PbI3
CH3NH3PbI3

Bulk crystals
Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 110 °C for 3 h (CH(NH2)2PbI3), 95 °C for 3 h (CH3NH3PbI3)
Gamma (γ) photons (59.6 keV, 0.66 MeV)

162




(1) CH3NH3PbCl3
(2) CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx
(3) CH3NH3PbBr3
(4) CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx

Bulk crystals
Cooling-induced crystallization: temperature of growth solution gradual decrease at a rate of ∼3 °C per day from 100 °C

(1) ∼415–440 nm
(2) ∼455–495 nm (Cl/Br, 4:1)
∼525–550 nm (Cl/Br, 1:1)
(3) ∼555–585 nm
(4) ∼575–615 nm (Br/I, 15:1)
∼625–660 nm (Br/I, 6:1)


82



CsPbBr3
Nanosheets
PbBr2 precursors in dodecylamine (DDA), 1-octadecene (ODE) and oleic acid (OA); CsSt in ODE solution hot-injection reactions at 140 °C for 3 h
300–550 nm

125



CsPbX3
Nanosheets
Cs-oleate precursor from Cs2CO3 and OA; Cs-oleate precursor injection into PbX2 in ODE, OA and oleylamine (OAm)
450 nm (monochromatic light illumination, CsPbBr3)

126



CH3NH3PbI3
Nanoplates

First step: spin-coating PbI2 DMF solution onto a substrate to form PbI2 thin film.
Second step: immersing the film into CH3NH3I 2-propanol solution for the reaction and recrystallization

Simulated 1 Sun

127



CH3NH3PbI3
Nanosheets

First step: drop-casting saturated PbI2 aqueous solution onto a substrate for the nucleation of PbI2 nanosheets.
Second step: converting as-grown 2D PbI2 nanosheets into CH3NH3PbI3 under CH3NH3I vapor phase reaction

405 nm, 532 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

129




CH3NH3PbBr3
CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx
CH3NH3PbBr3−xIx

Nanoplates
Adding CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 DMF solution into ODE and OAm to form CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoplates; mixing CH3NH3Cl or CH3NH3I 2-propanol solution with CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoplates in toluene for Br exchange reaction
365 nm, 505 nm, 617 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

81



CH3NH3PbI3
Nanowires
One-step self-assembly method: dropping perovskite/DMF solution onto a ∼10° slope substrate
400–750 nm

132



CH3NH3PbI3
Nanowires
Slip-coating method: dropping saturated perovskite/DMF solution onto a glass microscope slide followed by covering a second glass slide; gradually sliding one glass plate for solvent evaporation
633 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

134



CH3NH3PbI3
Nanowires
Etching method: spin-coating perovskite/DMF solution onto a substrate; spin-coating a mixed solvent (DMF, 2-propanol) onto the perovskite film with a dissolution–recrystallization process to form nanowires
532 nm (monochromatic light illumination), simulated 1 Sun

139



Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3
Nanowires
Aqueous solution method: preparing PbI2 flakes in saturated aqueous solution; adding CsI and CH3NH3I into above solution
530 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

163



CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3
Nanowires
SU-8 photoresist strips aligned on the substrate by photolithography; dipping photoresist template into perovskite/DMF solution followed by putting it on a tilted glass (∼5°) with dichloromethane as the antisolvent
370–780 nm

142



CsPb(Br/I)3
Nanowires
Cs stock solution (OA, ODE, OAm) hot-injection into the precursor solution of PbBr2 and PbI2
532 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

144



CsPbI3
Nanocrystals
Cs-oleate from the reaction of Cs2CO3 and OA in ODE; Cs-oleate hot-injection into PbBr2 in ODE, OA and OAm to form CsPbBr3 nanocrystals; adding LiI ethanol solution into CsPbBr3 nanocrystals in hexane
470–750 nm

150



APbBr3, APbI3 (A = CH3NH3+, Cs+, or CH(NH2)2+)
Nanocrystals
Ultrasound-induced synthesis: mixing AX (= MAX, CsX, or FAX), PbX2, and OAm in toluene; then sonication
365 nm (monochromatic light illumination)

154



CsPbBr3 + AuNP
Nanocrystals
Recrystallization method: adding PbBr2 and CsBr into DMSO; adding OA and OAm into above solution; this mixture injection into toluene
300–550 nm

152







3.2.2 Bulk crystals. 
The currently reported methods for the growth of bulk perovskite crystals used in photodetectors include inverse temperature crystallization,78,116 antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization,16,117 and gradually, cooling-induced crystallization techniques.118,119 The inverse temperature crystallization method is suitable for those materials whose solubility in particular solvents is high at room temperature, but decreases with increasing temperature. CH3NH3PbX3 perovskites exhibit inverse temperature solubility behavior in γ-butyrolactone, DMF, DMSO, or their mixture. This phenomenon can be used to rapidly crystallize CH3NH3PbX3 in hot solutions, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. Fig. 2b, which shows the solubility of CH3NH3PbCl3 powder in a mixture of DMSO–DMF (1:1 v/v), clearly demonstrates the decrease in solubility at elevated temperatures. A highly transparent and colorless CH3NH3PbCl3 crystal can be obtained with parallelepiped shape. Han et al. and Dirin et al. grew CH(NH2)2PbI3 and CsPbBr3 crystals, respectively, for photon detection by this method.120,121 The antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method uses a solvent with high solubility and moderate coordination for CH3NH3X and PbX2 (DMF or γ-butyrolactone) and an antisolvent in which both perovskite precursors are completely insoluble (dichloromethane). The antisolvent is then slowly diffused into the solution of precursors, leading to the growth of perovskite crystals (Fig. 2c). Saidaminov et al. succeeded in growing CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals on a planar substrate and over multiple cm2 areas (Fig. 2d), whose integration was further exploited to construct high-performance photodetectors.16 Walters et al. obtained large-sized CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals by using this method and fabricated the first perovskite two-photon photodetector to demonstrate the prospects of perovskites for applications in nonlinear optics.122 The cooling-induced crystallization method is conventional, but time-consuming. The crystals are slowly precipitated from the saturated solution of precursors by gradually lowering the temperature. Lian et al. grew centimeter-sized CH3NH3PbI3 bulk single crystals over the course of 15 days by introducing a seed crystal (Fig. 2e and f).119 Fang et al. reported the growth of single- and mixed-halide perovskite single crystals with different halide compositions, showing tunable spectral response (Fig. 2g). These high-quality crystals presented excellent photodetection performance.82
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the inverse temperature crystallization process, in which the solution is heated from room temperature and kept at an elevated temperature to initiate the crystallization. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (b) Solubility data for MAPbCl3 powder in DMSO–DMF (1:1 v/v) at different temperatures. Inset: Transparent single crystal grown from MAPbCl3 solution. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization process, in which an appropriate antisolvent is slowly diffused into the saturated solution of the crystal precursors, leading to the crystallization, and the kinetics of perovskite crystal growth. (d) Cross-sectional SEM of laterally continuous perovskite crystals on the substrate. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (e) Schematic of the cooling-induced crystallization in which the decrease in solution temperature induces the saturated solution of perovskite precursors to form the crystals. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (f) Image of MAPbI3 bulk single crystal grown through the cooling-induced crystallization technique. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (g) Images of single-halide and mixed-halide perovskite single crystals with different halide compositions. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 


3.2.3 Nano-sheet/plate crystals. 
Apart from 3D large-sized crystals, 2D perovskite crystals, such as nanosheets and nanoplates, have recently shown excellent photoresponsive properties. Currently, the preparation strategy of nano-sheet/plate perovskite crystals used in photodetectors mainly includes solution-phase growth124–127 and a combined solution process and vapor-phase conversion method.100,128–130 Song et al. reported for the first time the fabrication of atomically thin 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheets and their application in solution-processed flexible photodetectors, with high performance. These perovskite nanosheets were synthesized through the reaction of cesium stearate (CsSt) and PbBr2 precursors like the colloidal synthesis; the nanosheet edge could reach a length of more than 1.5 μm and the thickness was only about 3.3 nm (Fig. 3a).125 The same group also reported a strategy to enhance the conductivity of CsPbBr3 nanosheets, in which conductive nanonets are constructed from carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to provide fast carrier tracks.131 As a result, the CsPbBr3 nanosheet/CNT composite films exhibit both high light harvesting and high conductivity—such advantages being demonstrated by the high performances of the corresponding photoconductors. Lv et al. developed a general approach to directly synthesize 2D CsPbX3 perovskite and mixed perovskite nanosheets with uniform and ultrathin thicknesses down to a few monolayers.126 They mentioned that the key to the high-yield synthesis of perovskite nanosheets was the development of a new Cs-oleate precursor. Jang et al. found a facile and reversible halide-exchange reaction to synthesize composition-tuned mixed halide perovskite nanoplates.81 CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoplates were synthesized, and subsequently, mixed with CH3NH3X (X = Cl or I) to produce CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx or CH3NH3PbBr3−xIx nanoplates, respectively, in the solution phase under ambient conditions. Liu et al. reported a combined solution process and vapor-phase conversion method to synthesize 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites as thin as a single unit cell (∼1.3 nm).129 In particular, this method involves two steps of first casting saturated PbI2 aqueous solution onto a substrate, and subsequently, heating the substrate at an elevated temperature, during which 2D PbI2 nanosheets will nucleate, and then, mounting as-grown 2D PbI2 nanosheets under CH3NH3I vapor phase reaction in a chemical vapor deposition furnace to form 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanosheets (Fig. 3b). Cheng et al. also used this method to grow the 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanoplate and further constructed van der Waals heterojunction photodetectors combined with graphene/WSe2 2D materials.100
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of 2D ultrathin CsPbBr3 nanosheets prepared through solution-phase synthesis: SEM imagery; AFM imagery and height profiles of a monolayer and a bilayer with thicknesses of 1.6 and 3.3 ± 0.2 nm, respectively; thickness distribution histograms. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of the solution process to fabricate 2D PbI2 nanosheets and the vapor-phase conversion process to transfer PbI2 into 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanosheets; crystal structure of single-unit-cell-thick 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite; AFM imagery of 2D CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses: monolayer (1.3 nm), bilayer (2.5 nm), four-layer (5.0 nm), and ten-layer (13.0 nm). Scale bars: 2 μm. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 


3.2.4 Nanowire crystals. 
Halide perovskite nanowires reported in the photodetection applications are largely based on the solution-phase synthesis method. Deng et al. used the one-step self-assembly method to grow CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires,75,132 and further applied an evaporation-induced self-assembly to align single-crystalline perovskite nanowires (Fig. 4a).133 Horváth et al. reported a slip-coating technique to fabricate a network of perovskite nanowires (Fig. 4b),134 which can be easily combined with monolayer graphene or carbon nanotubes to form heterostructures.135,136 They also reported a template-guided growth method to crystallize CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires in the nanofluidic channels, owing to the strong guiding effect of the nano-grooves.137 Zhuo et al. reported an efficient self-template-directed synthesis of porous CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanowires through the reaction of Pb-containing precursor nanowires with CH3NH3Br and HBr in an organic solvent at room temperature, which exhibited superior optoelectronic activity as visible-light photodetectors with high sensitivity and stability.138 Zhu et al. demonstrated that CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires can be directly synthesized from perovskite films through an etching process (Fig. 5a).139 With fine kinetic control, nanowires with different morphologies and diameter distributions could be obtained, which were employed in flexible photodetector. Hu et al. fabricated highly oriented, large-area CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire arrays by large-scale roll-to-roll micro-gravure printing and doctor blading techniques on both flexible and hard substrates of up to 15 mm in length.140 Deng et al. developed a simple blade-coating method for one-step fabrication of ultrastable aligned 1D CH3NH3PbI3 arrays.141 This method is compatible with large-area processing, which is scalable for high-throughput industrial-scale fabrication. The same group very recently reported a facile fluid-guided antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method for large-scale fabrication of high-quality single-crystalline CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 nanowire arrays (Fig. 5b).142 Due to the slow crystallization process and moisture-isolated growth environment, the perovskite nanowires showed smooth surfaces and photodetectors made from the perovskite nanowires arrays exhibited extremely high responsivity. In addition, all-inorganic perovskite CsPbX3 nanowires were synthesized via the standard Schlenk method in solution phase143,144 and the as-prepared nanowires could then be dropped onto the substrate for the prototypical photodetecting device fabrication.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of an evaporation-induced self-assembly method for perovskite nanowire-aligned growth, and their optical image. The evaporation direction is indicated by arrows. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic of the slip-coating process. Representative SEM imagery of nanowires and their distribution of length and width. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the formation of perovskite nanowires through an etching process. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of the fluid-guided antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method for the fabrication of nanowire arrays. SEM and AFM imagery of nanowire arrays grown on the two sides of SU-8 photoresist strips. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 


3.2.5 Quantum dots/nanocrystals. 
Halide perovskite colloidal quantum dots/nanocrystals are expected to exhibit favorably integrated properties of quantum-size effects, enhancing their optical properties with respect to their bulk counterparts, versatile surface chemistry, and a “free” colloidal state, allowing their dispersion into various solvents and matrices, and eventual incorporation into various devices. The main methods that have been proposed for the synthesis of widely investigated APbX3 (A = CH3NH3+, Cs+, CH(NH2)2+) halide perovskite colloidal quantum dots/nanocrystals include hot injection88 and ligand-assisted reprecipitation (Fig. 6a).145,146 Post-synthetic transformation reactions in nanocrystals, such as cation and anion exchange reactions, have emerged as powerful tools for fine control over their composition.81,147–149 Due to the high excitonic binding energy and quantum confinement, these nanocrystals usually have high quantum yields with a narrow emission band. Thus, perovskite nanocrystals have already shown great promise in the applications of lasers and LEDs, but their research for photodetectors is rather new. Ramasamy et al. demonstrated, for the first time, photodetector devices based on entirely inorganic CsPbI3 nanocrystals.150 They synthesized CsPbBr3 nanocrystals through a hot-injection method, and then used halide exchange reactions to obtain CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 nanocrystals by adding lithium salts (LiCl or LiI). The same group also reported a highly sensitive hybrid photodetector based on graphene–CsPbBr3−xIx nanocrystals.151 Dong et al. demonstrated solution-processed high-performance CsPbBr3 nanocrystal photodetectors with a preferred-orientation film by centrifugal casting (Fig. 6b), which were further improved by the Au plasmonic effect.152 Zhou et al. fabricated photodetectors by employing a bilayer composite film of mesoporous TiO2 and CsPbBr3 quantum dots as a photosensitizer, with significantly enhanced performance, compared to those of pure bromine-based perovskite nanocrystal photodetectors.153 Jang et al. reported the ultrasound-induced synthesis of APbX3 perovskite nanocrystals with a wide range of compositions, where A = CH3NH3+, Cs+, or CH(NH2)2+ and X = Cl, Br, or I.154 All these nanocrystals with different compositions exhibited uniform plate-type morphologies, and their photodetection performances were systematically investigated.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the reaction system and process for a ligand-assisted reprecipitation method; schematic of starting materials to synthesize CH3NH3PbBr3 nanocrystals in the precursor solution, and typical optical image of colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 solution. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) SEM imagery of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals film prepared by drop-coating and centrifugal-casting, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 

Table 1 summarizes the representative preparation methodologies of different morphological perovskites and their spectral response characteristics. In general, perovskite polycrystalline films and bulk crystals can be employed for both vertical- and lateral-type photodetectors; however, perovskite nano-sheets/wires/particles can only be employed for lateral-type photodetectors combined with micrometer-channel electrodes, because in vertical-type devices, their poor surface coverage would cause serious current leakage. The following section discusses the performances of perovskite-based photodetectors with different architectures, including photodiodes, photoconductors, and phototransistors. In addition, the section introduces an effective strategy to design filterless narrowband photodetectors (NPs) with a narrow spectral window for both polycrystalline films and single crystals of perovskites.

4. Photodetecting devices
This section summarizes and discusses the operation mechanisms and photodetection performance of widely investigated perovskite-based photodetectors. Fig. 7 shows that the two-terminal devices include photodiodes and photoconductors, and the three-terminal device refers, in particular, to phototransistors with source, drain, and gate electrodes. According to the spatial layout of the photoactive medium and electrodes, photodiodes and vertical photoconductors have a small electrode spacing with a short carrier transit length, which together provide fast response, as well as low driving voltage; in contrast, lateral photoconductors and phototransistors lead to slow response and high driving voltage due to their large electrode spacing, where the response speed is sacrificed to maintain a high photocurrent. However, lateral devices have additional advantages that are typically much more reproducible and easier for production. Generally, in photodiodes, an absorbed photon can generate at best one electron–hole pair with an EQE of no more than 100%, which requires non-injecting metal–semiconductor contacts. Usually, the introduction of interface layers (hole- or electron-blocking layers) cannot guarantee an increase in responsivity, but can effectively reduce the dark current under reverse bias to obtain high detectivity, accompanied by small NEP and large LDR. In contrast, when metal–semiconductor contacts allow at least one type of carrier injection into the device under illumination, EQE in photoconductors and phototransistors can be in excess of 100%, which results in high photocurrent, and consequently, high responsivity. Due to the lack of dark current suppression, the performances of detectivity, NEP, and LDR have to be sacrificed.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of architectures for perovskite-based photodetectors and the characteristics of photodetection performance for different devices. 

Fig. 7 and the following section summarize and compare the important figure-of-merit parameters of the above photodetector configurations based on the versatile compositions, structures, and morphologies of perovskite materials, toward a rational guideline and design for high-performance perovskite photodetectors.
4.1 Photodiodes
The photodiode configuration is very similar to photovoltaic configuration, but is optimized to work with a reverse applied field with low dark currents and to provide a fast collection of charges. For perovskite photodiodes, the common configurations include the conventional and inverted types, in which the presence of hole/electron transporting or blocking layers is considered to enhance the performance. Meanwhile, the role of commonly employed interface layers is also discussed. Besides the polycrystalline perovskites films widely used in photodiodes, the bulk single crystals with the advantages of low trap density and long carrier diffusion length are also explored for light detection by constructing a vertical (sandwich-like) topology. These devices based on perovskite polycrystalline films or single crystals can detect not only regular ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared light, but also X-ray and gamma-ray, due to the high atomic numbers of Pb, Br, and I.
Generally, photodetectors can be classified as spectrally broadband or narrowband depending on the width of their spectral response window. Perovskite broadband photodetectors (BPs) based on a variety of halide components have mainly been investigated, allowing for facile tuning of the bandgap from ultraviolet to near infrared. However, spectrally selective photodetection is necessarily required when only a small spectral range of light (e.g., red, green, blue, or a selective portion of infrared) is to be detected, while the remainder, usually background or environmental radiation, needs to be suppressed. Recently, filterless NPs have been successfully developed on the basis of the charge collection narrowing (CCN) concept introduced by Armin et al.,164 and this area of research is likely to expand in the future.165 Next, the photodetection performance of perovskite photodiodes is discussed in combination with the spectral sensitivity to panchromatic or selectively specific wavelengths.

4.1.1 Broadband photodiodes. 
Dou et al. demonstrated the solution-processed high-performance photodetectors based on CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films using an “inverted” device configuration.15Fig. 8a shows that PEDOT:PSS and PCBM were typically used as the hole-transporting material and electron-transporting material, respectively. To reduce the charge recombination, as well as the dark current density under reverse bias, 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) and water/alcohol-soluble conjugated polymer of poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) were considered as the hole-blocking layer. Three types of devices were fabricated: PD1 as the control one, and PD2 and PD3 with BCP and PFN, respectively. Fig. 8b and c show that when PFN was used, PD3 revealed a significantly reduced dark current and a very high detectivity approaching 1014 Jones, which is about one order of magnitude higher than that of a commercially single-crystalline silicon photodiode in the spectral range of 400–750 nm. Compared to BCP with a deep HOMO level (−6.7 eV) for its hole-blocking properties in PD2, PFN built up the surface dipole to lower the work function of the metal cathode, which provided an extra electric field to prevent the hole injection, while enhancing electron injection.166 This also explained a marked increase in the forward bias injection of PD3. In addition, the device showed large LDR, small NEP, and fast response speed due to its extremely low dark current. The performance parameters are significantly better than most of the organic, quantum dot, and hybrid photodetectors reported so far, and are comparable with or even better than the traditional inorganic semiconductor-based photodetectors. Liu et al. demonstrated high-performance photodetectors based on organometal halide perovskite materials in a “conventional” device architecture (ITO/TiO2/PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3/P3HT/MoO3/Al).167 By additionally modifying a sol–gel-processed TiO2 compact layer with a solution-processed PCBM, the performance of the perovskite photodetectors was further improved through simultaneously enhancing the photocurrent via facilitating the charge carrier transport at the CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM interfaces and suppressing the dark current densities by passivating the inhomogeneous TiO2 film. As a result, a detectivity greater than 4 × 1012 Jones was obtained from 375 to 800 nm. Sutherland et al. reported the material tailoring of TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD junction-based photodiodes (Fig. 8d).168 Three device architectures were designed: TiO2 alone (I1), with the addition of Al2O3 (I2), and with a further addition of PCBM (I3). By developing a composite Al2O3/PCBM front contact interface layer, the device showed good stability of the photocurrent in air and reduced dark current (Fig. 8e and f). Here, the improved stability with the addition of these interface layers may be attributed to physically and electrically separating the (posited to be unstable) TiO2 and spiro–OMeTAD interfaces. Device I3 achieved a peak responsivity approaching 0.4 A W−1 at 600 nm wavelength, which is comparable to commercial large-area silicon photodiode detection at the red wavelength.169 With minimizing the dark current, the specific detectivity of device I3 approached 1012 Jones across the wavelength range 400–780 nm, showing high sensitivity throughout the visible and into the near-infrared region.
 Fig. 8  (a) Device structure and energy diagram of the perovskite photodetector. (b) Current density–voltage curves of photodetectors with and without the hole-blocking layer. PD1, without the hole-blocking layer; PD2 and PD3, with BCP and PFN as the hole-blocking layer, respectively. (c) External quantum efficiency and detectivity of PD3 at different wavelengths. The detectivity of a single-crystalline silicon diode (purple triangle) is shown for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. (d) Device material stack and their energy band alignment. (e) Effect of the front contact material stack on the dark current density. The addition of Al2O3 and further addition of PCBM reduce the dark current. (f) Stability of devices (I1, I2, I3) in air under continuous illumination. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Tang et al. developed a mixture interlayer by simply blending polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) with PCBM, and used scanning Kelvin probe microscopy to verify the presence of PMMA reducing the work function of the PCBM:PMMA interlayer, which led to increased energy barrier for hole injection and better hole-blocking property.170 The photodetector (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM:PMMA/Al) exhibited a high detectivity of 1.1 × 1013 Jones, a broad LDR of 112 dB, and a fast response time of 2.2 μs at 20 wt% PMMA. Zhu et al. introduced a room-temperature solution-processed NiOx:PbI2 nanocomposite hole extraction layer into CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based photodetectors and demonstrated their excellent performance characteristics.171 The NiOx:PbI2 layer favored the subsequent formation of high-quality crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 films and passivated the perovskite surface. Moreover, the NiOx:PbI2 nanocomposite structures offered a large electron injection barrier at the ITO interface for suppressing dark current and a favorable energy level alignment with the perovskite film to enhance the hole extraction. The optimal device (ITO/NiOx:PbI2/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag) presented an ultralow dark current density of 2.0 × 10−10 A cm−2 at −200 mV, a large LDR of 112 dB, a high responsivity in the visible spectral range of 450–750 nm, a large measured specific detectivity approaching 1013 Jones, and a fast fall time of 168 ns.
Silicon photodiodes are currently the workhorse for the image sensors that are used in digital cameras and smartphones. These photodiodes are low noise, and can deliver high detectivities of >1012 Jones and large LDRs of >200 dB. It can be seen that low-noise light detection is particularly important for image sensors since they need to operate over a broad intensity range. Lin et al. demonstrated an organohalide perovskite low-noise photodiode with performance metrics equivalent to commercial inorganic semiconductor devices.158 Four different structures of perovskite photodiodes, all of which had ITO/PEDOT:PSS anodes, an organohalide perovskite homojunction, and lithium fluoride (LiF)-modified silver (Ag) cathodes, were fabricated (Fig. 9a). The device with a combination of thick PCBM and C60 interlayer exhibited the lowest dark currents (Fig. 9b). An LDR of ∼170 dB and NEP of ∼200 fW Hz−1/2 were eventually achieved. Fang et al. reported a low-noise perovskite photodetector that can directly measure the visible light intensity from around 1 mW cm−2 all the way down to sub 1 pW cm−2, enabled by the dramatic reduction of device noise by device interface engineering (Fig. 9c).172 Three types of devices were fabricated with different electron transport layers (ETLs) and hole transport layers (HTLs), so that their functions in reducing device noise could be well studied: device A with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL and PCBM/C60 (20/20 nm) as the ETL, device B with cross-linked N4,N4′-bis(4-(6-((3-ethyloxetan-3-yl)methoxy)hexyl)phenyl)-N4,N4′-diphenylbiphenyl-4,4′-diamine (OTPD) as the HTL and PCBM/C60 (20/20 nm) as the ETL, and Device C with cross-linked OTPD as the HTL and PCBM/C60 (20/80 nm) as the ETL. Fig. 9d shows that after replacing the HTL of PEDOT:PSS by OTPD (Device B), more significant dark current suppression of nearly one order of magnitude was observed under a bias lower than −1 V, compared to Device A. When increasing the thickness of C60 (Device C), the dark current was further suppressed, which is similar to Lin's results.158 These results demonstrated that buffer layer engineering at both the cathode and anode sides can effectively suppress the dark current of perovskite photodetectors, eventually resulting in a noise level as low as 43 fW Hz−1/2 evaluated by NEP. The excellent weak light sensing capability of the perovskite photodetector can give it the potential to replace commercial silicon photodiodes in applications such as defense, communication, and imaging.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the four different perovskite photodiode structures: type 1 with thin PCBM (10 nm) layer, type 2 with thick PCBM (50 nm) layer, type 3 with thick C60 layer, and type 4 with thick PCBM (50 nm)/C60 (130 nm) layer. (b) Dark current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (c) The energy diagram of the perovskite photodetectors. (d) The dark current (solid symbols) and photocurrent density (hollow symbols, under white light ∼143 μW cm−2) versus bias curves of devices A (diamonds), B (circles), and C (squares). Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 
The detection of X-ray photons is of utmost importance for a wide range of applications, from specific crystal structure determinations to radio astronomy. The largest demand for X-ray detectors comes from medical radiography, where pixel-array detectors based on solid-state semiconductors are under development as a replacement for radiographic films.173 Yakunin et al. demonstrated the possibility of using CH3NH3PbI3 films for the sensitive detection of X-ray photons by direct photon-to-current conversion.157 In particular, CH3NH3PbI3 offered a compelling combination of fast photoresponse and a high-absorption cross-section for X-rays, owing to the heavy Pb and I atoms. The solution-processed photodiode with a thickness of 600 nm exhibited a sensitivity of 1.1 μC Gyair−1 cm−2. The operation of X-ray detectors is similar to that of visible-light photodetectors, in that a high SNR is needed for high sensitivity. The main differences are the photon energy absorbing process, the charge generation process, and the associated charge extraction process. Due to the much stronger penetration capability of X-ray photons, a much thicker active layer is needed to stop X-rays and charges are generated across the entire thickness of the semiconductor. To collect these charges, it is necessary to have a large charge-carrier mobility–lifetime (μτ) product because the μτ level determines the average carrier drift distance per unit electric field, and thus, the charge collection efficiency at a given electric field. In the CH3NH3PbI3 polycrystalline-film device, due to the small μτ product of 2 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 and the limitation of incomplete attenuation of the X-rays, only soft X-rays (<10 keV) can be detected. Wei et al. reported the first sensitive X-ray detector made of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal, with a sensitivity of 80 μC Gyair−1 cm−2.160 Subsequently, Yakunin et al. demonstrated that a series of hybrid lead halide perovskite single crystals (CH3NH3PbI3, CH(NH2)2PbI3, I-treated CH3NH3PbBr3) can serve as solid-state gamma-detecting materials.162 A path length of millimeters to centimeters is required for the complete absorption of hard X-rays (22–50 keV) and γ photons. Thus, these centimeter-scale-thickness crystals with a combined benefit of the reduced defect density, high μτ product (1.0–1.8 × 10−2 cm2 V−1), and reduced surface/interfacial recombination can be ideal for X-ray and γ-ray detection.
Sensing from UV-Vis to NIR is critical for both scientific and industrial applications. However, the spotlight perovskites CH3NH3PbI3 can absorb only the photons in the UV-Vis region (below 800 nm) because of their wide bandgaps. On the other hand, narrow-bandgap materials are considered to be composited or hybridized with perovskites to enhance the response of NIR light. Shen et al. integrated the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 layer with low-bandgap polymer bulk-heterojunction layer to produce a device that combined the advantages of the two types of photodetectors.107 The device composed of ITO/poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA)/CH3NH3PbI3/poly{2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione-3,6-di(5-thiophen-2-yl)yl-alt-N-(2-ethylhexyl)-dithieno-[3,2-b:2,3-d]pyrrole-2,6-diyl} (PDPPTDTPT):PCBM/BCP/Cu extended the response to a wavelength of 1000 nm, without deteriorating the responsivity and specific detectivity of either type of photodetector. Moreover, for NIR light detection, the perovskite layer acted as the hole-transport layer, which enlarged the spacing of the two electrodes, decreased the device capacitance, and reduced the device response time to 5 ns. Liu et al. demonstrated solution-processed ultrasensitive broadband photodiodes that utilized CH3NH3PbI3 and PbS QDs as light harvesters.104Fig. 10a shows the device architecture and cross-sectional SEM imagery of each layer in ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al. The PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3-based device possessed an EQE spectrum response from 375 to 1100 nm (Fig. 10b), which showed high responsivities over 300 and 130 mA W−1 and high detectivities exceeding 1013 and 5 × 1012 Jones in the Vis and NIR regions, respectively (Fig. 10c). For the assembly of QDs into films, the processing steps are typically associated with the formation of an appreciable density of electronic trap states arising from incompletely passivated nanoparticle surfaces. A new type of semiconducting material that consists of PbS QDs embedded in an epitaxially grown perovskite matrix has been recently reported.174 The quantum-dot-in-perovskite (QDiP) material combined the advantages of each: QD sensitization (therefore bandgap tunability), superior passivation of the QD surface states in view of their epitaxially matched interface, and excellent carrier transport properties, with low-trap density and high mobility of perovskite. Arquer et al. took advantage of the benefits of QDiP materials to build photodiodes that were sensitive across the visible region and into the NIR.105 The QDiP (PbS QDs in CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5) photoactive layer was sandwiched between TiO2 and spiro-MeOTAD (Fig. 10d). In the absence of external electric fields, photogenerated excitons were expected to be confined inside QDs, due to the heterojunction formed between the QD (∼1 eV) and the host CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5 (∼1.6 eV), and recombined through radiative or non-radiative channels. This should change under the presence of a suitably large electric field: excitons photogenerated in the quantum dots will then separate, and the charges may be ejected from the dots, under the action of the field, into the host perovskite matrix (Fig. 10e). The measured specific detectivity reached 5 × 1012 Jones through the visible region and 4 × 1012 Jones at the exciton peak of 1240 nm (Fig. 10f). This represented more than a doubling effect, compared to the previously reported best QD NIR photodiodes.175
 Fig. 10  (a) Device architecture and cross-sectional SEM imagery of each layer. (b) EQE spectra of PbS QDs, CH3NH3PbI3, and PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3-based photodiodes. (c) The detectivities versus wavelength for PbS QDs and PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic of the QDiP photodiode device and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM. (e) Schematic of photogenerated charges in the QD phase getting trapped and losing their energy via recombination at flat band conditions, and carriers tunneling into the CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5 host assisted by the high electric field, and being collected. (f) Specific detectivity spectrum. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017. 
Bao et al. used patterned Au nanowire (AuNW) networks with high conductivity and stability as transparent electrodes in flexible CH3NH3PbI3 photodiodes.176 The flexible device (PEN/AuNW/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al) showed a peak responsivity of 321 mA W−1, which was comparable to those of CH3NH3PbI3 photodiodes based on ITO electrodes. Moreover, around 90% and 60% of the initial photocurrent can be retained for the AuNW-based flexible photodiode when bent to radii of 2.5 and 1.5 mm. Ahmad et al. investigated the room-temperature photoresponse properties of 2D-layered perovskite (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4.92 The optimized photodiode (FTO/TiO2/perovskites/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au) presented only 10% EQE at the wavelength of 508 nm (calculated R ∼ 0.04 A W−1), due to the 2D perovskite exciton binding energy being more than 10-fold larger than the thermal energy. Despite strong excitonic 2D perovskite materials limiting the photocurrents, the advantage of the environmental stability of the materials themselves can be utilized for the design of stable photodetectors. Nie et al. reported an effective ultraviolet photoresponse of layered and Pb-free organic–inorganic hybrid manganese perovskite (CH3NH3)2MnCl4.177 This is the first study to demonstrate the use of hybrid manganese perovskites for photodetection application. The FTO/TiO2/(CH3NH3)2MnCl4/carbon electrode device showed a high Ion/Ioff ratio under 330 nm light with 10–30 Hz flashlight frequencies. From the above, machinability flexible, environmentally stable, and Pb-free perovskite-based photodetectors have become increasingly important in this research field.


4.1.2 Narrowband photodiodes. 
Wavelength-selective light detection is crucial for many applications, including imaging and machine vision. Narrowband spectral responses are required for colour discrimination, and current systems use broadband photodiodes combined with red, green, and blue (RGB) color filters. However, such absorptive filters add complexity to the fabrication of color imaging arrays, make increasing pixel density challenging, and can lead to interference artefacts and poor stability when illuminated with ultraviolet light. In addressing this issue, Lin et al.159 and Fang et al.82 independently reported that color-selective photodetectors can be fabricated without the need for filters. Using different architectures (Fig. 11), both groups developed photodiodes based on perovskite semiconductors. To realize narrowband photodetectors, there must be a way to stop short-wavelength light from contributing to the photocurrent. Independent control over an “onset” wavelength and a “switch-off” wavelength would therefore be ideal. It has also been previously shown that the bandgap of perovskites can be tuned by altering the halide, which allows the onset wavelength of absorbed light to be tuned. Lin et al. and Fang et al. were able to control the “switch-off” wavelength of their devices, as well as the “onset” wavelength over the full visible spectrum. They did this by adapting the strategy of CCN demonstrated in organic photodiodes.164 Electron–hole pairs photogenerated uniformly throughout the perovskite semiconductor layer are efficiently collected as photocurrent (“bulk” generation). In contrast, if photocarriers are generated only near the surface of the semiconductor layer (“surface” generation), they are not effectively collected as photocurrent. This inefficient charge collection narrows the spectral response of the photodiodes. For uniform “bulk” excitation, the absorption depth of light, 1/α, should be greater than the semiconductor thickness, L (that is, 1/α > L). Thus, it is possible to tune the spectral response bandwidth of the photodiodes by controlling either α as a function of the wavelength λ or the thickness L. Lin et al. fabricated thin-film (∼0.5 μm-thick) perovskite devices, which were too thin to realize wavelength selectivity since a broad spectrum of above-bandgap photons would be absorbed in the bulk of the device. So they increased the absorption coefficient of the perovskite at a selected switch-off wavelength by blending small-molecule dyes into the perovskite layer (Fig. 11a). This method works effectively and has two added advantages: devices can be fabricated by cheap thin-film deposition methods and the switch-on and switch-off wavelengths can be set independently (the halide alloy fraction and the choice of dye, respectively). Fig. 12a shows the absorption coefficients of the RGB device material combinations, and the junctions optimized to deliver a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of ∼100 nm in the response windows of 600–700, 500–600, and 400–500 nm. The normalized EQE for the RGB suite of photodetectors confirmed that the desired photoresponses were achieved, noting the blindness of each outside of its designed spectral window. For the red sensor, the perovskite CH3NH3PbI2Br was mixed with the dye Rhodamine B; for green, CH3NH3PbIBr2 was mixed with PEIE; and for blue, pure inorganic PbI1.4Br0.6 was mixed with PEIE. By increasing the junction thickness, the surface and bulk generation were distinguished and the EQE at shorter wavelengths was suppressed (Fig. 12b shows a case study of red CCN photodiode). Fig. 12c shows the ∼1 mm-thick perovskite single crystals used by Fang et al. to fabricate a range of narrowband (<20 nm FWHM) detectors that covered the center wavelengths ranging from ∼430 (CH3NH3PbCl3) to ∼630 nm (CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx). In the millimeter-thick devices, photocurrent was only generated for photons with energy close to the bandgap of the material for which these photons were absorbed relatively uniformly throughout the device. Below-bandgap photons passed through the device without photocurrent generation. On the other hand, above-bandgap photons were absorbed according to Beer's law (an exponentially decaying probability of being absorbed with distance x from the surface, exp(−αx)) very close to the crystal surface, which generated little or no photocurrent, due to the high rates of charge trapping and recombination at the surface (Fig. 11b). Fig. 12d shows a similar result that was also observed with Lin's work of EQE narrowing dependent on the photoactive layer thickness in the crystal. Note that narrowband CCN photodiodes have much lower EQEs than broadband devices, which means the photodetection performances of narrowband CCN devices have to be partially sacrificed. Table 2 summarizes some of the figure-of-merit parameters for ease of comparison.
 Fig. 11  Schematics of the basic mechanisms of color selectivity for (a) thin-film and (b) thick single-crystal perovskite photodiodes. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 12  (a) EQE spectra of optimized narrowband photodiodes and related junction absorption coefficients at −0.5 V, clearly showing how the CCN concept can be realized across the visible spectrum. (b) EQEs of narrowband red CCN photodiodes with various junction thicknesses at a reverse bias of −0.5 V. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (c) Normalized EQE spectra of the single-halide and mixed-halide perovskite single-crystal photodetectors with different halide compositions at −1 V, showing the ultra-narrow EQE peak and tunable spectral response. (d) EQE spectra of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals with different thicknesses, measured under −4 V bias. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
Table 2 Performance of perovskite-based photodetectors




Device structure/material
Responsivity (R)@Vbias (light source, intensity)
Detectivity (D*)@Vbias (light source, intensity)
Noise equivalent power (NEP)
Linear dynamic range (LDR)
Response speed [rise time (τr)/fall time (τf)]
Ref.





a Polycrystalline film.
b Bulk crystal.
c Nanosheet.
d Nanowire.
e Nanocrystal.





Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa
—
8 × 1013 Jones@−0.1 V (550 nm, 1 mW cm−2)
4.6 × 10−12 W Hz−1/2
>100 dB
180 ns/160 ns

15



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
0.34 A W−1@−2 V (500 nm, 0.53 mW cm−2)
4.8 × 1012 Jones
—
>100 dB
—

167



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
∼0.4 A W−1@0 V (600 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)
∼1012 Jones
—
>80 dB
1 μs/3 μs

168



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa
—
1.1 × 1013 Jones@−0.01 V (532 nm, 1 mW cm−2)
—
112 dB
3.0 μs/2.2 μs

170



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
∼0.5 A W−1@0 V (740 nm)
∼1013 Jones
∼56 fW Hz−1/2
112 dB
58 ns/168 ns

171



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
—
∼3 × 1012 Jones@0 V (700 nm)
∼200 fW Hz−1/2
∼170 dB
1.7 μs/1.0 μs

158



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
∼0.21 A W−1@−2 V (white light, 143 μW cm−2)
7.4 × 1012 Jones@−0.1 V (680 nm)
43 fW Hz−1/2
94 dB
—/120 ns

172



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
0.32 A W−1@0 V (670 nm)
—
—
84 dB
4.0 μs/3.3 μs

176



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
∼0.29 A W−1@0 V (490 nm)
3.29 × 1012 Jones
—
—
20 μs/17 μs

204



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
0.35 A W−1@0 V (500 nm)
1.53 × 1011 Jones
2 pW Hz−1/2
—
—

205



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a
∼0.4 A W−1@0 V (650 nm)
3 × 1012 Jones@−0.1 V
<1 pW Hz−1/2
>95 dB
—

206



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a + PDPPTDTPT
—
>1011 Jones@−0.1 V (900 nm)
∼2.4 pW Hz−1/2
95 dB (890 nm)
—

107



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a + PbS QD

∼0.3 A W−1@0 V (500 nm, 0.8 mW cm−2)
∼0.13 A W−1@0 V (900 nm, 0.7 mW cm−2)


1.2 × 1013 Jones@0 V (500 nm)
5.1 × 1012 Jones@0 V (900 nm)

—
>100 dB
—

104



Photodiode/PbS QD in CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5a
∼0.1 A W−1@−1 V (975 nm, 100 μW cm−2)
∼4 × 1012 Jones (1240 nm)
∼1 pW Hz−1/2
∼60 dB
<10 μs

105



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI2Bra + rhodamine B (red), CH3NH3PbIBr2a + PEIE (green), PbI1.4Br0.6a + PEIE (blue)
—

1.9 × 1011 Jones@−0.5 V (650 nm)
1.7 × 109 Jones@−0.5 V (550 nm)
4.5 × 108 Jones@−0.5 V (450 nm)

∼2 pW Hz−1/2 (red)
—

3.0 μs/1.9 μs (red)
6.9 μs/3.0 μs (green)
1.8 μs/1.5 μs (blue)


159



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3b
—
2 × 1010 Jones@−4 V (570 nm)
∼0.1 pW Hz−1/2
—
∼1.6 ms

82



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbCl3b
∼0.05 A W−1@−15 V (365 nm, 1 W cm−2)
1.2 × 1010 Jones
—
—
24 ms/62 ms

78



Photodiode/CsPbBr3b
6 A W−1@−10 V (550 nm)
—
—
—
—

121



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3 + CH3NH3PbIxBr3−xb
∼0.01 A W−1@0 V (450 nm)
—
—
—
2.3 s/2.76 s

207



Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3b
∼0.1 A W−1@−3 V (white light, 100 mW cm−2)
7.1 × 1011 Jones
—
—
70 μs/150 μs

208



Photodiode/CH(NH2)2PbI3b
0.68 A W−1@−0.1 V (380 nm, 0.5 mW cm−2)
—
2.6 × 10−14 W Hz−1/2
—
12.4 ms/17.2 ms

120



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa
620 A W−1@−0.7 V (550 nm, 10 μW cm−2)
—
—
—
∼100 ms

180



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a
208 A W−1@−0.6 V (500 nm)
—
—
106 dB
<0.01 s

179



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a
242 A W−1@−1 V (740 nm)
—
0.18 pW Hz−1/2
85 dB
10 μs/5.7 μs

155



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + PbS QD
∼15 A W−1@−2 V (580 nm)
∼6 × 1013 Jones
—
95 dB
—/11.5 μs

190



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + ZnO NR
24.3 A W−1@−1 V (500 nm)
3.56 × 1014 Jones




0.7 s/0.6 s

102



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + ZnO NW
26.7 mA W−1@0 V (325 nm, 19 μW cm−2)
4.0 × 1010 Jones
—
—
53 μs/63 μs

209



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a
3.49 A W−1@3 V (365 nm, 0.01 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
<0.2 s

74



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbCl3a
7.56 A W−1@4 V (360 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
170 μs/220 μs

79



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa
14.5 A W−1@2 V (white light, 66 nW/cm2)
—
—
—
0.2 μs/0.7 μs

156



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa
11.5 A W−1@−12 V (450 nm, 0.8 μW cm−2)
3.12 × 1013 Jones
—
—
—

184



Photoconductor/(C4H9NH3)2PbI4, (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7, (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10a
3.00 mA W−1 (one layer), 7.31 mA W−1 (two layers), 12.78 mA W−1 (three layers)@30 V (white light, 3.0 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
28.4 ms/27.5 ms (one layer), 8.4 ms/7.5 ms (two layers), 10.0 ms/7.5 ms (three layers)

93



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3−xIxa
55 mA W−1@10 V (475 nm)
—
—
—
<20 μs

183



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a
0.1 A W−1@10 V (650 nm, 100 μW cm−2)
1.02 × 1012 Jones
4.73 × 10−14 W Hz−1/2
—
0.3 ms/0.4 ms

75



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3a
∼0.18 A W−1@10 V (531 nm)
6.1 × 1010 Jones
—
—
1.0 ms/1.8 ms

192



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3a
2.7 A W−1@9 V (520 nm)
—
—
—
0.35 ms/1.26 ms

193



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + PDPP3T
∼0.05 A W−1@2 V (650 nm, 500 μW cm−2)
8.8 × 1010 Jones
6.5 pW Hz−1/2
—
30 ms/100 ms

106



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + rhodamine B
43.6 mA W−1@5 V (550 nm, 500 μW cm−2)
—
—
—
60 ms/40 ms

194



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + WSe2
110 A W−1@2 V (532 nm, 2.8 mW cm−2)
2.2 × 1011 Jones
—
—
2.1 s/2.9 s

101



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + WS2
17 A W−1@5 V (white light, 0.2 μW cm−2)
2 × 1012 Jones
∼0.1 pW Hz−1/2
—
2.7 ms/7.5 ms

99



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b
953 A W−1@1 V (532 nm, 2.12 nW cm−2)
—
—
76 dB
74 μs/58 μs

119



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3b
>4000 A W−1@5 V (525 nm)
>3 × 1013 Jones
<0.2 pW Hz−1/2
—
∼25 μs/25 μs

16



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbCl3b
∼18 A W−1@5 V (385 nm, 4 nW)
∼1012 Jones
—
—
—/∼1 ms

77



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b
0.24 A W−1@0 V (808 nm, 10 nW cm−2)
—
—
—
71 μs/112 μs

200



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b
2.53 A W−1@5 V (780 nm, 0.05 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
—

210



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b
1640 A W−1 (BPs)@5 V (810 nm), 275 A W−1 (NPs)@5 V (830 nm)
∼1013 Jones
—
∼70 dB
∼30 μs/20 μs

83



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c
∼40 A W−1@5 V (488 nm, 1.2 nW)
—
—
—
∼500 μs

128



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c
22 A W−1@1 V (405 nm, <10 pW)
—
—
—
<20 ms/40 ms

129



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c
∼0.2 A W−1@2 V (white light, 13 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
—

127



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c
0.64 A W−1@10 V (517 nm)
—
—
—
19 μs/25 μs

125



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c + CNTs
31.1 A W−1@10 V (517 nm)
—
—
85 dB
16 μs/0.38 ms

131



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c
—
—
—
—
17.8 ms/14.7 ms

126



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3d
—
—
—
—
0.12 s/0.086 s

138



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
0.3 A W−1@2 V (1 Sun, 100 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
<0.2 ms/0.25 ms

211



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
5 mA W−1@1 V (633 nm, 7 μW)
—
—
—
0.35 ms/0.25 ms

134



Photoconductor/Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3d
23 A W−1@5 V (530 nm, 4.5 mW cm−2)
2.5 × 1011 Jones
—
—
—

163



Photoconductor/CsPb(Br/I)3d
—
—
—
—
0.68 s/0.66 s

144



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
—
—
—
—
0.12 s/0.21 s

139



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
1.3 A W−1@30 V (650 nm, 80 μW cm−2)
2.5 × 1012 Jones
—
—
0.2 ms/0.3 ms

133



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
4.95 A W−1@1 V (530 nm, 2 nW cm−2)
2 × 1013 Jones
∼11 fW Hz−1/2
∼70 dB
<0.1 ms

132



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
1.2 A W−1@10 V (630 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)
2.39 × 1012 Jones
—
—
<10 ms

212



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
13.57 A W−1@−5 V (420 nm, 500 μW cm−2)
5.25 × 1012 Jones
—
>114 dB
80 μs/240 μs

141



Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d
12500 A W−1@5 V (550 nm, 42 μW cm−2)
1.73 × 1011 Jones
2.83 × 10−12 W Hz−1/2
150 dB
0.34 μs/0.42 μs

142



Photoconductor/CsPbI3e








24 ms/29 ms

150



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3e + AuNP
∼0.01 A W−1@2 V (520 nm)
4.56 × 108 Jones




0.2 ms/1.2 ms

152



Photoconductor/CsPbBr3e + TiO2
∼3.5 A W−1@4 V (510 nm)
—
—
—
∼10 s

153



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a
320 A W−1@Vd = −30 V, Vg = −40 V (white light, 10 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
6.5 μs/5.0 μs

17



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d
0.11 A W−1@Vd = 1.5 V (532 nm, 72 nW)
—
—
—
—

213



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d
6.1 A W−1@Vd = −20 V, Vg = −2 V (white light, 0.5 mW cm−2)
—
—
—
—

201



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + Graphene
180 A W−1@Vd = 0.1 V, Vg = 0 V (520 nm, 1 μW)
>109 Jones
—
—
87 ms/540 ms

94



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + graphene
115 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = 0 V (515 nm)
3 × 1012 Jones
—
—
0.25 s/5.3 s

97



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbBr2Ia + graphene
∼6 × 105 A W−1@Vd = 3 V, Vg = 0 V (405 nm, 1.052 nW)
—
—
—
<120 ms/750 ms

96



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + graphene + AuNP
∼2.1 × 103 A W−1@Vd = 10 V, Vg = 0 V (532 nm, 14 μW cm−2)
—
—
—
1.5 s/—

202



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d + graphene
∼2.6 × 106 A W−1@Vd = 10 mV, Vg = 0 V (633 nm, 3.3 pW)
—
—
—
55 s/75 s

135



Phototransistor/CsPbBr3−xIxe + graphene
8.2 × 108 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = −60 V (405 nm, 0.07 μW cm−2)
2.4 × 1016 Jones
—
—
0.81 s/3.65 s

151



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d + CNTs
7.7 × 105 A W−1@Vd = 0.2 V, Vg = −5 V (633 nm, 375 fW)
—
—
—
<1 s/35 s

136



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + MoS2
1.94 × 106 A W−1@Vd = 5 V, Vg = 20 V (520 nm, 4.63 pW)
1.29 × 1012 Jones
<100 fW Hz−1/2
—
6.17 s/4.5 s

98



Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3c + graphene
∼950 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = 0 V (532 nm, 1.52 nW)
—
—
—
22 ms/37 ms

100





Besides CCN strategy, another conventional approach to narrowband photodetection is to use truly narrowband absorbers. For perovskites, although CH3NH3PbCl3 with a wide bandgap has been successfully used in visible-blind UV photodetectors,78 it remains challenging to realize narrowband visible or infrared detection.

4.2 Photoconductors
An important type of photodetector is that exhibiting intrinsic photocurrent amplification (photoconductive gain), meaning that an incident photon triggers an electrical current flow provided by numerous electrons. Since more than one electron can flow in consequence of a single absorbed photon, an efficiency higher than 100% is possible, according to the ratio between the charge recombination time (τr) and the charge transit time (τt), which is termed photoconductive gain. High gain can maximize the sensitivity of photodetectors, rendering them remarkably promising for applications in high-speed optical communication and high-resolution imaging.178 Photoconductors based on perovskites have demonstrated high responsivities, through the use of vertical or lateral device architectures. For vertical-structure photoconductors, due to the much smaller electrode spacing (<500 nm), high gain can be obtained with low working voltage, which is attributed to the high charge carrier mobility of perovskites. Recently, this vertical structure was adopted in perovskite film devices, which resulted in a high responsivity of >200 A W−1 at low bias (<1 V), by accumulating photogenerated charges at the electrode/perovskite interface to change the electrode work function, and then to enable charge injection into perovskite under illumination.155,179,180 Lateral-structure devices for perovskite films, with large electrode spacing (>5 μm), require a relatively high working voltage to maintain high gain, which is related to the perovskite film quality.74,181–188 This is because charge carriers during long-distance transit can be more easily trapped by defects in films, causing photocurrent losses. Some photoconductors based on perovskite single crystals with low surface-trap density exhibited ultrahigh responsivities exceeding 103 A W−1,16,83,119 and the lateral-structure devices can be easily constructed with perovskite nano-sheets/wires/particles followed by a detailed discussion.

4.2.1 Vertical photoconductors. 
Under reverse bias, strong photocurrent amplification was early on observed in perovskite solar cells with a porous TiO2 blocking layer (BL), permitting the cell to work as a high-gain photodetector at low voltage.189 Moehl et al. used two types of TiO2 BLs: one made by spray pyrolysis with a compact morphology and the other made by spin coating, forming a porous structure. From the comparison of the dark and photocurrent behavior of the different device types, the effect of increasing dark and photocurrent under reverse bias was observed only in the case of the sample with a porous BL (Fig. 13a). Because the porous BL (or similarly in the case without any BL) placed the perovskite in direct contact with the FTO, this facilitated hole injection into the valence band (VB) of the perovskite under reverse bias. In contrast, a compact sprayed TiO2 BL hindered the hole transfer under reverse bias because the VB of the perovskite was not accessible from the FTO without direct contact. The amplification of the measured photocurrent signal showed a gain of six times at 0.9 V reverse bias. Such an increase in current under reverse bias going from dark conditions to illuminated conditions enabled a more favorable design for the high-gain, low-voltage photodetectors. Chen et al. used this strategy to fabricate a planar perovskite device (FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au),180 in which the compact TiO2 blocking layer (CL) played a key role in regulating the performance. Similar to Moehl's work, high-density CL was prepared by a gas-phase spray pyrolysis and less compact CL was prepared by a spin-coating method. They found the EQE action spectrum of the giant current for the planar device with spin-coated CL, measured at a bias of −0.9 V, along with the reference EQE spectrum of JSC under zero bias (Fig. 13b). The EQE value of the giant current reached 1700% or more, while that of JSC was around 80%. Based on the results, the amplified photocurrent in reverse bias was explained as photoconductive current of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (substantially CH3NH3PbI3), whose amplitude was strongly regulated by the TiO2 CL. Fig. 13c shows the mechanism of current amplification.
 Fig. 13  (a) Typical behavior of the dark and photocurrent in forward and reverse biases. The current response of the devices for the spin-coated BL is shown in blue, and that for the spray-pyrolized BL is shown in red, while the extrapolation of the photocurrent in reverse bias is shown in green. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) EQE action spectra for diode photocurrent and short-circuit current (JSC) for a planar perovskite device (spin-coat CL) biased at −0.9 and 0 V, respectively. Inset shows the action spectrum of JSC (enlarged). (c) Energy diagrams and carrier transfer mechanism for amplified current generation. Reverse bias condition (V = −0.6 V) with blocking TiO2 CL (spray coat) that blocks charge transfer from VB, and reverse bias (V = −0.6 V) with bypass-rich TiO2 CL (spin coat), leading to the generation of amplified current. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Domanski et al. demonstrated high-gain, low-voltage CH3NH3PbI3 photodetectors in various architectures.179 Photomultiplication in all structures with direct contact of FTO and perovskite with the highest responsivity 208 A W−1 corresponding to an incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of 47000% was observed (Fig. 14), although their photodetector performance was limited, because of high dark currents from shunting. It was proposed that the accumulation of negative ionic charge at the FTO/perovskite interface under reverse bias lowered the FTO work function, allowing for direct hole injection into the perovskite valence band. Due to an overall increase in conductivity, the hole current was enhanced upon illumination and the device behaved with photoconductive characteristics.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure of the model device and a schematic of the energy of the perovskite photodetector. (b) IPCE of the perovskite photodetector (the inset in logarithmic scale) and (c) responsivity at short-circuit conditions and under −0.6 V reverse bias (the inset shows the gain spectrum of the photodetector). Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 
Dong et al. reported a highly sensitive CH3NH3PbI3-based photodetector with a broadband response ranging from UV to NIR.155 The device composed of ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/4,4′-bis[(p-trichlorosilylpropylphenyl)phenylamino]-biphenyl (TPD-Si2)/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 15a) showed a very high responsivity of 242 A W−1 at low bias (−1 V). The hole traps caused by large concentration of Pb2+ cations in the top surface of the perovskite film were critical for achieving high gain in these devices. Benefitting from the trapped-hole-induced electron injection (Fig. 15b), the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector showed a transition from a diode-rectifying behaviour in the dark to photoconduction under illumination, verified by the photo- and dark-current density–voltage (J–V) curves (Fig. 15d). An IPCE value of 100% corresponds to a photodetector gain value of 1. A photoconductor can have IPCEs above 100%, because in addition to the photogenerated charges, charges are also injected by the electrodes under an applied bias. The resulting gain can be much higher than 1 because the injected charges can be significantly higher than the photogenerated charges. IPCE measurements were carried out at reverse biases between 0 and -ain with stepwise increases of −0.2 V (Fig. 15c). The IPCE curves agreed well with the profile derived from the absorption curve. The gain increased as a function of reverse bias from 0.3 at 0 V to 489 ± 6 at −1 V. In this study, the authors explained that trapped holes in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer induced band bending of perovskite close to the MoO3/Ag electrode, thus reducing the Schottky junction thickness and allowing electron injection under reverse bias. Liu et al. also used a similar trap-assisted charge-injection effect to increase the photo-responsivity, by eliminating the charge injection barrier from the cathode.190 They fabricated perovskite hybrid photodetectors (pero-HPDs) by introducing PbS QDs into the CH3NH3PbI3 sensitizer (Fig. 15e). The PbS QDs, possessing large amount of trap states, could down-shift the LUMO energy level of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film and adjust the energy level alignment at the CH3NH3PbI3/Al cathode interface, thus forming the ohmic contact for energy barrierless hole injection (Fig. 15g and h). As a result, the pero-HPDs reached an EQE of ∼4500%, a high R of ∼15 A W−1, and D* of ∼6 × 1013 Jones at a low voltage of −2 V (Fig. 15f).
 Fig. 15  (a) Device structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector. (b) Energy diagram of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector at reverse bias under illumination. (c) Absorption spectrum (solid line) of the CH3NH3PbI3 films and wavelength-dependent gain (solid lines with symbols) of the CH3NH3PbI3 devices under reverse biases between 0 and −1 V. (d) Photo- and dark-current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the CH3NH3PbI3 device. The reference PV device has a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (e) Device structure of pero-HPDs. (f) Responsivity and detectivity versus wavelength spectra of the pero-HPDs fabricated by the CH3NH3PbI3:PbS QD nanocomposite thin film at different negative biases (−0.5, −1, and −2 V). Energy level alignment of the materials used for fabrication of pero-HPDs (g) in dark and (h) under illumination. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Yu et al. reported a photodetector based on a ZnO nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction and a MoO3 hole-transport layer, which was sensitive to broadband wavelengths from the ultraviolet light to the entire visible light region (250–800 nm), showing a high photo-responsivity of 24.3 A W−1 and a high detectivity value of 3.56 × 1014 Jones at 500 nm.102 Due to the introduction of ZnO structures, the responsivity at 300 nm wavelength also reached 3.9 A W−1.


4.2.2 Lateral photoconductors. 
Different from the vertical-structure photodetectors requiring the uniformity and surface coverage of the active layer, the lateral-structure devices (metal–semiconductor–metal, MSM architecture) can be exploited to utilize perovskite 1D nanowires and 2D nanosheets by constructing microelectrodes. Hu et al. demonstrated the first embodiment of a CH3NH3PbI3 film photodetector by employing a lateral geometry with a perovskite-filled channel between a pair of conductive contacts.74 The device was sensitive to a broadband wavelength from the ultraviolet light to entire visible light, showing a photo-responsivity of 3.49 and 0.0367 A W−1 at 365 and 780 nm with a voltage bias of 3 V, respectively. Additionally, the as-fabricated photodetector exhibited excellent flexibility and robustness, with no obvious variation in photocurrent, after bending several times. The authors suggested that a modified Schottky barrier at the ITO/perovskite interface gave rise to electron injection, resulting in the observed photocurrent increase. This process is also explained by the simple energy band diagram shown in Fig. 16. Wang et al. reported a CH3NH3PbCl3 film ultraviolet photodetector based on the MSM configuration.79 The device exhibited a high responsivity of 7.56 A W−1 at the wavelength of 360 nm at 4 V. Guo et al. fabricated the air-stable perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx photodetector through spin-coating of a fluorous polymer as a light protection layer.156 The best responsivity of the device was 14.5 A W−1 to white light and 7.85 A W−1 to solar-blind UV light (λ = 254 nm). Importantly, the fluorous polymer coating increased the lifetime of the device to almost 100 days. Zhou et al. fabricated and tested the photodetectors based on 2D layer-structured perovskite materials with different layer numbers: (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 (one layer), (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 (two layers), and (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10 (three layers).93 These devices presented highly reproducible on-and-off switching photoresponse properties. The three-layered perovskites showed better performance than the others, which was attributed to smaller optical bandgap and a more condensed and compact microstructure. These layer-structured perovskite materials can be new candidates for flexible, functional, and tunable semiconductors in optoelectronic applications.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3 photoconductor. Upon illumination with photon energy above the bandgap (Eg), electron–hole pairs are generated. (b) Energy level diagram of the corresponding materials. (c) Band diagram of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector, taking into consideration Schottky barriers at the contacts. EF, EC, and EV are the Fermi level energy, conduction band energy, and valence band energy, respectively, while ΦB is the Schottky barrier height. There is no electrical current flowing under equilibrium conditions and no illumination. (d) Under light illumination, the lower Schottky barriers lead to photogenerated holes migrating to the surface and being trapped, leaving behind unpaired electrons in the CH3NH3PbI3 that contribute to the photocurrent, resulting in more efficient photocurrent extraction and increased photoresponse. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. 
Recently, the potential applications of all-inorganic halide perovskites in optoelectronic devices have been explored.86,191 As an active layer, the film quality of perovskite is particularly important, in that compact and smooth carrier channels are usually required for high device performance. However, the evaporation of solvent or residual ligands will lead to pinholes and cracks, a behavior that is universal in all types of solution-processed films. Li et al. reported a recyclable dissolution–recyrstallization phenomenon of all-inorganic pervoskite, as well as its application to room-temperature self-healing of compact and smooth carrier channels in ambient atmosphere for high-performance photodetectors with high stability.192 This strategy resulted in large-area, crack-free, low-roughness perovskite thin films, facilitating the transport and extraction of carriers in the channels of devices. As a result, the photodetector exhibited a responsivity increase of more than seven-fold, from 0.024 to 0.176 A W−1 for treated perovskite films relative to untreated ones under biases of 10 V. Furthermore, when the treated devices were stored under ambient condition (a humidity of 40–50%) for more than two months, the microstructure was almost the same and no obvious degradation was observed, indicating the high stability of devices and potential applications in the future. In the same group, Xue et al. constructed Mie-scattering porous and interface-fused all-inorganic perovskite films with enhanced light harvesting and charge transport ability.193 The authors used a freeze-drying recrystallization method. During the freeze-drying casting process, the rapid solvent evaporation produced massive pores, whose sizes could be adjusted to exploit the Mie scattering for enhancement of the light-harvesting ability. Meanwhile, owing to the strong iconicity, the interface between perovskite nanocrystals fused during recrystallization favored carrier transport. The microstructure of the Mie porous perovskite films appeared not only on the surface but also inside the film, and importantly, these ultra-large pores did not crack the whole film, indicating good crystallinity of the integrated CsPbBr3 grains (Fig. 17a). The light absorption coefficient of porous films, quantified to analyze the light-harvesting capability, could be improved up to nearly 6 times as compared to dense films, because incident light entering the porous film was scattered, and subsequently, reabsorbed (Fig. 17b and c). Subsequently, the Mie porous perovskite photodetectors showed obvious high photocurrent, when compared to compacted perovskite devices (Fig. 17d and e). The peak responsivity under 9 V reached 2.7 A W−1, which is quite extraordinary as compared to the previous report of the all-inorganic perovskite photodetectors.150–152,192 Moreover, the stability of photocurrent and dark current did not have any obvious deterioration after more than 104 times light on–off cycles.
 Fig. 17  (a) Microstructure of Mie porous and interface-fused CsPbBr3 perovskite films: surface, cross-section, and interface SEM observation. (b) Illustration of Mie scattering inside the pore size-matched films. (c) Absorption comparison between typical Mie porous and dense films. (d) Demonstration of photodetectors based on the Mie porous and interface-fused perovskite films. (e) I–V logarithmic curves of Mie porous and dense films in dark and under 532 nm laser (1 mW cm−2) irradiation. Solid: light current, hollow: dark current. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 
Besides the above pure perovskite devices, heterostructured photoconductors based on perovskites composited or hybrid with organic dyes, polymers, or TMDs have also been studied and usually present enhanced photodetection performance. Here, rather important problem of halide ionic movement that appears as current–voltage (I–V) hysteresis in photovoltaic devices is even more critical for photoconductors where typically even higher electrical fields can be applied to extract as more carriers as possible. The halide ionic movement is generated by external bias, and more severely affects dark current behavior as the external bias increases. Thus, pure perovskite-based photoconductors show poor on/off ratios and spikes of dark current and photocurrent at high external bias.188 Nevertheless, hybrid active layers with graphene or TMDs may have a benefit since the main current flow avoids the perovskite. Chen et al. reported a flexible UV-Vis-NIR photodetector that employed a bilayer composite film of CH3NH3PbI3 and a commercially available narrow-bandgap-conjugated polymer (poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene), PDPP3T) as a photosensitizer (Fig. 18a).106 Because the CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite film exhibited complementary absorption in the region of 550–940 nm (Fig. 18b), the device could be operated at low driving voltages, demonstrating not only sensitive photoresponse in the NIR region but also significantly improved spectral responsivity and specific detectivity in the UV-Vis region, compared to those of the pure CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector (Fig. 18c and d). More importantly, it demonstrated excellent mechanical flexibility and improved environmental stability. A possible explanation for the photoresponse enhancement of composite photodetector was proposed as follows (Fig. 18e): a PDPP3T layer was coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film to generate a heterojunction, so that the deeper-lying LUMO level of PDPP3T might make the photogenerated electrons transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to PDPP3T, inducing a spatial separation of electrons and holes. The same group then reported a similar working-mechanism photodetector based on the bulk heterojunction of CH3NH3PbI3 and an organic dye, rhodamine B.194 Zhang et al. prepared a photoconductive perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)–polyoxometalate (PW12) composite and demonstrated for the first time that the photoconductivity enhancement can be gained by incorporating PW12 into CH3NH3PbI3.186 The composite photodetector exhibited a maximum responsivity of 1.175 A W−1, which showed an increase of 88% over the pure CH3NH3PbI3 device (0.646 A W−1). Xia et al. fabricated a CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 hybrid photodetector with much enhanced performance of the response speed and the ON/OFF ratio.181 The results indicated that perovskites could be promising light-harvesting materials in earlier research of photodetectors.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the flexible photodetector with a CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photosensing layer. (b) Absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite films. (c) I–V curves of the flexible CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetector under dark or different monochromatic light illuminations; the incident light power density = 500 μW cm−2. (d) The spectral responsivity of the CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetectors in the UV-Vis-NIR region with an irradiance of 500 μW cm−2 at 1 or 2 V bias. (e) Energy level diagrams for pure CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetectors. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
TMDs with a 2D semiconducting structure, such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, or WSe2, are considered some of the most promising nanomaterials for future electronic and optoelectronic applications, due to their exceptional physical, electrical, and optical properties.195–198 However, despite their superior properties, it is physically difficult for TMDs to absorb sufficient light because of their atomically thin thickness, which prevents the successful integration of photosensing devices. With this consideration, perovskites with a large absorption cross-section have been applied to form the hybrid heterojunction for constructing high-performance photodetectors and other optoelectronic devices. Lu et al. presented a high-performance 2D photodetector based on a hybrid bilayer of WSe2–CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. 19a).101 The authors found that a laser-healing method can significantly reduce the unwanted carrier traps by passivating chalcogen vacancies of WSe2 to enhance its photoconduction. So they fabricated four types of devices—pristine WSe2 monolayer (D1), pristine WSe2 monolayer with CH3NH3PbI3 (D2), laser-annealed WSe2 monolayer (D3), and laser-annealed WSe2 monolayer with CH3NH3PbI3 (D4)—to investigate the factors that enhance the performance of the photodetectors. The responsivities of D1, D2, D3, and D4 were 30, 1780, 4285, and 1.1 × 105 mA W−1, respectively. However, the enhanced dark current resulted in the relatively low detectivity of devices, after the modification of the WSe2 monolayer with laser healing and perovskite functionalization (Fig. 19b and c). The maximum detectivity of D4 was 2.2 × 1011 Jones, which was more than two orders of magnitude higher than that of D1. To further suppress the dark current and enhance the photodetectivity of heterostructured TMDs/perovskite photoconductors, Ma et al. fabricated and characterized a photoconductor made of heterostructures of CH3NH3PbI3 films and WS2 monolayers.99 Among the well-investigated TMDs, WS2 (conductive band edge at −3.84 eV and valence band edge at −5.82 eV) has good band alignment with CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. 19d). Owing to the interfacial charge transfer (less charge recombination), the photocurrent of these bilayer photodetectors was enhanced by about one order of magnitude; more importantly, the dark current was significantly suppressed (Fig. 19e and f). As a result, these two factors led to a measured detectivity that was as high as 2 × 1012 Jones.
 Fig. 19  (a) Device configuration schematic, and atomic structure of a model CH3NH3PbI3/WSe2 monolayer interface and the perovskite structure. (b) D1 dark (black), D2 dark (orange), and D2 illuminated (green). (c) D1 dark (black), D3 dark (brown), D4 dark (pink), and D4 illuminated (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (d) Schematic device structure of the hybrid WS2/perovskite photoconductor fabricated on a C-plane (0001) sapphire substrate, and band structures of WS2 and perovskite in the hybrid bilayer. (e) I–V curves of the hybrid WS2/perovskite bilayer photoconductor measured in dark and under illumination with different white-light intensities. (f) Corresponding I–V curves measured on the perovskite single layer. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
Vertical-structure photodetectors based on bulk perovskite crystals cannot present better performance in terms of sensitivity and speed than their films' counterparts, except for their promising applications in X-ray, γ photons, and wavelength-selective narrowband photodetection. This is because the thickness of the crystal itself (millimeter scale) makes a much larger carrier transit length, leading to low current and slow response. Constructing lateral-structure devices with micrometer-spacing electrodes on the surface of crystals to shorten the carrier transit length can overcome the above problem. Combined with the advantages of low trap density, low intrinsic carrier concentration, high mobility, and long diffusion length of crystals, fast and sensitive photodetectors with high performance can be obtained that outperform their perovskite film counterparts. Lian et al. fabricated a lateral-structure photodetector on the (100) facet of CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal for the first time (Fig. 20a).119 The I–V curves show a nonlinear and asymmetrical behavior, where the rising rate of the photocurrent increased first and then decreased, implying that it may undergo a saturation effect of photocurrent with increasing bias voltage. This phenomenon may arise from the built-in electric field effect (Fig. 20b). Saidaminov et al. grew macroscopic CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals on top of the patterned ITO-coated glass (Fig. 20c).16 Two Schottky barriers contacting the active layer realized an MSM photodetector. The transparent glass substrate allowed for illumination from the bottom (contact) side. The I–V curve retained a rectifying shape, also after applying optical excitation of variable intensity modulated over different orders of magnitude (Fig. 20d), revealing that considerable photocurrent can be photogenerated. A large responsivity exceeding 4000 A W−1 was measured, which is a direct consequence of the high mobility of the single-crystal perovskites. Adinolfi et al. used the same strategy to fabricate a visible-blind UV photodetector based on CH3NH3PbCl3 single crystals.77 Shewmon et al. developed a solution-based method to form high-quality single-crystal CH3NH3PbI3 layers on single crystals of CH3NH3PbBr3.199 They found that after dipping in CH3NH3PbI3 growth solution, a single-crystal layer of CH3NH3PbI3 was formed at the surface, with a graded layer at the interface, due to the interdiffusion of I− and Br− ions. The photoconductor based on a CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal with an epitaxial CH3NH3PbI3 layer showed a responsivity of ∼0.03 A W−1 at 500 nm with a bias of 5 V. Ding et al. reported a self-powered photodetector based on a CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal by employing asymmetric Au–Al electrodes.200 The device could detect the lowest noticeable incident power density down to 1 × 10−8 W cm−2. Under this weak light intensity, the responsivity was as high as 0.24 A W−1 without any bias. This work might open up an avenue for the applications of perovskite materials in self-powered optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the lateral-structure photodetector fabricated on the (100) facet of CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal. (b) Photocurrent versus voltage curves under various irradiation densities of 532 nm. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (c) Three-dimensional illustration of the photodetector: the CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal perovskite layer (orange) is deposited on top of the ITO contacts (light blue)/glass substrate (transparent grey), and energy diagram of the photodetector. (d) Current–voltage characteristic measured under different light power illuminations. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
Saidaminov et al. designed photodetectors that operated efficiently in both broadband and narrowband regimes without an optical filter.83 They grew perovskite microcrystals on the patterned ITO substrate, similar to their previous work.16 The photodetectors sensed a broad spectrum of light (broadband regime) upon bottom illumination (from ITO side). Upon top illumination (from air/perovskite side), the same photodetectors sensed only a narrow fraction of photons (narrowband regime) because short-wavelength photons that cannot penetrate the whole (200 μm-thick) microcrystal layer generated charge carriers, mostly near the surface. This resulted in increased carrier recombination, diminishing the collection efficiency of carriers and losing the photocurrent (Fig. 21a and b), namely CCN discussed in the section of narrowband photodiodes. The EQE of ∼8 × 103% at 810 nm under a bias of 1 V increased to 2 × 105% (corresponding to a responsivity of 1640 A W−1) under a bias of 5 V for BPs (Fig. 21c). The EQE of NPs reached ∼104% (corresponding to a responsivity of 275 A W−1) at 830 nm under 5 V bias with a narrow FWHM of ∼33 nm (Fig. 21d). Overall, the engineering approach of dual-functional photodetectors demonstrated in this work represents an important step toward high-performance perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 21  (a) Photocurrent of the CH3NH3PbI3 microcrystalline (thickness: 200 μm) photodetector under white-light illumination of 0.5 mW cm−2 from a halogen lamp. Inset: Dark current. (b) Schematic of the narrowband photodetection mechanism. (c) EQE of the photodetector under bottom illumination, showing the BP behavior. (d) EQE of the photodetector under top illumination, showing the NP behavior. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
Next, we focus on the photoresponse properties of perovskites with nano/micro structures. Wang et al. reported the first scalable growth of perovskite microplate crystals with controlled spatial location and periodic arrangement over a large area (Fig. 22a), and further showed that this approach can enable the selective growth of perovskite crystals on prepatterned gold electrodes to create independently addressable photodetector arrays.128 A nearly zero dark current and a nearly linear I–V behavior under illumination indicated excellent photoresponse of the perovskite crystals (Fig. 22b). The responsivity was calculated to be ∼40 A W−1. Liu et al. demonstrated a high-performance photodetector based on 2D CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets with several unit cells (less than 10 nm),129 in which the current could be significantly enhanced by shining 405 and 532 nm lasers, showing photoresponsivities of 22 and 12 A W−1, respectively, with a voltage bias of 1 V. Qin et al. fabricated a photodetector using a nanoplate CH3NH3PbI3 crystal that exhibited improved performance over CH3NH3PbI3 polycrystalline thin films, with an on/off ratio approaching 103.127 Song et al. reported for the first time the fabrication of atomically thin 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheets and their application in solution-processed flexible photodetectors, with high performance.125 The flexible visible-light photodetectors exhibited excellent electron-transport properties and high sensitivity, as well as high stability. This work demonstrated that all-inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3 nanosheets have great potential to become a new class of 2D solution-processed semiconductor candidates for ultrathin and flexible solution-based optoelectronics. In the same group, they continued to report a general strategy to enhance the conductivity of the CsPbBr3 nanosheet film from which CNT conductive nanonets were constructed, to provide fast carrier tracks (Fig. 22c).131 When the volume ratio of CNTs was increased to 6%, the highest EQE of 7,488% and responsivity of 31.1 A W−1 were achieved (Fig. 22d and e). Besides, the efficient charge extraction and transport remarkably contributed to the fast response speed, where a rise time of 16 μs was achieved.
 Fig. 22  (a) SEM imagery of perovskite arrays. Scale bar, 20 μm. (b) Typical I–V curve of a perovskite crystal under dark and light illumination. (inset) Optical microscopy of a perovskite crystal bridging two gold electrodes. The distance between the electrode pair is 8 μm. Scale bar, 20 μm. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the flexible photodetector based on CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs, and their energy level. (d) Logarithmic I–V curves under dark and 442 nm light illumination. (e) EQE results of devices with different amounts of CNTs under a bias of 10 V. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Most of the prepared perovskite nanowires exhibited properties that were below expectations, due to poor crystalline quality and rough surfaces, which has greatly hampered their use in high-performance integrated optoelectronic devices. Very recently, Deng et al. succeeded in growing high-quality single-crystalline perovskite nanowires with smooth surfaces and achieved large-scale aligned arrays.142 Photodetectors made from the perovskite nanowire arrays exhibited an extremely high responsivity of 12500 A W−1, representing the best value ever reported for perovskite-based photodetectors (Fig. 23). Meanwhile, highly crystalline structures and fewer grain boundaries of these nanowires render the perovskite material more immune from degradation, yielding robust stability. Gao et al. obtained a perovskite nanowire photodetector with much improved stability and unprecedented sensitivity, by introducing oleic acid soaking to passivate surface defects of CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires.132 By taking advantage of 1D geometry, they also showcased, for the first time, the linear dichroic (polarization dependent) photodetection of the CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire photodetector.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire array photodetector. (b) I–V curves of the photodetector measured under dark condition and light illumination (550 nm, 42 μW cm−2). (c) Plots of responsivity and photoconductive gain of the photodetector as a function of light wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
The current photodetectors based on perovskite nanocrystals showed relatively poor performance because of the low carrier mobility of the fabricated nanocrystal films. Ramasamy et al. demonstrated for the first time the photodetectors based on entirely inorganic CsPbI3 nanocrystals, which exhibited a good on/off photocurrent ratio of 105.150 Dong et al. reported solution-processed high-performance inorganic perovskite nanocrystal photodetectors with a centrifugal casting film, which were further improved by the Au plasmonic effect, evidenced by a 238% plasmonic enhancement factor and 106 on/off ratio.152 For the commonly used drop-coating method, the nanocrystals were randomly oriented, leading to a relatively sparse and rough film; in contrast, for the centrifugal-casting film, the film was dense and smooth and beneficial for transporting the carriers (Fig. 24a). This was also verified by the photocurrent increase with the centrifugal-casting nanocrystal film (Fig. 24b). Due to the spectral overlap of CsPbBr3 absorption and AuNP plasmonic band, the performance of CsPbBr3 nanocrystal photodetectors could be further enhanced by near-field enhancement effects of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) (Fig. 24c). The responsivity of the AuNPs/CsPbBr3 photodetector was up to 10.04 mA W−1 at 520 nm with 2 V bias, exhibiting an evident improvement of 213% from the original 4.71 mA W−1 (Fig. 24d). Zhou et al. prepared an all-inorganic perovskite-based MSM photodetector with a bilayer composite film of mesoporous TiO2 and CsPbBr3 quantum dots, where the responsivity reached ∼3500 mA W−1, with about 44 times increase compared to that of a pure CsPbBr3 device (∼80 mA W−1).153
 Fig. 24  (a) Probable schematics of the carrier transportation of CsPbBr3 nanocrystal film with drop-coating and centrifugal-casting under light irradiation. (b) I–V logarithm curves of the photodetector with different film fabrications under 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). (c) Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation of plasmon resonance enhancement of the local optical field at a resonant wavelength of 532 nm for the composites of AuNPs and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. (d) Relative responsivities of devices with and without AuNPs under 2 V bias from front illumination. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 

4.3 Phototransistors
Phototransistors basically have the same three-terminal configuration as field-effect transistors (FETs). While in the operational mode of a normal FET, the amount of current flowing (the drain current, Id) in the accumulated channel is controlled by the magnitude of gate voltage (Vg) at a given source to drain bias (Vd), for phototransistors, the control of channel conductance can be additionally enabled by the absorption of light. The phototransistors based on perovskite materials show superior carrier transport property with ambipolar characteristics. The phototransistor performance can be further improved via hybridization with 2D layered materials or the embedding of plasmonic nanoparticles.

4.3.1 Pure perovskite phototransistors. 
Li et al. reported the fabrication and characterization of phototransistors on the basis of solution-processed perovskite films.17 The effects of gate voltage and light illumination on the transport of the perovskite channels were investigated. Fig. 25a and b show a schematic and a representative set of the transfer characteristics, which are the drain current versus gate voltage (Id–Vg) data, of a bottom-gate top-contact CH3NH3PbI3 phototransistor. An ambipolar high performance could be clearly observed in the transfer characteristics under light illumination with the typical V shape of the transfer curves. The maximum responsivity value of 320 A W−1 in the on state (Vg = −40 V) was obtained at a power density of 10 mW cm−2, and such high responsivity values existed in the broadband wavelength range of 400–750 nm (Fig. 25c and d). Importantly, the phototransistors exhibited an ultrafast photoresponse speed of less than 10 μs. Cho et al. fabricated an orientationally pure crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 film with periodic microarrays, which were distinguishable from general polycrystalline perovskite films. The phototransistors based on these films with unique crystal orientation and low trap-state density gave rise to significant anisotropy in charge transport as well as photoresponsivity characteristics with two orders of magnitude difference between the highest and lowest values.201 This work provided an essential guideline for material optimization of crystalline morphology and the future development of novel optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the phototransistor with a channel of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3. (b) Transfer characteristics of a perovskite-based phototransistor in the dark (black and red symbols) and under light illumination (blue and magenta symbols). (c) Photoresponsivity (R) characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 phototransistor under white-light illumination (power density = 10 mW cm−2). (d) EQE and R of the device at different wavelengths and a VDS of −30 V. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 


4.3.2 Hybrid 2D layered material/perovskite phototransistors. 
Two important figures of merit of the phototransistor, photoconductive gain and responsivity, are predominantly determined by the intrinsic properties of the channel material. Some 2D layered materials, such as graphene and TMDs, have been demonstrated to be effective channel materials for phototransistors because of their high carrier mobility and low driving current. However, the relatively low absorption cross-section, fast recombination rate, and absence of gain mechanism have limited the photodetection performance of devices. Considering the strong light-absorption ability of perovskites, several hybrid heterostructured phototransistors based on 2D layered materials and perovskites have delivered unprecedented performance, such as ultrahigh photoconductive gain and responsivity, attributed to the effective charge transfer in the heterojunction and photogating effect. Fig. 26 shows the common architectures of hybrid heterostructured phototransistors. Lee et al. found that the photoresponses of photodetectors were dramatically enhanced by hybridizing a single-layer graphene and the CH3NH3PbI3 film.94 From a dramatic quenching of the photoluminescence intensity in the graphene/perovskite system, it was indicated that the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs in the perovskite was limited because electrons in the graphene layer transferred to the proximal perovskite layer to fill the empty states in the perovskite valence band, while the photoexcited electrons remained in the perovskite conduction band. The trapped carriers produced effective photogating effects, such that the presence of the charges altered the conductivity of the graphene channel through capacitive coupling. The resulting graphene–CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid photodetector exhibited a responsivity of 180 A W−1. Also, using the graphene/CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid film, Dang et al. fabricated a flexible phototransistor with a responsivity of up to 115 A W−1.97 Unlike the above work, in which the perovskite bulk thin film was used, Wang et al. covered a thin layer of dispersive perovskite (CH3NH3PbBr2I) islands onto the graphene layer.96 The hybrid phototransistor exhibited an extremely high responsivity of ∼6.0 × 105 A W−1. They attributed such excellent performance to the relatively low bulk recombination rate in isolated perovskite islands, and further verified that smaller islands with good uniformity gave the highest photocurrent, while bad coverage and large particle size weakened the charge transfer and photogating effects, causing photocurrent losses. After that, Sun et al. integrated AuNPs into the graphene/CH3NH3PbI3 island system and found that the device with embedded AuNPs had a doubly higher responsivity compared to the pristine graphene–CH3NH3PbI3 device, which was attributed to the improved light harvesting in the perovskite layer by the surface plasmonic effect of AuNPs.202 Perovskite nanostructured crystals, such as CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires135 and CsPbBr3−xIx nanocrystals,151 have also been combined with graphene. Their hybrid phototransistors showed unprecedented performance, mainly attributed to nanoscale perovskite morphologies. The working mechanism was analogous to that of small-island perovskite-based devices. Concerning the high conductivity of graphene without a bandgap that caused very high dark currents, and subsequently, low detectivity, TMDs including MoS298,203 and WSe2100 have been considered as charge-transporting layers, which can suppress the dark current and promote the charge separation. Then, ultrahigh-performance phototransistors with high photoresponsivity and detectivity based on the perovskite/TMD hybrid structure were achieved. Such unique perovskite-2D heterostructures have significant potential for future optoelectronic research and can enable broad possibilities with compositional tunability of perovskites and the versatility offered by diverse 2D materials. Table 2 summarizes the figure-of-merit parameters.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematics of the perovskite/MoS2 phototransistor and the molecular structures of the materials. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Chinese Institute of Electronics, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic and optical imagery of a boron nitride (BN)-covered graphene/WSe2/perovskite/graphene (GWPG) phototransistor. Red and blue lines frame the top and bottom graphene, respectively; black and green arrows indicate the perovskite and WSe2, respectively; and white dashed lines outline the overlapping area of the GWPG structure. The top graphene is biased, while the bottom graphene is grounded for all measurements. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic of the perovskite–graphene hybrid phototransistor. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (d) A schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3–graphene–AuNPs device. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 

Fig. 27 combining different architectures and diverse materials gives visual impression about figure-of-merit properties of R and D* for the whole variety of prototypes in Table 2. There is a clear difference in the R performance of different material compositions and morphologies and device configurations. And generally, photodiodes require a relatively low working voltage to achieve the high D* compared to photoconductors.
 Fig. 27  Plots of responsivity versus voltage (a) and detectivity versus voltage (b) for different architecture devices based on diverse perovskite materials in Table 2. The voltage is expressed in the absolute value. Phototransistors based on hybrid perovskite-1D/2D conducting materials and photoconductors based on high-quality perovskite crystals show the high responsivities in panel a. Photodiodes and photoconductors can achieve high detectivities with the low and high working voltage, respectively, and the corresponding detection wavelength is shown in panel b. PD, photodiode; PC, photoconductor; PT, phototransistor; PF, polycrystalline film; BC, bulk crystal; NS, nanosheet; NW, nanowire; NC, nanocrystal. 

5. Conclusion and outlook
In this paper, the comprehensive progress of perovskite-based photodetectors is described and discussed in terms of versatile compositions, structures, and morphologies of constituent materials, diverse device architectures, and interfacial engineering. Hybrid halide perovskites integrated with the advantages of facile processing, tunable bandgaps, large absorption coefficient, ambipolar charge transport, and long diffusion length make them interesting candidates for the development of innovative and disruptive applications in the field of light detection. Broadband and filterless narrowband perovskite photodetectors with excellent performance have been demonstrated. The best figure-of-merit parameters of the perovskite photodetectors reported to date, which include high responsivity exceeding 104 A W−1,98,142 detectivity approaching 1014 Jones,15,102 small NEP of <50 fW Hz−1/2,132,172 large linear dynamic range of >150 dB,142,158 and short response time of <1 ns,157,214 show their remarkable potential for replacing commercial silicon-based photodetectors in applications such as imaging and communication.
In terms of commercialization, perovskite photodetectors will face many of the same challenges that perovskite solar cells face; specifically, stability, toxicity issues, and competition from more mature competing technologies. The long-term stability of perovskites is a key issue, especially when compared with highly stable inorganic semiconductors, such as silicon. Although some current research focuses on applying interface engineering using buffer layers,168 controlling perovskite morphologies of crystallization,141 passivating perovskite surface defects,132 and adopting sandwiched device architectures215 to improve the operated stability in the photodetection, it is much more important to develop chemically stable perovskite materials themselves, which benefit to essentially solve the issues of perovskite-based photodetectors in terms of stability. One effective way is to use perovskites with mixing of CH3NH3+, CH(NH2)2+, and Cs+ cations and I−, Br−, and Cl− anions, which show more thermally and structurally stable compositions than pure perovskite compounds.24,216,217 Aiming at the poor stability of conventional 3D perovskites due to the low formation energy,218 our recent research indicated that stoichiometry-tuned reduced-dimensionality ((RNH3)2An−1BnX3n+1, quais-2D) perovskites crafted using bulkier organic molecules can drive an increased formation energy, and therefore, improve the stability of materials while retaining a high performance that is comparable to that of 3D perovskites,32 which can offer a promising material system for the development of chemically stable perovskite photodetectors.
The current developed halide perovskites have a weak sensitivity photoresponse to NIR light. Although the bandgap can be made to be in the NIR range, by alloying the material with Sn, this resulting perovskite material is unstable in air due to the easy oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, which causes the perovskite to become metallic. Therefore, narrow-bandgap conjugated polymers, or PbS QDs, have been employed to be composited into perovskites, enhancing the absorption in the NIR region. Our recent research has verified that up-conversion nanocrystals can absorb low-energy photons with an up-conversion into high-energy photons, and then transfer the energy to semiconductors with the matched bandgap of Vis light absorption,219 which can be the candidate for being composited with perovskites, enhancing the photosensitivity by NIR-induced charge generation. We also found that employing AuNRs into polymer photodetectors can enhance the responsivity and detectivity for red light detection.220 Because the longitudinal LSPR band of AuNRs matches the excitation wavelength, the near-field enhancement effect and hot electron transfer can contribute to a photocurrent increase. The results can guide the design and tailoring of the aspect ratios of AuNRs to make the plasmon resonant wavelength located in the NIR region, which offers the benefit of obtaining high-performance perovskite photodetectors with enhanced NIR photoresponse.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (2017R1A2A1A05022387; 2015M1A2A2058365; 2011-0030255).
References
S. Donati, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2001, 12, 653 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y.-Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. J. Vuuren, A. Armin, A. K. Pandey, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4766 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C.-L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, Y. Liang, V. Shrotriya, S. Xiao, L. Yu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3979 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, D. Yang and D. Ma, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1570 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Jin, J. P. Wang, B. Q. Sun, J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chen, M. K. Lo, G. Yang, H. G. Monbouquette and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Arnold, J. D. Zimmerman, C. K. Renshaw, X. Xu, R. R. Lunt, C. M. Austin and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Bi and J. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Research Cell Record Efficiency Chart http://www.nrel.gov/pv (National Renewable Energy Laboratory, accessed 7 May 2017).
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zuo, S. Dong, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photon., 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z.-K. Tan, D. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H.-W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 CrossRef PubMed .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, N. L. Tran, K. M. Lee, T.-W. Koh, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Nat. Photon., 2017, 11, 108 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photon., 2016, 10, 699 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, S. M. Wood, J. B. Patel, P. K. Nayak, J. Huang, J. A. Alexander-Webber, B. Wenger, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Hörantner, J. T.-W. Wang, R. J. Nicholas, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, S. M. Morris, H. J. Snaith and M. K. Riede, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, A. N. Brigeman, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Zhang, J. Lee, J. Han and A. Nurmikko, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604781 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 378 RSC .
H. Kim, K.-G. Lim and T.-W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 12 CAS .
L. Yang, A. T. Barrows, D. G. Lidzey and T. Wang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2016, 79, 026501 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. J. Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710 CAS .
B. R. Sutherland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photon., 2016, 10, 295 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Kim, H. Cho and T.-W. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. Zhou, S. Jin, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11 RSC .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655 RSC .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photon., 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712 RSC .
J. Feng and B. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. A. G. Melissen, F. Labat, P. Sautet and T. L. Bahers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2199 RSC .
N. K. McKinnon, D. C. Reeves and M. H. Akabas, J. Gen. Physiol., 2011, 138, 453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. X. Sun, D. S. Yuan, X. L. Liu, W. Q. Lu, G. F. Liu, H. B. Xia and X. T. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 665 RSC .
N. Onodayamamuro, T. Matsuo and H. Suga, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1992, 53, 935 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. N. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. X. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, L. J. Schwan, M. Ottosson, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi, J. M. Ball, V. D’Innocenzo, C. Tao, S. Pathak, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 155 CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, W. Tress, J. P. Correa-Baena, T. Edvinsson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11382 CAS .
H. Wang, L. Whittaker-Brooks and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19590 CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photon., 2015, 9, 106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2015, 5, 401 CrossRef .
S. Torabi, F. Jahani, I. V. Severen, C. Kanimozhi, S. Patil, R. W. A. Havenith, R. C. Chiechi, L. Lutsen, D. J. M. Vanderzande, T. J. Cleij, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 150 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Bhattacharya, Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,  1997, pp. 345–367 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, X. Yang, D. Dong, B. Li, D. Yang, S. Yuan, K. Qiao, Y.-B. Cheng, J. Tang and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, B. S. Swartzentruber, M. T. Janish, K. C. Meyer, L. B. Biedermann, S. Okur, D. B. Burckel, C. B. Carter and B. Kaehr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Adinolfi, O. Ouellette, M. I. Saidaminov, G. Walters, A. L. Abdelhady, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Maculan, A. D. Sheikh, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, H. Xu, J. Cai, J. Zhu, C. Ni, F. Hong, Z. Fang, F. Xu, S. Cui, R. Xu, L. Wang, F. Xu and J. Huang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 8411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, H. Li, Y. Li, C. Liu and X. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 693 CrossRef .
D. M. Jang, K. Park, D. H. Kim, J. Park, F. Shojaei, H. S. Kang, J.-P. Ahn, J. W. Lee and J. K. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Photon., 2015, 9, 679 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, M. Savoie, A. L. Abdelhady, N. Cho, I. Dursun, U. Buttner, E. Alarousu, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. D. Yuan, R. F. Duan, F. Huang, T. B. Wei, Z. Q. Liu, J. X. Wang and J. M. Li, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 045115 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722 CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 889 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, P. K. Kanaujia, H. J. Beeson, A. Abate, F. Deschler, D. Credgington, U. Steiner, G. V. Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25227 CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Chu and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25660 CAS .
Y. Lee, J. Kwon, E. Hwang, C.-H. Ra, W. J. Yoo, J.-H. Ahn, J. H. Park and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, Y. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fang and Z. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9659 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Xu, H. Mu, C. Chen, H. Qiao, J. Song, S. Li, B. Sun, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1389 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Dang, G.-S. Han, T. Q. Trung, L. T. Duy, Y.-U. Jin, B.-U. Hwang, H.-S. Jung and N.-E. Lee, Carbon, 2016, 105, 353 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kang, S. R. Pae, J. Shim, G. Yoo, J. Jeon, J. W. Leem, J. S. Yu, S. Lee, B. Shin and J.-H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Hu, M. H. Chiu, Z. Liu, A. Bera, F. Li, H. Wang, L. J. Li and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Cheng, G. Wang, D. Li, Q. He, A. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Ding, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, A. Carvalho, H. Liu, S. X. Lim, A. H. C. Neto and C. H. Sow, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, X. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Zhou, M. Xue, Y. Xu, Z. Li, C. Ye, J. Zhang, P. A. van Aken, P. D. Lund and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7302 RSC .
H. Zhou, Z. Song, P. Tao, H. Lei, P. Gui, J. Mei, H. Wang and G. Fang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 6205 RSC .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, E. Wang, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16460 RSC .
F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, R. P. Sabatini, M. Liu, G.-H. Kim, B. R. Sutherland, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, Y. Pang, S. Hoogland, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14757 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Teng, M. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Xie and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, Y. Lin, C. Bao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, T. Li, Y. Lu, A. Gruverman, W. Li and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 242 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, S. Dong, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lian, Q. Yan, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, L. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Pan, Q. Li, L. Wang and J.-L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16563 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Han, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun, Y.-T. Hsieh, Y. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dirin, I. Cherniukh, S. Yakunin, Y. Shynkarenko and M. V. Kovalenko, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8470 CrossRef CAS .
G. Walters, B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, D. Shi, R. Comin, D. P. Sellan, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, D. Ju, L. Wang and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4476 RSC .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lv, Y. Xu, H. Fang, W. Luo, F. Xu, L. Liu, B. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Yang, W. Hu and A. Dong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13589 RSC .
X. Qin, Y. Yao, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z.-Q. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Weber, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, B. N. Shivananju, Y. Zhang, S. Li and Q. Bao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 094002 CrossRef .
X. Li, D. Yu, J. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. Sun, J. Ji, Y. Shen, H. Sun and H. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, K. Zeng, J. Guo, C. Ge, J. Du, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, H. Deng, Y. He, H. Song, G. Niu and J. Tang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, D. Dong, K. Qiao, L. Bu, B. Li, D. Yang, H.-E. Wang, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhao, J. Tang and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4163 RSC .
E. Horváth, M. Spina, Z. Szekrényes, K. Kamarás, R. Gaal, D. Gachet and L. Forró, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6761 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Spina, M. Lehmann, B. Náfrádi, L. Bernard, E. Bonvin, R. Gaál, A. Magrez, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Small, 2015, 11, 4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Spina, B. Náfrádi, H. M. Tóháti, K. Kamarás, E. Bonvin, R. Gaal, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4888 RSC .
M. Spina, E. Bonvin, A. Sienkiewicz, B. Náfrádi, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhuo, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, S. Gu, X. Shen, N. Xu, Y. Tan, S. Zhuang, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, H. Wu, J. Sun, D. Yan, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5350 RSC .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, L. Huang, X. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Jin, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, Z. Zu, H. Shao, W. Hu, M. Zhou, M. Deng, W. Chen, Z. Zang, T. Zhu and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15158 RSC .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-G. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levchuk, A. Osvet, X. Tang, M. Brandl, J. Perea, F. Hoegl, G. J. Matt, R. Hock, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, S. Kumar, J. Bär, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi, M. Grotevent, I. Shorubalko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, C.-J. Shih and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, D.-H. Lim, B. Kim, S.-H. Lee, M.-S. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2067 RSC .
D.-H. Kwak, D.-H. Lim, H.-S. Ra, P. Ramasamy and J.-S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65252 RSC .
Y. Dong, Y. Gu, Y. Zou, J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, X. Li and H. Zeng, Small, 2016, 12, 5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, K. Yu, F. Yang, J. Zheng, Y. Zuo, C. Li, B. Cheng and Q. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1766 RSC .
D. M. Jang, D. H. Kim, K. Park, J. Park, J. W. Lee and J. K. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10625 RSC .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, M. Sytnyk, D. Kriegner, S. Shrestha, M. Richter, G. J. Matt, H. Azimi, C. J. Brabec, J. Stangl, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Nat. Photon., 2015, 9, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, D. M. Lyons, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photon., 2015, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photon., 2016, 10, 333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Yang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9172 RSC .
S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, Y. Shynkarenko, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh, O. Nazarenko, D. Kreil, T. Nauser and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Photon., 2016, 10, 585 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dong, H. Deng, C. Hu, H. Song, K. Qiao, X. Yang, J. Zhang, F. Cai, J. Tang and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1567 RSC .
A. Armin, R. D. Jansen-vanVuuren, N. Kopidakis, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Johnston, Nat. Photon., 2015, 9, 634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, C. Yi, X. Shi, P. Du, A. W. Smith, A. Karim and X. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6600 RSC .
B. R. Sutherland, A. K. Johnston, A. H. Ip, J. Xu, V. Adinolfi, P. Kanjanaboos and E. H. Sargent, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1117 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Di Fisica, Silicon-Based Microphotonics: From Basics to Applications, IOS Press,  1999 Search PubMed .
F. Tang, Q. Chen, L. Chen, F. Ye, J. Cai and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 123301 CrossRef .
H. L. Zhu, J. Cheng, D. Zhang, C. Liang, C. J. Reckmeier, H. Huang, A. L. Rogach and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Moy, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 2000, 442, 26 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Clifford, G. Konstantatos, K. W. Johnston, S. Hoogland, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bao, W. Zhu, J. Yang, F. Li, S. Gu, Y. Wang, T. Yu, J. Zhu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23868 CAS .
Z. Nie, J. Yin, H. Zhou, N. Chai, B. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. Qu, G. Shen, H. Ma, Y. Li, J. Zhao and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28187 CAS .
R. J. Mclntyre, Measurement, 1985, 3, 146 CrossRef .
K. Domanski, W. Tress, T. Moehl, M. Saliba, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6936 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, N. Sakai, A. K. Jena, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami, K.-C. Ho and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-R. Xia, J. Li, W.-T. Sun and L.-M. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13695 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. Wu, G. Zhang, Y. Chu, D. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Liang and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21634 CAS .
F. Wang, J. Mei, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Zhao and D. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2840 CAS .
F. Zhao, K. Xu, X. Luo, W. Lv, Y. Peng, Y. Wang, F. Lu and S. Xu, Org. Electron., 2017, 46, 35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bao, J. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Gao, F. Li, G. Fu, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15426 RSC .
Y. Zhang, R. Tao, X. Zhao, Z. Sun, Y. Wang and L. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3304 RSC .
H. Lu, W. Tian, F. Cao, Y. Ma, B. Gu and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Kwon, K. Hong, Q. V. Le, S. Y. Lee, J. Choi, K.-B. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Moehl, J. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, K. Domanski, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. I. Dar, L.-P. Heiniger, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Peng, K. Wang, C. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Huang, C. Reckmeier, Y. Zhang, W. C. H. Choy and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Gu, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5903 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, Y. Gu, Q. Shan, Y. Zou, J. Song, L. Xu, Y. Dong, J. Li and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Teng, D. Xie, M. Sun, S. Chen, P. Yang and Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31289 CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, R. Gulotty, A. V. Sumant and A. Roelofs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, M. Y. Choi, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G.-B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena, J. Joo and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Shewmon, H. Yu, I. Constantinou, E. Klump and F. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33273 CAS .
J. Ding, H. Fang, Z. Lian, J. Li, Q. Lv, L. Wang, J.-L. Sun and Q. Yan, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4405 RSC .
N. Cho, F. Li, B. Turedi, L. Sinatra, S. P. Sarmah, M. R. Parida, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, L. Aigouy and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7377 RSC .
F. Liu, J. Wang, L. Wang, X. Cai, C. Jiang and G. Wang, J. Semicond., 2017, 38, 034002 CrossRef .
D. Li, G. Dong, W. Li and L. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Casaluci, L. Cinà, F. Matteocci, P. Lugli and A. Di Carlo, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2016, 15, 255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Yang, X. Zhou, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, A. Vadim and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7415 RSC .
M. Cao, J. Tian, Z. Cai, L. Peng, L. Yang and D. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233303 CrossRef .
P. A. Shaikh, D. Shi, J. R. D. Retamal, A. D. Sheikh, M. A. Haque, C.-F. Kang, J.-H. He, O. M. Bakr and T. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8304 RSC .
Z. Wang, R. Yu, C. Pan, Z. Li, J. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, S. Du, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Zuo, H. Cui, X. Zhan, Y. Gu and H. Sun, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 276 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Tang, F. Chen, A. G. Manohari, Y. Zhu, Z. Shi and C. Xu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2016, 454, 121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Li, C. P. Veeramalai, W. Chen, T. Guo, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11662 CAS .
R. Xiao, Y. Hou, Y. Fu, X. Peng, Q. Wang, E. Gonzalez, S. Jin and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, Y. Fang, D. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Lu and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Murali, M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, J. Liu, J. Pan, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2545 RSC .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656 CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, E. Kim, S. Ahn, K. Chung, J. Kim, H. Kim, H. Wang, J. Lee, D.-W. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. W. Lim, F. M. Mota, Y. J. Jang, M. Yoon, H. Kim, W. Hu, Y.-Y. Noh and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 399 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Huan Wang
	Huan Wang obtained his PhD degree in the College of Chemistry from Jilin University in 2011. His doctoral research on “Optoelectronic functional organic crystals toward laser applications” was carried out under Prof. Yuguang Ma's supervision. Then, he joined Intel Corporation as a process engineer, and subsequently, Northeast Petroleum University as an assistant professor. From 2015, he worked as a research professor in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University under the guidance of Prof. Dong Ha Kim. His current research interests focus on developing high-performance stable photodetectors based on organic–inorganic hybrid materials.

Dong Ha Kim
	Prof. Dong Ha Kim received his PhD degree in the Department of Fiber and Polymer Science at Seoul National University (2000). He worked as a postdoctor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. Then, he assumed a faculty position in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2006). His research interests include development of hybrid nanostructures for energy storage and conversion, environmental remediation, memory devices, display devices, and theragnosis. He has authored 145 SCI publications and holds 29 Korean and 2 US patents.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structures of orthorhombic and tetragonal phases of CH3NH3PbX3. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) Transient absorption signals for CH3NH3PbI3 orthorhombic and tetragonal phases. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 


CH3NH3PbI3	Polycrystalline films	One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone (solvent); dried in air naturally (film)	310–780 nm	
74

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Polycrystalline films	One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in air at 100 °C (film)	300–800 nm	
15

CH3NH3PbI3	Polycrystalline films	Vapor-assisted solution process: PbI2 in DMF; dried at 110 °C (as-deposited film); annealed in CH3NH3I vapor at 150 °C	400–800 nm	
17

CH3NH3PbI3	Polycrystalline films	Two-step solution process: PbI2 in DMF; hot spin-coated and dried at 70 °C; CH3NH3I in 2-propanol; annealed at 105 °C (film)	300–800 nm	
155

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Polycrystalline films	One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in N2 at 90 °C (film)	254 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
156

CH3NH3PbI3	Polycrystalline films	One-step solution process: DMF (solvent); annealed in N2 at 90 °C (film)	X-ray (8 keV)	
157

CH3NH3PbI3	Polycrystalline films	One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone and DMSO (7:3 v/v, mixed solvent); toluene drop-casting on the spinning “wet” film; annealed at 70 °C	300–800 nm	
158


(1) CH3NH3PbIxBr3−x + rhodamine B
(2) CH3NH3PbIxBr3−x + PEIE
(3) PbIxBr2−x + PEIE
	Polycrystalline films	
One-step solution process: γ-butyrolactone (solvent) for (1);
DMF (solvent) for (2); treated in CH3NH3Br 2-propanol solution;
DMF (solvent) for (3); annealed in N2 at 100 °C (all above films)
	
(1) 600–700 nm (red)
(2) 500–600 nm (green)
(3) 400–500 nm (blue)
	
159

CH3NH3PbCl3	Bulk crystals	Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 50 °C for 48 h	365 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
78

CH3NH3PbBr3	Bulk crystals	Antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization: DMF (solvent); dichloromethane (antisolvent); ∼48 h growth	380–600 nm	
16

CH3NH3PbBr3	Bulk crystals	Antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization: DMF (solvent); dichloromethane (antisolvent); ∼48 h growth	X-ray (50 keV)	
160

CH3NH3PbI3	Bulk crystals	Cooling-induced crystallization: temperature of growth solution from 100 °C to 57 °C; 15 days growth	275–790 nm	
119

CH(NH2)2PbI3	Bulk crystals	Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 100–105 °C for 3 h	380 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
120

CsPbBr3	Bulk crystals	Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 110 °C for ∼12 h	
410–570 nm
Gamma (γ) photons (59.6 keV)
	
121

CH3NH3Pb(BrxI1−x)3	Bulk crystals	Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at ∼95 °C for 48 h	405–710 nm	
161


CH(NH2)2PbI3
CH3NH3PbI3
	Bulk crystals	Inverse temperature crystallization: growth solution at 110 °C for 3 h (CH(NH2)2PbI3), 95 °C for 3 h (CH3NH3PbI3)	Gamma (γ) photons (59.6 keV, 0.66 MeV)	
162


(1) CH3NH3PbCl3
(2) CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx
(3) CH3NH3PbBr3
(4) CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx
	Bulk crystals	Cooling-induced crystallization: temperature of growth solution gradual decrease at a rate of ∼3 °C per day from 100 °C	
(1) ∼415–440 nm
(2) ∼455–495 nm (Cl/Br, 4:1)
∼525–550 nm (Cl/Br, 1:1)
(3) ∼555–585 nm
(4) ∼575–615 nm (Br/I, 15:1)
∼625–660 nm (Br/I, 6:1)
	
82

CsPbBr3	Nanosheets	PbBr2 precursors in dodecylamine (DDA), 1-octadecene (ODE) and oleic acid (OA); CsSt in ODE solution hot-injection reactions at 140 °C for 3 h	300–550 nm	
125

CsPbX3	Nanosheets	Cs-oleate precursor from Cs2CO3 and OA; Cs-oleate precursor injection into PbX2 in ODE, OA and oleylamine (OAm)	450 nm (monochromatic light illumination, CsPbBr3)	
126

CH3NH3PbI3	Nanoplates	
First step: spin-coating PbI2 DMF solution onto a substrate to form PbI2 thin film.
Second step: immersing the film into CH3NH3I 2-propanol solution for the reaction and recrystallization
	Simulated 1 Sun	
127

CH3NH3PbI3	Nanosheets	
First step: drop-casting saturated PbI2 aqueous solution onto a substrate for the nucleation of PbI2 nanosheets.
Second step: converting as-grown 2D PbI2 nanosheets into CH3NH3PbI3 under CH3NH3I vapor phase reaction
	405 nm, 532 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
129


CH3NH3PbBr3
CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx
CH3NH3PbBr3−xIx
	Nanoplates	Adding CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 DMF solution into ODE and OAm to form CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoplates; mixing CH3NH3Cl or CH3NH3I 2-propanol solution with CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoplates in toluene for Br exchange reaction	365 nm, 505 nm, 617 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
81

CH3NH3PbI3	Nanowires	One-step self-assembly method: dropping perovskite/DMF solution onto a ∼10° slope substrate	400–750 nm	
132

CH3NH3PbI3	Nanowires	Slip-coating method: dropping saturated perovskite/DMF solution onto a glass microscope slide followed by covering a second glass slide; gradually sliding one glass plate for solvent evaporation	633 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
134

CH3NH3PbI3	Nanowires	Etching method: spin-coating perovskite/DMF solution onto a substrate; spin-coating a mixed solvent (DMF, 2-propanol) onto the perovskite film with a dissolution–recrystallization process to form nanowires	532 nm (monochromatic light illumination), simulated 1 Sun	
139

Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3	Nanowires	Aqueous solution method: preparing PbI2 flakes in saturated aqueous solution; adding CsI and CH3NH3I into above solution	530 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
163

CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3	Nanowires	SU-8 photoresist strips aligned on the substrate by photolithography; dipping photoresist template into perovskite/DMF solution followed by putting it on a tilted glass (∼5°) with dichloromethane as the antisolvent	370–780 nm	
142

CsPb(Br/I)3	Nanowires	Cs stock solution (OA, ODE, OAm) hot-injection into the precursor solution of PbBr2 and PbI2	532 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
144

CsPbI3	Nanocrystals	Cs-oleate from the reaction of Cs2CO3 and OA in ODE; Cs-oleate hot-injection into PbBr2 in ODE, OA and OAm to form CsPbBr3 nanocrystals; adding LiI ethanol solution into CsPbBr3 nanocrystals in hexane	470–750 nm	
150

APbBr3, APbI3 (A = CH3NH3+, Cs+, or CH(NH2)2+)	Nanocrystals	Ultrasound-induced synthesis: mixing AX (= MAX, CsX, or FAX), PbX2, and OAm in toluene; then sonication	365 nm (monochromatic light illumination)	
154

CsPbBr3 + AuNP	Nanocrystals	Recrystallization method: adding PbBr2 and CsBr into DMSO; adding OA and OAm into above solution; this mixture injection into toluene	300–550 nm	
152


 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the inverse temperature crystallization process, in which the solution is heated from room temperature and kept at an elevated temperature to initiate the crystallization. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (b) Solubility data for MAPbCl3 powder in DMSO–DMF (1:1 v/v) at different temperatures. Inset: Transparent single crystal grown from MAPbCl3 solution. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization process, in which an appropriate antisolvent is slowly diffused into the saturated solution of the crystal precursors, leading to the crystallization, and the kinetics of perovskite crystal growth. (d) Cross-sectional SEM of laterally continuous perovskite crystals on the substrate. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (e) Schematic of the cooling-induced crystallization in which the decrease in solution temperature induces the saturated solution of perovskite precursors to form the crystals. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (f) Image of MAPbI3 bulk single crystal grown through the cooling-induced crystallization technique. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (g) Images of single-halide and mixed-halide perovskite single crystals with different halide compositions. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of 2D ultrathin CsPbBr3 nanosheets prepared through solution-phase synthesis: SEM imagery; AFM imagery and height profiles of a monolayer and a bilayer with thicknesses of 1.6 and 3.3 ± 0.2 nm, respectively; thickness distribution histograms. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of the solution process to fabricate 2D PbI2 nanosheets and the vapor-phase conversion process to transfer PbI2 into 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanosheets; crystal structure of single-unit-cell-thick 2D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite; AFM imagery of 2D CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses: monolayer (1.3 nm), bilayer (2.5 nm), four-layer (5.0 nm), and ten-layer (13.0 nm). Scale bars: 2 μm. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of an evaporation-induced self-assembly method for perovskite nanowire-aligned growth, and their optical image. The evaporation direction is indicated by arrows. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic of the slip-coating process. Representative SEM imagery of nanowires and their distribution of length and width. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the formation of perovskite nanowires through an etching process. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of the fluid-guided antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method for the fabrication of nanowire arrays. SEM and AFM imagery of nanowire arrays grown on the two sides of SU-8 photoresist strips. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the reaction system and process for a ligand-assisted reprecipitation method; schematic of starting materials to synthesize CH3NH3PbBr3 nanocrystals in the precursor solution, and typical optical image of colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 solution. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) SEM imagery of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals film prepared by drop-coating and centrifugal-casting, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of architectures for perovskite-based photodetectors and the characteristics of photodetection performance for different devices.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Device structure and energy diagram of the perovskite photodetector. (b) Current density–voltage curves of photodetectors with and without the hole-blocking layer. PD1, without the hole-blocking layer; PD2 and PD3, with BCP and PFN as the hole-blocking layer, respectively. (c) External quantum efficiency and detectivity of PD3 at different wavelengths. The detectivity of a single-crystalline silicon diode (purple triangle) is shown for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. (d) Device material stack and their energy band alignment. (e) Effect of the front contact material stack on the dark current density. The addition of Al2O3 and further addition of PCBM reduce the dark current. (f) Stability of devices (I1, I2, I3) in air under continuous illumination. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the four different perovskite photodiode structures: type 1 with thin PCBM (10 nm) layer, type 2 with thick PCBM (50 nm) layer, type 3 with thick C60 layer, and type 4 with thick PCBM (50 nm)/C60 (130 nm) layer. (b) Dark current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (c) The energy diagram of the perovskite photodetectors. (d) The dark current (solid symbols) and photocurrent density (hollow symbols, under white light ∼143 μW cm−2) versus bias curves of devices A (diamonds), B (circles), and C (squares). Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Device architecture and cross-sectional SEM imagery of each layer. (b) EQE spectra of PbS QDs, CH3NH3PbI3, and PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3-based photodiodes. (c) The detectivities versus wavelength for PbS QDs and PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic of the QDiP photodiode device and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM. (e) Schematic of photogenerated charges in the QD phase getting trapped and losing their energy via recombination at flat band conditions, and carriers tunneling into the CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5 host assisted by the high electric field, and being collected. (f) Specific detectivity spectrum. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematics of the basic mechanisms of color selectivity for (a) thin-film and (b) thick single-crystal perovskite photodiodes. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) EQE spectra of optimized narrowband photodiodes and related junction absorption coefficients at −0.5 V, clearly showing how the CCN concept can be realized across the visible spectrum. (b) EQEs of narrowband red CCN photodiodes with various junction thicknesses at a reverse bias of −0.5 V. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (c) Normalized EQE spectra of the single-halide and mixed-halide perovskite single-crystal photodetectors with different halide compositions at −1 V, showing the ultra-narrow EQE peak and tunable spectral response. (d) EQE spectra of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals with different thicknesses, measured under −4 V bias. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 


Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa	—	8 × 1013 Jones@−0.1 V (550 nm, 1 mW cm−2)	4.6 × 10−12 W Hz−1/2	>100 dB	180 ns/160 ns	
15

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	0.34 A W−1@−2 V (500 nm, 0.53 mW cm−2)	4.8 × 1012 Jones	—	>100 dB	—	
167

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	∼0.4 A W−1@0 V (600 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)	∼1012 Jones	—	>80 dB	1 μs/3 μs	
168

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa	—	1.1 × 1013 Jones@−0.01 V (532 nm, 1 mW cm−2)	—	112 dB	3.0 μs/2.2 μs	
170

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	∼0.5 A W−1@0 V (740 nm)	∼1013 Jones	∼56 fW Hz−1/2	112 dB	58 ns/168 ns	
171

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	—	∼3 × 1012 Jones@0 V (700 nm)	∼200 fW Hz−1/2	∼170 dB	1.7 μs/1.0 μs	
158

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	∼0.21 A W−1@−2 V (white light, 143 μW cm−2)	7.4 × 1012 Jones@−0.1 V (680 nm)	43 fW Hz−1/2	94 dB	—/120 ns	
172

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	0.32 A W−1@0 V (670 nm)	—	—	84 dB	4.0 μs/3.3 μs	
176

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	∼0.29 A W−1@0 V (490 nm)	3.29 × 1012 Jones	—	—	20 μs/17 μs	
204

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	0.35 A W−1@0 V (500 nm)	1.53 × 1011 Jones	2 pW Hz−1/2	—	—	
205

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a	∼0.4 A W−1@0 V (650 nm)	3 × 1012 Jones@−0.1 V	<1 pW Hz−1/2	>95 dB	—	
206

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a + PDPPTDTPT	—	>1011 Jones@−0.1 V (900 nm)	∼2.4 pW Hz−1/2	95 dB (890 nm)	—	
107

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI3a + PbS QD	
∼0.3 A W−1@0 V (500 nm, 0.8 mW cm−2)
∼0.13 A W−1@0 V (900 nm, 0.7 mW cm−2)
	
1.2 × 1013 Jones@0 V (500 nm)
5.1 × 1012 Jones@0 V (900 nm)
	—	>100 dB	—	
104

Photodiode/PbS QD in CH3NH3PbI2.5Br0.5a	∼0.1 A W−1@−1 V (975 nm, 100 μW cm−2)	∼4 × 1012 Jones (1240 nm)	∼1 pW Hz−1/2	∼60 dB	<10 μs	
105

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbI2Bra + rhodamine B (red), CH3NH3PbIBr2a + PEIE (green), PbI1.4Br0.6a + PEIE (blue)	—	
1.9 × 1011 Jones@−0.5 V (650 nm)
1.7 × 109 Jones@−0.5 V (550 nm)
4.5 × 108 Jones@−0.5 V (450 nm)
	∼2 pW Hz−1/2 (red)	—	
3.0 μs/1.9 μs (red)
6.9 μs/3.0 μs (green)
1.8 μs/1.5 μs (blue)
	
159

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3b	—	2 × 1010 Jones@−4 V (570 nm)	∼0.1 pW Hz−1/2	—	∼1.6 ms	
82

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbCl3b	∼0.05 A W−1@−15 V (365 nm, 1 W cm−2)	1.2 × 1010 Jones	—	—	24 ms/62 ms	
78

Photodiode/CsPbBr3b	6 A W−1@−10 V (550 nm)	—	—	—	—	
121

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3 + CH3NH3PbIxBr3−xb	∼0.01 A W−1@0 V (450 nm)	—	—	—	2.3 s/2.76 s	
207

Photodiode/CH3NH3PbBr3b	∼0.1 A W−1@−3 V (white light, 100 mW cm−2)	7.1 × 1011 Jones	—	—	70 μs/150 μs	
208

Photodiode/CH(NH2)2PbI3b	0.68 A W−1@−0.1 V (380 nm, 0.5 mW cm−2)	—	2.6 × 10−14 W Hz−1/2	—	12.4 ms/17.2 ms	
120

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa	620 A W−1@−0.7 V (550 nm, 10 μW cm−2)	—	—	—	∼100 ms	
180

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a	208 A W−1@−0.6 V (500 nm)	—	—	106 dB	<0.01 s	
179

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a	242 A W−1@−1 V (740 nm)	—	0.18 pW Hz−1/2	85 dB	10 μs/5.7 μs	
155

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + PbS QD	∼15 A W−1@−2 V (580 nm)	∼6 × 1013 Jones	—	95 dB	—/11.5 μs	
190

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + ZnO NR	24.3 A W−1@−1 V (500 nm)	3.56 × 1014 Jones	
	
	0.7 s/0.6 s	
102

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + ZnO NW	26.7 mA W−1@0 V (325 nm, 19 μW cm−2)	4.0 × 1010 Jones	—	—	53 μs/63 μs	
209

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a	3.49 A W−1@3 V (365 nm, 0.01 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	<0.2 s	
74

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbCl3a	7.56 A W−1@4 V (360 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	170 μs/220 μs	
79

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa	14.5 A W−1@2 V (white light, 66 nW/cm2)	—	—	—	0.2 μs/0.7 μs	
156

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3−xClxa	11.5 A W−1@−12 V (450 nm, 0.8 μW cm−2)	3.12 × 1013 Jones	—	—	—	
184

Photoconductor/(C4H9NH3)2PbI4, (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7, (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10a	3.00 mA W−1 (one layer), 7.31 mA W−1 (two layers), 12.78 mA W−1 (three layers)@30 V (white light, 3.0 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	28.4 ms/27.5 ms (one layer), 8.4 ms/7.5 ms (two layers), 10.0 ms/7.5 ms (three layers)	
93

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3−xIxa	55 mA W−1@10 V (475 nm)	—	—	—	<20 μs	
183

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a	0.1 A W−1@10 V (650 nm, 100 μW cm−2)	1.02 × 1012 Jones	4.73 × 10−14 W Hz−1/2	—	0.3 ms/0.4 ms	
75

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3a	∼0.18 A W−1@10 V (531 nm)	6.1 × 1010 Jones	—	—	1.0 ms/1.8 ms	
192

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3a	2.7 A W−1@9 V (520 nm)	—	—	—	0.35 ms/1.26 ms	
193

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + PDPP3T	∼0.05 A W−1@2 V (650 nm, 500 μW cm−2)	8.8 × 1010 Jones	6.5 pW Hz−1/2	—	30 ms/100 ms	
106

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + rhodamine B	43.6 mA W−1@5 V (550 nm, 500 μW cm−2)	—	—	—	60 ms/40 ms	
194

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + WSe2	110 A W−1@2 V (532 nm, 2.8 mW cm−2)	2.2 × 1011 Jones	—	—	2.1 s/2.9 s	
101

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3a + WS2	17 A W−1@5 V (white light, 0.2 μW cm−2)	2 × 1012 Jones	∼0.1 pW Hz−1/2	—	2.7 ms/7.5 ms	
99

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b	953 A W−1@1 V (532 nm, 2.12 nW cm−2)	—	—	76 dB	74 μs/58 μs	
119

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3b	>4000 A W−1@5 V (525 nm)	>3 × 1013 Jones	<0.2 pW Hz−1/2	—	∼25 μs/25 μs	
16

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbCl3b	∼18 A W−1@5 V (385 nm, 4 nW)	∼1012 Jones	—	—	—/∼1 ms	
77

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b	0.24 A W−1@0 V (808 nm, 10 nW cm−2)	—	—	—	71 μs/112 μs	
200

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b	2.53 A W−1@5 V (780 nm, 0.05 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	—	
210

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3b	1640 A W−1 (BPs)@5 V (810 nm), 275 A W−1 (NPs)@5 V (830 nm)	∼1013 Jones	—	∼70 dB	∼30 μs/20 μs	
83

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c	∼40 A W−1@5 V (488 nm, 1.2 nW)	—	—	—	∼500 μs	
128

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c	22 A W−1@1 V (405 nm, <10 pW)	—	—	—	<20 ms/40 ms	
129

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3c	∼0.2 A W−1@2 V (white light, 13 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	—	
127

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c	0.64 A W−1@10 V (517 nm)	—	—	—	19 μs/25 μs	
125

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c + CNTs	31.1 A W−1@10 V (517 nm)	—	—	85 dB	16 μs/0.38 ms	
131

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3c	—	—	—	—	17.8 ms/14.7 ms	
126

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbBr3d	—	—	—	—	0.12 s/0.086 s	
138

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	0.3 A W−1@2 V (1 Sun, 100 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	<0.2 ms/0.25 ms	
211

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	5 mA W−1@1 V (633 nm, 7 μW)	—	—	—	0.35 ms/0.25 ms	
134

Photoconductor/Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3d	23 A W−1@5 V (530 nm, 4.5 mW cm−2)	2.5 × 1011 Jones	—	—	—	
163

Photoconductor/CsPb(Br/I)3d	—	—	—	—	0.68 s/0.66 s	
144

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	—	—	—	—	0.12 s/0.21 s	
139

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	1.3 A W−1@30 V (650 nm, 80 μW cm−2)	2.5 × 1012 Jones	—	—	0.2 ms/0.3 ms	
133

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	4.95 A W−1@1 V (530 nm, 2 nW cm−2)	2 × 1013 Jones	∼11 fW Hz−1/2	∼70 dB	<0.1 ms	
132

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	1.2 A W−1@10 V (630 nm, 0.1 mW cm−2)	2.39 × 1012 Jones	—	—	<10 ms	
212

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	13.57 A W−1@−5 V (420 nm, 500 μW cm−2)	5.25 × 1012 Jones	—	>114 dB	80 μs/240 μs	
141

Photoconductor/CH3NH3PbI3d	12500 A W−1@5 V (550 nm, 42 μW cm−2)	1.73 × 1011 Jones	2.83 × 10−12 W Hz−1/2	150 dB	0.34 μs/0.42 μs	
142

Photoconductor/CsPbI3e	
	
	
	
	24 ms/29 ms	
150

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3e + AuNP	∼0.01 A W−1@2 V (520 nm)	4.56 × 108 Jones	
	
	0.2 ms/1.2 ms	
152

Photoconductor/CsPbBr3e + TiO2	∼3.5 A W−1@4 V (510 nm)	—	—	—	∼10 s	
153

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a	320 A W−1@Vd = −30 V, Vg = −40 V (white light, 10 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	6.5 μs/5.0 μs	
17

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d	0.11 A W−1@Vd = 1.5 V (532 nm, 72 nW)	—	—	—	—	
213

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d	6.1 A W−1@Vd = −20 V, Vg = −2 V (white light, 0.5 mW cm−2)	—	—	—	—	
201

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + Graphene	180 A W−1@Vd = 0.1 V, Vg = 0 V (520 nm, 1 μW)	>109 Jones	—	—	87 ms/540 ms	
94

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + graphene	115 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = 0 V (515 nm)	3 × 1012 Jones	—	—	0.25 s/5.3 s	
97

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbBr2Ia + graphene	∼6 × 105 A W−1@Vd = 3 V, Vg = 0 V (405 nm, 1.052 nW)	—	—	—	<120 ms/750 ms	
96

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + graphene + AuNP	∼2.1 × 103 A W−1@Vd = 10 V, Vg = 0 V (532 nm, 14 μW cm−2)	—	—	—	1.5 s/—	
202

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d + graphene	∼2.6 × 106 A W−1@Vd = 10 mV, Vg = 0 V (633 nm, 3.3 pW)	—	—	—	55 s/75 s	
135

Phototransistor/CsPbBr3−xIxe + graphene	8.2 × 108 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = −60 V (405 nm, 0.07 μW cm−2)	2.4 × 1016 Jones	—	—	0.81 s/3.65 s	
151

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3d + CNTs	7.7 × 105 A W−1@Vd = 0.2 V, Vg = −5 V (633 nm, 375 fW)	—	—	—	<1 s/35 s	
136

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3a + MoS2	1.94 × 106 A W−1@Vd = 5 V, Vg = 20 V (520 nm, 4.63 pW)	1.29 × 1012 Jones	<100 fW Hz−1/2	—	6.17 s/4.5 s	
98

Phototransistor/CH3NH3PbI3c + graphene	∼950 A W−1@Vd = 1 V, Vg = 0 V (532 nm, 1.52 nW)	—	—	—	22 ms/37 ms	
100


 	Fig. 13  (a) Typical behavior of the dark and photocurrent in forward and reverse biases. The current response of the devices for the spin-coated BL is shown in blue, and that for the spray-pyrolized BL is shown in red, while the extrapolation of the photocurrent in reverse bias is shown in green. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) EQE action spectra for diode photocurrent and short-circuit current (JSC) for a planar perovskite device (spin-coat CL) biased at −0.9 and 0 V, respectively. Inset shows the action spectrum of JSC (enlarged). (c) Energy diagrams and carrier transfer mechanism for amplified current generation. Reverse bias condition (V = −0.6 V) with blocking TiO2 CL (spray coat) that blocks charge transfer from VB, and reverse bias (V = −0.6 V) with bypass-rich TiO2 CL (spin coat), leading to the generation of amplified current. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure of the model device and a schematic of the energy of the perovskite photodetector. (b) IPCE of the perovskite photodetector (the inset in logarithmic scale) and (c) responsivity at short-circuit conditions and under −0.6 V reverse bias (the inset shows the gain spectrum of the photodetector). Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Device structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector. (b) Energy diagram of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector at reverse bias under illumination. (c) Absorption spectrum (solid line) of the CH3NH3PbI3 films and wavelength-dependent gain (solid lines with symbols) of the CH3NH3PbI3 devices under reverse biases between 0 and −1 V. (d) Photo- and dark-current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the CH3NH3PbI3 device. The reference PV device has a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (e) Device structure of pero-HPDs. (f) Responsivity and detectivity versus wavelength spectra of the pero-HPDs fabricated by the CH3NH3PbI3:PbS QD nanocomposite thin film at different negative biases (−0.5, −1, and −2 V). Energy level alignment of the materials used for fabrication of pero-HPDs (g) in dark and (h) under illumination. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3 photoconductor. Upon illumination with photon energy above the bandgap (Eg), electron–hole pairs are generated. (b) Energy level diagram of the corresponding materials. (c) Band diagram of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetector, taking into consideration Schottky barriers at the contacts. EF, EC, and EV are the Fermi level energy, conduction band energy, and valence band energy, respectively, while ΦB is the Schottky barrier height. There is no electrical current flowing under equilibrium conditions and no illumination. (d) Under light illumination, the lower Schottky barriers lead to photogenerated holes migrating to the surface and being trapped, leaving behind unpaired electrons in the CH3NH3PbI3 that contribute to the photocurrent, resulting in more efficient photocurrent extraction and increased photoresponse. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Microstructure of Mie porous and interface-fused CsPbBr3 perovskite films: surface, cross-section, and interface SEM observation. (b) Illustration of Mie scattering inside the pore size-matched films. (c) Absorption comparison between typical Mie porous and dense films. (d) Demonstration of photodetectors based on the Mie porous and interface-fused perovskite films. (e) I–V logarithmic curves of Mie porous and dense films in dark and under 532 nm laser (1 mW cm−2) irradiation. Solid: light current, hollow: dark current. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the flexible photodetector with a CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photosensing layer. (b) Absorption spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite films. (c) I–V curves of the flexible CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetector under dark or different monochromatic light illuminations; the incident light power density = 500 μW cm−2. (d) The spectral responsivity of the CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetectors in the UV-Vis-NIR region with an irradiance of 500 μW cm−2 at 1 or 2 V bias. (e) Energy level diagrams for pure CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3/PDPP3T composite photodetectors. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Device configuration schematic, and atomic structure of a model CH3NH3PbI3/WSe2 monolayer interface and the perovskite structure. (b) D1 dark (black), D2 dark (orange), and D2 illuminated (green). (c) D1 dark (black), D3 dark (brown), D4 dark (pink), and D4 illuminated (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (d) Schematic device structure of the hybrid WS2/perovskite photoconductor fabricated on a C-plane (0001) sapphire substrate, and band structures of WS2 and perovskite in the hybrid bilayer. (e) I–V curves of the hybrid WS2/perovskite bilayer photoconductor measured in dark and under illumination with different white-light intensities. (f) Corresponding I–V curves measured on the perovskite single layer. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the lateral-structure photodetector fabricated on the (100) facet of CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal. (b) Photocurrent versus voltage curves under various irradiation densities of 532 nm. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (c) Three-dimensional illustration of the photodetector: the CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal perovskite layer (orange) is deposited on top of the ITO contacts (light blue)/glass substrate (transparent grey), and energy diagram of the photodetector. (d) Current–voltage characteristic measured under different light power illuminations. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Photocurrent of the CH3NH3PbI3 microcrystalline (thickness: 200 μm) photodetector under white-light illumination of 0.5 mW cm−2 from a halogen lamp. Inset: Dark current. (b) Schematic of the narrowband photodetection mechanism. (c) EQE of the photodetector under bottom illumination, showing the BP behavior. (d) EQE of the photodetector under top illumination, showing the NP behavior. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM imagery of perovskite arrays. Scale bar, 20 μm. (b) Typical I–V curve of a perovskite crystal under dark and light illumination. (inset) Optical microscopy of a perovskite crystal bridging two gold electrodes. The distance between the electrode pair is 8 μm. Scale bar, 20 μm. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of the flexible photodetector based on CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs, and their energy level. (d) Logarithmic I–V curves under dark and 442 nm light illumination. (e) EQE results of devices with different amounts of CNTs under a bias of 10 V. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3 nanowire array photodetector. (b) I–V curves of the photodetector measured under dark condition and light illumination (550 nm, 42 μW cm−2). (c) Plots of responsivity and photoconductive gain of the photodetector as a function of light wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Probable schematics of the carrier transportation of CsPbBr3 nanocrystal film with drop-coating and centrifugal-casting under light irradiation. (b) I–V logarithm curves of the photodetector with different film fabrications under 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). (c) Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation of plasmon resonance enhancement of the local optical field at a resonant wavelength of 532 nm for the composites of AuNPs and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. (d) Relative responsivities of devices with and without AuNPs under 2 V bias from front illumination. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the phototransistor with a channel of perovskite CH3NH3PbI3. (b) Transfer characteristics of a perovskite-based phototransistor in the dark (black and red symbols) and under light illumination (blue and magenta symbols). (c) Photoresponsivity (R) characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 phototransistor under white-light illumination (power density = 10 mW cm−2). (d) EQE and R of the device at different wavelengths and a VDS of −30 V. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematics of the perovskite/MoS2 phototransistor and the molecular structures of the materials. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Chinese Institute of Electronics, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic and optical imagery of a boron nitride (BN)-covered graphene/WSe2/perovskite/graphene (GWPG) phototransistor. Red and blue lines frame the top and bottom graphene, respectively; black and green arrows indicate the perovskite and WSe2, respectively; and white dashed lines outline the overlapping area of the GWPG structure. The top graphene is biased, while the bottom graphene is grounded for all measurements. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic of the perovskite–graphene hybrid phototransistor. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (d) A schematic of the CH3NH3PbI3–graphene–AuNPs device. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 27  Plots of responsivity versus voltage (a) and detectivity versus voltage (b) for different architecture devices based on diverse perovskite materials in Table 2. The voltage is expressed in the absolute value. Phototransistors based on hybrid perovskite-1D/2D conducting materials and photoconductors based on high-quality perovskite crystals show the high responsivities in panel a. Photodiodes and photoconductors can achieve high detectivities with the low and high working voltage, respectively, and the corresponding detection wavelength is shown in panel b. PD, photodiode; PC, photoconductor; PT, phototransistor; PF, polycrystalline film; BC, bulk crystal; NS, nanosheet; NW, nanowire; NC, nanocrystal.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
