Striding the threshold of photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining via a bottom-up approach: from model compounds to realistic lignin  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC01409B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC01409B
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 5351-5378Striding the threshold of photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining via a bottom-up approach: from model compounds to realistic lignin

        
          
            Jikun 
            Xu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Pengfei 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuntao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lan 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Xiao
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Dai
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Kaifu 
            Huo
          
        
      d
aKey Laboratory of Hubei Province for Coal Conversion and New Carbon Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430081, China. E-mail: jkxu@wust.edu.cn
bCollege of Biomass Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610065, China. E-mail: xiao_xiao@scu.edu.cn
cTianjin Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, China
dWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
Received 
      13th April 2022
    , Accepted 13th June 2022First published on 16th June 2022AbstractUpgrading renewable lignocellulose into bulk chemicals and drop-in-fuels has been identified as a state-of-the-art paradigm to fulfill alternative energy demands. Lignin, as the largest precursor of alkyl aromatics, can be depolymerized effectively to maneuver task-specific phenols. Toward an ecofriendly lignin-first depolymerization, photocatalytic lignocellulose conversion, also termed photobiorefining, is of utmost importance to boost economic and technical feasibility of holistic biomass valorization. It is still an urgent but challenging task to rationally design light-driven lignin deconstruction with decent photocatalytic selectivity and durability for developing scalable photobiorefining. A bottom-up approach, beginning with representative model compounds as lignin intermediates, enables a chance to encompass well-defined photocatalytic mechanism/system for providing insights, feasibility, and guidelines before the technical or proto-lignin conversion. The emphasis of this review is mainly placed on photocatalytic lignin-first strategy that includes versatile photocatalyst types, transformation pathways, photoreactors, and reaction medium. The cleavage mechanisms of C–O (e.g., β-O-4′ and α-O-4′) and C–C (e.g., β-1′ and β-5′) linkages in native lignin and its models to form light aromatic hydrocarbons through homogeneous or heterogeneous photocatalysis are proposed. At the end, the remaining challenges for the selective control and practical spread of photocatalytic lignocellulose fractionation are elaborated, and burgeoning prospects to inspire opportunities on photocatalyst manipulation for efficient and sustainable light-mediated lignin conversion are also discussed. The present work sheds light on the structure–property–performance relationship in photocatalytic lignin valorization and forthcoming knacks to spark the bright pearl of high-performance photobiorefining.
1. Introduction
It is obvious that humankind must rapidly undertake transition from the exploitation of fossil resources, given the concerns over anthropogenic climate change. The mission to build and reshape global energy regimes often faces the conundrum of drastically alleviating fossil reliance and CO2 emissions.1 There is an urgent need to couple renewable feedstock and efficient techniques for the gradual replacement of fossil fuels.2 The skepticism over reproducible lignocellulose biomass to overcome energy shortage and the reluctance to embrace sustainable technologies such as photocatalysis has created space for an alternative narrative. With optimistic outlooks for the progress in the domain of lignocellulose conversion over years to come because of it is recognized to be the most abundant ecofriendly resource that outputs about 170 billion tons per year via photosynthesis on a global scale.3 If the ubiquitous solar energy can be returned to reform biomass into value-added chemicals using a pollution-free and low-power approach, it can be expected to overcome the dual crises of energy and environment at the same time.4
Large amounts of lignocellulose that mainly consist of cellulose (30–50%), hemicelluloses (20–35%), and lignin (25–35%) are processed nowadays for paper-making and specialty fiber (Fig. 1a) in some parts for heat or power worldwide. In recent decades, consequential industrial and governmental investments have boasted an unprecedented dynamic to commercialize the commodity of cellulosic bioethanol and platform chemicals, which has mobilized a large global scientific community to concentrate on lignocellulose biorefining.5 Upgrading lignocellulose carbohydrates into bulk biofuels and fine chemicals has long been the principal target of biomass valorization. To propel the cultivation of a universal bio-based circular economy that adopts lignocellulose as an original feedstock, it is also inevitable to derive value from lignin beyond low-value heating and burning system.6 The international research community is now eagerly chasing lignin valorization approaches in response to the demand for sustainable carbon neutrality.
 Fig. 1  (a) Proposed structures of three building blocks in lignocellulose including lignin (15–25%), cellulose (40–50%), and hemicellulose (15–30%). (b) Three representative precursors of lignin including syringyl (S), guaiacyl (G), and p-hydroxyphenyl (H) units. (c) Typical oxidative and reductive cycles in photoredoxcatalysis. General photocatalysts include (d) semiconductors,7 (e) transition metal complexes,7 and (f) nanometallic materials.7 (g) Unselective thermo-energy to activate all chemicals (reactant R to product P, C, E, and S refer to the catalyst, or molecules in the environment).7 (h) Selective solar energy to activate the photocatalyst.7 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lignin is a 3D aromatic polymer composed of three monolignol units, namely, coniferyl, coumaryl, and sinapyl alcohols with different types of carbon–carbon and ether bond connections (Fig. 1a and b),8 such as α-aryl ether (α-O-4′), β-aryl ether (β-O-4′), biphenyl (5–5′), and diphenyl ether (4-O-5′), in which the main β-O-4′ linkage captures approximately 45%–60% in native lignin. Despite the rich availability of lignin, its high carbon content (60%), and energy density (30% greater than polysaccharides), tiny amounts of lignin (less than 1%) are currently recycled as value-added materials because of their heterogeneous and highly cross-linked structure.9 Note that the distribution of lignin varies greatly among different plant species from softwood and hardwood to grasses.10 From the perspective of sustainable technologies and carbon neutrality, the efficient utilization of renewable lignin and its derivatives that builds the industrial platform of aromatic chemicals and drop-in-fuels would alleviate the intense dependence on fossil energy and minimize greenhouse gas emission.11,12 At present, inspired by the largest renewable aromatic biopolymer, the directional depolymerization of lignin can yield valuable phenyl intermediates including phenol, benzene, toluene, and xylene.13 Apart from that, it is of utmost importance to reform the current methods of lignin upgradation (e.g., pyrolysis, as well as chemical and biological catalysis), which generally require harsh reaction conditions (e.g., high temperature and pressure, acid/base, or extra hydrogen) and expensive catalysts that inevitably hinder their large-scale application. It is thus urgent to find a gentle approach for selectively cleaving lignin interunit linkages, which also requires the careful control of reaction conditions and catalysts capable of efficiently breaking bonds.14
Note that the amount of green solar energy that reaches the earth per hour (1.4 × 1030 joules) is greater than the annual energy consumption of human beings.15 As an ecofriendly redox reaction, photocatalysis has become a powerful chemical system to tackle the sustainable bottlenecks because of its natural existence, as well as pollution-free and mild reaction conditions. To this end, the promising photocatalysis utilizing solar energy is expected to fractionate and valorize lignocellulosic biomass, which efficiently deals with the energy and environment threats.16 The investigation of photocatalytic lignin depolymerization mainly focuses on two aspects, i.e., to remove the papermaking pollutants17 and obtain aromatic oligomers via lignin photoredox.18 From Fig. 1c, a typical photocatalyst (PC)-mediated redox (e.g., semiconductors, transition metal complexes, and metallic nanoparticles) depends upon the consecutive single electron transfer processes (SET) between both electron acceptor (A) and electron donor (D) to expedite the conversion of reactants into intermediates (Fig. 1d–f).19,20 As illustrated in Fig. 1g and h, the catalyst interacts with reactants or intermediates via surface adsorption or chemical bonding, which reduces the activation energy from Ea1 in non-catalytic processes to produce Ea2 and Ea3. Random heat is excessively required to overcome the activation barriers, resulting in an inexact shift of energy to the target reactant or chemical bond during traditional thermochemical techniques. It is fortunate that photocatalysis is usually initiated by light absorption, which selectively activates the photocatalyst to its excited state. The excited photocatalyst can further activate the reactants to overcome the energy barrier and obtain the target products.
The intervention of active stabilization for preferential lignin fractionation and valorization, generally described as lignin-first biorefining, is the broadly accepted umbrella term for solvent-based lignocellulose processing, which liberates or cleaves lignin and benefits polysaccharide preservation.21 It is strongly regarded as an upfront biorefining technique that moves away from the current practice of having to deal with an intractable lignin product. A universal lignin-first strategy integrates lignocellulose fractionation and lignin hydrogenolysis with a rudimentary perspective of waste-free biorefining, which is usually carried out in a reduced atmosphere using H2 pressure or hydrogen-donor solvent in a heterogeneous catalyst.22–25 From the standpoint of safety and feasibility, there is still a marked distance between exploiting cost-effective lignin-first method and acquiring well-defined aromatics from natural lignin.26 In this vein, photobiorefining has become one of the attractive approaches adopting photocatalytic lignocellulose conversion to drive the practical applications of sustainable lignin-first processing. Despite several reviews advancing the territory of photocatalytic biomass reforming, it is highly desirable to emphasize the photocatalytic lignin-first strategy for lignocellulose valorization.
As an important lignin-derived intermediates, the model compounds are often adopted as tools for gaining insight into the photocatalytic upgradation of depolymerized lignin. Unlike direct lignin conversion, it is certainly useful to propose an approach termed “bottom-up”, which focuses on the mechanism of cleaving typical C–O or C–C linkages from lignin models at the molecular scale. Inspired by the typical examples, the advances of theoretical investigations aimed at identifying their active sites and reaction origins are elaborated. Although a huge knowledge gap exists between the model compounds and technical/proto-lignin, the bottom-up scheme works as a vital supplement to link direct lignin fractionation, degradation and valorization, thereby efficiently presenting catalytic systems in lignin-first biorefining. A bottom-up strategy also targets the initial substrate transformation to produce a lignin intermediate and/or active molecule with a weakened C–O/C–C bond, thus generating new “binding spots” to couple a coordinated reagent capable of linkage fracture. To make this paradigm as broadly applicable as possible, we have chosen to issue a bottom-up approach from model compounds to native lignin that should make it possible to transfer the available mechanisms into the photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining platform. Herein, this review tends to highlight the state-of-the-art progress and breakthroughs in light-driven photocatalytic biorefining systems with a distinctive perspective on selective lignin depolymerization. The dominant issues that modulate the reaction routes and mechanisms are carefully examined. The photocatalytic functions in the elementary reactions, including redox neutral C–O bond cleavage (e.g., β-O-4′ and α-O-4′), selective oxidations, C–C scission (e.g., β-1′, β-5′, and Cα–Cβ), and C–H activation are speculated to offer insights into guiding the rational design for sensitive and selective photocatalysts for sustainable chemistry. The challenges and prospects of structure–catalysis–performance relationship in lignocellulose valorization are also briefly overviewed to fill the gap in lignin-first photobiorefining.
2. Guidelines and pathways of photocatalytic lignocellulose conversion toward lignin-first strategy
With the advances in materials science, task-specific photocatalysts can be facilely designed and tailor-made into multiscale shapes, sizes, and architectures according to the demands of photoredox reactions. As a rule, the photoactive semiconductors can be prepared in the form of zero- to three-dimensional sizes (0–3D) with diverse pattern (Fig. 2a).27 Once the incident light reaches the interface of photocatalyst particles that are homogeneously suspended in an aqueous photocatalytic system, full-scale light scattering occurs autonomously to lengthen the light penetration path and improve light absorption.28 With respect to every freely suspended photocatalyst pellet, the migration of photogenerated charge carriers is only required from the matrix to the particle-liquid interphase for conducting redox reactions. In principle, the energy of absorbent light greater than that of the photocatalyst band gap leads to the excitation of an electron (e−) from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) and creates an electron vacancy, named as a hole (h+) (Fig. 2c). The efficient photocatalytic activity is triggered by redox reactions from photoinduced electrons (e−) and holes (h+) that are usually produced on the surface of photocatalysts. Unfortunately, the bulk recombination of the electron and hole is a non-productive reaction to dissipate heat or emit light.29 Depending on the reaction conditions, a few reactive species are formed via the participation of electron–hole pairs. The conversion of oxygen to highly reactive species is generally called reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can oxidize the organic substrate depending on their unique redox potential. For instance, the hydroxyl radical (˙OH) that can be produced from the oxidation of surface hydroxyls or absorbed water occupies a redox potential of +2.81 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). Other reactive oxygen species, including superoxide anion radical (˙O2−, redox potential: +0.89 V vs. SHE) and singlet oxygen (1O2), also hold the ability to execute the photoredox reaction with a task-specific situation.30 Since ROS are the main intermediates in photocatalytic reactions, the formation, trapping, and detection of ROS have aroused great interest in the exhaustive understanding of the photocatalytic mechanism.31 The band gap structures of diverse photocatalysts and the potentials for redox couples in water (pH = 7) are schematically depicted in Fig. 2c.29 The generation of ROS by controlling the engineering band gap structure is conducive for the selectivity and activity of photocatalytic lignocellulose valorization. Manipulating the generation of active radical intermediates is beneficial for valuable chemical production from lignin, especially for multiple downstream conversion routes.32 However, the ROS-mediated processing is still faced with pivotal issues about unwanted side-reactions, not only from the low light transmittance of the black liquor but also, the most important, low selectivity. It will lead to the destruction or mineralization of the aromatic structure of lignin as a consequence of severe ROS-induced reaction intensities, thereby expediting the excessive decomposition of targeted arenes (e.g., phenolic monomers and dimers) into ultimate byproducts (e.g., CO2, H2O, and acids). Therefore, it is of great significance to enhance the selectivity of the photocatalytic reaction as well as fulfill the retention of the aromatic configuration of lignin during depolymerization processing.
 Fig. 2  (a) Light scattering/trapping and charge transport in nanostructures of single materials as a suspended photocatalyst including 0D nanocrystals, 1D nanostructures, 2D nanosheets, and 3D nanostructures.27,28 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) The generation pathway about four major reactive oxygen species (ROS),31 such as ˙OH, ˙O2−, 1O2, and H2O2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Band gap structures of various photocatalysts and potentials for different redox couples in water (pH = 7).29 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
2.1. Emerging concept of photobiorefining
Long-chain biomass must be fractionated into easily accessible constituents for downstream processing before it can be converted into useful molecules. Of late, a novel photocatalytic lignocellulose valorization, also termed as photobiorefining, is an emerging territory of light-driven approach that employs cutting-edge artificial photosynthesis to meet the success of near-practical sustainable biomass chemistry with energy-saving input.33 As the name implies, the objective of photobiorefining is to transfer lignocellulose and its three building blocks into a product portfolio of commercial bio-based chemicals, fuels, and intermediates using the photoreforming technique. Despite holding great promises, the competitiveness and practicability of novel photobiorefining technologies are deemed to be underdeveloped at the current generation because of faint reaction mechanism, sluggish kinetics, and limited carbon footprint. Accordingly, the selection of ideal biomass-model compounds is essential to gain the photochemical information and identify each limiting stage before further proceeding to light-oriented catalyst fabrication and reaction engineering. Apart from advanced catalyst design, the reasonable coupling of the thermochemical and photocatalytic system would enable a synergistic benefit that not only expedites the formation and transfer of long-lived e−/h+ pairs but also boosts reaction dynamics over the processing unit in biorefining. The improved carbon footprint and overall lifecycle should also be estimated to ensure the sustainability of the photobiorefining procedure. Photocatalytic lignocellulose conversion usually comprises the lignin-first depolymerization of both oxidation and reduction reactions to generate the light aromatic hydrocarbons, which alleviates the heavily reliance on the petrochemical resources. The allied concept between lignin-first and photobiorefining, i.e., the catalytic valorization of lignin with the preservation of carbohydrates (i.e., cellulose and hemicellulose) under the control of light-driven photocatalysis, delivers a chance to make use of entire lignocellulose in the cost-effective and ecofriendly paradigm.34,35 A native phenylpropanoid macromolecule of lignin possesses useful chemical bonds (e.g., aryl ethers) and functional groups (e.g., hydroxyl, carboxyl, and methoxyl). It thus is disclosed that photocatalytic lignin conversion usually involves the cession of its subunits and/or decoration of active groups.36 Generally, there are three prevalent pathways for the photocatalytic cleavage of lignin subunits such as β-O-4′ linkages:35,37–39 (1) reductive cleavage initiated by electrons or reductive agents; (2) oxidative cleavage promoted by holes or oxidative species; and (3) charge carrier-driven redox neutral cleavage combined with electron–hole pairs.
2.2. Reductive lignin depolymerization
The reductive depolymerization of lignin is generally promoted by photogenerated electrons in the presence of photocatalysts and/or co-catalysts. The selective cleavage of C–O bonds while maintaining the aromatic properties has been one of the major challenges for the catalytic conversion of lignin to arenes. The reductive method needs a catalyst that can selectively break the carbon–oxygen bond and lead to depolymerization.40 However, an external hydrogen source is required, which is a productive route to cleave the β-O-4′ bond by the reductive methods. In recent years, catalytic transfer hydrogenation (CTH) has become an ideal approach for the conversion of biomass-derived polymers. The decomposition of lignin into aromatic products by the CTH reaction under relatively mild conditions has been reported.41,42 Although biomass and alcohols can be used as hydrogen sources, the products of alcohols might condense with lignin phenolic products to form more refractory structures such as aldehydes, making the separation of target products laborious.43 Fortunately, the self-produced hydrogen of lignin can be fully utilized for the hydrogenation of Cβ–O bonds, precluding the need for external hydrogen sources.35,37
Luo et al. proposed self-hydrogen transfer hydrogenolysis with a heterogeneous ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst to transform lignin models into phenolic componds,44 through which 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (PP-ol) was converted to acetophenone (AP) and phenol (Phol) with yields of 83% and 90%, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanone (PP-one) was also generated as a byproduct with a yield of 6%. This work strode the threshold of lignin hydrogenolysis wherein lignin itself serves as a hydrogen source. A thio-assisted electrocatalytic reductive approach was reported as a complementary scheme to depolymerize lignin at room temperature.45 This strategy might lead to a sustainable cycle linking electrochemical reduction with lignin cleavage through thiols as small diffusive redox carriers, which can be coupled with photocatalytic reductive lignin dissociation (Fig. 3b). This study adopted cheap reticular glass carbon as a working cathode to crack β-O-4′ bonds in ketoaryl ethers to avoid the additional utilization of expensive catalysts. Li et al. reported that the selective cleavage of the lignin C–O bond with heterogeneous nitrogen-doped carbon-supported iron catalysts, confirming the presence of N–Fe species as the active center.46 The hydrogenolysis of α-O-4′ model linkage afforded phenol and toluene with yields of 95% and 90%, respectively. For the β-O-4′ linkage, the vicinal –OH group was essential for the iron-catalyzed hydrogenolysis of ether linkage. As depicted in Fig. 3c, regarding the possible reaction pathway for lignin valorization, the main route of lignin dimer conversion was classified into the two-step or direct hydrogenolysis of PP-ol, indicating that the enhanced hydrogenolysis reactivity was dependent on the reduced bond dissociation energy (BDE) of C–O bonds via α-carbon oxidation. The advent of thermochemical lignin hydrogenolysis brings photocatalytic ideas to lignin-first biorefinering. An effective photocatalyst (Au/CeO2) of CeO2-supported gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) was developed to make a referential path of lignin photoreforming with selective C–O cleavage (Fig. 3d).47 In particular, Au/CeO2 possessed excellent photocatalytic capacity for reducing nitro-aromatic hydrocarbons to azide compounds, hydrogenating azobenzene to hydroazobenzene, reducing ketones to alcohols, and deoxygenating epoxides to alkenes at ambient temperatures. The mechanisms of photocatalytic reduction with supported Au-NPs were proposed in Fig. 3d. Under visible light irradiation, Au-NPs can extract hydrogen from isopropanol to form a transient Au–H species on the surface without setting free hydrogen molecules, and then the active Au–H species attacked the double bonds (e.g., NO, NN, and CO) or epoxide bonds, thereby resulting in hydrogenation or deoxygenation via the interaction with the excited electrons in the Au-NPs. It can be disclosed that the emerging concept of the photocatalytic hydrogenolysis technique marks the brand-new development of reductive lignin depolymerization in the theme of photobiorefining.
 Fig. 3  (a) The fragmentation of lignin model PP-ol to AP, Phol, and PP-one.44 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The possible mechanism for lignin cleavage through thiols as small diffusive redox carriers.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The possible reaction path for the valorization of lignin with nitrogen-doped carbon-supported iron catalysts.46 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) A reasonable mechanism of the photocatalytic system with Au/CeO2.47 Inset picture: TEM images of Au-NPs on CeO2 supports. The length of the scale bars in the images is 10 nm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Scope of the one-pot electrocatalytic oxidation–photocatalytic reductive C–O bond cleavage.51 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
2.3. Oxidation lignin depolymerization
During photocatalytic oxidation transformation, lignin substrates interact with holes/oxidative species generated from the photocatalyst to produce free radicals and, subsequently, oxidants directly or indirectly excite the free radical cations for interrupting C–O bonds or C–C bonds in lignin substructures. The universal strategies for lignin oxidative conversion have been developed, which include photocatalysis, electrochemistry, and the employment of ionic liquids or heterogeneous catalysts.48 Adopting oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, or peroxyacids might be important and economically viable oxidation and delignification technologies, which have been widely implemented to bleach pulp in the papermaking industry.49 Although oxidation is a traditional paradigm to transform lignin, it urgently needs adequate selectivity to avoid the excessive oxidation of the substrate into unrecoverable or gaseous products. Ideally, oxidation methods should be able to depolymerize efficiently under mild conditions and convert lignin directly to specific chemicals containing alcohol, aldehyde, or carboxylic acid.50
With the innovation of lignocellulose chemistry, versatile oxidation systems for lignin degradation have been circulating in the market but not limited to photocatalysis. For instance, Bosque and his coworkers reported a moderate one-pot electrocatalytic/photocatalytic method for harnessing oxidative lignin depolymerization, which proposed an operationally facile procedure for selective β-O-4′ cleaving mechanism (Fig. 3d and 4a).51 As for an analogous free-radical path, photocatalytic lignin oxidation is mainly carried out with the assistance of oxygen free radicals, including the light-driven formation of hydroxyl (˙OH) and superoxide (˙O2−) radicals at the edge of the band gap.52 It is thus expected that the cleavage of the β-O-4′ bond of the lignin dimer and the native lignin might be conducted by rationally integrating photocatalytic fracture and electrocatalytic oxidation at ambient temperature. In this regard, heterogeneous semiconductors, such as Pd/ZnIn2S4,53 metal-free photocatalytic systems (e.g., DDQ/tBuONO/O2),54 and carbazolic porous organic frameworks (Cz-POFs),55 have been explored for the selective photocatalytic oxidation of lignin. Luo et al. reported a photocatalytic oxidation–hydrogenolysis tandem strategy for breaking C–O bonds of β-O-4′ alcohol (Fig. 4b).53 The α-C–OH of β-O-4′ alcohols was first oxidized to α-CO by the catalyst Pd/ZnIn2S4 with 455 nm light, and then the C–O bonds neighbor was broken into the α-CO bonds via the hydrogenolysis reaction with 365 nm light. Under direct blue light, lignin oxidation took place without traditional heating, employing δ-MnO2 as a photocatalyst, which can be designed into diverse structural configurations for tuning their photocatalytic properties.56 To be specific, the photocatalytic activity could be appropriately improved by increasing the pore size and surface area of MnO2. Li et al. presented the photocatalytic oxidation of Cα–OH in lignin model compounds by DSPEC (dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells) combined with hydrogen atom transfer (HAT).57 This photoelectrochemical heterogeneous catalytic process furnished a unique basis for the selective cleavage of the C–O bond with the scope of actual lignin valorization (Fig. 4c). In a separate story, the organosolv lignin was efficiently depolymerized by Pd/CeO2 in methanol with oxygen to form vanillin (5.2 wt%), guaiacol (0.9 wt%), and p-hydroxybenzaldehyde (2.4 wt%) (Fig. 4d).58 The α-OH groups in the chain can be further oxidized with 1.5 wt% Pd/CeO2 catalyst, thereby triggering the cracking of the β-O-4′ bond to form phenol and benzaldehyde. Despite the advent of catalyst engineering endowing the ability to create a mild photocatalytic lignin oxidation, the proper selectivity of the semiconductor and its compatibility with the existing electrochemical or thermochemical technologies are highly desired to deal with real lignin heterogeneity.
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrocatalytic oxidation mechanism of the lignin system under anaerobic and aerobic conditions.51 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The mechanism of lignin system in the catalyst Pd/ZnIn2S4 with 455 nm light.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The photoelectrochemical heterogeneous catalytic process with a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode.57 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) The organosolv lignin with the Pd/CeO2 catalyst.58 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4. Redox neutral cleavage of lignin
The redox-neutral pathway is regarded as a state-of-the-art tactic to convert lignin through photocatalytic depolymerization. Photogenerated electrons and holes are conducive for the one-pot depolymerization reaction without stoichiometric additives.59 In the process of the lignin-first strategy, the photogenerated holes are shifted from the semiconductor core to the reaction substrate, thereby promoting the cleavage of Cα–H bonds in the β-O-4′ structure to engender Cα free radicals. Afterward, photogenerated electrons are devolved from the semiconductor to Cα free radicals, which leads to the electron rearrangement of the free radicals to crack C–O bonds and generate valuable aromatics.60
A bottleneck in the adoption of lignin as a feedstock for fine aromatic chemicals lies in the selective cleavage of copious β-O-4′ and/or C–C linkages. Lately, a photocatalytic redox-neutral method to cleave the C–O bond in the β-O-4′ linkage of model and natural lignin substrates has been proposed to yield substituted aryl ketone and phenol products (Fig. 5a and b). In-depth mechanistic analyses verified the generation of a thiyl radical that was derived from a cystine-derived H-atom transfer catalyst, thereby triggering a spin-center shift (SCS) for the cleavage of the lignin Cβ–O bond. The SCS reactivity is reminiscent of the Cβ–O bond cleavage chemistry that occurs in the active site of ribonucleotide reductase.61 This photocyclic approach is highly desirable for large-scale lignin valorization without any stoichiometric reagents. Through the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process, photocatalytic lignin depolymerization breaking C–C bonds was proposed to gain benzaldehyde and phenyl ether with yields as high as 97% and 96%, respectively.62 This PCET method was 100% atom economic without destroying the Cβ–Cγ bond and the C–O bonds, producing the only C–C bond fracture-inspired products. As demonstrated in Fig. 5c, the PCET reaction mechanism of the Cα–Cβ bond fracture in the β-O-4′ lignin model was proposed in the following directions: (1) the IrIII-containing compounds became *IrIII species under blue light excitation; (2) after forming hydrogen bonds between lignin model molecules in the presence of a base, electrons were transferred from the lignin model phenyl to *IrIII for forming an IrII-containing compounds, synchronously deriving a radical cation intermediate that provided an alkoxy radical intermediate through the PCET process; (3) taking advantage of the neighboring Cα–Cβ bond, the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond to obtain benzaldehyde and carbon free-radical in the β-scission can be weakened by the alkoxy radical, in which the carbon free-radical forms anisole via the hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) of thiophenol along with PhS˙ radical production; (4) IrII was oxidized by the PhS˙ radical to reproduce PhSH and IrIII for the next catalytic cycle. This strategy not only presented high selectivity but also held approximately 100% conversion rate of carbon atoms. Liu et al. reported that the depolymerization of lignin through the rhodium-catalyzed hydrogen self-transfer process with rhodium-terpyridine to generate ketones and phenols, which ultimately proposed a possible path of the redox-neutral depolymerization, as can be seen from Fig. 5d.63 The ketone intermediate 2 was obtained from the initial oxidative cracking of lignin model 1, and then the reductive splitting resulted in the formation of aromatics 3 and 4, providing a typical case of the lignin-first process under mild conditions. Zhao et al. explored a mechanistic diagram of redox-neutral C–C bond cleavage in lignin model compounds catalyzed by [Ru(CL)(H)(PPH3)3]/triphosphate.64 According to the proposed mechanism of Fig. 5e, the reaction can be divided into four stages—the coordination between the substrate and the ruthenium center, dehydrogenation, reverse-aldol-type C–C bond breaking, and catalyst regeneration, simultaneously accompanied by the release of products and precursors. Ahsan Usman et al. launched the selective breaking of lignin C–O bonds by a palladium loaded metal–organic framework (MOF) in a redox-neutral approach.65 The underlying mechanism of the redox-neutral cleavage of C–O bonds is illustrated in Fig. 5f. The partial dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol was carried out, followed by the hydrogenolysis of ether bonds; therefore, no external hydrogen source was needed for this initiative reaction. Using dioxane or ethanol as the solvents, the reactant of lignin models mainly comprised of aryl ketone. In the case of aqueous ethanol solvent, the products of phenyl and ketone can be generated to draw the conclusion that the reaction selectivity was affected by the specific type of a solvent.
 Fig. 5  (a) Proposed photocatalytic spin-center shift (SCS) mechanism. (b) Cyclic voltammogram of persulfide that is consistent with the ECE electrochemical redox mechanism of persulfide cleavage.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Plausible mechanism for selective Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by Ir-1 via the PCET process.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Possible pathway of the redox-neutral depolymerization by the rhodium-terpyridine catalyst.63 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Mechanistic diagram of the redox-neutral cleavage of the C–C bond in lignin model compounds catalyzed by [Ru(CL)(H)(PPH3)3]/triphosphate.64 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) The possible mechanism of the redox-neutral cleavage of the C–O bond in a palladium-loaded metal–organic framework (MOF).65 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
3. Photocatalysis systems for light-driven lignin depolymerization
3.1. Homogeneous photocatalyst
Photocatalysts, also classified into homogeneous and heterogeneous systems, generally gather photons instead of thermal energy to drive chemical reactions, which are essential to depolymerize lignin. Homogeneous photocatalysts are commonly made up of metal ions and organic ligands to generate metal–organic complexes, such as Ru, Rh, and Ir organic phosphine complexes. Upon the absorption of visible photons, metal–organic complexes transfer from a ground state to a photoexcited state, acquiring oxidation and/or reduction properties. Homogeneous photocatalysts have relatively uniform intrinsic features that can be purposefully tailored by selecting metal ions and organic ligands. Hence, homogeneous catalysts usually have a higher selectivity of chemical reaction as compared with heterogeneous catalysts. Homogeneous photocatalysts have been widely applied to carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction and water (H2O) decomposition to generate fuels. To date, only a few examples of lignin conversion using homogeneous photocatalysts have been reported owing to the primary bottleneck in efficiently detaching aromatics from catalytic systems. When solving the product-catalyst separation issue, we can hope that the homogeneous catalyst is a rising star in the field of photocatalytic lignin-first strategy with remarkable selectivity. A highly promising research field is foreseen to be opened with the original immobilization of homogeneous catalysts onto solid/metal supports; on the other hand, the reasonable design and isolation of colloidal photocatalysts via reversible aggregation-colloidization strategies (e.g., hydrophilic or lipophilic organic ligands) can also solve the above problems to some extent.
Using vanadium catalyst under visible light irradiation in homogeneous solvent, the β-1′ (i.e., Cα–Cβ) and β-O-4′ (i.e., C–O) linkages of lignin models can be selectively fractured to generate the final aromatic monomers (e.g., benzaldehyde and syringaldehyde) with an overall conversion of >91%.66 The ROS of hydrogen peroxide has been conducted in a clean homogeneous photocatalytic system under visible light irradiation, which can effectively decompose highly complex lignin structure. The integral interaction of the hydroxyl (˙OH) and superoxide (O2˙−) radicals produced by hydrogen peroxide with phenols was indicative of complete lignin photodegradation.67 At room temperature, the uniquely cooperative interplay of photoredox and Pd source has allowed for the efficient oxidation of lignin model substrates and constituted a dual catalytic protocol toward retrieving low-molecular weight aromatics.68 As can be seen from Fig. 6a, Achilleos et al. introduced the solar-driven photoreforming of lignocellulose into sustainable H2 fuel and organics with homogeneous carbon dots (CDs)/NiP systems, in which the non-toxic, biocompatible CDs as the light absorbers can be prepared from the scalable calcination of cellulose or commercial precursors (e.g., citric and aspartic acid).69 The excellent solubility of CDs allowed for homogeneous interactions with the insoluble biomass substrates and photophysical properties with a high fraction of long-lived charge carriers, thereby leading to the availability of a redox quenching pathway. To be specific, it is possible that the trapped h+ was accumulated in the CDs with biomass as the electron donor due to the oxidative quenching pathway by NiP. Meanwhile, the emergence of the NiP− signal provided an evidence of photoinduced NiP reduction in the presence of CDs (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  (a) The synthesis of carbon dots (CDs) and their applications for the coproduction of H2 and oxidized biomass organics.69 (b) The photocatalytic mechanism of CDs and timescales of relaxation.69 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation.70 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of photoelectric transfer effect for TiO2 and the proposed mechanism for the conversion of the lignin model.71 
3.2. Heterogeneous photocatalysts
Heterogeneous photocatalytic systems that are capable of sensitizing the conversion of organic and polymer matrices have been widely studied, which also occupy a crucial role in lignocellulose valorization in terms of light harvesting, apparent quantum yield, charge generation and transition, and surface interaction.72 In the context of absorbed photons with a higher energy as compared with the band gap energy of the semiconductor, a well-accepted mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation is plotted in Fig. 6c. Taking advantage of photoinduced charge carrier, the separated electrons on the CB provoke the reduction reaction, and leftover holes on the VB initiate the oxidation reaction. In general, the specific band gap and/or morphological structure of the photocatalyst, usually composed of a dominant matrix and co-components, could be regulated to satisfy the synchronous goal of reaction activity and selectivity. It is still a challenging task to realize the vision of well-designed photocatalysts for precise and productive reforming of complex lignin. In short, the objective of designing an ideal heterogeneous photocatalyst is to satisfy the following demands: (1) an efficient light absorption capable of a visible interval to overcome dark lignin; (2) the location of band-edge matching the redox level to drive the appointed half reactions of oxidation and reduction; (3) specifying the band gap to make a compromise that allows compatible band-edge position with the redox potential and absorbs a large portion of light in the solar spectrum (high vs. narrow); (4) efficient separation and migration of photogenerated carriers; (5) the excellent physicochemical durability to avoid photocorrosion and side-reactions.

3.2.1. Metal oxides. 
Low-cost metal oxides have drawn extensive research interest in photocatalysis because of their long-term durability and facile preparation. However, the wide optical band gap of metal oxides constrains their light absorption, charge carrier mobility, and efficient electron–hole pair isolation, which is regarded as the main concern impeding their photocatalytic performance in the future. For the moment, the commonly used metal oxides are zinc oxide (ZnO) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) capable of splitting water molecules to produce hydroxyl radicals within the perspective of photocatalytic technology. Photocatalytic lignin degradation with representative TiO2 is mainly involved with the initiation of free radical generation. When the light irradiation energy is identical to or higher than the TiO2 energy band, the electron is subsequently excited and migrated to concede a hole, thereby producing superoxide and hydroxyl radicals for purposefully oxidizing the lignin interlinkages.16 A study by Chen and his colleagues reported the photocatalytic cleavage of β-O-4′ bonds in lignin over Ni-decorated TiO2.71Fig. 6d depicts the underlying pathways for the two-step lignin conversion tactic. The hydroxyl superseded on the α-C was firstly transferred to the ketone via the PCC (pyridinium chlorochromate) oxidation process (path 1). Afterward, the produced β-O-4′ ketone confronted a C–O bond fracture (path 2–4) to transport the ketones and phenols, followed by hydrogen atom abstraction (path 5) and protonation (path 6). As a contrast, the lignin degradation speed of TiO2 is usually lower than that of ZnO in pseudo-first order photocatalytic kinetics,73 which is mainly ascribed to the wide band gap of traditional TiO2 and its quick recombination of electron–hole pairs.74 In spite of the finite depolymerization of lignin by ZnO alone, its catalytic activity can be enhanced by tuning the electronic and morphological architecture to promote the electron transfer and alleviate the coalescence of photogenerated carriers. In this vein, metal-doped semiconductors can effectively enlarge their surface area and band gap to expedite the transformation of macromolecules into versatile oligomers, hence, also looking forward to photocatalytically depolymerized lignin.75 Ag–AgCl/ZnO nanorods was fabricated as a photocatalyst to efficiently depolymerize lignin under visible light irradiation, which still exhibited a considerable stability after seven cycles.76


3.2.2. Metal sulfides. 
In contrast to metal oxides, metal sulfides generally have a narrow band gap width coupled with strong quantum size effect, rendering them an ideal choice for the photocatalytic reaction. Taking advantage of the full sunlight spectrum, the chemical composition, crystal, and morphological structures also can be tuned to possess the excellent photon response.77 The metal sulfides that can perform the one-pot cleavage of β-O-4′ linkage mainly include ZnIn2S4,44 oxidized Ni/CdS nanosheet,78 zinc blende structured CdS NPs,79 Ag+-exchanged wurtzite CdS,80 and Zn4In2S7.81
A mild hydrothermal method was employed to synthesize a series of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) semiconductors that inspires the conversion of PP-ol (Fig. 7a).81 The energy-band structures of ZnmIn2Sm+3 could be adjusted by manipulating the atomic ratio of Zn to In. By increasing the value of m from 1 to 6 in ZnmIn2Sm+3, the negative position of the CB minimum migrated from −0.47 to −0.61 V, and the positive position of the VB maximum was shifted from 1.65 to 1.99 V. Consequently, the band gap energy gradually increased from 2.12 to 2.60 eV (Fig. 7b). Among the series of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) semiconductors, the Zn4In2S7 photocatalyst was affirmed to efficiently cleave the β-O-4′ bond in PP-ol, probably because of its balanced redox capability and visible-light harvesting ability, affording the yield of acetophenone and phenol over 80% within 4 h.81 Under visible-light irradiation, the cracking of organosolv birch lignin could also be driven by the Zn4In2S7 photocatalyst. After reaction for 24 h, the color of the dissolved organosolv birch lignin changed from dark brown to light yellow, implying the reduced molecular weights of lignin substrates (Fig. 7c). The cleavage of β-O-4′ bonds in the organosolv birch lignin was determined to be approximately 85% of the molar ratio, thereby offering the monomeric products of p-hydroxyl acetophenone derivatives with an yield of 18.4%.81 The relative value of S to G units in the resulting monomers was calculated to be 3.2, which is comparable to that of the original lignin (2.8). Compared with the widespread semiconductor materials such as ZnO and TiO2, task-specific CdS with a tunable structure has a relatively narrower visible light response band gap of approximately 2.4 eV,78 which could be tentatively introduced in the photocatalytic scope from hydrogen evolution, carbon dioxide reduction to pollutant remediation because of its synthetic strategies, morphology, and photoelectrical properties.82 As shown in Fig. 7d and e, the CdS quantum dots (QDs) with a size of 4.4 nm offered the highest yields of monomers from PP-ol and the conversion efficiency of lignin-to-aromatics over CdS QD was significantly higher than that over CdS NPs.79 Furthermore, the strong dependence of photocatalytic lignin-to-aromatics on ligands attached to CdS QD was also affirmed,83 indicating that the aromatics yields of native lignin with CdS QDs can be easily tuned via the varied attachment of 3-mercaptopropionic acid ligands (Fig. 7f). The charge carriers from the inorganic CdS QD core can be transferred to the β-O-4′ bond in the native lignin with the aid of organic ligand-driven electron-tunneling mechanism, through which the improvement of the catalytic activity for aromatic monomers was enabled by lowering the alkyl chains length of hydrophilic ligands (Fig. 7f).83
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) samples and the TEM and HRTEM images of Zn4In2S7. (b) Energy-band positions of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) and their photocatalytic activities for the conversion of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (PP-ol). (c) Photocatalytic depolymerization of organosolv birch lignin over Zn4In2S7 under visible-light irradiation.81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Energy-band diagram of CdS with different sizes and their photocatalytic performances in PP-ol conversion. (e) Yields of aromatic monomers obtained with CdS QDs and CdS NPs in the photocatalytic conversion of native lignin in birch wood meal.79 Inset images: TEM of CdS QDs and photos for the mixtures of birch wood meal with CdS QDs and CdS NPs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publication Group. (f) Effect of the alkyl chain length of the mercaptoalkanoic acid ligands on CdS QDs (CdS-Cx QDs) on photocatalytic conversion of native lignin. Inset images: Schematic illustrations of CdS-Cx QDs and photos for mixtures of birch wood meal with CdS-Cx QDs.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Yoo et al. also investigated photocatalytic lignin depolymerization with the metal sulfides, showing that the catalytic activity of CdS can be enhanced to nearly 100% conversion ratio for generating only cleaved aromatics via a facile Ag2+ exchange modification (Fig. 8a and b).80 It was witnessed that an appropriate Ag+ exchange afforded facile photoexcited electron transfer to the oxidized intermediate for manipulating the product selectivity (Fig. 8c). As depicted in Fig. 8d, the ultrathin metal/CdS hybrid catalyst was prepared by a simple chemical reduction method.78 Among these metal/CdS (e.g., Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) photocatalysts, Ni/CdS delivered the best activity with 93.4% conversion of benzylic alcohol to generate benzaldehyde and H2 (Fig. 8e). The possible mechanistic for dual pathways of the photocatalytic oxidation of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol is drawn in Fig. 8f. Under visible light irradiation, the Cα–OH groups of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol 5 were oxidized to form the corresponding ketone (2-phenoxy-1-phenyl-ethanone 6) by the excited holes that are generated in the photocatalyst of Ni/CdS. Owing to the high solubility in pure CH3CN, ketone 6 dissociated from the Ni/CdS surface to function as the sole product. H2 can be synchronously generated by the extracted proton from 5 with the assistance of Ni/CdS. Unfortunately, the quick charge recombination took place for photoirradiated Ni/CdS in CH3CN, leading to the limited conversion rate of 5 in CH3CN. With the addition of water, the decreased solubility of 6 allowed for a potential opportunity to linger on the surface of Ni/CdS. The excited electrons of Ni/CdS were conducive for anchoring adsorbed hydrogen species on the photocatalyst surface and then migrating to the Cβ–O bonds, which preferred to cleave the ether bond for producing acetophenone 7 and phenol 8 (route I). In a separate journey (path II), the chemical oxidation with hydrogen peroxide might dissociate the β-O-4′ and Cα–Cβ bond simultaneously, thereby resulting in the formation of phenol 8 and benzoic acid 9. It is a matter that a competing relationship between the resulting aromatic monomers should be balanced to match the conversion yield and selectivity. Making use of the exceptional catalytic capacity and task-specific selectivity, rationally designed metal sulfides will constantly stride the threshold for photocatalytic lignocellulose within the scope of green chemistry.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of the Ag+-exchanged CdS. (b) Conversion and product yields with Ag2S(2%)@CdS by varying the reaction time. (c) Schematic representation comparing the simultaneous oxidative dehydrogenation and reductive cleavage of the β-O-4 bond in the Cα radical intermediate in Ag2S@CdS (right) with the oxidative dehydrogenation and pinned Fermi level of CdS (left).80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM and elemental mapping images of Ni/CdS. (e) Activity comparison of the metal/CdS photocatalysts for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol, showing the conversion of benzyl alcohol together with the yields of benzaldehyde yield and H2 using different photocatalysts. (f) Proposed mechanistic steps for the two pathways of the photocatalytic oxidation of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (5) on Ni/CdS to produce different products with high selectivity. 2-Phenoxy-1-phenylethanone (6) is yielded as the sole product in CH3CN, which will be fully transformed to acetophenone (7) and phenol (8) in CH3CN/0.1 M KOH (v/v = 2/8) (pathway I) or benzoic acid (9) and phenol through chemical oxidation (pathway II).78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The architecture of carbon quantum dots (CQDs)-decorated TiO2 nanohybrid and its potential mechanism for degrading commercial alkali lignin.84 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.2.3 Carbon-based materials. 
Note that the advent of metal-based semiconductor photocatalysts brings the issues of deterioration of photocatalytic efficiency and generation of hazardous metal pollutants, which inspires the development of efficient metal-free photochemical systems. For instance, the metal-free photochemical approach for the degradation of lignin-related aryl ethers induced by ionic liquids was proposed by Kang et al., which maintained a huge potential of lignin degradation by promoting the formation of free radicals.85 As the dazzling star of carbon-based materials, nanosized carbon generally includes zero-dimensional (0D) fullerenes and carbon quantum dots (CQDs), 1D carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and nanofibers, 2D graphene and carbon nanosheets, and 3D super-lattice networks with the random assembly of 0D–2D nanocarbons.86 Benefiting from the excellent electrical conductivity/absorbent, the adjustable optics and architecture, carbon-oriented catalysts have been widely adopted in the spheres of thermal, electrical, and photon reactions during the last decade.87
It is well known that the carbon source can act as an additive to ameliorate the limited light absorption and to lower the recombination of photogenerated electron/hole pairs of typical semiconductors (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO). Srisasiwimon and his coworkers creatively proposed a naturally lignin-derived carbon not only to remodel TiO2 for getting improved photocatalysis activity but also to degrade the lignin substrate for the production of value-added aromatics with a photocatalytic conversion efficiency of 40.28%.88 The exploitation of low-cost and biocompatible CQDs as photocatalytic materials for pollutant degradation, solar energy devices, and photo/electrochemical water splitting have recently attracted ever-increasing attention due to their high aqueous solubility and affinity, chemical/photo and colloidal stability, and tunable optical properties.89 In response, a series of nitrogen-doped photonic crystal quantum dots with tunable redox potentials have been prepared to function as photocatalysts.90 Over CQDs-decorated TiO2 nanocomposite with a synergy between the wide band gap (2.88 eV) and existent ROS (e.g., superoxide and hydroxyl radicals) (Fig. 8g), the direct decomposition rate of photocatalytic alkali lignin valorization as high as 99% was determined by Sharma and coworkers, which can also be recycled due to its excellent photostability.84

4. Photocatalytic reactor and medium for lignin conversion
It is important to emphasize that catalysis engineering is highly dependent on the reaction conditions, mainly including reactor design, chosen catalyst, temperature, pressure, and stoichiometric ratio. Note that the photocatalytic reaction is mainly carried out in a moderate system (e.g., atmospheric pressure and room temperature), which prefers to monitor the photoreactor, hybrid catalysts, solvents, and gaseous fluid that can affect the interplay between the photocatalyst and the substrate, the generation of reactive species, the formation of intermediates, and long-term photocatalytic lifespan in lignin conversion. The separation and commercialization of complex lignin-derived fragments require the scaling-up fluidic photomicroreactor technology that could be achieved by increasing the number of reactors or an expansion of the channel size.
4.1. Selective photocatalysis of lignin in microfluidic reactors
Batch reactors are widely used in photocatalytic processes because of their simple structure and convenient operations; however, the high recombination rate of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the low surface area render poor photonic efficiency in the batch reactor. In this context, the microreactor technique has a high control over photochemical conversion because of continuous flow operation, enhanced heat and mass transfer rate, large specific surface area, and reduced safety risk. The miniaturized characteristic of the photoreactor ensures adequate and uniform irradiation by trapping medium light, thereby minimizing the irradiation time to guarantee a high conversion rate and low energy consumption of selective photocatalytic conversion. Owing to the relatively higher photon efficiency of the microreactor (ξ = 0.026) than that of the batch reactor,74,91 microfluidic photoreactors are of utmost importance in the field of photocatalysis (Fig. 9a–c).
 Fig. 9  (a–c) Diagrammatic sketch about different types of microfluidic photoreactors.91 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic types of hybrid photocatalysts, including (d) Au/TiO2 nanoparticles,94 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) TiO2 sol into the inner wall of capillaries containing molded ZnO nanorod arrays,95 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (f) graphene-based photocatalyst composites,96 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) TiO2-decorated biochar.97 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Through the microfluidic reactor, well-designed catalysts, solvents, and atmospheres can be selected to overcome lignin depolymerization. In recent years, lignin valorization has been studied in photocatalytic microreactor systems.74 An assignable influence of the reactor configuration on the photocatalytic reaction was verified by the production of lignin-related vanillin from ferulic acid, in which the approximately double yield of vanillin was achieved by coupling photocatalysis with pervaporation.92 The membrane separation with a high selectivity enabled the sequential recovery of vanillin, leading to the limited oxidative degradation of vanillin with an improved yield.92 Microwave-assisted photocatalytic reactor was developed to treat lignin wastewater by Vedichi and his colleagues, in which the microwave was conducive to enhance lignin degradation within a photoreactor.93 Importantly, a thorough mechanistic simulation of the photocatalytic reaction, including thermodynamics, kinetics, and the precise reaction pathway, is indispensable for designing a suitable photoreactor to amplify from the lab-scale to industrial application.
4.2. Hybrid catalysts and reaction medium
The rational design of hybrid catalysts with unique dimension, configuration, and electronic structure is of great concern to ensure lignin conversion in the photoreactor. The separation productivity of the photogenerated electron and hole plays a decisive role in the photocatalytic lignin performance. Generally, the development of hybrid photocatalysts that involved the fusion of individual characters within various materials (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, graphene, and CQDs) has shown burgeoning prospects to deliver high reactivity along with unique selectivity. In addition, a single photocatalyst has a theoretical limit for photocatalytic depolymerization, and the surface area of the catalyst can be enhanced by decorating certain components to further improve the catalytic activity. For example, the cordierite honeycombs loaded with 1 wt% Au/TiO2 nanoparticles have been successfully prepared, which can be adopted in an optical fiber photoreactor illuminated with UV LEDs to produce hydrogen from aqueous biomass-derived alcohols (e.g., ethanol and glycerol) (Fig. 9d).94 By pumping a TiO2 sol into the inner wall of capillaries containing molded ZnO nanorod arrays (Fig. 9e), a highly durable capillary-based photocatalytic microreactor was facilely fabricated for rapid and efficient continuous-flow photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue.95 As shown in Fig. 9f, graphene-based composites have been precisely constructed for selective photocatalytic conversion involving oxidation and reduction reactions, thereby generating high-value compounds such as carbonyls and amines.96 Due to its large surface area, biochar, which is a byproduct of pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass (e.g., lignin, wood, and bamboo), can act as a catalyst carrier to load semiconductors (e.g., TiO2) (Fig. 9g).97 More importantly, conductive biochar also has the character of electron reservoir that is conducive for migrating the electrons from the photogenerated carriers on TiO2, thus expediting the separation efficiency of the charge in TiO2. The synergistic sensitization of TiO2 and electron-conductive carbon phase activates O2 to O− ions.97 Sharma et al. disclosed that the ultrahigh photocatalytic activity of lignin degradation by CQDs-modified TiO2 nanocomposites can be attributed to the efficient separation and rapid transfer of photogenerated charge carriers with the aid of CQDs.84 Wu et al. reported a ligand-tailored colloidal CdS QDs not only for precise cutting the β-O-4′ bond in the native lignin but also to make complete use of lignocellulose within the lignin-first concept.79
Considering the complexity of native lignin species, it is particularly important to select ideal solvents and gaseous fluid for the given photoreforming. Solvents for the photocatalytic transformation of lignin should satisfy the following demands: (1) good solubility to lignin and its derivatives compatible with reactor materials; (2) long-term stability under photocatalytic conditions; (3) low-cost solvent with facile recyclability. Generally speaking, the hydroxyl radicals are regularly formed in water to possess a low selectivity for photocatalytic organic synthesis. In this vein, organic solvents are often applied instead of water to avoid the formation of hydroxyl radicals with the goal of improving the photocatalytic selectivity and dissolution performance for lignin or its models.98 The partial investigations on the photocatalysis of lignin are carried out using lignosulfonate as the feedstock, which can be dissolved in the alkaline solution or black liquor of the pulping industry.99 The optimization of photocatalytic processing that focused on the production of lignin-based thermoplastics can be realized under alkaline conditions with a specific catalyst concentration and treatment time, in which the solubility of lignin in organic solvents was manipulated via the molecular weights and aliphatic hydroxyls of lignin.100
The conversion rate and product selectivity of lignin in photocatalytic processing are also affected by the gaseous atmosphere, such as CO2, N2, and O3. Lignin can be depolymerized effectively by the photooxidation in the presence of oxygen. It is found that the presence of oxygen and acidic or alkaline media is conducive to the lignin removal. In the presence of oxygen, the oxygen electrons as traps prevent the recombination of photogenerated electron holes and expedite the generation of hydroxyl radicals, thus affecting the selectivity of reaction.101 A number of gases, such as carbon dioxide (CO2), might promote the desorption of the product by reducing the pH of the reaction solution, leading to the improvement of the photocatalytic selectivity.102 In addition, light irradiation under inert N2 atmosphere is prone to condense lignin phenylpropane segments, thereby increasing their molecular weight effectively.
5. Photocatalytic depolymerization of interlinked lignin bonds
The sustainable dissociation of lignin interlinkages (e.g., C–O and C–C bonds) is a predominantly preparatory strategy to upgrade lignin into light arenes and biofuels.35,103,104 The selective cleavage of targeted bonds in lignin yet preserving the rest of the functional groups can be ensured by the photogenerated reactive species as well as the mild reaction conditions.35 Photocatalytic lignin conversion with TiO2 semiconductor was firstly studied by Kobayakawa et al. It is unfortunate that the Kraft lignin was completely depolymerized into carbon dioxide and water.105 Of late, photocatalysis has become a prevalent field to depolymerize lignin by precisely breaking the ether bond or carbon–carbon bonds to gain aromatic monomers. Due to the irregular and complex structure of crude lignin macromolecules, in most studies, relatively simple model compounds are usually selected for photocatalysis and make a thorough inquiry into the reaction mechanism. In the meantime, the photocatalytic processes of native and industrial lignin are conducted to harvest aromatic chemicals and hydrogen fuels simultaneously. In this section, the methods, strategies, and mechanisms of photocatalytic C–O (e.g., β-O-4′ and α-O-4′) and C–C (e.g., β-1′ and β-5′) bonds fracture are summarized below.
5.1 Lignin depolymerization by photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage
The selective cutting of the C–O bond that accounts for 45%–65% of the lignin-connecting structure is essential for lignin-to-aromatics conversion. In this vein, we initially attempt to provide an overview of the state-of-the-art advances in the principal photocatalytic processes employed for the cleavage of the lignin Cβ-O-4′ bond and Cα-O-4′ bonds using various photocatalytic systems. Owing to a relatively lower dissociation energy of the Cβ–O bond, the cleavage of the Cβ–O bond in the β-O-4′ substructure is typically easier than that of the Cα–O bond, which produces phenols as the primary products. In the long run, the genres of selective C–O scission can be generally divided into two-step and one-step photoredox-neutral strategies. A formal two-step redox-neutral tactic adopts two different catalysts that operate under oxidation and reduction conditions independently, in which the sacrificial agents are needed to “neutralize” the leftover electrons or holes. It is thus highly attractive to explore an ideal one-step redox-neutral strategy (e.g., β-O-4′ ketone and Cα radical intermediates) that employs single catalyst handling of photogenerated electrons and holes to synchronously replace reductants and oxidants. Inventing a photocatalyst with well-designed interfacial physicochemical and intrinsic electronic features (e.g., amphiphilicity, exterior acidity/basicity, surface defects, crystal form/facet, band gap, VB/CB band-edge position, and charge mobility/recombination rate) is the crucial aspect to prompt the concept of selective lignin C–O bond cleavage. The representative examples of photocatalytic lignin-first depolymerization toward C–O bond cleavage are also summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Typical examples for photocatalytic cleavage of lignin C–O bonds




Entry
Catalysts
Lignin substrate
C–O bonds
Conditions
Products
Key mechanism
Ref.




1
Perylene diimide (PDI)



β-O-4′
Model molecule (0.50 mmol), MeCN (5.0 mL), xenon lamp (>420 nm), 25 °C, N2, 10 h



Single-electron transfer (SET) from the photoexcited strongly reducing PDI˙− anion to the ketone groups of the β-O-4′ linkage in the lignin
20202


2
[Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6



β-O-4′
0.50 mmol compound, 1.5 mmol N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA), 1.5 mmol HCOOH, and 1.0 mol% catalyst, 5.0 mL MeCN, xenon lamp (>420 nm), 25 °C



Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs catalyst adsorbs visible light induced the metal-to-ligand charge transfer to generate the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]3+* excited state
20188


3
Ag3PO4



β-O-4′
Light irradiation from a 300 W xenon lamp. Sodium lignin sulfonate (50 mg L−1, 100 mL) and Ag3PO4/SnO2/porcine bone catalyst (50 mg)



An electron–hole pair, a superoxide radical (˙O2−), hydroxyl radicals (˙OH)
201811


4
MnO2



β-O-4′
MnO2 (10 mmol) 3 h UV (λ = 254 nm), O2



Active oxygen species for alcohol oxidation could be either O2− or O22−
201956


5
Hydrogen peroxide



—
Guaiacylglycerol-β-guaiacyl ether 30 mg L−1, 50 mL; H2O2 = 0.01 mL; UV-and Vis-light irradiation; temperature ∼308 K



Both hydydroxyl (˙OH) and superoxide (O2˙−) radicals
202067


6
Ni/TiO2



β-O-4′
Catalyst (20 mg), DMF (2.5 mL); bT. = reaction temperature, t. = reaction time, con. = conversion, r.t. = room temperature



Benzylic alcohol to guaiacol and 4-methoxyacetophenone via a benzylic ketone intermediate
202071


7
TiO2/ZnO
Hydrolysis residue of rice straw
—
Lignin degradation of 83.4% is obtained with 2 g L−1 ZnO and 12 h of treatment time
Vanillin and 4-hydroxy benzaldehyde
Superoxide anions and hydroperoxyl radical generation may because of the presence of molecular oxygen in the system
202073


8
[PMim][NTf2] and the Brønsted acid [PrSO3HMim][OTf]



β-O-4′
500 mg of IL, [PrHSO3Mim] [OTf] 3% (weight, 0.028 mmol), H2O 1% (weight), atmospheric air, room temperature, 120 min, UV irradiation



Alkali lignin could also be degraded in the ILs system
201985


9
Copper and situ acidic EtOH/H2O/CO2



β-O-4′
Catalyst (10 mol%), K2S2O8 (5 equiv., 135.0 mg), diethyl ether (1 mL), 475 nm visible light, r.t., 10 h. solvent (3 mL), the total volume of solvent is 3 mL



Persulfate as initiator and oxidant, a five-membered cyclic transition state. In the second step, the reductive system
201882


10
Ag+-Exchanged CdS



β-O-4′
2-Phenoxy-1-phenylethanol as the substrate (10 mg), acetonitrile (1 mL), and catalyst (1 mg) were added into the glass tube reactor



Ag2S@CdS would render photogenerated electrons and holes to effectively participate in the cleavage of β-O-4′ bonds
202080


11
CdS quantum dots



β-O-4′
15 mg CdS QDs and 100 mg birch woodmeal (containing 19 mg native lignin) were added into a quartz reactor (10 mL) containing 5 mL solvent of CH3OH/H2O (1:1) (in the case of CdS–OA catalyst, the solvent was hexane to disperse CdS–OA)



In step 1, the photogenerated hole is transferred from the core of CdS QDs to form a Cα radical and a proton. In step 2, the photogenerated electron is transferred to the Cα radical
201983


13
Carbon quantum dots-decorated TiO2 nanocomposite



—
Lignin (10 mg L−1 lignin concentration, catalyst (TiO2/CQDs) dose 0.5 g L−1), λex = 315 nm



The superlative photocatalytic activity is attributed to the presence of CQDs in the nanocomposite that obstructed both the recombination and quick transfer of photogenerated charge carriers
202084


14
TiO2 nanoparticles coated on activated carbon
Synthetic lignin wastewater
—
The complete destruction of lignin was achieved under microwave with photocatalytic treatment at an initial concentration of 100 ppm within 60 min
Complete destruction of lignin
The enhanced ˙OH will lead to the opening up of the aromatic ring from the cleaved lignin compounds, although many organic acids as the final oxidation product are stable to ˙OH attack
202093


15
Equential palladium-catalyzed aerobic



β-O-4′
Pd(OAc)2 (0.02 mmol, 5 mol%) in DMSO (1.0 mL) at 65 °C for 18 h, then [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6 (0.12 μmol, 0.03 mol%), iPr2NEt (0.48 mmol, 1.2 equiv.) and HCO2H (0.04 mmol, 10 mol%) in MeCN (1.0 mL), room temperature, irradiation with blue LEDs, 32 h



A practical and operationally simple two-step degradation approach involving Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation and visible-light photoredox-catalyzed reductive fragmentation for the chemoselective cleavage of the β-O-4′ linkage
2019106


16
Cadmium sulfide quantum dots



β-O-4′
CdS QD–4.4 nm under visible light. Hydrogen donor in PP-one control reaction, CH3OH 0.5 mL. Scavenger concentrations: 2.0 mM NaIO3; 4.0 mM Na2S + 2.0 mM Na2SO3; 3.0 mM DMPO. Reaction time: 3 h



The β-O-4′ bond in lignin is cleaved by an electron–hole coupled photoredox mechanism based on a Cα radical intermediate, in which both the photogenerated electrons and holes participate in the reaction
201879


17
ZnmIn2Sm+3



β-O-4′
Catalyst (10 mg), 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (0.10 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (5.0 mL, 1:1 v/v), N2 atmosphere, 4 h, Xe lamp (l = 400–780 nm), 600 mW cm−2



A higher Zn/In ratio provided a higher redox capability but poorer visible-light absorption. The Cα–H bond to form the Cα radical intermediate, which could undergo subsequent reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond by accepting photogenerated electrons
201981


18
Zn0.95Bi0.05O nanomaterials
Extraction of lignin from the wood powder of Oryza sativa was carried out using a mixture of formic acid/acetic acid/water
—
100 ppm lignin (L1) solution in dioxane was prepared. 50 mL of L1 solution was subjected to stirring under sunlight in the presence of 0.1 g catalysts
Phenol, 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol and 1,2-dimethoxy benzene
—
2020114


19
ZnIn2S4



β-O-4′
0.1 mmol of substrate, 5 mg of ZnIn2S4, 1.0 mL of CH3CN, Ar atmosphere, 9.0 W LED (this LED reactor is different from the 9.6 W blue LED reactor in the configuration of LED array), 4 h



The adjacent Cβ–O bond is subsequently hydrogenolytically cleaved to two monomers by the “hydrogen pool”
201744


20
Ball milled lignin–TiO2
Asian lignin manufacturing
β-O-4′
Subjecting ball milled mixtures of lignin and TiO2 to ultraviolet (UV) radiation



Wet milling of lignin and TiO2 using polar solvents improves the contact between lignin and TiO2, thus facilitating lignin depolymerization to produce valuable phenolics and aromatic hydrocarbons
2016115


21
Phenothiazine (PTH)



β-O-4′
CH3CN:H2O = 1:1, 365 nm, HCOOH (4 eq.), ascorbic acid (2 eq.), phenothiazine (PTH)



The selective cleavage of aryl ether was realized by the intramolecular substitution on aryl rings, affording non-phenolic arylamine products
201959


22
Rh/Nb2O5



β-O-4′
0.05 g catalyst, 1 mmol 2-PPE, 20 mL n-decane, 260 °C, 0.1 MPa H2, 4 h



The high efficiency is mainly attributed to the cooperation between Rh and NbOx at the perimeter sites, in which Rh particles are responsible for the dissociation of H2 and NbOx for activating C–O bonds
2020116


23
Phenolics-assisted hydrogen transfer



β-O-4′
—



The decomposition of the β-O-4′ bond was facilitated by initiating the radical reaction-based and concerted reaction-based interactions
2020117


24
Pd@MOF



β-O-4′
Substrate (0.1 mmol), catalyst (2.8 mol% based on Pd), solvent (10 mL each). The reaction tube was purged with nitrogen and the reaction mixture was stirred under nitrogen atmosphere for 6 h



C–O bond cleavage occurred through a simultaneous dehydrogenation of side-chain alcoholic groups and intra-molecular hydrogen transfer reaction
202065


25
A Zn/S rich phase zinc indium sulfide



β-O-4′
10 mg of catalyst, 10 mg of lignin model compounds (or 100 mg kraft lignin), and 5 mL of solvents (CH3CN or CH3CN/H2O mixture) were added into the reactor under 420 nm UV (0.35 W cm−2 at the center)



Dehydrogenated radical intermediates are initially generated by the oxidation of photogenerated holes, and the protons generated from photocatalytic water splitting are superior in facilitating the subsequently hydrogenolysis process of Cβ–O bonds
2022109


26
HAT catalysis



β-O-4′
1 mol% Ir photocatalyst, 25 mol% disulfide catalyst, 50 mol% acetic acid, blue LEDs, dioxane



A thiyl radical derived from a cystine-derived H-atom transfer catalyst initiates a spin-center shift (SCS) that leads to C(β)–O bond cleavage
202161


27
Mesoporous TiO2 (MT400)
Sodium lignosulfonate
β-O-4′
Light wavelength of 350–780 nm on 300 W xenon lamp; 40 mg catalyst and 20 mL of SLS aqueous solution (2 g L−1)
Vanillin 2.1 mg gSLS−1
Both h+ and ˙O2− are the main reactive species, while ˙OH is adverse to this reaction
202139


28
Pd/TiO2 or Au (Ag)-ASN-NIII photocatalyst



α-O-4′
Halogen lamp (500 W, wavelength in the range of 400–750 nm)



Hot-electron transfer to the catalytically active Ni2+ complex sites and light-enhanced chemisorption of reactant species
2019113





5.1.1 Photocatalytic Cβ-O-4′ bond cleavage. 
The cleavage of the β-O-4′ bond can be mainly divided into two methods, including direct conversion or two-step strategy.7 In the direct conversion, the whole reaction would operate in a redox-neutral manner with a designed photocatalyst to accomplish the Cβ–O bond cleavage. As a contrast, a stepwise conversion usually consists of two separate pathways, which is illustrated in Fig. 10a. To be specific, for the evolution of the Cα-located hydroxyl (Cα–OH) into a carbonyl group (CαO) through photocatalytic oxidation in the first step, photogenerated electrons are directly or indirectly used to cleave the Cβ–O bond of the β-O-4′ bonds in the second step.82
 Fig. 10  (a) Two-step degradation strategy of β-O-4′ linkage in lignin. (b) Possible reaction mechanism for the first step in the system of cheap copper as the catalyst, persulfate as the initiator and oxidant. (c) The second step of b.82 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) One-pot photocatalytic breaking of β-O-4′ linkage via self-hydrogen transfer hydrogenolysis.37 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Cao et al.82 adopted low-cost copper as the catalyst and persulfate as the free radical initiator to oxidize lignin, which afforded the β-O-4′ ketones in the initial step. Zinc powder and in situ ethanol/H2O/CO2 acid as the deoxidizer promoted the cleavage of the C–O bond in the second step. As demonstrated in Fig. 10b, the first step possible reaction mechanism is disclosed as follows: (1) S2O82− can convert to SO4˙− under the irradiation of light; (2) SO4˙− triggers the oxidation of the lignin model compound to form the aryl radical cation and lose a benzyl proton, thereby producing the benzylic radical intermediate I; (3) the subsequent oxidation of I enables the alkyl carbocation intermediate II; meanwhile, Cu2+ is reduced to Cu+ and then oxidized to Cu2+ by SO4˙− for accomplishing the catalytic cycle. The second-step possible reaction path is displayed in Fig. 10c. For example, Magallanes et al.106 studied a two-step strategy for selective C–O bond fracture with an initial Pd-mediated aerobic oxidation in lignin model systems to gain the production of ketone and phenol, which would guide the future development of natural lignin industry-related reactions. In the one-pot strategy (Fig. 10d), in-depth mechanistic insights announced that the holes oxidized the alcoholic group (CαH–OH) to deliver ketone intermediates and protons, which were reduced by electrons to hydrogen subsequently on the surface of the catalyst.37,107 The interfacial adsorbed hydrogen could reductively dissociate the Cβ–O bond in the β-O-4′ ketone intermediate. This reaction mode, generally dubbed self-transfer hydrogenolysis, captures the hydrogen generated by the oxidative dehydrogenation of CαH–OH to further break the Cβ–O bond. It is interesting that the catalyst functions as a hydrogen pool to drive the self-transfer hydrogenolysis process.
A one-pot redox neutral route for the direct photocatalytic cracking of the Cβ–O bond avoids the two-step method, which is indicative of no separation or purification of ketone intermediates. The one-pot photocatalytic fracturing of the β-O-4′ linkage can be fulfilled through the initial oxidation of CαH–OH by holes to produce ketone intermediates, followed by the reductive cleavage of Cβ–O bond over ZnIn2S444 and Ni/CdS nanosheet.78 Zhao and colleagues successfully prepared an ultrafine core–shell structured TiO2–NiO n–p heterojunction via a facile one-pot hydrothermal method, which furnished a chance to greatly improve the productivity of solar-chemical energy conversion in a noble-metal-free system for hydrogen formation and biomass photoreforming.108 As proposed in Fig. 11a, the potential mechanism of the TiO2–NiO n–p heterojunction implied that the photocatalytic redox reaction was activated under simulated solar light irradiation. Wu et al. reported lignin valorization under visible light with CdS QDs,83 which mainly involved oxidative dehydrogenation and reductive bond cleavage. The schematic illustration of the ligand-mediated electron–hole coupled mechanism for the conversion of PP-ol is presented in Fig. 11b, in which the blue, orange, and red arrows denote hole-related, electron-based, and proton-transfer steps, respectively. Wu and colleagues also found that CdS QDs not only quantitatively catalyzed the fracture of β-O-4′ bonds in lignin models but also effectively converted native lignin into functionalized aromatic compounds under visible light.79 Moreover, the effective separation and recovery of the catalyst from reactants can be overcome via ligand-induced agglomeration. Also, the proposed electron–hole coupled (EHCO) mechanism for the cracking of a dimerization β-O-4′ model catalyzed by CdS photocatalyst is shown in Fig. 11c. In short, photogenerated electrons and holes are involved in lignin depolymerization via a Cα radical intermediate. The Cα–H bond was cleaved by photogenerated holes, becoming the Cα radical intermediate to decrease the BDE of the Cβ–O bond from 55 to 7.8 kcal mol−1. To this end, the reductive cleavage of the β-O-4′ bond was readily triggered. During the photocatalytic conversion of sodium lignosulfonate, the yield of vanillin over mesoporous TiO2 with regular pancake-like morphology was 2.1 mg g−1, in which the mesoporous structure allowed for the transport of photocarriers and h+/˙O2− triggered the transformation of lignosulfonate to vanillin.39
 Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic mechanism of TiO2–NiO n–p heterojunction under simulated light irradiation.108 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of ligand-mediated electron–hole coupled mechanism.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Mechanism about CdS quantum dots quantitatively catalyzing the fracture of β-O-4′ bonds in lignin models.79 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publication Group. (d) Mechanism about the conversion of lignin using Zn4In2S7 as a photocatalyst under visible light irradiation.81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Mechanism about combining ZIS and graphene oxide photocatalyst.110 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (f) Mechanism studies for the depolymerization of lignin in the β-O-4′ linkage.59 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Lin et al. discussed lignin conversion using Zn4In2S7 (ZIS) as a photocatalyst under visible light irradiation to gain functional aromatic hydrocarbons, in which the thiol groups played a key role in the photocatalytic system.81 During the degradation of the dioxasolv birch lignin, a high yield of aromatic monomers was approximately 18.4 wt% via two detached mechanisms for β-O-4′ bond cleavage (Fig. 11d). The minor two-step pathway A via the PP-one intermediate enabled a low BDE of β-O-4′ bond to get acetophenone (AP) and phenol (Phol). Through a dominant Cα radical intermediate, a one-step pathway B also generated AP and Phol with high yields. The photocatalytic selectivity of ZIS also can be controlled via the ratio of zinc to indium (Zn/In), indicating that a higher ratio of Zn/In was highly related to a better redox ability but a worse light absorption capacity. Using 3-mercaptopropionic acid as a structure tuning additive, CdxZn1−xS with tunable band gap energy was synthesized to understand the Cα radical intermediate pathway of cleaving the Cβ-O-4 bond in PP-ol under simulated sunlight, thereby making a reference of depolymerizing alkaline lignin into vanillin with 4.65 wt%.38 A Zn/S rich phase zinc indium sulfide photocatalyst was also proposed to improve the hydrogenolysis of Cβ–O linkages in lignin, in which water first functioned as the hydrogen donor to expedite the photocatalytic PP-ol conversion rate over 90% selectivity with aromatic monomers by dispelling the limitation of proton supply.109 Xu and partners also synthesized the ZIS-based hybrid photocatalysts via ordinary blending ZIS and graphene oxide (GO), which can be applied for depolymerizing organosolv lignin into ketones and phenols.110Fig. 11e shows the mechanism diagram for the cleavage of Cβ–O bond under simulated sunlight. First, the thiol groups on the ZIS-100 surface can be oxidized into thiol radicals by photogenerated holes. Secondly, the Cα–H bonds in PP-ol were activated by the thiol radicals and then formed the Cα radical intermediates; the BDE of the adjacent Cβ–O bond was also reduced from 55 to 7.5 kcal mol−1 at the same time. Finally, the photogenerated electrons at the CB quickly broke the Cβ–O bond by combining the proton hydrogen to form the products. On the other hand, photocatalytic dehydrogenation existed in Cα–H and Cα–OH to form PP-one, which is a minor process. Li et al. reported the depolymerization of the lignin β-O-4′ linkage to produce non-phenolic aromatics by installing an internal nucleophile.59 The mechanistic studies including electron spin resonance (ESR), fluorescence quenching experiments, and density functional theory (DFT) were investigated comprehensively (Fig. 11f). The reaction began with the reduction of the N–O bond by the excited phenothiazine (PTH); then, the generated iminyl radical attacked the aryl C–O bond, where the ortho-substituent boosted the spiro-cyclization, leading to the subsequent release of primary arylamine and α-hydroxy ketone after aryl C–O bond cleavage.


5.1.2 Photocatalytic Cα–O-4′ bond cleavage. 
Indeed, a few studies have focused on cleaving α-O-4′ bonds through photocatalysis under mild conditions, owing to a relatively unreactive aryl ether C–O bond in the α-O-4′ structure with a dissociation energy of 218 kJ mol−1.111 Hence, to avoid the undesired decomposition of aromatic rings and to achieve the sensitive cutting of the α-O-4′ linkages, the reaction should ideally be conducted by screening the highly active and selective photocatalysts. A organometallic homogeneous Ir-based photocatalyst was reported to cleave the aryl ether Cα–O bonds at room-temperature, which developed a lignin degradation paradigm consisting of a chemoselective benzylic oxidation with a recyclable oxidant ([4-AcNH-TEMPO]BF4) and a catalytic reductive C–O bond cleavage with a photocatalyst [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6.18 Imamura et al. presented that the Cα–O bond was broken by TiO2 (P25)-based photocatalysts in benzyl phenyl ether, which produced toluene and phenol with a total yield of 99% after 2 h UV irradiation.112 A novel tactic to apply the photocatalyst of immobilized Ni2+ complexes and plasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs) was invented for the cleavage of the Cα–O-4′ linkage by the hydrogenolysis of benzyl phenyl ether (Fig. 12a).113 Ni2+ complexes as catalytic reaction sites and Au or Ag NPs were anchored at the g-Al2O3 nanofibers to produce plasmonic antenna-promoted catalysts (Fig. 12b). The light irradiation on Au or Ag NPs strengthened the photocatalytic capacity of the Ni2+ complexes to reductively dissociate the C–O bonds. The mechanism studies indicated that the aryl ether molecules initially diffused within the skeleton of the photocatalyst and physically adsorbed onto the catalyst interface. Then, photogenerated hot electrons transferred to the Ni2+ sites (via the unoccupied anti-bonding π* orbitals of the aromatic ring of ether) and reduced the ions to Ni0 species. The reduced Ni0 species can catalyze the C–O bond cleavage, yielding the final aromatic hydrocarbons (i.e., phenol and toluene).113 The chemisorption of the reactant to the Ni2+ active sites can be substantially increased by the intense electromagnetic near-fields of the plasmonic metal NPs. The light-excited hot electrons transfer via a molecular bridge of the aromatic ring of the reactants (Fig. 12c). It is thus proved that the number of plasmonic hot spots can be significantly altered by changing the metal plasmonic loading on the alumina support.
 Fig. 12  (a) The photocatalytic cleavage of lignin α-O-4′ linkage with Pd/TiO2 or Au (Ag)-ASN-NIII photocatalyst to generate aromatic hydrocarbons. (b) Characterization (high-resolution TEM images) of 2.5Au-ASN-Ni2+ and 4.3Ag-ASN-Ni2+ photocatalysts. (c) Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage of benzyl phenyl ether with the photocatalyst.113 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Despite the budding endeavor of photocatalytic lignin conversion with aryl ether (e.g., β-O-4′ and α-O-4′), most of the current systems are still elusive at the lab scale and far from practical application for real lignin biomass. Because of the recalcitrance, heterogeneity, and complexity of lignocellulose, effective pretreatment is generally required to fractionate lignin and carbohydrates (i.e., cellulose and hemicellulose) in terms of unique components corresponding to distinct conversion regimes, which could markedly influence the selective lignin photoreforming of valuable chemicals and fuels. More importantly, the structure of isolated lignin varies dramatically with different lignocellulose species and pretreatment techniques that also bring great challenges for photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining. Therefore, coupling photocatalysis with other physical, chemical, and biological strategies would offer burgeoning opportunities to facilitate lignin readily dissociable via photobiorefining, particularly for covering more linkages such as α-O-4′ and β-5′.

5.2 Lignin depolymerization by photocatalytic C–C bond cleavage
Cracking the lignin C–O/C–C linkages while preserving the phenyl structure is a crucial juncture in the efficient generation of valuable aromatic chemicals. Despite the cleavage of the C–O bond in lignin yielding monomer aromatics, its theoretical yield is usually lower than 50% because of the interference of C–C. It is thus necessary to split the C–C bond for promoting the monomer yield from lignin depolymerization.118 The bond energies of C–C linkages (69–123 kcal mol−1) are generally higher than that of Cβ–O linkages (52–80 kcal mol−1) in naturally recalcitrant lignin, and the inevitable generation of additional C–C interunit linkages might take place in the condensed motifs during the delignification procedure, rendering the selective dissociation of C–C bonds an intractable yet meaningful affair for lignin valorization.66 Furthermore, the invalid splitting of the C–C bonds might produce inert aldehydes against phenolic hydrocarbons, which ignites the polycondensation of intermediates with a more obstinate structure, making them difficult to degrade. To this day, the photocatalytic scission of targeted lignin C–C linkages mainly include Cα–Cβ bond linkages (e.g., β-1′ and β-5′), which are abundant linkages in the aliphatic branch of lignin. Detailed information about photocatalytic C–C bond cleavage for lignin depolymerization is provided in Table 2.
Table 2 Photocatalytic cleavage of lignin C–C bonds (e.g., β-1, Cα–Cβ, and β-5) in the literatures




Entry
Catalysts
Lignin substrate
C–C bonds
Standard Conditions
Products
Key mechanism
Ref.




1
CuOx



β-1′
Catalyst (10 mg), CH3CN (1.0 mL), O2 (1 atm), 9.6 W LED (centered at 455 nm), room temperature (RT), 5 h



Photoexcited electrons, holes, and superoxide anion radicals
201754


2
IrIII/PhSH



Cα–Cβ
50 W blue LED irradiation in N2 atmosphere at RT for 12 h, with 0.1 mmol substrate, 2 mol% Ir-1, 20 mol% collidine, 10 mol% PhSH, 2 mL CH2Cl2



The generation of alkoxy radical intermediates via multisite PCET
201962


3
4-Acetamido-TEMPO



—
4-Acetamido-TEMPO (5 mol%; TEMPO = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl) in combination with HNO3 and HCl (10 mol% each)



Chemoselective metal-free aerobic alcohol oxidation
2013122


4
VO(OiPr)3 and VO(acac)2



β-1′
VO(OiPr)3 (30 mol%), CH3CN (1 mL), 9 W LEDs (455 ± 5 nm), 1 h, O2 or Ar (1 atm)



Benzyl radical can be further oxidized to benzaldehyde through a peroxide intermediate
201966


5
C3N4-mpg



Cα–Cβ
0.05 mmol substrates, 10 mg of mpg-C3N4, 1 mL of CH3CN, 0.05 mmol of the scavenger, O2 (1 atm), 455 nm LED (6 W)



Superoxide radical anion O2˙−, electron transfer in C through a six-membered ring transition state
2018119


6
Zeolite HY30



Csp2–Csp3
4-(1-Hydroxypropyl) phenol (1a; 1 mmol), catalyst (0.3 g), H2O (4.0 mL), 180 °C, 1 h, 0.5 MPa of Ar, and 800 rpm



The γ-methyl shift is proposed as the crucial step using water as the only reactant besides lignin
2020123


7
An Ir(III) chromophore



β-1′
1.5 mM [Ir(dF(CF3)ppy)2(5,5′-d(CF3)bpy)]PF6, 12.5 mM PBu4OP(O)(OtBu)2, 25.0 mM 3,4-difluorothiophenol, 2 mL dioxane, blue LEDs, RT, 48 h



A proton-coupled electron-transfer (PCET) activation of an alcohol O–H bond to generate a key alkoxy radical intermediate
2019124


8
Cyanobenziodoxolone



Cα–Cβ
Ir[(dF(CF3)ppy)2](dtbbpy)PF6 (3 mol%), CBX (0.22 mmol), Cs2CO3 (0.22 mmol), DCE (2 mL), blue LED, RT, Ar balloon, 16 h



Disclosed via β-scission of in situ generated alkoxy radical intermediates
2020125


9
(Bis-2,2′-bipyridine) (2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylicacid) Ru(II) (RuC) adsorbed onto a TiO2 nanorod array (FTO|TiO2 NRAs|RuC) film
1-(4-Hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-(2-methoxyphenoxy) propane-1,3-diol
Cα–Cβ
Short reaction time and mild, redox-neutral reaction conditions
—
A hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) mediator
2021126


10
CoS2
A representative methylene-linked C–C model dimer
—
Low temperature of 250 °C
88% yield of mainly two aromatic monomers
—
2018127


11
TiO2
A lignin model dimer of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol)
β-5′
45 min of UV-LED irradiation with a degradation rate of 6.3 × 10−3 mg mL−1 min−1 achieved during the first 30 min of irradiation
Formation of a diol species
The first report of photocatalytic TiO2 technology for the degradation of β-5 model dimer
2021128


12
Z-Scheme Ag3PO4–polymeric carbon nitride (PCN)
A lignin model dimer of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol)
β-5′
5 mL of CH3CN/H2O (1:1), 10 mg of catalyst, 0.1 mmol of lignin model compound under a 300 W xenon lamp with AM 1.5 filter
Aromatic aldehydes with high yields of 66%–95%
Electron–hole coupled Cα–Cβ photoredox mechanism
2021121




Hou and coworkers studied the selective cleavage of C–C bonds with dual characters of CuOx clusters in the lignin β-1′ model, producing 96% yields of benzaldehydes under visible light irradiation.54 A tentative reaction mechanism was proposed in Fig. 13a. Due to the shift of the photogenerated electron to O2, the superoxide anion radical was formed preliminarily. The hydrogen can be extracted from the β-located carbon via leftover holes to produce a Cβ-centered radical. An unstable peroxide intermediate was produced owing to the existence of the superoxide anion radical and the Cβ-centered radical reaction. The unstable peroxide intermediate would undergo Cα–Cβ cleavage in the wake of the elimination of H2O to produce benzaldehyde by means of a six-membered-ring transition state. Alternatively, diphenylethanone 1b can be produced by a radical generated at α-C. This work is of utmost importance to design the photocatalyst for C–C bond activation and lignin valorization with high photocatalytic performance under visible light. Liu et al. reported a mild photocatalytic oxidation strategy with mesoporous graphitic carbon catalysts for cleaving C–C bonds,119 revealing the interaction between catalyst surfaces and complex lignin structures. Because of the low charge recombination rate and high surface area (206.5 m2 g−1), the catalytic system with mpg-C3N4 has high catalytic activity. A possible mechanism of the photodriven conversion of lignin model 1 (PP-ol) is depicted in Fig. 13b. First, mpg-C3N4 was excited by light irradiation to generate electrons and holes in the conduction and valence bands. Second, under surface basic sites on mpg-C3N4 and the role of photogenerated holes, a hydrogen was abstracted from the Cβ section to produce a Cβ-centered radical A, thereby obtaining the peroxide intermediate B by further binding with O2 and hydrogen. Third, the following Cα–Cβ and C–O bond cleavage owing to electron transfer via a six-membered ring transition state in C yielded aromatic aldehyde and phenyl. It should be noted that the aldehyde products might be further oxidized to benzoic acid during this step. On the other hand, oxygen molecules can be also reduced by photogenerated electrons to superoxide radical anions O2˙−, which would deprotonate benzyl alcohol into alkoxide anions and eventually formed byproduct 2. This strategy not only inspired the further development of visible light-driven heterogeneous catalysts for lignin conversion but also revealed the direct lignin depolymerization by photoinduced holes on solid catalyst surfaces.
 Fig. 13  (a) Plausible mechanism for selective Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by dual characters of CuOx clusters.54 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Proposed mechanism of mpg-C3N4 catalyzed transformation of lignin molecules.119 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Plausible reaction path about vanadium-based homogeneous photocatalysts.66 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) A reasonable mechanism of photocatalytic system in cerium(III) chloride photocatalyst.120 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Chinese Chemical Society. (e) Photocatalytic conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol) by polymeric carbon nitride (PCN), Z-scheme Ag3PO4–PCN nanocomposites, and Ag3PO4. (f) Proposed reaction pathways for the photocatalytic conversion of DPol-catalyzed by Z-scheme Ag3PO4–PCN.121 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Under visible light, Liu et al. reported that the vanadium catalysts enabled the selective Cα–Cβ bond cleavage of lignin β-1′ models at room temperature. The light irradiation-initiated electron transfer from the substrate molecules to vanadium center, followed by the cleaving of the Cα–Cβ bond to form radical intermediates.66 While adopting the vanadium catalysts in visible light-driven system to directly depolymerize dioxasolv lignin, the liquid phase of aromatic aldehydes can also be detected including p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, vanillin, and syringaldehyde. The general mechanism for homogeneous vanadium-based photocatalysts for Cα–Cβ bond cleavage is shown in Fig. 13c. Initially, a VIV-benzaldehyde complex and a benzyl radical were engendered, then the benzyl radical would be oxidized to benzaldehyde in the presence of O2via a peroxide intermediate. The dissociation of the VIV-benzaldehyde complex provided another molecule of benzaldehyde, and the reduced vanadium was re-oxidized to VV ultimately. Wang et al. reported a facilely available cerium chloride (CeCl3)-promoted photocatalytic conversion strategy.120 This photocatalytic system still exhibited excellent catalytic activity for the native lignin depolymerization after ten cycles. A reasonable mechanism was proposed for this photocatalytic β-scission/amination of the Cα–Cβ bond procedure in Fig. 13d. It can generally be classified into four steps: (1) CeCl3 was coordinated with the lignin model PP-ol (A) to produce a CeIIICln/lignin complex in the presence of nBu4NC via the deprotonation of the hydroxyl group, which subsequently underwent single-electron oxidation with DBAD* (di-tert-butyl azodicar-boxylate) to generate a CeIVCln/lignin species along with the release of DBAD˙−; (2) the key alkoxy radical intermediate was formed via the photoinduced ligand-to-metal charge-transfer (LMCT) homolysis of the CeIVCln/lignin species; (3) the aldehyde product (benzaldehyde, aa) and alkyl radical were formed by the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond; (4) the cleavage of the Cα–Cβ bond through the highly reactive alkyl radical species could be coupled with DBAD; the alkyl radical could also react with DBAD˙− to produce hydrazinium (ba). Under simulated solar light, an efficient Z-scheme Ag3PO4–polymeric carbon nitride (PCN) nanocomposite was fabricated to break the lignin C–C bonds in various lignin model compounds, which can be converted into aromatic aldehydes with high yields of 66%–95% (Fig. 13e).121 The highest benzaldehyde yield of photocatalytic 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol) was affirmed by 40Ag3PO4–60PCN, reaching 86%, which was about 5.7 times higher than that of PCN. The photocatalytic cleavage of the β-1′ linkages in dioxasolv birch lignin catalyzed by 40Ag3PO4–60PCN also led to a reduced molecular weight of the substrate, in which the major CH2Cl2-soluble products were aromatic aldehyde and acid monomers. As demonstrated in Fig. 13f, the leading pathway involved an electron–hole coupled photoredox process that started with photogenerated hole oxidation to produce the Cβ radical intermediate and subsequently reacted with O2˙− from the reduction of oxygen by the photogenerated electron. The Z-scheme structure of the Ag3PO4–PCN nanocomposites governed the high oxidation and reduction ability to efficiently drive the generation of both the Cβ radical intermediate and O2˙−, thereby germinating the Cα–Cβ bond cleavage.121 It is thus expected that the photocatalytic cleavage of the lignin C–C bond not only illustrates a sustainable and efficient appoarch to generate aromatic aldehydes but also offers insights into the demands of redox potentials for the rational design of semiconductors.
The breaking of the C–O bonds in lignin alone can only yield aromatic monomer with a theoretical yield of <50%. Considering the C–C backbone and the oxygen-rich character of native lignin, it is a promising pathway for C–C bond cleavage to obtain valuable oxygen-containing chemicals (e.g., ketones and organic acids).35 In contrast with the comprehensive development of C–O bond cleavage strategies, only a small quantity of examples shed substantial light on the selective scission of lignin C–C linkages (e.g., β-5′ and β-1′, Table 2), probably due to their higher bond dissociation energy (314–494 kJ mol−1 of C–C bonds vs. 218–294 kJ mol−1 of C–O links) and lower amount (∼35% C–C vs. ∼65% C–O). Unfortunately, unexpected condensation might take place to form additional C–C interunit bonds during the common delignification step, rendering the intractable mission of selective C–C cleavage. The CαH–OH in β-O-4′ alcohol is also prone to oxidation for producing the CαO derivate that is detrimental to the C–C bond cleavage with the perspective of BDE. At present, we tentatively summarize the potential pathways to direct C–C scission, which can be classified into the following subjects: (1) the introduction of strong electron-withdrawing groups boosts the oxidation potential of the catalyst complex; (2) ligand-to-metal charge transfer-driven homolytic C–C bond cleavage; (3) the photocatalytic activation of alcohol O–H bonds via an intramolecular proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process to generate an alkoxy radical intermediate; (4) the direct activation of Cβ–H to generate carbon radicals. Taking advantage of advanced scientific research, there is a huge impetus behind exploring novel and efficient strategies to offset this gap.
6. Conclusion and perspectives
To fulfill the mission of complete lignocellulose transformation, solar light-driven photocatalysis is an innovative and sustainable paradigm for selectively converting renewable lignin into aromatics from the perspective of well-preserved carbohydrates. This review offers critical insights into photocatalytic lignin-first development and the external reaction conditions that are of significance to expedite the multiscale valorization of lignocellulose into bio-based fuels and chemicals. The state-of-the-art achievements in the photocatalytic conversion of native lignin and its derivatives, focusing on the selective cleavage of lignin C–O (e.g., β-O-4′ and α-O-4′) and C–C (e.g., β-1′, β-5′, and Cα–Cβ) bonds, as well as the innovative alliance with lignin-first strategy are highlighted. However, photocatalytic lignin reforming is still in the infancy of scientific research, and most of the present experiments are largely performed at the laboratory scale with relatively restricted practicability. To this end, there are still several pivotal bottlenecks that need to be tackled regarding the lignin universality, selective photocatalysts/reactor, and exploring the surface/interfacial phenomenon is of vital importance for understanding the authentic mechanism of the photocatalytic lignin-first strategy and worthy of detailed studies in the future.
First, the heterogeneous structure of native lignin in lignocellulose is a crucial impediment that needs to be harnessed via its photocatalytic processing instead of the simplex model derivative. A valuable lignin valorization experiment should end up with the ultimate goal of lignin-first depolymerization. Dictated by the easy-to-change properties of the intricate lignin structure with dark brown color, the photocatalytic processing of actual lignin is much more complicated than those of the model compounds. Thus, more efforts should be shifted from the model compounds to lignin macromolecules using the available photocatalytic mechanisms and efficient light-capturing systems from a bottom-up approach. The requirement of manipulating lignin from its assembly within plant cell walls to its photocatalytic aromatic hydrocarbons should be aligned with the accurate characterization of complex biological structures (e.g., in situ NMR techniques), such as interior linkages (e.g., β-O-4′, C–C), subunits ratio (e.g., S/G/H), and functional groups (e.g., –OCH3, –OH, and –COOH). The quantitative variation of the lignin structure dominates its specific reaction activity/selectivity that can direct the option and amend photocatalytic lignin systems by establishing a bottom-up approach from model compounds to quantitative macromolecular structures and emerging mechanisms/strategies. The emerging photobiorefining should be shifted to complex lignin for expanding the adaptability of diverse lignocellulose species. Due to the recalcitrant and complex structure of native lignin, the photocatalytic processing of native lignin is vastly more complicated as compared with its models. The dark-brown color of technical lignin is reviewed as a hidden aspect that must be taken into account upstream. Subtly tuning the interconnection between a specific catalyst with adjustable broad band gap and light-induced carriers/radical species is highly imperative for wide-spectral capture of photons, thereby destroying the lignin chromophores with a potential of upgrading monomers. More importantly, exploring the efficient physicochemical and/or biological approaches (e.g., multimodal ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, gradient-solvent fractionation, chemical crosslinking, and enzyme-induced free-radical coupling) to decolorize technical lignin with suitable molecular weight is indispensable before photoinduced reaction. Therefore, the integrated system ranging from product identification (e.g., LC-MS and GPC) to separation and purification (e.g., membrane filtration and PHPLC) should also be followed up in the future, which not only enables the detailed structure and detachable yield of aromatic monomers but also provides the constructive viewpoint as a navigating light of real lignin depolymerization behavior. Meanwhile, lignocellulose fractionation is also an energy-intensive procedure that would augment the investment of natural feedstock utilization. It is thus imperative to seek an affordable path with the objective of selectively converting native lignin into high-quality desired products.
Second, in-depth insights into active sites and reaction kinetics of native lignin conversion are still lacking, which is mainly rooted in the complex interlinkages of lignocellulose. Dictated by proto-lignin, a systematic and exhaustive work should be circulated to synthesize the commercially standard substrate of lignin fragments with a simplified structure. The bottom-up concept that combines with appropriate photocatalytic systems can render the lignin model dissociation more selective and efficient to broaden the technical feasibility of industrial/proto-lignin conversion. From the perspective of fundamental research, the huge possibilities in direct lignin depolymerization exist for further exploring the cleavage strategies over β-O-4′, β-1′, and 4-O-5′ linkages as well as more stable lignin linkages. The current mechanistic studies are mainly focused on photogenerated charge carriers to provoke organic transformations, which can be adjusted by the electronic structure of the photocatalysts for matching the redox potentials or increasing the charge carrier separation. The surface or interface-centered mechanism at the photocatalyst-reactant system is urgently simulated to enable the regulation of elementary lignin reactions with excellent selectivity and long-term durability. Therefore, a distinctive photocatalyst with well-defined, tunable surface structures and properties should be constructed to bridge the gap between the surface–reactivity relationship and task-tailored modification via the direct thermodynamic or kinetic evidence from atomic-level active spots, thereby pushing forward the boundaries of lignin-first biorefining. In the meantime, the precisely in situ/operando characterization and simulation technologies would be retrofitted to seize the catalyst evolution from interfacial carriers, electron–hole, adsorbates, and radical intermediates, thereby deeply illustrating the underlying mechanism of photocatalytic lignin-to-aromatics conversion (e.g., operando Raman and synchrotron-based X-ray techniques, in situ atomic-scale scanning transmission electron microscopy, transient absorption spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, and DFT calculation).
Third, a defect of intermittent solar energy is the seasonal and regional variability in its intensity. Though solar energy is facile and inexhaustible, it is still a challenge to quickly and efficiently capture it using cheaply manufactured reactors, which would constrain lignin valorization by conversion efficiency, selectivity, and stability of photocatalytic systems. From a chemical engineering perspective, a novel, specialized, and cost-effective photoreactor, preferably in continuous-flow mode, should be designed to enhance the available photon trapping and interaction between the photocatalyst with lignin for scaling up photocatalytic lignin valorization. To match a task-specific microfluidic photoreactor, the manipulation of the chemical composition, space structure, and crystal form, the regulation of surface states, and morphological optimization are also readily required to precisely engineer the band gap structure of the photocatalyst, thereby adjusting the activities of the reactive species for both oxidation and reduction. Moreover, the rational design of the catalyst baskets and pre-sized catalyst pellets in the photoreactor coupled with advanced membrane technologies or gel chromatography hold great promise to enable the practical separation of catalysts and monomers after photocatalytic lignin conversion.
Last but not least, considering the recalcitrant structure of the origin lignocellulose, the direct conversion of lignin to light aromatic using photocatalysis alone is difficult to be conceived because of its sturdy nature. Nevertheless, photobiorefining provides a powerful medium for complete lignocellulose conversion, which can be easily coupled with thermal, biological, or electrocatalysis. The trade-off between the separation and purification of the lignin-derived aromatic products from the reaction medium is still to be rethought for breaking the practical limitations in chemical engineering aspects. A photocatalytic processing that preferentially transforms lignin is conducive to recover light aromatics and digestible carbohydrates in lignocellulose photoreforming, thereby easing the subsequent separation burden. Of particular note, the important factors for deciding the economic feasibility of lignin-first photoreforming presumably include the conversion efficiency and selectivity, specific solvent, photocatalyst lifespan, and separation costs. The technoeconomic analysis of the value-added chemicals and biofuels is also indispensable for the satisfaction of the proposed photobiorefining. The monophenolics-containing oil from lignin-first chemistry is typically spurred by the cleavage of ether and, where relevant, ester bonds. Beyond monomers, the full analysis of dimers and oligomers with photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining that is generally derived from C–C-bonded lignin motifs represents a major analytical undertaking. It will also be crucial for an in-depth understanding of not only the impact of photocatalytic lignin-first processing on lignin itself more precisely but also designing downstream separations and valorization strategies more holistically in terms of the resulting lignin-rich streams. Within the scope of holistic photobiorefining, the inevitable liberation and off-target products of carbohydrates along with the lignin are needed to be controlled and analyzed by coupling detailed experiments with computational tools. The fate of minor products, solvent losses, separation and purification steps, catalyst recycling, capping or scavenge reagents, and energy demand are usually ignored at the lab scale. It must be emphasized that these aspects are likely to become the priorities for photocatalytic lignin-first biorefining moving toward realistically industrial scale-up. It is thus believed that the rational construction of the photocatalytic lignin-first approach in next-generation biorefining systems will seek their accurate position of industrial take-off and eventually benefit the overall situation of biomass valorization.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32171728 and 31700511), and the Project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018T110770).
References
O. Kraan, G. J. Kramer, M. Haigh and C. Laurens, Joule, 2019, 3, 2286–2290 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Hao, K. Wang, M. Tong, Y. Yang, H. Jiang, Y. Xiao and F. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11243–11246 RSC .
A. Corma, S. Iborra and A. Velty, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2411–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2019, 15, 38–46 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Qiu, W. Liu and D. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 206–216 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ragauskas, G. T. Beckham, M. J. Biddy, R. Chandra, F. Chen, M. F. Davis, B. H. Davison, R. A. Dixon, P. Gilna, M. Keller, P. Langan, A. K. Naskar, J. N. Saddler, T. J. Tschaplinski, G. A. Tuskan and C. E. Wyman, Science, 2014, 344, 1246843 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, N. Luo, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .
Z. Hao, S. Li, J. Sun, S. Li and F. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, M. Wang, X. Zhang, A. Heyden and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5589–5598 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naseem, S. Tabasum, K. M. Zia, M. Zuber, M. Ali and A. Noreen, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 93, 296–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, M. Cao, C. Ding and X. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 26782–26792 RSC .
M. Alherech, S. Omolabake, C. M. Holland, G. E. Klinger, E. L. Hegg and S. S. Stahl, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 1831–1837 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mazarji, M. Alvarado-Morales, P. Tsapekos, G. Nabi-Bidhendi, N. M. Mahmoodi and I. Angelidaki, Environ. Int., 2019, 125, 172–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bourbiaux, J. Pu, F. Rataboul, L. Djakovitch, C. Geantet and D. Laurenti, Catal. Today, 2021, 373, 24–37 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Li, S. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594–607 RSC .
H. El Hajjouji, F. Barje, E. Pinelli, J. R. Bailly, C. Richard, P. Winterton, J. C. Revel and M. Hafidi, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 7264–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, B. S. Matsuura and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1218–1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3071–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Martín-Perales, D. Rodríguez-Padrón, A. García Coleto, C. Len, G. de Miguel, M. J. Muñoz-Batista and R. Luque, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 17085–17093 CrossRef .
R. A. Sheldon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4464–4480 CrossRef CAS .
T. Renders, S. Van den Bosch, S. F. Koelewijn, W. Schutyser and B. F. Sels, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1551–1557 RSC .
M. M. Abu-Omar, K. Barta, G. T. Beckham, J. S. Luterbacher, J. Ralph, R. Rinaldi, Y. Román-Leshkov, J. S. M. Samec, B. F. Sels and F. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 262–292 RSC .
M. V. Galkin, D. Di Francesco, U. Edlund and J. S. M. Samec, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 202, 281–301 RSC .
Z. Sun, B. Fridrich, A. de Santi, S. Elangovan and K. Barta, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 614–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, J. Cheng, D. Wang, T.-Q. Yuan, G. Song and K. Barta, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5199–5212 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. L. Tan, C. Y. Toe, J. Scott, L. Wang, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904717 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
U. Nwosu, A. Wang, B. Palma, H. Zhao, M. A. Khan, M. Kibria and J. Hu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 148, 111266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, M. Cao, Q. Zeng and X. Li, Green Energy Environ., 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.gee.2022.02.011 .
Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, N. Luo, C. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 197–214 CrossRef .
T. Butburee, P. Chakthranont, C. Phawa and K. Faungnawakij, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1873–1890 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Chang, K. L. Orchard, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2856–2862 RSC .
H. Chen, K. Wan, F. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang and D. Long, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 147, 111217 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Zhao, A. Wang, G. W. Huber and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11559–11624 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, B. F. Sels and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007129,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202007129 .
J. Xu, M. Li, J. Qiu, X.-F. Zhang and J. Yao, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 185, 297–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, D. Dai, L. Zhang, M. Li, J. Xu and J. Yao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 319, 111043 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaheer and R. Kempe, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1675–1684 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Nichols, L. M. Bishop, R. G. Bergman and J. A. Ellman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12554–12555 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, F. Wang, J. Cai, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Yu and J. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 994–1007 RSC .
J. S. M. Samec, J.-E. Baeckvall, P. G. Andersson and P. Brandt, ChemInform, 2006, 37, 23 Search PubMed .
N. Luo, M. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhang, T. Hou, H. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Lu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4571–4580 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, M. G. Flynn, J. E. Jackson and E. L. Hegg, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 412–421 RSC .
J. Li, H. Sun, J.-X. Liu, J.-J. Zhang, Z.-X. Li and Y. Fu, Mol. Catal., 2018, 452, 36–45 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ke, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Sarina, J. Barry and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 236–244 RSC .
H. Zhou, Z. Li, S.-M. Xu, L. Lu, M. Xu, K. Ji, R. Ge, Y. Yan, L. Ma, X. Kong, L. Zheng and H. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8976–8982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, Y. Xu and X. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 24–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Behling, S. Valange and G. Chatel, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1839–1854 RSC .
I. Bosque, G. Magallanes, M. Rigoulet, M. D. Kärkäs and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 621–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, S. H. Lee, S. Han, J. Kim, N. V. T. Trang, K. Kim, E.-G. Choi, P. Boonmongkolras, Y. W. Lee, B. Shin, Y. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5151–5160 RSC .
N. Luo, M. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7716–7721 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hou, N. Luo, H. Li, M. Heggen, J. Lu, Y. Wang and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3850–3859 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5062–5070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dai, A. F. Patti, G. N. Styles, S. Nanayakkara, L. Spiccia, F. Arena, C. Italiano and K. Saito, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2005–2014 RSC .
S. Li, Z.-J. Li, H. Yu, M. R. Sytu, Y. Wang, D. Beeri, W. Zheng, B. D. Sherman, C. G. Yoo and G. Leem, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 777–784 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, H. Zhang, X. Wu, R. Li, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 5009–5018 RSC .
H. Li, A. Bunrit, J. Lu, Z. Gao, N. Luo, H. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8843–8851 CrossRef .
Z. Xiang, W. Han, J. Deng, W. Zhu, Y. Zhang and H. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4199–4213 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhu and D. G. Nocera, ACS Catal., 2021, 14181–14187,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.1c04008 .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. He and Y. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1658–1666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Li, W. Miao, W. Tang, D. Xue, J. Xiao, T. Zhang and C. Wang, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 33–38 RSC .
X. Zhao, Y. Yang, R. Zhu, C. Liu and D. Zhang, Mol. Catal., 2019, 471, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahsan Usman, M. Naeem, M. Saeed and M. Zaheer, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2021, 521, 120305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Li, N. Luo and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 632–643 CrossRef CAS .
K. Asha and S. K. Badamali, Mol. Catal., 2020, 497, 111236 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kärkäs, I. Bosque, B. S. Matsuura and C. R. J. Stephenson, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5166–5169 CrossRef .
D. S. Achilleos, W. Yang, H. Kasap, A. Savateev, Y. Markushyna, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18184–18188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, Z. Geng, J. Xu, F. Guo and C. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, P. Liu, H. Xia, M. Zhou, J. Zhao, B. K. Sharma and J. Jiang, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lathasree, A. N. Rao, B. SivaSankar, V. Sadasivam and K. Rengaraj, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 223, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ahmad, H. Roy Ghatak and S. M. Ahuja, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2020, 131, 383–395 CrossRef .
J. C. Colmenares, R. S. Varma and V. Nair, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6675–6686 RSC .
A. Fukuoka and P. L. Dhepe, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9, 224–235 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Lei, C. Liu, Z. Zhang and B. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 175, 494–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, K. Lian, B. Su, L. Lu, J. Lin, D. Tang, S. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25055–25062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, T. Yan, W. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, D. Y. Lee, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11341–11349 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, X. Fan, S. Xie, J. Lin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang, L. Chen and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 772–780 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoo, M.-W. Lee, S. Lee, J. Lee, S. Cho, H. Lee, H. G. Cha and H. S. Kim, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8465–8475 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, X. Wu, S. Xie, L. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5023–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, X. He, H.-R. Li and L.-N. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15032–15039 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Xie, C. Liu, C. Zhou, J. Lin, J. Kang, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8443–8451 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma, S. Kumar, S. M. Arumugam and S. Elumalai, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 602, 117730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, X. Lu, G. Zhang, X. Yao, J. Xin, S. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Xu, M. Feng and S. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4005–4013 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, B. Gao, Y. S. Ok and L. Dong, Chemosphere, 2019, 218, 845–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Srisasiwimon, S. Chuangchote, N. Laosiripojana and T. Sagawa, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 13968–13976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
F. Rigodanza, L. Đorđević, F. Arcudi and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5062–5067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das and V. C. Srivastava, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 714–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Camera-Roda, V. Augugliaro, A. Cardillo, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano and L. Palmisano, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 224, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vedichi and S. Mani, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 47, 800–806 CAS .
E. Taboada, I. Angurell and J. Llorca, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 281, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 93, 376–382 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares, R. S. Varma and P. Lisowski, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5736–5750 RSC .
L. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, M. Bellardita, A. Di Paola, E. García López, V. Loddo, G. Marcì, G. Palmisano and S. Yurdakal, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1431–1438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rinaldi, R. Jastrzebski, M. T. Clough, J. Ralph, M. Kennema, P. C. A. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8164–8215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sameni, S. Krigstin and M. Sain, BioResources, 2017, 12, 18 CrossRef .
S. Yurdakal, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, H. Berber and L. Palmisano, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 6699–6708 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ide, R. Ogino, M. Sadakane and T. Sano, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 766–773 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Zhang and F. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 470–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, S. Maldonado and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 10104–10114 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koichi, S. Yuichi, N. Shigeo and F. Akira, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1989, 62, 3433–3436 CrossRef .
G. Magallanes, M. D. Kärkäs, I. Bosque, S. Lee, S. Maldonado and C. R. J. Stephenson, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2252–2260 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, C. Zhang, B. Han and F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1608–1628 RSC .
H. Zhao, C.-F. Li, L.-Y. Liu, B. Palma, Z.-Y. Hu, S. Renneckar, S. Larter, Y. Li, M. G. Kibria, J. Hu and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 585, 694–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao, K. Wang, J. B. Love, J. Yu, S. Du, Z. Yue and X. Fan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 134980 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, M. Li, J. Qiu, X.-F. Zhang and J. Yao, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 180, 403–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20768–20775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imamura, H. Kato, Y. Wada, K. Makabe, A. Onda, A. Tanaka, H. Kominami, K. Sato and K. Nagaoka, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7298–7301 RSC .
P. Han, T. Tana, Q. Xiao, S. Sarina, E. R. Waclawik, D. E. Gómez and H. Zhu, Chem, 2019, 5, 2879–2899 CAS .
S. Kausar, A. Ali Altaf, M. Hamayun, M. Danish, M. Zubair, S. Naz, S. Muhammad, M. Zaheer, S. Ullah and A. Badshah, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 502, 119390 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nair, P. Dhar and R. Vinu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 18204–18216 RSC .
W. Guan, X. Chen, H. Hu, C.-W. Tsang, J. Zhang, C. S. K. Lin and C. Liang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2020, 203, 106392 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, W.-L. Xie, B. Hu, J. Liu, W. Zhao, B. Zhang and T.-P. Wang, Combust. Flame, 2021, 225, 395–405 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Galkin and J. S. M. Samec, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1544–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Li, J. Lu, S. Zeng, M. Wang, N. Luo, S. Xu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4761–4771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. He and Y. Zhang, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, J. Lin, H. Zhang, S. Xie, Q. Zhang, B. F. Sels and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 10071–10078 RSC .
A. Rahimi, A. Azarpira, H. Kim, J. Ralph and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6415–6418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Meng, X. Shen, B. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Xiang, H. Liu and B. Han, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabd1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Nguyen, P. R. D. Murray and R. R. Knowles, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 800–805 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, Y. Huang, L.-W. Zhan, J. Hou and B.-D. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2020, 61, 152420 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, S. Kim, A. H. Davis, J. Zhuang, E. W. Shuler, D. Willinger, J.-J. Lee, W. Zheng, B. D. Sherman, C. G. Yoo and G. Leem, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 3771–3781 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shuai, J. Sitison, S. Sadula, J. Ding, M. C. Thies and B. Saha, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6507–6512 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. J. Murnaghan, N. Skillen, C. Hardacre, J. Bruce, G. N. Sheldrake and P. K. J. Robertson, J. Phys.: Energy, 2021, 3, 035002 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Proposed structures of three building blocks in lignocellulose including lignin (15–25%), cellulose (40–50%), and hemicellulose (15–30%). (b) Three representative precursors of lignin including syringyl (S), guaiacyl (G), and p-hydroxyphenyl (H) units. (c) Typical oxidative and reductive cycles in photoredoxcatalysis. General photocatalysts include (d) semiconductors,7 (e) transition metal complexes,7 and (f) nanometallic materials.7 (g) Unselective thermo-energy to activate all chemicals (reactant R to product P, C, E, and S refer to the catalyst, or molecules in the environment).7 (h) Selective solar energy to activate the photocatalyst.7 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Light scattering/trapping and charge transport in nanostructures of single materials as a suspended photocatalyst including 0D nanocrystals, 1D nanostructures, 2D nanosheets, and 3D nanostructures.27,28 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) The generation pathway about four major reactive oxygen species (ROS),31 such as ˙OH, ˙O2−, 1O2, and H2O2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Band gap structures of various photocatalysts and potentials for different redox couples in water (pH = 7).29 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The fragmentation of lignin model PP-ol to AP, Phol, and PP-one.44 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The possible mechanism for lignin cleavage through thiols as small diffusive redox carriers.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The possible reaction path for the valorization of lignin with nitrogen-doped carbon-supported iron catalysts.46 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) A reasonable mechanism of the photocatalytic system with Au/CeO2.47 Inset picture: TEM images of Au-NPs on CeO2 supports. The length of the scale bars in the images is 10 nm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Scope of the one-pot electrocatalytic oxidation–photocatalytic reductive C–O bond cleavage.51 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrocatalytic oxidation mechanism of the lignin system under anaerobic and aerobic conditions.51 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The mechanism of lignin system in the catalyst Pd/ZnIn2S4 with 455 nm light.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The photoelectrochemical heterogeneous catalytic process with a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode.57 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) The organosolv lignin with the Pd/CeO2 catalyst.58 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Proposed photocatalytic spin-center shift (SCS) mechanism. (b) Cyclic voltammogram of persulfide that is consistent with the ECE electrochemical redox mechanism of persulfide cleavage.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Plausible mechanism for selective Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by Ir-1 via the PCET process.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Possible pathway of the redox-neutral depolymerization by the rhodium-terpyridine catalyst.63 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Mechanistic diagram of the redox-neutral cleavage of the C–C bond in lignin model compounds catalyzed by [Ru(CL)(H)(PPH3)3]/triphosphate.64 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) The possible mechanism of the redox-neutral cleavage of the C–O bond in a palladium-loaded metal–organic framework (MOF).65 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The synthesis of carbon dots (CDs) and their applications for the coproduction of H2 and oxidized biomass organics.69 (b) The photocatalytic mechanism of CDs and timescales of relaxation.69 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation.70 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of photoelectric transfer effect for TiO2 and the proposed mechanism for the conversion of the lignin model.71	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) samples and the TEM and HRTEM images of Zn4In2S7. (b) Energy-band positions of ZnmIn2Sm+3 (m = 1–6) and their photocatalytic activities for the conversion of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (PP-ol). (c) Photocatalytic depolymerization of organosolv birch lignin over Zn4In2S7 under visible-light irradiation.81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Energy-band diagram of CdS with different sizes and their photocatalytic performances in PP-ol conversion. (e) Yields of aromatic monomers obtained with CdS QDs and CdS NPs in the photocatalytic conversion of native lignin in birch wood meal.79 Inset images: TEM of CdS QDs and photos for the mixtures of birch wood meal with CdS QDs and CdS NPs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publication Group. (f) Effect of the alkyl chain length of the mercaptoalkanoic acid ligands on CdS QDs (CdS-Cx QDs) on photocatalytic conversion of native lignin. Inset images: Schematic illustrations of CdS-Cx QDs and photos for mixtures of birch wood meal with CdS-Cx QDs.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of the Ag+-exchanged CdS. (b) Conversion and product yields with Ag2S(2%)@CdS by varying the reaction time. (c) Schematic representation comparing the simultaneous oxidative dehydrogenation and reductive cleavage of the β-O-4 bond in the Cα radical intermediate in Ag2S@CdS (right) with the oxidative dehydrogenation and pinned Fermi level of CdS (left).80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM and elemental mapping images of Ni/CdS. (e) Activity comparison of the metal/CdS photocatalysts for the oxidation of benzyl alcohol, showing the conversion of benzyl alcohol together with the yields of benzaldehyde yield and H2 using different photocatalysts. (f) Proposed mechanistic steps for the two pathways of the photocatalytic oxidation of 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (5) on Ni/CdS to produce different products with high selectivity. 2-Phenoxy-1-phenylethanone (6) is yielded as the sole product in CH3CN, which will be fully transformed to acetophenone (7) and phenol (8) in CH3CN/0.1 M KOH (v/v = 2/8) (pathway I) or benzoic acid (9) and phenol through chemical oxidation (pathway II).78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The architecture of carbon quantum dots (CQDs)-decorated TiO2 nanohybrid and its potential mechanism for degrading commercial alkali lignin.84 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–c) Diagrammatic sketch about different types of microfluidic photoreactors.91 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic types of hybrid photocatalysts, including (d) Au/TiO2 nanoparticles,94 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) TiO2 sol into the inner wall of capillaries containing molded ZnO nanorod arrays,95 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (f) graphene-based photocatalyst composites,96 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) TiO2-decorated biochar.97 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1	Perylene diimide (PDI)	

	β-O-4′	Model molecule (0.50 mmol), MeCN (5.0 mL), xenon lamp (>420 nm), 25 °C, N2, 10 h	

	Single-electron transfer (SET) from the photoexcited strongly reducing PDI˙− anion to the ketone groups of the β-O-4′ linkage in the lignin	20202
2	[Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	

	β-O-4′	0.50 mmol compound, 1.5 mmol N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA), 1.5 mmol HCOOH, and 1.0 mol% catalyst, 5.0 mL MeCN, xenon lamp (>420 nm), 25 °C	

	Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs catalyst adsorbs visible light induced the metal-to-ligand charge transfer to generate the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]3+* excited state	20188
3	Ag3PO4	

	β-O-4′	Light irradiation from a 300 W xenon lamp. Sodium lignin sulfonate (50 mg L−1, 100 mL) and Ag3PO4/SnO2/porcine bone catalyst (50 mg)	

	An electron–hole pair, a superoxide radical (˙O2−), hydroxyl radicals (˙OH)	201811
4	MnO2	

	β-O-4′	MnO2 (10 mmol) 3 h UV (λ = 254 nm), O2	

	Active oxygen species for alcohol oxidation could be either O2− or O22−	201956
5	Hydrogen peroxide	

	—	Guaiacylglycerol-β-guaiacyl ether 30 mg L−1, 50 mL; H2O2 = 0.01 mL; UV-and Vis-light irradiation; temperature ∼308 K	

	Both hydydroxyl (˙OH) and superoxide (O2˙−) radicals	202067
6	Ni/TiO2	

	β-O-4′	Catalyst (20 mg), DMF (2.5 mL); bT. = reaction temperature, t. = reaction time, con. = conversion, r.t. = room temperature	

	Benzylic alcohol to guaiacol and 4-methoxyacetophenone via a benzylic ketone intermediate	202071
7	TiO2/ZnO	Hydrolysis residue of rice straw	—	Lignin degradation of 83.4% is obtained with 2 g L−1 ZnO and 12 h of treatment time	Vanillin and 4-hydroxy benzaldehyde	Superoxide anions and hydroperoxyl radical generation may because of the presence of molecular oxygen in the system	202073
8	[PMim][NTf2] and the Brønsted acid [PrSO3HMim][OTf]	

	β-O-4′	500 mg of IL, [PrHSO3Mim] [OTf] 3% (weight, 0.028 mmol), H2O 1% (weight), atmospheric air, room temperature, 120 min, UV irradiation	

	Alkali lignin could also be degraded in the ILs system	201985
9	Copper and situ acidic EtOH/H2O/CO2	

	β-O-4′	Catalyst (10 mol%), K2S2O8 (5 equiv., 135.0 mg), diethyl ether (1 mL), 475 nm visible light, r.t., 10 h. solvent (3 mL), the total volume of solvent is 3 mL	

	Persulfate as initiator and oxidant, a five-membered cyclic transition state. In the second step, the reductive system	201882
10	Ag+-Exchanged CdS	

	β-O-4′	2-Phenoxy-1-phenylethanol as the substrate (10 mg), acetonitrile (1 mL), and catalyst (1 mg) were added into the glass tube reactor	

	Ag2S@CdS would render photogenerated electrons and holes to effectively participate in the cleavage of β-O-4′ bonds	202080
11	CdS quantum dots	

	β-O-4′	15 mg CdS QDs and 100 mg birch woodmeal (containing 19 mg native lignin) were added into a quartz reactor (10 mL) containing 5 mL solvent of CH3OH/H2O (1:1) (in the case of CdS–OA catalyst, the solvent was hexane to disperse CdS–OA)	

	In step 1, the photogenerated hole is transferred from the core of CdS QDs to form a Cα radical and a proton. In step 2, the photogenerated electron is transferred to the Cα radical	201983
13	Carbon quantum dots-decorated TiO2 nanocomposite	

	—	Lignin (10 mg L−1 lignin concentration, catalyst (TiO2/CQDs) dose 0.5 g L−1), λex = 315 nm	

	The superlative photocatalytic activity is attributed to the presence of CQDs in the nanocomposite that obstructed both the recombination and quick transfer of photogenerated charge carriers	202084
14	TiO2 nanoparticles coated on activated carbon	Synthetic lignin wastewater	—	The complete destruction of lignin was achieved under microwave with photocatalytic treatment at an initial concentration of 100 ppm within 60 min	Complete destruction of lignin	The enhanced ˙OH will lead to the opening up of the aromatic ring from the cleaved lignin compounds, although many organic acids as the final oxidation product are stable to ˙OH attack	202093
15	Equential palladium-catalyzed aerobic	

	β-O-4′	Pd(OAc)2 (0.02 mmol, 5 mol%) in DMSO (1.0 mL) at 65 °C for 18 h, then [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6 (0.12 μmol, 0.03 mol%), iPr2NEt (0.48 mmol, 1.2 equiv.) and HCO2H (0.04 mmol, 10 mol%) in MeCN (1.0 mL), room temperature, irradiation with blue LEDs, 32 h	

	A practical and operationally simple two-step degradation approach involving Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation and visible-light photoredox-catalyzed reductive fragmentation for the chemoselective cleavage of the β-O-4′ linkage	2019106
16	Cadmium sulfide quantum dots	

	β-O-4′	CdS QD–4.4 nm under visible light. Hydrogen donor in PP-one control reaction, CH3OH 0.5 mL. Scavenger concentrations: 2.0 mM NaIO3; 4.0 mM Na2S + 2.0 mM Na2SO3; 3.0 mM DMPO. Reaction time: 3 h	

	The β-O-4′ bond in lignin is cleaved by an electron–hole coupled photoredox mechanism based on a Cα radical intermediate, in which both the photogenerated electrons and holes participate in the reaction	201879
17	ZnmIn2Sm+3	

	β-O-4′	Catalyst (10 mg), 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (0.10 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (5.0 mL, 1:1 v/v), N2 atmosphere, 4 h, Xe lamp (l = 400–780 nm), 600 mW cm−2	

	A higher Zn/In ratio provided a higher redox capability but poorer visible-light absorption. The Cα–H bond to form the Cα radical intermediate, which could undergo subsequent reductive cleavage of the Cβ–O bond by accepting photogenerated electrons	201981
18	Zn0.95Bi0.05O nanomaterials	Extraction of lignin from the wood powder of Oryza sativa was carried out using a mixture of formic acid/acetic acid/water	—	100 ppm lignin (L1) solution in dioxane was prepared. 50 mL of L1 solution was subjected to stirring under sunlight in the presence of 0.1 g catalysts	Phenol, 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol and 1,2-dimethoxy benzene	—	2020114
19	ZnIn2S4	

	β-O-4′	0.1 mmol of substrate, 5 mg of ZnIn2S4, 1.0 mL of CH3CN, Ar atmosphere, 9.0 W LED (this LED reactor is different from the 9.6 W blue LED reactor in the configuration of LED array), 4 h	

	The adjacent Cβ–O bond is subsequently hydrogenolytically cleaved to two monomers by the “hydrogen pool”	201744
20	Ball milled lignin–TiO2	Asian lignin manufacturing	β-O-4′	Subjecting ball milled mixtures of lignin and TiO2 to ultraviolet (UV) radiation	

	Wet milling of lignin and TiO2 using polar solvents improves the contact between lignin and TiO2, thus facilitating lignin depolymerization to produce valuable phenolics and aromatic hydrocarbons	2016115
21	Phenothiazine (PTH)	

	β-O-4′	CH3CN:H2O = 1:1, 365 nm, HCOOH (4 eq.), ascorbic acid (2 eq.), phenothiazine (PTH)	

	The selective cleavage of aryl ether was realized by the intramolecular substitution on aryl rings, affording non-phenolic arylamine products	201959
22	Rh/Nb2O5	

	β-O-4′	0.05 g catalyst, 1 mmol 2-PPE, 20 mL n-decane, 260 °C, 0.1 MPa H2, 4 h	

	The high efficiency is mainly attributed to the cooperation between Rh and NbOx at the perimeter sites, in which Rh particles are responsible for the dissociation of H2 and NbOx for activating C–O bonds	2020116
23	Phenolics-assisted hydrogen transfer	

	β-O-4′	—	

	The decomposition of the β-O-4′ bond was facilitated by initiating the radical reaction-based and concerted reaction-based interactions	2020117
24	Pd@MOF	

	β-O-4′	Substrate (0.1 mmol), catalyst (2.8 mol% based on Pd), solvent (10 mL each). The reaction tube was purged with nitrogen and the reaction mixture was stirred under nitrogen atmosphere for 6 h	

	C–O bond cleavage occurred through a simultaneous dehydrogenation of side-chain alcoholic groups and intra-molecular hydrogen transfer reaction	202065
25	A Zn/S rich phase zinc indium sulfide	

	β-O-4′	10 mg of catalyst, 10 mg of lignin model compounds (or 100 mg kraft lignin), and 5 mL of solvents (CH3CN or CH3CN/H2O mixture) were added into the reactor under 420 nm UV (0.35 W cm−2 at the center)	

	Dehydrogenated radical intermediates are initially generated by the oxidation of photogenerated holes, and the protons generated from photocatalytic water splitting are superior in facilitating the subsequently hydrogenolysis process of Cβ–O bonds	2022109
26	HAT catalysis	

	β-O-4′	1 mol% Ir photocatalyst, 25 mol% disulfide catalyst, 50 mol% acetic acid, blue LEDs, dioxane	

	A thiyl radical derived from a cystine-derived H-atom transfer catalyst initiates a spin-center shift (SCS) that leads to C(β)–O bond cleavage	202161
27	Mesoporous TiO2 (MT400)	Sodium lignosulfonate	β-O-4′	Light wavelength of 350–780 nm on 300 W xenon lamp; 40 mg catalyst and 20 mL of SLS aqueous solution (2 g L−1)	Vanillin 2.1 mg gSLS−1	Both h+ and ˙O2− are the main reactive species, while ˙OH is adverse to this reaction	202139
28	Pd/TiO2 or Au (Ag)-ASN-NIII photocatalyst	

	α-O-4′	Halogen lamp (500 W, wavelength in the range of 400–750 nm)	

	Hot-electron transfer to the catalytically active Ni2+ complex sites and light-enhanced chemisorption of reactant species	2019113

 	Fig. 10  (a) Two-step degradation strategy of β-O-4′ linkage in lignin. (b) Possible reaction mechanism for the first step in the system of cheap copper as the catalyst, persulfate as the initiator and oxidant. (c) The second step of b.82 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) One-pot photocatalytic breaking of β-O-4′ linkage via self-hydrogen transfer hydrogenolysis.37 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic mechanism of TiO2–NiO n–p heterojunction under simulated light irradiation.108 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of ligand-mediated electron–hole coupled mechanism.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Mechanism about CdS quantum dots quantitatively catalyzing the fracture of β-O-4′ bonds in lignin models.79 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publication Group. (d) Mechanism about the conversion of lignin using Zn4In2S7 as a photocatalyst under visible light irradiation.81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Mechanism about combining ZIS and graphene oxide photocatalyst.110 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (f) Mechanism studies for the depolymerization of lignin in the β-O-4′ linkage.59 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The photocatalytic cleavage of lignin α-O-4′ linkage with Pd/TiO2 or Au (Ag)-ASN-NIII photocatalyst to generate aromatic hydrocarbons. (b) Characterization (high-resolution TEM images) of 2.5Au-ASN-Ni2+ and 4.3Ag-ASN-Ni2+ photocatalysts. (c) Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic C–O bond cleavage of benzyl phenyl ether with the photocatalyst.113 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

1	CuOx	

	β-1′	Catalyst (10 mg), CH3CN (1.0 mL), O2 (1 atm), 9.6 W LED (centered at 455 nm), room temperature (RT), 5 h	

	Photoexcited electrons, holes, and superoxide anion radicals	201754
2	IrIII/PhSH	

	Cα–Cβ	50 W blue LED irradiation in N2 atmosphere at RT for 12 h, with 0.1 mmol substrate, 2 mol% Ir-1, 20 mol% collidine, 10 mol% PhSH, 2 mL CH2Cl2	

	The generation of alkoxy radical intermediates via multisite PCET	201962
3	4-Acetamido-TEMPO	

	—	4-Acetamido-TEMPO (5 mol%; TEMPO = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl) in combination with HNO3 and HCl (10 mol% each)	

	Chemoselective metal-free aerobic alcohol oxidation	2013122
4	VO(OiPr)3 and VO(acac)2	

	β-1′	VO(OiPr)3 (30 mol%), CH3CN (1 mL), 9 W LEDs (455 ± 5 nm), 1 h, O2 or Ar (1 atm)	

	Benzyl radical can be further oxidized to benzaldehyde through a peroxide intermediate	201966
5	C3N4-mpg	

	Cα–Cβ	0.05 mmol substrates, 10 mg of mpg-C3N4, 1 mL of CH3CN, 0.05 mmol of the scavenger, O2 (1 atm), 455 nm LED (6 W)	

	Superoxide radical anion O2˙−, electron transfer in C through a six-membered ring transition state	2018119
6	Zeolite HY30	

	Csp2–Csp3	4-(1-Hydroxypropyl) phenol (1a; 1 mmol), catalyst (0.3 g), H2O (4.0 mL), 180 °C, 1 h, 0.5 MPa of Ar, and 800 rpm	

	The γ-methyl shift is proposed as the crucial step using water as the only reactant besides lignin	2020123
7	An Ir(III) chromophore	

	β-1′	1.5 mM [Ir(dF(CF3)ppy)2(5,5′-d(CF3)bpy)]PF6, 12.5 mM PBu4OP(O)(OtBu)2, 25.0 mM 3,4-difluorothiophenol, 2 mL dioxane, blue LEDs, RT, 48 h	

	A proton-coupled electron-transfer (PCET) activation of an alcohol O–H bond to generate a key alkoxy radical intermediate	2019124
8	Cyanobenziodoxolone	

	Cα–Cβ	Ir[(dF(CF3)ppy)2](dtbbpy)PF6 (3 mol%), CBX (0.22 mmol), Cs2CO3 (0.22 mmol), DCE (2 mL), blue LED, RT, Ar balloon, 16 h	

	Disclosed via β-scission of in situ generated alkoxy radical intermediates	2020125
9	(Bis-2,2′-bipyridine) (2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylicacid) Ru(II) (RuC) adsorbed onto a TiO2 nanorod array (FTO|TiO2 NRAs|RuC) film	1-(4-Hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-(2-methoxyphenoxy) propane-1,3-diol	Cα–Cβ	Short reaction time and mild, redox-neutral reaction conditions	—	A hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) mediator	2021126
10	CoS2	A representative methylene-linked C–C model dimer	—	Low temperature of 250 °C	88% yield of mainly two aromatic monomers	—	2018127
11	TiO2	A lignin model dimer of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol)	β-5′	45 min of UV-LED irradiation with a degradation rate of 6.3 × 10−3 mg mL−1 min−1 achieved during the first 30 min of irradiation	Formation of a diol species	The first report of photocatalytic TiO2 technology for the degradation of β-5 model dimer	2021128
12	Z-Scheme Ag3PO4–polymeric carbon nitride (PCN)	A lignin model dimer of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol)	β-5′	5 mL of CH3CN/H2O (1:1), 10 mg of catalyst, 0.1 mmol of lignin model compound under a 300 W xenon lamp with AM 1.5 filter	Aromatic aldehydes with high yields of 66%–95%	Electron–hole coupled Cα–Cβ photoredox mechanism	2021121

 	Fig. 13  (a) Plausible mechanism for selective Cα–Cβ bond cleavage by dual characters of CuOx clusters.54 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Proposed mechanism of mpg-C3N4 catalyzed transformation of lignin molecules.119 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Plausible reaction path about vanadium-based homogeneous photocatalysts.66 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) A reasonable mechanism of photocatalytic system in cerium(III) chloride photocatalyst.120 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Chinese Chemical Society. (e) Photocatalytic conversion of 1,2-diphenylethanol (DPol) by polymeric carbon nitride (PCN), Z-scheme Ag3PO4–PCN nanocomposites, and Ag3PO4. (f) Proposed reaction pathways for the photocatalytic conversion of DPol-catalyzed by Z-scheme Ag3PO4–PCN.121 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
