Recent advances in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction using efficient catalysts in eco-friendly media  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8GC02860E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8GC02860E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2019, 21, 381-405Recent advances in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction using efficient catalysts in eco-friendly media

        
          
            Seyyed Emad 
            Hooshmand
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bahareh 
            Heidari
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Roya 
            Sedghi
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Rajender S. 
            Varma
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Organic Chemistry and Oil, Faculty of Chemistry and Petroleum Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University, 1983969411, Tehran, Iran
bDepartment of Polymer and Materials Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Petroleum Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University, 1983969411, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: r_sedghi@sbu.ac.ir
cRegional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, Šlechtitelů 27, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic. E-mail: varma.rajender@epa.gov
Received 
      9th September 2018
    , Accepted 5th November 2018First published on 5th November 2018AbstractThe ever-increasing interest in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction (SMR) and its applications, with more than 40 years of history, has increased exponentially in the last decade, which speaks volumes about its efficiency and effectiveness. This widely used powerful method provides a practical synthetic route for the direct formation of carbon–carbon bonds, which has found considerable academic and industrial use for the production of polymers, fine chemicals and materials, in addition to total synthesis and pharmaceuticals. Green chemistry predicates the use of environmentally-benign media in organic transformations and in recent years, catalytic systems have been introduced in diverse and neoteric green media for SMR. In view of the widespread popularity, there is the need for a comprehensive understanding of the various greener strategies introduced for this important reaction encompassing diverse catalytic systems based on palladium, nickel, gold, ferrites, copper, silver, and cobalt. The present review embodies literature from 2008 onward that covers the SMR using efficient catalysts in various green media.Seyyed Emad HooshmandSeyyed Emad Hooshmand was born in Iran, in 1988 and received his B.Sc. in Chemistry from Bu-Ali Sina University, Hamedan, in 2011, and his M.Sc. in Organic Chemistry from Kharazmi University, in 2013. He started his Ph.D. studies at Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, in 2014, and was awarded the Shahid Shahriari research fellowship in 2017. His current research interests are focused on green chemistry, metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions and multi-component reactions based on dithiocarbamates and isocyanides. He is the author of over 25 scientific articles, including, reviews, and a book chapter.Bahareh HeidariBahareh Heidari was born in Qorveh/Kurdistan, Iran, in 1989. She received her B.Sc. in Chemistry from Razi University, Kermanshah in 2011, and her M.Sc. in Organic Chemistry from Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran under the supervision of Dr Mohammad Reza Nabid, in 2013. She is currently working towards her Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Majid M. Heravi with Dr Roya Sedghi as an advisor. Her research interest involve the synthesis of polymeric nanocomposites as catalyst, colorimetric sensors and molecularly imprinted polymers.Roya SedghiRoya Sedghi was born in 1980 in Tehran and received her B.Sc. degree from the Tehran Azad University of Iran in 2002 before being accepted for M.Sc. at Shahid Beheshti University. She completed her Ph.D. under the supervision of Professor H. Abdi Oskoiee and is presently working at Shahid Beheshti University as an assistant professor. She has authored 50 publications and her research is mainly focused on the application of nanocomposites in various chemistry disciplines such as catalysis and drug delivery. In 2017, she is awarded research project in green chemistry for Life supported by UNESCO, PhosAgro and IUPAC.Rajender S. VarmaProf. Rajender Varma (H-index 102; ‘Highly Cited Researchers’ 2016, 2018; Publons awardee 2018) did his PhD from Delhi University, 1976. After postdoctoral research at Robert Robinson Laboratories, Liverpool, England, he was a faculty at Baylor College of Medicine and Sam Houston State University prior to joining the US Environmental Protection Agency in 1999 with appointment at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Palacky University at Olomouc, Czech Republic from 2014. He has over 45 years of research experience in the management of multi-disciplinary technical programs. Lately, he is engaged in greener assembly of nanomaterials and the sustainable applications of magnetically retrievable nanocatalysts. He is board member of several international journals, published over 480 papers, and has been awarded 16 US Patents with 35000 citations.
1 Introduction
1.1 Green chemistry: a necessity
The new sustainability-focused development plan outlined by the United Nations in 2015 is entitled “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” and is comprised of 17 sustainable development goals that address a broad range of topics, mainly recognizing the need for green and sustainable chemistry and engineering.1 Achieving the objectives of this plan is vital for the future of the planet and its biological species, which include humans, plants, and animals. A significant challenge and barrier to attaining this goal is the selection of appropriate media and solvents for use in industrial, hospital and research centers; the study and development of eco-friendly media have been under active scrutiny in diverse scientific and commercial fields. The term green chemistry has been defined by IUPAC as follows: “the invention, design and application of chemical products and processes to reduce or to eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances”.2 Importantly, an ideal green medium should be safe for both human beings and the environment and its use and production should adhere to the sustainability theme. From a synthetic chemist's viewpoint, this emphasis on environmental and health issues is leading to a paradigm shift in the design of greener approaches for the preparation of all molecules without applying any toxic solvents and damaging substances; some of the traditional solvents used earlier by researchers in academia and the industrial community have been blacklisted by international regulations; for example, chlorinated hydrocarbon solvents, benzene and some of its derivatives have been severely curtailed.3 Consequently, scientists and researchers have been ceaselessly trying to find appropriate sustainable replacements for expensive, toxic and environmentally damaging organic solvents. In this context, many efforts have been expanded during the last decade for accomplishing SMR in environmentally benign media. These remarkable developments to conduct this noteworthy and widely deployed cross-coupling reaction in green solvents such as water and ethanol (EtOH) as well as neoteric media like biomass-derived solvents, ionic liquids, deep eutectic solvents, and supercritical carbon dioxide, etc., has encouraged us to review this field.
1.2 The Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction (SMR)
Transition-metal-mediated cross-couplings, namely, Suzuki–Miyaura, Hiyama, Stille, Heck, Negishi, Kumada, and Sonogashira reactions, are powerful tools for C–C bond formation.4–11 The C–C coupling reactions have become truly fundamental routes in natural product synthesis, materials science, biological-, medicinal-, and supramolecular chemistry, and also in catalysis, coordination chemistry and polymer synthesis.12–14 The Suzuki–Miyaura reaction has been heavily exploited in this decade, especially reactions that provide rapid entry to biaryl frameworks via sp2–sp2 linkages.15,16 This reaction is widely used due to attractive properties such as the mild reaction conditions, the commercial availability of an array of precursors, the functional-group compatibility, the high stabilities towards air and moisture, and the deployment of nontoxic and easily synthesized boronic acids. A recent survey of the literature reveals many examples of palladium (Pd), nickel (Ni) and gold (Au) complexes as efficient catalysts for the cross-coupling reactions;17,18 the award of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 2010 to Ei-ichi Negishi, Akira Suzuki and Richard Heck is testimony to their valuable contribution to this research field.19 Several reviews on the SMR have appeared in the literature,20–23 with the initial one being written by Suzuki and Miyaura in 1995. Today, numerous papers have emerged on the SMR in a truly explosive growth pattern comprising diverse fields; the frequency of publications from 1995 to 2017 is illustrated in Fig. 1, showing an upward trend of about 4369 articles published in addition to over 3506 patents.
 Fig. 1  The frequency of SMR publications, obtained from a search of the title, abstract, or keywords contained in Scopus from 1995 to 2017. 
2 Water
Water, a plentiful resource with an admirable specificity, is an abundant, safe and green medium and has been applied to an array of organic reactions in the last two decades.24 Water plays a dual role as medium and as a co-catalyst in quite a few of these convergent synthetic routes due to its high surface tension and hydrophobic nature, which underscore the tendency of nonpolar molecules or their surfaces to aggregate in water; Breslow's hydrophobic effect in-water emphasizes that for decreasing the exposed organic surface area, the substrates must be aggregated.25 On the other hand, there are some salient properties of water including a large cohesive energy density derived from some characteristics of water molecules such as the small size and high polarity, along with the three-dimensional (3D) hydrogen bond networks of water. Often, water plays an important role in the rate acceleration of reactions by establishing extensive hydrogen bonding with the functional groups of reactants and activating them in the process.26 In recent years, the use of water as a greener sustainable reaction medium has been under focus for diminishing environmental pollution,27–30 and has been applied in the SMR coupled with different support systems for a wide variety of nanoparticles (NPs) as catalysts.20,21,31 Substantial considerations have been extended to the aqueous and heterogeneous switching of organic transformations by amphiphilic block copolymer-supported transition metal complexes or metal NPs.32 The Suzuki–Miyaura reaction (SMR) has been carried out in water via assorted catalysts, accommodating not only hydrophilic substrates but also hydrophobic substituents in aqueous medium, affording high to excellent yields. The driving force for the hydrophobic guest molecules to diffuse onto the sphere is mainly ascribed to the hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions in water. These ensuing good yields might be due to a combination of the hydrophobic effect of water and the nature of the support,33 and stabilization of leached palladium reactive species34 in water.
2.1 Palladium NPs
Jin et al. devised the hierarchical MFI zeolite support 1 for the immobilization of Pd(OAc)2 in two steps (Scheme 1),35 which was successfully used for the SMR to afford the coupled compounds under mild conditions (Scheme 2). This catalyst, with a narrow distribution of mesopore diameters of around 3.3 nm, was hydrothermally synthesized using a mesopore-directing agent and possessed the specific BET surface area of 502 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.46 cm3 g−1. Interestingly, substrates bearing both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups, 4, 5, were well tolerated and the catalyst can be readily recovered and recycled several times in fast reactions with high turnover numbers. The superior catalytic activity, higher stability and reusability (1.5 ppm Pd metal leaching into the reaction mixture during the first run) of the catalyst could be attributed to the strong binding of Pd(OAc)2 to MFI-supported ionic liquid (IL) support, 2.
 Scheme 1  Preparative steps for MFI-supported Pd(OAc)2–IL 3 as the SMR catalyst. 
 Scheme 2  The SMR of aryl bromides 4 with arylboronic acid 5 using MFI-supported Pd(OAc)2–IL 3. 
Karimi et al. reported the design, preparation and characterization of a water-dispersible Pd catalyst on a Fe3O4@SiO2 anchored hydrophilic triethylene glycol (TEG)-imidazolium IL (Mag-IL-Pd, 7) for the SMR (Scheme 3);36 the core–shell structure had a narrow size distribution, with the thickness of the iron oxide core and the silica shell being ∼10 and 5–7 nm, respectively. The products were acquired in good to superior yields with high turnover numbers (TONs) (185-4000) using a very low Pd loading (0.025–0.5 mol% of catalyst), which could be recycled 10 times without significant loss of activity and no apparent decrease in Pd content; nearly the same as the fresh catalyst (0.084 mmol Pd g−1). The TEG tags of functionalized magnetic NPs led to a hydrophilic nanocatalyst that provided an excellent dispersion of the catalyst in water. Furthermore, supported IL not only stabilizes the Pd NPs during the reaction but also provides an IL-based nano-environment on the surface of magnetic Pd to increase their interaction with aryl halides, thus improving the overall reaction efficiency.
 Scheme 3  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and boronic acids 5 by Mag-IL-Pd catalyst 7. 
N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) have aroused considerable attention in recent years as possible alternative ligands for metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions,37 exemplified by N-substituted main-chain NHC-Pd polymers 11a–c (Scheme 4) as reusable catalytic systems for the SMR of chloroarenes (Scheme 5).38 The catalyst 11c, bearing the more lipophilic n-dodecyl group, was found to be more reactive (91% yield, with extremely low Pd loading (0.0005 mol%)) for reactions of both deactivated and hindered aryl chlorides 4 with various arylboronic acids 5, exclusively in aqueous media. The results demonstrate that the electronic effects do not significantly affect the isolated yields for electron-deficient and electron-rich aryl chlorides. The lifetime and recycling of the catalyst were investigated; the obtained data showed that catalyst 11a could be consistently applied in 6 consecutive coupling reactions of 4-chlorobenzaldehyde with phenylboronic acid to afford the product in an average yield of 92%. The same coupling model reaction in the presence of 11c (0.05 mol%) could be successfully recycled in seven reaction runs. While the obtained data clearly show that virtually no significant deactivation occurred during these runs, it was necessary to increase the reaction times after the 4th run to ensure proper conversion.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of main-chain NHC-Pd polymers 11a–c as SMR catalysts. 
 Scheme 5  The SMR of various aryl chlorides 4 with arylboronic acid 5 by N-substituted main-chain NHC-Pd polymer catalyst 11c. 
In another variation of the methodology, Liu et al. described a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-functionalized imidazolium salts-based Pd-catalyst for the cross-coupling of aryl bromides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 in the presence of 0.5 mol% Pd(OAc)2 at 100 °C (Scheme 7),39 wherein several water-soluble imidazolium salts bearing PEG moieties directly linked to an N-atom of imidazole could serve as NHC precursors 16a–c (Scheme 6). For comparison purposes, a kinetic study of the SMR was performed in the presence of Pd(OAc)2 and triethylamine (Et3N) at 80 °C in aqueous media; 16c displayed a relatively higher catalytic activity in a shorter induction period than catalysts 16a and 16b. These results show that increasing the “steric-bulk” of the ligand attached to the metal center is crucial for attaining the Pd-catalyzed SMR; Et3N is the ideal choice among the other bases such as morpholine, CH3CH2ONa, piperidine, 1,2-diaminocyclohexane, DMEDA (N,N′-dimethylethanediamine) and TMEDA (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethanediamine). The superior performance of Et3N is presumably due to its inherent tendency to re-coordinate with the active NHC-Pd groups, thus elongating the lifetime in solution.40
 Scheme 6  The synthetic path to PEG-functionalized imidazolium salts, 16a–c. 
 Scheme 7  The SMR between aryl bromides 4 and aryl boronic acids 5 in water. 
Zhang et al. reported the SMR within the core–corona nanoreactor of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-grafted Pd NPs (Pd@PNIPAM) 18 with average size of ∼3 nm, which were synthesized by covalently grafting the thiol-terminated PNIPAM brushes to Pd NPs, in water (Scheme 8).41 The Pd NPs as core and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) brushes as the corona provided the nanoenvironment to the guest molecules for the SMR. Both hydrophilic and hydrophobic reactants can be enriched in the nanoenvironment of 18 (Scheme 9). The hydrophilic substrates can be entrapped in the nanoreactor of PNIPAM brushes due to the strong hydrogen bonding at room temperature and therefore the SMR within the nanoreactor is carried out in water. For hydrophobic reactants, the substrates can diffuse into the nanoenvironment of 18 and the SMR is carried out efficiently above the phase-transition temperature of the nanoenvironment of the PNIPAM brushes. Furthermore, the catalyst can be reused due to the reversible phase transition of the PNIPAM brushes. At room temperature, the PNIPAM brushes are soluble in water and the 18 nanoreactor exists as a colloid; when reactants such as benzeneboronic acid, 4-bromophenol and K2CO3 are added and the temperature is increased above the phase-transition temperature, the PNIPAM brushes become insoluble and collapse onto the Pd NPs, rendering 18 as a fine flocculent suspension. After completion of the SMR, the organic compounds are extracted into the organic solvent phase and the catalyst 18 NPs, which exist as a fine flocculent suspension, remain in the aqueous phase; the suspended catalyst is then carefully collected and reused in next run of the SMR.
 Scheme 8  Schematic representation of guest molecules entrapped within the nanoreactor of Pd@PNIPAM 18. 
 Scheme 9  The aqueous SMR within the Pd@PNIPAM nanoreactor 18 as catalyst. 
The SMR of arenediazonium salts, 22 can be catalyzed using alginate/gellan-stabilized Pd NPs (Pdnp/A–G) 21 under aerobic conditions;42 Pd NPs are stabilized by dropping an alginate/gellan (50:50) solution into a CaCl2 solution 19, followed by soaking hydrogel beads in a Na2PdCl4 solution. The reduction of Pd NPs occurs during the dehydratation step (Scheme 10). The virgin catalyst system is comprised of Pd spheroidal NPs whose average size is 3.4 ± 1.4 nm, and the material recovered after eight runs showed the NPs to be about 3.6 ± 1.7 nm in diameter. The Pd catalyst 21 was applied in the SMR of 22 with potassium aryltrifluoroborates 23 (1:1 molar ratio) with 0.01–0.002 mol% loading under aerobic, base-, and phosphine-free conditions (Scheme 11); the use of other solvents in the SMR was explored and no coupling product was discerned in MeOH or EtOH, and MeCN or DMF afforded products only in lower yields. The catalyst could be reused several times without significant loss of activity, with the cumulated TON over eight runs being 68400.
 Scheme 10  Preparation of Pd np/A–G 21. 
 Scheme 11  The aqueous SMR of arenediazonium tetrafluoroborates, 22 with potassium aryltrifluoroborates, 23 using Pdnp/A–G 21 as the catalyst. 
The immobilization of Pd NPs directly onto various supports such as carbon,43 zeolites,44 silica,45 and polymers,46 and their application in cross-coupling reactions in green media has been emphasized lately due to the ever-intensifying demand for cleaner and sustainable chemistry; the choice of supports is shifting from petrochemical-based feedstocks to environmentally safe materials. Bacterial cellulose (BC) is an example of such a support due to its eco-friendly properties, possessing a large surface area and stable heterogeneous interface for developing semi-heterogeneous catalysts.47–49 In this context, Sun et al. introduced bio-supported Pd NPs (Pd/BC) as a phosphine-free catalyst for the SMR (Scheme 12)50via one-pot synthesis by simply mixing Pd(NO3)2 (or PdCl2) and the reducing reagent with BC nanofibres in a hydrothermal reaction; the ensuing Pd NPs are comprised of small polydisperse islands with dimension of about 20 nm on BC nanofibers. Higher yields of the products were attained in water in the presence of 0.05 mol% recyclable Pd/BC catalyst, with yields over 86% after five cycles; the Pd concentration was found to be 5.29% before reaction and 5.26% after five reaction cycles.
 Scheme 12  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 by 0.05 mol% Pd/BC catalyst in water. 
Pitchumani et al. reported the preparation and function of an ionic Pd(II) complex stabilized using water-soluble pyridinium-modified β-cyclodextrin (Pyr:β-CD) (supramolecular ligand) as an efficient catalyst for the SMR;51 this homogeneous catalyst is very soluble in water as compared to native β-CD and could be reused more than six times without significant loss of catalytic activity. The substrate scope, under the optimized conditions, was explored for a range of diverse 4-substituted aryl bromides, 4, containing both electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups, which all furnished products 6 in good yields in a short time, with the exception of nitro-group substitution (0.5 mol% Pd(OAc)2 at 80 °C in 2 mL H2O) (Scheme 13).
 Scheme 13  The SMR of various aryl halides 4 with phenylboronic acid 5 catalyzed using the pyridinium-modified CD/Pd(OAc)2 complex. 
Zou et al. developed the Pd@MIL-101Cr-NH2 catalyst via the immobilization of Pd NPs on an amino-functionalized metal–organic framework (MOF);52 four catalysts with different loadings of Pd NPs were introduced (denoted as 4-, 8-, 12-, and 16 wt% Pd@MIL-101Cr-NH2). The catalytic activity of these catalysts was evaluated for the SMR, with the best catalytic performance being achieved with the MOF that contained 8 wt% Pd NPs (Scheme 14). Furthermore, the catalyst can be reused at least 10 times without alteration of its catalytic activity.
 Scheme 14  The SMR of various aryl bromides and chlorides, 4, catalyzed by 8 wt%Pd@MIL-101Cr-NH2. 
In recent years, oxygen-equilibrated aqueous solutions of Kolliphor EL, a well-known surfactant, have been noted to form nanomicelles with oxygen-free cores that provided an ideal green core environment for Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions.53 The Lipshutz group recently showed that the high solubility of oxygen in an organic medium, including micelles, can be beneficially applied to perform the aerobic oxidation of water-insoluble arylalkynes to β-ketosulfones under mild conditions. In 2017, Beverina et al. showed that such micelles provide an appropriate medium for the SMR in an oxygenated environment at room temperature;54 Kolliphor EL can be used for the synthesis of popular molecular semiconductors relevant to the classes of diketopyrrolopyrroles,55,56 diarylanthracenes,57 isoindigos,58 diarylbenzothiadiazoles,59 and perylenediimides.60–63 The scope of the reaction is indicated by the coupling of aryl and heteroaryl bromides with boronic acids and esters. A wide variety of Suzuki–Miyaura coupling products, 6a–c, produced in high yield by this new catalyst is shown in Scheme 15; all reactions can be conducted directly in a standard oxygenated environmental condition in deionized water and the reaction medium can be reused.
 Scheme 15  Micellar couplings in water and air by [1,1′-bis(di-tertbutylphosphino) ferrocene]dichloropalladium(II) (Pd(dtbpf)-Cl2). 
The Varma research group described a versatile iron-cellulose-derived Fe3O4@CPd catalyst, 27, which has been prepared by the in situ production of nanoferrites and the incorporation of carbon from renewable cellulose via calcination (Scheme 16).64 The particle size of 27 is in the range of 20–50 nm, the weight percentage of Pd was determined to be 4.81% by ICP-AES analysis, and the surface analysis of 27 showed a BET surface area of 175.71 m2 g−1. The arylation of aryl halides 4 could be easily carried out by boronic acid 5 under microwave (MW) irradiation conditions within 30 min (Scheme 17) and accommodates both the electron withdrawing and electron donating substituents.
 Scheme 16  Preparation of carbon-coated magnetic Fe3O4@CPd 27 catalyst. 
 Scheme 17  Arylation of aryl halides 4 using 27 as catalyst. 
Huo et al. introduced a fullerene-supported PdCl2 [C60-TEGS/PdCl2] 30 as a water-soluble nanocatalyst via the coordination of water-soluble fullerene NPs 29 with PdCl2; the average particle sizes of 29 and 30 were 42.5 nm and 61.5 nm, respectively (Scheme 18).65 Both the electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups of aryl halides 4 were coupled with phenylboronic acid 5, and the ensuing biphenyl compounds 6 could be obtained in excellent yields using 0.01 mol% of the catalyst at room temperature (Scheme 19); 4-chloroacetophenone was coupled using 0.5 mol% catalyst to afford 65% yield and the catalyst could be reused five times without significant loss in its catalytic activity. The stable Pd catalyst 30 leached only a small amount of Pd in a long-term static state and ICP-AES analysis showed that there was only 10 wt% loss after five recycling runs.
 Scheme 18  The preparation of water-soluble fullerene-supported PdCl2 nanocatalyst 30. 
 Scheme 19  The SMR of arylboronic acid 5 with aryl halides 4 using catalyst 30. 
A heterogeneous biopolymer complex, wool-based Pd catalyst, has been reported for the SMR in water.66 Wool is an inexpensive natural biopolymer comprising amino acids cross-linked via S–S bonds, the main component being keratin. This biodegradable biopolymer, bearing numerous amino acids units with functional groups such as –NH–CO–, –NH2 and –S–S– etc.,67 serves as a green support for facile reactions and the broad scope of these reactions with respect to both coupling partners has been explored.
2.2 Gold/palladium NPs
Jutand et al. described the homogeneous origin of Au–Pd core–shell NPs in aqueous SMR through Pd leaching.68 The presence of the Au core allowed the careful evaluation of the surface status of the Pd NPs after a catalytic reaction using surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS); Au@Pd NPs turned out to be efficient catalysts for the SMR, where even a sluggish reagent69 reacted readily in water at room temperature with an average yield of 95% in roughly 4 h (Scheme 20).
 Scheme 20  The SMR via Au–Pd core–shell NPs. 
2.3 Fe-ppm Pd NPs
Most of today's applications of transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling chemistry rely on the expensive Pd. However, Lipshutz et al. in 2015 demonstrated that NPs from inexpensive iron(III) chloride (FeCl3), which naturally contains ppm levels of Pd,70 can be used directly for the SMR. Using several control reactions, it was clearly shown that successful couplings require the presence of both FeCl3 and Pd within these nanocomposites. All reactions were carried out using 2-dicyclohexylphosphino-2,6-dimethoxybiphenyl (SPhos) as a ligand in various ratios. The reduction of 5 mol% of pure FeCl3 with 10 mol% of MeMgCl in the presence of 5 mol% SPhos and 320 ppm Pd(OAc)2 generated a superior nanocatalyst that mediated the formation of the desired coupled product 6 in 95% isolated yield (Scheme 21). Doping pure FeCl3 with 500 ppm of other metals, such as Ni(acac)2, NiCl2, MnCl2, CoCl3, Cu(OAc)2 or CuBr2 produced catalysts that generated variable levels of product; in all cases, the yields were ≤38%.
 Scheme 21  Couplings between aryl halides and aryl or alkenyl boron derivatives. 
2.4 Cu-ppm Pd NPs
The same research group reported copper-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura reactions under remarkably mild conditions, wherein ppm levels of Pd(OAc)2 worked synergistically with Cu catalyst to generate biaryls in the absence of organic solvent;71 the investment of significant energy in the form of typically harsh reaction temperatures could thus be eliminated. A new P(O),N-ligand generated in situ from a readily available precursor has been uncovered that allows couplings to occur with inexpensive Cu(OAc)2. The entire aqueous system containing nanomicelles as the reaction vessels, base, copper and palladium can be recycled, further attesting to the eco-friendly nature of this technology.
2.5 Nickel NPs
Nickel nanoparticles, formed in situ and used in combination with micellar catalysis, catalyze the SMR under mild aqueous reaction conditions;72 the proper choice of ligand on the metal, complementing the hydrophobic characteristics of aqueous nanomicelles achieves the objective. This newer technological development also showcases broader substrate scope, essentially stoichiometric levels of reaction partners, considerable flexibility in the choice of both leaving group and source of boron, very mild reaction conditions and notably, the option for recycling of the aqueous medium containing both the surfactant and the catalyst.
2.6 Ferrite NPs
The potential application of the glutathione-based organocatalyst, having uniform-sized particles with cube-like morphology with an average size range of 10–15 nm, was introduced in the homocoupling of aryl boronic acids 5 under the microwave (MW)-assisted aqueous synthesis of symmetric biaryls 6 by Varma and co-workers (Scheme 22).73 A wide range of substituents, regardless of their electron-withdrawing or donating nature, was accommodated and the catalyst was found to be reusable after 4 cycles; easy recovery from the reaction mixture was facilitated using an external magnet. The firm anchoring of the glutathione on the ferrite support via the thiol group is responsible for achieving the high reusability of the catalyst.
 Scheme 22  Aqueous homocoupling of substituted arylboronic acids 5 by the glutathione-based catalyst under MW irradiation. 
2.7 Gold NPs
Although the chosen catalyst for the SMR is invariably Pd NPs, Au(I) complexes can also be applied as efficient alternatives.74 Au NPs have gained significant prominence in catalytic applications75–77 as exemplified by the facile synthesis of highly poly(2-aminothiophenol) (PAPT)-stabilized Au NPs78 applied for the SMR. The proposed mechanism of Au NPs use in SMR may follow a homogeneous route, as the leaching of Au was observed in the first half-hour of the coupling reaction (5.5% of the initial catalyst charge).79 Importantly, the precise control over the size of Au NPs and the amount of PATP stabilizer are crucial for improving the catalytic activities of Au NPs; an increase in size from 1.0 to 2.0 and 5.0 nm decreased the yield from 87% to 76% and 10%, respectively. On the other hand, when the size of Au NPs was maintained at 1.0 nm but with considerably more stabilizer added, only a trace amount of product was formed. It is known that the smaller size of Au NPs will lead to higher catalytic activity, while the effect of polymer amount on the Au activity may be attributed to the fact that the PAPT polymer may act as a catalyst inhibitor. With only 0.05 mol% of Au catalyst loading, high yields of products from substituted aryl chlorides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 were attained (Scheme 23) and the recovered Au catalyst, by simple filtration, retained its activity without significant loss over six cycles, with yield loss being within 3% for six cycles.
 Scheme 23  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 by Au catalyst in water. 
The preparation of Au NPs and graphene oxide (GO)-incorporated strontium ion cross-linked alginate/carboxymethylcellulose (Sr/Alg/CMC/GO/Au) composites was accomplished using dissipative convective procedures that were followed by the freeze-drying method (Scheme 24). In the case of the Sr/Alg/CMC composite, capillary formation in the range of 50–80 μm with interconnected pores having a diameter of about 5–20 μm was observed. Incorporation of Au-NPs into the alginate/CMC composites resulted in organized capillaries of 25–50 μm with interconnected pores around 5–30 μm. Moreover, the Sr/Alg/CMC/GO/Au composite gel revealed capillaries and pores with diameter around 10–15 μm and 5–20 μm, respectively; its application for the SMR required only 0.005 mol% catalyst (Scheme 25).80 Higher yields were obtained in the case of substituted aryl iodides, while substituted aryl chlorides gave a lower yield. The composites displayed 6 cycles of recyclability and 98% isolated yield, the turnover frequency (TOF) value being 4900 h−1; ICP-MS analysis did not show any leaching of Sr2+-ions.
 Scheme 24  Schematic representation of the Sr2+ crosslinked alginate/CMC composite hydrogels synthesis process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. 
 Scheme 25  The SMR of aryl halides 4 with phenylboronic acids 5 catalyzed by Sr/Alg/CMC/GO/Au composites. 
2.8 Cobalt
In recent years, considerable attention has been focused on Pd-free reactions as the awareness sets in that transition metal catalysts such as Ni,81 Cu,82 Fe83 and Co,84,85 may serve as substitutes for air-sensitive and expensive precious metals such as Pd. Although Co-catalyzed reactions have been relatively rare,86,87 they have attracted attention in organic synthesis owing to their superior reactivity for various C–C bond forming reactions in view of nontoxicity, low cost, accessibility and their interesting mode of action;88,89 both homogeneous and heterogeneous Co-based catalysts in combination with various ligands have improved the cross-coupling reactions.90–94 Akhlaghinia et al. introduced a green magnetic catalyst based on Fe3O4@Boehmite NPs 35 of very small size; the immobilization of Co(II) was accomplished via the reaction of Fe3O4@Boehmite-NH239 with ethanolic solution of CoCl2·6H2O (Scheme 26) and the ensuing catalyst used for SMR.95 Boehmite NPs 32, a component of the aluminum ore, bauxite, with octahedral double sheets centered with aluminum ions and extra hydroxyl groups on their outer surface, provide the ability for immobilization of metal ions.96 The particle sizes of the resultant Fe3O4@Boehmite-NH2-CoII NPs 40, in irregular geometric shape, were about 13–54 nm. Under the optimized reaction conditions, a variety of structurally divergent aryl halides 4 reacted with phenylboronic acid 5 to produce the desired coupling products 6 (Scheme 27) and the superior catalytic activity of the new nanocatalyst was not significantly decreased even after seven recycle runs. The hot filtration test demonstrated that a negligible amount of active species (less than 0.31 mol% by ICP-OES analysis) was leached out during the catalytic reaction.
 Scheme 26  The preparative steps for Fe3O4@ Boehmite-NH2-Co(II) NPs 40. 
 Scheme 27  The SMR of diverse aryl halides with phenylboronic acid catalyzed using 40. 
3 Ethanol
The selection of an appropriate solvent or solvent mixture as the reaction medium is of paramount importance besides task-specific reaction catalysts and energy requirements. The influence of solvent on chemical reactivity has been studied for more than a century, beginning with the work of Berthelot and Pe′an de Saint Gilles in Paris, France in 1862 on the esterification of acetic acid with ethanol (EtOH);97 EtOH is a green and ideal renewable solvent for numerous organic reactions.
3.1 Palladium NPs
Several scientific groups have developed catalytic systems that operate in EtOH solvent for cross-coupling reactions. Wu et al. devised a novel reusable alkoxy Pd complex based on the N, O-ligand 43 (Scheme 28) that demonstrated superior catalytic activity in EtOH for the SMR without using any phosphine ligand (Scheme 29);98 complex 43 showed high catalytic activity for an array of aryl bromides to give excellent yields and no significant loss of catalytic activity was discerned after six cycles.
 Scheme 28  The synthetic steps for assembly of the Pd complex based on N, O-ligand 43. Conditions: (i) n-BuLi, THF; (ii) Ph2CO; (iii) 2 N HCl; (iv) Pd(OAc)2, toluene, room temperature, 3 days. 
 Scheme 29  Modified SMR of aryl bromides 4 with boronic acid 5 by catalyst 43 in EtOH solvent. 
The Nahra research group introduced the [NHC·H][Pd(η3-R-allyl)Cl2] complexes 44 as facile, environmentally-friendly and effective catalysts for electron-withdrawing and electron-donating aryl bromides and chlorides as well as heteroatom-containing and sterically hindered aryl halides 499 (Scheme 30).
 Scheme 30  Scope of the SMR using catalyst 44 in EtOH solvent. 
Wang et al. produced (Ni,Mg)3Si2O5(OH)4 solid-solution nanotubes (NTs) of tunable compositions via hydrothermal synthesis by varying the molar ratio of Mg2+ to Ni2+, which were then loaded with Pd (∼0.045 wt%); the ensuing catalyst demonstrated superior activity for the SMR between iodobenzene or 4-iodotoluene and phenylboronic acid (Scheme 31).100 Among the various ratios of Mg2+:Ni2+ investigated (Mg2+:Ni2+ = 0:2.0, 0.5:1.5, 1.0:1.0, and 1.5:0.5), hydrothermally stable (Ni,Mg)3Si2O5(OH)4 solid-solution silicate NTs with Mg2+:Ni2+ ratio = 1.0:1.0, provided an ideal tubular-structured support for catalysts with low Pd loading, excellent recycling performance for 10 cycles, with yields of ∼99%, and an extremely low Pd release level of ∼0.02 ppm was also observed; Pd was 0.0449 wt% before the 1st cycle and 0.0447 wt% after the 10th cycle.
 Scheme 31  The SMR between 4-iodotoluene 4 and phenylboronic acid 5. 
3.2 Copper/palladium
A Suzuki-type C–H arylation of azoles was accomplished using Pd(OAc)2, Cu(OAc)2 and CuCl101 and the beneficial effect of CuCl was described in the Pd(OAc)2 catalyzed SMR with 2-heterocyclic boronates.102 Liebeskind et al. introduced a Pd catalyzed, Cu-mediated route for the reaction of aryl- and alkenyl halides and arylboronic acids with Cu(I) thiophene-2-carboxylate as a mediator in the absence of a base.103 Alginate-based nanocatalysts have been used for the C–C bond formation via a procedure that might be applied for gelling many metals Mn+ (Ca, Ba, Mn, Zn, Ni, Ce, Cu, and Co), allowing the straightforward preparation of a panel of alginate/Mn+/Pd NPs gels (Scheme 32).104 The main influence of the gelling metal nature on the surface areas of alginate/Mn+/Pd NPs aerogels has been disclosed. Although Mn2+, Zn2+, Ni2+ and Co2+ did not induce considerable change, the use of Ca2+, Ba2+, Cu2+ and Ce3+ increased the surface areas when compared with the solids obtained without gelling metal Mn+. The optimum Pd/Mn+ ratio was found to be 97/03, which resulted in the formation of monodisperse Pd NPs; higher ratios produced a larger size range, accompanied by some aggregation of NPs. At this Pd/Mn+ ratio, the particle size was close to 7 ± 2 nm irrespective of the gelling metal Mn+, except Cu2+ for which a special narrow size distribution was obtained. The ensuing bimetallic hybrid catalysts are of special interest because they incorporate the textural properties of alginate, the excellent catalytic activity of Pd NPs and the presence of a second metal species that influences the catalytic activity as highlighted in the superior performances of Pd NPs supported on copper-alginate aerogels for the SMR. This heterogeneous catalyst, which could be reused for several cycles without significant loss of activity or metal leaching, showed excellent catalytic activities as illustrated by a TOF value of 10 s−1 and a TON value close to 106.
 Scheme 32  Schematic diagram of Pd NPs supported on copper-alginate aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
4 Water/ethanol mixture
4.1 Palladium NPs
Over the last few years, GO105,106 and chemically-derived graphene (CDG)107 have been introduced as extremely versatile carbon materials; GO and its CDG derivatives have been used as supports for Pd clusters and NPs as superior catalysts for the SMR in aqueous EtOH. In contrast to the conventional Pd/C catalyst, GO and graphene-based catalysts afforded much higher activities with TOF exceeding 39000 h−1 and very low Pd leaching, the highest activity being achieved with Pd2+-GO and the H2-reduced derivative Pd0-CDG-H2, followed by Pd0-CDGEXP and Pd/C (Scheme 33).
 Scheme 33  The SMR of various aryl Bromides 4 using 0.25 mol% Pd(II)–GO. 
Recently, Fu et al. disclosed a facile photodeposition strategy to produce a green catalyst, Pd/g-C3N4 nanocomposite with lower Pd contents (Pd0.10/g-C3N4), for the SMR (Scheme 34) where the Pd NPs are uniformly dispersed on the g-C3N4 surface;108 excellent catalytic activity was observed at room temperature with quantitative conversion and a high yield of 97% for biphenyls. The high catalytic activity in the SMR was accredited to the specific nanostructured characteristics of Pd/g-C3N4; i.e., the concerted effects of g-C3N4 in conjunction with ultrafine Pd particles. The exact amounts of Pd in Pd/g-C3N4 were detected via ICP-AES and the contents of Pd in Pd0.05/g-C3N4 and Pd0.10/g-C3N4, were measured to be 4.4 wt% and 8.8 wt%, respectively.
 Scheme 34  The SMR of aryl halides 4 on the catalytic conversion to biaryls 6. 
In another methodology, Astruc et al. reported the use of Pd NPs (1.4 nm) that were stabilized by dendritic nanoreactors containing 1,2,3-triazole ligands bearing TEG termini and its application for the SMR of aryl bromides 4 at sub-ppm levels (Scheme 35);109 the hydrodynamic diameters of the TEG dendrimers determined by DOSY NMR and DLS were 5.5 ± 0.2 nm and 9 nm, respectively. The structure of TEG termini of the dendrimer tethers are responsible for this excellent degree of intra dendritic Pd NP stabilization since they interact inter dendritically to form large assemblies; the TONs are very impressive at 80 °C, sometimes even larger than 106 with only 0.3 ppm of Pd for bromides.
 Scheme 35  The SMR between bromoarenes 4 and phenylboronic acid 5. 
It has been shown that 3D amine-terminated IL covalently functionalized graphene (3D IL-rGO)/Pd composite aerogels (Scheme 36) can be used as efficient and stable catalysts for the SMR under mild conditions (Scheme 37).110 The catalyst was synthesized via a green reduction-inducing self-assembly process; the cations of NH2-IL introduced to the surface of graphene sheets prevented the restacking of graphene sheets and developed the specific surface area, which improved the performance of the catalyst. The negatively charged Pd precursor, adsorbed on the positively charged imidazolium ring moiety of NH2-IL, created Pd NPs with small sizes uniformly distributed on the graphene sheets, which increased the active surface area of catalysts and enhanced their catalytic activity (Scheme 36). The cross-coupling of aryl halides with phenylboronic acid was investigated under 5 wt% loading amount of Pd in mixed solvents, EtOH/H2O. Non-substituted aryl halides, iodobenzene and bromobenzene afforded good yields up to 90%, with electron-withdrawing groups delivering higher yields than electron-donating groups, while the yield of chlorobenzene was still very low even after a prolonged reaction time.
 Scheme 36  Schematic of the fabrication process for the 3D IL-rGO/Pd hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
 Scheme 37  The SMR of a variety of aryl halides with phenylboronic acids catalyzed by the 3D IL-rGO/Pd hydrogel. 
Silyl ketones have recently emerged as visible-light photoinitiators in polymer science,111 which, upon irradiation, undergo homolytic Norrish type I C–C or C–Si bond cleavage and the ensuing radical fragments initiate the polymerization process. This strategy was exploited by Studer et al. for the preparation of Pd NPs starting with Pd(OAc)2 under visible light-emitting diode (LED) irradiation.112 Depending on the photoinitiator used, the diameter of the Pd NPs could be adjusted to 1.9 or 5.2 nm and stabilized with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP); these recyclable catalysts accomplished the SMR at low loading (0.5 mol%) to produce excellent yields of substituted biphenyls (Scheme 38), with Pd leaching content being 0.1 ppm after 0.5 h.
 Scheme 38  The SMR under irradiation with a visible light-emitting diode (LED). 
The nanostructured Pd NPs, immobilized on the surface of modified magnetic GO by poly 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propansulfonic acid (GO/Fe3O4/PAMPS/Pd), were introduced as an efficient nanocatalyst for the SMR in a mixture of H2O and EtOH by Sedghi and co-workers (Scheme 39);113 superior catalytic activity was observed for the cross-coupling of alkyl iodides, aryl bromides as well as aryl chlorides as the challenging substrates. The Fe3O4 NPs are quasi-spherical, with average diameters of 16 nm and the Pd-NPs having a mean size of 5 nm were dispersed in close contact with the surface of the GO sheet; the Pd content was estimated to be 1.1150 mmol g−1. The results revealed that PAMPS is a superior ligand with advantages such as performance in green solvent, ease of separation, shorter reaction times, recyclability, much-reduced Pd leaching and high isolated yields.
 Scheme 39  The SMR of various aryl halides 4 with aryl boronic acids 5 catalyzed by the GO/Fe3O4/PAMPS/Pd nanocomposite. 
4.2 Palladium/silver NPs
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs) make an interesting choice for supporting metals because of their high surface area, chemical stability and inertness.114 This was exemplified by the synergistically active bimetallic Pd–Ag hybrid NPs supported on CQDs (Pd-Ag@CQD) 45, which were formed by an expeditious UV-light-driven (365 nm) one-step wet chemical protocol via the in situ reduction of Pd(II) and Ag(I) ions (Scheme 40);115 CQDs served as both stabilizing agent and reducing agent. The Pd–Ag nanohybrid particles nucleated on the CQDs, thereby forming a stable and supportive nanohybrid structure and statistical analysis demonstrated that the size distribution was between 2 and 6 nm, with the largest dimension being in the range of 3–5 nm. The presence of electron-donating substituents on aryl halides as well as the aryl boronic acid resulted in less time for the completion of the reaction, whereas those with electron-withdrawing substituents took a bit longer, presumably due to the presence of polar electron-donating groups on the surface of the nanohybrid CQD catalyst (Scheme 41). The catalyst was found to be reusable up to the third run, without any loss of the catalytic activity. The leaching studies with Pd and Ag in the reaction medium showed the leakage of 0.871 ppm Pd and 0.520 ppm Ag in the reaction mixture, amounting to a loss of 0.058% Pd and 0.034% Ag from the total amount of the catalyst. The highest TON and TOF were found to be 752.3 and 12.53 min−1, respectively, for the cross-coupling reaction. In another report, Yamashita et al. had the same bimetallic Pd/Ag nanocatalyst on SBA-15 mesoporous silica as a plasmonic catalyst in the SMR with high catalytic efficiency.116
 Scheme 40  Synthesis of the Pd–Ag@CQD 45 nanohybrid. 
 Scheme 41  The SMR by Pd–Ag@CQD 45. 
Ultrasound and microwave irradiation represent alternative energy input systems to conventional heating and classical methods, and have received noticeable attention in the past decades for a variety of chemical processes;117–119 these methods often fulfill green chemistry objectives via faster heat- and mass-transfer, culminating in better yields and selectivity, short reaction times, and energy savings.120 Cavitation is caused by the formation of gas or vapor bubbles and clouds of bubbles in a liquid that can be amplified by acoustic or hydrodynamic effects, and their collapse generates higher localized temperature and pressure.121 Gogate et al. disclosed the usefulness of ultrasound for the SMR of 4-bromoanisole with phenylboronic acid, catalyzed by 5 wt% Pd/C in a mixture of ethanol and distilled water under ambient conditions.122 Ultrasound reduced the reaction time from 70 min to only 35 min, with catalyst loading of 1.5 mol%, a frequency of 22 kHz and power dissipation of 40 W.
4.3 Nickel
Although Pd catalysis has dominated the field and was responsible for the coveted 2010 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, there has been much attention toward the identification of complementary Ni-catalyzed processes,123–125 which tend to be low-cost operations as compared to Pd catalysis,123,124 besides the opportunity to discover new reactivity.126 Patel et al. produced Keggin-type mono Ni(II)-substituted phosphomolybdate and used it as a catalyst for the SMR with 0.1 mol% catalyst loading;127 various reaction parameters were investigated, with the highlight being the realization of >97% yield under mild reaction conditions (Scheme 42).
 Scheme 42  Coupling of diverse halobenzenes 4 with phenylboronic acid 5. 
4.4 Fe2O3 NPs
Astruc et al. unveiled the usefulness of α-Fe2O3 nanoclusters of 1.8 nm in size that were homogeneously deposited on the edge of the GO sheets (α-Fe2O3 nanocluster/GO) as an efficient catalyst in parts-per-million for the SMR;128 the reaction was conducted overnight at 80 °C in the presence of 150 ppm mol%. Bromobenzene derivatives containing electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups, 4, in the para positions were suitable coupling partners, forming 6 with good yields (Scheme 43); the catalyst could be recycled at least four times with good yields.
 Scheme 43  The SMR catalyzed by α-Fe2O3 nanocluster/GO. 
5 Aqueous extracts
5.1 Water extract of rice straw ash (WERSA)
Rice straw or its derived residues have been attractive feedstocks for energy manufacture due to its accessibility around the globe, and therefore its use in organic synthesis would be of tremendous interest from the environmental perspective as an inexpensive and eco-friendly renewable natural material. Saikia et al. introduced the neat aqueous extract of rice straw ash (WERSA) as a novel green catalyst for the SMR at room temperature (Schemes 44 and 45)129 as the reactions proceeded smoothly in the Pd(OAc)2–WERSA system without the use of any base/ligand/promoter/additive or organic media. The deployment of 1 mol% Pd(OAc)2 in WERSA appeared to be the ideal catalyst loading at room temperature, where most of the reactions generated the corresponding coupling products, 6, in moderate to high conversion yields, irrespective of the presence of electron withdrawing groups or electron donating groups in the substrates 4 and 5.
 Scheme 44  Preparation of WERSA and its catalytic activity in the SMR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Scheme 45  Substrate scope for the SMR using Pd(OAc)2 in WERSA. 
The chemical analysis of rice straw ash has shown that it primarily consists of oxides like SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, TiO2, CaO, MgO, K2O, Na2O, P2O5, etc.130 It is believed that alkali oxides of potassium, sodium, calcium and magnesium react with water to generate the corresponding metal hydroxides and these alkali metal hydroxides act as internal bases to facilitate the SMR. The recovered catalyst system was directly used for several reaction cycles; the yields were, however, slightly lower in the 5th and 6th cycles.
5.2 Water extract of banana (WEB)
Saikia et al. reported an efficient and expedient greener system for the Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed ligand-free SMR in neat water extract of banana (WEB) under ambient aerial conditions in the absence of base/ligand/promoter/organic co-solvents (Schemes 46 and 47);131 0.5 mol% of catalyst provided the cross-coupled product in high yield (99%) within a short reaction time (5–90 min). Furthermore, it was possible to reuse the catalytic medium after the extraction of products but the yields produced in consecutive steps were low (60% yield in the 1st recycle) possibly due to the dissolution of Pd(0) or Pd(II) species in the extraction solvent.
 Scheme 46  Various stages of WEB preparation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Scheme 47  Pd(OAc)2 and WEB-catalyzed SMR of aryl halides 4 with aryl boronic acids 5. 
6 Poly(ethylene glycol)
Today, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) oligomers are efficient, eco-friendly and low-volatility liquids and are organic compounds with a broad spectrum of chemical, industrial and medical applications,132 although explored and produced independently in 1859 by Wurtz and Laurence.133 PEGs are readily miscible with water and polar organic solvents, but immiscible with non-polar organic solvents, aliphatic hydrocarbons and supercritical CO2.134 In recent years, relatively inexpensive PEGs have been widely used as greener media in several organic reactions as they are nearly harmless, being routinely used in drug formulations. Additionally, PEGs have a very low vapor pressure, high catalytic capacity, high thermal stability135 and stability in both acidic and basic media, which make them suitable media for oxidation/reduction transformations. Furthermore, PEGs have been used as efficient additives in aqueous-phase cross-coupling transformations to improve the interaction between water-soluble catalysts and organic reactants.136,137 Varma and co-workers reported the first study of PEG as a preferred solvent for the Pd-catalyzed SMR,138 which was adapted by other research groups using Pd salts such as PdCl2139 and Pd(OAc)2140 or Pd NPs.141 de Souza and co-workers deployed Pd2(dba)3 as a catalyst in PEG-300 (the attached numbers in all cases refer to the average molecular weight of PEG) for carbon–carbon bond formation under ligand-free conditions (Scheme 48);142 the salient advantages being milder reaction conditions, shorter reaction times, ease of handling and excellent yield (up to 98%) of products 6 with high turnover number of ∼9700; the reaction system enables recycling of the catalyst, similar to ionic liquids, and it could be reused several times with no decrease in activity.
 Scheme 48  The SMR catalyzed by Pd2(dba)3 in PEG-300. 
The Cho research group demonstrated that a catalytic amount of Ni(0) powder and K2CO3 in PEG-400 at 110 °C are equally as effective for the SMR;143 biaryls were obtained from reactions of iodoarenes and arylboronic acids in high yields and bromoarenes could also be coupled with arylboronic acids under similar reaction conditions with further addition of iodine. Naghipour et al. reported the use of a heterogeneous Fe3O4@chitosan-Schiff base Pd nanocatalyst as a robust and magnetically-recoverable catalyst for the SMR.144 Various solvents such as water, DMF, DMSO and PEG were investigated in the SMR of 4-nitrobromobenzene with phenylboronic acid as model substrates and higher yields of the product in shorter reaction time periods were obtained in PEG and K2CO3 as a base at 60 °C. Another heterogeneous catalyst, in the form of a reusable heterogenized Pd nanocatalyst, was prepared on mesoporous MCM-41 support145 and applied for the synthesis of biphenyls 6via the carbon–carbon cross-coupling reaction of sodium tetraphenylborate (NaBPh4) 46 with aryl halides 4 in PEG-400 under phosphine-free conditions (Scheme 49). This catalyst displayed excellent catalytic activity and air- or moisture-stability for the SMR with good to excellent yields and high turnover frequency. The surface analysis showed that the BET surface area of the MCM-41 and Pd-TEDETA-MCM-41 is 1372.3 and 908.6 m2g−1, respectively. The immobilization of organic layers and Pd-complex onto the mesoporous wall were confirmed by investigation of the large BET pore volume for MCM-41 and Pd-TEDETA-MCM- 41, which was found to be 1.521 and 1.471 cm3 g−1, respectively. The catalyst could be recovered and reused several times; the amount of Pd in Pd-TEDETA-MCM-41 was determined before and after the reaction and was found to be 0.0029 mol g−1 and 0.0028 mol g−1, respectively (1.52% leaching).
 Scheme 49  The SMR of aryl halides 4 with NaBPh446 in PEG 400. 
The plasmonic characterization and catalytic efficiency of Pd particles anchored to the surface of the TiO2 were investigated for the SMR by Hosseini-Sarvari and co-workers;146 the photodeposition procedure under sunlight was used for the synthesis of nano Pd/TiO2 and this semiconductor with band gap ≥3 eV generated C–C bond formation. Notably, the Pd NPs size was responsible for improving the localized surface plasmon resonance (Scheme 50). This novel photocatalyst could accomplish the heterogeneous cross-coupling reaction at room temperature in the H2O-PEG mixture by efficiently activating substrates via the generation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs under visible light irradiation conditions. A rational mechanism has been proposed to explain the tentative reaction pathway that may occur under visible light irradiation (Scheme 51).
 Scheme 50  The SMR under visible light irradiation. 
 Scheme 51  The suggested mechanism for enhanced catalytic activity under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
7 Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids (IL) are increasingly being used as popular media in a diverse range of scientific and technical applications; the first ionic liquid, ethylammonium nitrate, was described by Walden in 1914. The discovery of this new class of media did not have the expected impact until 1982 when dialkylimidazolium chloroaluminate melts were introduced by Wilkes and co-workers. A decade later, the new generation of air-stable 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium-based ILs was reported, thus allowing the successful use of ILs147 with unique task-specific features. The notable physicochemical properties of ILs, such as non-flammability, non-volatility, polarity and stability (thermal, chemical and electrochemical) can be substantially modified by changing the cationic and/or the anionic components,148 which can give rise to ILs with specific properties via numerous combinations of cations and anions. In view of these attributes, ILs have been used in diverse applications, for instance, batteries, fuel cells, sensors, thermal fluids, plasticizers, lubricants, extractants and as a reaction media in synthesis, analysis, catalysis, and separation as well as medicine and pharmaceuticals.149 Not surprisingly, ILs have been used in SMR-based transformations in recent years as efficient and sustainable media. The Welton research group reported the first study of ionic liquids as a solvent for Pd-catalyzed C–C cross-coupling reactions150 followed by several others. For example, in 2015, Singh et al. devised an efficient recyclable clay carbapalladacycle nanocomposite for the SMR in tetramethyl butyl ammonium bis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide [TMBA]NTf2 IL (Scheme 52);151 chloro-, bromo- and iodo-substituted aryl halides 4 generated the desired products 6 in good to excellent yield and selectivity.
 Scheme 52  Pd-catalyzed SMR in ionic liquid. 
Several Pd-based catalytic systems for the SMR were introduced in different ionic liquids, namely, 1-butyl-1-methyl-pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoro methylsulfonyl)imide [bmpy][NTf2]–water,152 1-aminoethyl-3-methyl imidazolium bromide [Aemim]Br,153 1-butyl-1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane dicyanamide [C4-DABCO][dca],154 and trihexyltetradecylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([P66614][NTf2]),155 among others, (Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of various ILs reported in the literature for the SMR




Entry
Solvent
Catalyst
Base

T (°C)
Time (h)
Yielda (%)
Ref.





a Isolated yield.





1
[bmpy][NTf2]–water
PdCl2
K3PO4
65
2
84–99

152



2
[Aemim]Br
[[Gmim]Cl–Pd(II)]
Et3N
25
1–10
65–94

153



3
[C4-DABCO][dca]
PdCl2
—
110
3–6
40–99

154



4
[P66614][NTf2]–water
Pd2(dba)3
Cs2CO3
160
48
19–99

155





Interestingly, the reaction can be conducted at room temperature with the appropriate yield (entry 2) and a base-free efficient cross-coupling reaction is feasible (entry 3). The Ni-catalyzed SMR for the formation of biaryls and terphenyls has also been described.156 In the presence of β-diketone and PPh3 ligands, Ni(TFA)2 performed as a robust catalyst for the SMR of aryl halides 4 with arylboronic acids 5 in a mixture of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide [bmim][Tf2N] and water; the desired products 6 were achieved in good yields using this catalytic system (Scheme 53).
 Scheme 53  Ni-catalyzed SMR in the ionic liquid. 
8 Deep eutectic solvents
Deep eutectic solvents (DES), introduced initially by Abbott et al., are important alternatives to room temperature ionic liquids (RTIL), due to their interesting properties and benefits such as low cost, ease of synthetic accessibility, benign and safe nature along with renewability and biodegradability.157 In general, DES are prepared via the complexation of quaternary ammonium salts as hydrogen-bond acceptors with a hydrogen bond donor such as urea, carboxylic acids, amino acids, sugars, and glycerol or M2+ ions such as Zn2+.158 The charge delocalization occurs via hydrogen bonding between the electronegative component, such as a halide ion, and the hydrogen-donor moiety, which is responsible for the decrease in the melting points of the mixture relative to the melting points of the individual components. One of the most characteristic properties of DESs is their high viscosity due to the presence of an extensive hydrogen-bonding network, relatively large ion sizes, and electrostatic forces within the liquid.159 Furthermore, they possess negligible volatility, a broader liquid temperature range than conventional molecular solvents, and are generally non-flammable. DESs as green media have been used for many chemical processes160,161 such as creating alloys, extraction, surfactant chemistry, electrochemistry, polymerization, gas adsorption, biomass processing, nanotechnology and various organic and inorganic transformations.162–164 The first reported use of DES in the SMR was described by König and co-workers when they synthesized biaryls with the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of aryl halides with boronic acids in a mannitol–DMU–NH4Cl mixture; phenylboronic acid 5 was coupled with aryl bromides 4 in the DES at 90 °C using 10 mol% of Pd(OAc)2 as a catalyst and 1.2 equiv. of Na2CO3 as a base, resulting in the nearly quantitative conversion of the starting materials after 6 h (Scheme 54).165
 Scheme 54  Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of aryl halides 4 with boronic acids 5 in DES. 
The formation of various biaryls 6 using SMR in a DES system has been reported via the construction of C–C bonds at 100 °C using 0.1–1 mol% of PdCl2 as the catalyst, cationic phosphine ligands and K2CO3 as the base (Scheme 55). Among the various eutectic mixture systems examined, ideal results were obtained with choline chloride and ethylene glycol, followed closely by choline chloride and glycerol. Glycerol is greener than ethylene glycol, and with the minimal difference in the obtained yield, the choline chloride and glycerol system has become the chosen medium for this reaction.166 After completion of the reactions, DES and catalyst can be recovered and reused five times.
 Scheme 55  Pd-catalyzed SMR in choline chloride and glycerol system. 
9 Supercritical carbon dioxide
Supercritical or liquid carbon dioxide (compressed CO2) has attracted enormous interest as an efficient and green alternative to many hazardous organic solvents. Supercritical CO2 is an abundant, cheap, nontoxic and non-flammable reagent that is readily available and inexpensive. Carbon dioxide emissions due to human activities, especially in densely populated areas, have greatly increased over the past century. With increasing awareness of its role in climate change, there is an ever increasing interest in finding applications for the captured carbon dioxide.167 At room temperature and pressure, CO2 is gaseous in nature, which facilitates the recovery of the analyte and provides solvent-free analytes. CO2, being a linear and small molecule, diffuses much faster than other conventional solvents168 and has been used to replace harmful Freons and certain organic solvents. Supercritical CO2 (scCO2) has ideal properties for the extraction of non-polar compounds, for example hydrocarbons, while its large quadrupole moment also enables it to dissolve some polar compounds such as aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, and esters.169 For the first time, Holmes and co-workers reported the application of scCO2 as a solvent in carbon–carbon bond formation via the Pd-catalyzed SMR,170 followed by Feng et al. who reported the use of SBA-15-supported Pd catalyst for the SMR in scCO2.171 The use of supercritical CO2 as an eco-friendly medium not only preserves the simplicity but also prevents the leaching of the Pd metal from their support. Furthermore, to expand the repertoire of the new synthetic methodology using scCO2, Wang and co-workers explored an environmentally benign and efficient access to C–C bonds in good to high yields, which comprised the use of Pd2(dba)3 under [hmim]NTf247 and a supercritical CO2 biphasic system employing K2CO3 as a base (Scheme 56).
 Scheme 56  The SMR under the [hmim]NTf2/supercritical CO2 biphasic system. 
The combination of scCO2 and ILs may provide a unique synthesis strategy in which reaction and separation can occur consecutively. Owing to the strong electrostatic forces between cations and anions, scCO2 dissolves well in ionic liquids, but ILs actually do not dissolve in supercritical CO2.172 This catalytic system has several advantages such as operational simplicity, ease of isolation of products, and high yields. The catalytic system could be easily reused for up to six consecutive cycles without noticeable loss in activity. A plausible mechanism for this reaction is shown in Scheme 57. Initially, Pd2(dba)3 can react with ionic liquid [hmim]NTf2 to form the metal carbene complexes Pd (NHC) NTf2, followed by the oxidative addition of bromobenzene 4 to Pd (NHC) NTf2 to obtain the aryl palladium intermediate A. Phenylboronic acid 5, activated by K2CO3, reacts with intermediate A, which generates the intermediate B upon transmetallation. Finally, the reductive elimination of intermediate B produces the desired product 6, which was separated from the reaction mixture by scCO2 extraction during the course of the reaction.
 Scheme 57  Possible mechanism for the Suzuki reaction. 
10 Biomass-derived solvents
Nature provides us with a generous supply of molecules that can be applied as media either directly or after purification or processing (valorization). In addition to the aforementioned water, pioneering investigations are currently underway exploiting the biomass-derived solvents as green and plentiful resources. Biomass-derived solvents, which satisfy the seventh principle of the green chemistry protocol, are emerging as favourable alternatives as feedstock and renewable resources for solvent production. This has been a burgeoning field of interest within the fields of green and sustainable chemistry and the following section describes several biomass-derived solvents that have been used in the SMR, e.g., glycerol, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF), ethyl lactate and Cyrene, etc.
10.1 Glycerol
The etymology of the word ‘glycerol’ is from the Greek word ‘glykeros’ which means ‘sweet’. Since its discovery in 1779 by the Swedish chemist Carl Scheele, the polyol has been used in several disciplines.173 Glycerol, also known as glycerin, or as 1,2,3-propanetriol, is an environmentally benign, hygroscopic, colorless, and sweet-tasting viscous liquid that is the principal by-product of the biodiesel industry; 100 kg of glycerol is produced for every ton of biodiesel. Glycerol finds use in various fields such as the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and food industries, where it is mainly employed as a humectant, thickener, lubricant, sweetener or anti-freeze, besides being a green medium for a wide range of chemical processes. This eco-friendly medium can dissolve a lot of organic and inorganic substances, including transition-metal complexes, with several advantages of high efficiency, low cost, biodegradability, non-toxic nature (does not metabolize to toxic products, unlike ethylene glycol) and nonflammability. In addition, its high boiling point enables the conduction of reactions at elevated temperatures without losses via evaporation.174 In this regard, glycerol as an effective medium has been used in many organic syntheses as well as various cross-coupling reactions,175,176 particularly for the SMR where the glycerol was initially deployed as an efficient medium in 2007 when Wolfson and co-workers reported their results with several aryl halides.177 Gómez et al. prepared Pd NPs stabilized by tris(3-sulfophenyl)phosphine trisodium salt (TPPTS) in glycerol, starting from Pd(II) and Pd(0) precursors and other reactants; this nanocatalyst was used for the SMR in glycerol and t-BuOK as a base at 100 °C with excellent yields.178 Also, Cravotto et al. demonstrated the use of microwave (MW) radiation and ultrasound (US) energy and combinations thereof (MW/US), instead of conventional heating to produce C–C bond formation in glycerol; Pd salt or the corresponding amount of solid catalysts (5% Pd/C or Pd-cross-linked chitosan) were used.179 The use of alternative energy input systems, such as US and MW as substitutes for conventional heating and classical methods for a variety of chemical processes, has received noticeable attention in the past two decades.118,120,180 US-promoted SMR in glycerol has been reported under mild conditions (Scheme 58)181 and four new Pd N-heterocyclic-carbene (NHC)-based complexes were prepared with 3,4,5-trimethoxybenzyl, alkyl and sulfonate N-substituents. The catalytic activity of catalysts was investigated in the synthesis of various biphenyls in a short reaction time at 40 °C; aryl iodides and bromides 4 reacted successfully with arylboronic acids, naphthalene-1-boronic acid or potassium phenyltrifluoroboronate 5 with good to excellent yields.
 Scheme 58  The SMR process in glycerol under ultrasound irradiation. 
Recently, Grison et al. disclosed the usefulness of Eichhornia crassipes, commonly known as water hyacinth, to prepare recyclable EcoPd.182 Based on the natural ability of Eichhornia crassipes to bioconcentrate Pd in its roots, the authors reported the transformation of plant-derived Pd metals as eco-friendly catalysts. This biobased EcoPd has been used for the SMR of various heteroaryl rings with good yields and enabled the expeditious synthesis of a broad spectrum of heterocyclic biaryl and heterocyclic-heterocyclic biaryl scaffolds, in the presence of a small amount of catalyst in glycerol and in the absence of ligands or any additives. Nagarkar and co-workers reported the Ni-catalyzed SMR of phenylboronic acid 5 with various aryl diazonium salts 22 in glycerol with good to excellent yield without using any base (Scheme 59);183 this greener protocol can be successfully repeated for up to five consecutive cycles with no considerable loss in catalytic activity.
 Scheme 59  Ni-catalyzed SMR of phenylboronic acid 5 with various aryl diazonium salts 22 in glycerol. 
10.2 2-Methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF)
2-Methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF) is accessible from natural resources from biomass-derived compounds such as furfural or levulinic acid and is a good alternative medium for the development of green synthetic methodologies. Its chemical and physical properties, namely its low miscibility with water, boiling point, significant stability compared to other cyclic-based media such as THF, 1,4-dioxane and others, renders it more attractive for processes involving olefin metathesis,184 organocatalysis, and organometallics.185 Also, 2-MeTHF being an environmentally benign and harmless medium, may be used in the pharmaceutical chemical process.186 Garg and co-workers reported an efficient and inspiring concise synthesis of various biaryls 6 using boronic acid derivatives 5 and aryl halides 4 or phenol-derived substrates 48via the Ni-catalyzed SMR in 2-MeTHF (Scheme 60);187 1–10 mol% of commercially available bis(tricyclohexylphosphine)nickel(II) dichloride NiCl2(PCy3)2 complex was used as an efficient catalyst for this reaction. Additionally, several bis(heterocyclic) frameworks are easily accessible and so is the potential for these cross-couplings to be performed for the preparative gram scale assembly of bis-heterocyclic frameworks with low catalyst loadings.
 Scheme 60  Ni-catalyzed SMR in 2-MeTHF. 
The impressive influence of the biosolvent, 2-MeTHF, in the SMR was demonstrated by the Bora research group, where arylboronic acids 5 were allowed to react with acid chlorides 49 to produce aryl ketones 51 using 0.4 mol% of oxime-palladacycle 50 as a catalyst in excellent yield in open air (Scheme 61).188 Gratifyingly, the reaction under a N2 atmosphere provides a slightly lower yield of the coupling product. This suggests that the presence of dissolved air in 2-MeTHF accelerates the catalytic cycle by enhancing the rate of activation of arylboronic acid to aryl ion species, vital for the catalytic transmetalation step. A wide variety of aromatic acid chlorides have been applied in this catalytic system but aliphatic acyl chlorides were not reactive under otherwise identical reaction conditions. The salient advantageous feature of this approach is the application of water-immiscible 2-MeTHF as the medium, which provides convenient isolation of the crude reaction mixture via the separation of 2-MeTHF–water layers, followed by the evaporation of 2-MeTHF. Moreover, oxime-palladacycles are stable to heat, air and moisture, and are easily accessible from low-cost starting materials.
 Scheme 61  Synthesis of aryl ketones 51 in 2-MeTHF. 
The mechanism proposed by the authors shows that initially, Pd(0) is formed by the reduction of the Pd–C bond of oxime-palladacycle 50 and then the oxidative addition of acid chloride 49 to Pd(0) produces the acylpalladium(II) chloride intermediate A. Under alkaline conditions, the subsequent transmetallation of ArB(OH)25 to the acylpalladium intermediate A occurs at the Pd–Cl bond to generate (acyl)(aryl)palladium(II) species B, which upon reductive elimination delivers the oxidative coupling product 51; the active Pd(0) species were regenerated and the catalytic cycle resumed (Scheme 62).
 Scheme 62  Probable mechanism for the cross-coupling reaction pathway. 
10.3 Ethyl lactate
Ethyl lactate, a lactic acid ethyl ester, is an important monobasic ester that is found naturally in small quantities in a wide range of foods including wine, chicken, and some fruits. Its industrial preparation, in the form of a racemic mixture, occurs via a reversible reaction between lactic acid and ethanol. It is a slightly yellowish liquid, has a pleasant odor and is a suitable solvent for many organic reactions due to attractive properties such as nontoxicity, high solvency power, low vapour pressure, high boiling point (154 °C), and low surface tension. Furthermore, ethyl lactate as a sustainable medium has been used in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries.189 Wan and co-workers used ethyl lactate as a solvent in the SMR190 where the reaction occurred at 60 °C with Pd(OAc)2 as a catalyst and K2CO3 as a base in the mixture of H2O/ethyl lactate under ligand-free conditions. Later on, the Chalker research group developed another system that used pure ethyl lactate for the SMR (Scheme 63),191 where a melamine–Pd complex 53 was used as an effective catalyst to provide direct access to biaryl 6 structures in high yields. Furthermore, this catalyst is soluble and active in common tap water. Next, the melamine–palladium catalyst can also be cross-linked by reaction with formaldehyde to generate an insoluble polymeric catalyst that can be recovered after cross-coupling. The melamine–palladium system is inexpensive, easy to handle, bench-stable and effective in catalysis in the presence of a variety of impurities. The authors, via this melamine–palladium system, could successfully synthesize Felbinac, a topical anti-inflammatory drug, on a gram-scale in a single step in nearly quantitative yield using unfiltered Arkansas River water as the solvent.
 Scheme 63  The SMR catalyzed by melamine–Pd complex 53 in pure ethyl lactate. 
10.4 Cyrene
Dihydrolevoglucosenone (Cyrene) 54, obtainable from cellulose in two steps, has been demonstrated to have physical properties similar to dimethylformamide (DMF) and other dipolar aprotic solvents and, so far, has not shown any adverse effects. In 2018, Watson et al. reported a greener route for the SMR, which employs 54 as an eco-friendly and efficient alternative to conventional solvents such as DMF, THF, and 1,4-dioxane (Scheme 64);192 this benign method offers simplicity and excellent functional group tolerance and generality with appropriate yields in both small and larger scale synthesis.
 Scheme 64  Pd-catalyzed SMR in Cyrene 54. 
11 Solvent-free conditions
According to the principles of green chemistry and addressing sustainable development from both economic and environmental perspectives, organic reactions under solvent-free conditions have garnered much attention in the recent years in an attempt to curb the production of pollutants, reduce the utilization of or eliminate hazardous and expensive organic solvents, as well as operational simplicity. The solvent-free synthetic route is in compliance with the philosophy of green chemistry since that can improve the E-factor (defined as the ratio of the weight of waste to the weight of product) and the process mass intensity, defined as the total mass of materials used to produce a specified mass of product.193 Solvent-free reactions have gained considerable attention as green methodologies that are alternatives to the traditional procedures,194 often using supported reagents under MW irradiation conditions.195 These include grinding methods (performance of the reaction in standard glassware using a magnetic stirring bar for mixing) and high-speed ball milling.196 in recent years, the SMR has been conducted under solventless conditions.197,198 Schneider et al. demonstrated a greener protocol for solvent-free SMR in the presence of an inorganic solid support (KF–Al2O3) and the development of alternative energy forms such as mechanochemical treatment (grinding with mortar and pestle and ball milling) and MW irradiation (Scheme 65).199
 Scheme 65  Solvent-free synthesis of biphenyl 6 under MW and ball-milling. 
Tolerance toward atmospheric oxygen, desirable safety aspects, higher yields and shorter reaction times make this strategy a facile and attractive version of the SMR. Very recently in 2018, Baran et al. reported a magnetically recoverable sporopollenin-based Pd catalyst for the direct synthesis of biaryl compounds via SMR with high turnover frequency and turnover numbers;200 the recyclability of the catalyst was inspected to ten consecutive cycles for the synthesis of biaryls with only minor decreases in the reaction yields from 99 to 93%. In an interesting work, Borchardt et al. described the mechanochemical Suzuki polycondensation as a greener and more effective alternative to the conventional media-based polymerization transformation of poly(phenylene)s.201 Under optimized conditions, this synthetic route can produce linear polymers with an outstanding degree of polymerization, under ligand-free conditions in 30 minutes. Furthermore, the strategy was broadened to a hyperbranched system with high-temperature resistance in moderate to good yields in a short span of time.
12 Conclusions and future prospects
After nearly three decades of enthusiastic green chemistry activity in the face of increasing worldwide pollution and the global warming crisis, green and sustainable protocols have turned out to be commonplace strategies in every aspect of human activities both in academia and industry. In this regard, comprehensive discussion and analyses of recent advances in cleaner approaches will help us to gain better insight into the holistic aspects of green metrics. This article spotlights the most relevant advances in eco-friendly and environmentally-benign media for the synthesis of organic compounds via the SMR as a key step and a practical approach to total synthesis and organic transformations. A wide spectrum of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic systems, especially nanocatalysts with metals such as palladium, nickel, gold, ferrite, copper, silver, and cobalt for the SMR have been summarized. Diverse classes of heterogeneous catalysts based on graphene, zeolites, Fe3O4, carbon quantum dots, cellulose, wool, polymers, MCM-41, and chitosan, etc., have shown their usefulness in friendly vehicles ranging from water, ethanol, glycerol, PEG, and ionic liquids to newfound media such as DES, aqueous extracts, supercritical carbon dioxide, and biomass-derived solvents such as ethyl lactate, Cyrene etc. Notably, in all the aforementioned efforts, the researchers have tried to improve the important outcomes such as yield, time, amount of catalyst, TON, TOF and generality with a wide substrate scope. It is important to evaluate the number of effective catalysts used and their prowess under both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, which may differ as has been shown very recently.202 In the near future, the emergence of the neoteric biocompatible catalytic systems for SMR will prompt the utilization of catalysts supported on biomass such as sugarcane bagasse, silk, carrageenan, casein, pullulan, hyaluronan, glucan as well as nanocomposite materials based on the chitosan, cellulose and alginate. Furthermore, the option to explore a combination of alternative energy output systems such as microwave, ultrasound and mechanochemical bill-mill operation or solar and visible light-assisted reactions in conjunction with renewable biomass-derived greener media such as Cyrene, ethyl lactate or γ-valerolactone (GVL) present exciting opportunities. In addition, the predominant use of earth-abundant base metals that are cheaper and safer should be examined for this protocol, which will open new avenues. Moreover, the newer developments in flow chemistry as a key enabling technology along with greener media described in this review can forge an effective alliance in this cross-coupling reaction, capitalizing on the use of newer substrates other than aryl halides. Further improvements in benign by design methodologies are expected in the coming decades and hopefully, this review will stimulate the design of more innovative, efficient, biocompatible and biodegradable, non-metallic systems to help circumvent any limitations of this widely-used coupling protocol.
Conflicts of interest
Authors do not have any conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Research Council of Shahid Beheshti University.
References
C. J. Clarke, W.-C. Tu, O. Levers, A. Bröhl and J. P. Hallett, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 747–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .

          R. Ballini, Eco-friendly synthesis of fine chemicals, RSC,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Suzuki, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 1749–1758 CAS .
R. F. Heck, Org. React., 2004, 27, 345–390 Search PubMed .
D. Milstein and J. Stille, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 4992–4998 CrossRef CAS .

          E. I. Negishi and F. Liu, Metal-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions,  1998, pp. 1–47 Search PubMed .
E. Negishi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1982, 15, 340–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakao and T. Hiyama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4893–4901 RSC .

          K. Sonogashira, Comprehensive Organic Synthesis, Pergamon Press, New York,  1991, vol. 3, p. 521 Search PubMed .
R. Narayanan, Molecules, 2010, 15, 2124–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Heravi and E. Hashemi, Tetrahedron, 2012, 45, 9145–9178 CrossRef .
A. J. Cocuzza, D. R. Chidester, S. Culp, L. Fitzgerald and P. Gilligan, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 1999, 9, 1063–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yokoyama, H. Suzuki, Y. Kubota, K. Ohuchi, H. Higashimura and T. Yokozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7236–7237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ocansey, J. Darkwa and B. C. E. Makhubela, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 13826–13834 RSC .
B. Cornelio, A. R. Saunders, W. A. Solomonsz, M. Laronze-Cochard, A. Fontana, J. Sapi, A. N. Khlobystov and G. A. Rance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3918–3927 RSC .
C. Wolf and H. Xu, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 162–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tobisu, T. Xu, T. Shimasaki and N. Chatani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19505–19511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Johansson Seechurn, M. O. Kitching, T. J. Colacot and V. Snieckus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5062–5085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Polshettiwar, A. Decottignies, C. Len and A. Fihri, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 502–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fihri, M. Bouhrara, B. Nekoueishahraki, J.-M. Basset and V. Polshettiwar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5181–5203 RSC .
F.-S. Han, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5270–5298 RSC .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457–2483 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. Bonifácio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5522–5551 RSC .
R. Breslow, Acc. Chem. Res., 1991, 24, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Li and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 68–82 RSC .
A. Z. Halimehjani, S. E. Hooshmand and E. V. Shamiri, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 5454–5457 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shaabani, R. Afshari and S. E. Hooshmand, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 8469–8481 RSC .
R. B. N. Baig, B. R. Vaddula, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1243–1248 RSC .
R. B. N. Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2122–2127 RSC .
S. Paul, M. M. Islam and S. M. Islam, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42193–42221 RSC .
R. Nakao, H. Rhee and Y. Uozumi, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 163–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Putta and S. Ghosh, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 1889–1896 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Chen, A. N. Vasiliev, A. P. Panarello and J. G. Khinast, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 325, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Jin, A. Taher, H.-J. Kang, M. Choi and R. Ryoo, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 309–313 RSC .
B. Karimi, F. Mansouri and H. Vali, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2587–2596 RSC .
M. M. Heravi, B. Heidari, M. Ghavidel and T. Ahmadi, Curr. Org. Chem., 2017, 21, 2249–2313 CAS .
B. Karimi and P. Fadavi Akhavan, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 6063–6072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, C. Liu and Z. Jin, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 592–597 RSC .
M.-T. Chen, D. A. Vicic, M. L. Turner and O. Navarro, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 5052–5056 CrossRef .
G. Wei, W. Zhang, F. Wen, Y. Wang and M. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10827–10832 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cacchi, E. Caponetti, M. A. Casadei, A. Di Giulio, G. Fabrizi, G. Forte, A. Goggiamani, S. Moreno, P. Paolicelli and F. Petrucci, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 317–320 RSC .
C. R. LeBlond, A. T. Andrews, Y. Sun and J. R. Sowa, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 1555–1557 CrossRef CAS .
G. Durgun, Ö. Aksın and L. Artok, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 278, 189–199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paul and J. H. Clark, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 215, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schönfelder, O. Nuyken and R. Weberskirch, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 4648–4655 CrossRef .
B. J. Gallon, R. W. Kojima, R. B. Kaner and P. L. Diaconescu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7251–7254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chtchigrovsky, A. Primo, P. Gonzalez, K. Molvinger, M. Robitzer, F. Quignard and F. Taran, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 6030–6034 CrossRef .
C. E. Song and S.-g. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3495–3524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Yang, J. Tang, D. Sun and W. Tang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1759–1761 RSC .
R. I. Khan and K. Pitchumani, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5518–5528 RSC .
V. Pascanu, Q. Yao, A. Bermejo Gómez, M. Gustafsson, Y. Yun, W. Wan, L. Samain, X. Zou and B. Martín-Matute, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 17483–17493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Handa, J. C. Fennewald and B. H. Lipshutz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 3500–3503 CrossRef .
S. Mattiello, M. Rooney, A. Sanzone, P. Brazzo, M. Sassi and L. Beverina, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 654–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Lin, J. Liu, C. Kim, A. B. Tamayo, C. M. Proctor and T.-Q. Nguyen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 14101–14108 RSC .
E. Ripaud, D. Demeter, T. Rousseau, E. Boucard-Cétol, M. Allain, R. Po, P. Leriche and J. Roncali, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 95, 126–133 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gray, D. Dzebo, A. Lundin, J. Alborzpour, M. Abrahamsson, B. Albinsson and K. Moth-Poulsen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11111–11121 RSC .
R. Stalder, S. R. Puniredd, M. R. Hansen, U. Koldemir, C. Grand, W. Zajaczkowski, K. Müllen, W. Pisula and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1286–1297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Chen, A. J. Rojas, E. V. Jucov, T. V. Timofeeva, T. C. Parker, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16376–16379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, C. R. Saha-Möller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2015, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, P. Slattum, C. Wang and L. Zang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11967–11998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Hartnett, A. Timalsina, H. R. Matte, N. Zhou, X. Guo, W. Zhao, A. Facchetti, R. P. Chang, M. C. Hersam and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16345–16356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4333–4338 RSC .
J. Li, P. Huo, J. Zheng, X. Zhou and W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24231–24235 RSC .
H.-c. Ma, W. Cao, Z.-k. Bao and Z.-Q. Lei, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2291–2296 RSC .
L. Xue, B. Jia, L. Tang, X. F. Ji, M. Y. Huang and Y. Y. Jiang, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2004, 15, 346–349 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Fang, A. Jutand, Z. Q. Tian and C. Amatore, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 12392–12396 CrossRef .

          N. Miyaura, in Advances in Metal-Organic Chemistry, Elsevier,  1998, vol. 6, pp. 187–243 Search PubMed .
S. Handa, Y. Wang, F. Gallou and B. H. Lipshutz, Science, 2015, 349, 1087–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Handa, J. D. Smith, M. S. Hageman, M. Gonzalez and B. H. Lipshutz, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Handa, E. D. Slack and B. H. Lipshutz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11994–11998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Luque, B. Baruwati and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1540–1543 RSC .
C. González-Arellano, A. Corma, M. Iglesias and F. Sánchez, J. Catal., 2006, 238, 497–501 CrossRef .
M. Haruta, Chem. Rec., 2003, 3, 75–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abad, P. Concepción, A. Corma and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4066–4069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Thielecke, M. Aytemir and U. Prüsse, Catal. Today, 2007, 121, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Liu and R. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2060–2061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. W. Davies, L. Matty, D. L. Hughes and P. J. Reider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10139–10140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Thomas, M. U. D. Sheikh, D. Ahirwar, M. Bano and F. Khan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 115–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, H. Wang, K. Gao and F. Zhao, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 248, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Babu, N. Neelakandeswari, N. Dharmaraj, S. D. Jackson and R. Karvembu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7774–7781 RSC .
A. R. Hajipour and G. Azizi, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1030–1034 RSC .
Y. Ikeda, T. Nakamura, H. Yorimitsu and K. Oshima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6514–6515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li-xia, W. Zi-wei, W. Guo-song, L. Xiao-dong and R. Jian-guo, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2010, 21, 244–249 Search PubMed .
G. Cahiez and H. Avedissian, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 6159–6162 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kauffmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 386–403 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Guo, C. M. Weng and F. E. Hong, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 2010, 3220–3228 CrossRef .
J. M. Hammann, D. Haas and P. Knochel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4478–4481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, Y. Li, P. Sun, J. Zhou and J. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1418–1420 RSC .
H. Qi, W. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Li, J. Chen, K. Peng and M. Shao, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1178–1183 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Hajipour, Z. Khorsandi and H. Karimi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2015, 29, 805–808 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Hajipour and Z. Khorsandi, Catal. Commun., 2016, 77, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iyer and V. V. Thakur, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 157, 275–278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohammadinezhad and B. Akhlaghinia, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5625–5641 RSC .
V. Vatanpour, S. S. Madaeni, L. Rajabi, S. Zinadini and A. A. Derakhshan, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 401, 132–143 CrossRef .
C. Reichardt, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Mi, M. Huang, R. Cai and Y. Wu, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 8502–8508 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zinser, K. G. Warren, R. E. Meadows, F. Nahra, A. M. Al-Majid, A. Barakat, M. S. Islam, S. P. Nolan and C. S. Cazin, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3246–3252 RSC .
W. Zhu, Y. Yang, S. Hu, G. Xiang, B. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6020–6031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, X. Qin, K. Li, X. Li, Q. Guo, J. Lan and J. You, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11836–11839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Deng, D. V. Paone, A. T. Ginnetti, H. Kurihara, S. D. Dreher, S. A. Weissman, S. R. Stauffer and C. S. Burgey, Org. Lett., 2008, 11, 345–347 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Savarin and L. S. Liebeskind, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 2149–2152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chtchigrovsky, Y. Lin, K. Ouchaou, M. Chaumontet, M. Robitzer, F. Quignard and F. Taran, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1505–1510 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan and B. I. Yakobson, Nature, 2006, 441, 818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Fu, G. He, X. Sun and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 661–667 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deraedt, L. Salmon, L. Etienne, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8169–8171 RSC .
Y. Huang, Q. Wei, Y. Wang and L. Dai, Carbon, 2018, 136, 150–159 CrossRef CAS .
B. Graff, J. E. Klee, C. Fik, M. Maier, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1600470 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Mäsing, H. Nüsse, J. r. Klingauf and A. Studer, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 752–755 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Asadi, R. Sedghi and M. M. Heravi, Catal. Lett., 2017, 147, 2045–2056 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
R. Bayan and N. Karak, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 8868–8876 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 3, 18889–18897 CAS .
R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1129–1130 RSC .
A. Shaabani and S. E. Hooshmand, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 40, 84–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bruckmann, A. Krebs and C. Bolm, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1131–1141 RSC .
R. N. Baig and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1559–1584 RSC .
W. Bonrath and R. Paz Schmidt, Adv. Org. Chem., 2011, 81–117 Search PubMed .
S. V. Sancheti and P. R. Gogate, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 40, 30–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Tasker, E. A. Standley and T. F. Jamison, Nature, 2014, 509, 299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mesganaw and N. K. Garg, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2013, 17, 29–39 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Rosen, K. W. Quasdorf, D. A. Wilson, N. Zhang, A.-M. Resmerita, N. K. Garg and V. Percec, Chem. Rev., 2010, 111, 1346–1416 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Weires, E. L. Baker and N. K. Garg, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pathan and A. Patel, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 11600–11606 RSC .
C. Wang, L. Salmon, R. Ciganda, L. Yate, S. Moya, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 644–646 RSC .
P. R. Boruah, A. A. Ali, M. Chetia, B. Saikia and D. Sarma, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11489–11492 RSC .
B. Jenkins, R. Bakker and J. Wei, Biomass Bioenergy, 1996, 10, 177–200 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Boruah, A. A. Ali, B. Saikia and D. Sarma, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1442–1445 RSC .
J. Chen, S. K. Spear, J. G. Huddleston and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 64–82 RSC .

          F. E. Bailey and J. V. Koleske, Alkylene oxides and their polymers, CRC Press,  1990 Search PubMed .
D. J. Heldebrant and P. G. Jessop, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5600–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, P. Chaudhary, S. Nimesh and R. Chandra, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 356–358 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 6122–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. F. de Souza, A. d. C. Silva and O. Antunes, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 23, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Namboodiri and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2001, 3, 146–148 RSC .
L. Yin, Z.-h. Zhang and Y.-m. Wang, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 9359–9364 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Li, W.-J. Liu and Y.-X. Xie, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 5409–5412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, C. Liu and Z.-L. Jin, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 4005–4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. da Conceição Silva, J. D. Senra, L. C. Aguiar, A. B. Simas, A. L. F. de Souza, L. F. B. Malta and O. Antunes, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 3883–3885 CrossRef .
C. S. Cho and N. T. Tran, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naghipour and A. Fakhri, Catal. Commun., 2016, 73, 39–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajjami and M. Cheraghi, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 1099–1106 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koohgard and M. Hosseini-Sarvari, Catal. Commun., 2018, 111, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pena-Pereira and J. Namieśnik, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1784–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3508–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. D. Rogers, K. R. Seddon and S. Volkov, Green industrial applications of ionic liquids, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
C. J. Mathews, P. J. Smith and T. Welton, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1249–1250 RSC .
A. Kaur and V. Singh, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 1128–1131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lombardo, M. Chiarucci and C. Trombini, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 574–579 RSC .
P. Karthikeyan, A. Vanitha, P. Radhika, K. Suresh and A. Sugumaran, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 7193–7197 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Boruah, M. J. Koiri, U. Bora and D. Sarma, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 2423–2425 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Keith, S. D. Kosik, L. V. Tillekeratne and M. R. Mason, Synlett, 2014, 977–982 CAS .
M. Wang, X. Yuan, H. Li, L. Ren, Z. Sun, Y. Hou and W. Chu, Catal. Commun., 2015, 58, 154–157 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2003, 70–71 RSC .
Q. Zhang, K. D. O. Vigier, S. Royer and F. Jérôme, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7108–7146 RSC .
T. Arnold, A. J. Jackson, A. Sanchez-Fernandez, D. Magnone, A. Terry and K. Edler, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 12894–12902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott and K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11060–11082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Carriazo, M. C. Serrano, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4996–5014 RSC .
D. A. Alonso, A. Baeza, R. Chinchilla, G. Guillena, I. M. Pastor and D. J. Ramón, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 612–632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shaabani, S. E. Hooshmand, R. Afshari, S. Shaabani, V. Ghasemi, M. Atharnezhad and M. Akbari, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 258, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shaabani, S. E. Hooshmand, M. T. Nazeri, R. Afshari and S. Ghasemi, Tetrahedron Lett., 2016, 57, 3727–3730 CrossRef CAS .
G. Imperato, S. Höger, D. Lenoir and B. König, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 1051–1055 RSC .
X. Marset, A. Khoshnood, L. Sotorríos, E. Gómez-Bengoa, D. A. Alonso and D. J. Ramón, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1269–1275 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. D'Alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Herrero, J. A. Mendiola, A. Cifuentes and E. Ibáñez, J. Chromatogr. A, 2010, 1217, 2495–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lang and C. M. Wai, Talanta, 2001, 53, 771–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Early, R. S. Gordon, M. A. Carroll, A. B. Holmes, R. E. Shute and I. F. McConvey, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1966–1967 RSC .
X. Feng, M. Yan, T. Zhang, Y. Liu and M. Bao, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1758–1766 RSC .
C. I. Melo, R. Bogel-Łukasik and E. Bogel-Łukasik, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2012, 61, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fluhr, R. Darlenski and C. Surber, Br. J. Dermatol., 2008, 159, 23–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. García, H. García-Marín and E. Pires, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1007–1033 RSC .
A. Shaabani and R. Afshari, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 510, 384–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Díaz-Álvarez, J. Francos, B. Lastra-Barreira, P. Crochet and V. Cadierno, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6208–6227 RSC .
A. Wolfson and C. Dlugy, Chem. Pap., 2007, 61, 228–232 CAS .
F. Chahdoura, C. Pradel and M. Gómez, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 3648–3660 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cravotto, L. Orio, E. C. Gaudino, K. Martina, D. Tavor and A. Wolfson, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1130–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Heravi, M. Ghavidel and B. Heidari, Curr. Org. Synth., 2016, 13, 569–600 CrossRef CAS .
A. Azua, J. A. Mata, P. Heymes, E. Peris, F. Lamaty, J. Martinez and E. Colacino, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 1107–1116 CrossRef CAS .
G. Clavé, F. Pelissier, S. Campidelli and C. Grison, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4093–4103 RSC .
J. M. Bhojane, S. A. Sarode and J. M. Nagarkar, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 1564–1570 RSC .
M. Smoleń, M. Kędziorek and K. Grela, Catal. Commun., 2014, 44, 80–84 CrossRef .
V. Pace, P. Hoyos, L. Castoldi, P. Domínguez de María and A. R. Alcántara, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1369–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Antonucci, J. Coleman, J. B. Ferry, N. Johnson, M. Mathe, J. P. Scott and J. Xu, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 939–941 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Ramgren, L. Hie, Y. Ye and N. K. Garg, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 3950–3953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mondal and U. Bora, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3119–3123 RSC .
C. S. Pereira, V. M. Silva and A. E. Rodrigues, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2658–2671 RSC .
J.-P. Wan, C. Wang, R. Zhou and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8789–8792 RSC .
G. A. Edwards, M. A. Trafford, A. E. Hamilton, A. M. Buxton, M. C. Bardeaux and J. M. Chalker, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 2094–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Wilson, J. Murray, C. Jamieson and A. J. B. Watson, Synlett, 2018, 650–654 CAS .
R. A. Sheldon, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3180–3183 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. Bonifácio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 24–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 1999, 1, 43–55 RSC .
A. Stolle, T. Szuppa, S. E. Leonhardt and B. Ondruschka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2317–2329 RSC .
S. F. Nielsen, D. Peters and O. Axelsson, Synth. Commun., 2000, 30, 3501–3509 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bandgar and A. Patil, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 7627–7630 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schneider, T. Szuppa, A. Stolle, B. Ondruschka and H. Hopf, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1894–1899 RSC .
T. Baran, İ. Sargın, M. Kaya, P. Mulerčikas, S. Kazlauskaitė and A. Menteş, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 331, 102–113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grätz, B. Wolfrum and L. Borchardt, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2973–2979 RSC .
R. Hudson and J. L. Katz, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14880–14887 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Seyyed Emad Hooshmand	Seyyed Emad Hooshmand was born in Iran, in 1988 and received his B.Sc. in Chemistry from Bu-Ali Sina University, Hamedan, in 2011, and his M.Sc. in Organic Chemistry from Kharazmi University, in 2013. He started his Ph.D. studies at Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, in 2014, and was awarded the Shahid Shahriari research fellowship in 2017. His current research interests are focused on green chemistry, metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions and multi-component reactions based on dithiocarbamates and isocyanides. He is the author of over 25 scientific articles, including, reviews, and a book chapter.
Bahareh Heidari	Bahareh Heidari was born in Qorveh/Kurdistan, Iran, in 1989. She received her B.Sc. in Chemistry from Razi University, Kermanshah in 2011, and her M.Sc. in Organic Chemistry from Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran under the supervision of Dr Mohammad Reza Nabid, in 2013. She is currently working towards her Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Majid M. Heravi with Dr Roya Sedghi as an advisor. Her research interest involve the synthesis of polymeric nanocomposites as catalyst, colorimetric sensors and molecularly imprinted polymers.
Roya Sedghi	Roya Sedghi was born in 1980 in Tehran and received her B.Sc. degree from the Tehran Azad University of Iran in 2002 before being accepted for M.Sc. at Shahid Beheshti University. She completed her Ph.D. under the supervision of Professor H. Abdi Oskoiee and is presently working at Shahid Beheshti University as an assistant professor. She has authored 50 publications and her research is mainly focused on the application of nanocomposites in various chemistry disciplines such as catalysis and drug delivery. In 2017, she is awarded research project in green chemistry for Life supported by UNESCO, PhosAgro and IUPAC.
Rajender S. Varma	Prof. Rajender Varma (H-index 102; ‘Highly Cited Researchers’ 2016, 2018; Publons awardee 2018) did his PhD from Delhi University, 1976. After postdoctoral research at Robert Robinson Laboratories, Liverpool, England, he was a faculty at Baylor College of Medicine and Sam Houston State University prior to joining the US Environmental Protection Agency in 1999 with appointment at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Palacky University at Olomouc, Czech Republic from 2014. He has over 45 years of research experience in the management of multi-disciplinary technical programs. Lately, he is engaged in greener assembly of nanomaterials and the sustainable applications of magnetically retrievable nanocatalysts. He is board member of several international journals, published over 480 papers, and has been awarded 16 US Patents with 35000 citations.

 	Fig. 1  The frequency of SMR publications, obtained from a search of the title, abstract, or keywords contained in Scopus from 1995 to 2017.	 

 	Scheme 1  Preparative steps for MFI-supported Pd(OAc)2–IL 3 as the SMR catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 2  The SMR of aryl bromides 4 with arylboronic acid 5 using MFI-supported Pd(OAc)2–IL 3.	 

 	Scheme 3  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and boronic acids 5 by Mag-IL-Pd catalyst 7.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of main-chain NHC-Pd polymers 11a–c as SMR catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 5  The SMR of various aryl chlorides 4 with arylboronic acid 5 by N-substituted main-chain NHC-Pd polymer catalyst 11c.	 

 	Scheme 6  The synthetic path to PEG-functionalized imidazolium salts, 16a–c.	 

 	Scheme 7  The SMR between aryl bromides 4 and aryl boronic acids 5 in water.	 

 	Scheme 8  Schematic representation of guest molecules entrapped within the nanoreactor of Pd@PNIPAM 18.	 

 	Scheme 9  The aqueous SMR within the Pd@PNIPAM nanoreactor 18 as catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 10  Preparation of Pd np/A–G 21.	 

 	Scheme 11  The aqueous SMR of arenediazonium tetrafluoroborates, 22 with potassium aryltrifluoroborates, 23 using Pdnp/A–G 21 as the catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 12  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 by 0.05 mol% Pd/BC catalyst in water.	 

 	Scheme 13  The SMR of various aryl halides 4 with phenylboronic acid 5 catalyzed using the pyridinium-modified CD/Pd(OAc)2 complex.	 

 	Scheme 14  The SMR of various aryl bromides and chlorides, 4, catalyzed by 8 wt%Pd@MIL-101Cr-NH2.	 

 	Scheme 15  Micellar couplings in water and air by [1,1′-bis(di-tertbutylphosphino) ferrocene]dichloropalladium(II) (Pd(dtbpf)-Cl2).	 

 	Scheme 16  Preparation of carbon-coated magnetic Fe3O4@CPd 27 catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 17  Arylation of aryl halides 4 using 27 as catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 18  The preparation of water-soluble fullerene-supported PdCl2 nanocatalyst 30.	 

 	Scheme 19  The SMR of arylboronic acid 5 with aryl halides 4 using catalyst 30.	 

 	Scheme 20  The SMR via Au–Pd core–shell NPs.	 

 	Scheme 21  Couplings between aryl halides and aryl or alkenyl boron derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 22  Aqueous homocoupling of substituted arylboronic acids 5 by the glutathione-based catalyst under MW irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 23  The SMR of aryl halides 4 and arylboronic acids 5 by Au catalyst in water.	 

 	Scheme 24  Schematic representation of the Sr2+ crosslinked alginate/CMC composite hydrogels synthesis process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2017) Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 25  The SMR of aryl halides 4 with phenylboronic acids 5 catalyzed by Sr/Alg/CMC/GO/Au composites.	 

 	Scheme 26  The preparative steps for Fe3O4@ Boehmite-NH2-Co(II) NPs 40.	 

 	Scheme 27  The SMR of diverse aryl halides with phenylboronic acid catalyzed using 40.	 

 	Scheme 28  The synthetic steps for assembly of the Pd complex based on N, O-ligand 43. Conditions: (i) n-BuLi, THF; (ii) Ph2CO; (iii) 2 N HCl; (iv) Pd(OAc)2, toluene, room temperature, 3 days.	 

 	Scheme 29  Modified SMR of aryl bromides 4 with boronic acid 5 by catalyst 43 in EtOH solvent.	 

 	Scheme 30  Scope of the SMR using catalyst 44 in EtOH solvent.	 

 	Scheme 31  The SMR between 4-iodotoluene 4 and phenylboronic acid 5.	 

 	Scheme 32  Schematic diagram of Pd NPs supported on copper-alginate aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 33  The SMR of various aryl Bromides 4 using 0.25 mol% Pd(II)–GO.	 

 	Scheme 34  The SMR of aryl halides 4 on the catalytic conversion to biaryls 6.	 

 	Scheme 35  The SMR between bromoarenes 4 and phenylboronic acid 5.	 

 	Scheme 36  Schematic of the fabrication process for the 3D IL-rGO/Pd hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 37  The SMR of a variety of aryl halides with phenylboronic acids catalyzed by the 3D IL-rGO/Pd hydrogel.	 

 	Scheme 38  The SMR under irradiation with a visible light-emitting diode (LED).	 

 	Scheme 39  The SMR of various aryl halides 4 with aryl boronic acids 5 catalyzed by the GO/Fe3O4/PAMPS/Pd nanocomposite.	 

 	Scheme 40  Synthesis of the Pd–Ag@CQD 45 nanohybrid.	 

 	Scheme 41  The SMR by Pd–Ag@CQD 45.	 

 	Scheme 42  Coupling of diverse halobenzenes 4 with phenylboronic acid 5.	 

 	Scheme 43  The SMR catalyzed by α-Fe2O3 nanocluster/GO.	 

 	Scheme 44  Preparation of WERSA and its catalytic activity in the SMR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 45  Substrate scope for the SMR using Pd(OAc)2 in WERSA.	 

 	Scheme 46  Various stages of WEB preparation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 47  Pd(OAc)2 and WEB-catalyzed SMR of aryl halides 4 with aryl boronic acids 5.	 

 	Scheme 48  The SMR catalyzed by Pd2(dba)3 in PEG-300.	 

 	Scheme 49  The SMR of aryl halides 4 with NaBPh446 in PEG 400.	 

 	Scheme 50  The SMR under visible light irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 51  The suggested mechanism for enhanced catalytic activity under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 52  Pd-catalyzed SMR in ionic liquid.	 


1	[bmpy][NTf2]–water	PdCl2	K3PO4	65	2	84–99	
152

2	[Aemim]Br	[[Gmim]Cl–Pd(II)]	Et3N	25	1–10	65–94	
153

3	[C4-DABCO][dca]	PdCl2	—	110	3–6	40–99	
154

4	[P66614][NTf2]–water	Pd2(dba)3	Cs2CO3	160	48	19–99	
155


 	Scheme 53  Ni-catalyzed SMR in the ionic liquid.	 

 	Scheme 54  Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of aryl halides 4 with boronic acids 5 in DES.	 

 	Scheme 55  Pd-catalyzed SMR in choline chloride and glycerol system.	 

 	Scheme 56  The SMR under the [hmim]NTf2/supercritical CO2 biphasic system.	 

 	Scheme 57  Possible mechanism for the Suzuki reaction.	 

 	Scheme 58  The SMR process in glycerol under ultrasound irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 59  Ni-catalyzed SMR of phenylboronic acid 5 with various aryl diazonium salts 22 in glycerol.	 

 	Scheme 60  Ni-catalyzed SMR in 2-MeTHF.	 

 	Scheme 61  Synthesis of aryl ketones 51 in 2-MeTHF.	 

 	Scheme 62  Probable mechanism for the cross-coupling reaction pathway.	 

 	Scheme 63  The SMR catalyzed by melamine–Pd complex 53 in pure ethyl lactate.	 

 	Scheme 64  Pd-catalyzed SMR in Cyrene 54.	 

 	Scheme 65  Solvent-free synthesis of biphenyl 6 under MW and ball-milling.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
