Unique chemistries of metal-nitrate precursors to form metal-oxide thin films from solution: materials for electronic and energy applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA07727H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07727H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24124-24149Unique chemistries of metal-nitrate precursors to form metal-oxide thin films from solution: materials for electronic and energy applications

        
          
            Elizabeth A. 
            Cochran
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Keenan N. 
            Woods
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Darren W. 
            Johnson
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Catherine J. 
            Page
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Shannon W. 
            Boettcher
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Materials Science Institute, The Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403-1253, USA. E-mail: dwj@uoregon.edu; cpage@uoregon.edu; swb@uoregon.edu
Received 
      17th July 2019
    , Accepted 23rd September 2019First published on 23rd September 2019AbstractMetal-oxide thin films are used extensively in electronic and energy applications. Solution processing offers a potentially scalable and inexpensive deposition method to expand the applications of metal-oxide films and to complement vacuum-deposition techniques. Among precursors for solution deposition, metal nitrates stand out for their ability to form high-quality metal-oxide thin films. This review focuses on unique aspects of metal-nitrate chemistry that have been exploited to advance the development of solution-processed thin films. We discuss the solid-state bulk, solution, and thin-film chemical reactions involving metal nitrates and illustrate how the resulting metal-oxide thin-film properties depend on the entire reaction pathway. To conclude, we offer perspective as to how understanding the chemistry of film formation from metal-nitrate precursors is useful for addressing the primary drivers for industrial manufacturing of solution-processed metal-oxide thin films.Elizabeth A. CochranElizabeth Cochran received her B.S. degree in Chemistry from the University of San Francisco in 2013. She is currently a Chemistry Ph.D. candidate at the University of Oregon working with Shannon Boettcher and Darren W. Johnson. Her graduate work focuses on characterizing and elucidating the thin-film reaction pathway of solution-deposited metal oxide thin films.Keenan N. WoodsKeenan Woods received his B.S. in Chemistry from California Lutheran University in 2013. He later obtained his M.S. and Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Oregon in 2015 and 2017, respectively. His graduate work was performed under the direction of Catherine Page and centered on the development of aqueous-processed metal oxide thin films for microelectronic applications. He currently holds an R&D position in the semiconductor industry.Darren W. JohnsonDarren Johnson has been at the University of Oregon since 2003, where he is currently a Professor of Chemistry and the Bradshaw and Holzapfel Research Professor in Transformational Science and Mathematics. He obtained his Ph.D. from UC-Berkeley in 2000 and was an NIH post-doctoral researcher at the Scripps Research Institute. Research in the group uses supramolecular chemistry as a tool to explore a variety of problems in self-assembly, molecule/ion recognition, and inorganic cluster synthesis. He was co-founder of SupraSensor Technologies, a UO spinout that sought to commercialize remote sensors for nutrient management in precision agriculture. He has co-authored over 130 papers and is co-inventor on 14 pending/issued patents.Catherine J. PageCatherine Page received her B.A. from Oberlin College and her Ph.D. in Inorganic Chemistry from Cornell University. She was a research scientist at DuPont before joining the faculty in the Chemistry Department at the University of Oregon in 1986. Research in her laboratory has centered on the synthesis and characterization of new solid-state oxides that have technological relevance, particularly in thin-film form. As a member of the NSF-sponsored Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry, her group has focused on making high-quality metal oxide dielectric films from aqueous nitrate precursors.Shannon W. BoettcherShannon Boettcher is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oregon. His research is at the intersection of materials science and electrochemistry, with a focus on fundamental aspects of energy conversion and storage. He has been named a DuPont Young Professor, a Cottrell Scholar, a Sloan Fellow, and a Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar.
1. Introduction
The versatility of metal-oxide thin films makes them useful for applications in electronic and energy technologies. Metal oxides are utilized as dielectric,1,2 semiconductor,1,3 or metal components (i.e. transparent conducting oxides)4,5 of thin-film transistors (TFTs) and photovoltaic cells.6,7 In photovoltaics, metal oxides can also serve as carrier-selective contacts to improve solar-cell efficiencies (silicon, perovskite, organic, etc.), including TiO2 (ref. 8–10) and ZnO10–12 for electron-selective contacts and MoOx (ref. 13 and 14) and NiO15,16 for hole-selective contacts. Additional applications include smart windows,17,18 solid-oxide fuel cells,19–21 protective layers,22 and catalysis, as both active23,24 and support25,26 materials for renewable fuel production.
Conventional vapor-phase deposition methods produce high-quality metal-oxide thin films for many of the above-mentioned applications, but face inherent challenges in large-area deposition critical for “macroelectronics”. Such devices require the use of substrates much larger than semiconductor fabrication facilities currently accommodate.27 For this reason, solution processing offers opportunity for growth in macroelectronic technology sectors (e.g. photovoltaics, displays, and “smart” window coatings). Additional advantages of solution processing relative to vapor-phase deposition include potentially lower cost, ambient processing conditions, simple composition tuning, and the use of environmentally benign solvents/precursors.27
Despite these benefits, solution-processed metal oxides often contain more impurities/defects than vapor-deposited films resulting in degraded properties relative to vapor-deposited films. However, significant progress has been made over the past decade to enable the production of solution-processed metal-oxide thin films of high (opto)electronic quality competitive with vacuum-deposited films.7,28,29 These advances have been aided by enhanced understanding of how the solution-precursor chemistry affects the structure/morphology (grain size, density, degree of condensation, etc.) of resulting thin-film materials, which directly influences their function. Such relationships are well-established for films prepared from sol–gel precursors.30,31 However, significant knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of the chemical reaction pathways from metal-salt precursors to metal-oxide films which, in many cases, produce higher-quality films (i.e. denser, fewer impurities, etc.) than sol–gel precursors.32,33 Here we discuss how the chemical transformations of metal-nitrate solution precursors influence metal-oxide film formation chemistry and resulting film properties, which requires analysis of the solid-state bulk, solution, and thin-film literature.
Among salt precursors for metal-oxide films, metal nitrates, M(NO3)x, have proved superior to other commonly used precursors (e.g. metal chlorides and acetates). Films produced from metal nitrates are generally denser, contain fewer impurities, and require lower processing temperatures due to the high volatility of their decomposition byproducts.33,34 Consequently, the resulting thin films often display excellent electronic properties for solution-processed films, and have been implemented as semiconductors,32,35–38 dielectrics,2,37,39–45 transparent conducting oxides (TCOs),46,47 magnets,48 solid electrolytes,49 and charge-carrier selective contacts.50,51 Nitrate counterions exhibit unique reactivities that make them susceptible to decomposition pathways involving little to no thermal annealing. Such “low-temperature processing” methods, including combustion synthesis,52 ultraviolet (UV) photolysis,53 and water-vapor (or “steam”) annealing,54 have been investigated for thin-film processing in efforts to improve compatibility with low-melting-point polymeric substrates and enable roll-to-roll processing.2,29,55,56
While the use of metal-nitrate precursors has become ubiquitous, a fundamental understanding of the nitrate decomposition pathways and the oxide-formation processes is important for the advancement of thin-film solution-deposition technologies. This review examines the important chemical considerations that enable the preparation of high-quality metal-oxide thin films from metal-nitrate precursors. An improved understanding of metal-nitrate chemistry, including the thermal evolution and decomposition of bulk salts, the chemical nature of metal-nitrate solution precursors, and film-formation reactions in thin-film precursor gels, serves to inform process development for metal-oxide thin-film deposition. Such considerations of the entire film reaction pathway, from precursor to metal oxide, provide insights that may facilitate manufacturing of high-quality metal-oxide thin films from metal-nitrate precursors.
2. Metal-nitrate-based precursors: chemistry, design, and characterization
2.1 Bulk metal nitrate chemistry
In addition to thin-film precursors, metal-nitrate salts are used for the preparation of bulk metal oxides (and metals) used in numerous materials-science applications. Nitrate salts are preferred to other metal salts due to their relatively low decomposition temperatures and highly-volatile decomposition products, resulting in few residual contaminants in the final products.57 Knowledge of metal-nitrate decomposition mechanisms has proved important for optimizing synthesis conditions to improve material properties. For example, in catalysis, changes to the annealing atmosphere (inert, O2, H2, etc.) of metal nitrates can influence metal-oxide-catalyst-particle dispersion,58 as well as the mechanical and chemical nature of catalyst–support interactions.59,60 Here we discuss the chemical factors that influence decomposition behavior of metal nitrates and what implications this has for selecting thin-film precursors and processing conditions to control film-formation reactions.
The mechanism(s) of metal-nitrate bulk salt decomposition have been studied extensively by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).61–67Fig. 1a shows representative chemical reactions for metal-nitrate salt decomposition in air. Prior to decomposition, the salt melts and releases loosely bound waters (∼25–75 °C), forming a concentrated salt solution. Nitrate can be removed from the salt through two pathways. The first pathway (Fig. 1a, reaction (i)) involves the removal of some nitrates via nitric acid (HNO3) formation and the subsequent evaporation of the water–acid azeotrope (68% HNO3/32% H2O), which boils at 120 °C. At higher annealing temperatures (∼200–500 °C, depending on the metal-cation identity), remaining nitrate thermally decomposes to NOx gases (Fig. 1a, reaction (ii)).57,68 The nitrate thermal decomposition pathway is complex, with many possible NOx decomposition products (NO, NO2, N2O, N2O2, etc.).68 The distribution of products varies with the metal identity and temperature. Thermal decomposition at lower temperatures typically involves formation of NO, NO2 and N2O; as the temperature increases, NO and O2 become the primary decomposition products.68 This general description of the nitrate decomposition pathway also applies to thin films (see 3.2 Characterization of the metal oxide thin film reaction pathway). Following nitrate decomposition, the resulting solid metal-hydroxide product then condenses to form the final metal oxide (Fig. 1a, reaction (iii)). These reactions are often concurrent, resulting in overlapping mass loss events in TGA, which makes full characterization of the metal-nitrate decomposition reactions challenging.
 Fig. 1  Bulk metal nitrate decomposition. (a) Representative chemical reactions for metal-nitrate-hydrate thermal decomposition in air. (b) Schematic depicting the electronic interaction between Mz+ and nitrate. Low charge-density (CD) metals are unable to polarize the nitrate electron cloud, resulting in high Td (left), whereas high-CD metals attract the electron density of nitrate (indicated by distortion and shading of the electron cloud), which lowers Td (right). 
Metal-nitrate salts have a wide range of decomposition temperatures due to differing electronic interactions between the metal and nitrate.57 Positively-charged cations polarize the electron cloud of the negatively-charged nitrates. This lowers the N–O bond order (i.e. lengthens and weakens the bonds), which promotes nitrate dissociation and decomposition. For metals with accessible d-orbital vacancies, π-back-donation of nitrate electron density can occur, which further lowers the N–O bond order. The metal-ion charge density (CD) is a measure of its polarizing ability (, where z = atomic charge and r = atomic radius in nm), which dictates the covalent nature of the metal and nitrate interaction. Yuvaraj et al. studied the decomposition behavior of alkali, alkaline-earth, main-group, and transition-metal nitrates,57 and observed an inverse correlation between metal-cation CD and the nitrate-salt decomposition temperature (Td).57 Low-CD cations have little influence on the nitrate electron cloud and Td tends to be high (Fig. 1b, left). High-CD cations effectively polarize nitrates, which facilitates decomposition and lowers Td (Fig. 1b, right).
We have studied the decomposition behavior of a broad selection of hydrated metal-nitrate salts that are relevant to solution deposition, including rare-earth lanthanides (Ln), which have recently gained popularity as precursors for LnOx gate dielectrics.39,40,69,70 TGA curves for these metal-nitrate salts are shown in Fig. 2. We define Td as the temperature at which the metal-nitrate salt has lost 75% of its total volatile mass.71 For the metal-nitrate hydrate salts considered here, the inverse correlation between CD and Td that Yuvaraj previously established generally holds (Fig. 3 and Table 1). For the lanthanides, which all have similar CDs, we do not observe an obvious trend in Td. The mechanism behind the experimentally-observed trends in Td for lanthanides appears to be missing from the literature.
 Fig. 2  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of metal nitrates used as solution precursors. TGA curves are shown for hydrated metal nitrate salts of: (a) main-group metals, (b) first-row transition metals, and (c) and (d) lanthanide(-like) metals. Experimental details can be found in ref. 72. 
 Fig. 3  Metal-nitrate decomposition temperature (Td) as a function of metal-cation charge density (CD). Metal-nitrate salts exhibit a broad range of decomposition temperatures due to differing electronic interactions between the metal and nitrate. As a general trend, Td increases with decreasing CD (i.e. the cation polarizing ability decreases). Td is defined as the temperature at which the salt has lost 75% of its volatile mass. 
Table 1 Summary of metal-ion parameters relevant to calculating charge density and thermal-decomposition temperature (Td). Coordination numbers (CN) and ionic radii are determined based on the coordination and valence state of the metal in their respective hydrated metal-nitrate salts




Cation (Mz+)

T
d (°C)
CNref.
Ionic radius73 (pm)
CD (103z nm−3)





a In(NO3)3 crystal structure reports CN = 7. Radius for CN = 6 (as reported in ref. 77) is used for this CD calculation.
b Sm(NO3)3 crystal structure shows CN = 10. Radius for CN = 9 (as reported in ref. 73) is used for this CD calculation.
c Crystal structure for Er(NO3)3 is not reported. Assumed CN = 9 due to similarity to other lanthanides.





Mg2+
435
6 (ref. 74)
72
1.28


Al3+
155
6 (ref. 75)
53.5
4.68


Ga3+
195
6 (ref. 76)
62
3.01


In3+
183
6 (ref. 77)a
80
1.40


Sc3+
240
8 (ref. 78)
87
1.09


Cr3+
155
6 (ref. 79)
61.5
3.08


Mn2+
180
6 (ref. 80)
83
0.84


Fe3+
141
6 (ref. 81)
64.5
2.67


Co2+
224
6 (ref. 82)
74.5
1.15


Ni2+
298
6 (ref. 83)
69
1.45


Cu2+
175
5 (ref. 84)
65
1.74


Zn2+
244
6 (ref. 85)
74
1.18


Y3+
386
8 (ref. 86)
102
0.67


Zr4+
210
8 (ref. 87)
84
1.61


La3+
445
10 (ref. 88)
127
0.35


Ce3+
266
10 (ref. 89)
125
0.37


Nd3+
404
9 (ref. 90)
116
0.46


Sm3+
470
10 (ref. 91)b
113
0.50


Gd3+
373
9 (ref. 92)
111
0.52


Dy3+
427
9 (ref. 93)
108
0.57


Ho3+
372
9 (ref. 94)
107
0.58


Er3+
350
9c
106
0.60




In addition to the metal identity, nitrate decomposition is sensitive to the annealing ambient. Yuvaraj et al. also investigated metal-nitrate decomposition temperatures in reducing atmospheres (Tr) of 10% H2 in N2.57 They observe Td < Tr for many first-row transition and group 13 metal nitrates, whereas many of the alkali, alkaline-earth, and noble-metal nitrates exhibit Td > Tr. This difference in reactivity is explained by the ability of the lower-CD metals (i.e. alkalis, alkaline earths, and noble metals) to adsorb and dissociate H2, forming NH3 (or even N2) and H2O as byproducts. The authors propose that the (post-)transition metals, in contrast, do not undergo nitrate reduction by this pathway because the metal cation cannot effectively polarize and dissociate H2 due to the covalent nature of metal nitrate interactions. Low-CD metals, in contrast, experience mostly ionic metal-nitrate interactions and, therefore, can more effectively dissociate H2.
While additional systematic studies on this effect are lacking, select examples of other annealing atmospheres influencing Td exist in the literature. Water vapor is observed to lower Td for some metal-nitrate systems, including La(NO3)3,95 Mn(NO3)2,67 and a nitrate-ligated scandium dimer species.96 This effect has been attributed to suppression of metal-carbonate intermediates,95 which decompose at higher temperatures than nitrates, as well as enhanced nitrate removal via HNO3-H2O azeotrope evaporation.96 When NO is introduced to the annealing atmosphere for Ni(NO3)2 and Co(NO3)2, the decomposition rate slows compared to a pure O2 atmosphere, resulting in improved NiO and Co3O4 nanoparticle size dispersity.97 Support materials can also influence decomposition. Alumina supports have been shown to lower Td for first-row transition-metal nitrates with d occupations other than d5 and d10 (e.g. Ni2+, Co2+, and Cu2+) compared to the bulk; the authors hypothesize that alumina changes the metal-nitrate electronic structure, thereby facilitating decomposition.98
Metal-nitrate Td is primarily dictated by the metal-cation identity (i.e. charge density/electrostatic interaction with nitrate), but is also influenced by ambient conditions (discussed above). For applications where metal-nitrate precursor solutions are employed to deposit metal-oxide films, the metal-nitrate Td is an important consideration for compatibility with substrates and other device components. In some cases, compatibility may limit the choice of metal-nitrate salts. For example, the high Td of Y(NO3)3 and La(NO3)3 in air (386 and 445 °C, respectively) render them unsuitable as a dielectric layer for flexible TFTs on a polyimide substrate, which softens and deforms above 275 °C.55 Suitable alternatives would include Al(NO3)3 or Ga(NO3)3, as these salts are substantially decomposed by 150 °C (Fig. 2). In other cases, a particular metal-oxide target may be critical for a desired application. In this instance, strategies to alter the Td by controlling the ambient annealing atmosphere or thin-film composition may be possible. Our research groups have demonstrated enhanced nitrate removal at low annealing temperatures for Y- and La-based thin films using a water-vapor atmosphere (see 3.3.3 Controlled-atmosphere annealing: the role of water vapor in film formation).54 Additionally, pairing high-Td salts, like La(NO3)3, with low-Td salts (e.g. Al(NO3)3 or ZrO(NO3)2) in ternary oxide compositions effectively lowers the overall Td of the thin-film system.39,42,99 We hypothesize this effect is a result of high-CD cations polarizing nitrate ions from the low-CD salt, facilitating their decomposition. Indeed, the process parameter space to influence metal-nitrate decomposition chemistry is expansive. Further investigation of factors influencing nitrate Td could allow for improved control over thermal processing conditions and thus the final film properties/performance.
2.2 Aqueous solution behavior of metal nitrates
Metal nitrate salts are highly soluble in aqueous and (polar) organic solvents. Upon dissolution, complex equilibria and speciation are established, the details of which are generally not well understood. Even in dilute salt solutions (≥10−4 M Mz+), monomeric cations can react to form polynuclear species, which can be present in equal concentrations to monomer, depending on solution conditions.100 At concentrations relevant to solution processing (≥0.1 M Mz+), metal-anion complexes can form, further complicating solution speciation.101–103 Both oligomerization and complex formation depend on pH, concentration, and temperature. Understanding the chemical speciation and interactions taking place in solution can inform precursor design, allowing for control of decomposition pathways and the production of thin films with desired morphology and structure. Examples of speciation-informed precursor design will be highlighted in Section 2.3. For simplicity, we focus the solution-speciation discussion here on aqueous metal nitrate solutions; however, many of the concepts discussed are also relevant to any solvent system that contains water (e.g. alcohol/water mixtures), including traditional sol–gel precursors.30

2.2.1 Metal ions in solution. 
When dissolved in water, positively-charged cations (Mz+) experience an electrostatic attraction towards the lone electron pairs of oxygen in water to form an ordered hydration shell around Mz+ – this is referred to as an aquo (or aqua) cation. The electron lone pairs on water molecules in the aquo cation are attracted to the positively-charged Mz+ and form a strong M-O interaction. Electron density from O–H moves closer to oxygen in order to compensate for lost electron density that is now shared with Mz+. This results in an increased partial positive charge on hydrogen. If the electrostatic attraction between Mz+ and oxygen is strong enough, the positive charge on hydrogen will increasingly resemble H+, eventually resulting in hydrolysis and the dissociation of H+ into solution (eqn (1)). [M(H2O)N]z+ + hH2O ↔ [M(OH)h(H2O)N−h](z−h)+ + hH3O+(1)
Such hydrolysis reactions are the origin of metal-cation acidity. Relative cation acidities can be determined from their pKa values. Metals with pKa values ≤6 are considered to be acidic, whereas those with pKa values >6 are nonacidic.104
The presence of hydroxyl ligands makes possible the formation of soluble, polynuclear cationic species through condensation reactions. Two condensation pathways are possible: olation and oxolation. Olation occurs via nucleophilic attack of an M-OH group on another metal aquo cation to form a bridging hydroxyl ligand; water is the leaving group (eqn (2)). M-OH + M-H2O → M-OH-M + H2O(2)
Oxolation results in metal oxo linkages (M-O-M) when two OH ligands react and form water as a byproduct (eqn (3)). M-OH + M-OH → M-O-M + H2O(3)
The kinetics of olation are rapid compared to oxolation.100 Therefore, oxolation will not occur to an appreciable extent until H2O ligands have been eliminated by olation.105 Soluble oxolation products are most common for highly-charged cations (z ≥ 4), as these cations have high h:Mz+ ratios (see eqn (1)) due to low (or even negative) pKa values (i.e. few H2O ligands are present).104,106 Oxolation reactions of low-valence cations (z ≤ 4) often results in the precipitation of (oxy)hydroxides. Because most metal-nitrate salts are low-valence (z = 2 and 3), olation products are more commonly observed in metal-nitrate solutions.
Olation products with discrete stoichiometry form due to self-limiting reactivity. Olation kinetics are limited by the lability of H2O ligands, which is quantified by the water-exchange rate constant (kH2O, s−1). The kH2O is defined as the equilibrium pseudo-first-order rate constant at which water molecules in the inner-most solvation sphere of the metal cation are exchanged with “bulk” water molecules from solution at 25 °C (i.e.; rate = kH2O(c[M(H2O)6]z+) where c is the concentration of aquo cations).107 As a general trend, kH2O for metal cations increases with increasing ionic radius (see Fig. 6c). For d-block metals with partially-occupied d states, the ligand-field stabilization energy (LFSE) also influences the strength and lability of M-H2O bonds. Cations with higher LFSE experience slower kH2O as a result of greater orbital overlap between metal d orbitals and those of H2O.107 Additionally, OH ligands must be good nucleophiles in order for olation to occur. The OH ligands on metal olation products become less nucleophilic (i.e. δ(OH) becomes less negative) as they form more bonds and the positive charge on the polynuclear species increases, which slows kH2O.100 This leads to the formation of polynuclear species with a defined stoichiometry, rather than indefinite oligomerization. For many metal cations, olation stops at or before hexamer formation,108 although some cations are capable of forming larger polycations. The OH bridges in small olation products, such as trimers, can remain strong nucleophiles and further react to form large clusters. Such is the case for Al3+, which forms the tridecameric Keggin ion [Al13O4(OH)24(H2O)12]7+ under certain pH and concentration conditions.105
Solution equilibria and the existence of polynuclear species, which can include multiple hydrolysis products, can be complex and challenging to predict. Pourbaix diagrams are helpful representations that depict predominant species in solution under equilibrium conditions as a function of pH and concentration.109 We consider here the Pourbaix diagrams of two metal systems commonly used as solution precursors for thin films: aluminum and indium. For an aqueous solution with 0.1 M metal ion concentration, the monomeric trivalent aquo ions Al3+ and In3+ are the predominant species up to pH ∼3.7 and ∼2.8, respectively, after which M(OH)3 persists (Fig. 4a and b). Thin-film precursor solutions should be maintained at a pH below that at which insoluble M(OH)3 forms, as this can result in material loss and/or negatively affect film morphology. Additionally, excess acid should also be avoided as it is typically detrimental to film quality given that additional volatile components must be removed during densification, which can lead to increased porosity. While Pourbaix diagrams are useful for determining the predominant species under equilibrium conditions, they leave out hydrolysis/olation products that may contribute appreciably to soluble species in solution. For a more-complete depiction of solution speciation, we must consider speciation diagrams.
 Fig. 4  Aqueous solution speciation of aluminum and indium. Pourbaix (a and b) and speciation (c and d) diagrams describing the aqueous chemistry of aluminum and indium. The dashed lines in panels (c) and (d) indicate species in solutions super-saturated with respect to α-Al(OH)3 and In(OH)3 (i.e. [Mz+] < 0.1 M). Grey shading in panels (c) and (d) indicates the region to the left of the M3+|M(OH)3 boundary from the Pourbaix diagram (i.e. the pH region where soluble species predominate). The data used to construct the Pourbaix and speciation diagrams are from ref. 110 and 108, respectively. 
Speciation diagrams describe the evolution of solution equilibria as a function of pH. These diagrams are calculated from thermodynamic values and describe the distribution of soluble species in equilibrium with the solid M(OH)x phase. Baes and Mesmer compiled a library of equilibrium constants for polynuclear hydrolysis products used to formulate such speciation diagrams.108 For a 0.1 M Al3+ solution, monomeric Al3+ (i.e. Al(H2O)63+) persists as the dominant ionic species up to pH 3.5 (Fig. 4c). As the pH increases above pH 3, the concentration of Al13O4(OH)247+ (the “Al13” Keggin ion) increases to ∼35% of soluble Al species near the precipitation boundary (pH 3.7). Minor hydrolysis products Al(OH)2+, Al2(OH)24+, and Al3(OH)45+ have narrow stability windows centered around pH 3.5 and, combined, contribute less than 10% of soluble species at pH 3.5 (Fig. 4c). For a 0.1 M In3+ aqueous solution, In(H2O)63+ is the predominant species below pH 2. As the solution pH increases from ∼1 to 2, the hydrolysis product In3(OH)45+ increasingly contributes to solution speciation up to 50% at pH 2 (Fig. 4d). Soluble species at pH values above the hydroxide precipitation boundary, indicated by the unshaded region in Fig. 4b and c, are not relevant when considering thin-film solution precursors due to low solubilities.
Baes and Mesmer's publication, “The Hydrolysis of Cations,” is still considered the most-comprehensive treatment of solution speciation; however, Baes and Mesmer acknowledge their published solution speciation diagrams are far from complete.108 Identifying and characterizing polynuclear species is a difficult task and is an active area of research. Significant progress toward solution speciation characterization has been made in recent years with the aid of a suite of corroborative techniques, including nuclear-magnetic-resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS).111 In the field of Al speciation, our research groups have prepared and studied [Al13(OH)24(H2O)24]15+ (“flat”-Al13) and [Al8(OH)14(H2O)18]10+,112,113 while others have previously observed [Al30O8(OH)56(H2O)24]18+ in aqueous solution.114 Additional indium hydrolysis products (In2(OH)24+ and In4(OH)66+) have also been experimentally identified.115 Recent computational work on Al and Ga aqueous speciation predicted some polynuclear species are predominant, thermodynamic products that belong on Pourbaix diagrams.116 It is important to note that the identity of the counterion can also influence speciation if it is capable of coordination to the metal,117 which can, in turn, influence the identity and quantity of olation products. Additionally, metastable polynuclear products can become kinetically trapped due to stabilizing effects of counterions.
There are numerous approaches to systematically influence thin-film precursor solution speciation by changing solution pH. Perhaps the most straightforward approach involves controlling the metal salt concentration, which will necessarily change the pH and the olation product distribution. For a constant metal concentration, solution pH can be controlled using acid or base addition. Dissolution of metal oxides/hydroxides using HNO3 has proven a successful approach for targeting olation products of interest as thin-film precursors.47,118 However, the addition of excess acid or base to solution should be avoided, as such additives can have a deleterious effect on film morphology, imparting porosity and inhibiting densification. Alternatively, redox reactions that consume protons and nitrate can be used to increase the solution pH and drive olation. This can be accomplished via electrochemical reduction to avoid introducing additives.119 For mixed-metal precursors, the effect of the component metal cations on the solution pH must also be considered. We have observed the formation of olation products in mixed Al3+ and La3+ nitrate precursors.39 Because La3+ is less acidic than Al3+ (pKa = 7.6 and 5.0, respectively),104 La3+ increases the solution pH, which drives the formation of Al clusters. These approaches are discussed in more detail in Section 2.3.1. An understanding of the solution-speciation chemistry for thin-film precursors is useful for relating solution conditions to thin-film chemistry and morphology, which influences their performance in devices.


2.2.2 Nitrates in solution. 
Nitrates do not exhibit the same complex speciation chemistry as metal cations, but can be (electro)chemically reduced to a variety of nitrogen-containing species in aqueous solution. The nitrogen Pourbaix diagram shows the predominant (soluble) reduction products for nitrate as a function of pH and solution potential (E) (Fig. 5). For metal-nitrate solutions, which are typically acidic (pH < 7), NH4+(aq) is the predominant thermodynamic reduction product in solution at E < 0.86 V. From E ≈ 0.1–1 V, HNO2 (aq) and NO2− (aq) have narrow predominance regions at pH < 3 and from pH = 3–7, respectively. While other nitrate-reduction products are possible, including N2, NO, N2O, and N2O5, these products are gases with low solubilities.109,110 In Section 2.3.1, we discuss the importance of metal-nitrate reduction chemistry in the design and control of thin-film precursor solution speciation.
 Fig. 5  Nitrate reduction chemistry. The above Pourbaix diagram shows the aqueous solution speciation of nitrogen (0.1 M). The aqueous stability of nitrate is pertinent to understanding its reduction chemistry, which can be utilized to influence metal-nitrate precursor solution speciation. The data used to construct this Pourbaix diagram are from ref. 110. 
In addition to considering metal cation and nitrate solution chemistry independently, it is important to understand how these species interact in solution. Metal-anion complexes form in aqueous solutions under certain concentration conditions.101–103,120,121 Metal-nitrate complexes (i.e. [M(NO3)(H2O)N−1](z−1)+, abbreviated here as “M-NO3”) have been identified and quantified using Raman spectroscopy. For In(NO3)3, In-NO3 complex can be identified by a shift in the InO6 vibrational mode, and the appearance of additional vibrational modes, as the In(NO3)3 concentration is increased (Fig. 6a).101 Changes to the Raman spectra result from broken symmetry of the aquo cation [In(H2O)6]3+ when nitrate substitutes for a water molecule to form In-NO3. The following quantities of M-NO3 complex (compared to the amount of [M(H2O)N]z+) for a select few metal cation systems relevant to thin-film solution precursors are as follows: In3+ (60%)101 > Y3+ (45%)102 ≈ La3+ (44%)103 > Ga3+ (5%)121 > Al3+ (0%)120 (∼2 M [M3+] in aqueous solution). For all metal cations, the quantity of M-NO3 complex decreases with decreasing [Mz+] and [NO3−].
 Fig. 6  Metal-nitrate (M-NO3) complex formation. (a) Raman spectra of In(NO3)3 solutions. Raman frequencies shift and new vibrational modes appear as [In3+] increases, indicating M-NO3 complex formation. The figure is adapted from ref. 101 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Relationship between cation radius (r) and ΔGhyd (values from ref. 122). Cations that are more strongly hydrated (i.e. more negative ΔGhyd) are thermodynamically stable and tend to form fewer M-NO3 complexes. Deviation of z = +2 first-row transition metals from this trend is due to weak ligand-field effects, which results in cation radius expansion when eg orbitals are filled.107 (c) Relationship between cation radius (r) and kH2O. Exchange kinetics will dictate how quickly equilibrium concentrations of M-NO3 complex will be established in aqueous solution. Values are complied from ref. 101, 124 and 125. 
The dependence of M-NO3 complex formation on metal cation identity can be explained by considering the relative thermodynamic stabilities of the aquo cations and the M-NO3 complex. The free energy of hydration (ΔGhyd for the reaction: Mz+(g) + nH2O (l) → Mz+(aq)) provides a measure of the thermodynamic stability of hydrated metal cations. ΔGhyd for the cations considered here are as follows: −4525 kJ mol−1 (Al3+) < −4515 kJ mol−1 (Ga3+) < −3980 (In3+) < −3450 (Y3+) < −3145 kJ mol−1 (La3+).122 Al3+ and Ga3+ form stable aquo cations (i.e. large, negative ΔGhyd), due to their high charge densities, which result in strong M-H2O bonds; this may explain why little to no M-NO3 complex is observed for Al3+ and Ga3+. In contrast, In(NO3)3 forms the largest quantity of M-NO3 complex. The stability constant (logK1) for In-NO3 (0.18) is larger than that of La-NO3 (0.1), despite the trend in ΔGhyd. The reaction described by K1 is given in eqn (4). The fact that In-NO3 is more stable than La-NO3 is likely related to an optimal binding interaction between indium and nitrate due to cation size, charge density, and/or possibly differences in nitrate binding mode (e.g. monodentate vs. bidentate). Significant gaps in published K1 values for M-NO3 prevent us from making thorough comparisons of M-NO3 stabilities. [M(H2O)N]z+ + NO3− ↔ [M(NO3) (H2O)N−1](z−1)+ + H2O(4)
Consideration of thermodynamic and kinetic parameters of aquo cations can be useful for predicting if M-NO3 may form, if stability constants are not available. The ΔGhyd exhibits a linear relationship with cation size (r) (Fig. 6b). Deviations from this trend arise for some first-row transition metal cations; weak ligand-field effects make filling of the anti-bonding eg orbitals favorable, resulting in an expansion of the cation radius that weakens M-H2O bonds (i.e. ΔGhyd values are lower than predictions based on r).107 To first approximation, strongly-hydrated cations (i.e. large, negative ΔGhyd) are expected to be thermodynamically stable and will likely form lower equilibrium concentrations of M-NO3. It is also important to know the timescale required to establish equilibrium concentrations of the M-NO3 complex (eqn (4)). This can be determined by considering the water exchange rate (kH2O). kH2O values tend to increase with increasing r but level off for r > 80 pm as a result of weakening first hydration sphere M-H2O bond strengths (Fig. 6c). The kH2O for the cations reported here suggest equilibrium for most aqueous metal nitrate solution is established in a matter of seconds.107 The exception, Cr3+, requires several days to reach equilibrium, as the water exchange reaction requires the formation of a high-energy transition state.123 In Section 2.3.2, we will discuss ways in which M-NO3 complexes in thin-film precursor solutions influence the thin-film reaction pathway and the final metal-oxide thin-film properties.

2.3 Tuning metal nitrate precursor chemistry
While metal-salt solution speciation is complex, some control can be achieved by altering solution pH, concentration, and/or temperature. Changing these parameters influences olation and metal-anion-complex equilibria. Here we discuss strategies to control metal-nitrate solution speciation for thin-film precursor design. We highlight examples that demonstrate how solution speciation influences thin-film morphology, chemical composition, and function.

2.3.1 Olation products as thin-film precursors. 
Our research groups (among others) have developed scalable synthetic methods for olation products, specifically nitrate-stabilized metal-hydroxo nanoclusters, for use as thin-film precursors. Such nanoclusters were targeted to solve common challenges associated with traditional sol–gel precursors for film deposition. In sol–gel syntheses, pre-condensation reactions are initiated in solution to control film morphology and ensure atomic-level mixing of multi-metal systems.126 Organic solvents and additives are critical for controlling hydrolysis and condensation reactions in sol–gel chemistry. Solution equilibria can be shifted in order to influence the sol–gel precursor structure to alter reactivity and selectivity toward hydrolysis and condensation. This can be accomplished by controlling metal–ligand binding strengths, changing metal/ligand ratios, and/or the addition of acid or base catalysts. Danks et al. includes a detailed review of the chemical reactions/interactions relevant to sol–gel formation.126 Removal of these organic species during thermal processing can negatively influence film morphology through cracking and/or the incorporation of pores.30,127–129 In contrast, nanoclusters are pre-condensed with networks of hydroxyl linkages. Nanoclusters can be thought of as an “all-inorganic” analog to sol–gel thin-film precursors, as they typically contain inorganic anions for charge balance instead of organic ligands. The presence of a pre-condensed metal-hydroxo network and the lack of organic solvents or ligands allows nanoclusters to densify more readily, resulting in films with fewer morphological defects. Indeed, this pre-condensed metal-hydroxyl network should also prevent crystallization of monomer salts during solvent evaporation, resulting in homogeneous film morphology. Additionally, heterometallic nanoclusters inhibit phase segregation during film formation, which results in a uniform distribution of metal cations.
Two classes of nitrate-stabilized metal-hydroxo nanoclusters commonly utilized as thin-film precursors have the general formula [M13(OH)24(H2O)24](NO3)15 (i.e., “M13” where M can be Al3+ or Ga3+)112,119,130–135 or [Ln6(O)(OH)8(H2O)12(NO3)6](NO3)2 (i.e., “Ln6”, where Ln = Y3+, Gd3+, Ho3+, or Er3+).136 The resulting structure of “M13” nanoclusters has a planar (i.e. “flat”) arrangement of octahedrally-coordinated metal sites and “free” (i.e. unbound) nitrate counterions (Fig. 7a). A variation of this “M13” cluster type includes substitution of the six exterior metal sites to form heterometallic structures, of which “Ga7In6” and “Al7In6” have been prepared to date.112,131
 Fig. 7  Metal-hydroxo nanoclusters as thin-film precursors. (a) X-ray crystal structure of a [M13(OH)24(H2O)24](NO3)15 (M = Al3+ or Ga3+) with (bottom) and without (top) non-coordinating nitrate counterions. (b) Current (J)–electric field (ξ) curve fitting of conduction mechanisms for Al2O3-based devices from “Al13” precursors annealed at 350 (top) and 600 °C (bottom). The 350 °C-annealed film exhibits Frenkel–Poole (FP) conduction, whereas the film annealed at 600 °C displays Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling. FN tunneling is indicative of a high-quality insulator. Reprinted from ref. 41. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) films prepared from nitrate salt solutions (top) and electrochemically-treated cluster solutions (bottom). Islands present on the surface of films from the salt precursor are phase-segregated In2O3. Electrochemically-treated solutions are believed to inhibit phase segregation as a result of the pre-condensed hydroxo network of “Ga7In6”. Images adapted from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) FT-IR spectra of films from the Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursor. Vibrational modes for nitrate and hydroxyl groups (labeled) are nearly undetectable after annealing at 100 °C in air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Olation reactions that form nanocluster products of these types can be driven by reactions that increase solution pH, for example proton (eqn (5)) and nitrate (eqn (6)) reduction. H+ + 2e− → H2 (Eo = 0 V vs. SHE)(5) NO3− + 3H+ + 2e− → HNO2 + H2O (Eo = 0.94 V vs. SHE)(6)
Increased solution pH promotes cation hydrolysis (eqn (1)) and provides the reactive M-OH species for olation (eqn (2)). Eqn (6) is one of several possible nitrate-reduction reactions that increase pH, which all have similar reduction potentials (Eo = 0.8–1 V vs. SHE).133 These reactions can be initiated with a variety of reductants, including organic molecules (i.e. nitrosobenzene),130,132 zero-valent metals (Zn or Al),41,131,134–136 or electrons via bulk electrolysis.32,119,137 Metal-hydroxo nanoclusters can also be prepared from a “top-down” approach via digestion of metal hydroxide or oxide species in nitric acid. In this way, nanoclusters of a desired stoichiometry with specific Mz+:NO3− ratios can be targeted. Such “dissolution” methods have thus far been applied to the preparation of flat-“Al13” ([Al13(OH)24(H2O)24](NO3)15) and tin(II) hydroxide nitrate (Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y) nanoclusters.47,118
There are numerous examples of thin films from “M13” (including its heterometallic variants) and “Ln6” precursors that have excellent morphology and properties.32,41,71,112,118,131,136–138 Such films are dense and exhibit essentially atomically-smooth surfaces,71 which are properties critical for preparing high-performance electronic devices. Here we highlight select studies that demonstrate progress toward addressing common limitations of solution processing by using nanocluster precursors to prepare high-quality films.
As mentioned previously, impurities from solvents and counterions can inhibit condensation and densification processes in solution-deposited metal oxide thin films. Precursors from the “Al13” nanocluster, which contain fewer nitrates per Al3+ (15:13) than the simple Al(NO3)3 salt (3:1) and a pre-condensed metal-hydroxyl network, have been used to produce dense, high-quality metal-oxide thin films with excellent insulating properties, as demonstrated in metal–insulator–metal (MIM) diodes. The insulating properties of Al2O3 thin films can be directly correlated with the chemical composition as a function of annealing temperature. At low annealing temperatures (350 °C), conduction is dominated by Frenkel–Poole emission at electric fields (ξ) above 3 MV cm−1, which is a trap-mediated conduction mode (Fig. 7b, top). The source of these trap states is suggested to be water, nitrate, and hydroxyl impurities remaining in the film, which are detected by temperature-programmed-desorption mass spectrometry (TPD-MS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As the film annealing temperature is increased to 600 °C, chemical impurities are increasingly removed. The film further densifies, and, as a result, Frenkel–Poole emission is replaced by Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (Fig. 7b, bottom). Fowler–Nordheim conduction requires low-defect density and had only been observed for devices from vapor-deposited thin films prior to this work. This study shows that solution-deposited thin-film properties are sensitive to precursor chemistry and processing conditions. Additionally, having pre-condensed nanoclusters minimizes the amount of nitrate counterions that must be eliminated, aiding condensation and minimizing residual defects in the final films. The high-quality charge-transport characteristics obtained in solution-deposited thin films suggests there is opportunity to further design precursors to expand the application base of solution-processed films to those requiring low-defect-density materials (i.e. flash memory and solar cells).
Nanocluster precursors have also been used to combat phase segregation in multi-metal thin-film systems. Solutions of electrolyzed In(NO3)3, Ga(NO3)3, and Zn(NO3)2, which contain “Ga7In6” and Zn(NO3)2, can be used to prepare films with a homogeneous distribution of all metal atoms in indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) films.32 In contrast, when the component salts are used, In2O3 islands decorate the film surface (Fig. 7c). Phase segregation appears to be inhibited by the 'pre-condensed' metal-hydroxo network of “Ga7In6.” Nitrate reduction/removal during electrolysis can also substantially reduce the nitrate concentration in solution, which leads to decreased mass loss during annealing and improved densification of the thin films, as evidenced by a 20% total mass change for films from nanocluster precursors vs. a 50% change for films from the component-salt precursors after a 300 °C anneal. Mass loss was monitored by thin-film thermal analysis using a quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM; described in Section 3.2). Decreased mass loss correlates with denser films, as observed by X-ray reflectivity (XRR). Increased film homogeneity and densification translate to improved TFT device performance. Average channel mobilities increase from 5 to 9 cm2 V−1 s−1 when electrolyzed solutions are used (400 °C annealing temperature). Similar device performance improvements have been reported for IGO-based TFTs prepared from Ga7In6 precursors over films from Ga- and In(NO3)3 salts.137
An alternative strategy to initiate more-complete nitrate removal and condensation involves designing nanoclusters with reducing agents as a functional component of the final metal oxide film. We have synthesized precursors for SnO2 and F-doped SnO2 (F:SnO2) that leverage redox reactions between Sn atoms and nitrate in a nanocluster with the general formula Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y.47 For F-doped films, SnF2 is added to solution.
According to the Sn Pourbaix diagram, Sn2+ is stable over narrow pH (∼0–1.6) and potential (∼0–0.25 V) regions within the water stability window110 and can oxidize readily to SnO2 in water (eqn (7)). Standard reduction potentials indicate nitrates are capable of facilitating this oxidation process (eqn (8) and (9)). The following is one proposed reaction pathway for SnO2 formation from the nanocluster precursor (eqn (9)). Sn2+ + 2H2O → SnO2 + 4H+ + 2e− (Eo = 0.13 vs. SHE)(7) NO3− + 3H+ + 2e− → HNO2 + H2O (Eo = 0.94 V vs. SHE)(8) Sn2+ + NO3− + H2O → SnO2 + HNO2 + H+ (Eorxn = 0.81 V)(9)
We observed by transmission Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) that ∼90% of nitrates are removed after annealing a film from the Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursor at just 100 °C (Fig. 7d). We hypothesize the redox reaction shown in eqn (9) facilitates nitrate removal at low temperature. The resulting films are smooth, dense, and amorphous up to a 150 °C annealing temperature; at higher temperatures (e.g. 300 °C) crystalline, nanoporous SnO2 forms. Porosity is likely caused by rapid, low-temperature metal-oxide network formation, solid-state diffusional processes to densify the film are not sufficiently fast at these temperatures. Regardless, the resulting F:SnO2 films are conductive (ρ < 10−2 Ω m at 250 °C annealing temperature) with high optical transparency in the visible spectrum (>85%). Demonstrated compatibility with polyimide substrates suggest their usefulness as transparent conducting oxide materials for flexible devices.


2.3.2 Mitigating metal-nitrate (M-NO3) complex formation in solution. 
At solution concentrations relevant to thin-film precursor solutions (0.1–3 M in Mz+), many metal salts are capable of forming metal-anion complexes (abbreviated here as M-X). The presence of such complexes has been correlated with degraded electronic performance in resulting metal-oxide thin films. Work by Rim et al. on a variety of In2O3 precursors suggests the presence of fully-solvated [In(H2O)6]3+ ions (i.e. in which there are no M-X complexes present) are critical for the preparation of high-quality In2O3 thin films at low annealing temperatures (∼200 °C).36 A comparison of the Raman spectra of In(C2H3O2)3, InCl3, InF3, and In(NO3)3 aqueous precursor solutions shows evidence of M-X complexes in all cases except In(NO3)3, in which only “free” (i.e. unbound) nitrate is detected (ν(NO3−) = 1050 cm−1) (Fig. 8a). A comparison of the stability constants for In-X complexes of these salts explains this observation, as the logK1 value () for In(NO3)3 complexes is lowest of all the salts investigated, indicating In-NO3 complexes are weakest (logK1 = 0.18, 2.32, 3.50, and 3.75 for In(NO3)3, InCl3, InF3, and In(C2H3O2)3, respectively).36,139 A lack of M-X complexes in In(NO3)3 solutions is said to facilitate hydrolysis, requiring a lower energy input for metal oxide formation, as there are no M-X bonds that must be broken. There is a loose correlation between logK1 and metal oxide (M-O) character (determined by XPS). Films from In(NO3)3 and InCl3 contain >20% more metal-oxygen bonds than those from InF3 and In(C2H3O2)3 (Fig. 8b). TFT device performance of resulting In2O3 films from In(NO3)3 exceeds that of films from the other precursors. Saturated channel mobilities (μsat) and on–off current ratios are up to two-orders-of-magnitude higher than for the next-best devices from the InF3 precursor (In(NO3)3: μsat = 24 cm2 V−1 s−1, Ion/off = 108; InF3: μsat = 1.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, Ion/off = 106) (Fig. 8b). The low μsat from InCl3-based films is hypothesized to be to a result of Cl impurities due to incomplete decomposition at this 250 °C annealing temperature, despite high M-O content.
 Fig. 8  Metal-nitrate (M-NO3) complex formation in thin-film solution precursors. (a) Raman spectra of aqueous indium salt (InX3) precursor solutions. The observed vibrational modes are assigned to M-X complexes, with the exception of the peak at 1050 cm−1 in In(NO3)3 spectra, which is assigned to “free” nitrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) TFT μsat and M-O content in In2O3 films from various precursors (data adapted from ref. 36). The high μsat for the In2O3 film from In(NO3)3 is a result of high metal-oxide content due to lack of M-NO3 complex in the precursor solution, as well as few counterion impurities in the final metal oxide. All films for these TFTs were annealed at 250 °C. (c) Relationship between precursor solution temperature, TFT channel mobility (μ) and M-O content in indium zinc oxide thin films (data adapted from ref. 140). As precursor solution temperature is decreased, M-O content and μ increase, which is suggested to be a result of fewer M-NO3 complexes present as the solution is cooled. The TFT data shown are for devices that use SiO2 as the dielectric layer. 
The presence of M-NO3 complexes in thin-film precursor solutions has been correlated with degraded metal-oxide properties, despite the fact such complexes are thermodynamically weak compared to other M-X complexes. One reported strategy for mitigating M-NO3 complex formation involves changing the precursor solution temperature. Lee and co-workers observe a decrease in the ratio of “free” to complexed nitrates in the Raman spectra of mixed In(NO3)3/Zn(NO3)2 solutions as the solution temperature is increased from 4 to 60 °C (Fig. 8c).140 The underlying assumption is that “free” nitrate will more readily decompose, resulting in a greater degree of metal-oxide condensation in the thin film. The authors hypothesize that the high dielectric constant of water at lower temperatures (ε ≈ 85 at 4 °C, compared to ∼70 at 60 °C) supports greater separation of charge, thereby favoring “free” nitrate over M-NO3 complexes. However, given the majority solvent in this study is 2-methoxyethanol, which has a lower ε than water and a weak temperature dependence (ε ≈ 19 at 4 °C and ∼14 at 60 °C), the effect of ε is uncertain.141 Chemical analysis by XPS of the O 1s spectra show the film from the 4 °C solution has 20% greater metal-oxygen character than the film from the 60 °C solution (Fig. 8c). These chemical differences are apparently responsible for higher TFT mobilities (μ) for films from the 4 °C solution (Fig. 8c). A similar study, in which aqueous In(NO3)3 precursor solutions are used, also shows chemical differences (by XPS) between films prepared from “chilled” and room-temperature In(NO3)3 solutions.141 However, the differences in TFT performance between films from these two solutions are not appreciable (μsat = 0.94 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the film from a “chilled” solution and 0.66 cm2 V−1 s−1 for room temperature). High-temperature solution aging (70 °C for 72 h) has also been suggested to increase the “free” nitrate concentration and improve metal-oxide condensation, leading to high-μ In2O3 TFTs (∼24 cm2 V−1 s−1).142
The effect of precursor-solution temperature on thin-film formation chemistry is clearly complex. Mitigating M-NO3 complexation and increasing “free” nitrate concentration appears to facilitate more-complete metal oxide condensation in the final thin film. However, the seemingly contradictory reports of improved device performance observed for films prepared from solutions that have undergone both low and high temperature treatments suggests that the dielectric of the solvent medium may not be responsible for this effect. It is clear that temperature influences M-NO3 equilibria, which exhibits a correlation with thin-film composition and device performance. Further study is needed to elucidate how temperature-dependent equilibria influence thin-film formation processes.

3. The chemical evolution of metal nitrate gels: the initial stages of metal oxide thin-film formation
3.1 From solution to thin films: fundamental considerations for the preparation of metal oxide coatings
The above discussion highlights important considerations for solution-precursor preparation. The following section will elaborate on the use of these metal-nitrate solution precursors and the reaction pathways from solution to solid-state thin films. Common thin-film solution deposition methods include spin-, spray-, and dip-coating, with many variations on each process. The physics governing material deposition from each of these methods is detailed elsewhere.31,46,143,144 In order to deposit a uniform thin film, the substrate must first be wetted with solution (Fig. 9, step I). In order to achieve uniform wetting, the surface must be free of organic contaminants. For aqueous solutions, the surfaces must also be sufficiently hydrophilic to achieve proper wetting and reduce the interfacial energy between the solution and substrate.144 Eliminating organic contaminants and generating polar, hydrophilic surfaces can be achieved through a variety of dry and wet chemical processes. Common surface treatments include O2 plasma, piranha (H2O2/H2SO4), and RCA-1 (H2O2/NH4OH) cleaning methods. When choosing a surface treatment method, possible damage to the substrate through chemical degradation and/or physical roughening should be considered, which can negatively affect film and device properties. Once a favorable interaction between the solution and substrate is achieved, gel formation is initiated by solvent evaporation to begin the drying process (Fig. 9, step II). This is accomplished via rapid substrate rotation in spin-coating and heating of the substrate during spray-coating, for example. At the end of the coating process, a concentrated metal-nitrate gel film is adhered to the substrate. In order to convert the gel into a metal-oxide thin film, remaining solvent must be evaporated (continuation of step II), nitrates removed/decomposed via HNO3 and NOx gas formation (Fig. 9, step III), and metal-hydroxide groups condensed to form the metal oxide (M-O-M) network (Fig. 9, step IV). These remaining steps require energy input, often in the form of thermal annealing.
 Fig. 9  Stages of thin-film formation from solution precursors. (I) The substrate is wetted with an aqueous metal nitrate solution. Adequate wetting is achieve via substrate surface preparation treatments to remove organic contaminants and introduce polar functional groups to impart hydrophilicity. (II) The thin-film precursor gel is formed by rapid evaporation of excess solvent (H2O, in this example). The resulting metal-nitrate gel must then be decomposed to form a metal oxide. (III) With addition of energy (commonly thermal annealing), additional solvent is evaporated and nitrates decompose to HNO3, NOx, etc. Condensation is initiated, forming M(OH)x species. (IV) Once nitrates and solvent are removed, M(OH)x further condense to form the final metal oxide. See Fig. 1a for representative chemical reactions for nitrate decomposition and hydroxyl condensation. 
Controlling the reaction rates (and mechanisms) taking place in steps II–IV is crucial for controlling film morphology and structure (density, porosity, grain size, etc.), which ultimately influence device performance. If condensation of the rigid metal oxide network occurs rapidly, evaporation and decomposition byproducts will disrupt the network.31,56 For example, as discussed previously, films from Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursors experience rapid decomposition, resulting in nanoporosity.47 Film morphology is also sensitive to annealing ramp rate. We observe for lanthanum zirconium oxide (LZO) films from nitrate salts that, as the temperature ramp rate is decreased from 125 to 0.25 °C min−1, the films contain fewer voids and are denser. As the ramp rate slows, nitrate decomposition and hydroxide condensation are temporally separated.54 This is a general consideration in the preparation of thin films from solution precursors. The film-formation steps II–IV often overlap substantially. While difficult to control, the temporal overlap can be decreased in many cases by controlling the thermal processing parameters (i.e. ramp/hold profiles), which provides opportunity to optimize metal-oxide film properties.
In order to exercise greater control over film formation, which will influence the resulting film structure and properties, it is important to understand the decomposition behavior of nitrates in thin-film gels. In the following section, we discuss insights gained from studying thin-film reaction pathways as a function of temperature, as thermal energy is central to most processing methods currently used.
3.2 Characterization of the metal oxide thin-film reaction pathway
Metal nitrates are generally thermally unstable and decompose at modest annealing temperatures (Fig. 2). As the annealing temperature is increased, solvent, nitrates, and impurities are increasingly removed and metal-oxide content increases. Film evolution as a function of temperature can be evaluated using a variety of characterization techniques. Here we highlight chemical insights gained from the thermal decomposition behavior of metal-nitrate gel films to elucidate the thin-film reaction pathway.
When studying thin-film reaction pathways, it is important to know at what temperatures decomposition processes occur. While TGA of bulk precursors can provide a good estimate of the metal-oxide formation temperature, thin films have been shown to decompose at lower annealing temperatures than their bulk counterparts.145 Higher surface-area-to-volume ratios of nanoscale thin films compared to bulk powders leads to efficient mass and thermal transport through the thin film, which results in faster decomposition kinetics.145,146 Therefore, studying thin-film thermal analysis directly is important for understanding decomposition behavior. Traditional TGA has been successfully adapted to studies on films 300–500 nm thick; however, greater sensitivity is required to probe small mass changes in films below 100 nm thick, which are relevant thicknesses for many electronic applications. Quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM) analysis, which has ng cm−2 sensitivity and has been extensively applied to studies of vapor-phase film deposition,147 as well as dissolution of electrode films during electrochemistry,148 is a good candidate for studying small mass changes during annealing of solution-processed thin films. The effect of temperature on the crystal resonator must be accounted for in the application of QCM mass monitoring. The temperature range accessible is limited by a phase transition at 573 °C, above which the quartz crystal loses its piezoelectric properties;147 practically, we find this temperature limit is ∼300 °C, due to thermal shock that can result in cracking. Additionally, quartz resonators have a temperature-dependent frequency response. Therefore, to decouple effects from temperature and mass loss, we have performed these experiments ex situ (i.e. “step-wise” annealing the QCM with a deposited film at a fixed temperature, then returning to room temperature to measure the frequency following each annealing step). In principle, such limitations could be addressed to perform in situ thermal analysis on thin films using a resonator material with a small temperature coefficient, such as gallium orthophosphate (GaPO4), and reliable temperature response calibration.147 We have successfully applied ex situ QCM thermal analysis to study thin-film mass loss below 300 °C.32,47,72 An example of QCM mass loss data can be seen for films from Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursors in Fig. 10a.47 Mass loss for films is complete by 225 °C, whereas a 400 °C annealing temperature is needed to convert commonly-used bulk precursors to SnO2.149
 Fig. 10  Characterization techniques used to study the metal-oxide thin-film reaction pathway by thermal annealing. (a) Quartz-crystal-microbalance (QCM) thermal-analysis data is used to determine thin-film decomposition temperatures (Td). The above example shows the Td of a thin film from the Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursor was estimated to be ∼225 °C (data from ref. 47). (b) Chemical composition of thin films as a function of annealing temperature can be monitored by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, due to the intense nitrate IR active modes. Representative data of an FT-IR annealing study is shown for films from a La(NO3)3/ZrO(NO3)2 (1 La:1 Zr) precursor for lanthanum zirconium oxide (LZO) films. These data are adapted from ref. 36. (c) Thin-film decomposition products can be studied using temperature-programmed-desorption mass spectrometry (TPD-MS). Two distinct nitrate-decomposition mechanisms can be inferred from the data shown for Y(NO3)3 thin films. Mechanism I (highlighted in blue) is associated with “loosely-bound” nitrate, including the HNO3/H2O azeotrope as a decomposition product, as evidenced by concomitant detection of NO+ and H2O+ fragments. Mechanism II (highlighted in red) is associated with nitrate in more thermally stable environments and is identified by simultaneous detection of NO+ and O2+ fragments. These data are adapted from ref. 72. 
Because film properties are sensitive to chemical composition, studying thin-film chemical evolution is important for preparing thin films with desired properties. While thermal analysis by QCM is useful to understand when decomposition reactions occur, resolution limits resulting from ex situ measurements (i.e. step-wise annealing) makes assessing decomposition mechanisms difficult. Chemical characterization techniques are needed to obtain a complete picture of film formation reactions. The vibrational modes of nitrate, water, hydroxide, and metal-oxide bonds make FT-IR spectroscopy a convenient tool for monitoring the chemical composition as a function of annealing temperature. Representative FT-IR data that demonstrate the chemical evolution of a mixed La(NO3)3/ZrO(NO3)2 precursor for the preparation of lanthanum zirconium oxide (LZO) is shown in Fig. 10b. Nitrate can be identified by a split N–O stretching mode, with bands centered at ∼1300–1400 and 1600–1700 cm−1. The splitting originates from a reduction of symmetry (D3h to C2v) due to covalent character between nitrate and the metal and/or different binding modes (monodentate, bidentate, or bridging).150 Weaker vibrational modes, associated with M-NO3 complexes, appear at ∼1000 and 800 cm−1.151 Water is identified by the OH stretch (∼3500 cm−1) and the H–O–H bending mode152 (∼1650 cm−1); intensities of these modes decrease dramatically at low annealing temperatures (∼200–300 °C). Once most of the nitrate and free water are gone, the OH stretch can be attributed primarily to metal hydroxides and the appearance of a weak, broad, metal-oxide stretch is observed near 700–800 cm−1.
In addition to studying the evolution of thin-film chemical composition, decomposition byproducts can provide useful mechanistic insight into film formation. Temperature-programmed-desorption mass spectrometry (TPD-MS), a tool that has been used extensively in materials science to study interactions between absorbed gases and solid surfaces, has recently been applied to thin-film formation studies on solution-deposited films.153–157 While TPD studies of metal-nitrate-based films are limited,54,72,158 there is a wealth of literature on decomposition mechanisms of adsorbed nitrate on metal-oxide surfaces. While metal oxides with surface-adsorbed nitrates and metal nitrate thin-film gels are not analogous materials, there are similarities (described below) between the nitrate decomposition pathways observed by TPD-MS for both systems.
Two distinct nitrate decomposition events have been identified in the TPD literature from studies of nitrates on metal-oxide surfaces. The first (mechanism I) is a lower-temperature event that can be identified by the evolution of NO+ (m/z = 30) as the primary fragment, with minor contributions from N2+ (28), N2O+ (44), and NO2+ (46).159 The products that evolve by mechanism I are hypothesized to originate from “loosely-bound” nitrate. Corroborative FT-IR studies suggest bidentate (chelating and/or bridging) metal-nitrate complexes contribute to this decomposition mechanism.159,160 At higher temperatures (mechanism II), NO+ and O2+ (m/z = 32) evolution are concomitant, and are associated with decomposition of nitrates that are more thermally stable, such as monodentate or ionic nitrates.159–161
For films prepared from metal-nitrate precursors, we similarly identify two distinct nitrate decomposition and desorption events by TPD-MS. A detailed discussion of metal-nitrate decomposition chemistry can be found in Section 2.1, along with representative chemical equations in Fig. 1a. Because we are unable to definitively assign IR-active nitrate modes for nitrates in thin films to specific binding motifs (Fig. 10b), we do not assign these fragments as originating from specific nitrate environments. In addition to the fragments described by mechanism I, we observe H2O+ (m/z = 18) accompanying this first nitrate decomposition event, which may suggest the H2O/HNO3 azeotrope contributes to the film decomposition pathway (Fig. 1a, eqn (i)).72 For mechanism II, we believe these fragments are associated with the thermal decomposition of “tightly-bound” nitrate (Fig. 1a, eqn (ii)), likely M-NO3 complexes. TPD-MS fragments produced from a film made from a Y(NO3)3 precursor are representative of fragmentation patterns typically observed from nitrate decomposition byproducts that evolve from thin-film samples (Fig. 10c).
Once nitrate is effectively eliminated from the film, XPS is useful to continue studying film evolution. The degree of metal-oxide condensation can be evaluated as a function of annealing temperature by analyzing the O 1s regional spectrum. Three oxygen environments are commonly fit for metal-oxide thin-films: metal oxide (528–531 eV, denoted OI), “oxygen vacancies” (531–532 eV, OII), and metal hydroxide (531–534 eV, OIII) (Fig. 11a).34,36,162–165 Sometimes referred to as “oxygen-deficient states,” the OII region encompasses under-coordinated metal atoms due to sub-stoichiometric compositions, as well as weakly-bound impurities from adsorbed gases, residual nitrate, adventitious carbon, etc.162–164 For In(NO3)3 precursors, the OI peak area increases with annealing temperature; there exists a linear correlation between the OI peak area and In2O3 TFT mobility (Fig. 11b).34,36,165 Increased μ is attributed to improved condensation at higher annealing temperatures, as well as “clean” nitrate decomposition (i.e. few impurities remaining in the film), which facilitates densification.36
 Fig. 11  Evaluating the quality of metal oxides from metal-nitrate precursors. (a) O 1s XPS spectrum from an In2O3 film indicating oxygen environments typically observed in metal-oxide thin films. The OI, OII, and OIII environments, as denoted in the figure, are assigned to indium oxide (In-O), oxygen vacancies (i.e. nitrate (N-O), carbon (C-O), under-coordinated oxygen species, etc.), and indium hydroxide (In-OH), respectively. (b) Metal-oxide character and In2O3 TFT saturated channel mobility (μsat) increase with annealing temperature for films from In(NO3)3. Higher μsat at higher annealing temperatures is a result of increased M-O content and fewer nitrate impurities remaining in the film. The TFT data shown are for devices that use SiO2 as the dielectric layer. Data reproduced and adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Alternatives to conventional thermal processing: a survey of low-temperature processing methods utilizing unique metal nitrate chemistries
Because of their relatively low decomposition temperatures, metal nitrate precursors have been extensively used in the development of low-temperature solution-processing methods. Various chemical strategies have been introduced to produce high-quality metal-oxide thin films using a reduced thermal budget. The primary objective of so-called “low-temperature processing” methods is to improve compatibility of solution-processed films with low-melting point, inexpensive polymeric substrates. Here, we highlight progress made toward low-temperature processing by utilizing the unique reactivity of nitrate with alternative energy sources and annealing atmospheres.

3.3.1 Combustion processing. 
The combustion processing method, first introduced by Kim et al.,52 endeavors to use the internally-produced exothermic heat from a combustion reaction between nitrate and an organic fuel. This approach is intended to lower thin-film processing temperatures relative to metal nitrate thermal decomposition reactions, which is an endothermic process. Fig. 12a depicts a reaction coordinate diagram and representative chemical reactions for the combustion and thermal decomposition pathways. Since the combustion process is highly exothermic, this change to the reaction enthalpy (ΔH) leads to a comparatively more spontaneous ΔG compared to the ΔG of the thermal decomposition reaction. Mild annealing conditions (∼200–300 °C) are purported to ignite a combustion front that propagates through the thin-film volume. High local temperatures produced by this reaction (reported to be upward of 1000 °C for bulk systems, depending on the oxidizer-fuel mixture used166) are hypothesized to decompose nitrate and condense the metal-oxide network. Combustion processing is, in principle, compatible with low-melting-point polymeric substrates because the high surface-area-to-volume ratio of the film rapidly dissipates heat to the atmosphere.52 Since the first report of thin-film combustion processing, which focused primarily on In(NO3)3-based precursors using acetylacetone and urea fuels,52 the method has been applied to many other metal nitrate and fuel systems.50,51,167–176
 Fig. 12  Reactivity of combustion precursors. (a) Reaction coordinate diagram depicting combustion and thermal decomposition pathways with their associated chemical reactions. Combustion is considered a low-temperature thin-film processing method because low applied temperatures (compared to thermal decomposition) lead to ignition of an exothermic combustion front. It is suggested the heat produced by combustion decomposes nitrates and condenses the metal-oxide network. (b) TGA comparison for a bulk powder (top) and thin film (bottom) prepared from the combustible mixture In(NO3)3-acac. An exotherm (i.e. combustion) is detected for the bulk powder, whereas an endotherm (i.e. thermal decomposition) is detected for the thin film. Data adapted from ref. 146. (c) O 1s XP spectra for a powder and film prepared from a Y(NO3)3-acac mixture by annealing near the combustion ignition temperature. Composition analysis suggests combustion occurs in the powder (i.e. high Y-O, low NO3− content) but not in the thin film (i.e. low Y-O, high NO3−) when samples are annealed above the combustion ignition temperature (215 °C). Data adapted from ref. 72. 
The combustion method has been utilized to prepare a variety of metal-oxide films for TFTs170–176 and photovoltaic applications.50,51,169 In order to benchmark the performance of combustion-processed films relative to other common solution-deposition approaches, we compare here TFT-derived electron mobilities of In2O3 films (Fig. 13). Combustion-synthesized films demonstrate respectable μ improvements compared to sol–gel films (i.e. 2-methoxyethanol solvent without combustion additives), especially when spray-deposited.176 However, In2O3 films from aqueous precursors exhibit up to an order of magnitude higher μ than combustion and sol–gel films annealed at comparable temperatures. This is likely a result of increased densification and fewer carbon impurities in the films made from aqueous In(NO3)3 precursors.33
 Fig. 13  Comparison of In2O3 films prepared by various low-temperature processing methods. Channel mobilities (μ) for In2O3 TFTs are used to compare the properties of thin films prepared using various low-temperature processing strategies. All data presented here are for TFTs with SiO2 dielectric layers, for ease of comparison. The associated references for the data categories plotted above are as follows: combustion,52,176 aqueous,36,142,177,178 sol–gel,179,180 and photo-annealing.53,181 
For selective-contact applications in solar cells, combustion-processed thin films have demonstrated improved performance over other commonly-used methods/precursors. When paired with an organic absorber, combustion-synthesized NiO films perform similarly to widely-used organic hole-transport layers (HTLs), with power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 1.6 and 1.7%, respectively, and outperforms NiO from a nickel acetate precursor (0.16%).169 In another study, PCEs for combustion (17.7%) and sol–gel (15.5%) Cu-doped NiO films exhibit similar performance as selective contacts to perovskite active layers at drastically-reduced processing temperatures (150 and 500 °C, respectively).51 Additionally, combustion-derived IGO and IGZO films have electronic structures that are tunable with composition, which demonstrates a design strategy for engineering charge-carrier selective contacts that can be tailored to match valence and conduction band energies of various absorber materials.50 It should be noted, however, that direct comparisons in the literature of thin films from combustion precursors (metal nitrates with fuels) and metal nitrates without fuels are lacking; therefore, it is impossible to attribute improved solar-cell performance to combustion processing directly.
The number of examples of metal oxides prepared by the combustion method demonstrates these precursors are useful for making solution-processed films/devices of reasonable quality. However, several studies have called into question the fundamental chemistry of combustion reactions in thin films.72,146,182–184 The In(NO3)3-acetylacetone (or “acac”) mixture, first studied by Kim,52 was further investigated using TGA in both the bulk and thin-film form.146 Combustion is identified by an abrupt mass loss event, accompanied by an exotherm in the differential thermal analysis (DTA) signal, which is evident for the bulk system (Fig. 12b, top). In contrast, gradual mass loss and an endotherm, associated with thermal decomposition, are detected for a thin film prepared from the same precursor, suggesting combustion does not occur (Fig. 12b, bottom). To investigate this observed difference in bulk and thin-film reactivity, we studied the chemical composition and thermal behavior of several model combustion-precursor systems. When we applied the thin-film QCM technique to In(NO3)3- and Y(NO3)3-acac precursors, we similarly observed gradual mass loss with annealing temperature, which is an indicator of thermal decomposition rather than combustion.72 Additionally, XPS analysis of powders and films prepared from Y(NO3)3-acac show significant chemical differences when annealed near the combustion ignition temperature (Tig ∼ 200 °C). While the powder contains high Y-O content, the thin film contains comparatively low Y-O and retains significant Y(NO3)3 precursor character (Fig. 12c). Incorporation of fuel into the precursor solutions does not improve precursor conversion to the corresponding metal oxide at lower processing temperatures for thin films, as it does in the bulk, which suggests combustion does not occur in thin films.
Computational modeling to simulate the decomposition kinetics and heat conduction in thin films corroborates experimental data that suggests thin-film combustion does not occur.146,182–184 When modeled in the geometry of a bulk powder in a crucible, combustible mixtures exhibit an inhomogeneous reaction rate throughout the sample volume, consistent with combustion front propagation.146 When the same precursor is modeled in the geometry of a thin film, a combustion front is not observed. Numerical modeling of reaction kinetics suggests that, in order to overcome the activation energy for combustion in a 1 μm-thick film, the substrate temperature and ramp rate must be at least 1200 K and 107 K min−1, respectively.184 These values are determined using expressions that exhibit strong dependence on the height-to-radius ratio of the sample (the sample volume is approximated as that of a cylinder) and the critical mass, which is dependent on the thermal conductivity of the sample/substrate. Therefore, even when the same combustion precursors are used in the preparation of bulk and thin-film metal oxides, differences in thermal transport result in different reaction pathways.
In light of the experimental and computational results discussed here, thin-film combustion of metal nitrates at low temperatures is unlikely. Rather, the various improvements in device performance obtained when the combustion thin-film synthesis is used may be attributed to other factors, namely, the high volatility of metal nitrate decomposition products. Most studies compare films prepared from combustion precursors to those from metal chlorides and/or acetates,51,52,169 which decompose at higher temperatures and leave non-volatile impurities in the metal-oxide thin films.34,36 Additionally, some studies have observed fuels can improve film morphology, which can also improve device performance. NiO films from a Ni(NO3)2–urea precursor are smoother than those from a Ni(C2H3O2)4 precursor ( Rrms roughness of 1.1 and 12.3 nm, respectively, by atomic force miscroscopy).169 In our previous studies on combustion thin-film processing, films from the In(NO3)3-acac precursor show enhanced crystallinity by X-ray diffraction (XRD) compared to films from In(NO3)3, indicating fuel incorporation can influence the nanoscale structure of films.72 Indeed, there may be ways in which film properties benefit from the use of “combustion” precursors, even if combustion does not occur.


3.3.2 Ultraviolet (UV) photo-annealing. 
A unique aspect of metal-nitrate chemistry is the susceptibility of nitrates to decomposition when irradiated with deep-ultraviolet (UV) light (λ = 185–254 nm). This chemistry has been applied to thin-film formation and is known as “photo-annealing” (Fig. 14a).53 The mechanism of nitrate removal from thin films was confirmed to be nitrate photolysis (eqn (10)), through UV-visible and NMR studies on UV-irradiated Al(NO3)3 solutions.185 The oxygen radical produced in eqn (10) further reacts with water to form hydroxyl species (eqn (11)), which then condense to form the metal oxide. (10) O˙− + H2O  O·H + OH−(11)
 Fig. 14  Photo-annealing of metal-nitrate gel films. (a) Schematic of the photo-annealing reaction. UV light decomposes nitrates to various volatile NOx products via photolysis. Photon energy from the UV source, as well as heat from operation of the UV lamp (∼150 °C), facilitate condensation of M(OH)x to metal oxide. (b) FT-IR spectra of Al(NO3)3 films photo- and thermally-annealed (at 150 °C) as a function of irradiation/annealing time. IR active modes for nitrate are no longer visible after 5 min of photo-annealing (red), whereas nitrates are still present in thermally-annealed films (blue) after a 2 h annealing time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons. (c) Fitted O 1s XP spectra comparing the oxygen chemical environments present in photo- and thermally-annealed (350 °C) indium–gallium–zinc-oxide (IGZO) films. Photo-annealed films are chemically similar to films thermally-annealed at high temperature, which suggests photo-annealing is an effective low-temperature processing method for preparing IGZO with high metal oxide content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
This reaction mechanism is consistent with previous literature on photolysis of nitrate in aqueous solution.186,187 In thin films, the radicals produced by nitrate photolysis are hypothesized to facilitate decomposition of organic solvents and M-OH formation. While photo-annealing effectively eliminates nitrates from thin films at room temperature, moderate annealing treatments (∼150–200 °C), using radiant heat from UV lamp operation or post-UV exposure, aid condensation to the final metal-oxide phase.53,188 FT-IR spectroscopy confirms nitrates are removed from Al(NO3)3, as evidenced by disappearance of N–O vibrational modes (1340 and 1440 cm−1) after 5 min of UV exposure (Fig. 14b). In contrast, films from Al(NO3)3 thermally annealed at 150 °C for up to 120 min still exhibit intense N–O stretching modes, indicating photolysis enhances nitrate decomposition over moderate thermal annealing conditions.
Kim et al. demonstrated the effect of photo-annealing on IGZO films prepared from nitrate salts.53 In this study, photo-annealed films were shown to have comparable metal-oxide content (determined by XPS) to films thermally annealed at 350 °C (Fig. 14c). Similar optical band gaps (Eg ≈ 3.2 eV) and higher average channel mobilities (μ ∼ 9 cm2 V−1 s−1 compared to ∼6 cm2 V−1 s−1) further confirm relatively high-performance metal oxides can be prepared at low temperature via this method. Mobilities of >30 cm2 V−1 s−1 for photo-annealed In2O3 and IZO channel layers have since been reported.181 Such improvements to device performance are attributed to O3 production during photolysis, which is suggested to mediate oxygen-vacancy formation in the resulting thin films, thereby reducing trap states.189,190 The channel mobilities for photo-annealed films are comparable to (or even greater than) those achieved for aqueous, sol–gel, and combustion In2O3 films annealed at temperatures of 200 °C or higher, indicating photo-annealing is an effective low-temperature processing method for the preparation of high-quality electronic thin films (Fig. 13).
Since these initial studies, photo-annealing has been used to prepare a variety of semiconductor and dielectric thin films for electronics,37,45,185,191 as well as catalyst films for the oxygen-evolution reaction.192 Aside from low metal-oxide formation temperatures, photo-annealing treatments have been correlated with increased film densification.191,193 Denser films result in higher areal capacitance for dielectrics and higher carrier mobilities for semiconductors in TFTs. Additionally, photo-annealed films are observed to have low interfacial roughness due to improved wetting of subsequent layers, leading to a reduction of interfacial trap states.185 Interestingly, films from flat-“Al13” nanocluster precursors photo-annealed at 60 °C exhibit high breakdown fields (>6 MV cm−1) and respectable dielectric constants (κ = 8.37) in contrast to similarly-treated films from Al(NO3)3 precursor, which produce non-functional MIM devices at this annealing temperature.194 Jo et al. suggest the pre-condensed M-O-M network and low counterion content in films from the “Al13” precursor enable greater densification of the Al2O3 film (2.58 and 1.86 g cm−3 for “Al13” cluster and Al(NO3)3 prepared films, respectively), which leads to improved insulating properties.
While there are numerous studies that utilize the photo-annealing method to prepare high-quality thin films, it is worth noting that nearly all systems studied to date are “low-Td” metal nitrate salts. As discussed in Section 2.1, thermal decomposition behavior has a strong dependence on the metal cation identity. An interesting area of future work would involve studying the UV-susceptibility of “high-Td” salts to determine if photolysis behavior exhibits a metal dependence similar to that observed for thermal decomposition.


3.3.3 Controlled-atmosphere annealing: the role of water vapor in film formation. 
In addition to using different energy sources to initiate nitrate decomposition and metal-oxide formation, reactions of film components with atmospheric gases have also shown promise for lowering processing temperatures. Approaches include annealing under O3, high pressure, and vacuum, which were discussed in depth in a recent review;195 however, these annealing atmospheres are primarily used once the metal oxide has already formed, rather than to influence film formation chemistry. Here, we focus on the relatively underexplored water-vapor annealing process, which has been demonstrated to facilitate low-temperature film formation from a variety of solution precursors. For metal-alkoxide precursors, water facilitates removal of organic residues and improves metal-oxide conversion, resulting in high channel mobilities for In2O3-based TFTs (∼30 cm2 V−1 s−1).196,197 A similar effect was reported for ZnO films from a Zn(NH3)42+ precursor.198 A steady supply of water vapor is hypothesized to enhance the rate of hydrolysis of coordinating ligands by ensuring water does not become a limiting reagent as hydrolysis progresses. One study investigates the effect of water vapor on film formation from sol–gel (i.e. 2-methoxyethanol) metal-nitrate precursors; however, the authors do not comment on the reactions of nitrates with atmospheric water.197
We reported the effects of a water-vapor annealing atmosphere on films from all-inorganic aqueous precursors, which we refer to as the “steam-annealing” process.54 Advantages of steam annealing, compared to ambient “dry” annealing (∼45% relative humidity at room temperature), are threefold: (1) enhanced nitrate removal at low annealing temperatures (<200 °C), (2) improved resistance to water reabsorption, and (3) increased densification. The most striking reduction of nitrate content is observed in lanthanum zirconium oxide (LZO) films annealed at temperatures as low as 200 °C.54 We hypothesize nitrate removal is facilitated by maintaining the metal cation hydration sphere, thereby inhibiting the formation of M-NO3 complexes, which require higher temperatures to decompose than “free” nitrates. Excess water also favors the removal of nitrate through the HNO3/H2O azeotrope (with a boiling point of 120 °C), offering an alternative pathway to thermal decomposition for “loosely-bound” nitrates. This hypothesis is supported by TPD-MS data, which shows a distinct difference in the annealing temperatures at which NO+ decomposition fragments are observed, especially at temperatures below 400 °C (Fig. 15a). Steam-annealed films are also resistant to post-processing water reabsorption, another indication of enhanced nitrate removal, as nitrates are hygroscopic. FT-IR spectra of steam- and dry-annealed films, collected immediately following annealing and again after 1 h in ambient, show significant water absorption for the dry-annealed film compared to the steam-annealed film (Fig. 15b). A comparison of the N–O stretching region intensities in the FT-IR spectra further indicates that steam-annealed films contain fewer nitrates.
 Fig. 15  Chemical analysis of steam- and dry-annealed LZO films. (a) Comparison of the NO+ fragment (m/z = 30) desorption profile for dry- and steam-annealed LZO films (200 °C) shows a reduction in signal below 400 °C for the steam-annealed film compared to a dry-annealed film, indicating enhanced nitrate removal with steam annealing. (b) FT-IR spectra of LZO films annealed at 200 °C (solid lines), then left in ambient for 1 h (dotted lines). While dry-annealed films absorb water, as evidenced by the increased intensity of the OH stretching mode, steam-annealed films are moisture resistant. Data adapted from ref. 54. 
Enhanced nitrate removal via steam annealing enables improved densification. Cross-sectional scanning-electron-microscope (SEM) images confirm steam-annealed films are 15% thinner than dry-annealed films (Fig. 16). Differences in film chemistry at or near the surface may influence densification processes. We hypothesize, for steam-annealed films, that water helps maintain surface hydroxyl groups, which allow for facile diffusion of HNO3 and other decomposition byproducts out of the film (Fig. 16a). In contrast, the surfaces of dry-annealed films are likely dehydrated, which may result in a dense surface layer that inhibits diffusion of nitrate decomposition byproducts to the film surface, resulting in thicker, lower-density films (Fig. 16b).199,200
 Fig. 16  Improved densification of steam-annealed films. SEM images of (a) steam- and (b) dry-annealed films. The schematics show the different decomposition products that are hypothesized to form under each atmosphere (i.e. HNO3 from steam-annealing and NOx gases from dry-annealing), as well as the formation of a dense surface layer (indicated by the dark blue region at the film surface) in dry-annealed films, which we hypothesize inhibits densification. 
The benefits of steam annealing on film composition and morphology led to higher dielectric constants (κ) for LZO films in metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) devices. The κ for MIS devices prepared from 500 °C dry-annealed films is comparable to that of 350 °C steam-annealed films (κ = 15 at 1 kHz). Notably, MIS devices prepared from 200 °C dry-annealed films are nonfunctional dielectrics, while steam-annealed films fabricated at the same temperature exhibit modest dielectric constants (κ = 11 at 1 kHz). In contrast to our reports of improved device performance for steam-annealed dielectrics, a previous study reported a degradation in the dielectric response of Al2O3 with increased relative humidity (RH) of the annealing environment (Al(NO3)3 precursor).201 Devices prepared from films annealed in a 0% RH environment experience lower leakage currents and higher breakdown voltages than those annealed in a 60% RH atmosphere. A similar effect was observed for In2O3 channel mobility as the RH of the annealing atmosphere was increased. The authors suggest high humidity inhibits condensation by favoring metal hydroxyl species in the metal hydroxide/oxide equilibria. However, the films characterized in this study were of noticeably poor morphology. Optical microscope images show increasing defects on the film surface as RH is increased, likely due to water droplets disturbing the film surface. High surface roughness is known to negatively impact TFT performance, and a roughness as small as a few nanometers has been shown to decrease field-effect mobility up to an order of magnitude.202–204 For this reason it is critical to completely aerosolize and evaporate water for steam-annealing studies, as is done in our work, in order to avoid degrading film morphology in a water-vapor atmosphere.

4. Outlook: toward implementation of solution-processed metal-oxide films in manufacturing
In this review, we have discussed ways in which the unique aspects of metal-nitrate chemistry have been used to facilitate the development of high-quality, solution-processed metal-oxide thin films. Detailed knowledge of the chemical interactions and reactions that influence metal-oxide film formation is important for the future integration of solution deposition into industrial manufacturing. David Mitzi, in his book, Solution Processing of Inorganic Materials,27 discusses six primary drivers that must be addressed in order to make high-volume production of solution-processed inorganic materials commercially viable. Here we discuss how each of the following drivers can be addressed by utilizing and controlling metal-nitrate chemistry.
4.1 Low cost per unit area and large area-deposition (drivers 1 & 2)
In many ways, metal-nitrate precursors are ideal candidates for large-scale production of solution-processed coatings. Metal-nitrate salts are generally inexpensive; however, scalable synthetic methods for metal-nitrate-based precursors have the potential to further decrease raw materials cost. We demonstrated a dissolution approach for the preparation of flat-“Al13” nanocluster precursors from HNO3 digestion of the abundant, inexpensive Al(OH)3 gibbsite mineral (∼$ 0.04 mol−1, compared to ∼$ 0.3 mol−1 for Al(NO3)3·9H2O at 2019 bulk international commodity prices) and demonstrated its usefulness as a Al2O3 film precursor.118 One could imagine extension of this approach to other mineral, hydroxide, or oxide systems to reduce cost and generate large quantities of metal-nitrate precursors.
Another aspect of metal-nitrate chemistry with potential to further address cost is their UV susceptibility (see Section 3.3.2), which makes these precursors “self-patterning”.205,206 Because photo-annealing is a metal-oxide-forming reaction, exposure through a shadow mask results in selected-area metal-oxide condensation to pattern the functional material. Therefore, there is potential to utilize such reactions to eliminate photolithography steps.
Solution processing is compatible with a variety of high-volume, ambient processing deposition techniques. The ability to deposit metal oxides via spray-coating, ink-jet, slot-die, etc. makes solution deposition an attractive option for low-cost, large-area deposition technologies, such as roll-to-roll processing.
4.2 Ability to deposit on diverse substrates (driver 3)
The development of low-temperature processing methods, including those discussed in this review, have potential to improve compatibility of solution-deposited thin films with temperature-sensitive substrates. In particular, low-Td nitrate salts (i.e. In, Ga, Zn, and Al nitrates) have already demonstrated some level of compatibility with low-melting-point polymeric substrates.52,53,193,207 There are comparatively few examples of effective low-temperature processing methods for their high-Td counterparts (i.e. Y and La).208,209 There remains substantial opportunity to design processes to lower decomposition temperatures for such materials, including further investigations of UV photo-annealing and steam annealing. A particularly under-explored area of thin-film processing chemistry is that of alternative annealing atmospheres. As discussed in Section 2.1, metal-nitrate decomposition exhibits a strong dependence on the surrounding ambient. Introduction of different gases to control decomposition kinetics and reaction pathways could provide additional control over thin-film decomposition temperatures and resulting film properties, as we have demonstrated for steam annealing. Control over metal-nitrate decomposition chemistry is crucial for expanding the application base of solution-processed metal oxides to flexible devices.
4.3 “Adequate” electronic performance (driver 4)
Recently, great strides have been made to improve the electronic performance of solution-deposited films, with some semiconductors and dielectrics approaching the electronic quality equivalent to vacuum-deposited films.32,41,176,178 The electronic properties of the films are sensitive to impurities (i.e. residual counterions and hydroxides), density, morphology, and degree of crystallinity and crystallite size. Improvements to electronic properties rely heavily on designing processes that leverage control over metal-nitrate chemistry, both in solution and during film formation. As is clear from the wide range of chemical processes that influence the thin-film reaction pathway, controlling these processes is not simple. Complete impurity removal is imperative for maximizing metal-oxide condensation and density. The most-effective strategies demonstrated in the literature thus far include the use of nanocluster precursors and steam annealing, which both result in fewer counterions in the resulting film and enhanced film densification. Control over film morphology/crystallinity would additionally improve electronic performance. In cases where amorphous materials are preferred (for example, in the dielectric layers of TFTs), crystallization can often be suppressed by controlling multi-metal composition and annealing conditions.
4.4 High yield, low variability (driver 5)
Devices from solution-processed thin films are often afflicted by low yield and high variability. While these are primarily process-engineering challenges to be addressed during production ramp, consideration of precursor chemistry has been utilized to address such issues on a laboratory scale. Many of the studies highlighted in this review demonstrate how the chemical nature of precursors influences thin-film electronic performance (i.e. olation products, solution temperature, purity, etc.). An understanding of how concentration, temperature, and pH influence solution chemistry could decrease lot-to-lot variation and inform how precursor conditions affect film properties. Additionally, as was demonstrated for electrochemically-treated IGZO precursors, purposeful and controlled changes to solution chemistry can improve film homogeneity by preventing phase segregation, which is a source of variability.32 While some “M13”-type nanoclusters are thermodynamic products,116 there are likely many metal-hydroxo nanoclusters throughout the periodic table that are kinetic products,47,136 which may present additional scale-up and storage challenges that would need to be addressed in order to maintain batch-to-batch consistency.
4.5 Long-term stability and durability (driver 6)
Long-term stability of metal-oxide films produced from metal-nitrate precursor solutions is strongly dependent on successful elimination of hygroscopic nitrate counterions. Additionally, some metal oxides are prone to water absorption (i.e. La2O3),210 which can be exacerbated by residual nitrate content in thin films. This is another area in which chemistry can be used to improve processing conditions to enhance stability. We have shown steam-annealing metal-nitrate-based thin films improves moisture resistance. We attribute the ambient stability of steam-annealed films to differences in their chemical and physical properties compared to dry-annealed films, namely fewer residual nitrates and higher density.54 Another strategy to improve thin-film stability toward water involves incorporating moisture-resistant components into the film using capping layers or preparing ternary metal-oxide compositions. Thin capping layers of HfO2211,212 and ZrO2213 on hygroscopic metal-oxide thin films have also proven to be successful strategies for inhibiting water uptake. Our research groups have developed aqueous routes for the preparation of lanthanum zirconium and lanthanum aluminum oxides (LZO, LaAlO3) from metal-nitrate precursors, which exhibit reduced hygroscopicity compared to La2O3.39,40 Apart from water absorption, ternary metal-oxide compositions can improve stability toward other impurities. LZO thin films are more resistant to atmospheric carbonate absorption compared to La2O3,40,54 whereas LaAlO3 contains fewer hydrogen impurities than Al2O3,214 which results in improved dielectric properties.
Metal-oxide thin-film stability and durability are influenced by precursor choice, processing conditions, and intrinsic metal-oxide properties, all of which must be considered when developing solution-deposition methods.
5. Conclusion
In this review, we have highlighted ways in which understanding metal-nitrate chemistry has contributed to the advancement of solution deposition as a method for preparing high-quality metal-oxide thin films. An examination of bulk metal-nitrate chemistry demonstrates the sensitivity of decomposition behavior to the metal identity and the annealing atmosphere, which has implications for selecting processing conditions that optimize metal-oxide formation in thin films. Solution-speciation chemistry exhibits a complex dependence on concentration, pH, and temperature and can influence film properties, including density, homogeneity, and chemical composition. Some unique aspects of metal-nitrate reactivity, such as UV photolysis and reactions with water vapor (i.e. steam annealing), are utilized to enhance nitrate removal and metal-oxide conversion during thin-film formation. Continued improvement of our understanding of metal-nitrate chemistry will further aid process optimization to facilitate high-volume manufacturing of high-quality metal oxide thin films for (opto)electronic applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSF Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry (CHE-1606982). This work was also supported by the Bradshaw and Holzapfel Research Professorship in Transformational Science and Mathematics to D. W. J. Forrest A. L. Laskowski is thanked for assistance with figure preparation.
References
J. S. Park, W. J. Maeng, H. S. Kim and J. S. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 1679–1693 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, H. Zhu, H. Sun, Y. Xu and Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706364 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha and R. Martins, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2945–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Dixon, D. O. Scanlon, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6946–6961 RSC .
A. N. Banerjee and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2005, 50, 52–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lorenz, M. S. Ramachandra Rao, T. Venkatesan, E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha, R. Branquinho, D. Salgueiro, R. Martins, E. Carlos, A. Liu, F. K. Shan, M. Grundmann, H. Boschker, J. Mukherjee, M. Priyadarshini, N. DasGupta, D. J. Rogers, F. H. Teherani, E. V Sandana, P. Bove, K. Rietwyk, A. Zaban, A. Veziridis, A. Weidenkaff, M. Muralidhar, M. Murakami, S. Abel, J. Fompeyrine, J. Zuniga-Perez, R. Ramesh, N. A. Spaldin, S. Ostanin, V. Borisov, I. Mertig, V. Lazenka, G. Srinivasan, W. Prellier, M. Uchida, M. Kawasaki, R. Pentcheva, P. Gegenwart, F. Miletto Granozio, J. Fontcuberta and N. Pryds, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 433001 CrossRef .
X. Yu, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 383–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Q. Bi, H. Ali, K. Davis, W. V. Schoenfeld and K. Weber, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5891–5897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, C. Battaglia, Y. Lin, K. Chen, M. Hettick, M. Zheng, C. Y. Chen, D. Kiriya and A. Javey, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 1245–1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. Wußler, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Lakus-Wollny, E. Mankel, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 680–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Boix, J. Ajuria, I. Etxebarria, R. Pacios, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef .
C. Battaglia, X. Yin, M. Zheng, I. D. Sharp, T. Chen, S. McDonnell, A. Azcatl, C. Carraro, B. Ma, R. Maboudian, R. M. Wallace and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 967–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, C. Y. Jiang, G. Q. Lo, D. W. Zhao and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 2006–2009 CrossRef .
K. X. Steirer, J. P. Chesin, N. E. Widjonarko, J. J. Berry, A. Miedaner, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1414–1418 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, E. L. Runnerstrom and D. J. Milliron, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2016, 7, 283–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Granqvist, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 564, 1–38 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, C. C. Chao, F. Hossein-Babaei and F. B. Prinz, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10903–10906 RSC .
X. Chen, N. J. Wu, L. Smith and A. Ignatiev, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2700–2702 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Asundi, J. A. Raiford and S. F. Bent, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 908–925 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830–22837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prevot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. St. Clair and D. W. Goodman, Top. Catal., 2000, 13, 5–19 CrossRef .
H. J. Freund and G. Pacchioni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2224–2242 RSC .

Solution Processing of Inorganic Materials, ed. D. B. Mitzi, John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, 1st edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. M. Kim, C. W. Kim, J. S. Heo, H. Na, J. E. Lee, C. B. Park, J. U. Bae, C. D. Kim, M. Jun, Y. K. Hwang, S. T. Meyers, A. Grenville and D. A. Keszler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 242109 CrossRef .
W. Xu, H. Li, J. Bin Xu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25878–25901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol-Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol-Gel Processing, Academic Press, Inc., Boston, 1st edn,  1990 Search PubMed .
R. W. Schwartz, T. Schneller and R. Waser, C. R. Chim., 2004, 7, 433–461 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nadarajah, M. Z. B. Wu, K. Archila, M. G. Kast, A. M. Smith, T. H. Chiang, D. A. Keszler, J. F. Wager and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5587–5596 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Lim, J. Lee, J.-E. Huh, J. Park, J.-H. Lee, S.-E. Lee and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7768–7776 RSC .
S. Jeong, J. Y. Lee, S. S. Lee, Y. Choi and B. H. Ryu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11773–11780 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Scheideler, R. Kumar, A. R. Zeumault and V. Subramanian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606062 CrossRef .
Y. S. Rim, H. Chen, T.-B. Song, S.-H. Bae and Y. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5808–5812 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, A. Liu, H. Zhu, B. Shin, E. Fortunato, R. Martins, Y. Wang and F. Shan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2564–2572 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, G. X. Liu, H. H. Zhu, F. Xu, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and F. K. Shan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17364–17369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Plassmeyer, K. Archila, J. F. Wager and C. J. Page, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1678–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Woods, T. H. Chiang, P. N. Plassmeyer, M. G. Kast, A. C. Lygo, A. K. Grealish, S. W. Boettcher and C. J. Page, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10897–10903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Perkins, M. Jenkins, T.-H. Chiang, R. H. Mansergh, V. Gouliouk, N. Kenane, J. Wager, J. F. Conley and D. A. Keszler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36082–36087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Woods, E. C. Waddington, C. A. Crump, E. A. Bryan, T. S. Gleckler, M. R. Nellist, B. A. Duell, D. P. Nguyen, S. W. Boettcher and C. J. Page, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 39147–39152 RSC .
A. Liu, G. Liu, H. Zhu, H. Song, B. Shin, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and F. Shan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7180–7188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, G. Liu, H. Zhu, B. Shin, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and F. Shan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86606–86613 RSC .
C. Zhu, A. Liu, G. Liu, G. Jiang, Y. Meng, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and F. Shan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10715–10721 RSC .
R. M. Pasquarelli, D. S. Ginley and R. O. Hayre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5406–5441 RSC .
A. Nadarajah, M. E. Carnes, M. G. Kast, D. W. Johnson and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4080–4087 CrossRef CAS .
P. Richter, P. N. Plassmeyer, J. Harzdorf, T. Rüffer, H. Lang, J. Kalbacova, N. Jöhrmann, S. Schulze, M. Hietschold, S. S. P. K. Arekapudi, M. Albrecht, D. R. T. Zahn, C. J. Page and G. Salvan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4917–4927 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Clayton, D. Lepage, P. N. Plassmeyer, C. J. Page and M. C. Lonergan, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 7046–7051 RSC .
N. Zhou, M.-G. Kim, S. Loser, J. Smith, H. Yoshida, X. Guo, C. Song, H. Jin, Z. Chen, S. M. Yoon, A. J. Freeman, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2015, 112, 7897–7902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jung, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7874–7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 382–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, J.-S. Heo, T.-H. Kim, S. Park, M.-H. Yoon, J. Kim, M. S. Oh, G.-R. Yi, Y.-Y. Noh and S. K. Park, Nature, 2012, 489, 128–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Woods, P. N. Plassmeyer, D. H. Park, L. J. Enman, A. K. Grealish, B. L. Kirk, S. W. Boettcher, D. A. Keszler and C. J. Page, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8531–8538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Rim, S. H. Bae, H. Chen, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4415–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bretos, R. Jiménez, J. Ricote and M. L. Calzada, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 291–308 RSC .
S. Yuvaraj, F. Y. Lin, T. H. Chang and C. T. Yeh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1044–1047 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wolters, H. Daly, A. Goguet, F. C. Meunier, C. Hardacre, J. H. Bitter, P. E. De Jongh and K. P. De Jong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7839–7845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and B. W. L. Jang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 8433–8438 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Quddus, M. M. Hossain and H. I. De Lasa, Catal. Today, 2013, 210, 124–134 CrossRef CAS .
P. Melnikov, V. A. Nascimento, I. V. Arkhangelsky, L. Z. Zanoni Consolo and L. C. S. De Oliveira, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2013, 111, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
P. Melnikov, V. A. Nascimento and L. Z. Z. Consolo, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2012, 107, 1117–1121 CrossRef CAS .
P. Melnikov, V. A. Nascimento, L. Z. Z. Consolo and A. F. Silva, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2013, 111, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. Melnikov, V. A. Nascimento, I. V. Arkhangelsky, L. C. S. de Oliveira, A. F. Silva and L. Z. Z. Consolo, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2014, 119, 1073–1079 CrossRef .
A. J. Kozak, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 1999, 58, 647–651 CrossRef .
W. W. Wendlandt and J. L. Bear, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1960, 12, 276–280 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Gallagher and D. W. Johnson Jr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
A. Małecki and B. Małecka, Thermochim. Acta, 2006, 446, 113–116 CrossRef .
J. Zhuang, Q. J. Sun, Y. Zhou, S. T. Han, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, H. Peng, S. Venkatesh, W. Wu, R. K. Y. Li and V. A. L. Roy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31128–31135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, G. He, L. Zhu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xia, F. Alam and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 625–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kast, E. A. Cochran, L. J. Enman, G. Mitchson, J. Ditto, C. Siefe, P. N. Plassmeyer, A. L. Greenaway, D. C. Johnson, C. J. Page and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16800–16808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Cochran, D.-H. Park, M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, C. K. Perkins, R. H. Mansergh, D. A. Keszler, D. W. Johnson and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9480–9488 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
J. Schefer and M. Grube, Mater. Res. Bull., 1995, 30, 1235–1241 CrossRef .
D. Lazar, B. Ribár and B. Prelesnik, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1991, 47, 2282–2285 CrossRef .
A. D. Hendsbee, C. C. Pye and J. D. Masuda, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E: Struct. Rep. Online, 2009, 65, i65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Malyarik, S. P. Petrosyants, A. B. Ilyukhin and Y. A. Buslaev, Zh. Neorg. Khim., 1993, 38, 1975–1980 CAS .
T. J. Boyle, J. M. Sears, M. L. Neville, T. M. Alam and V. G. Young, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 11831–11841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lazar, B. Ribár, V. Divjaković and C. Mészáros, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1991, 47, 1060–1062 CrossRef .
D. Popov, R. Herak, N. Radulovic and B. Ribar, Z. Kristallogr., 1975, 142, 347–355 Search PubMed .
N. J. Hair and J. K. Beattie, Inorg. Chem., 1977, 16, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Prelesnik, F. Gabela, B. Ribar and I. Krstanovic, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1973, 2, 581–583 Search PubMed .
F. Bigoli, A. Braibanti, A. Tiripicchio and M. T. Camellini, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1971, 27, 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS .
B. Morosin, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1970, 26, 1203–1208 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Ribar and W. Nowacki, Z. Kristallogr., 1970, 131, 175–185 CrossRef .
B. Ribar, N. Milinski, Z. Budovalcev and I. Krstanovic, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1980, 9, 203–206 CAS .
P. Bénard, M. Louër and D. Louër, J. Solid State Chem., 1991, 94, 27–35 CrossRef .
A. Gobichon, M. Loue, D. Loue and J. P. Auffre, J. Solid State Chem., 1996, 126, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Milinski, P. Radivojevic, B. Ribar and S. Djuric, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1982, 11, 1241–1244 CAS .
D. J. Rogers, N. J. Taylor and G. E. Toogood, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1983, 39, 939–941 CrossRef .
R. Kawashima, M. Sasaki, S. Satoh, H. Isoda, Y. Kino and Y. Shiozak, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2000, 69, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stockhause and G. Meyer, Z. Kristallogr., 1997, 212, 315 CAS .
G. Shengli, M. Huairang and Y. Zupei, Xibei Daxue Xuebao, Ziran Kexueban, 1990, 20, 53–58 Search PubMed .
C. Rincke, H. Schmidt and W. Voigt, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2017, 643, 437–442 CrossRef CAS .
A.-E. Gobichon, J.-P. Auffrékdic and D. Louër, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 93, 51–64 CrossRef .
W. Wang, I.-Y. Chang, L. Zakharov, P. H.-Y. Cheong and D. A. Keszler, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 1807–1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. A. Sietsma, J. D. Meeldijk, J. P. Den Breejen, M. Versluijs-Helder, A. J. Van Dillen, P. E. De Jongh and K. P. De Jong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4547–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Małecka, A. Łącz, E. Drozdz and A. Małecki, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2015, 119, 1053–1061 CrossRef .
K. N. Woods, D. M. Hamann and C. J. Page, Solid State Sci., 2018, 75, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. Livage, Catal. Today, 1998, 41, 3–19 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Rudolph, D. Fischer, M. R. Tomney and C. C. Pye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 5145–5155 RSC .
W. W. Rudolph and G. Irmer, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 18492–18505 RSC .
W. W. Rudolph and G. Irmer, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 295–305 RSC .

          G. Wulfsberg, Inorganic Chemistry, University Science Books, Sausalito, 1st edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

          M. Henry, J. P. Jolivet and J. Livage, in Chemistry, Spectroscopy and Applications of Sol-Gel Glasses. Structure and Bonding, vol. 77, ed. R. Reisfeld and C. K. JJørgensen, Springer, Berlin,  1992, pp. 153–206 Search PubMed .
R. E. Mesmer and C. F. Baes, MRS Proc., 1990, 281, 935–962 Search PubMed .

          D. T. Richens, The Aqueous Chemistry of Aqua Ions, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, England, 1st edn,  1997 Search PubMed .

          C. F. Baes and R. E. Mesmer, The Hydrolysis of Cations, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New york,  1976 Search PubMed .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1st edn,  1966 Search PubMed .

          G. K. Schweitzer and L. L. Pesterfield, The aqueous chemistry of the elements, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2013, vol. 48 Search PubMed .
M. N. Jackson, M. K. Kamunde-Devonish, B. A. Hammann, L. A. Wills, L. B. Fullmer, S. E. Hayes, P. H. Y. Cheong, W. H. Casey, M. Nyman and D. W. Johnson, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 16982–17006 RSC .
M. K. Kamunde-Devonish, M. N. Jackson, Z. L. Mensinger, L. N. Zakharov and D. W. Johnson, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 7101–7105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Perkins, E. S. Eitrheim, B. L. Fulton, L. B. Fullmer, C. A. Colla, D. H. Park, A. F. Oliveri, J. E. Hutchison, M. Nyman, W. H. Casey, T. Z. Forbes, D. W. Johnson and D. A. Keszler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10161–10164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Allouche, C. Gerardin, T. Loiseau, G. Ferey and F. Taulelle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 511–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Biedermann and D. Ferri, Acta Chem. Scand., 1982, 36, 611–622 CrossRef .
L. A. Wills, X. Qu, I. Y. Chang, T. J. L. Mustard, D. A. Keszler, K. A. Persson and P. H. Y. Cheong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Livage, M. Henry and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1988, 18, 259–341 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Fulton, C. K. Perkins, R. H. Mansergh, M. A. Jenkins, V. Gouliouk, M. N. Jackson, J. C. Ramos, N. M. Rogovoy, M. T. Gutierrez-Higgins, S. W. Boettcher, J. F. Conley, D. A. Keszler, J. E. Hutchison and D. W. Johnson, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7760–7765 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, W. Liu, I.-Y. Chang, L. A. Wills, L. N. Zakharov, S. W. Boettcher, P. H.-Y. Cheong, C. Fang and D. A. Keszler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 18397–18401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Rudolph, R. Mason and C. C. Pye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 5030–5040 RSC .
W. W. Rudolph and C. C. Pye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 4319–4327 RSC .
Y. Marcus, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 2295–2999 Search PubMed .
F. P. Rotzinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5230–5238 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, S. Nagayama and T. Busujima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8287–8288 CrossRef CAS .
L. Helm and A. E. Merbach, Dalton Trans., 2002, 633–641 RSC .
A. E. Danks, S. R. Hall and Z. Schnepp, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 91–112 RSC .
Z. Wang, U. Helmersson and P. O. Käll, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 405, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, B. McQuillin, A. K. Ray, M. L. Turner and A. B. Seddon, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 2683–2686 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Seo, Y. H. Cho, W. H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, Y. S. Kim and K. Char, Japan Soc. Appl. Phys., 2019, 12, 071004 Search PubMed .
E. Rather, J. T. Gatlin, P. G. Nixon, T. Tsukamoto, V. Kravtsov and D. W. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3242–3243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Mensinger, J. T. Gatlin, S. T. Meyers, L. N. Zakharov, D. A. Keszler and D. W. Johnson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9484–9486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Gatlin, Z. L. Mensinger, L. N. Zakharov, D. Macinnes and D. W. Johnson, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1267–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard, R. Parsons and J. Jordan, Standard Potentials in Aqueous Solution, International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, 1st edn,  1985 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, K. M. Wentz, S. E. Hayes, D. W. Johnson and D. A. Keszler, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 4683–4685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Jackson, L. A. Wills, I. Y. Chang, M. E. Carnes, L. F. Scatena, P. H. Y. Cheong and D. W. Johnson, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 6187–6192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Marsh, S. Goberna-Ferrón, M. K. Baumeister, L. N. Zakharov, M. Nyman and D. W. Johnson, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 947–955 RSC .
M. E. Carnes, C. C. Knutson, A. Nadarajah, M. N. Jackson, A. F. Oliveri, K. M. Norelli, B. M. Crockett, S. R. Bauers, H. A. Moreno-Luna, B. N. Taber, D. J. Pacheco, J. Z. Olson, K. R. Brevick, C. E. Sheehan, D. W. Johnson and S. W. Boettcher, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8492–8496 RSC .
C. K. Perkins, R. H. Mansergh, J. C. Ramos, C. E. Nanayakkara, D.-H. Park, S. Goberna-Ferrón, L. B. Fullmer, J. T. Arens, M. T. Gutierrez-Higgens, Y. R. Jones, J. I. Lopez, T. M. Rowe, D. M. Whitehurst, M. Nyman, Y. J. Chabal and D. A. Keszler, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. Smith and A. E. Martell, Critical Stability Constants, Springer, New York,  1976, vol. 4 Search PubMed .
K. H. Lee, J. H. Park, Y. B. Yoo, W. S. Jang, J. Y. Oh, S. S. Chae, K. J. Moon, J. M. Myoung and H. K. Baik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2585–2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Kang, J. H. Ryu, H. Kim, Y.-W. O. K.-H. Baek and L.-M. Do, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 8473–8477 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, T. Gergely, Y. S. Rim and S. Pyo, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 505–512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, H. Zhu, H. Sun, Y. Xu and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–39 Search PubMed .

          P. Martin, Handbook of Deposition Technologies for Films and Coatings: Science, Applications and Technologies, Elsevier, Inc., Oxford, 3rd edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
P. Roura, J. Farjas, S. Ricart, M. Aklalouch, R. Guzman, J. Arbiol, T. Puig, A. Calleja, O. Peña-Rodríguez, M. Garriga and X. Obradors, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 1949–1953 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sanchez-Rodriguez, J. Farjas, P. Roura, S. Ricart, N. Mestres, X. Obradors and T. Puig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20133–20138 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 3531–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Buttry and M. D. Ward, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 1355–1379 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. L. Baker, R. D. Sanderson and A. M. Crouch, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 6691–6697 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vratny, Appl. Spectrosc., 1959, 13, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Nyquist, C. L. Putzig, M. A. Leugers and R. O. Kagel, The Handbook of Infrared and Raman Spectra of Inorganic Compounds and Organic Salts, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. A. Al-abadleh and V. H. Grassian, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi and T. Nishide, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 238, 234–238 Search PubMed .
H. Shimizu, S. Konagai, M. Ikeda and T. Nishide, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 1011011–1011016 Search PubMed .
H. Shimizu, D. Nemoto, M. Ikeda and T. Nishide, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. H. Mansergh, L. B. Fullmer, D. H. Park, M. Nyman and D. A. Keszler, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1553–1558 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Frederick, J. M. Amador, S. Goberna-Ferrón, M. Nyman, D. A. Keszler and G. S. Herman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16100–16112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, M. G. Kast, B. A. Hammann, Y. Afriyie, K. N. Woods, P. N. Plassmeyer, C. K. Perkins, Z. L. Ma, D. A. Keszler, C. J. Page, S. W. Boettcher and S. E. Hayes, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7456–7463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chi and S. S. C. Chuang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4673–4683 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. He, H. Gao and Y. Yu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2008, 71, 1446–1451 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Prinetto, G. Ghiotti, I. Nova, L. Lietti, E. Tronconi and P. Forzatti, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12732–12745 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeong, J. Y. Lee, S. S. Lee, Y. H. Seo, S. Y. Kim, J. U. Park, B. H. Ryu, W. Yang, J. Moon and Y. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4236–4243 RSC .
X. Yu, L. Zeng, N. Zhou, P. Guo, F. Shi, D. B. Buchholz, Q. Ma, J. Yu, V. P. Dravid, R. P. H. Chang, M. Bedzyk, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2390–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Kim, C. H. Ahn, M. G. Yun, S. W. Cho, W. J. Kang and H. K. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Sun, W. Xu, F. Xie, L. Ye, Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, J. Chen and J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54729–54739 RSC .
A. Varma, A. Mukasyan, A. Rogachev and K. V. Manukyan, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14493–14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, L. Zeng, W. Huang, F. S. Melkonyan, W. C. Sheets, L. Chi, M. J. Bedzyk, T. J. Marks and A. F. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7067–7074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Wang, W. Huang, X. Zhang, G. Wang, M. J. Leonardi, Y. Huang, Z. Lu, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3323–3329 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and Z. Li, Ceram. Int., 2015, 42, 6360–6368 CrossRef .
R. Branquinho, D. Salgueiro, L. Santos, P. Barquinha, L. Pereira, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19592–19599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kang, S. Jeong, J. M. Ko, J.-Y. Lee, Y. Choi, C. Lee and S. Y. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4247–4256 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Feng, C. Wu, R. Sun, X. Li, B. Lu, Z. Ye and J. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 053503 CrossRef .
J. Smith, L. Zeng, R. Khanal, K. Stallings, A. Facchetti, J. E. Medvedeva, M. J. Bedzyk and T. J. Marks, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500146 CrossRef .
J. W. Hennek, J. Smith, A. Yan, M. G. Kim, W. Zhao, V. P. Dravid, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10729–10741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hennek, M. G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9593–9596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Smith, N. Zhou, L. Zeng, P. Guo, Y. Xia, A. Alvarez, S. Aghion, H. Lin, J. Yu, R. P. H. Chang, M. J. Bedzyk, R. Ferragut, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2015, 112, 3217–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Hwang, J. S. Seo, J. M. Yun, H. J. Park, S. Yang, S. H. K. Park and B. S. Bae, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e45 CrossRef CAS .
I. Isakov, H. Faber, M. Grell, G. Wyatt-Moon, N. Pliatsikas, T. Kehagias, G. P. Dimitrakopulos, P. P. Patsalas, R. Li and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–9 CrossRef .
J. S. Lee, Y.-J. Kwack and W.-S. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11578–11583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, G. Liu, A. Liu, H. Song, Y. Hou, B. Shin and F. Shan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37807–37813 RSC .
R. A. John, A. C. Nguyen, S. Shukla, N. Tiwari, S. Chen, G. I. Ng and N. Mathews, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8305–8313 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sanchez-Rodriguez, H. Eloussifi, J. Farjas, P. Roura and M. Dammak, Thermochim. Acta, 2014, 589, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roura, J. Farjas, H. Eloussi, L. Carreras, S. Ricart, T. Puig and X. Obradors, Thermochim. Acta, 2015, 601, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sánchez-Rodriguez, J. Farjas and P. Roura, Combust. Flame, 2017, 186, 211–219 CrossRef .
S. Park, K. H. Kim, J. W. Jo, S. Sung, K. T. Kim, W. J. Lee, J. Kim, H. J. Kim, G. R. Yi, Y. H. Kim, M. H. Yoon and S. K. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2807–2815 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goldstein and J. Rabani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10597–10601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mack and J. R. Bolton, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1999, 128, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Daunis, D. Barrera, G. Gutierrez-Heredia, O. Rodriguez-Lopez, J. Wang, W. E. Voit and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 2454–2462 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Y. Su, S.-Y. Chu, Y.-D. Juang and H.-C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 192101 CrossRef .
Y. J. Kim, J. K. Jeong, J. H. Park, B. J. Jeong, H. D. Lee and G. W. Lee, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 4–8 Search PubMed .
J. Hwang, K. Lee, Y. Jeong, Y. U. Lee, C. Pearson, M. C. Petty and H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400206 CrossRef .
J. He, D. M. Weekes, W. Cheng, K. E. Dettelbach, A. Huang, T. Li and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18174–18177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Leppäniemi, K. Eiroma, H. Majumdar and A. Alastalo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8774–8782 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jo, Y. Kim, J. Park, J. S. Heo, S. Hwang, W. Lee, M. Yoon, M. Kim and S. K. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35114–35124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, H. Li, J.-B. Xu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25878–25901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Banger, Y. Yamashita, K. Mori, R. L. Peterson, T. Leedham, J. Rickard and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 45–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Park, I. Son, H. W. Park, K. B. Chung, Y. Xu, T. Lee and Y. Y. Noh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13289–13294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, K. L. Chang, C. Chi, J. Zhang and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5397–5403 RSC .
K. C. Fairley, D. R. Merrill, K. N. Woods, J. Ditto, C. Xu, R. P. Oleksak, T. Gustafsson, D. W. Johnson, E. L. Garfunkel, G. S. Herman, D. C. Johnson and C. J. Page, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 667–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Woods, M. C. Thomas, G. Mitchson, J. Ditto, C. Xu, D. Kayal, K. C. Frisella, T. Gustafsson, E. Garfunkel, Y. J. Chabal, D. C. Johnson and C. J. Page, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37476–37483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lim, J. E. Huh, J. Lee, N. K. Cho, J. W. Park, B. Il Nam, E. Lee and Y. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 548–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Okamura and H. Hahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 153114 CrossRef .
S. Polster, M. P. M. Jank and L. Frey, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 024504 CrossRef .
S. R. Thomas, P. Pattanasattayavong and T. D. Anthopoulos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6910–6923 RSC .
Y. S. Rim, H. S. Lim and H. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3565–3571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Rim, H. Chen, Y. Liu, S. H. Bae, H. J. Kim and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9680–9686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Carlos, R. Branquinho, A. Kiazadeh, P. Barquinha, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31100–31108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Song, W. Yang, Y. Jung, S. Jeong and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21265–21271 RSC .
S. Y. Je, B. G. Son, H. G. Kim, M. Y. Park, L. M. Do, R. Choi and J. K. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18693–18703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, K. Kita and A. Toriumi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 2001–2004 Search PubMed .
J. T. Anderson, W. Wang, K. Jiang, T. Gustafsson, C. Xu, E. L. Gafunkel and D. A. Keszler, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1081–1085 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Perkins, R. H. Mansergh, D. H. Park, C. E. Nanayakkara, J. C. Ramos, S. R. Decker, Y. Huang, Y. J. Chabal and D. A. Keszler, Solid State Sci., 2016, 61, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Daunis, J. M. H. Tran and J. W. P. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39435–39440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Banger, C. Warwick, J. Lang, K. Broch, J. E. Halpert, J. Socratous, A. Brown, T. Leedham and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6337–6346 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Elizabeth A. Cochran	Elizabeth Cochran received her B.S. degree in Chemistry from the University of San Francisco in 2013. She is currently a Chemistry Ph.D. candidate at the University of Oregon working with Shannon Boettcher and Darren W. Johnson. Her graduate work focuses on characterizing and elucidating the thin-film reaction pathway of solution-deposited metal oxide thin films.
Keenan N. Woods	Keenan Woods received his B.S. in Chemistry from California Lutheran University in 2013. He later obtained his M.S. and Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Oregon in 2015 and 2017, respectively. His graduate work was performed under the direction of Catherine Page and centered on the development of aqueous-processed metal oxide thin films for microelectronic applications. He currently holds an R&D position in the semiconductor industry.
Darren W. Johnson	Darren Johnson has been at the University of Oregon since 2003, where he is currently a Professor of Chemistry and the Bradshaw and Holzapfel Research Professor in Transformational Science and Mathematics. He obtained his Ph.D. from UC-Berkeley in 2000 and was an NIH post-doctoral researcher at the Scripps Research Institute. Research in the group uses supramolecular chemistry as a tool to explore a variety of problems in self-assembly, molecule/ion recognition, and inorganic cluster synthesis. He was co-founder of SupraSensor Technologies, a UO spinout that sought to commercialize remote sensors for nutrient management in precision agriculture. He has co-authored over 130 papers and is co-inventor on 14 pending/issued patents.
Catherine J. Page	Catherine Page received her B.A. from Oberlin College and her Ph.D. in Inorganic Chemistry from Cornell University. She was a research scientist at DuPont before joining the faculty in the Chemistry Department at the University of Oregon in 1986. Research in her laboratory has centered on the synthesis and characterization of new solid-state oxides that have technological relevance, particularly in thin-film form. As a member of the NSF-sponsored Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry, her group has focused on making high-quality metal oxide dielectric films from aqueous nitrate precursors.
Shannon W. Boettcher	Shannon Boettcher is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oregon. His research is at the intersection of materials science and electrochemistry, with a focus on fundamental aspects of energy conversion and storage. He has been named a DuPont Young Professor, a Cottrell Scholar, a Sloan Fellow, and a Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar.

 	Fig. 1  Bulk metal nitrate decomposition. (a) Representative chemical reactions for metal-nitrate-hydrate thermal decomposition in air. (b) Schematic depicting the electronic interaction between Mz+ and nitrate. Low charge-density (CD) metals are unable to polarize the nitrate electron cloud, resulting in high Td (left), whereas high-CD metals attract the electron density of nitrate (indicated by distortion and shading of the electron cloud), which lowers Td (right).	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of metal nitrates used as solution precursors. TGA curves are shown for hydrated metal nitrate salts of: (a) main-group metals, (b) first-row transition metals, and (c) and (d) lanthanide(-like) metals. Experimental details can be found in ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 3  Metal-nitrate decomposition temperature (Td) as a function of metal-cation charge density (CD). Metal-nitrate salts exhibit a broad range of decomposition temperatures due to differing electronic interactions between the metal and nitrate. As a general trend, Td increases with decreasing CD (i.e. the cation polarizing ability decreases). Td is defined as the temperature at which the salt has lost 75% of its volatile mass.	 


Mg2+	435	6 (ref. 74)	72	1.28
Al3+	155	6 (ref. 75)	53.5	4.68
Ga3+	195	6 (ref. 76)	62	3.01
In3+	183	6 (ref. 77)a	80	1.40
Sc3+	240	8 (ref. 78)	87	1.09
Cr3+	155	6 (ref. 79)	61.5	3.08
Mn2+	180	6 (ref. 80)	83	0.84
Fe3+	141	6 (ref. 81)	64.5	2.67
Co2+	224	6 (ref. 82)	74.5	1.15
Ni2+	298	6 (ref. 83)	69	1.45
Cu2+	175	5 (ref. 84)	65	1.74
Zn2+	244	6 (ref. 85)	74	1.18
Y3+	386	8 (ref. 86)	102	0.67
Zr4+	210	8 (ref. 87)	84	1.61
La3+	445	10 (ref. 88)	127	0.35
Ce3+	266	10 (ref. 89)	125	0.37
Nd3+	404	9 (ref. 90)	116	0.46
Sm3+	470	10 (ref. 91)b	113	0.50
Gd3+	373	9 (ref. 92)	111	0.52
Dy3+	427	9 (ref. 93)	108	0.57
Ho3+	372	9 (ref. 94)	107	0.58
Er3+	350	9c	106	0.60
[M(H2O)N]z+ + hH2O ↔ [M(OH)h(H2O)N−h](z−h)+ + hH3O+	(1)
M-OH + M-H2O → M-OH-M + H2O	(2)
M-OH + M-OH → M-O-M + H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Aqueous solution speciation of aluminum and indium. Pourbaix (a and b) and speciation (c and d) diagrams describing the aqueous chemistry of aluminum and indium. The dashed lines in panels (c) and (d) indicate species in solutions super-saturated with respect to α-Al(OH)3 and In(OH)3 (i.e. [Mz+] < 0.1 M). Grey shading in panels (c) and (d) indicates the region to the left of the M3+|M(OH)3 boundary from the Pourbaix diagram (i.e. the pH region where soluble species predominate). The data used to construct the Pourbaix and speciation diagrams are from ref. 110 and 108, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nitrate reduction chemistry. The above Pourbaix diagram shows the aqueous solution speciation of nitrogen (0.1 M). The aqueous stability of nitrate is pertinent to understanding its reduction chemistry, which can be utilized to influence metal-nitrate precursor solution speciation. The data used to construct this Pourbaix diagram are from ref. 110.	 

 	Fig. 6  Metal-nitrate (M-NO3) complex formation. (a) Raman spectra of In(NO3)3 solutions. Raman frequencies shift and new vibrational modes appear as [In3+] increases, indicating M-NO3 complex formation. The figure is adapted from ref. 101 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Relationship between cation radius (r) and ΔGhyd (values from ref. 122). Cations that are more strongly hydrated (i.e. more negative ΔGhyd) are thermodynamically stable and tend to form fewer M-NO3 complexes. Deviation of z = +2 first-row transition metals from this trend is due to weak ligand-field effects, which results in cation radius expansion when eg orbitals are filled.107 (c) Relationship between cation radius (r) and kH2O. Exchange kinetics will dictate how quickly equilibrium concentrations of M-NO3 complex will be established in aqueous solution. Values are complied from ref. 101, 124 and 125.	 
[M(H2O)N]z+ + NO3− ↔ [M(NO3) (H2O)N−1](z−1)+ + H2O	(4)

 	Fig. 7  Metal-hydroxo nanoclusters as thin-film precursors. (a) X-ray crystal structure of a [M13(OH)24(H2O)24](NO3)15 (M = Al3+ or Ga3+) with (bottom) and without (top) non-coordinating nitrate counterions. (b) Current (J)–electric field (ξ) curve fitting of conduction mechanisms for Al2O3-based devices from “Al13” precursors annealed at 350 (top) and 600 °C (bottom). The 350 °C-annealed film exhibits Frenkel–Poole (FP) conduction, whereas the film annealed at 600 °C displays Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling. FN tunneling is indicative of a high-quality insulator. Reprinted from ref. 41. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) films prepared from nitrate salt solutions (top) and electrochemically-treated cluster solutions (bottom). Islands present on the surface of films from the salt precursor are phase-segregated In2O3. Electrochemically-treated solutions are believed to inhibit phase segregation as a result of the pre-condensed hydroxo network of “Ga7In6”. Images adapted from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) FT-IR spectra of films from the Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursor. Vibrational modes for nitrate and hydroxyl groups (labeled) are nearly undetectable after annealing at 100 °C in air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
H+ + 2e− → H2 (Eo = 0 V vs. SHE)	(5)
NO3− + 3H+ + 2e− → HNO2 + H2O (Eo = 0.94 V vs. SHE)	(6)
Sn2+ + 2H2O → SnO2 + 4H+ + 2e− (Eo = 0.13 vs. SHE)	(7)
NO3− + 3H+ + 2e− → HNO2 + H2O (Eo = 0.94 V vs. SHE)	(8)
Sn2+ + NO3− + H2O → SnO2 + HNO2 + H+ (Eorxn = 0.81 V)	(9)

 	Fig. 8  Metal-nitrate (M-NO3) complex formation in thin-film solution precursors. (a) Raman spectra of aqueous indium salt (InX3) precursor solutions. The observed vibrational modes are assigned to M-X complexes, with the exception of the peak at 1050 cm−1 in In(NO3)3 spectra, which is assigned to “free” nitrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) TFT μsat and M-O content in In2O3 films from various precursors (data adapted from ref. 36). The high μsat for the In2O3 film from In(NO3)3 is a result of high metal-oxide content due to lack of M-NO3 complex in the precursor solution, as well as few counterion impurities in the final metal oxide. All films for these TFTs were annealed at 250 °C. (c) Relationship between precursor solution temperature, TFT channel mobility (μ) and M-O content in indium zinc oxide thin films (data adapted from ref. 140). As precursor solution temperature is decreased, M-O content and μ increase, which is suggested to be a result of fewer M-NO3 complexes present as the solution is cooled. The TFT data shown are for devices that use SiO2 as the dielectric layer.	 

 	Fig. 9  Stages of thin-film formation from solution precursors. (I) The substrate is wetted with an aqueous metal nitrate solution. Adequate wetting is achieve via substrate surface preparation treatments to remove organic contaminants and introduce polar functional groups to impart hydrophilicity. (II) The thin-film precursor gel is formed by rapid evaporation of excess solvent (H2O, in this example). The resulting metal-nitrate gel must then be decomposed to form a metal oxide. (III) With addition of energy (commonly thermal annealing), additional solvent is evaporated and nitrates decompose to HNO3, NOx, etc. Condensation is initiated, forming M(OH)x species. (IV) Once nitrates and solvent are removed, M(OH)x further condense to form the final metal oxide. See Fig. 1a for representative chemical reactions for nitrate decomposition and hydroxyl condensation.	 

 	Fig. 10  Characterization techniques used to study the metal-oxide thin-film reaction pathway by thermal annealing. (a) Quartz-crystal-microbalance (QCM) thermal-analysis data is used to determine thin-film decomposition temperatures (Td). The above example shows the Td of a thin film from the Sn(II)(OH)x(NO3)y nanocluster precursor was estimated to be ∼225 °C (data from ref. 47). (b) Chemical composition of thin films as a function of annealing temperature can be monitored by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, due to the intense nitrate IR active modes. Representative data of an FT-IR annealing study is shown for films from a La(NO3)3/ZrO(NO3)2 (1 La:1 Zr) precursor for lanthanum zirconium oxide (LZO) films. These data are adapted from ref. 36. (c) Thin-film decomposition products can be studied using temperature-programmed-desorption mass spectrometry (TPD-MS). Two distinct nitrate-decomposition mechanisms can be inferred from the data shown for Y(NO3)3 thin films. Mechanism I (highlighted in blue) is associated with “loosely-bound” nitrate, including the HNO3/H2O azeotrope as a decomposition product, as evidenced by concomitant detection of NO+ and H2O+ fragments. Mechanism II (highlighted in red) is associated with nitrate in more thermally stable environments and is identified by simultaneous detection of NO+ and O2+ fragments. These data are adapted from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 11  Evaluating the quality of metal oxides from metal-nitrate precursors. (a) O 1s XPS spectrum from an In2O3 film indicating oxygen environments typically observed in metal-oxide thin films. The OI, OII, and OIII environments, as denoted in the figure, are assigned to indium oxide (In-O), oxygen vacancies (i.e. nitrate (N-O), carbon (C-O), under-coordinated oxygen species, etc.), and indium hydroxide (In-OH), respectively. (b) Metal-oxide character and In2O3 TFT saturated channel mobility (μsat) increase with annealing temperature for films from In(NO3)3. Higher μsat at higher annealing temperatures is a result of increased M-O content and fewer nitrate impurities remaining in the film. The TFT data shown are for devices that use SiO2 as the dielectric layer. Data reproduced and adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Reactivity of combustion precursors. (a) Reaction coordinate diagram depicting combustion and thermal decomposition pathways with their associated chemical reactions. Combustion is considered a low-temperature thin-film processing method because low applied temperatures (compared to thermal decomposition) lead to ignition of an exothermic combustion front. It is suggested the heat produced by combustion decomposes nitrates and condenses the metal-oxide network. (b) TGA comparison for a bulk powder (top) and thin film (bottom) prepared from the combustible mixture In(NO3)3-acac. An exotherm (i.e. combustion) is detected for the bulk powder, whereas an endotherm (i.e. thermal decomposition) is detected for the thin film. Data adapted from ref. 146. (c) O 1s XP spectra for a powder and film prepared from a Y(NO3)3-acac mixture by annealing near the combustion ignition temperature. Composition analysis suggests combustion occurs in the powder (i.e. high Y-O, low NO3− content) but not in the thin film (i.e. low Y-O, high NO3−) when samples are annealed above the combustion ignition temperature (215 °C). Data adapted from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 13  Comparison of In2O3 films prepared by various low-temperature processing methods. Channel mobilities (μ) for In2O3 TFTs are used to compare the properties of thin films prepared using various low-temperature processing strategies. All data presented here are for TFTs with SiO2 dielectric layers, for ease of comparison. The associated references for the data categories plotted above are as follows: combustion,52,176 aqueous,36,142,177,178 sol–gel,179,180 and photo-annealing.53,181	 
	(10)
O˙− + H2O  O·H + OH−	(11)

 	Fig. 14  Photo-annealing of metal-nitrate gel films. (a) Schematic of the photo-annealing reaction. UV light decomposes nitrates to various volatile NOx products via photolysis. Photon energy from the UV source, as well as heat from operation of the UV lamp (∼150 °C), facilitate condensation of M(OH)x to metal oxide. (b) FT-IR spectra of Al(NO3)3 films photo- and thermally-annealed (at 150 °C) as a function of irradiation/annealing time. IR active modes for nitrate are no longer visible after 5 min of photo-annealing (red), whereas nitrates are still present in thermally-annealed films (blue) after a 2 h annealing time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons. (c) Fitted O 1s XP spectra comparing the oxygen chemical environments present in photo- and thermally-annealed (350 °C) indium–gallium–zinc-oxide (IGZO) films. Photo-annealed films are chemically similar to films thermally-annealed at high temperature, which suggests photo-annealing is an effective low-temperature processing method for preparing IGZO with high metal oxide content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chemical analysis of steam- and dry-annealed LZO films. (a) Comparison of the NO+ fragment (m/z = 30) desorption profile for dry- and steam-annealed LZO films (200 °C) shows a reduction in signal below 400 °C for the steam-annealed film compared to a dry-annealed film, indicating enhanced nitrate removal with steam annealing. (b) FT-IR spectra of LZO films annealed at 200 °C (solid lines), then left in ambient for 1 h (dotted lines). While dry-annealed films absorb water, as evidenced by the increased intensity of the OH stretching mode, steam-annealed films are moisture resistant. Data adapted from ref. 54.	 

 	Fig. 16  Improved densification of steam-annealed films. SEM images of (a) steam- and (b) dry-annealed films. The schematics show the different decomposition products that are hypothesized to form under each atmosphere (i.e. HNO3 from steam-annealing and NOx gases from dry-annealing), as well as the formation of a dense surface layer (indicated by the dark blue region at the film surface) in dry-annealed films, which we hypothesize inhibits densification.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
