Metal–organic framework composites: from fundamentals to applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR00518C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR00518C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7482-7501Metal–organic framework composites: from fundamentals to applications

        
          
            Shaozhou 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Fengwei 
            Huo
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing, China. E-mail: iamszli@njupt.edu.cn
bInstitute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University, 30 South Puzhu Road, Nanjing, China. E-mail: iamfwhuo@njtech.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd January 2015
    , Accepted 23rd March 2015First published on 24th March 2015AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of crystallized porous polymeric materials consisting of metal ions or clusters linked together by organic bridging ligands. Due to their permanent porosity, rich surface chemistry and tuneable pore sizes, MOFs have emerged as one type of important porous solid and have attracted intensive interests in catalysis, gas adsorption, separation and storage over the past two decades. When compared with pure MOFs, the combination of MOFs with functional species or matrix materials not only shows enhanced properties, but also broadens the applications of MOFs in new fields, such as bio-imaging, drug delivery and electrical catalysis, owing to the interactions of the functional species/matrix with the MOF structures. Although the synthesis, chemical modification and potential applications of MOFs have been reviewed previously, there is an increasing awareness on the synthesis and applications of their composites, which have rarely been reviewed. This review aims to fill this gap and discuss the fabrication, properties, and applications of MOF composites. The remaining challenges and future opportunities in this field, in terms of processing techniques, maximizing composite properties, and prospects for applications, have also been indicated.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordination polymers (PCPs), are a class of crystallized porous polymeric materials formed by the coordination of metal ions/clusters and organic bridging ligands. Although the synthesis of coordination polymers with microporous structures such as Prussian blue can be traced back to the 18th century,1 the systematic studies of MOF synthesis and their applications only started about two decades ago. The pioneering work was carried out by Robson,2,3 Moore,4,5 Yaghi,6 and Zaworotko7 in early 1990s. From then on, attracted by the vision that such materials can be incorporated with designed structural, magnetic, electrical, optical, and catalytic properties by choosing appropriate metal ions and organic ligands, many scientists started to join this young but dynamic field. With their efforts, many synthetic strategies have been developed to form MOFs with different crystal structures, pore sizes and surface chemistry.8,9
When compared with other porous materials, such as zeolites, active carbon and mesoporous silica, MOFs show a better chemical tailorability owing to the diverse functional groups on their frameworks. This rewards MOFs with potential applications beyond the traditional areas of porous materials (such as molecule storage,10,11 separation,12,13 and catalysis14,15), which mainly utilize the porous structure of the materials.16–18 However, the fragileness of the functional groups in the ligands of MOFs greatly restricts the development and application of functional MOFs. For applications such as sensing and catalysis, robust MOFs are required, which excludes many MOFs formed using room temperature synthetic strategies because the MOFs synthesized at low temperature are rarely highly thermally or chemically stable.19 To form sturdy MOFs, elevated temperature, solvothermal reactions or microwave irradiation are often employed to activate the coordination reactions. These, on the other hand, degrade the active functional groups on the ligands and thus restrict the functionality of the synthesized MOFs. Some alternative approaches have been developed to circumvent these issues and the use of a post-synthetic method (PSM) is one popular strategy among them. Through chemical modification of the organic linkers in the MOFs with designed functional groups, this method can introduce functionalities into the preformed MOFs.20,21
The study of MOFs was originally carried out by chemists from the fields of coordination and solid-state/zeolite chemistry. Recently, MOFs have also attracted the growing attention of material scientists. Like the use of PSM via a series of chemical reactions was adopted by chemists to introduce the functionalities, material scientists learn from the development of composite materials and tend to impart functionality into the MOFs by the integration of functional species, such as organic dyes, small bio-molecules, NPs, NWs, nanofibers and polymers, through the formation of composites.22,23 MOF composites can be made either by ① growing or depositing MOFs on a two-dimensional planar or curved substrate to form thin films or ② incorporating MOFs with other components to form mixed structures. The preparation and applications of MOF thin films grown on different substrates have been fully reviewed by Bradshaw and Fischer, separately.24,25 Therefore, this review will focus on the second case and will try to provide a broad overview of the MOF composite materials that have been reported to date. The strategies employed to synthesize MOF composites according to their formation process have been introduced first and their potential applications and adopted application-specific configurations of MOF composites are discussed. Finally, the current challenges and future opportunities of MOF composites, in terms of processing techniques, maximizing composite properties, and prospects for applications have been provided.
2. The formation of MOF composites
A composite is a solid material composed of two or more substances, which retain their own identity while contributing desirable properties to the whole system. Usually, there is at least one substance dominating the material, which is denoted as the matrix. Therefore, the MOF composites formed are described as A/B in this study, in which A stands for the functional species and B denotes the matrix materials as adopted by Stock and Biswas.19 Such notations have also been adopted by the nomenclature of the traditional composite materials.26 The physical fragility of MOFs has greatly limited their fabrication processibility.27 Thus, MOF/A composites, in which the MOF crystals are embedded into one continuous, flexible matrix, have been produced for applications such as small molecule separation, purification and catalysis. The matrix in such structures not only allows the reuse and recovery of the MOFs, but also enhances the formability of the MOF materials. Apart from functional species, MOFs themselves can also serve as matrices for applications such as heterogeneous catalysis and drug delivery, which correlate to the functionalities stemming from the MOFs and the active species having been imparted. In these applications, MOFs are the stabilizing matrix materials to provide confined spaces for the functional species. The unique structures of MOFs not only restrict the possible diffusion and aggregation of species loaded in the MOFs, but can also change the reaction pathways taking place, thus leading to new catalytic properties.
2.1 MOFs as functional species
The applications of MOFs for molecule storage, separation and catalysis are limited by their poor processability. To circumvent this difficulty, researchers started to investigate the incorporation of MOF crystals into polymer matrices. Polymers have the advantage of good mechanical, thermal and chemical stability. Moreover, the good formability of polymers also eases the fabrication of their composites. Apart from polymers, inorganic materials such as porous silica and porous alumina have also been used as matrices. Based on the processes involved, the formation of MOF/matrix composites can be categorized as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  An overview of the MOF composites and their corresponding synthesis methods. The composites are categorized as (a) MOFs as functional species and (b) MOFs as matrix materials. 

2.1.1 The formation of MOF composites by the solution blending method. 
The solution blending method is briefly described as follows. Mechanical stirring or sonication is applied to a mixture of the polymers and functional species to enhance the homogeneity of the incorporated materials in solution before the solvent is vaporized to leave a polymer-based composite. As many polymers can dissolve into liquid solvents, this method has been widely used in the synthesis of polymer-based composites.28 Flexible MOF/polymer membranes, such as HKUST-1/PMMA,29 ZIF-8/PI,30 ZIF-90/matrimid,31 MOF-5/matrimid,32 HKUST-1/matrimid,33 Cu-BPY-HFS/matrimid,34 CuTPA/PVA35 and ZIF-8/PSU,36 have been produced using this method. The ease of mass production makes these MOF/polymer membranes in high demand for industrial applications. However, the variation in the MOF lattice resulting from the host–guest interactions of the MOF structures when the solvents are removed leads to a weak adhesion between the polymers and the MOF particles. Moreover, the MOF/polymer membranes formed are often highly defective with uncontrollable voids inside their structures. These issues are undesirable in membranes used for gas separation and liquid filtration. To improve the compatibility between the polymer matrices and MOF particles, N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroaceamide was used as a silyating agent to modify the surface of the MOF particles (HKUST-1, MIL-47, MIL-53 and ZIF-8) before they were incorporated into PDMS.37 The gas diffusion properties of the membranes formed were studied and an improvement in the gas transport was shown in these MOF/PDMS composite membranes.


2.1.2 The formation of MOF composites by electrospinning. 
As a technique to produce fibre structures in polymer engineering, electrospinning has also been employed in the synthesis of MOF/polymer composites. This process can be simply described as follows. A high voltage is applied to a liquid droplet to make it charged, then the high cohesion of the molecule to liquid leads to the formation of a charged liquid jet and the fast vaporization of the solvent during the liquid jet flight results in the formation of fibre composites. This technique allows for an easy generation of fibre composites from a wide variety of MOF/polymer combinations. Moreover, the diameters of the fibres and the MOF loadings can also be tuned by varying the polymer concentration and polymer to MOF ratio in the spun mixtures. ZIF-8/PVP,38 HKUST-1/PS,39 ZIF-8/PS and MIL-101(Fe)/PS40 fibrous composites have been produced using this method. With a combination of the facile electrospinning technique and the diverse functionalities of the MOFs, the MOF/polymer composite fibres not only show many applications in the fields of gas separation but can also be potentially used for personal protective systems to remove toxic gases in the environment.39


2.1.3 
            In situ growth of MOFs in the matrices. 

In situ growth is another widely used method to form MOF composite materials. The matrices are immersed into a solution containing MOF precursors and then heated to a designed temperature to induce the growth of the MOFs on the internal/external surface of the matrices, which yields the formation of the MOF composite. Porous metal oxide spheres and porous polymer membranes have been used to synthesize MOF composites using this method.
Silica and alumina microspheres are widely used matrices for the in situ growth of MOF composites. Using the solvothermal reaction of a HKUST-1 precursor solution in the presence of silica microspheres, HKUST-1 particles are formed and attached firmly on the silica spheres with adjustable porosity.41,42 The SIM-1/alumina spheres formed using the in situ growth of SIM-1 (a substituted imidazolate-based MOF) onto α- or γ-alumina beads under mild heating conditions was reported by S. Aguado et al. (Fig. 2a).43 Interestingly, the SIM-1 crystals cover the α-alumina beads to form a core–shell type structure, whereas the majority of the MOF crystals reside within the cavities of the support when γ-alumina was used. The latter structure is particularly attractive for catalysis applications owing to its good mechanical strength and attrition resistance.
 Fig. 2  The growth of MOFs in the matrices. (a) SIM-1 supported on γ-alumina and α-alumina beads. (1–2) SEM images of the beads and cross-sectional view. (3–4) SEM image and (5–6) EDS mapping of the core and surface. Reproduced from ref. 43. (b) Digital image of HKUST-1/PAM beads. (c) Digital image of HKUST-1/HCM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The in situ growth method shows its advantage in palliating the low surface area of MOF composites resulting from the blockage of the MOF pore aperture by polymer chains, which is one key issue in the solution blending and electrospinning processes. For example, MOF/polymer foam was prepared by the direct synthesis of UiO-66 over the PU foam template.44 The composited foam not only maintains the macrostructure and flexibility of PU foam, but also exhibits the micro-porosity, high surface area, and adsorption properties of UiO-66. By the in situ growth of MOF crystals, HKUST-1 and ZIF-8 on PSU based porous asymmetric ultrafiltration membranes have also been synthesized.45 Apart from foams and membranes, macro-beads of MOF composites (Co-CPO-27/PAM and HKUST-1/PAM) have also been synthesized using the solvothermal reaction of PAM beads in MOF precursor solutions or via loading the metal ions onto the pre-swelled PAM beads, and immersing the beads into the ligand solutions followed by a solvothermal reaction (Fig. 2b).46 Using a step-by-step impregnation and crystallization process, monolithic HCM has also been used as the matrix in which HKUST-1 crystals were synthesized in situ to form a HKUST-1/HCM composite (Fig. 2c).47


2.1.4 Surface coating with silica or polymers. 
MOFs can be used for bio-applications such as the bio-imaging and drug delivery. Due to the cytotoxicity and intrinsic instability of many MOFs under physiological conditions, the as-synthesized MOFs are typically further coated with thin silica or bio-polymer shells to optimize their in vivo performance.17,48 The silica/polymer coating can also be used to control the release of loaded drugs in the MOF cavities during drug delivery.48 Moreover, these shells are also platforms for surface modification to improve the water dispersity of the MOFs and to add the affinity of the MOFs to the molecules to target specific cells or tissues, thus providing the MOF composites with many potential advantages over their pristine counterparts. A silica layer is usually prepared using the slow hydrolysis of TEOS on the MOF surface under acidic conditions. By applying this process, Rieter et al. have covered the MOF NPs made up of a cisplatin derivative and Tb3+ ions with a silica shell of around 7 nm.49 Liu and co-workers have reported the stabilization of a phosphorescent ruthenium MOF [Ru-{5,5′-(CO2H)2-bpy}(bpy)2](PF6)2([L-H2](PF6)2) with amorphous silica shells.50 The targeting efficiency of this MOF composite was further improved by a surface coating of PEG and PEG–anisamide (AA). Taylor et al. synthesized two Mn-MOFs: Mn(1,4-BDC)(H2O)2 and Mn3(BTC)2(H2O)6, which were then coated with thin silica shells and subsequently functionalised with a cyclic peptide c(RGDfK) and a fluorescence dye-Rhodamine B for the target-specific imaging applications.51


2.1.5 Other methods. 
Kaskel et al. have demonstrated the incorporation of HKUST-1 particles into polyHIPEs using a three-step synthetic route:52 ① the synthesis of a macroporous polymeric support based on 4-vinylbenzyl chloride cross-linked with divinylbenzene; ② hydrophilization of polyHIPE by introducing hydroxyl groups into the material; and ③ impregnation with the precursor solution and hydrothermal synthesis of HKUST-1 within the interconnected voids of the macroporous monolith. As the polyHIPE composite enclosing the MOF crystals can be synthesized with a user-defined geometry, this synthetic technique can enhance the workability of the MOF composites produced.

2.2 MOFs as matrix materials
As the matrix materials in composites, MOFs show many unique properties when compared with other porous solids. ① The nanometre scaled cavities of the MOFs can be accessed by reactants from the exterior environment and thus allow the direct reaction and formation of active species inside the frameworks. ② The internal surfaces of the MOFs are chemically tuneable to optimize the molecule adsorption/binding and chemical reactions. ③The designed porous matrices make MOFs excellent sieving materials.

2.2.1 Impregnation of MOFs with functional species. 
MOFs can be impregnated with precursors through a diffusion/deposition process owing to their accessible pores to metal ions and small molecules. The procedure usually consists of two steps: ① MOF solids are immersed into a solution containing the precursors for impregnation, and ② the adsorbed precursors were either the final active species or further reacted (by reduction, decomposition or other chemical pathways) to form a new functional phase inside the MOF matrices. MOFs provide a confined space to limit the growth of these functional species and impede their agglomeration. Therefore, highly stable MOFs are often required as a sequential of reactions, which can damage or degrade the MOF crystals, may be necessary before the formation of final MOF composites.
To impregnate the precursors into the MOFs under solvent conditions, three loading strategies, namely, direct adsorption, incipient wetness and ion exchange, have been employed. The process of direct adsorption can be described as follows: MOF powders are immersed into a solution containing metal ions without considering the stoichiometry of the MOFs and metal ions. Metal NPs usually grow indiscriminately inside the MOF cavities and on the outer surface of the MOF in this approach due to the out-diffusion of precursors during their reduction. Therefore, an incipient wetness infiltration method has been developed to control the spatial distribution of the NPs inside the MOFs. Incipient wetness infiltration was once a commonly used technique for the synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts. Typically, the metal precursor is dissolved in a solution, which is added to a catalyst support containing the same pore volume as the volume of the solution that was added. The capillary action draws the solution into the pores, and solution added in excess of the support pore volume causes the solution transport to change from a capillary action process to a diffusion process, which is considerably slower. The product can then be calcined to remove the volatile components and leave the deposited metal catalysts. This method has been employed for the synthesis of Pd NP/MOF-5,53 Pd NP/MIL-10154,55 and Pt NP/MIL-101 composites.56 To further inhibit the growth and aggregation of NPs on the external surface of MOFs, double solvents have been used for the precursor loading by Xu's group (Fig. 3a).56,57 Both a hydrophilic solvent (water, containing the metal precursor with a volume set equal to or less than the pore volume of the adsorbent) and a hydrophobic solvent (hexane, suspending the adsorbent and facilitating the impregnation process) are used. Through this method, Pt NPs (size 1.2–3 nm)56 and AuNi NPs (size 2–5 nm) have been successfully incorporated into MIL-101 (Fig. 3b).57 Ion exchange is another loading method (Fig. 3c) that is mainly used in the synthesis of Pd NP/MOF composites. The complexes of PdCl42−-MIL-NH3+ are formed by mixing MIL serial MOFs (such as MIL-53(Al), MIL-101(Cr) and MIL-53(Al)-NH2, which contain or have been post-functionalised with amine groups) with a solution containing PdCl42−. The mixture was then reduced using NaBH4 to yield Pd NP/MOF composites.58–60 Due to the good dispersion of Pd NPs in the composites formed and the high chemical stability of the MIL-MOF structures, these materials show high chemical activity in the catalytic reactions.6
 Fig. 3  An overview of the strategies used to form MOF composites via the impregnation of functional species. (a) A schematic representation of the formation of metal NP/MOF composites by a double-solvent method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) TEM images of the composites of AuNi NP/MIL-101 obtained via reduction using different amounts of NaBH4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration of the ion exchange method to form Pd NP/MOFs bearing amine groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) The DXP/MOF composite formed by vapour deposition. Reproduced from ref. 62. (e) and (f) The scheme for Pd NPs formation in the SNU-3 MOF via auto-redox and the TEM image of the Pd NPs/SNU-3 obtained, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Without further treatment, cluster/MOF and molecule/MOF composites are the products usually formed after the impregnation process. For example, the large mesoporous cage (34 Å) and microporous window (16 Å) of MIL-101(Cr) allows easy loading of POM clusters, a class of solid-acid catalysts used for many acid-catalysed organic transformations and industrial applications, within their pores through liquid filtration.61 Other clusters such as the highly emissive perylene derivative DXP and the iridium complex FIrpic have also been incorporated into MOF-5, MOF-177, UMCM-1 and MIL-53(Al) using vapour deposition and a loading rate of 1.4 wt% for DXP/MOF-5 and 8 wt% for DXP/UMCM-1 was reported (Fig. 3d).62
In most of cases, however, the employment of additional chemical treatments such as hydrolysis or chemical reduction are necessary to convert the impregnated precursors into the final functionalized species. A (ZnO)2/MOF-5 composite has been synthesized via the vapour deposition of a Zn-organometallic precursor in MOF-5 followed by a mild hydrolysis/oxidation process.63 ZnO NP/MOF-5 and TiO2 NP/MOF-5 were synthesized through the dry oxidation of loaded metal compound precursors such as ZnEt2 and Ti{OCH(CH3)2}4 in MOF-5 crystals into their metal oxides, respectively.64,65 Metal nitride NPs embedded inside MOFs have also been formed through a similar chemical pathway.66 A GaN NP/ZIF-8 composite was synthesized by loading ZIF-8 with [(CH3)3NGaH3] via vapour deposition, which yields (H2GaNH2)3/ZIF-8 through ammonia treatment and the intermediate eventually gave a GaN NPs/ZIF-8 composite through further annealing.
Chemical reduction happens in the procedure of converting metal ions impregnated inside MOFs into metal NPs. The reduction can be carried out by the MOFs themselves or with the assistance of external stimuli such as reducing agents, solar light, UV and even microwave irradiation. Auto-redox takes place when MOFs bearing redox sites such as reductive functional groups on the ligands or metal nodes with low oxidation potential are used. The idea of synthesizing metal nanostructures encapsulated via redox sites in the porous materials is not totally new. Kim and co-workers have demonstrated the synthesis of single-crystalline Ag NWs of 0.4 nm diameter using CHQ NT as the template.67 The Ag+ ions in CHQ were reduced to Ag0 by the hydroxyl groups on the inner surfaces of CHQ and the Ag atoms were then packed along the hydroquinone channel to form Ag NWs. Although some MOFs used for the auto-redox of metal ions show more rigid structures compared with CHQ, it is interesting to note that the metal nanostructures formed via auto-redox MOFs are not defined by the MOF channels found in CHQ and NPs with average diameters considerably larger than the MOF pores are usually formed.
[Zn3(ntb)2(EtOH)2]·4EtOH (denoted as SNU-3) synthesized by Suh's group has been used to reduce Pd ions into NPs.68 Pd NPs with a size of 3–4 nm were formed inside the channels of SNU-3 owing to the redox of Pd2+ by 4,4′,4′′-nitrilotrisbenzoate (ntb3−) (Fig. 3e–f) and the doping amount of Pd NPs in the composite can be tuned by varying the immersion time of SNU-3 in the Pd(NO3)2 solution. Rb-CD-MOF and Cs-CD-MOF (CD = γ-cyclodextrin) containing cyclodextrin and OH− counter ions have also been used to form metal NP/MOF composites through auto-redox reactions.69 After immersing the CD MOFs into AgNO3 or HAuCl4 solution separately, Ag NPs (∼2 nm) and Au NPs (3–4 nm) were formed inside the matrices. As these CD-MOFs can dissolve in water to release the metal NPs into solution and also considering the antibacterial properties of Ag and Au NPs and the non-toxic MOFs, these MOF composites are potentially applicable in biomedicines.
Apart from active functional groups, the metal nodes in MOFs can also act as redox sites. The oxidation of Ni(II) to Ni(III) sites in Ni-MOF has been employed to reduce the metal ions in MOFs.70–73 Three Ni(II)-MOFs, [{Ni(C10H26N6)}3(bpdc)3]·2C5H5N·6H2O, {[Ni(cyclam)]2[BPTC]}n·2nH2O, and {[Ni(cyclam)]2[TCM]}·2DMF·10H2O, have been applied to reduce the metal ions loaded (Ag+, AuCl4− and Pd2+) in their cavities into their corresponding metal NPs. Ag NPs of ∼4 nm, Au NPs of ∼2 nm and Pd NPs of ∼3 nm were synthesized in these three MOFs, respectively.
External stimuli have been widely used to reduce metal ions inside MOFs and yield metal NP/MOF composites. For example, a hydrogenolysis process has been developed to reduce the organometallic precursors inside MOF crystals and generate metal NP/MOF composites. The synthesis of Au NP/MOF-5 with (CH3)Au(PMe3) as the precursor,74 Cu NP/MOF-5 with (η5-C5H5)Cu(PMe3) as the precursor,74 Pd NP/MOF-5 with (η5-C5H5)Pd(η3-C3H5) as the precursor,74 Ru NP/MOF-5 with Ru(cod)(cot) as the precursor,75 Au NP/ZIF with Au(CO)Cl as the precursor,76 Ni NP/MesMOF-1 with NiCp2 as the precursor77 and Pd NP/MIL-101 with (η5-C5H5)Pd(η3-C3H5) as the precursor78 have been reported employing this process. Apart from hydrogenolysis, the metal ion/MOF intermediates can also be reduced by agents such as PVP, NaBH4 and N2H4·H2O to yield the final products, which are exemplified by the formation of Pd NP/MOF-5,79,80 Au@Ag core–shell NP/ZIF-8,81 and Au NP/MIL-101.82 In addition, microwave processing is one immerging techniques to activate/accelerate chemical reactions and has also been used for the synthesis of MOF composites. By the irradiation of the specific composites of metal ion/MIL-101 with microwaves, Pd-Cu NP/MIL-10183 and Cu NP/MIL10184 composites have been achieved. Last but not the least, heat treatment was also applied for the synthesis of MOF composites. The Pd NP/MIL-101 composite has been synthesized by the reduction of PdII/MIL-101 with the assistance of H2 at high temperature.85–87


2.2.2 The encapsulation of pre-synthesized structures into MOFs. 
Many properties of nano-objects such as quantum size effect, surface-enhanced Raman scattering, and superparamagnetism are their size, shape and composition related.88,89 The impregnation strategy lacks tuneability for these parameters in the incorporated structures and thus narrows the applications of the MOF composites. Novel strategies of encapsulating pre-synthesized nano-objects with the post-formation of MOF shells on their surfaces have been developed to circumvent this difficulty. The MOF shells can be formed either by post-growth in the MOF growth solution or via chemical conversion of the pre-deposited metal compound structures into MOFs.
2.2.2.1 MOF shells formed by a post-growth process. 
The formation of MOF shells is an interface related process, of which there are three general types: ① the “build-bottle-around-ship” method to encapsulate clusters into MOF composites, ② selective nucleation and growth of MOFs on the surface of an inorganic nanostructure, and ③ the heteroepitaxial growth of MOF shells on another MOF crystal surface.
A typical “build-bottle-around-ship” synthesis procedure has usually been adopted, in which the desired catalytic metallo-complex is encapsulated inside the nanopores/channels of porous materials in the presence of synthetic precursors of the porous materials. This method was originally employed to encapsulate metallocomplexes into the cage of zeolites90 and has been recently employed to synthesize MOF composites. POMs were chosen as the encapsulated clusters to form the cluster/MOF composites. Su and co-workers have synthesized POM/HKUST-1 composites (NENU-n, n = 1 to 6) by a one-step hydrothermal reaction of copper nitrate, 1,3,5-BTC and different types of POMs (Fig. 4a).91 NENU-n show high thermal stability and the high loading amount of POMs (∼50 wt%) exceeds that of most traditional POM-supported catalysts. However, copper carboxylate based MOFs usually dissolve in water and this might rule out their practical use for many aqueous phase applications. The more stable POM/MOF composites, POM/MIL-101(Cr)92 and POM/MIL-100(Fe),93 were synthesized and these two composites were found to be stable in aqueous solution with no POM leaching. Compared with NENU-n, these two composites also show considerably higher surface areas. The surface area decreases from >1000 m2 g−1 in pure HKUST-1 to ∼460 m2 g−1 for NENU-1, whereas the BET values of POM/MIL-101(Cr) and POM/MIL-100(Fe) are almost same as those of their pure counterparts.
 Fig. 4  An overview of the methods used to encapsulate the pre-synthesized structures into MOFs. (a) The encapsulation of POM clusters into HKUST-1 using the “build-bottle-around-ship” method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Au NP/HKUST-1 synthesized by the surface modification of MUA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic of the controlled encapsulation of NPs in ZIF-8 crystals with the assistance of PVP. Reproduced from ref. 99. (d) A schematic illustration of the heteroepitaxial growth of MOF@MOF structures with [M2(L)2(P)] (L = dicarboxylate; P = diamine pillar) isoreticular family. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) A schematic of the synthesis of the Au NR@MOF composite using a scarified template method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
To selectively nucleate and grow MOF shells on the surfaces of the incorporated nanostructures, chemical modifications of the functional structures with organic molecules such as surfactants or polymers are often carried out. The modified substances are added into the growth solution containing suitable MOF precursors and subsequently the MOF shells are constructed around their surfaces. Noble metal NPs are well-studied species for encapsulation due to their broad applications in heterogeneous catalysis and also because of the well-established surface modification techniques of noble metals. By functionalising the Au NPs with MUA and subsequently transferring them into a mixing solution containing Cu2+ and 1,3,5-BTC, Au NP@HKUST-1 core–shell crystals were synthesized (Fig. 4b and 5a).94 Here the symbol @ is adopted from the notation of core–shell nanostructures in nanoscience and nanotechnology.95 Au NP@MIL-100(Fe) and Pt NP@ZIF-8 composites have also been formed using this method.96,97 Furthermore, functional species beyond metal NPs can also be incorporated into MOF crystals using this approach with suitable surface treatments used to trigger the heterogeneous nucleation of MOF crystals. By heterogeneous nucleation of porous MOF networks on the outer surface of magnetic NPs, iron oxide NPs have been successfully incorporated into three MOFs (DUT-4, DUT-5 and HKUST-1).98 Huo's group reported the incorporation of diverse types of inorganic nanostructures, such as Au NPs, Pt NPs, CdTe NPs, Fe3O4 NPs, NaYF4 NPs, Ag nanocubes, β-FeOOH NRs, and even organic nanostructures such as PS nanospheres into ZIF-8 crystals by capping the nanostructures incorporated with PVP before the growth of ZIF-8 shells (Fig. 4c and 5b).99 In addition, controlled incorporation of multiple species within one ZIF-8 crystallite using this strategy was also demonstrated. In their following study, this method was further extended to the encapsulation of NPs into other MOFs such as ZIF-7, MIL-53 and MIL-101-NH2.100 Using a thin Cu2O layer to activate the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of ZIF-8, Tsung's group has synthesized yolk-shell Pd NP@ZIF-8 structures (Fig. 5c).101 The selective growth of the ZIF-8 shell was attributed to the similar binding properties expressed by zinc and copper ions to 2-methylimidazole, which enhanced the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of ZIF-8 on the surface of the metal NPs.
 Fig. 5  Electron microscopy images of the nanostructures@MOF composites. (a) TEM image of Au NP@HKUST-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) TEM images of ZIF-8 composites containing different types of NPs. (1) and (2) Hybrid crystals containing 3.3 nm Pt NPs. (3) Hybrid crystals containing Ag cubes (∼160 nm). (4) Hybrid crystals containing 180 nm PVP-modified PS spheres with surfaces that were partially coated with unmodified 13 nm Au NPs. (5) Hybrid crystal containing homogeneously distributed 13 nm Au and 34 nm Au NPs in the central area. (6) Hybrid crystals consisting of 34 nm Au NP-rich cores, 13 nm Au NP-rich transition layers and NP-free shells. Reproduced from ref. 99. (c) Pd nanocrystal@ZIF-8 yolk-shell nanostructures. (d) Enlarged TEM image of the yolk-shell nanostructure. The cores are Pd octahedra with edge sizes of 60 nm and the shells are microporous ZIF-8 with thickness of ∽100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM images of the Au NR@[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n core–shell composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The growth of MOF shells on the surface of another MOF crystal has also been investigated. Unlike the MOF composites discussed above, the formation of MOF core and MOF shell structures strongly relies on the close lattice mismatch between the two MOFs. Therefore, a heteroepitaxial property is usually shown between the two MOFs and a preferred crystal orientation along the MOF interface to maximize the coincidence between the two lattices was observed in the MOF heterostructures. For example, Kitagawa and co-workers have explored the heterometallic epitaxial growth of tetragonal [Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)] shell on the pre-formed [Zn2(ndc)2(dabco)] MOF surface using a solvothermal reaction of core-MOF in the growth solution of the shell-MOF (Fig. 4d).102 A perfect mismatch between [Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)] and [Zn2(ndc)2(dabco)] at the (100) surface was shown on the synchrotron X-ray diffraction pattern, whereas rotational growth of two Miller domains of the shell lattice was observed at the (001) surface with an average rotational angle of 11.7° between them (Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6  Characterization of the MOF@MOF structures. (a) A schematic model of the structural relationship between the core lattice [Zn2(ndc)2(dabco)] and the shell lattice [Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)] on the (001) surface. The red lines indicate the commensurate lattice between the core lattice and the shell lattice; the (5 × 5) structure of the core crystal or the (√26 × √26) structure of the shell. Two Miller domains of the shell crystal are grown on the (001) surface of the core crystal while maintaining the rotational angle (Δφav = 11.6518), which corresponds to the √26 direction of the (001) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) MOF crystal hybridization for sequentially functionalised systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Microscopy images of the core–shell MOFs (1) IRMOF-3(shell)@MOF-5(core) and (2) MOF-5(shell)@IRMOF-3(core). Reproduced from ref. 105. (d) SEM images of the MOF crystals (a mixture of bio-MOF-11 and bio-MOF-14). Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from metal nodes, the bridging ligands can also be varied to form MOF core-MOF shell structures, which was first demonstrated by Kitagawa's group (Fig. 6b).103,104 By controlling the location of individual functional ligands, the MOF@MOF structures with spatially separated porous networks of differential pore sizes and chemistry have been synthesized. A combination of small and large pore sizes in one heterogeneous structural crystal provides a simultaneous size selectivity and storage of small molecules. Koh et al. have prepared the IRMOF-1/IRMOF-3 core–shell MOF structures, which present good colour contrast arising from the colourless IRMOF-1 and orange IRMOF-3, and the core–shell structures can be synthesized in both ways (Fig. 6c).105 Li et al. have designed and synthesized a mixed MOF composite comprising of porous bio-MOF-11/14 and the less porous bio-MOF-14 by applying the ligand variation method (Fig. 6d).106
2.2.2.2 Chemical conversion of pre-deposited inorganic structures into MOFs. 
Conversion chemistry is a versatile approach for the conversion of one compositional nanostructure into another. Through the chemical conversion process, metal compound materials, which serve as both the source of metal ions and introduce the interface for MOF growth, have been used for the synthesis of MOFs. Kitagawa and co-workers have employed this method to synthesize Al2O3/[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n composites and Au NR@[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n NPs using the pseudomorphic replication of preformed Al2O3 structures (Fig. 4d and 5d).107,108 The conversion was realized by the reaction of alumina with the ligand (H2(1,4-ndc)) under high temperature in a microwave reactor. Apart from Al2O3, ZnO and Cu2O were also used as the conversion materials. ZnO@ZIF-8 NW arrays were formed by partial chemical conversion of the ZnO NW to ZIF-8 in DMF–H2O or 1-octanol with the assistance of 2-methylimidazole at elevated temperatures.109,110 As Cu2O can dissolve gradually in the mildly acidic growth solution of 1,3,5-BTC and direct the growth of HKUST-1, the encapsulation of pre-synthesized NPs into HKUST-1 can be achieved using NP@Cu2O core–shell nanostructures as the self-template.111 With the protection of the Cu2O shell, various NPs (Au NPs, Au NRs, Pd nanocubes, and Pt-on-Au dendritic NPs) can be easily encapsulated into HKUST-1 to form a yolk-shell structure without being aggregated or dissolved in the reaction mixture. As many metal compounds dissolve under acidic or basic conditions to give the metal ions at elevated temperature and given the fact that diversified types of metal compound core–shell nanostructures have been synthesized,112 it is expected that this method will be widely applicable for the synthesis of different types of nanostructure@MOF composites.


2.2.3 Other methods. 
One-pot synthesis, which is a strategy to improve the efficiency of a chemical reaction whereby a reactant is subjected to successive chemical reactions in just one reactor, was also applied in the synthesis of MOF composites. Tang's group recently reported the synthesis of Au NP/MOF-5, Au NP/ZIF-8, Au NP/IRMOF-3 and Ag NP/MOF-5 composites through the direct mixing and reaction of either Au or Ag and the MOF precursors in the reaction solution containing DMF, PVP and ethanol.113 Bandosz's group have demonstrated the synthesis of graphite oxide/MOF-5, graphite oxide/HKUST-1 and graphite oxide/Fe-MIL-100 composites using one-pot reactions of the mixing solutions of graphite oxide and the MOF precursors.114–116 The graphite oxide/MOF-5 composite prefers to adopt a lamellar structure constructed from alternative layers of graphite oxide and MOF-5. The formation mechanism was explained based on the interactions between the epoxy groups found on the graphene sheets and the oxide clusters in MOF-5.117 Similar laminar structures were also observed for the in situ synthesized graphene-porphyrin MOF composite.118 However, the other graphite oxide/MOF composites, such as the graphite oxide/HKUST-1 and graphite oxide/MIL-100, synthesized by Bandosz's group did not show such hierarchical structures. This architecture deference was attributed to the different growth mechanisms of HKUST-1, MIL-100 and MOF-5 on the surface of graphite oxide.
Apart from one-pot synthesis, a solid grinding strategy has also been employed to form MOF composites. By solid grinding of (Me)2Au(acac) with the MOF powders followed by H2 reduction at elevated temperatures, different Au NP/MOF composites (CPL-1, CPL-2, MIL-53, MOF-5, HKUST-1 and ZIF-8) have been synthesized.119–121

3. Applications of MOF composites
3.1 Small molecule absorption, storage and separation

3.1.1 Gas absorption and storage. 
Stimulated by the sharply rising level of atmospheric CO2, which is one of the greatest environmental concerns facing our civilization today,122 the adsorption/capture of CO2 is becoming one important application of MOF composites. GO/MOF or graphite oxide/MOF composites are well studied for this owing to their synergistic effects for the reactive adsorption of CO2 correlating to the active sites formed at the interface between the graphene layers and the MOFs.123 The capabilities of CO2 absorption are greatly enhanced for ZIF-8 and HKUST-1 when combined with GO or graphite oxide. The CO2 uptake increases from 27.2 wt% (pure ZIF-8) or 33 wt% (pure GO) to 72 wt% (ZIF-8 composite with 20 wt% GO) at 195 K for the GO/ZIF-8 composites.124 The graphite oxide/HKUST-1 composite shows a CO2 uptake as high as 4.23 mmol g−1 at room temperature, which is twice of that found for pristine HKUST-1 powder and 10 times higher than that found for graphite oxide sample.125 Apart from CO2, the absorption and removal of other toxic gases such as NH3, H2S and NO2 by MOF composites have also been investigated.45,126–128
Hydrogen storage is another important application of MOF composites. Energy sources with low or no carbon are expected to decrease the CO2 level in the environment and hydrogen is one of the most promising candidates. It has an energy density considerably greater than gasoline and emits no CO2 after burning. The H2 uptakes are generally represented as the excess and total adsorption amount.129 To date, the highest excess H2 storage capacity reported for MOFs is 99.5 mg g−1 at 56 bar and 77 K using NU-100 and the highest total H2 storage capacity reported is 176 mg g−1 (excess 86 mg g−1) using MOF-210 at 77 K and 80 bar.130,131 Moreover, MOFs show high hydrogen uptake at low temperatures, and they do not show advantages on hydrogen storage at room temperature when compared with other porous materials such as activated carbon and zeolites.132,133 The weak interactions between H2 molecules and the MOF structures at room temperature are believed to be one important reason. Therefore, new methods to enhance the interactions of MOFs with H2 by incorporating functional species have been developed and better hydrogen adsorption performances at room temperature were achieved by these MOF composites.
3.1.1.1 Optimization of the pore size distribution of MOFs with the incorporation of other porous materials. 
The large void spaces in MOFs are often not completely utilized for hydrogen storage and these spaces can be optimized by the incorporation of other microporous materials. Carbon materials have been widely used in composite systems for diverse applications. Particularly, CNTs have been used for the preparation of composite materials with enhanced gas storage capacity. The CNT/MOF-5 composite shows not only about a 50% increase in the hydrogen storage capacity (from 1.2 to 1.52 wt% at 77 K and 1 bar and from 0.3 to 0.61 wt% at 298 K and 95 bar) but also considerably improved environmental stability in the presence of ambient moisture when compared with pristine MOF-5.134 The incorporation of SWCNT into MIL-101 also results in an increase of hydrogen storage from 0.23 (pristine MIL-101) to 0.64 wt% (8 wt% SWCNT in MIL-101) at 298 K and 60 bar.135 Other carbon materials have also been used to enhance the hydrogen uptake of MOF composites. GO/HKUST-1 composite with a GO content of 9 wt% exhibits about a 30% enhancement in H2 capacity when compared with pristine HKUST-1 (from 2.81 wt% to 3.58 wt% at 77 K and 42 bar).136
3.1.1.2 Enhancing hydrogen storage using the “spillover” effect. 
The spillover effect involves the dissociative chemisorption of hydrogen on the surface of metal NPs to atomic hydrogen and its subsequent migration onto adjacent surfaces via diffusion. Combining this property with the high surface-volume ratio of MOFs, the metal NP/MOF composites are promising materials to enhance the hydrogen capacity. Two major approaches to facilitate the hydrogen spillover effect in MOF composites have been reported: ① building carbon bridges between the dissociative metals and MOFs and ② direct doping of dissociative metals (Pt, Pd, and Ni) into the MOFs.
A carbon bridge between the metal catalyst and MOF can form via the linkage of amorphous carbon through the carbonization of saccharides such as glucose or sucrose. With the bridging of metal catalysts and MOFs, the spillover effect takes place on the catalysts surface and the recombination of atomic hydrogen formed retarded by the MOF channels. Pt NPs are often used in combination with matrices such as IRMOF-8137–140 or MIL-101141 through the bridging reaction. The Pt NP/MOF composites formed show a significantly enhanced hydrogen capacity at room temperature and a capacity as high as 4 wt% achieved at 100 bar using Pt NP/IRMOF-8, which is considerably higher than that found with pristine IRMOFs (usually <1 wt% at room temperature).
The spillover effect of hydrogen also takes place in MOFs directly doped with metal NPs.53,68,142,143 Metal NP/MOF composites, such as Pd NP/MOF-5, Pt NP/MOF-177, Ni NP/MIL-101, Pd NP/MIL-100(Al) and Pd NP/{[Zn3 (ntb)2(EtOH)2]·4EtOH}n, have been synthesized by the reduction of metal ions inside MOF matrices and these composites show higher hydrogen capacities when compared with their pristine counterparts.
3.1.1.3 Formation of hydrides. 
Metal hydrides are also used as the storage medium of hydrogen. Latroche and Ferey et al. reported that the Pd NP/MIL-100(Al) composite shows an increased hydrogen uptake, twice that of the pristine MOF powder, at room temperature and 40 bar (the excess hydrogen capacity increases from 0.19 wt% to 0.35 wt%).144 The diffraction peaks of Pd shift with an increase in H2 pressure, indicating the formation of Pd hydride due to the insertion of hydrogen atoms at the interstitial sites of Pd. It should be noted that the hydride and dehydride processes are not reversible under mild conditions for many metals. Therefore, selecting a suitable metal is one key factor to enhance the hydrogen capability of metal NP/MOF composites. For example, Pt NP/MOF-177 adsorbed 2.5 wt% of H2 at room temperature and 144 bar in the first adsorption cycle. The capacity decreased to 0.5 wt% (close to that found with pure MOF-177) in the second cycle due to the irreversible dehydride process of Pt hydrides at room temperature.143


3.1.2 Liquid adsorption. 
MOFs have been investigated for the adsorption of harmful materials from liquids and the adsorption efficiency can be greatly enhanced with the introduction of metal ions/clusters or NPs inside the MOFs. Jhung's group have systematically studied the removal of sulfur-containing compounds (such as Th, BT and DMDBT) and nitrogen-containing compounds (such as QUI and IND) in fuels using MOF composites. They found that the adsorption capacity of BT using CuCl2-loaded MIL-47 (310 mg g−1 for CuCl2 (0.05)/MIL-47) was considerably higher than that of pure MIL-47 (231 mg g−1) and even higher than that of CuI-Y, which once showed the highest capacity (254 mg g−1).145,146 Upon loading CuCl, the adsorption capacity of CuCl/MIL-100(Cr) for QUI and IND improved by 9% and 15% when compared to that of pristine MIL-100(Cr), respectively.147 In these two cases, the enhancement of adsorption was attributed to the π-complexation effect of the Cu+ sites. They also introduced POM clusters into MOFs and the adsorption capacity of basic QUI increased by 20% with 1 wt% PWA impregnation in MIL-101.148 Apart from MIL-101, the impregnation of PWA in HKUST-1 also resulted in an increase of 26% in BT adsorption when compared with pure HKUST-1.149 Moreover, graphite oxide/MOF composites have also been used in adsorption studies.150 The graphite oxide/MIL-101 composite synthesized by Jhung's group shows the highest adsorption capacity for QUI and IND (863 mg g−1) among the adsorbents reported to date.
Apart from removing sulphur- and nitrogen-containing compounds in fuels, MOF composites have also been used to adsorb other adsorbates such as ethylene and toluene. The cuprous NP loaded MIL-101 shows an enhanced ethylene adsorption capacity and higher ethylene-ethane selectivity (14.0) when compared to pure MIL-101 (1.6).151 The PdCl2/MIL-101 composite shows excellent toluene adsorption and an uptake of 660 mg g−1 achieved using 3 wt% of PdCl2/MIL-101,152 representing an enhancement of 450% over that of unmodified MIL-101.


3.1.3 Molecule separation. 
MOFs are ideal materials for small molecule separation owing to their high surface area, adjustable pore dimensions, and tuneable surface functionality. However, given the fragility of MOFs, the formation of high quality MOF crystal membranes is still a great challenge. The fabrication of mixed-matrix membranes (MMMs) through the incorporation of MOF crystals with polymeric matrices is an alternative approach to solve this problem. One key advantage of such MMMs is that they combine the high processability and mechanical stability of polymers with the excellent gas separation properties of MOF solids. A short summary of the current publications reporting the gas separation performance of MOF/polymer membranes is listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Gas separation performance of MOF/polymer membranes




MOF/polymer
MOF loading
Permeability
Selectivity
Test conditions




MIL-53(Al)-NH2/copolyimide153
10–15 wt%
CO2, 57–137
H2/CH4, 34.7
35 °C, 3 bar


CO2/CH4, 35.8




MIL-101(Al)-NH2/copolyimide153
5–10 wt%
CO2, 53–151
H2/CH4, 67.3
35 °C, 3 bar


CO2/CH4, 42.2




ZIF-7/Pebax154
8–34 wt%
CO2, 41–145
CO2/CH4, 44
25 °C, 3.75 bar


CO2/N2, 105




Cu-bipy/PSF155
0–5 wt%


H2/CH4, ∼200
35 °C, 1 bar


CH4/N2, ∼10




MIL-53(Al)-NH2/PSF156
8–40 wt%
CO2, 5
CO2/CH4, ∼25
35 °C, 3 bar


MIL-101/PSF157
0–24 wt%
O2, 6
O2/N2, 5–6
30 °C, 3 bar


HKUST-1/PSF45




H2/CO2, 7.2
25 °C, 2.75 bar


H2/C3H6, 5.7




HKUST-1/PPO158
10–50 wt%


CO2/N2, ∼25
30 °C


CO2/CH4, ∼30




H2/N2, ∼25




H2/CH4, ∼30




ZIF-8/6FDA-durene159
33.3 wt%
H2, 2136
H2/CO2, 12
35 °C, 3.5 bar


N2, 137
H2/N2, 141




O2, 449
H2/CH4, 203




CH4, 140






MIL-53 (Al)/polyimide160
20–40 wt%


CO2/CH4, 77




Cu-BPY-HFS/matrimid34
10–40 wt%


CH4/N2, 1.21




ZIF-8/matrimid30
0–80 wt%
O2, 1.13–5.88
H2/CO2, 3–4
35 °C, 2.7 bar


CO2, 4.72–24.55
CO2/CH4, 44–125




H2, 18.07–71.22






ZIF-90/6FDA-DAM31
15 wt%
CO2, 590–720
CO2/CH4, 37
25 °C, 2 bar


HKUST-1/matrimid33




CO2/N2, 23–27
35 °C, 10 bar


HKUST-1/polyimide161




H2/CO2




CO2/N2






Apart from gas separation, MOF containing MMMs have also been used for liquid separation. The MMMs with MOFs (HKUST-1, MIL-47, MIL-53(Al) and ZIF-8) as the dispersed phases in PDMS have been used for the separation of Rose Bengal (RB) from isopropanol.37 An increased permeance from 0.54 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 (unfilled PDMS membranes) to 0.7–0.9 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 was reported. Sorribas et al. have synthesized MMMs containing a range of 50–150 nm MOF NPs (ZIF-8, MIL-53(Al), NH2-MIL-53(Al) and MIL-101(Cr)) in a PA thin film layer and the organic solvent nanofiltration of the membranes was evaluated on the basis of MeOH, THF permeances and the rejection of styrene oligomers.162 MeOH and THF permeance increased when the MOF particles were embedded into the PA layer, whereas the rejection remains higher than 90% in all the membranes. The permeance was also enhanced with an increase in the pore size and porosity of the MOFs. Within all the membranes, the membrane using MIL-101(Cr) (pore size ∼3.4 nm) leads to an exceptional increase in permeance from 1.5 to 3.9 and from 1.7 to 11.1 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 for MeOH/PS and THF/PS, respectively.
Through the coating on the surface of porous oxide microspheres, MOFs can also be employed as the stationary phase in liquid chromatography for molecule separations. Ameloot et al. have prepared silica@HKUST-1 particles for the separation of ethylbenzene/styrene and the particle column shown to be extremely effective in the separation of ethylbenzene and styrene with a relatively low back pressure (Fig. 7a).41 As a comparison, a pure HKUST-1 column also can separate these components but the peaks are considerably broader (Fig. 7a-1), whereas the bare silica column has no observable resolution (Fig. 7a-2). The separation of toluene/ethylbenzene/styrene and toluene/o-xylene/thiophene using silica@HKUST-1 microspheres packed columns has also been demonstrated. (Fig. 7b–c).42 When a pure silica packed column was employed, the three xylene isomers were eluted as a single broad peak (Fig. 7c-1). The separation can be easily realized using a silica@HKUST-1 packed column (Fig. 7c-2). The silica@ZIF-8 microspheres have also been used as the stationary phase and a high column efficiency (23000 plates m−1 for bisphenol A) for the HPLC separation of endocrine-disrupting chemicals and pesticides achieved.163
 Fig. 7  The application of MOF composites for fast separation. (a) HPLC experiments for the separation of mixtures of ethylbenzene and styrene on: (1) a pure HKUST-1 column, (2) an unmodified column of Nucleosil-100 silica and (3) the HKUST-1-silica composite column. In chromatogram (3), ethylbenzene is eluted first with a retention time of 4.1 min followed by styrene at 12.3 min. The separation factor for this mixture is 5.2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) A SEM image of the silica@HKUST-1 particles. Reproduced from ref. 42. (c) (1) A chromatogram showing that the column packed with silica particles cannot separate styrene and ethylbenzene. (c) (2) A chromatogram for the column packed with silica@HKUST-1 particles used for the separation of toluene 1, ethylbenzene 2, and styrene 3. Reproduced from ref. 42. 

3.2 Catalysis
MOFs and their composites have emerged as novel materials with great potential in catalysis. The catalytic properties can stem from the MOFs themselves for pure MOF,14 the incorporated functional species in the MOF composites or a combination of both. The application of metal NP/MOF composites in heterogeneous catalysis has been fully reviewed by Dhakshinamoorthy and Garcia.164 Therefore, this study emphasises on the catalytic properties of MOF composites integrated with other functional species such as clusters and semiconductor NPs, which have not been fully reviewed to date.

3.2.1 Catalysis by cluster/MOF composites. 
POMs are polyatomic ions (usually anions) that consist of three or more transition metal oxyanions linked together by shared oxygen atoms to form large, closed 3-dimensional frameworks. The huge range of size, structure and elemental composition leads to POMs with a wide range of properties. In particular, the high thermal stability and reversible reducibility of the Keggin ions by accepting electrons make them good catalysts for a range of organic reactions such as epoxidation, alcohol oxidation, sulfoxidation and alkeyl arene oxidation.165 However, the low specific surface area, low stability under catalytic conditions and high solubility in aqueous solution restrict their catalytic applications. Owing to the higher surface area, enhanced chemical stability and easy reuse of the POM/MOF composites when compared with pristine POMs, the formation of POM containing MOF composites have attracted considerable attention.
The hydrolysis of an ester in excess water was employed as a demonstration of the catalytic properties of POM/HKUST-1 composites (NENU-n, n = 1–6).91 The NENU-n composites show superior catalytic activity when compared to most inorganic solid acids. Among all the synthesized NENU-n composites, NENU-3a had the highest catalytic activity of 313.8 mmol molacid−1 min−1, which even exceeds the best prior results of 275 mmol molacid.−1 min−1 obtained using H3PW12O40 immobilized in organo-modified mesoporous silica.166 The conversion of ethyl acetate reaches a maximum of >95% at ∼7 h (Fig. 8a).91 The PMo12−nVn (n = 1–3)/HKUST-1 composites were applied to the liquid hydroxylation of benzene with O2 and the phenol yield can reach up to 7.37% in 20 min and a high TOF of 44.2 h−1 was obtained.167 A comparison of the catalytic capabilities between POM/MOF and zeolite has been carried out through the esterification reaction of acetic acid with 1-propanol (Fig. 8b). POM/HKUST-1 outperforms zeolite Y and shows a conversion rate as high as 30% after 7 hours, compared with only 15% conversion in 7 hours for zeolite Y.168 Moreover, the POM/HKUST-1 composites also exhibit higher catalytic performances than pure HKUST-1 or γ-Al2O3, and γ-Al2O3 supported POM catalysts (Fig. 8c). The dehydration of methanol to dimethyl ether was employed to investigate the effect of the particle size of POM/HKUST-1 on their catalytic activity.169 NENU-1 with an average particle diameter of 23, 105, and 450 μm were prepared and it is interesting to note that the reaction can be carried out at a lower temperature when NENU-1 (23 nm) was used as the catalyst. Moreover, even the cheap methanol with a high water content can be used as the starting material when NENU-1 (23 nm) particles were used.
 Fig. 8  The catalytic capability of POM/MOF composites. (a) The results for the hydrolysis of an ester in the presence of NENU: (1) methyl acetate; (2) ethyl acetate; (3) methyl benzoate; (4) ethyl benzoate and (5) 4-methyl-phenyl propionate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The esterification reaction of acetic acid with 1-propanol. Conversion of acetic acid (1) without catalyst, on (2) hydrothermally synthesized micron-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2, (3) ultrastable Y zeolite (4) 65 nm-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2 and (5) 50 nm-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 168. (c) Conversion of methanol dehydration to DME over the catalysts: (■) Cu3(BTC)2, (●) γ-Al2O3, and NENU with the average particle diameters of (▼) 23, (▲) 105, and (◆) 450 μm at a pressure level of 0.6 MPa and LHSV of 2 h−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) The yields and selectivity over time for fructose dehydration using PTA(3.0)/MIL-101 in DMSO at 130 °C; ■ fructose retention, ● HMF yield, and ▲ HMF selectivity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
As copper carboxylate based MOFs degrade in water,170 researchers started to replace HKUST-1 with more chemically stable MOFs such as MIL-101. PTA (H3PW12O40) was encapsulated into MIL-101(Cr) and its catalytic capability for the selective dehydration of fructose and glucose to HMF tested.171 An HMF yield of 79% from fructose was obtained after 2.5 h and the TOF of the solid catalyst (reaction time of 10 min) was about 350 h−1. The HMF yield was 63% and the selectivity was 77% after 0.5 h for the dehydration of glucose (Fig. 8d). This PTA/MIL-101(Cr) can also be recycled under the same reaction conditions. Moreover, the POM/MIL-101(Cr) composite also shows the highest catalytic activity (TOF > 656 h−1) in all the studies reported to date for the Knoevenagel condensation reaction between benzaldehyde and ethyl cyanoacetate in solvents such as toluene, DMF and ethanol at 313 K.78


3.2.2 Catalysis by semiconductor/MOF composites. 
The applications of MOFs in light harvesting have recently attracted considerable attention. Apart from designing the MOFs with photoactivity such as UiO-66,172 amino-functionalised Ti(IV)MOF173 and Ru-based MOFs,174 an alternative way is the formation of semiconductor/MOF heterostructures with better capability in light harvesting owing to their synergistic effects. Although porphyrin-based MOFs are attractive for solar photochemistry applications, their absorption bands provide limited coverage in the visible spectral range. Jin et al. have functionalised a porphyrin-based MOF with CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs for the enhancement of light harvesting via energy transfer from the QDs to the MOF.175 This sensitization approach results in a >50% increase in the number of photons harvested by a single monolayer MOF structure with a monolayer of QDs on the surface of the MOF. By a solvothermal reaction of Cd(Ac)2·2H2O in DMSO in the presence of MIL-101 crystals, a CdSe NP/MIL-101 composite has been synthesized and the embedding of CdS NPs significantly increases the photocatalytic efficiency of the composite in the reaction of visible-light-promoted photocatalytic hydrogen production. The rate of H2 evolution increases from no detectable H2 evolution using the pristine MIL-101 to a maximum of ∼150 μmol h−1 after embedding CdS NPs on MIL-101.176

3.3 Biomedical applications
MOFs can be designed to respond to external stimuli such as heat, light and magnetic forces. The resulting microstructure evolutions show implications in disease therapy and the signal produced can be analysed for the health diagnosis. The review by Horcajada et al. has provided a detailed discussion on pure MOFs as drug carriers (including the cytotoxicity of MOFs, the interactions between MOFs and the loaded molecules, and controllable drug release by the designed MOF structures).17 Therefore, this section emphasises on the bio-applications of MOF composites, which could be MOFs bearing a surface coating to enhance their bio-compatibility or MOFs with embedded nanostructures to introduce more functionality.

3.3.1 Biomedical imaging. 
Silica/polymer coated MOFs have been studied in biomedical imaging owing to their unique fluorescence and magnetic properties.177 The silica coated phosphorescent ruthenium MOF [Ru-{5,5′-(CO2H)2-bpy}(bpy)2](PF6)2([L-H2](PF6)2) with high dye loadings has been synthesized by Liu and co-workers and the targeting efficiency of this material was further improved by coating with PEG–AA.50 This MOF composite is an efficient optical imaging contrast agent and exhibits excellent cancer specificity as demonstrated by uptake studies and confocal microscopy of H460 cells in vitro (Fig. 9a). A significant MLCT luminescent signal was observed in the confocal z section images for H460 cells incubated with the MOF composite and less luminescence was observed for H460 cells incubated with the non-targeted MOF. By further functionalization of the silica shell with contrast agents, MOF composites with multimode imaging properties have been achieved. Ln(BDC)1.5(H2O) 2 (Ln = Eu3+, Gd3+ or Tb3+ and BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) MOFs with surface modification using a silylated Tb-EDTA monoamide derivative (3′-Tb-EDTM) can selectively detect DPA, a major constituent of many pathogenic spore-forming bacteria, in the presence of biologically prevalent interferences such as amino acids.178 By the attachment of multifunctional polymer chains to Gd-MOF NPs, a novel theragnostic device with the bi-functions of tumour targeting and diagnostic imaging was prepared by Rowe and co-workers.179 Apart from imaging, the MOF NPs also show a dose-dependent inhibition of the growth of FITZ-HSA tumour cells in cell growth inhibition studies.
 Fig. 9  The applications of MOF composites in bio-imaging. (a) Confocal microscopy images of H460 cells that have been incubated without any particles (1), with a PEG-SiO2 coating (2) and with a AA-PEG-SiO2 coating (3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Merged confocal images of HT-29 cells that were incubated with different MOF NPs. The blue colour is from DRAQ5 used to stain the cell nuclei, whereas the green colour is from Rhodamine-B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) Overlayed DIC and confocal fluorescence images of the DRAQ5 channel (blue, nuclear stain) and the BDC-NH-BODIPY channel (green) of HT-29 cells incubated with no particles (left), 0.19 mg mL−1 of NPs (equivalent to 17 μM BODIPY) (middle) and 0.38 mg mL−1 of NPs (equivalent to 34 μM BODIPY) (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
The MOF@sillica core–shell NPs have also been used for simultaneous bio-imaging and drug delivery. A preliminary study on the utilization of MOF composites in MRI and anticancer drug delivery has been reported by the Lin group.51 They synthesized silica coated Mn-BDC MOF NPs and functionalized them with both a fluorophore and cell-targeting peptide. These particles display large transverse relativities (R2) of 112.8 mM−1 s−1 on a per NP basis. Moreover, the MOF particles with the targeting peptide also show enhanced uptake of c (RGDfK) when compared with those without the targeting peptide, which was confirmed by the confocal image studies (Fig. 9b).51 In their following study, the loading of an organic fluorophore and anticancer drug via covalent modification of the as-synthesized MOF NPs and the utilization of the system in optical imaging and anticancer therapy have been demonstrated in vitro (Fig. 9c).180 Laser scanning confocal microscopy studies on HT-29 human colon adenocarcinoma cells show fluorescent labelling in a dose dependent manner. The BODIPY fluorescence is present in cells incubated with MOF NPs but absent in cells without the MOF NPs.


3.3.2 Drug delivery. 
MOFs have been widely studied as drug carriers, in which the delivery process of medicines by intrinsic MOFs and the toxicity of the MOFs are the main concerns to be investigated. However, the manipulation of delivery and release pathways of drugs, which is critical during the therapy, has not been fully investigated in MOF systems to date. Therefore, this section emphasises on this immerging field and discusses the methods have been employed to control drug delivery and release in MOFs.
Although bio-recognition by MOFs has been reported,51 the manipulation of an intrinsic MOF drug cargo by magnetic forces has not been reported owing to the restricted cooperative interactions in the inorganic–organic network of MOFs. The combination of MOFs with magnetic NPs becomes an alternative solution to circumvent this difficulty. Upon conjugation with target-specific biomolecules, the magnetic NPs can travel into the human body via blood or lymphatic vessels and recognize the desired biological targets. In addition, the magnetic NPs can also direct therapeutic agents to a localized target by focusing an external magnetic field on the region.181 The magnetic NPs will heat up when subjected to a magnetic AC field due to the losses during the magnetization reversal process of the particles.182 The implication of magnetic hyperthermia to heat up the MOFs was first demonstrated by Kaskel et al. by triggering the release of drugs loaded in the γ-Fe2O3 NP/HKUST-1 composite by magnetic forces (Fig. 10a).98 The magnetic field induces heating of γ-Fe2O3 NPs, which was monitored at a frequency of 183 kHz and a specific absorption rate (SAR) of 11.1 W g−1 was calculated from the slope of the curve that is equivalent to 105.7 W g−1(Fe) (Fig. 10b). As a comparison, they also loaded HKUST-1 with ibuprofen using a wet infiltration technique and measured its release rate under different temperatures in the control experiment, which show a significantly accelerated release rate at higher temperatures.
 Fig. 10  The application of MOF composites in drug delivery. (a) SEM and TEM images of a HKUST-1-magnetite composite. (b) Magnetic heating curve of 324 mg (a) in 30 ml of ethanol at 183 kHz and a field strength of 1.7 kA m−1 giving a specific absorption rate (SAR) of 114.2 W g−1 based on the Fe content (X). The arrows indicate the initial release rates for ibuprofen at 20 and 40 °C. Reproduced from ref. 98. (c) EDX elemental mapping images of a single Au NR@[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n core–shell composite. (1) TEM image of the composite and elemental mapping images by (2) Au, (3) Al, (4) all merged, (5) O, and (6) C. (d) Evaluation of anthracene release from (1) core–shell composites and (2) [Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n crystals without Au NRs. The graphs show linear plots for the fluorescence intensity maxima of the released anthracene versus time with (red) and without (black) NIR light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from magnetic hyperthermia, local heat can also be converted from NIR light irradiation through the photothermal effect.183 The manipulation of molecule release from MOFs utilising the photothermal effect has been demonstrated by the NIR light controlled anthracene release from a Au NR@ [Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n composite.108 The release rate of anthracene from the channel of [Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n was enhanced by the heat produced through the highly efficient conversion of optical energy by Au NRs (Fig. 10d). The intensity of anthracene in the solution after 120 min was 13.4 times higher than the one without irradiation. Without the Au NR inside, the fluorescence intensity maxima measured after 120 min for the irradiated sample was only 1.4 times higher than the one without irradiation. Therefore, the burst release of anthracene was unambiguously attributed to the local heating generated by the Au NRs through photothermal conversion. Given the abundant types of bio-molecules/drugs that can be loaded into MOFs and the possibility of spatially controlling their release during their journey in the human body via local heating, these two strategies will show broad applications in the field of cell biology and clinic therapy.

3.4 Electrical applications
A combination of the high porosity of MOFs with protonic/electronic conductivity can open up a range of new applications such as electrical sensors and fuel cells. However, MOFs are typically poor conductors because their metal nodes are not in a redox active form and most organic ligands used in MOF synthesis do not facilitate electron transfer.184 Strategies to synthesis MOFs with enhanced conductivity rely on the use of redox active metal centres or/and organic linkers,185 or electron donor and acceptor building blocks,186 which suffer from some serious limitations in terms of their structural integrity upon redox changes and the conditions used to activate their conductivities.
To enhance the protonic conductivity of MOFs, Kitagawa's group has developed a hybridization method by filling the MOF channels with proton-carrier molecules such as imidazole or histamine (Fig. 11a).187,188 The synthetic proton conducting MOFs usually show conductivity ranging from 10−3 to 10−7 S cm−1.189,190 Owing to the strong host–guest interactions, the proton carrier molecule/MOF composite can generate a good proton conductivity larger than 10−3 S cm−1 at high temperature.
 Fig. 11  The electrical application of MOF composites. (a) Imidazole molecules are densely packed with a low mobility that adversely affects the proton-transport process. (1) This occurs in the bulk solid. (2) Imidazole accommodated in a nanochannel containing an active site with a high affinity to imidazole. The strong host–guest interaction retards the mobility of imidazole to afford low proton conductivity. (3) Imidazoles are accommodated in a nanochannel without strong host–guest interactions and therefore, the molecules obtain high mobility to show high proton conductivity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group. (b) The schematic structures of the graphene-porphyrin MOF composite and its DE voltammograms for graphene, (Fe–P)n MOF, (G 50 wt% –FeP)n MOF, G-dye 50 wt% –Fe–Porphyrin, (G-dye 50 wt% –FeP)n MOF and GO at a rotation rate of 2000 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of the PEC sensor with selectivity to H2O2, photocurrent responses of the ZnO@ZIF-8 NR array in the presence of H2O2 (0.1 mM) and AA (0.1 mM) and ΔI − ΔI0 curves in the presence of H2O2 and AA with the concentrations as functions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
To enhance the electrical conductivity of MOFs, GO, which can be reduced to form rGO, has been used for the synthesis of MOF composites. The combination of high surface area, the abundant functional groups in the MOFs with the good carrier conductivity and thermal stability of rGO makes their composites very suitable for electrocatalysis.191 By functionalising the GO surface and using it as the interlayer for MOF growth, Loh's group has synthesized a graphene-porphyrin MOF composite (Fig. 11b).118 This composite exhibits catalytic activity towards the ORR in an alkaline medium with an onset potential of ca. 0.93 V vs. RHE. The incorporation of G-dye into the MOF, as opposed to physical mixing of G-dye and MOF, offers better electrocatalytic behaviour (Fig. 11b-3) owing to the unique structure of the graphene-porphyrin MOF hybrid where the G-dye interconnects with the Fe-MOF in a 3D manner. Moreover, the large bond polarity and framework porosity of this MOF composite affords a near 4-electron ORR pathway. When compared with a commercial Pt catalyst, this porphyrin-MOF composite possesses a considerably higher selectivity for the ORR and significantly reduced methanol crossover effects. In the following study, they also synthesized a GO-copper cantered MOF composite.192 Due to the unique porous scaffold structure, improved charge transport and synergistic interactions between the GO and MOF, the GO-incorporated Cu-MOF composite exhibits smaller over potential and a higher current for all three electrocatalytic reactions (HER, OER and ORR) and better stability in acidic media when compared with the intrinsic Cu-MOF. Moreover, the GO-incorporated Cu-MOF composite delivers a power density that is 76% of the commercial Pt catalyst in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell testing, which indicates that this material is potentially a lower cost substitute to previously reported noble metal catalysts.
Owing to the molecular sieving properties of MOFs, their composites also show the implications in molecule sensing and detection. The application of MOF composites in electrical sensing has been demonstrated through the detection of H2O2 in a buffer solution using the ZnO@ZIF-8 NR arrays (Fig. 11c).109 H2O2 is considerably smaller in size than the aperture of ZIF-8 and its easy penetration induces the enhancement of the photocurrent response (Fig. 11c-2 and 11c-3), whereas ascorbic acid, a larger molecule, cannot penetrate the MOF shell and leads to the decrease in current, which confirmed that the ZnO@ZIF-8 NR arrays have a distinct PEC response to hole scavengers with different molecular sizes. Moreover, the positive influence of H2O2 on the PEC response of ZnO@ZIF-8 NRs is linear to the concentration of H2O2 within a certain range, indicating that the as-prepared MOF array can be used as a PEC-based sensor.
4. Conclusions
With more than twenty years development, MOF studies are shifting from the design and synthesis of functional crystal structures to the application and commercialization of MOFs and their derivatives. Composite formation is one alternative way to broaden the scope of applications for MOFs from gas absorption, separation and catalysis to new fields such as vapour sensing, drug delivery, and electrical applications. As the MOF structures may be destroyed during the formation of the composites, the stability and activity of MOFs under the processing conditions are key points to be addressed. The MOFs must be retained with a high surface area, ordered framework structure and full accessibility of their pores to the substrates and reagents. Therefore, before and after the formation of MOF composites, the materials should be characterized correctly to confirm their stability. The XRD of pristine MOFs and their composites should be compared to confirm that the crystal structures of the MOFs were retained. Data on the surface area and pore volume can be given by nitrogen isothermal adsorption measurements before and after processing.
Although considerable effort has been dedicated for the study of composite formation strategies, some drawbacks of these approaches restrict their potential utilization. Given the fact that abundant types of ligands with reducing functional groups and polyvalent metal nodes are available for the MOF synthesis, it might be expected that the auto-redox strategy is widely applicable to the synthesis of diverse types of metal NP/MOF composites. However, the MOF structures after the compounding process may degrade due to the oxidation of the functional groups or metal nodes as both of which can induce the collapse of the micropores. Moreover, the amount of NPs in the MOF composites is restricted by the maximum loading of metal ions in the incipient wetness filtration and ion exchange strategies. The solubility of the precursors in solution and the immersing time of the MOF powders determine the amount of metal ions loaded for incipient wetness filtration and the maximum loading in ion-exchange strategy depends on the amount of active sites in the MOFs. Therefore, simultaneously increasing the metal NP loading and avoiding their aggregation in the MOFs becomes one of the main challenges in the synthesis of metal NP/MOF composites.
In order to realize high performance separations for industrial applications, many improvements are required for the preparation of MOF contained MMMs. The size, dispersion of MOF particles and their interactions in the matrices are critical to the synthesis of high quality MOF MMMs. A high homogeneity and dispersion of MOF particles will improve the separation capability of the membranes. Therefore, surface functionalized, size-tuneable MOF particles are in high demand. However, the study on this is only at its infant stage and more effort should be dedicated to it in the future.193 Another key challenge for the fabrication of MOF MMMs is the trade-off between gas selectivity and permeability. The permeability of the MOF MMMs usually decreases with an increase in MOF content when small pore sized MOFs are used, whereas the gas selectivity enhances owing to the molecular sieve effect of the MOF crystals.194 The trend is adverse when MOFs with large pores are used.34 Moreover, the affinity of functional groups and the open metal sites in MOFs should also be considered for applications in gas storage and separation. For example, due to the interaction of the quadrupole moment of CO2 with the localized dipoles generated by heteroatom incorporation, polarizing groups such as –NH2 and –CF3 have a strong affinity to bind with CO2.194 Open metal sites can also enhance the CO2 adsorption by serving as effective binding sites in the MOF materials.12 Moreover, engineering of the interface between the dispersed MOF particles and the matrices is also another challenge for the synthesis of high quality MOF MMMs.195 As has been discussed in section 2.1, solvent-involved strategies are often employed towards the fabrication of MOF MMMs, which may induce the formation of uncontrollable voids in the composites. Therefore, solvent-free processes to enhance the adhesion between the MOF/polymer interfaces are needed.
Investigations on the new properties of MOF composites owing to the coupling and synergy effects that originate from the collective interactions between the two constituents are very rare. For example, oxide-supported metal NP/cluster catalysts are essential components of many important chemical processes required by modern industrial economies.196 Fundamental understanding of the roles of the supported oxide in the reactions has been intensively studied. When compared with metal oxides, the MOFs show richer surface chemistry and coupling effects can happen in the MOF channels when reactions catalysed by MOF composites are taking place. However, research on the catalytic properties of metal NP/MOF and cluster/MOF composites is at its early stage and a deep understanding of the possible interactions between the MOFs and the NPs/clusters during the catalytic reactions is still a long term vision.
Lastly, simulation is becoming an indispensable tool for MOF design and application taking advantage of the high-speed calculations of today's computer that can accelerate the generation of new insights.197 Currently simulations are mainly emphasised on the studies of the adsorption of gases, such as methane, hydrogen, and acetylene, in pristine MOFs. Given the fast development of MOF composite materials on molecular storage and separation, more effort on the simulation should be made to guide the design and optimize of MOF composite materials for better properties.
In summary, by the combination of MOFs and other functional species, the MOF composites synthesized show enhanced gas absorption, separation, storage capability and catalytic properties. Furthermore, the interaction of functional components/matrix materials with MOF structures can also widen the applications of MOF composites to new fields such as drug delivery/release, fuel cells and electrical catalysis. Although many challenges still remain, it is highly expected that the sustained research effort towards this exciting field will lead the practical application of MOF composites to be realized in the future.
List of abbreviations

AAAscorbic acid
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
BGFBenzoic-acid functionalized graphene
Bpdc4,4′-Biphenyldicarboxylate
BPTC1,1′-Biphenyl-2,2′,6,6′-tetracarboxylic acid
BPY4,4′-Bipyridine
BTBenzothiophene
CHQCalix[4]hydroquinone
CNTCarbon nanotube
CPOCoordination polymer of Oslo
CSPsChromatographic stationary phases
CVDChemical vapour deposition
Cyclam1,4,8,11-Tetraazacyclotetradecane
DAPDipicolinic acid
DMDBADimethyldibenzothiophene
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DXP
N,N-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-3,4:9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic diimide
FIrpic2-Carboxypyridyl)bis(3,5-difluoro-2-(2-pyridyl)phenyl)iridium(III)
FTOFluorine doped tin oxide
GOGraphene oxide
HCMHierarchical porous carbon monolith
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HIPEsHigh internal phase emulsions
HKUSTHong Kong University of Science and Technology
HMF5-Hydroxymethylfurfural
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatography
INDIndole
LBLLay-by-layer
MILMaterial of Institute Lavoisier
MLCTMetal-to-ligand charge transfer
MOFMetal–organic framework
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
MTXMethotrexate
MUA11-Mercaptoundecanoic acid
NIRNear-infrared region
NPNanoparticle
NTNanotube
NWNanowire
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PAPolyamide
PAMPolyacrylamide
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PECPhotoelectrochemical
PIPolyimide
PMMAPolymetylmethaacrylate
POMPolyoxometalate
PSPolystyrene
PSUPolysulfone
PTAPhosphotungstic acid
PUPolyurethane
PVAPoly(vinyl acetate)
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
QDQuantum dot
QUIQuinoline
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SWCNTSingle-wall carbon nanotube
TCMTetrakis[4-(carboxyphenyl)oxamethyl]methane
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TEOSTetraethyl orthosilicate
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
ThThiophene
TOFTurnover frequency
UIOUniversity of Oslo
UMCMUniversity of Michigan crystalline material
ZIFZeolitic imidazolate framework

Acknowledgements
S. Z. Li would like to thank the support of the start-up fund of Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications (NY213098) and the National Science Foundation of China (GZ213054).
Notes and references
L. Samain, F. Grandjean, G. J. Long, P. Martinetto, P. Bordet, J. Sanyova and D. Strivay, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2013, 20, 460 CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 5962 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1546 CrossRef CAS .
D. Venkataraman, G. B. Gardner, S. Lee and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 11600 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Gardner, D. Venkataraman, J. S. Moore and S. Lee, Nature, 1995, 374, 792 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, G. M. Li and H. L. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subramanian and M. J. Zaworotko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, L. Bai, W. Xiong, P. Li, J. Ding, G. Zhang, T. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Lee, Y. Yang, B. Geng and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, K. Ye, L. Yang, W. Xiong, L. Ye, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, H. J. Park, T. K. Prasad and D. W. Lim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wu, Q. H. Gong, D. H. Olson and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T. H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Li, J. Sculley and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoon, R. Srirambalaji and K. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, L. Bai, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Rakesh, J. Lee, Y. Yang and Q. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 2559 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, R. Gref, T. Baati, P. K. Allan, G. Maurin, P. Couvreur, G. Ferey, R. E. Morris and C. Serre, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, J. Miao, P. Li, W. Teng, L. Yang, Y. Zhao, B. Liu and Q. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3786 RSC .
N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Wang and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1315 RSC .
S. M. Cohen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu and Q. X, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5468 RSC .
I. Ahmed and S. Jhung, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bradshaw, A. Garai and J. Huo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2344 RSC .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081 RSC .

          K. K. Chawla, Composite Materials: Science and Engineering, 3rd edn, Springer,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. Millange, C. Serre, N. Guillou, G. Ferey and R. I. Walton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ben, C. J. Lu, C. Y. Pei, S. X. Xu and S. L. Qiu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 10250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. C. Ordonez, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Ferraris and I. H. Musselman, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 361, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Bae, J. S. Lee, W. L. Qiu, W. J. Koros, C. W. Jones and S. Nair, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Perez, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Ferraris and I. H. Musselman, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 328, 165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Basu, A. Cano-Odena and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 362, 478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Zhang, I. H. Musseman, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 313, 170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Adams, C. Carson, J. Ward, R. Tannenbaum and W. Koros, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 131, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Diaz, L. Garrido, M. Lopez-Gonzalez, L. F. del Castillo and E. Riande, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basu, M. Maes, A. Cano-Odena, L. Alaerts, D. E. De Vos and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 344, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ostermann, J. Cravillon, C. Weidmann, M. Wiebcke and B. M. Smarsly, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 442 RSC .
L. L. Fan, M. Xue, Z. X. Kang, H. Li and S. L. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25272 RSC .
Y. N. Wu, F. T. Li, H. M. Liu, W. Zhu, M. M. Teng, Y. Jiang, W. N. Li, D. Xu, D. H. He, P. Hannam and G. T. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16971 RSC .
R. Ameloot, A. Liekens, L. Alaerts, M. Maes, A. Galarneau, B. Coq, G. Desmet, B. F. Sels, J. F. M. Denayer and D. E. De Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 3735 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ahmed, M. Forster, R. Clowes, D. Bradshaw, P. Myers and H. F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3276 CAS .
S. Aguado, J. Canivet and D. Farrusseng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7999 RSC .
M. L. Pinto, S. Dias and J. Pires, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2360 CAS .
D. Nagaraju, D. G. Bhagat, R. Banerjee and U. K. Kharul, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8828 CAS .
L. D. O'Neill, H. F. Zhang and D. Bradshaw, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5720 RSC .
D. Qian, C. Lei, G. P. Hao, W. C. Li and A. H. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6125 CAS .
Y. J. Cui, Y. F. Yue, G. D. Qian and B. L. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. Pott, K. M. L. Taylor and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Liu, R. C. Huxford and W. B. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. L. Taylor, W. J. Rieter and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Schwab, I. Senkovska, M. Rose, M. Koch, J. Pahnke, G. Jonschker and S. Kaskel, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 1151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sabo, A. Henschel, H. Froede, E. Klemm and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3827 RSC .
A. Henschel, K. Gedrich, R. Kraehnert and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4192 RSC .
Y. Y. Pan, B. Z. Yuan, Y. W. Li and D. H. He, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2280 RSC .
A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Ronnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Zhu, J. Li and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. A. Huang, Z. L. Zheng, T. F. Liu, J. Lu, Z. J. Lin, H. F. Li and R. Cao, Catal. Commun., 2011, 14, 27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Huang, S. Y. Gao, T. F. Liu, J. Lu, X. Lin, H. F. Li and R. Cao, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Hwang, D. Y. Hong, J. S. Chang, S. H. Jhung, Y. K. Seo, J. Kim, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, C. Serre and G. Ferey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ferey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S. Surble and I. Margiolaki, Science, 2005, 309, 2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Muller, A. Devaux, C. H. Yang, L. De Cola and R. A. Fischer, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 846 Search PubMed .
S. Hermes, F. Schroder, S. Amirjalayer, R. Schmid and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2464 RSC .
M. Muller, S. Hermes, K. Kaehler, M. W. E. van den Berg, M. Muhler and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4576 CrossRef .
M. Muller, X. N. Zhang, Y. M. Wang and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Commun., 2009, 119 RSC .
D. Esken, S. Turner, C. Wiktor, S. B. Kalidindi, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Hong, S. C. Bae, C. W. Lee, S. Jeong and K. S. Kim, Science, 2001, 294, 348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. E. Cheon and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wei, S. B. Han, D. A. Walker, P. E. Fuller and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Moon, J. H. Kim and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, H. R. Moon, E. Y. Lee and S. Y. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. E. Cheon and M. P. Suh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Moon and M. P. Suh, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 3795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hermes, M. K. Schroter, R. Schmid, L. Khodeir, M. Muhler, A. Tissler, R. W. Fischer and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schroeder, D. Esken, M. Cokoja, M. W. E. van den Berg, O. I. Lebedev, G. van Tendeloo, B. Walaszek, G. Buntkowsky, H. H. Limbach, B. Chaudret and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Esken, S. Turner, O. I. Lebedev, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Park, S. B. Choi, H. J. Nam, D. Y. Jung, H. C. Ahn, K. Choi, H. Furukawa and J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3086 RSC .
J. Juan-Alcaniz, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, U. Lafont, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, J. Catal., 2010, 269, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Gao, N. Zhao, M. H. Shu and S. N. Che, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 388, 196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Dang, Y. H. Zhu, S. C. Ghosh, A. Q. Chen, C. L. L. Chai and A. M. Seayad, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1805 RSC .
H. L. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Liu, Y. L. Liu, Y. W. Li, Z. Y. Tang and H. F. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13362 CAS .
M. S. El-Shall, V. Abdelsayed, A. Khder, H. M. A. Hassan, H. M. El-Kaderi and T. E. Reich, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7625 RSC .
F. Wu, L. G. Qiu, F. Ke and X. Jiang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2013, 32, 5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Liu, Y. W. Li, R. Luque and H. F. Jiang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 3107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Z. Yuan, Y. Y. Pan, Y. W. Li, B. L. Yin and H. F. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Huang, Z. J. Lin and R. Cao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. S. Jin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8035 RSC .
N. S. Porter, H. Wu, Z. W. Quan and J. Y. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Z. Zhan and X. Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 1998, 349 RSC .
C. Y. Sun, S. X. Liu, D. D. Liang, K. Z. Shao, Y. H. Ren and Z. M. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Juan-Alcaniz, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, U. Lafont, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, J. Catal., 2010, 269, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Canioni, C. Roch-Marchal, F. Secheresse, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, M. Hardi-Dan, G. Ferey, J. M. Greneche, F. Lefebvre, J. S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, O. Lebedev, S. Turner and G. Van Tendeloo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1226 RSC .
T. Tsuruoka, H. Kawasaki, H. Nawafune and K. Akamatsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3788 CAS .
F. Wang, R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Han, H. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ke, J. F. Zhu, L. G. Qiu and X. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1267 RSC .
P. Wang, J. Zhao, X. B. Li, Y. Yang, Q. H. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3330 RSC .
M. R. Lohe, K. Gedrich, T. Freudenberg, E. Kockrick, T. Dellmann and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3075 RSC .
G. Lu, S. Z. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Y. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Han, X. G. Liu, J. S. DuChene, H. Zhang, Q. C. Zhang, X. D. Chen, J. Ma, S. C. J. Loo, W. D. Wei, Y. H. Yang, J. T. Hupp and F. W. Huo, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Li and F. W. Huo, Small, 2014, 10, 4371 CAS .
C. H. Kuo, Y. Tang, L. Y. Chou, B. T. Sneed, C. N. Brodsky, Z. P. Zhao and C. K. Tsung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furukawa, K. Hirai, K. Nakagawa, Y. Takashima, R. Matsuda, T. Tsuruoka, M. Kondo, R. Haruki, D. Tanaka, H. Sakamoto, S. Shimomura, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furukawa, K. Hirai, Y. Takashima, K. Nakagawa, M. Kondo, T. Tsuruoka, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5097 RSC .
K. Hirai, S. Furukawa, M. Kondo, H. Uehara, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koh, A. G. Wong-Foy and A. J. Matzger, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6162 RSC .
T. Li, J. E. Sullivan and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, N. Horike, M. Tsotsalas, K. Hirai, H. Uehara, M. Kondo, N. Louvain, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Kira Khaletskaya, M. M. M. Nakahama, S. Diring, S. I. Masahiko Tsujimoto, F. Kim, K.-i. Kamei, R. A. Fischer and S. F. Susumu Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8 Search PubMed .
W. W. Zhan, Q. Kuang, J. Z. Zhou, X. J. Kong, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao and F. W. Huo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 1017 CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, W. N. Zhang, S. Z. Li, C. L. Cui, J. Wu, H. Y. Chen and F. W. Huo, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. He, Y. Liu, J. Z. Liu, Y. S. Xiong, J. Z. Zheng, Y. L. Liu and Z. Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit, J. Burress and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2011, 49, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4753 CAS .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishida, M. Nagaoka, T. Akita and M. Haruta, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jiang, B. Liu, T. Akita, M. Haruta, H. Sakurai and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jiang, Q. P. Lin, T. Akita, B. Liu, H. Ohashi, H. Oji, T. Honma, T. Takei, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Marc, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1413 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 447, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, K. Jayaramulu, T. K. Maji and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4947 RSC .
Y. X. Zhao, M. Seredych, Q. Zhong and T. J. Bandosz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4951 CAS .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4027 RSC .
C. Petit, B. Mendoza and T. J. Bandosz, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit, B. Levasseur, B. Mendoza and T. J. Bandosz, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 154, 107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. K. Salem, P. Braeuer, M. von Szombathely, M. Heuchel, P. Harting, K. Quitzsch and M. Jaroniec, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3376 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Farha, A. O. Yazaydin, I. Eryazici, C. D. Malliakas, B. G. Hauser, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. T. Nguyen, R. Q. Snurr and J. T. Hupp, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi, A. O. Yazaydin, R. Q. Snurr, M. O'Keeffe, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 329, 424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Thomas, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Dong, X. Y. Wang, H. Xu, Q. Zhao and J. P. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yang, J. Y. Choi, H. K. Chae, J. H. Cho, K. S. Nahm and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1893 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Prasanth, P. Rallapalli, M. C. Raj, H. C. Bajaj and R. V. Jasra, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. X. Sun, F. Xu, J. Zhang, C. L. Jiao, F. Li, Z. B. Li, S. Wang, Z. Q. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Y. Zhou, L. N. Yang and C. Schick, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 818 CAS .
Y. W. Li and R. T. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Tsao, M. S. Yu, C. Y. Wang, P. Y. Liao, H. L. Chen, U. S. Jeng, Y. R. Tzeng, T. Y. Chung and H. C. Wut, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Miller, C. Y. Wang and G. N. Merrill, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3222 CAS .
N. R. Stuckert, L. F. Wang and R. T. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anbia and S. Mandegarzad, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 532, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, J. Zhang, J. L. Zeng, H. L. Chu, F. Xu and L. X. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2008, 29, 655 CAS .
S. Proch, J. Herrmannsdorfer, R. Kempe, C. Kern, A. Jess, L. Seyfarth and J. Senker, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zlotea, R. Campesi, F. Cuevas, E. Leroy, P. Dibandjo, C. Volkringer, T. Loiseau, G. Ferey and M. Latroche, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 237, 180 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ahmed and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 251, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ahmed, N. A. Khan, Z. Hasan and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 250, 37 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 100, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ahmed, N. A. Khan and S. H. Jhung, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 14155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Chang, Z. B. Bao, Q. L. Ren, S. G. Deng, Z. G. Zhang, B. G. Su, H. B. Xing and Y. W. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20230 RSC .
W. P. Qin, W. X. Cao, H. L. Liu, Z. Li and Y. W. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2414 RSC .
B. Seoane, C. Tellez, J. Coronas and C. Staudt, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 111, 72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, Y. C. Pan, K. V. Peinemann and Z. P. Lai, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 425, 235 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Won, J. S. Seo, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, Y. S. Kang, S. J. Kim, Y. M. Kim and J. G. Jegal, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zornoza, A. Martinez-Joaristi, P. Serra-Crespo, C. Tellez, J. Coronas, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9522 RSC .
H. B. T. Jeazet, C. Staudt and C. Janiak, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2140 RSC .
L. Ge, W. Zhou, V. Rudolph and Z. H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6350 CAS .
S. N. Wijenayake, N. P. Panapitiya, S. H. Versteeg, C. N. Nguyen, S. Goel, K. J. Balkus, I. H. Musselman and J. P. Ferraris, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 6991 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, H. Vinh-Thang, D. Rodrigue and S. Kaliaguine, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 6895 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. P. Cai, H. Q. Ren, Y. M. Wei, Z. L. Xu, H. L. Liu and Y. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 12605 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Sara Sorribas, C. Téllez, J. Coronas and A. G. Livingston, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Fu, C. X. Yang and X. P. Yan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 13484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5262 RSC .
C. L. Hill and C. M. Prossermccartha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1995, 143, 407 CrossRef CAS .
K. Inumaru, T. Ishihara, Y. Kamiya, T. Okuhara and S. Yamanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. Li, L. Y. Wang, W. Dai, Y. Lv and S. Gao, Catal. Commun., 2013, 35, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Wee, S. R. Bajpe, N. Janssens, I. Hermans, K. Houthoofd, C. E. A. Kirschhock and J. A. Martens, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8186 RSC .
D. D. Liang, S. X. Liu, F. J. Ma, F. Wei and Y. G. Chen, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, P. S. Wheatley, X. B. Zhao, A. J. Fletcher, S. Fox, A. G. Rossi, I. L. Megson, S. Bordiga, L. Regli, K. M. Thomas and R. E. Morris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, V. Degirmenci, C. Li and E. J. M. Hensen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, I. Luz, F. Xamena, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Fu, D. R. Sun, Y. J. Chen, R. K. Huang, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kataoka, Y. Miyazaki, K. Sato, T. Saito, Y. Nakanishi, Y. Kiatagwa, T. Kawakami, M. Okumura, K. Yamaguchi and W. Mori, Supramol. Chem., 2011, 23, 287 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Jin, H. J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, Z. Y. Yan, J. Q. Wang, J. Xie, L. Jiang, Y. M. Shi, F. G. Yuan, F. Yu and Y. J. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6761 RSC .
J. Della Rocca, D. M. Liu and W. B. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. L. Taylor and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Rowe, D. H. Thamm, S. L. Kraft and S. G. Boyes, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. L. Taylor-Pashow, J. Della Rocca, Z. G. Xie, S. Tran and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Jun, J. W. Seo and A. Cheon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hergt, S. Dutz and M. Roder, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20 Search PubMed .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .
D. M. D'Alessandro, J. R. R. Kanga and J. S. Caddy, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 718 CrossRef .
Y. Kobayashi, B. Jacobs, M. D. Allendorf and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4120 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miyasaka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Umeyama, S. Horike, M. Inukai, Y. Hijikata and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bureekaew, S. Horike, M. Higuchi, M. Mizuno, T. Kawamura, D. Tanaka, N. Yanai and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sadakiyo, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoon, K. Suh, S. Natarajan and K. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Maryam Jahan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Pang, A. J. Cairns, Y. L. Liu, Y. Belmabkhout, H. C. Zeng and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Wilmer, O. K. Farha, Y. S. Bae, J. T. Hupp and R. Q. Snurr, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9849 CAS .
C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, S. Surble, N. Audebrand, Y. Filinchuk and G. Ferey, Science, 2007, 315, 1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Getman, Y. S. Bae, C. E. Wilmer and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Henry, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1998, 31, 235 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  An overview of the MOF composites and their corresponding synthesis methods. The composites are categorized as (a) MOFs as functional species and (b) MOFs as matrix materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  The growth of MOFs in the matrices. (a) SIM-1 supported on γ-alumina and α-alumina beads. (1–2) SEM images of the beads and cross-sectional view. (3–4) SEM image and (5–6) EDS mapping of the core and surface. Reproduced from ref. 43. (b) Digital image of HKUST-1/PAM beads. (c) Digital image of HKUST-1/HCM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  An overview of the strategies used to form MOF composites via the impregnation of functional species. (a) A schematic representation of the formation of metal NP/MOF composites by a double-solvent method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) TEM images of the composites of AuNi NP/MIL-101 obtained via reduction using different amounts of NaBH4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic illustration of the ion exchange method to form Pd NP/MOFs bearing amine groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) The DXP/MOF composite formed by vapour deposition. Reproduced from ref. 62. (e) and (f) The scheme for Pd NPs formation in the SNU-3 MOF via auto-redox and the TEM image of the Pd NPs/SNU-3 obtained, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  An overview of the methods used to encapsulate the pre-synthesized structures into MOFs. (a) The encapsulation of POM clusters into HKUST-1 using the “build-bottle-around-ship” method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Au NP/HKUST-1 synthesized by the surface modification of MUA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic of the controlled encapsulation of NPs in ZIF-8 crystals with the assistance of PVP. Reproduced from ref. 99. (d) A schematic illustration of the heteroepitaxial growth of MOF@MOF structures with [M2(L)2(P)] (L = dicarboxylate; P = diamine pillar) isoreticular family. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) A schematic of the synthesis of the Au NR@MOF composite using a scarified template method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electron microscopy images of the nanostructures@MOF composites. (a) TEM image of Au NP@HKUST-1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) TEM images of ZIF-8 composites containing different types of NPs. (1) and (2) Hybrid crystals containing 3.3 nm Pt NPs. (3) Hybrid crystals containing Ag cubes (∼160 nm). (4) Hybrid crystals containing 180 nm PVP-modified PS spheres with surfaces that were partially coated with unmodified 13 nm Au NPs. (5) Hybrid crystal containing homogeneously distributed 13 nm Au and 34 nm Au NPs in the central area. (6) Hybrid crystals consisting of 34 nm Au NP-rich cores, 13 nm Au NP-rich transition layers and NP-free shells. Reproduced from ref. 99. (c) Pd nanocrystal@ZIF-8 yolk-shell nanostructures. (d) Enlarged TEM image of the yolk-shell nanostructure. The cores are Pd octahedra with edge sizes of 60 nm and the shells are microporous ZIF-8 with thickness of ∽100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM images of the Au NR@[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n core–shell composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Characterization of the MOF@MOF structures. (a) A schematic model of the structural relationship between the core lattice [Zn2(ndc)2(dabco)] and the shell lattice [Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)] on the (001) surface. The red lines indicate the commensurate lattice between the core lattice and the shell lattice; the (5 × 5) structure of the core crystal or the (√26 × √26) structure of the shell. Two Miller domains of the shell crystal are grown on the (001) surface of the core crystal while maintaining the rotational angle (Δφav = 11.6518), which corresponds to the √26 direction of the (001) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) MOF crystal hybridization for sequentially functionalised systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Microscopy images of the core–shell MOFs (1) IRMOF-3(shell)@MOF-5(core) and (2) MOF-5(shell)@IRMOF-3(core). Reproduced from ref. 105. (d) SEM images of the MOF crystals (a mixture of bio-MOF-11 and bio-MOF-14). Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

MIL-53(Al)-NH2/copolyimide153	10–15 wt%	CO2, 57–137	H2/CH4, 34.7	35 °C, 3 bar
CO2/CH4, 35.8	

MIL-101(Al)-NH2/copolyimide153	5–10 wt%	CO2, 53–151	H2/CH4, 67.3	35 °C, 3 bar
CO2/CH4, 42.2	

ZIF-7/Pebax154	8–34 wt%	CO2, 41–145	CO2/CH4, 44	25 °C, 3.75 bar
CO2/N2, 105	

Cu-bipy/PSF155	0–5 wt%	
	H2/CH4, ∼200	35 °C, 1 bar
CH4/N2, ∼10	

MIL-53(Al)-NH2/PSF156	8–40 wt%	CO2, 5	CO2/CH4, ∼25	35 °C, 3 bar
MIL-101/PSF157	0–24 wt%	O2, 6	O2/N2, 5–6	30 °C, 3 bar
HKUST-1/PSF45	
	
	H2/CO2, 7.2	25 °C, 2.75 bar
H2/C3H6, 5.7	

HKUST-1/PPO158	10–50 wt%	
	CO2/N2, ∼25	30 °C
CO2/CH4, ∼30	

H2/N2, ∼25	

H2/CH4, ∼30	

ZIF-8/6FDA-durene159	33.3 wt%	H2, 2136	H2/CO2, 12	35 °C, 3.5 bar
N2, 137	H2/N2, 141	

O2, 449	H2/CH4, 203	

CH4, 140	
	

MIL-53 (Al)/polyimide160	20–40 wt%	
	CO2/CH4, 77	

Cu-BPY-HFS/matrimid34	10–40 wt%	
	CH4/N2, 1.21	

ZIF-8/matrimid30	0–80 wt%	O2, 1.13–5.88	H2/CO2, 3–4	35 °C, 2.7 bar
CO2, 4.72–24.55	CO2/CH4, 44–125	

H2, 18.07–71.22	
	

ZIF-90/6FDA-DAM31	15 wt%	CO2, 590–720	CO2/CH4, 37	25 °C, 2 bar
HKUST-1/matrimid33	
	
	CO2/N2, 23–27	35 °C, 10 bar
HKUST-1/polyimide161	
	
	H2/CO2	

CO2/N2	


 	Fig. 7  The application of MOF composites for fast separation. (a) HPLC experiments for the separation of mixtures of ethylbenzene and styrene on: (1) a pure HKUST-1 column, (2) an unmodified column of Nucleosil-100 silica and (3) the HKUST-1-silica composite column. In chromatogram (3), ethylbenzene is eluted first with a retention time of 4.1 min followed by styrene at 12.3 min. The separation factor for this mixture is 5.2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) A SEM image of the silica@HKUST-1 particles. Reproduced from ref. 42. (c) (1) A chromatogram showing that the column packed with silica particles cannot separate styrene and ethylbenzene. (c) (2) A chromatogram for the column packed with silica@HKUST-1 particles used for the separation of toluene 1, ethylbenzene 2, and styrene 3. Reproduced from ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 8  The catalytic capability of POM/MOF composites. (a) The results for the hydrolysis of an ester in the presence of NENU: (1) methyl acetate; (2) ethyl acetate; (3) methyl benzoate; (4) ethyl benzoate and (5) 4-methyl-phenyl propionate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The esterification reaction of acetic acid with 1-propanol. Conversion of acetic acid (1) without catalyst, on (2) hydrothermally synthesized micron-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2, (3) ultrastable Y zeolite (4) 65 nm-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2 and (5) 50 nm-sized HPW/Cu3(BTC)2 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 168. (c) Conversion of methanol dehydration to DME over the catalysts: (■) Cu3(BTC)2, (●) γ-Al2O3, and NENU with the average particle diameters of (▼) 23, (▲) 105, and (◆) 450 μm at a pressure level of 0.6 MPa and LHSV of 2 h−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) The yields and selectivity over time for fructose dehydration using PTA(3.0)/MIL-101 in DMSO at 130 °C; ■ fructose retention, ● HMF yield, and ▲ HMF selectivity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  The applications of MOF composites in bio-imaging. (a) Confocal microscopy images of H460 cells that have been incubated without any particles (1), with a PEG-SiO2 coating (2) and with a AA-PEG-SiO2 coating (3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Merged confocal images of HT-29 cells that were incubated with different MOF NPs. The blue colour is from DRAQ5 used to stain the cell nuclei, whereas the green colour is from Rhodamine-B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) Overlayed DIC and confocal fluorescence images of the DRAQ5 channel (blue, nuclear stain) and the BDC-NH-BODIPY channel (green) of HT-29 cells incubated with no particles (left), 0.19 mg mL−1 of NPs (equivalent to 17 μM BODIPY) (middle) and 0.38 mg mL−1 of NPs (equivalent to 34 μM BODIPY) (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The application of MOF composites in drug delivery. (a) SEM and TEM images of a HKUST-1-magnetite composite. (b) Magnetic heating curve of 324 mg (a) in 30 ml of ethanol at 183 kHz and a field strength of 1.7 kA m−1 giving a specific absorption rate (SAR) of 114.2 W g−1 based on the Fe content (X). The arrows indicate the initial release rates for ibuprofen at 20 and 40 °C. Reproduced from ref. 98. (c) EDX elemental mapping images of a single Au NR@[Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n core–shell composite. (1) TEM image of the composite and elemental mapping images by (2) Au, (3) Al, (4) all merged, (5) O, and (6) C. (d) Evaluation of anthracene release from (1) core–shell composites and (2) [Al(OH)(1,4-ndc)]n crystals without Au NRs. The graphs show linear plots for the fluorescence intensity maxima of the released anthracene versus time with (red) and without (black) NIR light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  The electrical application of MOF composites. (a) Imidazole molecules are densely packed with a low mobility that adversely affects the proton-transport process. (1) This occurs in the bulk solid. (2) Imidazole accommodated in a nanochannel containing an active site with a high affinity to imidazole. The strong host–guest interaction retards the mobility of imidazole to afford low proton conductivity. (3) Imidazoles are accommodated in a nanochannel without strong host–guest interactions and therefore, the molecules obtain high mobility to show high proton conductivity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group. (b) The schematic structures of the graphene-porphyrin MOF composite and its DE voltammograms for graphene, (Fe–P)n MOF, (G 50 wt% –FeP)n MOF, G-dye 50 wt% –Fe–Porphyrin, (G-dye 50 wt% –FeP)n MOF and GO at a rotation rate of 2000 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of the PEC sensor with selectivity to H2O2, photocurrent responses of the ZnO@ZIF-8 NR array in the presence of H2O2 (0.1 mM) and AA (0.1 mM) and ΔI − ΔI0 curves in the presence of H2O2 and AA with the concentrations as functions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
AA	Ascorbic acid
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
BGF	Benzoic-acid functionalized graphene
Bpdc	4,4′-Biphenyldicarboxylate
BPTC	1,1′-Biphenyl-2,2′,6,6′-tetracarboxylic acid
BPY	4,4′-Bipyridine
BT	Benzothiophene
CHQ	Calix[4]hydroquinone
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CPO	Coordination polymer of Oslo
CSPs	Chromatographic stationary phases
CVD	Chemical vapour deposition
Cyclam	1,4,8,11-Tetraazacyclotetradecane
DAP	Dipicolinic acid
DMDBA	Dimethyldibenzothiophene
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DXP	
N,N-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-3,4:9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic diimide
FIrpic	2-Carboxypyridyl)bis(3,5-difluoro-2-(2-pyridyl)phenyl)iridium(III)
FTO	Fluorine doped tin oxide
GO	Graphene oxide
HCM	Hierarchical porous carbon monolith
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HIPEs	High internal phase emulsions
HKUST	Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
HMF	5-Hydroxymethylfurfural
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
IND	Indole
LBL	Lay-by-layer
MIL	Material of Institute Lavoisier
MLCT	Metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MOF	Metal–organic framework
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
MTX	Methotrexate
MUA	11-Mercaptoundecanoic acid
NIR	Near-infrared region
NP	Nanoparticle
NT	Nanotube
NW	Nanowire
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PA	Polyamide
PAM	Polyacrylamide
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEC	Photoelectrochemical
PI	Polyimide
PMMA	Polymetylmethaacrylate
POM	Polyoxometalate
PS	Polystyrene
PSU	Polysulfone
PTA	Phosphotungstic acid
PU	Polyurethane
PVA	Poly(vinyl acetate)
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
QD	Quantum dot
QUI	Quinoline
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SWCNT	Single-wall carbon nanotube
TCM	Tetrakis[4-(carboxyphenyl)oxamethyl]methane
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TEOS	Tetraethyl orthosilicate
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
Th	Thiophene
TOF	Turnover frequency
UIO	University of Oslo
UMCM	University of Michigan crystalline material
ZIF	Zeolitic imidazolate framework

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
