An overview of electrospun nanofibers and their application in energy storage, sensors and wearable/flexible electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC03058D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC03058D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12657-12673An overview of electrospun nanofibers and their application in energy storage, sensors and wearable/flexible electronics

        
          
            Amutha 
            Chinnappan†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Chinnappan 
            Baskar†
b, 
      
        
          
            Shikha 
            Baskar
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Greeshma 
            Ratheesh
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Seeram 
            Ramakrishna
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Nanofibers and Nanotechnology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119260, Singapore. E-mail: mpecam@nus.edu.sg; seeram@nus.edu.sg;   Tel: +65 65162216
bTHDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand 249001, India
cChemistry Division, Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, Uttarakhand 248006, India
dInstitute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Science and Engineering Faculty, School of Chemistry Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
Received 
      10th July 2017
    , Accepted 20th November 2017First published on 4th December 2017AbstractWearable and flexible electronics are currently a highly demanded and passionate topic of research owing to their excellent combination of related base functions with stretchability and foldability. Textiles are a universal interface and ideal substrate for the integration of nanomaterials, electronics, and optical devices. Smart/e-textiles are fabrics that have been designed and developed with new technologies that provide benefits to the wearer with increased functionality. The rapid development of technology in smart clothing has opened new innovations and is leading to promising applications, such as the ability to communicate with other devices, conduct energy, self-powered sensing, and safeguarding the user from environmental hazards. This review article focuses on the recent developments in the field of smart/e-textiles and mainly gives attention to electrospun nanofiber-based materials and methods used in wearable/flexible electronics, sensors and energy storage.
Amutha Chinnappan
Amutha Chinnappan received her PhD degree in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She then worked as a BK21 Postdoctoral Fellow until 2015, and after that became an Assistant Professor (Research) at the Department of Energy Science and Technology, Myongji University. She is currently working as a Research Fellow at the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. Her current research interests include green chemistry, conducting cables/wires, smart textiles, wearable/flexible electronics, and ionic liquid-based functional nanomaterials for energy applications.
Chinnappan Baskar
Dr. Chinnappan Baskar is an Associate Professor and former Director (Officiating) of THDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Constituent Institute of Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, India. He has received his MSc Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and PhD in Organic and Materials Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore. His research interests include synthetic organic chemistry, conducting polymers, green chemistry, ionic liquids, biomass conversion, bioenergy, green polymers, bioplastics, smart textiles, and wearable electronics. He is the editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); author of Engineering Chemistry book (Wiley India); co-author of Stereochemistry (Narosa Publishing House and Alpha Science International Ltd), and co-author of Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).
Shikha Baskar
Dr. Shikha Baskar obtained her PhD in Organic Chemistry from the Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India and received post-doctoral training at Myongji University, South Korea. She is currently working as a Project Scientist (under the Scheme for Young Scientist and Technologist of SEED Division, Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology) in Chemistry Division, Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India. Her current research interests are in the areas of synthetic organic chemistry, ionic liquids, biomass conversion: biopolymers, biodegradable plastics, fine-chemicals and biofules. She is the co-editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); co-author of Engineering Chemistry (Wiley India); and co-author of Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).
Greeshma Ratheesh
Greeshma Ratheesh is a PhD student at Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. She completed her Master of Science in Biotechnology from Bharathidasan University, India. She also completed her MTech in Nanoscience and technology from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India. Her research interests include scaffold fabrication for regenerative therapy, drug delivery, nanomedicine and 3D printing.
Seeram Ramakrishna
Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng is the Director of Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology at the National University of Singapore (NUS) and world-renowned researcher in the field of nanomaterials. He is a Highly Cited Researcher (http://www.highlycited.com). He has co-authored 1000 articles, with 67000 citations and an H-index of 125. Three start-up companies in Singapore leverage his research innovations. He is a member of the World Economic Forum Committee on Future of Production, and the Singapore Smart Manufacturing Technology Standards Committee. He innovated electro-hydrodynamic technology to mass-produce nanofibers and nanoparticles with new functionalities.
Introduction
Wearable and flexible electronics are currently a highly demanded and passionate topic of research owing to their excellent combination of related base functions with stretchability and foldability.1,2 Flexible energy devices can convert or store energy upon repeated bending, folding and/or stretching without a dramatic decrease in performance. These devices have attracted a great deal of attention because of their potential applications in wearable and portable electronics, such as roll-up displays, electronic papers, touch screens, active radio frequency identification tags, military garment devices, wearable sensors and biomedical devices.3–6 A new cutting edge in clothing technology is nanoengineered functional textiles.7–9 The advantage of nanomaterials concerns creating function without altering the comfort properties of the substrate.10 Textiles are a universal interface and ideal substrate for the integration of nanomaterials, electronics, and optical devices. These research and development activities have been driven by the motivation of fibrous and linear assemblies with different functions of communicating, sensing, computing and actuating etc. The potential for developing conformable, light-weight and flexible electronic devices on textile products is very significant and offers tremendous opportunities to deploy electronic-based energy and sensing devices built-in or embedded into cotton-based materials.11–16
Smart textiles are defined as textile products such as fibers, filaments, and yarns together with woven, knitted or non-woven structures, which can interact with the environment/user. The convergence of textiles and flexible electronics has the potential to combine the positive attributes of each technology, the speed and computational capacity of modern electronics, with the flexible, wearable, and continuous nature of fiber assemblies. Smart textiles will serve as a means of increasing social welfare and they might lead to important savings in welfare budget.17–19 Nanostructured smart materials need to satisfy weight, performance, and appearance properties in wearable/flexible electronics. A significant challenge in the textile industry is that conventional approaches to functionalize fabrics do not lead to permanent effects. For example, laundering decreases imparted functional effects. Hence, nanotechnology can play a part in introducing new and permanent functions to fabrics. Multifunctional and multidimensional e-textiles can be nanoengineered to have specific functions, including hydrophobicity, antibacterial properties, conductivity, antiwrinkle properties, antistatic behavior, and light guidance and scattering. Using nanotechnology, these properties can be achieved without affecting breathability or texture. Such materials may be in the form of surface coatings, voided patterns, fillers, or foams.20–23 The main challenge in electronic textiles is to incorporate the material with the desired functionality into the fabrics whilst preserving properties of both components.24 In general, two geometrical parameters, size and morphology, have some important effects on the novel chemical/physical properties, especially when the structures are in the nanometer scale. One-dimensional (1D) materials, such as nanowires, nanobelts, nanorods, nanotubes and nanofibers, are considered as a very promising component of nanomaterials. The advantage of 1D nanomaterials is that they can function as an electron pathway in the axial orientation and they can improve the carrier collection and shorten the carrier transport path. Moreover, 1D nanostructures have excellent mechanical properties, which are essential for atomic scale-manipulation and further modification. Due to the large surface area, 1D nanomaterials can interact with various inorganic species at the surface.25–28
The harvest of new nanomaterials/fibers enables scientists today to design materials that touch upon our everyday lives in myriad ways. The design of nanofiber materials and methods used in wearable/flexible electronics, sensors and energy storage demands the following virtues from, and cultivates the best in, those who practice it: ingenuity, artistic taste, experimental skill, persistence, and character. In turn, the practitioner is often rewarded with discoveries and inventions that impact, in major ways, not only other areas of chemistry, but most significantly material science, biology, and medicine. Fiber-based structures are highly desirable for wearable electronics, which are expected to be lightweight, long-lasting and flexible.29–31 Many fibrous structures have been manufactured by well-established cost-effective textile processing technologies, normally under ambient conditions. The hierarchical nature of these fibrous structures makes them particularly suitable for the fabrication of wearable electronics.29,32
At present, it is essential to develop highly efficient supercapacitors, batteries and solar cells. It depends on the both materials and fabrication method. The process of energy conversion and storage can be considered to comprise charge generation, transport, and collection, as well as diffusion. In that aspect, electrospun nanofibers can shorten the carrier transportation path and enhance the carrier collection ability by functioning as an electron expressway in the axial direction. Other unique characteristics of the nanofibers include optical transparency, high specific surface area, low cost, and good mechanical flexibility/strength, and conductive nanofibers have good electrical conductivity. The combination of these characteristics gives these materials great potential to be applied in the next generation of energy conversion and storage devices with high energy/power density, transparency, portability, and flexibility.33–36Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of an electrospinning setup.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of electrospinning setup. 
During electrospinning, nanofibers are produced in submicrometer sizes by applying an electric force to polymer solutions or melts. The electric force extrudes polymer jets from a spinneret and stretches them from millimeter to submicrometer diameters through a whipping-like motion. A grounded collector plate is placed across from the spinneret, and the polymer solution accelerates towards the collector plate when the electrostatic forces between the collector plate and the spinneret overcome the surface tension at the spinneret tip. After leaving the spinneret, the polymer solution undergoes whipping, and the solvent evaporates, resulting in a solid polymer fiber. The nanofibers accumulate on the collector plate, forming non-woven mats. Electrospun nanofibers can easily be functionalized through the incorporation of nanoscale materials within the spinning dope or through surface modifications after spinning. Conductive nanofibers are frequently fabricated by doping polymer solutions with carbon nanotubes or nanoparticles.37–41 This review article focuses on the electrospun nanofibers fabrication method used for wearable/flexible electronics. Recent research reports that fiber-based wearable/flexible electronics support high carrier mobility and excellent electrical performance, combined with mechanical and environmental stability.42–44 Therefore, this review particularly focusses on electrospun nanofiber-based wearable electronics in energy storage, such as Li ion batteries, supercapacitors, and hydrogen storage and sensor applications (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Electrospun nanofibers in different applications. 
Electronics in textiles
Electrically conductive fibers or yarns can be achieved using conductive materials in fibrous form, such as metals or carbon, or even conductive polymers such as poly-aniline, which can be used as wiring within a piece of fabric. These wires can carry electricity to various components. This innovation is a major new concept that enables a whole assortment of multi-functional, wearable e-textiles for sensing/monitoring body functions, delivering communication facilities, data transfer, individual environment control, and many other applications.18,45–48 Generally, e-textiles can be readily made by knitting, weaving, embroidering,49 coating/laminating, printing, dip coating,50 and atomic layer deposition.51 Commercial conductive threads are exploited in embroidering, sewing and weaving. Though the conductivity of traditional conductive threads is pretty good, the cost and weight are relatively high, and mechanical flexibility is sacrificed as well. Expensive facilities must be utilized for atomic layer deposition, adding to the cost and inconvenience. Dip coating methods have been proposed to achieve conductive threads such as conductive polymers,52 carbon nanotubes, graphene53 and metallic nanowires.54 Dip-coating is quite facile and convenient, but physical absorption is not as stable as chemical absorption. Furthermore, dip-coating is not suitable for creating patterns, which limits its utilization.55 Durability is another crucial issue in wearable generator devices. In previously published work, metal foil electrodes or metal-coated thin film electrodes were used for the power generators, which showed a very short utility life under repeated mechanical deformation.56,57 The poor fatigue resistance of metal foils is responsible for the early failure of the former electrodes. In the latter case, the metal coating layer is compromised when the interfacial shear stress causes delaminating in the sandwich structure because of a mismatch of the Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the coating and the thin film. Hence, the devices lose their mechanical integrity and electric connectivity so that failure occurs quickly in repeated deformation cycles, which is common in wearable applications. Until now, development of a flexible and durable electrode for wearable electric power generators has remained a major challenge for scavenging of kinetic energy from human motions.58 Fiber-based electric power generators are highly desirable as they are light and comfortable to wearers. The flexible and soft fiber-based devices can be designed in such a manner that low levels of strain, thus high fatigue resistance, can be achieved under many deformation cycles. Moreover, piezoelectric nanomaterials demonstrating excellent piezoelectric properties offer great opportunities to be integrated in polymer composites and composite fibers.59–67 Zeng et al. reported incorporating silver coated polyamide multifilament yarns into elastic knitted fabric electrodes, by which a piezoelectric nonwoven fabric made from NaNbO3 nanowires and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) composite nanofibers is sandwiched, as shown in Fig. 3. Such a fiber nanogenerator survived at least 1000000 compression cycles without failure.58
 Fig. 3  Highly durable piezoelectric nanogenerator based on PVDF/NaNbO3 nanocomposite and conductive fabric electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright 2013. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Fang and co-workers found that randomly oriented electrospun nanofiber membrane can be directly used to prepare a piezoelectric power generator without any extra poling treatment (Fig. 4).69 The power generator device can be prepared simply by sandwiching an as-spun PVDF nonwoven membrane between two metal foils. The electrical output can be as high as several volts. They also reported on the mechanical-to-electrical energy conversion of the novel nanofiber power generation devices. From this study, the power was generated although the nanofiber membranes were not poled after electrospinning. This suggests that electrospinning assists in forming oriented molecular dipoles within nanofibers, besides the formation of a high β phase, and the authors found that when two metal electrodes were added to the same side of a nanofiber membrane, but leaving a small gap between them, no piezoelectric responsiveness was detected no matter how the membrane was impacted mechanically. It is therefore important to add the metal electrodes to the two opposite sides of the nanofiber membrane for the electrical generation. However, the fact that the output polarity is impact-side-dependent suggests the molecular dipoles within nanofibers are unlikely to orient along the fiber length direction. This was confirmed by Hansen et al.'s study68 that when aligned electrospun PVDF nanofibers were used to make power generation devices, a post-electrospinning poling treatment had to be used to make the molecular dipoles align along the fiber length direction.69
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of power generating device. (b) Typical voltage outputs of a nanofiber membrane device subjected to an impact action (initial impact speed, 34 mm s−1). (c) Voltage and (d) current outputs of the same nanofibre device under 5 Hz repeated compressive impacts. Nanofibre membrane thickness = 140 mm; working area = 2 cm2. (e) PVDF nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission. Copyright 2011. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Huang and co-workers reported pristine soft conductive yarns, which are continuously produced by a scalable method with the use of twist-bundle-drawing technique, and are mechanically robust enough to be knitted to a cloth by a commercial cloth knitting machine (Fig. 5). Subsequently, the reduced-graphene-oxide-modified conductive yarns covered with a hierarchical structure of MnO2 nanosheets and a polypyrrole thin film were used to fabricate weavable, knittable and wearable yarn supercapacitors. Large energy storage textiles were fabricated by weaving flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor yarns into a cloth of 15 cm and 10 cm on a loom and knitting into a woollen wrist band to form a pattern, enabling dual functionalities of energy storage capability and wearability.70 Hansen et al. reported a self-powered nanosystem by powering a ZnO nanowire UV light sensor. The hybrid energy scavenging device consists of a piezoelectric PVDF nanofiber nanogenerator for harvesting mechanical energy, such as from breathing or from the beat of a heart, and a flexible enzymatic biofuel cell for harvesting the biochemical (glucose/O2) energy in biofluid, which are two types of energy available in vivo. The two energy harvesting approaches can work simultaneously or individually, thereby boosting output and lifetime.68
 Fig. 5  Schematics and demonstration of yarns. (a) Schematics of yarn fabrication. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of an as-drawn yarn. (c) A long yarn rolled on a rod and knotted. (d) A cloth knitted with the as-drawn yarn (gray-colored) and a cotton yarn (white-colored). (e) Illustration of the yarn modified by deposition of rGO, MnO2 and PPy. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission. Copyright 2015. American Chemical Society. 
Sensing in textiles
The high surface area-to-volume ratio of electrospun nanofibers makes them an attractive material for sensor applications. Electrospun fibers have been investigated for use in many sensor applications due to its flexibility in materials selection and ease of incorporating active agents. Sensor techniques that have been achieved using electrospinning include optical change, electrical resistivity, electrochemical sensing and acoustic waves depending on the materials and its properties. Most sensors using electrospun fibers are in the form of a nonwoven mesh, which does not require modifications to the standard setup. The performance of sensors made from electrospun fibers is often more sensitive than cast film sensors of the same material. Targeted applications and sensor techniques typically depend on the material selected rather than the form. To construct a sensor, there must be a change in the characteristics or properties of the material upon exposure to the target and, secondly, there must be a way to measure the change.71,72 Polymer-based textile sensors have many advantages over conventional electronic sensors. Compliant substrates make them adaptable to any shape and surface, as well as making them portable, if some short-range telemetry is used.73
Electrospun PVDF nanofiber membranes have strong piezoelectricity without further poling treatments and can be assembled as piezoelectric devices directly. Huang and Yin et al. presented kinetically controlled mechano-electrospinning (MES) to direct-write PVDF nanofibers onto a prestrained polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate.74,75 This method had superior advantages for fabricating highly flexible and stretchable piezoelectric devices, and could be used for stretchable sensors and wearable energy providers.76 Chang and co-workers used near-field electrospinning to direct-write PVDF nanofibers with in situ mechanical stretch and electrical poling characteristics to produce piezoelectric properties.77 The strong electric fields (greater than 107 V m−1) and stretching forces from the electrospinning process naturally align dipoles in the nanofiber crystal such that the nonpolar α phase is transformed into a polar β phase. Under mechanical stretching, nanogenerators have shown repeatable and consistent electrical outputs with energy conversion efficiency an order of magnitude higher than those made of PVDF thin films. The early onset of the nonlinear domain wall motions behavior has been identified as one mechanism responsible for the apparent high piezoelectricity in nanofibers, rendering them potentially advantageous for sensing and actuation applications (Fig. 6).77
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the near field electrospinning process showing possible dipole directions (black arrows) and electrical field direction (red arrows). The PVDF polymer solution experiences mechanical stretching and in situ electrical poling during the formation of nanofibers owing to the high electrostatic field toward the substrate. (b) SEM microphoto showing an electrospun PVDF nanofiber on two contact pads. (c) An optical image of a single nanofiber nanogenerator on top of a plastic substrate with two electrical wires. (d) Testing results of a PVDF nanofiber nanogenerator under constant mechanical strain but with varying strain rate. As the strain rate increases, higher output current is produced while the total charges generated in both cases remain approximately the same. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission. Copyright 2010. American Chemical Society. 
A new microstructure was fabricated with hollow structures and a mechanical energy transfer circuit. A near-field electrospinning process with a metallic coaxial needle injector was designed to fabricate piezoelectric hollow PVDF fibers. The hollow PVDF fibers were obtained by an optimal electrical field and repolarization process. Then the hollow PVDF fibers were attached to a 0.5 mm wide PDMS interdigitated electrode and packaged for an intelligent force touching sensing device where the interdigitated structure mold of PDMS was fabricated by electrical discharge machining. When repolarized at 65 °C and 7 V μm−1, the intelligent sensing device could sense voltage output from 125 mV to 280 mV and work temperature from 25 °C to 100 °C (the patient's body weight is 30–70 kg). This device was applied to detect the large area force of paralyzed patients by an array of intelligent force touching sensing device.78 Gheibi and co-workers reported piezoelectric electrospun nanofibrous materials for self-powering wearable electronic textiles applications.83 In this research article, they focused on fabricating a one-step nano-generator based on electrospun nanofibrous materials. A nanofibrous structure was produced from PVDF using the electrospinning technique. They evaluated the piezoelectric properties of the fabricated composites on a self-made system as a function of frequency. The results showed that not only can the electrospinning process effectively improve the piezoelectric properties of nanofiber mats by changing the crystalline structure compared to PVDF film samples, but also the fibrous structure of these materials interestingly can be used in the wearable electronic textiles.79–82 By using a novel approach to fabricate the nanofiber layer along with incorporating the electrodes within the structure of the device, the electrical output was improved as much as 1 volt. These results imply promising applications for various wearable self-powered electrical devices and systems.83 Soft, sensitive and conformable strain sensors can provide a tactile sensation to prosthetic limbs and can be used for health monitoring in the form of epidermal or wearable electronics. Soltanian et al. reported a nature-inspired, nanofibrous resistive mesh that exhibited an unprecedented strain gauge factor in excess of 60, arising from reversible jointing and disjointing of a large number of inter-fiber junctions in response to mechanical deformation.84 Due to the continuous high aspect-ratio structure of the electrospun nanofibers with metallic shells, the sensor has a stable and low resistance, allowing fast and low-noise measurements of dynamic changes in tensile and compressive strains with high accuracy and repeatability. Epidermal strain sensing applications of the nanofiber sensors were demonstrated for monitoring of limb and muscle movements, accurate monitoring of radial pulse, and real-time monitoring of simulated intermittent Parkinson's tremors. An array of biaxial nanofiber sensors was used to demonstrate the potential for tactile sensing and localization of point of touch.84–86 Li et al. presented a three-layer structure of piezoelectric membrane device, in which the PVDF nanofiber membrane is sandwiched between two PVDF–rGO electrode membranes (Fig. 7).76 The as-prepared device demonstrates high electric output since the piezoelectric device is prepared by electrospinning; both the active layer and electrode layer have high levels of electroactive β-phase crystallinity. The open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and power density can reach up to 46 V, 18 mA and 18.1 mW cm−2, respectively. The electric output is remarkably affected by the frequency and magnitude of the exerted excitation force, specifically, the output demonstrates a linear relationship with the excitation force. The authors showed that the piezoelectric membrane device demonstrates a long working stability of over 50000 cycles and is capable of lighting light emitting diodes (LEDs) directly.76
 Fig. 7  Morphologies of the PVDF–rGO electrode membranes (a and b) and the PVDF nanofiber membrane (c and d); schematic of the piezoelectric device (e); and cross-sections of the piezoelectric device assembled using the continuous electrospinning method (f). Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission. Copyright 2016. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Arogbonlo and co-workers addressed the methods used for the design and fabrication of a capacitance-based wearable pressure sensor fabricated using neoprene and plated nylon fabric.87 The experimental set up for the pressure sensor comprised a shielded grid of sensing modules, a 555-timer based transduction circuitry, and an Arduino board measuring the frequency of signal to a corresponding pressure. The fundamental design for the pressure sensor is based on a material layer configuration. A single sensor module is considered to initially define the important design parameters of the sensor, to then consider the possibility of scalability to a sensor modules grid for different application requirements. Taking the latter into account, each sensor module consists of a capacitor realized by sandwiching a compressible dielectric material, such as neoprene, between two layers of conductive fabric.87 Jo et al.88 prepared a novel chemical warfare agent sensor based on conjugated polymer dots (CPdots) immobilized on the surface of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)–silica nanofibers with a dots-on-fibers (DoF) hybrid nanostructure via simple electrospinning and subsequent immobilization processes. They synthesized a polyquinoxaline (PQ)-based CP as a highly emissive sensing probe and employed PVA–silica as a host polymer for the electrospun fibers. It was demonstrated that the CPdots and amine-functionalized electrospun PVA–silica nanofibers interacted via an electrostatic interaction, which was stable under prolonged mechanical force. The authors explained that the CPdots were located on the surface of the nanofibers, and the highly emissive properties of the CPdots could be maintained and even enhanced, leading to a sensitive turn-off detection protocol for chemical warfare agents. The prepared fluorescent DoF hybrid was quenched in the presence of a chemical warfare agent simulant due to the electron transfer between the quinoxaline group in the polymer and the organophosphorous simulant. The detection time was almost instantaneous, and a very low limit of detection was observed (∼1.25 × 10−6 M) with selectivity over other organophosphorous compounds. The DoF hybrid nanomaterial can be developed as a rapid, practical, portable, and stable chemical warfare agent-detecting system and, moreover, can find further applications in other sensing systems simply by changing the probe dots immobilized on the surface of nanofibers.89,90 Garain et al. reported an in situ poled fabrication strategy to construct a large area, highly sensitive, flexible pressure sensor by electrospun Ce3+-doped PVDF/graphene composite nanofibers.91 They said that their entire device fabrication process is scalable and suitable for large-area integration. It can detect an imparting pressure as low as 2 Pa with a high level of sensitivity. Furthermore, Ce3+-doped PVDF/graphene nanofiber-based ultrasensitive pressure sensors can also be used as an effective nanogenerator as it generates an output voltage of 11 V with a current density of ∼6 nA cm−2 upon repetitive application of mechanical stress that could light up 10 blue LEDs instantaneously. Furthermore, to use random environmental vibrations, a nanogenerator is integrated with musical vibration that is able to power up three blue LEDs instantly and has promise as an ultrasensitive acoustic nanogenerator (ANG). The superior sensing properties in conjunction with mechanical flexibility, integrability, and robustness of nanofibers enabled real-time monitoring of sound waves as well as detection of different type of musical vibrations. Thus, ANG is promising for us as an ultrasensitive pressure sensor, mechanical energy harvester, and effective power source for portable electronic and wearable devices.91 Zhao and co-workers demonstrated the in situ polymerization of polyaniline (PANI) on electrospun nanofibers to form a macroscopic membrane with inside nanostructure and its application in wearable gas sensing. This synthesis approach results in a subtle architecture composed of high-quality PANI nanocones anchored on the polyacrylonitrile (PAN) backbone.92 Liu et al. reported CeO2 nanofibers for in situ O2 and CO sensing in harsh environments.93 They prepared large-scale polycrystalline CeO2 nanofibers with an average diameter of 376 ± 55 nm using a facile two-step synthesis route including electrospinning and calcination. The as-prepared CeO2 nanofibers showed good morphological and structural stability in high-temperature environments (800–1000 °C). The fabricated CeO2 nanofiber-based resistive type sensor exhibited sensitive, reversible, and reproducible concentration-dependent behavior to reducing gas (CO) and oxidizing gas (O2) at 800 and 1000 °C. Due to different sensing mechanisms for reducing gas and oxidizing gas, the response to CO and O2 can be easily distinguished based on the observed resistance increase or decrease. The stable performance and fast response/recovery can be attributed to free access of gaseous molecules to CeO2 nanofibers.93 Li and co-workers reported the fabrication of flexible NiFe2O4 nanofiber-based in-plane micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), which can serve as energy storage receptors to drive a portable graphene pressure sensor. The obtained NiFe2O4 nanofiber electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 2.23 F cm−3 at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and excellent rate capability and robust cycling stability with a capacitance retention of 93.6% after 10000 charge/discharge cycles. Moreover, the in-plane MSCs have superior flexibility and outstanding stability even after repetition of charge/discharge cycles during the convex and concave bending states. The MSCs offered a high energy density of 0.197 mW h cm−3 and power density up to 2.07 W cm−3. They also coupled the MSCs with a graphene pressure sensor as a micro-integrated system to implement its pressure response function and used MATLAB to simulate this system behavior as well. The performance of the designed systems exhibited a stable pressure response, and the simulated results coincide well with the experimental data, demonstrating its feasibility in wearable electronic devices.94
Wu et al. prepared a conductive polymer-based single yarn consisting of core-sheath PANI/PAN nanofibers by combining an electrospinning method with an in situ solution polymerization process.95 The as-prepared PANI/PAN uniaxially aligned coaxial nanofiber yarn (UACNY) was utilized to construct an ammonia sensor. The PANI/PAN UACNY sensor possessed robust mechanical strength with flexibility, and could be processed into defined electronic textiles using various textile-forming techniques, i.e., knitting, braiding, and embroidering. The flexible and conductive PANI/PAN UACNY has the potential to be applied for the development of wearable smart textiles owing to its stable structure, handling convenience, excellent mechanical properties and high gas sensing performance.95
Energy storage
Lithium ion batteries
In lithium ion batteries (LIBs), graphite is used as the anode and the cathode is usually made of layered LiCoO2 as an intercalation host for Li+, separated by a porous permeable membrane, which only allows Li+ ions but prevents a short circuit due to direct contact of electrodes. Li ions are intercalated and deintercalated between graphite and LiCoO2 through the electrolyte during discharging and charging. A general schematic representation of a Li ion battery is given in Fig. 8.96
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of Li ion battery intercalation–de-intercalation reaction. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission. Copyright 2014. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanofibers are promising materials for LIBs because of their good electrochemical activity, high mechanical strength, and high specific surface area.97–101 The electrochemical performance of electrospinning fibers as anode materials can be improved by the following strategies. (i) Design of porous nanostructures. The volumetric change of the materials can be buffered; thus, the cycle stability can be improved. Meanwhile, the reversible capacity can be increased. (ii) Synthesis of carbon fiber network. Such a fiber network can be used as an electrode directly without any binder or conductive filler, which results in better electric conductivity. (iii) Increasing the proportion of active materials with high theoretical capacity, such as Si, Sn, and so on.102–110 A carbon nanofiber-based electrode exhibits a large accessible surface area (derived from the nanometer-sized fiber diameter), high carbon purity (without binder), relatively high electrical conductivity, structural integrity, thin web macro morphology, a large reversible capacity (ca. 450 mA h g−1), and a relatively linearly inclined voltage profile. It is fabricated by nanofiber formation via electrospinning of a polymer solution and its subsequent thermal treatment.111 Yu et al. fabricated reticular tin nanoparticle-dispersed carbon (Sn/C) nanofibers by stabilization of electrospun SnCl4/PAN composite fibers and subsequent carbonization at different temperatures. The Sn/C composite nanofibers were used as anode materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.112 Li et al.98 reported hierarchical CaCo2O4 (CCO) NFs prepared by electrospinning as anode materials for LIBs. It was found that the hierarchical CCONFs exhibited excellent cycling performance and high rate capability. Zou et al. reported that an electrospinning process has been used to prepare a film of porous carbon nanofibers that contain Sn/SnOx nanoparticles in the pores.113 The authors say that this film can be used as an electrode directly without any binder or conductive filler because the pores in the fibers and the abundant spaces between the fibers not only offer more interface for the reaction of the film and lithium ions, but also buffer the volumetric change of the whole film during cycling. The nanofibers consist of porous carbon with encapsulated Sn/SnOx nanoparticles. The size of the particles encapsulated in the pores is smaller than the volume of the pores, thus providing buffering spaces for the volumetric change of tin during cycling. These features result in its good electrochemical performance of 735 and 510 mA h g−1 in the 1st and 40th cycles, respectively.113 Electrospun carbon–silicon composite nanofibers have been employed as anode materials for lithium ion batteries by Wang et al.114 The electrochemical properties of the C/Si composite nanofibers were characterized using 2032-coin cells with metallic lithium as the counter electrode. The C/Si composite nanofibers were adhered onto a copper foil with a PVDF binder to make working electrodes with a load density of about 1.3 mg cm−2. The C/Si (77/23, w/w) nanofiber exhibits large reversible capacity up to 1240 mA h g−1 and excellent capacity retention. Ex situ scanning electron microscopy was also conducted to study the morphology change during the discharge/charge cycle, and the results revealed that fibrous morphology can effectively prevent the electrode from mechanical failure owing to the large volume expansion during lithium insertion in silicon. AC impedance spectroscopy revealed the possible reason for the unsatisfactory rate capability of the nanofiber. These results indicate that this novel C/Si composite nanofiber may have some limitations in high-power lithium ion batteries, but it can be a very attractive potential anode material for high energy-density LIBs.115–117 Choi and co-workers118 reported the effects of various surrounding confinements of Si nanoparticles on the electrochemical performance of an Si nanoparticle-based anode for LIBs. Three different types of surrounding confinements were incorporated onto or around the surface of Si nanoparticles: Si nanoparticle-embedded carbon nanofibers (Si@CNF) via electrospinning, carbon nitride-encapsulated Si nanoparticles with core/shell structure (Si@CND), and a binder-enriched Si nanoparticle-based anode (Si@RBD). They found that Si@CNF, which has conducting hard surrounding confinements, and Si@RBD, exhibited high reversible specific capacities of 620 mA h g−1 and 1200 mA h g−1 up to the 30th cycle, respectively. Lin et al. demonstrated the preparation of MnOx/carbon nanofiber composites (MnOx/CNFs) through the electrodeposition of MnOx nanoparticles onto carbon nanofibers and their enhanced electrochemical performance as the anode material in lithium half cells.119 Hosono et al. synthesized carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanowires as well as triaxial LiFePO4 nanowires with a carbon nanotube core and a carbon shell by the electrospinning method.120 Zhu and co-workers121 reported in situ carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanowires with diameters of around 100 nm produced by electrospinning. They grew the nanowires along the c direction and featured a uniform and continuous carbon coating of moderate thickness. These nanowires are single-crystalline and show good electrochemical performance. Mai and co-workers122 developed and synthesized ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires with a diameter of 100–200 nm and length up to several millimeters using low-cost starting materials by electrospinning combined with annealing. The hierarchical nanowires were constructed from attached vanadium oxide nanorods with diameter of around 50 nm and length of 100 nm (Fig. 9). The initial and 50th discharge capacities of the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowire cathodes were up to 390 and 201 mA h g−1, respectively, when the lithium ion battery was cycled between 1.75 and 4.0 V. When the battery was cycled between 2.0 and 4.0 V, the initial and 50th discharge capacities of the nanowire cathodes were 275 and 187 mA h g−1, respectively. Compared with self-aggregated short nanorods synthesized by hydrothermal method, the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires exhibit much higher capacity. This is due to the fact that self-aggregation of the unique nanorod-in-nanowire structures has been greatly reduced because of the attachment of nanorods in the ultralong nanowires, which can keep the effective contact areas of active materials, conductive additives, and electrolyte large and thus fully realize the advantage of nanomaterial-based cathodes. This demonstrates that ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires are one of the most favorable nanostructures as cathodes for improving the cycling performance of lithium ion batteries. Toprakci et al.123 synthesized a LiFePO4/C composite by using a combination of electrospinning and sol–gel techniques. Polyacrylonitrile was used as an electrospinning media and a carbon source. LiFePO4 precursor/PAN fibers were heat treated, during which the LiFePO4 precursor transformed to energy-storing LiFePO4 material and PAN was converted to carbon. Cheah and co-workers124 synthesized one-dimensional vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) nanofibers (VNF) by electrospinning vanadium sol–gel precursors containing vanadyl acetylacetonate and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) followed by sintering. Electrospun VNF exhibited an initial discharge capacity of ∼316 mA h g−1 (∼2.2 Li per V2O5) in the voltage range of 1.75 and 4.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at 0.1 °C rate. When cycled at a reduced voltage range of 2.0–4.0 V vs. Li/Li+, less phase transitions occur, giving rise to the initial specific capacity of 308 mA h g−1 and improved cyclic retention of 74% after 50 cycles. The vanadium-containing precursor VO(acac)3 is dissolved in a solution of ethanol and acetic acid, with addition of PVP to increase the viscosity of the solution. During the electrospinning process, the PVP forms a polymeric scaffold in which the droplets of dissolved VO(acac)3 are evenly dispersed. This enables the formation of a random network of as-spun fibers. Upon sintering, the degradation of PVP and the growth of the V2O5 nanoparticles, via the oxidation of VO(acac)3, occur simultaneously. The sintering process has an annealing effect on the V2O5 nanoparticles and allows the nanoparticles to join, forming porous nanofibers. In addition, the slow sintering rate enables sufficient time for the PVP to be totally degraded.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) FESEM images of electrospun NH4VO3/PVA composite nanowires. (c–f) FESEM images of the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires after annealing. (g) Capacity vs. cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Liang et al.100 reported that PVDF fiber membranes, used as separators for LIBs, prepared by electrospinning combined with heat treatments, exhibited high ionic conductivity at room temperature, a good electrochemical stability, and stable cycle performance. These results indicate that heat-treated PVDF fiber membranes are promising separator candidates for high-performance LIBs. In addition, nanofiber composite membranes including polyvinylidenefluoride-co-chlorotrifluoroethylene (PVDF–CTFE) and PVDF–CTFE/PVDF–HFP were also prepared by electrospinning and used as separator membranes for LIBs.99 Similarly, Jayaraman et al. reported a gelled electrospun PVDFHFP NFs membrane. The separator exhibited liquid-like conductivity of ∼2.9 mS cm−1 at ambient conditions when it was used as a separator in LIBs where the full-cell displays excellent cyclability and high rate capability, which is due to faster ionic transport.101
Supercapacitors
In energy storage devices, supercapacitors have gained attention due to their high-power density, moderate energy density, long cycling life and low maintenance cost. There are two types of superapacitors, one is electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs), which depend on reversible ion absorption in an electrolyte onto the working materials. It requires electrode materials with high specific surface areas. The other is pseudocapacitors, which store charges through a fast and reversible Faradaic reaction.125–130 Compared to carbon electrode materials for electrochemical double-layer capacitors, pseudo-capactive electrode materials including transition-metal oxides and conductive polymers have larger electrochemical capacitances and energy densities and can therefore satisfy the needs of high-performance supercapacitors.131–133
Li and co-workers reported the fabrication of flexible NiFe2O4 nanofiber-based in-plane micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), which could serve as energy storage receptors to drive a portable graphene pressure sensor.134 The obtained NiFe2O4 nanofiber electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 2.23 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and robust cycling stability with a capacitance retention of 93.6% after 10000 charge/discharge cycles. The in-plane MSCs have superior flexibility and outstanding stability even after repetition of charge/discharge cycles during the convex and concave bending states. The MSCs offered a high energy density of 0.197 mW h cm−3 and power density up to 2.07 W cm−3. They also examined MSCs with a graphene pressure sensor as a micro-integrated system to implement its pressure response function and used MATLAB to simulate this system behavior as well. The performance of the designed systems exhibited a stable pressure response, and the simulated results coincide well with the experimental data, demonstrating its feasibility in wearable electronic devices (Fig. 10).134 An and co-workers synthesized activated porous carbon nanofibers with three different types of porous structures, which were controlled to contain 1, 4, and 8 wt% of Sn–poly(vinylpyrrolidone) precursors in the core region and 7 wt% PAN/PVP precursors in the shell region during electrospinning, using a co-electrospinning technique with H2 reduction. The activated porous CNFs, for use as electrodes in high performance electrochemical capacitors, have excellent capacitances (289.0 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1), superior cycling stability, and high energy densities; these values are much better than those of the conventional CNFs. The improved capacitances of the activated porous CNFs are explained by the synergistic effect of the improved porous structures in the CNF electrodes and the formation of activated states on the CNF surfaces.135 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanofibers were fabricated by the combination of electrospinning and vapor-phase polymerization. The fibers had diameters around 350 nm and were soldered at most intersections, providing a strong dimensional stability to the mats. The nanofiber mats demonstrated conductivity of 60 ± 10 S cm−1. The mats were incorporated into all-textile flexible supercapacitors, using carbon cloths as the current collectors and electrospun PAN nanofibrous membranes as the separator. The textile layers were stacked and embedded in a solid electrolyte containing an ionic liquid and PVDF-co-HFP as the host polymer. The resulting supercapacitors were totally flexible and demonstrated interesting and stable performances in ambient conditions.136
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the flexible in-plane MSCs with NiFe2O4 nanofiber electrodes on the PET substrate. (a) Plasma cleaning of the surface of PET, (b) spreading NiFe2O4 nanofibers, (c) sputtering Ni on substrate, (d) coating with photoresist, (e) photolithography, (f) removing Ni, (g) air plasma etching, (h) removing resist, and (i) digital photograph of MSC device. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhi et al. prepared porous activated carbon nanofibers by electrospinning a H3PO4-containing polyacrylonitrile precursor. A small amount of H3PO4 (<1 wt%) serves as the activation agent during carbonization of the nanofibers. The activated carbon nanofibers have a large surface area (∼709 m2 g−1) and high porosity (0.356 cm3 g−1) and they achieved a high specific capacitance of 156 F g−1 (at 0.5 A g−1) at a 1:10 mass ratio of H3PO4 to polyacrylonitrile. The energy density of the supercapacitor with the activated carbon nanofibers as the electrodes reaches 10.98 W h kg−1 at a power density of 10 kW kg−1. This is ∼9 fold larger than that of carbon nanofibers without H3PO4 because the H3PO4-based activation process significantly increases both the micropore volume and the volume ratio of mesopores to micropores.137 Zhou et al. reported the synthesis and electrochemical performance of carbon nanofibers surface-grown with carbon nanotubes (CNT) and nanostructured polyaniline films, i.e., PANI/CNT/CNF, for use as a high-performance electrode material in pseudosupercapacitors.138 The PANI/CNT/CNF films were synthesized via in situ polymerization of aniline onto the surface of CNT-coated CNFs. The CNT coated CNFs were prepared via electrospinning continuous polyacrylonitrile nanofibers, followed by controlled carbonization and CNT growth.138 A facile electrospinning method with subsequent heat treatments was employed to prepare carbon nanofibers containing uniformly dispersed Co3O4 nanoparticles as electrodes for supercapacitors; this work was reported by Xu and co-workers.139 The Co3O4/CNF electrodes with ∼68 wt% active particles delivered a capacitance of 586 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. When the current density was increased to 50 A g−1, ∼66% of the original capacitance was retained. Miao and co-workers140 designed and synthesized hierarchical carbon hybrid-based pseudocapacitive electrodes. Electrospun carbon nanofibers/carbon nanotubes/polyaniline (CNFs/CNTs/PANI) ternary composites were fabricated. The hierarchical CNF/CNT hybrids serving as inner current collectors can afford plentiful transport channels for more rapidly transporting and collecting electrons, greatly reducing the ion diffusion length, and increasing the utilization of pseudocapacitive materials. The ternary composites as electrodes present a high specific capacitance (i.e., 315 F g−1 at 1 A g−1) and dramatic rate capability (i.e., 235 F g−1 at 32 A g−1) in three-electrode configuration, high energy/power density (i.e., 5.1 W h kg−1 at 10.1 kW kg−1), and remarkable cycling stability (i.e., 92% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 2 A g−1). Lee et al.141 prepared electrospun nanofibers (NFs) from a poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)/manganese(II) acetate composite by electrospinning. As-spun hybrid NFs were calcined at different temperatures to remove the polymer matrix, resulting in inorganic MnOx NFs of variable compositional ratios of Mn3O4 to Mn2O3. They obtained a high specific capacitance of 360.7 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Chaudhari and co-workers142 fabricated polyaniline nanofiber (PANI-NF) web electrodes by electrospinning. They achieved a specific capacitance of ∼230 F g−1 at the 1000th cycle. Choi et al.143 reported the fabrication and characterization of conductive Pt fiber mats as the conducting core of a high rate redox supercapacitor. Electrospun Pt fiber mats exhibited electrical conductivity of 412 S cm−1. The Pt fiber mats served as the conducting core for electrochemically deposited hydrous RuO2 overlayers. The hybrid electrode utilizing hydrous RuO2-coated Pt fiber mats showed a high specific capacitance of ∼409.4 F g−1 and high rate capability with a capacity loss of only 21.4% from 10 to 1000 mV s−1. The Ni(OH)2/CNF Ni(OH)2 hybrid membrane exhibited a high specific capacitance of 2523 F g−1 at a scan rate of (5 mV s−1).144 This is attributed to the Ni(OH)2/CNF hybrid membranes with three-dimensional macroporous architectures as well as hierarchical nanostructures, which can provide open and continuous channels for rapid diffusion of electrolyte to access the electrochemically active Ni(OH)2 nanoplatelets. Moreover, the carbon nanofiber can act both as a conductive core to provide efficient transport of electrons for fast Faradaic redox reactions of the Ni(OH)2 sheath and as a buffering matrix to mitigate the local volumetric expansion/contraction upon long-term cycling.144 Electrospun polyacrylonitrile/polyaniline core–shell composite nanofibers showed a high specific capacitance of 335 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and a high rate capability with a capacitance retention of 175 F g−1 at 32 A g−1 in a three-electrode configuration test.145 A flexible supercapacitor based on MnO2 nanoparticles exhibited a specific capacitance of 645 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.5 (A g−1).146 Hollow polyaniline nanofibers with controllable wall thickness were fabricated by in situ polymerization of aniline using the electrospun poly(amic acid) fiber membrane as a template. A maximum specific capacitance of 601 F g−1 was achieved at 1 (A g−1).147 Nickel-embedded carbon nanofibers were prepared by the processes of stabilization and carbonation after electrospinning a mixture solution of nickel acetate and polyacrylonitrile in N,N-dimethylformamide. The specific capacitance of the carbon nanofiber electrode without the Ni loading was 50 F g−1, while that of the 22.4 wt% Ni/carbon electrode increased to 164 F g−1.148
Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen is a well-known energy carrier that can serve as an ideal fuel. It is a promising alternative to conventional energy source because the exhaust gases in hydrogen-powered vehicles mainly contain water vapor. The chemical energy density of hydrogen (142 MJ kg−1) is at least three times larger than that of other chemical fuels.149–153 A key technological challenge to the widespread use of hydrogen as a sustainable energy carrier is storing it in a safe, efficient, and economical manner. After decades of exploration, it is, however, still a big challenge to find practical systems that can provide satisfied thermodynamics, kinetics, and cycling stabilities for hydrogen storage application.154,155 As a unique technology, electrospinning offers a versatile route for immobilizing small nano particles in and/or on the nanofibers. The hydrogen storage capacity of electrospun nanofibers/carbon nanofibers is determined by physical properties such as the pore geometry, surface area and size of the particles. Carbon nanofibers can store a large amount of hydrogen up to 68 wt%.156–162
Polyacrylonitrile has typically been used for preparation of carbon fibers with high performance. Carbonization of PVDF or saran polymers also gives mesoporous or microporous carbon materials. The ultrafine structure of electrospun PVDF nanofibers is expected to be suitable for the formation of pores that are effective for hydrogen adsorption, compared to PVDF films or microfibers. So, microporous carbon nanofibers as hydrogen storage materials were prepared through the carbonization of as-electrospun PAN and PVDF nanofibers. As-electrospun PAN- or PVDF-based nanofibers were prepared from the typical electrospinning of the polymer solution containing several different proportions of iron(III) acetylacetonate (IAA) on the weight of the polymer as a catalyst for graphitization. Carbon nanofibers and graphite nanofiber were prepared from carbonization after stabilization of them.149,163–166 Xia and co-workers demonstrated carbon-coated complex hydrides with 3D porous nanostructures. They used a simple one-pot template-free synthesis of carbon-coated Li3N porous nanofibers via electrospinning for hydrogen storage. In particular, discrete carbon nanofibers comprising well-distributed Li3N prepared by the calcination of the as-electrospun PVA-coated LiN3 nanofibers. The pore geometry, such as micropores, mesopores and macropores, was introduced by the decomposition of PVA and LiN3 during the calcination. These features could effectively limit the growth of Li3N particles and facilitate the H2 diffusion through pores of carbon walls to react with the active species.167 Sharma and co-workers synthesized composites of polyaniline and aluminum doped tin-xide (Al–SnO2/PANI) nanofibers for hydrogen gas sensing application. Al–SnO2/PANI composite nanofibers have been fabricated via electrospinning technique and subsequent calcination procedure. The as-prepared Al–SnO2/PANI composite nanofibers showed a diameter of around 200–300 nm and formed a non-woven material with a highly porous and agglomerated structure. On exposure to hydrogen gas (1000 ppm), it was found that the nanofibers of Al–SnO2/PANI composite showed high sensitivity at 48 °C with relatively faster response/recovery as compared to pure SnO2 and Al doped SnO2 nanofibers.168 Electrospun poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)/ammonia borane (AB) nanofiber composites for hydrogen storage applications were presented by Alipour et al.169 In this study, PMMA/AB nanofiber composites were fabricated and the synergetic nanoconfinement effect of nanofibers on dehydrogenation temperature and the removal of unwanted by-products of AB (NH3BH3) were examined. The dehydrogenated PMMA/AB samples exhibited an exothermic reaction temperature of 112 °C, which is significantly lower than that of pure AB (120 °C). Furthermore, the interaction between AB molecules and PMMA nanofiber structures decreased the enthalpy of exothermic decomposition from −21.00 to −10.66 kJ mol−1 H2, suggesting that this type of AB nanofiber composite can provide a convenient reversible hydrogen storage material. Li and co-workers synthesized three kinds of structured carbon-nanofibers/carbon-paper (CNFs/CP) composites via in situ growth of CNFs on the surface of CP by catalytic chemical vapor deposition, and directly employed them as the catalytic supports to disperse active Pt nano-particles for decalin dehydrogenation to produce COx-free hydrogen. The CNFs/CP composites combined the unique physico-chemical properties of CNFs with the excellent thermal conductivity and the large geometric surface area of CP, making them favorable for heat transfer to the strongly endothermic dehydrogenation reaction. The reaction and composite variables, such as the feed volume and the CNF yield, were optimized to ensure the maximum amount of hydrogen evolution in a definite reaction time. The results show that the largest accumulative hydrogen amount (4.32 mol g−1 Pt) in 2 h was generated from a proper volume of decalin over a structured Pt/CNFs/CP catalyst.170 A colloidal silica-incorporated porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) was utilized as a dual template to prepare mesoporous carbon nanofibers (MCNFs) for electrochemical hydrogen storage, which was studied by Xing et al.171 The as-prepared MCNF showed a hierarchical nanostructure consisting of open macroporous channels connected with large mesopores and micropores. Because of the large surface area and unique hierarchical nanoarchitecture, which facilitates fast mass and electron transport, the MCNF revealed a discharge capacity of 679 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1. This value is significantly greater than that (i.e., 394 mA h g−1) observed for an ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) with a similar specific surface area. Furthermore, at 3000 mA g−1, the MCNF demonstrated a discharge capacity of 585 mA h g−1, which is about twice that (i.e., 256 mA h g−1) of the OMC.171 Nanofiber composites were also studied for the hydrogen generation reaction.172–174 Chinnappan and co-workers reported electrospun nanofiber composites for hydrogen evolution, such as PVDF/Co(II)Cl2,175 ionic liquid/polymer nanoscale networks,176 (PVDF–[C6(mpy)2][NiCl4]2−) nanofiber composites.177
Summary
Smart textiles refers to nanomaterials with surface modification, which can interact with the environment/user. The convergence of textiles and flexible electronics has the potential to combine the positive attributes of each technology: the speed and computational capacity of modern electronics with the flexible, wearable, and continuous nature of fiber assemblies. Recent research reports show that wearable textiles have integrated energy storage systems, which is the primary component of garment devices and a prerequisite for constructing self-powered e-textiles. In this review, we have compiled electrospun nanofiber-based materials used in smart textiles, including sensors as well as energy storage and conversion. In order to produce inexpensive piezo/triboelectric nanofibers, the electrospinning process is a good candidate as various materials and nanoparticles have been successfully fabricated as nanofibers and/or nanofibers with embedded nanoparticles. The conventional electrospinning process has been modified for good alignment and position controllability as well as the feasibility to embed nanoparticles. The obtained nanofibers show high flexibility and stretchability, whilst at the same time being cost-effective and highly clothing-compatible smart e-textiles, and thus hold promise for applications in, and are at the frontiers of science for, wearable electronic devices. Electrospinning is an old technology, which has existed in the literature for more than 70 years, and it is the most suitable method for the fabrication of continuous nanofibers. Although electrospinning is a versatile and important technique for synthesizing 1D nanostructures, there are still some issues that need to be addressed before these materials can reach their potential towards industrialization and practical applications. It has been difficult to obtain uniform nanofibers with diameters below 50 nm and the production rate is low. We hope that, in the near future, all the difficulties in this technique will be overcome by research exploration and development of the electrospinning method combined with other fabrication techniques. Moreover, as is evident from this review, the current progress in electrospinning techniques make us believe that it is a powerful tool. It will play a vital role in the development of wearable/flexible electronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Lloyd's Register Foundation, UK (Project Number R265000553597, Nanotechnology in Sub-Sea Power Transmissions) for research support.
Notes and references
C. Wu, T. W. Kim, F. Li and T. Guo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6449–6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hansora, N. G. Shimpi and S. Mishra, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107716 RSC .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
Y. He, W. Chen, C. Gao, J. Zhou, X. Li and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8799–8820 RSC .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790–823 CAS .
L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423–6435 Search PubMed .

          P. Brown and K. Stevens, Nanofibers and Nanotechnology in Textiles, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. P. Hinestroza, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 64 CrossRef .
A. G. Avila and J. P. Hinestroza, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 458–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Han, B. Kim, J. Li and M. Meyyappan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 1–4 Search PubMed .
N. Liu, W. Ma, J. Tao, X. Zhang, J. Su, L. Li, C. Yang, Y. Gao, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4925–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Guinovart, M. Parrilla, G. A. Crespo, F. X. Rius and F. J. Andrade, Analyst, 2013, 138, 5208–5215 RSC .
L. Kou, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Han, X. Zhao, K. Gopalsamy, H. Sun and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, Q. Hu, B. Hu, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6273–6280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X. M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, Sensors, 2014, 14, 11957–11992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Honarvar and M. Latifi, J. Text. Inst., 2017, 108, 631–651 CrossRef .
L. M. Castano and A. B. Flatau, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 053001 CrossRef .
A. K. Yetisen, H. Qu, A. Manbachi, H. Butt, M. R. Dokmeci, J. P. Hinestroza, M. Skorobogatiy, A. Khademhosseini and S. H. Yun, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3042–3068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cherenack and L. van Pieterson, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 091301 CrossRef .
A. Sawhney, B. Condon, K. Singh, S. Pang, G. Li and D. Hui, Text. Res. J., 2008, 78, 731–739 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gould, Mater. Today, 2003, 6, 38–43 CrossRef .
L. R. Ferreras, R. Pfattner, M. Mas-Torrent, E. Laukhina, L. Lopez, V. Laukhin, C. Roviraab and J. Veciana, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 637–640 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, L. Li, J. K. Y. Lee, L. Tian, M. Srinivasan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 361–395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Cai, X. Zong, J. J. Zhang, Y. Y. Hu, Q. F. Wei, G. F. Hei, X. X. Wang, Y. Zhao and H. Fong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 598–618 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gniotek and I. Krucinska, Fibres Text. East. Eur., 2004, 12, 13–16 CAS .
P. Lukowicz, T. Kirstein and G. Troster, Methods Inf. Med., 2004, 43, 232–238 CAS .
S. Park and S. Jayaraman, MRS Bull., 2003, 28, 585–591 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, K. S. Lee, J. Shim, Y. Liu, C. Lee, H. Cho, M. J. Kim, S.-J. Park, Y. J. Yun, H. Y. Kim and D. I. Son, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thavasi, G. Singh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 205–221 CAS .
S. Peng, G. Jin, L. Li, K. Li, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1225–1241 RSC .

          S. Ramakrishna, K. Fujihara, W. E. Teo, T. C. Lim and Z. Ma, An introduction to electrospinning and nanofibers, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd, Singapore,  2005 Search PubMed .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feng, K. C. Khulbe and T. Matsuura, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 756–776 CrossRef CAS .
A. Frenot and I. S. Chronakis, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 64–75 CrossRef .
J. M. Deitzel, J. Kleinmeyer, D. Harris and N.C. Beck Tan, Polymer, 2001, 42, 261–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chuangchote, A. Sirivat and P. Supaphol, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 1–8 CrossRef .
L. Matlock-Colangelo and A. J. Baeumner, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2612–2620 RSC .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X. M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, Q. Hu, B. Hu, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6273–6280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, Sensors, 2014, 14, 11957–11992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Langenhove and C. Hertleer, International Journal of Clothing Science and Technology, 2004, 16, 63–72 CrossRef .

          H. R. Mattila, Intelligent textiles and clothing, CRC Press, Cambridge,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. A. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Boubée de Gramont, S. Zhang, G. Tomasello, P. Kumar, A. Sarkissian and F. Cicoira, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 093701 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Bayram and J. L. Volakis, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2012, 60, 4141 CrossRef .
Y. Atwa, N. Maheshwari and I. A. Goldthorpe, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3908 RSC .
J. Jur, W. J. Sweet, C. J. Oldham and G. N. Parsons, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1993 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mattana, P. Cosseddu, B. Fraboni and G. G. Malliaras, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2033 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gan, S. Shang, C. W. M. Yuen and S. X. Jiang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 117, 208 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shakir, Z. Ali, J. Bae, J. Park and D. J. Kang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6324 RSC .
S. Liu, M. Hu and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1320–1325 RSC .
S. Cha, S. M. Kim, H. Kim, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, Y. J. Park, B. G. Song, M. H. Jung, E. K. Lee, B. L. Choi, J. J. Park, Z. L. Wang, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5142–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, X. G. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
W. Zeng, X.-M. Tao, S. Chen, S. Shang, H. L. W. Chan and S. H. Choy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2631–2638 CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. G. Wei, R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Hsu and K. C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9351–9355 CAS .
J. H. Jung, M. Lee, J. I. Hong, Y. Ding, C. Y. Chen, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10041–10046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. B. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. W. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, A. C. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3086–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cha, S. M. Kim, H. Kim, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, Y. J. Park, B. G. Song, M. H. Jung, E. K. Lee, B. L. Choi, J. J. Park, Z. L. Wang, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5142–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, G. A. Zhu, R. S. Yang, A. C. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2534–2537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4632–4646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Sohn, S. N. Cha, B. G. Song, S. Lee, S. M. Kim, J. Ku, H. J. Kim, Y. J. Park, B. L. Choi, Z. L. Wang, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 97–104 CAS .
B. J. Hansen, Y. Liu, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3647–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
Y. Huang, H. Hu, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, C. Liu, Z. Pei, C. Hao, Z. Wang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. H. Khoshaman, Application of electrospun thin films for supra-molecule based gas sensing, Master of Applied Sciences Thesis, Simon Fraser University,  2011 .

          L. M. Castano and A. B. Flatau, Smart Textile Transducers: Design, Techniques, and Applications, in Industrial Applications for Intelligent Polymers and Coatings, ed. M. Hosseini and A. S. H. Makhlouf, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,  2016, pp. 121–146 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Zheng, S. Diao, W. D. Toh, C. W. Ang, M. Je and C. H. Heng, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2011, 58, 768–772 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Duan, Y. Huang, Z. Yin, N. Bu and W. Dong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3289–3295 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Duan and Y. Huang, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, F. Zhang, S. Guan, J. Zheng and C. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6988–6995 RSC .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y.-K. Fuh and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. T. Pan, C. K. Yen, S. Y. Wang, W. C. Chuang, Y.-S. Yang, Y.-C. Lai and C. H. Tsao, Conference paper, 2015, retrieved on 23 sep 2016.
J. Chang, M. Dommer, C. Chang and L. Lin, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 356–371 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 479–481, 340–343 CrossRef CAS .
T. Greeshma, R. Balaji, M. M. Nayak and S. Jayakumar, Ferroelectrics, 2009, 393, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
A. Gheibi, M. Latifi, A. A. Merati and R. Bagherzadeh, J. Polym. Res., 2014, 21, 469 CrossRef .
S. Soltanian, R. Rahmanian, A. Servati, F. Ko and P. Servati, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 30, 121–129 CrossRef .
P. Kulha, O. Babchenko, A. Kromka, M. Husak and K. Haenen, Vacuum, 2012, 86, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kon, K. Oldham and R. Horowitz, Sensors and Smart Structures Technologies for Civil, Mechanical, and Aerospace Systems 2007, Pts 1 and 2,  2007, vol. 6529, pp. U901–U911 Search PubMed .
A. Arogbonlo, C. Usmaa, A. Z. Kouzani and I. Gibson, Procedia Technol., 2015, 20, 270–275 CrossRef .
S. Jo, J. Kim, J. Noh, D. Kim, G. Jang, N. Lee, E. Lee and T. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22884–22893 CAS .
D. Kim, G. Jang, J. Kim, S. Seo, W. H. Park and T. S. Lee, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1510–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pecher and S. Mecking, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6260–6279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Garain, S. Jana, T. K. Sinha and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4532–4540 CAS .
J. Zhao, G. Wu, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, X. Taob and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24333–24337 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Ding, L. Zhang, P.-X. Gao and Y. Lei, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5193–5198 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Lou, W. Han and G. Shen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14986–14991 RSC .
S. Wu, P. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and X. Qin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 252, 697–705 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 CAS .
X. Shi, W. Zhou, D. Ma, Q. Ma, D. Bridges, Y. Ma and A. Hu, J. Nanomater., 2015, 140716 Search PubMed .
L. Li, S. Peng, Y. Cheah, Y. Ko, P. The, G. Wee, C. Wong and M. Srinivasan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14823–14830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, M. Alcoutlabi, J. V. Watson and X. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1939–1951 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, S. Cheng, J. Zhao, C. Zhang, S. Sun, N. Zhou, Y. Qiu and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayaraman, V. Aravindan, P. S. Kumar, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8660–8666 CAS .
L. W. Ji and X. W. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1146–1149 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Yu, P. C. Chen, D. W. Zhang and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. L. Wang, A. Dhanabalan, P. A. V. Aken and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6485–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, L. Gan, F. Y. Kang, M. X. Wang, W. C. Shen and Z. H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1216–1220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. B. Zhu, P. A. V. Aken and J. Maier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15984–15985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10151–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, Y. Yang, C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji and X. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3219–3226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, G. Yin, Y. Ma, P. Zuo and X. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3216–3220 RSC .
C. Kim, K. S. Yang, M. Kojima, K. Yoshida, Y. J. Kim, Y. A. Kim and M. Endo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2393–2397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Q. Yang, D. Teng, X. Yang and S. Ryu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1187–1190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, L. Gan, R. Lv, M. Wang, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and W. Shen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. X. Ding, L. C. Zhang, H. W. Xu, D. W. Zhang, T. Cheng and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5052–5056 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Luo, D. D. Fan, X. L. Liu, H. Y. Mao, C. F. Yao and Z. Y. Deng, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wolf, Z. Pajkic, T. Gerdes and M. Willert-Porada, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Yu, P. C. Chen, D. W. Zhang and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, J. G. Lee, H. Y. Lee, S. W. Kim and C. R. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 790–796 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, L. Ji, M. D. Woodroof and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5025–5031 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hosono, Y. Wang, N. Kida, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, M. Okubo, H. Matsuda, Y. Saito, T. Kudo, I. Honma and H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 212–218 CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Yu, L. Gu, K. Weichert and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mai, L. Xu, C. Han, X. Xu, Y. Luo, S. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4750–4755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Toprakci, L. Ji, Z. Lin, H. A. K. Toprakci and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7692–7699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Cheah, N. Gupta, S. S. Pramana, V. Aravindan, G. Wee and M. Srinivasan, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6465–6472 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
B. J. Yoon, S. H. Jeong, K. H. Lee, H. S. Kim, C. G. Park and J. H. Han, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 388, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, A. D. Su, S. Li, S. T. Nguyen, L. Lu, C. Y. H. Lim and H. M. Duong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 601, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Candelaria, Y. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Li, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Li and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 195–220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, B. M. Sanchez, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 839–855 RSC .
Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3408–3416 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Lou, W. Han and G. Shen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14986–14991 RSC .
G.-H. An and H.-J. Ahn, Carbon, 2013, 65, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laforgue, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhi, S. Liu, Z. Hong and N. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 43619–43623 RSC .
Z. Zhou, X.-F. Wu and H. Hou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23622–23629 RSC .
Z.-L. Xu, E. K. Heidari, J.-Q. Huang, J. Huang and J.-K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13503–13511 Search PubMed .
F. Miao, C. Shao, X. Li, K. Wang, N. Lu and Y. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1689–1696 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, T. Lee and B.-S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 335–340 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhari, Y. Sharma, P. S. Archana, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, S. Mhaisalkar and M. Srinivasan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1660–1668 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Choi, T.-S. Hyun, H. Lee, S.-Y. Jang, S.-G. Oh and I.-D. Kim, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A65–A68 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. Ding, Y. Huang, H. Gu, Y.-E. Miao and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22669–22677 CAS .
F. Miao, C. Shao, X. Li, K. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4180–4187 CAS .
X. Li, G. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li and J. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10103–10106 CAS .
Y.-E. Miao, W. Fan, D. Chen and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4423–4428 CAS .
J. Li, E.-H. Liu, W. Li, X.-Y. Meng and S.-T. Tan, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 478, 371–374 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 206–211 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. San Martin, I. Zamora, J. J. San Martin, V. Aperribay, E. Torres and P. Eguia, Energy, 2010, 35, 1898–1907 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-i. Orimo, Y. Nakamori, J. R. Eliseo, A. Züttel and C. M. Jensen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4111–4132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Mu Jo, Electrospun Nanofibrous Materials and Their Hydrogen Storage, ©2012, license InTech.
J. Yang, A. Sudik, C. Wolverton and D. J. Siegel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 656–675 RSC .
C. Weidenthaler and M. Felderhoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2495–2502 CAS .
A. Chambers, C. Park, T. K. Bakers and N. M. Rodriguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4253–4256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Hwang, S. H. Lee, K. S. Sim and J. W. Kim, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, N. M. Musyoka, P. Annamalai, H. W. Langmi, B. C. North and M. Mathe, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9382–9387 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Nielsen, F. Besenbacher and T. R. Jensen, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2086–2098 RSC .
P. E. de Jongh and P. Adelhelm, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1332–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fichtner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21186–21195 RSC .
S. Peng, L. Li, J. K. Y. Lee, L. Tian, M. Srinivasan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 361–395 CrossRef CAS .
D.-K. Kim, S. H. Park, B. C. Kim, B. D. Chin, S. M. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2005, 13, 521–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, B. C. Kim, S. M. Jo, D. Y. Kim and W. S. Lee, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2005, 837, 71–76 CAS .
H. J. Chung, D. W. Lee, S. M. Jo, D. Y. Kim and W. S. Lee, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2005, 837, N3.15.11–N13.15.16 Search PubMed .
S. E. Hong, D.-K. Kim, S. M. Jo, D. Y. Kim, B. D. Chin and D. W. Lee, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xia, D. Li, X. Chen, Y. Tan, Z. Tang, Z. Guo, H. Liu, Z. Liu and X. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6238–6244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Sharma, D. V. Jamkar and S. B. Kondawar, Procedia Mater. Sci., 2015, 10, 186–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alipour, A. M. Shoushtari and A. Kaflou, e-Polym., 2014, 14, 305–311 CAS .
X. Li, Y. Tuo, H. Jiang, X. Duan, X. Yu and P. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 12217–12226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, B. Fang, A. Bonakdarpour, S. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 7859–7867 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xuezhi, Z. Jinghong, Q. Gang, L. Ping, Z. Xinggui and C. De, Chin. J. Catal., 2010, 31, 979–986 CrossRef .
L. Jia, D. A. Bulushev, O. Y. Podyacheva, A. I. Boronin, L. S. Kibis, E. Yu. Gerasimov, S. Beloshapkin, I. A. Seryak, Z. R. Ismagilov and J. R. H. Ross, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Sheikh, T. Cantu, J. Macossay and H. Kim, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2011, 3, 216–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chinnappan, H.-C. Kang and H. Kim, Energy, 2011, 36, 755–759 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chinnappan, A. H. Jadhav, J. M. C. Puguan, R. Appiah-Ntiamoah and H. Kim, Energy, 2015, 79, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chinnappan and H. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18851–18859 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Amutha Chinnappan
	Amutha Chinnappan received her PhD degree in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She then worked as a BK21 Postdoctoral Fellow until 2015, and after that became an Assistant Professor (Research) at the Department of Energy Science and Technology, Myongji University. She is currently working as a Research Fellow at the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. Her current research interests include green chemistry, conducting cables/wires, smart textiles, wearable/flexible electronics, and ionic liquid-based functional nanomaterials for energy applications.

Chinnappan Baskar
	Dr. Chinnappan Baskar is an Associate Professor and former Director (Officiating) of THDC Institute of Hydropower Engineering and Technology Tehri, Constituent Institute of Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun, India. He has received his MSc Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and PhD in Organic and Materials Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore. His research interests include synthetic organic chemistry, conducting polymers, green chemistry, ionic liquids, biomass conversion, bioenergy, green polymers, bioplastics, smart textiles, and wearable electronics. He is the editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); author of Engineering Chemistry book (Wiley India); co-author of Stereochemistry (Narosa Publishing House and Alpha Science International Ltd), and co-author of Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).

Shikha Baskar
	Dr. Shikha Baskar obtained her PhD in Organic Chemistry from the Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab, India and received post-doctoral training at Myongji University, South Korea. She is currently working as a Project Scientist (under the Scheme for Young Scientist and Technologist of SEED Division, Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology) in Chemistry Division, Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India. Her current research interests are in the areas of synthetic organic chemistry, ionic liquids, biomass conversion: biopolymers, biodegradable plastics, fine-chemicals and biofules. She is the co-editor of Biomass Conversion: The Interface of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer-Verlag); co-author of Engineering Chemistry (Wiley India); and co-author of Systematic Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (IK International Publishers, Delhi).

Greeshma Ratheesh
	Greeshma Ratheesh is a PhD student at Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. She completed her Master of Science in Biotechnology from Bharathidasan University, India. She also completed her MTech in Nanoscience and technology from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India. Her research interests include scaffold fabrication for regenerative therapy, drug delivery, nanomedicine and 3D printing.

Seeram Ramakrishna
	Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng is the Director of Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology at the National University of Singapore (NUS) and world-renowned researcher in the field of nanomaterials. He is a Highly Cited Researcher (http://www.highlycited.com). He has co-authored 1000 articles, with 67000 citations and an H-index of 125. Three start-up companies in Singapore leverage his research innovations. He is a member of the World Economic Forum Committee on Future of Production, and the Singapore Smart Manufacturing Technology Standards Committee. He innovated electro-hydrodynamic technology to mass-produce nanofibers and nanoparticles with new functionalities.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of electrospinning setup.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrospun nanofibers in different applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  Highly durable piezoelectric nanogenerator based on PVDF/NaNbO3 nanocomposite and conductive fabric electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright 2013. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of power generating device. (b) Typical voltage outputs of a nanofiber membrane device subjected to an impact action (initial impact speed, 34 mm s−1). (c) Voltage and (d) current outputs of the same nanofibre device under 5 Hz repeated compressive impacts. Nanofibre membrane thickness = 140 mm; working area = 2 cm2. (e) PVDF nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission. Copyright 2011. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematics and demonstration of yarns. (a) Schematics of yarn fabrication. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of an as-drawn yarn. (c) A long yarn rolled on a rod and knotted. (d) A cloth knitted with the as-drawn yarn (gray-colored) and a cotton yarn (white-colored). (e) Illustration of the yarn modified by deposition of rGO, MnO2 and PPy. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission. Copyright 2015. American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the near field electrospinning process showing possible dipole directions (black arrows) and electrical field direction (red arrows). The PVDF polymer solution experiences mechanical stretching and in situ electrical poling during the formation of nanofibers owing to the high electrostatic field toward the substrate. (b) SEM microphoto showing an electrospun PVDF nanofiber on two contact pads. (c) An optical image of a single nanofiber nanogenerator on top of a plastic substrate with two electrical wires. (d) Testing results of a PVDF nanofiber nanogenerator under constant mechanical strain but with varying strain rate. As the strain rate increases, higher output current is produced while the total charges generated in both cases remain approximately the same. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission. Copyright 2010. American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Morphologies of the PVDF–rGO electrode membranes (a and b) and the PVDF nanofiber membrane (c and d); schematic of the piezoelectric device (e); and cross-sections of the piezoelectric device assembled using the continuous electrospinning method (f). Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission. Copyright 2016. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of Li ion battery intercalation–de-intercalation reaction. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission. Copyright 2014. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) FESEM images of electrospun NH4VO3/PVA composite nanowires. (c–f) FESEM images of the ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires after annealing. (g) Capacity vs. cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the flexible in-plane MSCs with NiFe2O4 nanofiber electrodes on the PET substrate. (a) Plasma cleaning of the surface of PET, (b) spreading NiFe2O4 nanofibers, (c) sputtering Ni on substrate, (d) coating with photoresist, (e) photolithography, (f) removing Ni, (g) air plasma etching, (h) removing resist, and (i) digital photograph of MSC device. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
