Recent progress in noble metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA06942F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA06942F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22467-22487Recent progress in noble metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction

        
          
            Jian 
            Cai
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rida 
            Javed
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daixin 
            Ye
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Hongbin 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      
Department of Physics, College of Sciences & Institute for Sustainable Energy, Shanghai University, 200444, PR China
Received 
      16th July 2020
    , Accepted 11th September 2020First published on 7th October 2020AbstractHydrogen, a renewable and clean energy carrier, is the best alternative to fossil fuels. Hydrogen evolution from water electrolysis using renewable electrical energy is quite attractive. Noble-metal-based materials are currently considered the best electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode of electrolysis cells. Noble metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts as model materials with an ultra-small size and high atomic utilization have shown promising catalytic HER performance. In this paper, recent research efforts toward developing advanced noble metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts supported on different support materials with high performance for water splitting catalysis are reviewed and analyzed in terms of their design, synthesis, characterization, catalytic mechanisms, and HER performance validation and optimization. The technical challenges in researching and developing such nanocluster and single atom HER electrocatalysts are discussed and future research directions are also proposed for overcoming the challenges toward their practical application.Jian CaiJian Cai received his Bachelor's degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2018, and is currently pursuing his doctorate in the College of Sciences, Shanghai University. His research interests include the synthesis of noble metal catalysts and their application in fuel cells and perovskite electrocatalysis for water-splitting techniques.Rida JavedRida Javed received her Bachelor's degree in Physical Chemistry from Hazara University Mansehra, Pakistan, and M.Phil. in Physical Chemistry from the NCE, University of Peshawar, Pakistan. Currently, she is working as a PhD Scholar under the supervision of associate Professor Hongbin Zhao at Shanghai University. Her research interests are focused on electrode materials from biomaterials for energy storage devices and electrocatalysis.Daixin YeDaixin Ye received her PhD from Fudan University in 2015 and worked at the University of Gothenburg between 2015 and 2019 as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2019, she joined Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the application of nanomaterials and nanotechnology in biosensing and electrochemical energy conversion and storage. She was awarded the “Shanghai Young Oriental Talent” in 2019 and has published more than 20 academic papers and edited two books.Hongbin ZhaoHongbin Zhao received his PhD from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 2009 and completed his postdoctoral research at Shanghai University between 2009 and 2011. Since 2011, he has remained at Shanghai University in addition to working for a year in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo, Canada, from 2014 to 2015 as a visiting scholar (Shanghai Pujiang Talent). He is currently an associate professor at Shanghai University, and his research interests focus on electrode materials for fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulphur batteries and supercapacitors. He was awarded the “Shanghai Pujiang Talent” award and has published more than 70 academic papers, 1 edited book, 2 book chapters and 6 patents. In addition, he has also organized more than 5 academic research projects and one application project.Jiujun ZhangJiujun Zhang is a professor at Shanghai University and a principal research officer (Emeritus) and technical core competency leader at the National Research Council of Canada Energy (NRC). Dr Zhang received his B.S. and M.Sc. in Electrochemistry from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 30 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion. In addition, he is also an adjunct professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo.
1. Introduction
With the increased demand for energy, the rapid consumption of non-renewable fossil fuels and its associated environmental pollution have become a concern in terms of the sustainability of global communities. Regarding this, exploring clean and renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, waterfall, sea-wave, geothermal, etc. and developing their associated energy storage and conversion technologies seem to be necessary.1,2 Among different energy storage and conversion technologies, the electrochemical splitting of water to produce hydrogen using electricity produced from renewable energy sources and even excess electricity has been recognized to be a reliable and practical option. Hydrogen as the energy carrier, having one of the highest energy density values per mass (120–142 MJ kg−1), can be used through both direct combustion to release heat energy and fuel cells to produce clean electrical energy.3,4 Regarding electrochemical water splitting, the electrolysis cell involves two half-reactions of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, 2H+ + 2e− → H2) at the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER, H2O(l) → 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−) at the anode.5,6 These two half-reactions are both kinetically slow, leading to low energy efficiency of the electrolysis devices even though electrocatalysts are used on the electrodes.7,8 For hydrogen generation through the HER, the most practical electrocatalysts are still noble metal (such as Pt) based materials.9,10 For such high-performance HER electrocatalysts, a favorable morphology/structure, high surface area, high catalytic activity and stability are necessary. With respect to this, innovative materials design and synthesis are critical in order to achieve such favorable properties.11–13
Currently, the most active/stable electrocatalysts are carbon-supported noble metals such as Pt nanomaterials with different morphologies and structures. An ideal electrocatalyst for the HER would have the following typical features: (1) robust electrocatalytic activity in electrolyte solutions with a wide pH range; (2) high durability with stable activity in complex electrolytes; (3) simple synthesis route and facile industrial production; (4) low noble-metal loading to save cost; and (5) easy recycling and reemployment. Therefore, the rational design of electrocatalysts on the basis of structure and morphology can be an efficient way to enhance the electrocatalytic performance of the HER. There are some strategies with which the synthesized catalyst would have high performance, and these resulting catalysts can have several properties such as: (1) large specific surface area and tons of exposed active sites; (2) improved electrical contact; (3) increased porosity between adjacent nanostructures of the catalyst, which can effectively transport charges deep into the catalyst surface; and (4) enhanced crystal and topological defects which increase materials' electron density and conductivity. It seems that one of the most important factors that influence the properties and performance of an electrocatalyst is the size of metal particles. Regarding this, some theoretical and experimental research has shown that sub-nanometer sized catalysts have better electrocatalytic activity and selectivity than nanometer sized ones.14–16 The high activity of small particles can be attributed to their high surface-to-volume ratio, surface geometric effect, electronic properties, and quantum size effect.17 In addition, the low-coordination, unsaturated atoms often play an important role as the active sites in catalysis.18 Thus, downsizing the particles to nano-size and atomic levels such as nanoclusters and single atoms, as shown in Fig. 1, is a feasible strategy for electrocatalytic reactions including the HER.
 Fig. 1  Geometric and electronic structures of single atom, nanocluster, and nanoparticle. 
For practical application, the catalyst's stability during the operation of water electrolysis seems to be even more important. The degradation of HER catalysts can be caused by the following factors:19–22 (1) the Ostwald ripening effect or crystal grain migration causing Pt nanoparticles to become bigger and aggregated; (2) insufficient retention of the active catalyst structure; (3) the detachment of Pt nanoparticles from the support particles; and (4) the poisoning deactivation of electrocatalysts in an environment with trace impurities commonly occurring in practical applications. Furthermore, Pt-based catalysts are expensive due to the insufficient resources and rocketing price of the noble metal Pt, which can hinder their large-scale application. Therefore, enhancing the working stability while decreasing the cost of Pt-based HER electrocatalysts has become an important research topic.
Regarding efficient noble metal electrocatalysts for the HER, the surface modification of supporting materials by a small amount of Pt in the form of single-atoms or atomic clusters can significantly increase the catalytic activity to a level comparable to or even better than that of commercial Pt/C.23,24 The atomic-cluster, a molecule or ion consisting of three or more finite atoms directly bonded to form a polyhedron or a missing point polyhedron bone skeleton,25 has been explored as a catalyst in the field of HER electrocatalysis. As early as the 1950s, Chini synthesized some noble metal subnano- and nano-clusters.26 Thereafter, due to the unique physical and chemical properties of such materials, some researchers explored them as catalysts in the 1980s.27,28 Generally, the smaller the size, the larger the specific surface area, the higher the catalytic activity, and the more efficient the atom-utilization rate.29 As demonstrated, when the size of the particle decreases to below 5 nm, its continuous energy spectrum can split into discrete energy levels, which gives rise to remarkable changes in the physicochemical and optical/electronic properties.30,31 When the particle is downsized to an extreme size, single atom materials with only isolated single-atoms dispersed on the support surface can be obtained.32,33 For example, Qiao et al.34 used a coprecipitation method to prepare a single atom catalyst which consisted of Pt single atoms dispersed on an iron oxide substrate. In recent years, single atom catalysts have attracted extensive attention in many catalysis fields because of their high atom-utilization efficiency, high selectivity, and unique properties.35,36
Noble metals such as Pt nanoclusters and single atom catalysts must be dispersed and anchored on appropriate supports. In particular, the supports should have hetero-nanostructures of distinct chemical components with open skeletons or interior vacancies in the interfaces induced by crystal-lattice dislocation, providing abundant voids and vacancy defects.37,38 Atomic-level electrocatalysts (nanoclusters and single atom catalysts) have been claimed to significantly reduce the load of noble metals while decreasing the cost and increasing atom-utilization efficiency and thus improving the catalytic performance. As shown in Fig. 1, the electronic properties of metal particles can be strongly changed when the particle size is decreased gradually.
Regarding understanding of nanoclusters and single atom catalysts, with the emergence of advanced characterization methods, the structure, catalytically active sites and catalytic mechanism have been gradually revealed. For example, high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM), X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra and X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra can all be used to deeply study the physical and chemical features of catalysts. Furthermore, density functional theory (DFT) and first principles calculations can also be used to study the electrocatalytically active centers theoretically and help understand the catalytic behavior of the catalysts.
This paper with a focus on noble-metal nanocluster and single-atom electrocatalysts for the HER provides a comprehensive overview of the recent progress in preparation, characterization, catalytically active sites and the corresponding catalytic mechanisms. The main content is as follows: (1) summarizing different types of noble metal nanocluster and single-atom electrocatalysts and their support materials; (2) analyzing catalytic HER mechanisms for a fundamental understanding of catalyst performance optimization; (3) summarizing the design and synthesis strategies and methods of noble metal nanocluster and single-atom catalysts; (4) presenting the design and synthesis rules for achieving high-performance HER electrocatalysts; (5) summarizing the challenges in developing noble metal nanocluster and single-atom HER electrocatalysts and proposing several future research directions for overcoming challenges toward their practical applications in water electrolysis for hydrogen production.
2. Effect of the support on the geometric structures and electronic structures of noble metal nanocluster and single-atom HER electrocatalysts
As identified, noble metal nanoclusters and single atoms can only be anchored on the supporting materials to form catalysts. The supporting materials can provide voids, vacancies, defects and/or strong interactions. Generally speaking, noble metal atoms in nanoclusters and single atoms tend to aggregate into nanoparticles during the synthesis and catalysis processes due to their high surface energy and activity, leading to a decrease in catalytic performance.39,40 Furthermore, metal atoms are prone to oxidization in air, resulting in difficulty in the recognition of the real active sites by ex situ characterization.41,42 Using supporting materials the nanoclusters and single atoms can be supported and active sites can be anchored to enchance both catalytic activity and stability. Surface studies have indicated that the structures and electronic properties of the supports have significant influences on the spatial location and stability of the metal species.43,44 Furthermore, the supports can also control the metal particle size by anchoring or confining noble metal atoms. Studies have shown that the Ostwald ripening process could be significantly suppressed if the size of metal particles was controlled in a narrow range.45,46 As a result, the ultra-small particles would not agglomerate during the pyrolysis and thermal treatments. In addition, the three-dimensional nanocage or space between interfaces formed on the surface of the supports could also limit the growth of metal nanoparticles to an atomic level.47–49
2.1 Effect of geometric structure of the support on noble metal anchor sites
The geometric structures of noble metal nanocluster and single-atom sites depend strongly on their local environment on the supports, which is determined by the bare surface of supports, atmospheric exposure and even dynamic fluctuations under reaction conditions. In the case of metal oxides as supports, noble metal atoms are commonly hosted by cationic vacancies. This is due to the facile oxidation of noble metal atoms by the uncapped oxygen atoms, and these oxo ligands can partially break down to engender some metal–metal contributions according to the exposure circumstances.50,51 Besides the cationic vacancies, surface oxygen can also be reduced by the formation of an oxygen vacancy, which then serves as the binding site for nanoclusters and single atoms.52,53 Many studies on oxide-supported metal clusters showed that surface defects of the supports could serve as the anchoring sites for metal clusters or even single atoms.54,55 On carbon-based materials, metal atoms are mainly coordinated and anchored with heterogeneous heteroatoms such as N or S in carbon materials.56,57 As reported, carbon doped with heteroatoms such as N or S can effectively stabilize single-atom catalysts due to the strong effects of the local coordination structure.23,57,58 Additionally, the three-dimensional nanocage or space between interfaces formed on the surface of carbon materials could also be used as anchoring sites.47–49
For single-atom catalysts, there are more types of reported supports. With the second metal as a support for a single-atom alloy, the surface structure of active sites is related to the type and the exposed crystallographic plane of the host second metal.59,60 The noble metal single atoms can be substituted in the lattice of the second metal for anchoring. For other kinds of support materials, the location of noble metal single atoms relies on the type of vacancies on surfaces. For example, with sulfur defects on MoS2, Pt single atoms could be trapped in the anionic vacancies.61
2.2 Effects of electron structure changes of the support on surface energy of the catalyst and adsorption of reactive species
Due to the strong metal–support interaction between the anchored metal atoms and supports, the electron transfer between the support and metal species can lead to a variation of charge states of single atoms, which is also dependent on the diverse coordination environment on different supports. Such a strong metal–support interaction would affect the charge density and distribution of metal species, which could further affect the catalytic properties. As reported, the electron transfer between the metal and the support could be affected by the size of metal particles and the geometric location of the metal species on the support.62–64 Electron transfer between the support and metal species can make the Fermi energy level between the metal species and the support balanced. Furthermore, electron transfer can be affected not only by the support species, but also by the size of metal particles. Lykhach et al.65 used resonant photoemission spectroscopy (RPES) to indirectly measure the number of electrons transferred across the Pt/CeO2 interface. Their results showed that the relationship between the number of electrons transferred and the number of Pt atoms was parabolic and the number of electrons transferred per Pt atom reached a maximum for Pt nanoclusters with 30–70 atoms (approximately 1–1.5 nm). It was observed in many systems that metal nanoclusters prefer to be positively charged, which was believed to be a medium state between metallic nanoparticles and isolated atoms.30 Different types of vacancies, i.e., cation or anion defects, could lead to different charge states of single atom active sites. According to the geometry of a single atom on the support, the single atom in the cation vacancy showed a positive charge state to act as a cation in the vacancy, while it appeared as a negative charge in the oxygen vacancy.66,67
The electron transfer between the support and metal and the changes in the charge state of the metal particles can result in a change in the surface energy, so that the absorption and desorption energy of the reactant species is changed during the reaction. For example, for H2, studies indicated that the chemisorption of H2 on reducible transition metal oxide (TiO2, Fe3O4, CeO2, and Nb2O5)-supported noble metals (Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, and Ir) was obviously suppressed after high-temperature reduction.68–70 Lin et al.71 studied Au clusters supported on MgO using differential conductance (dI/dV) maps, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and electronic structure calculations. A high dI/dV intensity was exclusively observed at the cluster edges while the center remained dark, suggesting that the perimeter sites at the Au/MgO interface carried most of the excess electrons transferred from MgO thin films to Au clusters. Furthermore, they also used CO as a probing molecule to study the active sites of Au/MgO.72 Their results showed that CO could exclusively adsorb onto the perimeter sites at the Au/MgO interface and the adsorption of CO could induce a redistribution of the localized charges from the Au/MgO interface toward the interior of Au clusters. Bruix et al.73 reported that a charge transfer from Pt nanoclusters to the CeO2 support together with an O transfer from CeO2 to Pt could lead to an enhancement in water adsorption and O–H bond dissociation.
Many studies have shown that the strong interaction between the support and nanoclusters/single atoms could help to anchor noble metal particles on the supports and thus improve catalytic performance. With respect to this, the strong interactions between various metals and reducible oxide supports (such as TiO2, CeO2, and FeOx) have been studied in terms of the electron and lattice oxygen transfers through an interface, which can effectively stabilize the highly dispersed metals in the oxidized state.75–77 As shown in Fig. 2, four strong chemical bonds between Pt and adjacent O atoms can be formed through covalent (d–p) orbital interactions, as reported by Fang et al.74 However, the weakened Pt–support interaction can cause the single Pt atoms to be dynamically released from the nitrogen–carbon substrate during the reaction, resulting in a very high hydrogen evolution catalytic activity.74 As shown in Fig. 2, the two Pt1–C2 sites can provide a very low density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, verifying the weakened Pt–support interaction. Such near-free Pt with high 5d density and a low-valence state is favorable for the adsorption of H2O and H reactants and shows the optimal level for the H adsorption step with a near-zero ΔGH* (0.17 and 0.06 eV). As a matter of fact, the interaction between noble metals and supports still needs more effective and reliable characterization and dynamic monitoring methods for it to be revealed, which may be a big challenge in the future.
 Fig. 2  (a) Computational models of Pt1–C3N1, two Pt1–C2 and two Pt1–C1N1 moieties. White: H; gray: C; blue: N; purple: Pt. (b) Calculated adsorption energies of H2O and H on the surfaces of Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2 and Pt1–C1N1. (c) Calculated PDOS of the Pt d orbital of clean surfaces, H 1s of hydrogen adsorbed on Pt sites and Pt d-orbital of Pt sites with adsorbed hydrogen (denoted as *Pt d-orbital), from left to right, respectively. The gray, red and blue colours represent the Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2-1, and Pt1–C2-2 surfaces, respectively. The DOS peaks of the H 1s-Pt 5d antibonding state are indicated by the arrows. Note that the sharp peak ∼−1 eV for Pt1–C2-2 represents the bonding rather than antibonding state, as it corresponds to the prominent Pt d-band in the *Pt d-orbital PDOS (partial density of states). (d) Schematic DOS illustration of the interaction between Pt and H, the H 1s states split into bonding and antibonding states. With four-coordinate Pt evolving to two-coordinate, the corresponding antibonding states upshift to higher energy with lower occupancy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
2.3 Effects of electronic structures of the support on the coordination environment and catalytically active center of noble metals
Due to the special electronic structure of the noble metal and its unsaturated 5d-orbital, the noble metal particles and their coordination environment on the support can directly serve as the catalytically active centers. For example, in metal oxide supports, the noble metal–oxygen system could adsorb OH− or H+ and then catalyze the evolution of H2.57 For carbon materials, the coordination environment of noble metals could serve as the catalytically active center, such as Pt–N4 (ref. 58 and 78) and Pt–C4.79 As shown in Fig. 2, the Pt sites with weakened Pt-support interaction and high 5d density are the real active centers as indicated by theoretical simulation.74 In addition, the atomic level dispersed noble metal particles could also act as the reinforcements in electrocatalysts. Generally speaking, the active centers of two-dimensional MoS2 for the HER correspond to the coordinatively unsaturated S atoms along its edges, leaving a large number of in-plane domains useless.80,81 Deng et al.82 used both experimental measurements and DFT calculation to observed that single Pt atom-doped few-layer MoS2 nanosheets (Pt–MoS2) could show a significantly enhanced HER activity compared with pure MoS2, due to the tuned adsorption behavior of H atoms on the in-plane S sites neighboring the doped Pt atoms. Zhang et al.59 reported that noble metal single atoms could be deposited on the surface of the second metal and integrated into the lattice to adjust the electronic structure of the surrounding atoms for improving the electrocatalytic performance.
In fact, the interaction of noble metal nanoclusters or single atoms with supports can change the electronic structure of the metal and also change the atomic and electronic structure of the supports around the metal particles. There is even a dynamic structural change during the catalytic reaction. The maximum contact between the metal and supports can help to exert a synergistic effect on the metal and the support to improve the catalytic activity. In recent years, the support materials of noble metal nanoclusters and single atom electrocatalysts have been changed from oxides and organic carbon materials to inorganic carbon materials. This is because the inorganic carbon materials have better conductivities, larger specific surface areas, rich and controllable pore structures and low cost. In addition, during pre-activation and catalytic processes, the involvement of chemical bonding of metal atoms with the reactants can lead to the change of the coordination environment of active sites, thus weakening their chemical bonding and stability on the supports.83 In this regard, further dynamic monitoring by in situ characterization methods to observe the changing processes, exploring suitable supports to load the appropriate noble metal nanoclusters or single atoms with optimized loadings and developing innovative synthesis strategies for achieving high-performance HER electrocatalysts are necessary.
3. Noble-metal nanocluster electrocatalysts
In general, noble metal nanoclusters possess well-defined chemical compositions and atomic structures,84,85 which exhibit abundant catalytically active sites for catalyzing the electrochemical reactions.86 The following subsection will summarize the preparation methods, structures and catalytic properties of noble metal nanocluster electrocatalysts for the HER studied in recent years.
3.1 Synthesis of noble metal nanocluster electrocatalysts
Innovative methods to synthesize noble metal nanoclusters with nanoscale structures and strong electrocatalytic performance have been extensively explored in recent years. Many synthesis methods have been developed to be the simplest and mildest approaches in terms of achieving high-purity nanoclusters with high productivity. The methods can be categorized into two kinds. One is the wet chemical method, such as the chemical reduction method,56,87–92 electrochemical method,93–95 metal-exchange method,96–99 or space-confinement method.47–49 The other is the solid phase method, which includes a deposition step and a subsequent pyrolysis step. In this solid phase method, the precursor with noble metal ions uniformly dispersed and adsorbed on the support is first prepared and subsequent pyrolysis at a high temperature under different atmospheres is performed to produce the final product.75,100–103
Traditional wet chemical methods for preparing noble metal nanoclusters have many advantages, such as maturity and ease of operation. However, the mass loading of noble metal is difficult to accurately control, and the loading is generally too small to significantly affect the catalytic performance. Furthermore, mass production using wet chemical methods is a bottleneck. Over the last several years, some solid phase methods have been developed to prepare metal nanoclusters.104,105 For example, Ye et al.104 prepared Ru NCs/BNG (Ru nanoclusters anchored on B/N-doped graphene) by the traditional solid-phase reaction method. Their synthesis steps are shown in Fig. 3. Gao et al.106 reported that a tunable amount of monatomic and nanoscale Pt clusters could be trapped in TiO2 and CeO2 nanowires via a generic one-step dealloying approach from the designed Al–Ti–Pt and Al–Ce–Pt precursor alloys. They used a spin-coating method with dealloying through a NaOH solution soaking treatment to prepare Pt–TiO2 and Pt–CeO2. There are many cases of synthesizing nanoclusters by solid composite synthesis, and the obtained materials were Aun/MoS2,107 WS2 NS/Ag NCs108 and so on. Tsunoyama et al.52 developed an intensive and size-selective nanocluster ion source using high-power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) to prepare Pt NCs.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the synthesis of Ru NCs/BNG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
With the in-depth understanding of noble metal nanoclusters, more simple methods for preparation have emerged, some of which have shown promise for large-scale production. Controlling the grain growth of noble-metal nanoparticles through vacancies, defects or space confinement on the support surface plays an important role in preparing noble metal nanoclusters without being restricted to wet chemical methods.
3.2 Pt-based noble monometallic nanocluster electrocatalysts for the HER
Currently, Pt-based materials are still the state-of-the-art and practical electrocatalysts for the HER. However, the high price and low reserves of Pt sources have hindered its large-scale commercial applications. On the premise of ensuring catalytic activity and stability, many strategies for reducing the Pt content have been proposed in the past few decades. One of these is to decrease the particle size to nanoclusters for increasing the Pt atom utilization while exposing more active sites at the same time.

Pt-metal oxide composite electrocatalysts. 
It has been reported that all kinds of metal oxides can be used as the support (such as TiO2, CeO2, NiO and FeOx) and can induce strong interactions between electrons and lattice oxygen and effectively stabilize highly dispersed metals in their oxidation states.75,95,109 For example, Gao et al.106 used Al–Ti–Pt and Al–Ce–Pt alloys as precursors to prepare Pt nanoclusters with the supports of TiO2 and CeO2. The results showed that a complete dealloying in three days was possible. The obtained Pt0.2–CeO2 nanowires displayed a similar performance to the Pt/C catalyst on the basis of the onset potential in an acid electrolyte, while the mass activity was more than 50 times that of Pt/C.
Pt can be loaded not only on a single metal oxide support, but also on a perovskite oxide surface. For example, Tsunoyama et al.52 used HiPIMS to prepare Pt nanoclusters on a STO (SrTiO3) (100) surface. When the number of Pt atoms was 30 (Pt30/STO), the lowest HER onset potential in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution was achieved. Based on the electron affinities of Pt nanoclusters measured by gas-phase anion photoelectron spectroscopy, the reaction mechanism of the HER was proposed as follows: the size-specific HER activity originated from the matching of energy levels of Pt nanoclusters with the band structure of SrTiO3 surfaces.
It has also been reported that the strong interactions between noble metals and reducible oxide supports (such as TiO2, CeO2, NiO and FeOx) involve their oxygen vacancy rich surfaces and the interface transfer of electrons and lattice oxygen, which can effectively stabilize the highly dispersed noble-metal nanoclusters in their oxidized state. However, in recent years, the number of reports on the preparation of noble metal nanocluster electrocatalysts using oxide supports seems to be reduced. Although oxygen vacancies exist on the surfaces of the oxide supports to improve the conductivity of the catalysts, carbon support materials seem to be the better choice due to their higher conductivity compared to metal oxides and modifiable surface vacancies and defects. Moreover, due to the low specific surface area of oxide supports, there are fewer anchor sites for effective active sites, which limits the activity of the catalyst.


Pt-carbon composite electrocatalysts. 
Noble metal nanoclusters can be easily deposited on carbon supports from their respective ions with relatively high redox potentials through either electroless deposition or substrate enhanced electroless deposition.110 In addition, the structural defects on carbon materials, particularly those doped with heteroatoms such as nitrogen or sulfur, have recently been demonstrated to be the effective sites for electrocatalytically active centers, which can also tune the surface charge distribution.111–114 For example, Cheng et al.103 reported a novel one-step carbon-defect-driven electroless deposition method to prepare ultrasmall, well-defined and stable Pt atom clusters (Pt-AC) (∼0.8 nm) supported on defective graphene (Pt-AC/DG). As shown in Fig. 4, the electrochemical analysis demonstrates the high performance of Pt-AC in catalyzing the HER, showing a greatly enhanced mass activity, faster kinetic process, and excellent stability compared with commercial Pt/C catalysts. Both XANES and EXAFS show a strong peak located at approximately 1.71 Å, corresponding to Pt–C/O coordination, indicating the intense electronic interaction between Pt atoms and carbon defects in the Pt-AC/DG structures. This not only helped improve catalytic performance but also effectively restricted the migration of spontaneously reduced Pt atoms to immobilize/stabilize the resultant Pt-AC. Yan et al.56 reported Pt nanoclusters (∼1.5 nm) with a sulfur-doped carbon support. In their DFT calculations of metal size-dependent charge transfer, the electron affinity analysis and d-band center results further suggested the charge transfer reversal between Pt and S-graphene when the Pt atom number was increased from 1 to 44, which was believed to be due to the increase of electron affinity and the downshift of the d-band center for enhancing the electron capture ability of Pt clusters. As a result of this, the electron-enriched Pt NC/S–C (Pt nanocluster anchored on sulfur-doped carbon) was far more active than the electron-deficient Pt single atoms for catalyzing the HER and exhibited an overpotential of only 11 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a high mass activity of 26.1 A mg−1 at 20 mV, which was 38 times greater than that of commercial Pt/C. Wang et al.94 applied an in situ electrochemical reduction method for preparing Pt nanoclusters supported on carbon nanotubes with obvious structural defects. According to DFT calculations and the measured catalytic activity and stability, the vacancy defective structure (di- and mono-vacancies) could stabilize the Pt nanoclusters induced by migration and oxidation and optimize the state of electronic density. By changing the morphology of the carbon support from sheets to a hollow 3D structure (hollow mesoporous sphere92) and changing the morphology of the Pt nanoclusters through introducing Co-MOF97 (MOF: metal organic framework), the catalytic HER activity and stability could also be improved due to the structural advantages.
 Fig. 4  (a) High-magnification HAADF-STEM images of Pt-AC/DG-150 (Pt-AC is highlighted with yellow circles); (b) the Pt size distribution; (c) XANES and (d) EXAFS spectra of Pt-AC/DG-100, Pt-AC/DG-150 and Pt foil; (e) linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the HER on Pt-AC/DG-X and commercial Pt/C (20%) in a N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution; the loading amounts of Pt on glassy carbon are 0.67, 1.01, 2.06, 3.43 and 20 μg cm−2 for Pt-AC/DG-X and commercial Pt/C, respectively; (f) Tafel plots; (g) LSV curves of the HER on Pt-AC/DG-150 at 0 and 5000 accelerated durability test cycles; all the electrochemical measurements were corrected with iR compensation by using CHI software. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2020 ACS. 
Regarding carbon materials, although their interaction mechanism with Pt nanoclusters and the catalytic mechanism of the HER still need to be further revealed and verified, they have been considered to be one of the best supports for Pt nanocluster electrocatalysts due to the unique physical properties, excellent chemical stability, and wide variability.

3.3 Other noble monometallic (Ru, Pd, Ir, and Rh) nanocluster electrocatalysts for the HER
Besides Pt-based nanocluster, non-Pt noble-metals, such as Ru, Pd, Ir, Rh, etc. have also been explored as HER electrocatalysts. These noble metals have unique electronic structures on their surfaces, making them have high electrocatalytic performance.

Ru-based nanocluster. 
Recently, there have been many reports on Ru-based nanoclusters, and their supports are basically carbon materials. For example, Ye et al.104 employed a solid-phase reaction method to prepare Ru nanoclusters (NCs) (0.5–1 nm) anchored on B/N-doped graphene, and the structure of Ru NCs/BNG is shown in Fig. 5(a). Through DFT calculations, the mechanism of Ru NCs/BNG catalyzing water cracking to generate hydrogen was found to occur through the Volmer–Tafel route. The electronic interaction between B and Ru NCs could accelerate the cleavage of H–OH, altering the HER mechanism with a lowered activation energy of H2 formation. Fig. 5(b) and (c) show high HER activity catalyzed by Ru NCs/BNG, which is even better than that of Pt/C. Yuan et al.98 employed a two-step method to prepare metal nanoclusters (Ru, Pt, Pd, etc.) combined with single cobalt atoms anchored on nitrogen-doped carbon (Ru/Pt/Pd@Co-SAs/N–C). The DFT calculations suggested that the synergy between surface Ru nanoclusters and Co-SAs/N–C could efficiently stimulate the cleavage of HO–H bonds of H2O to generate the required H* intermediate species, which were adsorbed at the active Ru sites to boost the HER kinetic process. The Ru@Co-SAs/N–C exhibited an outstanding electrocatalytic HER activity better than that of commercial Pt/C.
 Fig. 5  (a) Structure of Ru NCs/BNG; (b) LSV curves of Ru NCs/BNG, Ru NPs/NG, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH at 2 mV s−1 with iR correction; (c) Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 


Pd-based nanocluster. 
Palladium has similar physical and chemical properties to Pt and its composite materials have been considered to be competitive alternative HER electrocatalysts.115,116 For example, Pd@MOF-74-M (M = Co, Zn, Ni) was prepared through a chemical reduction method by Zhang et al.89 Pd nanoclusters (3 nm) were confined in the cavities of the MOF-74-Co, which could hamper the aggregation of Pd nanoclusters during the HER. Thus, Pd@MOF-74-Co showed both higher electrocatalytic activity and stability than commercial Pt/C. Porous CeO2 nanorods synthesized by a hydrothermal method were also used as the support, which showed advantages of rich defects anchoring Pd nanoclusters.117 Gao et al.90 used porous CeO2 nanorods as the support to prepare Pd nanoclusters (0.5 nm). According to the calculations and XANES/EXAFS measurements shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c), the Pd–O bonds between Pd nanoclusters and CeO2 can be clearly seen, demonstrating that the porous CeO2 can help anchor Pd nanoclusters. The electrochemical results indicate that the Pd nanoclusters can give an onset potential of −0.036 V vs. RHE and an approximately 100 times higher current density and a higher stability for the HER than the commercial Pt/C in the low-potential region, as shown in Fig. 6(d–g). Based on the free energy of absorption for hydrogen atoms (ΔGH*), further insights from density functional theory suggested that the active centers were the subunits of Pd nanoclusters rather than the CeO2 support.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CeO2 porous nanorods and the subsequent confinement of Pd nanoclusters for the HER; (b) XANES spectra and (c) EXAFS spectra of Pd NCs@CeO2, PdO, and Pd powder, respectively; (d) LSV curves for the HER; (e) comparison of current densities from Pd NCs@CeO2 and Pt/C in the potential range from −0.14 to −0.44 V; (f) LSV curves of the HER on Pd NCs@CeO2; (g) comparison of current densities from Pd NCs@CeO2. All the polarization curves were obtained in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 ACS. 


Ir-based nanocluster. 
Ir-based electrocatalysts have also been employed as HER electrocatalysts.118–122 For example, Pi et al.123 reported a new class of carbon supported highly dispersed IrM (M = Ni, Co, Fe) nanocluster electrocatalysts by using a one-step facile wet-chemical strategy. The IrNi nanoclusters (1.5–2 nm) exhibited high electrocatalytic performance for both the HER and OER due to the ultrasmall particle size and high purity. Cao et al.122 prepared a catalyst of Ir/C-1 with Ir nanoclusters with a diameter of ∼3 nm highly dispersed on the carbon support that showed both high OER and HER performance. At a current density of 10 mA cm−2, the catalyst showed overpotentials of only 50.4 mV for the HER, which is better than that of commercial Ir/C and Pt/C catalysts. The results of DFT calculations revealed that the exposure of Ir (110) in Ir/C-1 could facilitate the thermodynamic process of the HER.


Rh-based nanocluster. 
Hu et al.105 reported a facile and scalable ion-adsorption strategy to in situ immobilize ultrafine and well-dispersed Rh nanoclusters (2.93 wt% loading of Rh) on the carbon support (Rh/C), which showed high-performance in catalyzing water splitting under both acidic and alkaline electrolyte conditions. The resulting in situ Rh/C nanoclusters presented high electrocatalytic performance with low overpotentials of 8 and 30 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4, respectively, which outperformed the state-of-the-art Pt catalysts. However, Rh is more expensive than Pt, and so its large-scale application is limited.

3.4 Noble bimetallic nanocluster electrocatalysts for the HER
To further improve the electrocatalytic HER performance and fundamental understanding of noble monometallic nanoclusters, some noble bimetallic nanoclusters have also been designed and synthesized. As observed some noble bimetallic nanoclusters could further improve the catalytic HER activity and selectivity compared with monometallic ones due to the synergistic effects of heteroatoms.124–126 The combination of noble metals with transition metals such as Ni, Co, and Fe can effectively decrease the use of noble metals and reduce the cost. However, transition metals are more prone to corrosion in both acidic and alkaline solutions. The supports of early bimetallic nanoclusters were mainly organic materials,96,99,127 and the resulting catalysts generally exhibit lower electrocatalytic HER performance than commercial Pt/C due to the poor electrical conductivities of organic supports and the hindered mass transfer of reactants and products as well as fewer exposed active sites. However, the noble bimetallic nanoclusters in situ grown on inorganic supports can give optimal electrocatalytic HER activity and stability. For example, Li et al.128 reported a PtRu@RFCS (RFCS: resorcinol-formaldehyde carbon sphere) electrocatalyst with Pt–Ru nanoclusters in situ embedded in carbon. As shown in Fig. 7(a–d), the catalyst shows a high turnover frequency (4.03 H2 s−1), a small Tafel slope (27.2 mV dec−1), and small overpotentials (19.7 mV and 43.1 mV at current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively) in 0.5 M H2SO4. Based on the instrument characterization and DFT calculations, the high performance is attributed to the strong interaction between PtRu nanoclusters and the carbon support, abundant active sites and catalytic sites being exposed, and the synergistic effect of Pt and Ru (H2 is formed through a Tafel mechanism on Pt surfaces and a Heyrovsky mechanism on Ru surfaces). Furthermore, Pt can display an optimal level of hydrogen adsorption for the evolution of hydrogen.129,130 With an in-depth understanding of the support, as shown in Fig. 7, Li et al.88 synthesized Pt22Ru33 nanoclusters ex situ grown and embedded on carbon (BP) nanosheets which show a high catalytic HER performance in alkaline solution due to the strengthened interaction between nanoclusters and the BP support. The theoretical modeling indicates that the electronic interaction between BP and PtRu nanoclusters speeds up the dissociation of water through the optimized adsorption strength of H* species, giving rise to the remarkably high HER activity. The XANES spectrum in Fig. 7(f) shows the shift of the absorption edge of Ru to higher energy indicating the slight electron transfer from Ru to BP nanosheets and the synergistic effect between BP and PtRu nanoclusters. Therefore, the in situ embedded bimetallic nanoclusters in the supports can enhance the interaction between supports and the nanoclusters for improving the electrocatalytic HER performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM images and atomic configuration diagrams for PtRu@RFCS-6h and (b) PtRu/RFCS; (c) the polarization curves (iR compensated) and (d) the corresponding comparisons of the onset overpotential (η) and η values obtained at current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2; (a–d) reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing. (e) The polarization curves for PtRu NCs/BP and Pt/C; (f) the Ru K-edge XANES spectra of PtRu NCs and PtRu NCs/BP; (e and f) reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019 ACS. 
4. Noble metal single atom electrocatalysts
Reducing the size of noble metal catalysts to very small particles on supports is an efficient approach to expose more catalytically active sites,131,132 especially for single-atom catalysts. Noble metal single atom electrocatalysts can not only drastically reduce the overall noble metal loading so as to maximize the atom utilization, but also improve the electrochemical performance and reaction selectivity because the low coordination of single metal atoms may induce high chemical activity as long as their sites can prolong the active time.133,134 The unique features make single atom catalysts ideal models for understanding atomic-level catalysis mechanisms, simultaneously bridging the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis.135 With respect to this, Qiao et al.34 demonstrated that single Pt atoms doped in FeOx could be used as a catalyst for CO oxidation and exhibited high performance. Later on, more single-atom catalysts were developed, which were dispersed on many types of supports, such as Mxene,136,137 g-C3N4,138 metal oxide,139,140 Mo-based compounds,134,141 carbon-based materials,142,143 and so on. At the same time, many preparation methods for noble metal single atom electrocatalysts have also been developed. In this section, the recent development of noble metal single atom electrocatalysts and their synthesis methods, structures and electrocatalytic HER performance will be reviewed and analyzed.
4.1 Synthesis of noble metal single atom electrocatalysts
There are physical and chemical methods for synthesizing noble metal single atom electrocatalysts. The representative physical method is the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method, which is very common in the preparation of single atom catalysts with low noble metal loading. This physical method can not only be used to prepare single noble metal (Pt) atoms,23,59,74,144,145 but also Pt–Ru dimers.146 However, it requires specific reaction equipment to physically evaporate atoms under high vacuum conditions,23,147 which seems to be a critical step. However, the chemical methods, which do not require such harsh conditions, are widely used to prepare noble metal single atom catalysts. The commonly used methods include the electrochemical reduction/deposition method,24,136,148,149 hydrothermal or solvothermal method,60,61,150–152 impregnation method,57,79,137,153–156 photochemical method,78,157,158 and so on. Although these methods are easy to perform, the catalytically active sites seem insufficient. Recently, noble-metal single atom electrocatalysts have become research hotspots, and some new strategies have been proposed and developed to prepare single atom materials, such as the microwave reduction method,58 solid-phase reaction method,159–161 laser ablation method162 and electrospinning method.163 These new methods for preparing noble metal single atom catalysts have achieved efficient preparation of small doses. However, there is still a certain gap in terms of large-scale production.
4.2 Pt-based single atom electrocatalysts for the HER
In 2011, Qiao et al.34 was the first to synthesize Pt single atom catalysts for CO oxidation. Since then, various platinum single atom catalysts have emerged. When the size of the catalyst is reduced to the atomic level, it exhibits quantum effects and unique physical and chemical properties, improving utilization of platinum for cost-reduction. The interaction between Pt single atoms and the support is the key to improving performance, and the structure of the support can effectively prevent the aggregation or shedding of Pt single atoms during the catalytic reaction and help improve the catalyst's physical and chemical stability. Regarding Pt-based single atom electrocatalysts, the following several types of materials are the typical ones that have been developed in recent years.

Electrocatalysts composited with Pt single atoms with metal oxides. 
In recent years, Pt single atoms supported on metal oxides to form electrocatalysts can show a favorable relationship between Pt single atoms and supports for the improvement of the electrocatalytic HER performance. Very recently, Park et al.153 employed an impregnation method to prepare an HER electrocatalyst consisting of Pt single atoms (SA) and a WO3−x support (Pt SA/WO3−x) with 0.42 wt% Pt loading, which showed 16.3 times higher mass activity than commercial Pt/C due to the high electronic conductivity of WO3−x and the synergistic effect between Pt single atoms and the WO3−x support. Feng et al.161 reported that Pt single atoms with a high loading of 2.8 wt% were selectively anchored on NiS in three-dimensional flower-like NiS@Al2O3 with a heterostructure through a solid-phase reaction method. The Pt/NiS@Al2O3 exhibited a high catalytic activity, with a low overpotential of 34 mV and high stability with only a 2% increase in overpotential after 120 hours of constant polarization with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4. From the HAADF-STEM and XANES results shown in Fig. 8, it can be seen that Pt single atoms are mainly anchored at the interfaces and carry positive charges on NiS@Al2O3, which can induce strong interaction between Pt single atoms and the support. According to DFT calculation, when Pt atoms were adsorbed on the support surface and replaced Ni atoms, the Gibbs free energy of H adsorption was remarkably reduced and close to zero. Pt atoms and their surrounding S atoms could act as the catalytic sites for the HER. Liu et al.152 observed that Pt1/MoO3−x with a strong interaction between Pt atoms and the support could exhibit a high HER electrocatalytic performance. Therefore, the strong interaction between Pt single atoms and metal oxide supports can create a synergistic effect for improving the electrocatalytic HER performance. However, compared with other supports, the metal oxide supports have relatively lower electronic conductivities and smaller surface areas. In some cases, the interactions between Pt atoms and the supports are also insufficient for a synergetic effect. In addition, the loading of Pt single atoms is also limited (volume load is less than 1 wt%). The low conductivities of the metal oxide support and the low Pt loading, and therefore fewer Pt active sites, can hinder their application in catalyzing electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of Pt/NiS@Al2O3; (b) and (c) normalized Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt/NiS@Al2O3 in comparison with Pt foil; (d–f) HAADF-STEM images of Pt/NiS@Al2O3 showing the doping sites of Pt atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing. 


Electrocatalysts composited with Pt single atoms and Mo compounds. 
Mo-based materials mainly including MoC, MoS2, MoS2/NiS2 and Mxenes (Mo2TiC2Tx) have been explored as the supports for Pt single atoms to form electrocatalysts in recent years. There is a consensus that the active centers of MoS2 are the coordinatively unsaturated S atoms along the edges,164 while the in-plane domain of MoS2 is always inert. However, through the doping of Pt single atoms, the in-plane domain of MoS2 can become active for HER electrocatalysis.61,82 For example, Wu et al.61 employed a one-step hydrothermal method to prepared Pt–MoS2 catalysts with 1.18 atom% Pt. The results of DFT calculations indicated that in the absence of Pt single atoms, once a H atom is adsorbed on S2−, it could adversely affect the catalytic activity and inhibit the catalytic reaction, and after the platinum atom is anchored on the surface of MoS2, these Pt single atoms could serve as critical active centers for the HER through capturing H+ from the solution. When NiS2 was introduced into the MoS2 support to form a ganoderma-like heterogeneous structure, the support could modify the electronic structure and improve the HER activity.155 This unique ganoderma-like heterostructure with doped dispersed Pt atoms could not only improve electrical conductivity but also increase the active site number, thereby enhancing the catalytic HER performance. Zhang et al.136 used electrochemical exfoliation to fabricate double transition metal MXene nanosheet-Mo2TiC2Tx, with abundant exposed basal planes and Mo vacancies in the outer layers. The developed catalyst exhibited a high catalytic ability with low overpotentials of 30 and 77 mV for achieving 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, and a mass activity about 40 times greater than that of the commercial Pt/C. The Pt atom entered into the lattice of Mxene and occupied the Mo vacancy, which led to the redistribution of the electronic structure, thus improving the electronic environment of catalytic HER. Furthermore, Pt single atom immobilized MXene showed highly occupied states compared to the bare MXene near the Fermi level, which could promote electron transfer, leading to a higher conductivity of Mo2TiC2O2–PtSA.
In conclusion, the positively charged Pt single atoms are favorable for the HER because the strength of hydrogen adsorption on them is less than that on Pt atoms of the Pt/C catalyst, leading to faster formation and release of molecular hydrogen.


Electrocatalyst composited with Pt single atoms with other metals. 
Metal supports commonly include some different host metal or alloy nanoparticles, such as Pd nanoparticles,59 Pd/Au core–shell nanowires,150 Pd nanorings,60 and so on. As identified, the charge-transfer between Pt single atoms and other metal supports and the tunable coordination environments can endow Pt single-atom catalysts with great potential in promoting the intrinsic activity of active sites.165,166 For example, Chao et al.150 reported that an enhanced electrocatalyst constituting atomically dispersed Pt on screw-like Pd/Au nanowires with 2.74 atom% Pt was synthesized by a hydrothermal method, exhibiting superior catalytic HER performance in acidic solution with an overpotential of 20.6 mV at 10 mA cm−2 without obvious activity attenuation after 5000 continuous CV cycles. Zhang et al.59 employed the ALD method to deposit Pt single atoms on the (100) and (111) surfaces of Pd nanoparticles supported on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes to form a Pt/Pd SAA (single atom alloy) electrocatalyst, which showed a high mass HER activity with an overpotential of 0.05 V at a current density of 23.5 A mg−1, which was 54.6 times greater than that of the Pt/C catalyst (0.43 A mg−1). From the XANES measurements, the Pt isolated atoms on octahedral Pd particles were observed to have a character of Pt 5d unoccupied density of 0.8176, indicating that the interaction between Pt single atoms and the Pd surface was higher than that of baseline catalysts. According to DFT calculations, the improved HER activity of the Pt/Pd SAA catalyst was attributed to the high unoccupied density of the Pt 5d state and the decreased adsorption energy of the H2 product.
In conclusion, the strong interaction between the Pt atoms and the metal supports can improve the electronic structure of Pt and metal supports near Pt single atoms so as to have a synergistic effect to promote the electrocatalysis of the HER. Pt single atoms can be embedded in some inert metals, so that the resultant catalysts show good catalytic activity in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes. However, during the HER, migration of Pt atoms in the metal lattice may occur, resulting in the degradation of activity and durability of the catalyst. The Pt single atoms can be further anchored by doping multiple supports to improve the stability of the electrocatalysts.


Electrocatalysts composited with Pt single atoms and carbon materials. 
Carbon-based materials are widely used as favorable electrocatalyst supports because of their large surface area, high electron conductivity, chemical and physical stability and adjustable pore structure.23,78 In general, adhering the isolated Pt single atoms to the carbon supports and maintaining their uniform dispersion are challenging due to the weak interaction of the supports with Pt atoms. Normally, for a single atom electrocatalyst, the coordination environments of the isolated metal atoms can largely influence their electronic structure, which in turn affects the catalytic activity. For example, Yin et al.79 anchored Pt single atoms on graphdiyne (GDY) supports to form four-coordinated C2–Pt–Cl2 species, as shown in Fig. 9(a), which indicates that the coordination environment of Pt single atoms in the electrocatalyst can greatly influence the catalytic HER activity. A high catalytic HER performance with a mass activity up to 26.9 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C catalysts can be achieved. This high catalytic performance was attributed to the near to zero value of 0.092 eV, as well as the high unoccupied density of the Pt 5d orbital state. Li et al.78 synthesized an electrocatalyst of Pt1/NPC (N-doped porous carbon) as shown in Fig. 9(b) and proved that the favorable chemical and electronic structures of Pt–N4 coordination induced by strong electron transfer from the isolated Pt atoms to the coordinated N atoms in the Pt1/NPC electrocatalyst can improve the catalytic HER performance. Ye et al.58 anchored single Pt atom sites on aniline-stacked graphene to prepare an electrocatalyst, as shown in Fig. 9(c). This electrocatalyst showed a high catalytic HER performance induced by the coordination interaction between Pt single atoms and the nitrogen of aniline. Fang et al.74 reported a Pt single atom catalyst, as shown in Fig. 9(d). This Pt single atom catalyst exhibited a high HER activity with only 19 mV overpotential in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 46 mV in 1.0 M NaOH at 10 mA cm−2, respectively. As observed, the Pt atoms tended to dynamically release from the nitrogen–carbon substrate because the geometric structure is less coordinated to the support and the electronic properties are closer to zero valence during the reaction. From the theoretical simulation results, the Pt sites with weakened Pt–support interaction and more 5d density states were the real active centers.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration for the synthesis of Pt-GDY1 and Pt-GDY2; reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of the Pt1/NPC catalyst: (A) resultant NPC substrate, (B) PtCl62− ions adsorbed on the NPC, and (C) Pt single atoms anchored on the NPC; reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 ACS. (c) Synthetic scheme of Pt SASs/AG; reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019 RSC Publishing. (d) Synthetic mechanism for Pt1/N–C; reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 Nature Springer. 
The effect of the interaction between Pt single atoms and the carbon supports on the catalytic HER performance needs to be specifically analyzed due to the different coordination environments, and the promotion mechanism of HER electrocatalysis needs to be further studied.154 In general, although carbon-based material supports have many advantages for improving the HER catalytic performance, there are still uncertainties due to the complicated Pt coordination environments, different doping strategies of heterogeneous atoms on the surface of carbon materials and insufficient understanding of the interaction mechanisms between Pt and coordination atoms.
Recently, dual-metal sites were found to exhibit greatly enhanced activities due to the synergistic effects between the electronic structures of the two elements. For example, Zhang et al.146 synthesized a one-to-one A–B bimetallic dimer catalyst (Pt–Ru dimer, as shown in Fig. 10) by the ALD method. This catalyst showed both high catalytic HER activity (more than 50 times) and stability compared to the commercial Pt/C catalyst. According to their first principles calculations, the high electrocatalytic performance was attributed to the absorption of several H atoms on single Pt and Ru atoms through the synergistic effect induced by the modulated electronic structure. Compared to single-metal sites, the electronic structure of dual-metal sites could be significantly tuned with the formation of a bimetallic dimer structure, resulting in small H adsorption Gibbs free energy on metal atoms and leading to a synergistic effect of the bimetal to improve the catalytic performance.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of ALD synthesis of Pt–Ru dimers on N-doped carbon nanotubes. Gray: C; blue: N; yellow: Pt; and red: Ru. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 

4.3 Ru-based single atom electrocatalysts for the HER
Due to Pt's low reserves and high cost, it is necessary to explore other noble metal single atom electrocatalysts as alternative cost-effective electrocatalysts. The other noble metal single atom HER electrocatalysts are mainly Ru single atom catalysts, and they have only been reported in recent years. For example, Zhang et al.151 reported a SA-Ru–MoS2 (Ru single atom anchored on MoS2) electrocatalyst which showed a high HER activity due to the synergy effect of single-atom Ru doping and S vacancies, as shown in Fig. 11(a). It can be seen that the phase transition of the local structure of MoS2 can efficiently tailor the electronic structure of SA-Ru–MoS2 and significantly reduce the energy barrier of the Volmer and adsorption/desorption of the H* intermediate steps. However, the HER overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 is still a little higher than that for commercial Pt/C as shown in Fig. 11(b). Tiwari et al.156 reported an electrocatalyst called [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN with a lower overpotential (31 mV at 10 mA cm−2) than that of commercial Pt/C, as shown in Fig. 11(d). The Ru loading of this catalyst was 16 wt%, which was high due to the mixing of Ru single atoms and Ru nanoparticles (the synthesis method is shown in Fig. 11(c)).
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis illustration of the SA-Ru–MoS2 electrocatalysts; (b) linear sweep voltammograms of pure MoS2 and samples with different Ru contents in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1; reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Synthesis of electrocatalyst [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN; (d) HER polarization curves (iR-compensated) (1: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C); 1′: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@GN]/GN (750/750 °C); 2: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/C3N4 (650/650 °C); 3: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (850/750 °C); 4: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C) where less phosphorus was used; 5: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C) where more phosphorus was used; 6: Ru/GO(750/750 °C); Pt/C: commercial 20 wt% Pt); reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
In general, the intrinsic catalytic HER activities of Ru single atom electrocatalysts are not as good as those of Pt single atom ones. Part of the reason may be that non-Pt metal single atom coordination or anchoring interactions with the carbon surface are not strong enough to generate favorable active sites and for electronic structures for HER electrocatalysis. In addition, low metal loading may be the other factor for the low electrocatalytic activity for the HER. Thus, the structure and catalytic mechanism of this kind of non-Pt material need to be further explored in order to improve the catalytic HER performance.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
5.1 Summary
Noble-metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts, as a new family of atomic-scale nanomaterials, have many unique properties such as ultrasmall sizes, high efficiency of atom utilization, low coordination active sites and metal–support interactions, which have attracted more and more attention in the field of the electrocatalytic HER. The ultrasmall sizes of nanoclusters and single atoms generate discrete energy levels, leading to strong energy quantization. On the one hand, these special material-based electrocatalysts can have strong catalytic HER activity and selectivity. On the other hand, the precise control of the type and location of noble atoms or nanoclusters and support surface ligands or their coordination environments provide the possibility of studying the structure-activity relationships and surface/interface effects, for an in-depth understanding and exploration of the catalytic HER mechanism. In this paper, the latest research progress in noble metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts for the HER is comprehensively reviewed and analyzed in terms of their design, synthesis, characterization, and performance validation. The preparation methods of noble metal nanoclusters and single-atom catalysts have many similarities. They can be prepared by using the same methods, such as the wet chemical reduction method, electrochemical method, impregnation pyrolysis method, solid phase reaction method and so on. Since the size of the nanoclusters is much larger than that of single atoms, nanocages or other three-dimensional spaces can be used to constrain nanoclusters. In the preparation of single-atom catalysts, there are some strategies that require high energy and special equipment, such as laser etching and atomic layer deposition. Moreover, the preparation methods selected for the preparation of nanoclusters and single-atom catalysts with the same type of support can also be different. Though some preparation methods of noble metal nanocluster and single-atom catalysts are the same, the binding mechanisms of the noble metal and support are different. However, there is a lack of in-depth study of the materials, and also lack of deeper characterization techniques.
One of the key approaches to achieve a noble metal nanocluster or single atom electrocatalyst with high catalytic performance is to find a suitable support which has appropriate features, such as abundant vacancies or defects, a reasonable coordination environment and a good three-dimensional structure to confine the noble metal atoms. It should be emphasized that for the electrocatalytic HER, an optimal catalyst should have suitable interaction between the surface of the catalyst and the reactants, intermediates, and products, which is called the Sabatier rule.167–169 For a noble metal nanocluster or single atom electrocatalyst, the support materials not only play an important role in regulating the electronic structure on the surface of the catalyst, but also have a synergistic effect between the noble metal cluster and single atom through the coordination environment or the doped heterogeneous atoms on the support, so as to promote the electrocatalytic HER. Surface science studies have indicated that the structure and electronic properties of the support have a significant influence on the spatial location and stability of nanoclusters and single metal atoms.170 For example, oxygen vacancies on the surface of the oxide supports, the surface coordination environment of carbon materials, lattice atomic substitution of metal supports and sulfur vacancies on the surface of MoS2 materials can all contribute to anchoring noble-metal active sites and maintaining structural stability.
5.2 Perspectives
As discussed above, for noble-metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts, the nature of the support and metal and metal-support interaction can strongly affect the metal-support surface morphologies/structures and the electrocatalytic HER activity and stability. Even though great progress has been achieved in terms of catalyst design, synthesis, and characterization, understanding of the mechanism and validation of catalytic activity/stability, several challenges still exist, such as large-scale production, in situ characterization of catalytic behavior, and so on. To overcome these challenges, several research directions may be proposed as follows:
(1) Continuing to explore new catalyst design strategies and synthesis methods, particularly for rapid and large-scale fabrication. For noble metal nanoclusters, the preparation methods are diverse and relatively mature using wet chemical methods, but most of these methods are only suitable for small-scale preparation in the laboratory. Although solid-phase reaction methods and spin coating methods could be used for preparing high performance noble metal nanocluster HER electrocatalysts on a relatively large scale, the cost seems to be high in terms of industrial application. Therefore, it is still necessary to continue exploring new design strategies and cost-effective synthesis methods to fabricate new nanocluster HER electrocatalysts in large quantities for practical application in water electrolysis. Regarding noble metal single atom electrocatalysts, many approaches have been applied for preparation and the preparation is gradually becoming easier and more controllable. However, it is not an easy task to precisely control the dispersion of single atoms on the supports to generate high catalytically active and stable HER electrocatalysts. Furthermore, the existing laboratory preparation methods cannot be used for large-scale production of noble metal single atom electrocatalysts. In this regard, further effort is needed to design and synthesize new noble metal single atom electrocatalysts with optimized support materials for achieving a large-scale rational preparation method with elaborately controlled active sites and excellent electrocatalytic performance. On the other hand, the support materials are also critical for achieving high performance single atom electrocatalysts. Even if the atom-level vacancies and defects induced by doping heteroatoms into the support can help anchor separated noble metal atoms, the large-scale preparation of uniformly dispersed nanoclusters and single atoms remains a huge challenge.
(2) Further fundamental understanding of the catalysis mechanisms through in situ characterization techniques for dynamic monitoring of catalytic processes. The dynamic characteristics of the noble-metal nanocluster and single atom electrocatalysts during the catalytic HER reaction process dominated by metal–reactant and/or metal–solvent interactions and the changes in the geometric or electronic structure may lead to different reaction pathways. The interaction between the support and the metal can also lead to dynamic structural changes during the catalytic process, which may be the key factor in improving catalytic activity. Therefore, it is necessary to in situ monitor the dynamic structures of nanoclusters and single atoms and the metal–support interaction is significant for an in-depth understanding of the relationship between the catalyst structure and catalytic activity as well as the reaction mechanisms through electrochemically assisted in situ characterization techniques, such as operando synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy,74 Raman spectroscopy, XRD, etc. These in situ characterization techniques are helpful in revealing the real active sites and the dynamic process of adsorption and desorption between the active sites and reactants, intermediates and products.
(3) Further fundamental understanding of the catalysis mechanisms through combining theoretical calculations and molecular simulations with experimental measurements. In order to reasonably interpret the experimental results for understanding the electrocatalytic HER process, theoretical calculations and molecular simulation should be as close as possible to the experimental conditions. At present, it is still difficult to design new catalytic materials without the help of experiment data, i.e., only the simulation based on the experiment data is reliable. However, to obtain a fundamental understanding of the catalytic HER mechanisms for new nanocluster and single atom electrocatalyst designs, theoretical calculations and simulation such as DFT seem to be very useful. Based on the experiment data, theoretical calculation can simulate the favorable structure of active sites, interaction between metal atoms and the support surface, and reaction intermediates/radicals, as well as the reaction mechanisms.170,171 Due to both nanoclusters and single atoms having relatively simple structures, they can serve as model materials especially for molecular calculation and simulation. Having said this, if the theoretically calculated parameters are not well set, the output results may not represent the real situation. In this case, experiment measurements for validating the modeling are necessary. With the advanced development of computational hardware and software, the results from theoretical calculation and molecular simulation should be close to those of the real catalytic processes, resulting in a more clear understanding of the catalytic mechanisms.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFB0102900).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11763–17587 Search PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, X. Liu, B. Zhu, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, C. He and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Miner, T. Fukushima, D. Sheberla, L. Sun, Y. Surendranath and M. Dincă, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10942 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700559 CrossRef .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef .
X. Wen, Z. Duan, L. Bai and J. Guan, J. Power Sources, 2019, 431, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, K. Nath, S. Kumar, R. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, N. H. Le, D. H. Youn, J. S. Lee and K. S. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2221 CrossRef .
M. A. Khan, H. Zhao, W. Zou, Z. Chen, W. Cao, J. Fang, J. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 483–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, S. Yin and P. K. Shen, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 105–127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali and P. K. Shen, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 370–394 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, J. P. Greeley, C. L. Marshall, L. A. Curtiss, G. A. Ballentine, J. W. Elam, S. Catillon-Mucherie, P. C. Redfern, F. Mehmood and P. Zapol, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
K. Judai, S. Abbet, A. S. Wörz, U. Heiz and C. R. Henry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2732–2737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlogl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, Science, 2010, 328, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li and R. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Remediakis, N. Lopez and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1824–1826 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, S. G. Advani, A. K. Prasad, M. E. Boggs, S. P. Sullivan and T. P. Beebe, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4025–4030 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lim, H. Oh, S. Jang, Y. Ko, H. Kim and H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 575–579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasuda, A. Taniguchi, T. Akita, T. Ioroi and Z. Siroma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 746–752 RSC .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. Sham, L. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Han, H. Liu, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13694–13698 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guangxian, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 1982, 3, 114–125 Search PubMed .
P. Chini, J. Organomet. Chem., 1980, 200, 37–61 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Andrews and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Mater., 1989, 1, 174–187 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Aiken, Y. Lin and R. G. Finke, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1996, 114, 29–51 CrossRef .
Y. Du, H. Sheng, D. Astruc and M. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 526–622 CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gogate, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2020 DOI:10.1080/00986445.2020.1719078 .
L. Wang, L. Huang, F. Liang, S. Liu, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1528–1539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, C. Hao and Y. Shi, Chemcatchem, 2015, 7, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Kim and H. Lee, Chemsuschem, 2018, 11, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pu, I. S. Amiinu, R. Cheng, P. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Mu, W. Zhao, F. Su, G. Zhang, S. Liao and S. Sun, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–29 CrossRef .
S. Han, C. Gu, S. Zhao, S. Xu, M. Gong, Z. Li and S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12913–12919 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, J. Chen, C. Tan, Y. Zhu, Y. Han and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 470–475 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501602 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhou, N. Tian, J. T. Li, I. Broadwell and S. G. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4167–4185 RSC .
T. W. Hansen, A. T. DeLaRiva, S. R. Challa and A. K. Datye, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1720–1730 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Ji, X. Feng, X. Duan, G. Qian, P. Li, X. Zhou, D. Chen and W. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16736–16739 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sasahara, C. L. Pang and H. Onishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13453–13457 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, A. Selloni, O. Dulub, P. Jacobson and U. Diebold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 370–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Simonsen, I. Chorkendorff, S. Dahl, M. Skoglundh, J. Sehested and S. Helveg, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 147–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wettergren, F. F. Schweinberger, D. Deiana, C. J. Ridge, A. S. Crampton, M. D. Rötzer, T. W. Hansen, V. P. Zhdanov, U. Heiz and C. Langhammer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5803–5809 CAS .
H. Wang, C. Xu, Q. Chen, M. Ming, Y. Wang, T. Sun, Y. Zhang, D. Gao, J. Bi and G. Fan, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 1178–1184 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, H. Guo, S. Chen, Y. Li, C. Cai, P. Gao, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Sun, X. Niu and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13859–13866 RSC .
S. Wang, X. Gao, X. Hang, X. Zhu, H. Han, W. Liao and W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16236–16239 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902031 CrossRef CAS .
L. DeRita, J. Resasco, S. Dai, A. Boubnov, H. V. Thang, A. S. Hoffman, I. Ro, G. W. Graham, S. R. Bare, G. Pacchioni, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 746–751 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsunoyama, Y. Yamano, C. Zhang, M. Komori, T. Eguchi and A. Nakajima, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chang, Y. Tanaka, R. Ishikawa, K. Toyoura, K. Matsunaga, Y. Ikuhara and N. Shibata, Nano Lett., 2013, 14, 134–138 CrossRef .
J. H. Kwak, J. Hu, D. Mei, C. W. Yi, D. H. Kim, C. H. F. Peden, L. F. Allard and J. Szanyi, Science, 2009, 325, 1670–1673 CrossRef CAS .
D. Matthey, J. G. Wang, S. Wendt, J. Matthiesen, R. Schaub, E. Lægsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2007, 315, 1692–1696 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yan, D. Wu, S. Chu, Z. Chen, Y. Lin, M. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Wu and H. Liang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4977 CrossRef .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. Kim, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. Ouyang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Liu, S. Liu, M. Norouzi Banis, Z. Song, J. Li, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, Y. Zhao, R. Li, M. Zheng, S. Ye, Z. Zhao, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9350–9358 CAS .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, D. Li, S. Ding, Z. U. Rehman, Q. Liu, S. Chen, B. Zhang and L. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6081–6087 CrossRef CAS .
L. Giordano, G. Pacchioni, J. Goniakowski, N. Nilius, E. D. L. Rienks and H. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 26102 CrossRef .
W. Schneider, M. Heyde and H. Freund, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2317–2327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. S. Shim, M. Lee, J. K. Song and D. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2840–2845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lykhach, S. M. Kozlov, T. Skála, A. Tovt, V. Stetsovych, N. Tsud, F. Dvořák, V. Johánek, A. Neitzel, J. Mysliveček, S. Fabris, V. Matolín, K. M. Neyman and J. Libuda, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 284–288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Lin, Y. Huang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, Acc. Chem. Res., 1987, 20, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchijima, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 105–117 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, N. Nilius, M. Sterrer, P. Koskinen, H. Häkkinen and H. Freund, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 153406 CrossRef .
X. Lin, B. Yang, H. Benia, P. Myrach, M. Yulikov, A. Aumer, M. A. Brown, M. Sterrer, O. Bondarchuk, E. Kieseritzky, J. Rocker, T. Risse, H. Gao, N. Nilius and H. Freund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7745–7749 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bruix, J. A. Rodriguez, P. J. Ramírez, S. D. Senanayake, J. Evans, J. B. Park, D. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek and F. Illas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8968–8974 CAS .
S. Fang, X. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, S. Wei, Y. Li and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1029 CAS .
X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Yan, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, S. Sun and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2450–2458 RSC .
J. Ke, W. Zhu, Y. Jiang, R. Si, Y. Wang, S. Li, C. Jin, H. Liu, W. Song, C. Yan and Y. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bliem, J. E. S. van der Hoeven, J. Hulva, J. Pavelec, O. Gamba, P. E. de Jongh, M. Schmid, P. Blaha, U. Diebold and G. S. Parkinson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2016, 113, 8921–8926 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8450–8458 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, H. Wang, S. Tang, X. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Q. Fang, Q. Liu, D. Liu, C. Wang, T. Xiang, A. Khalil, S. Chen and L. Song, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 663–667 RSC .
Q. Tang and D. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4953–4961 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
R. Bliem, J. Pavelec, O. Gamba, E. McDermott, Z. Wang, S. Gerhold, M. Wagner, J. Osiecki, K. Schulte, M. Schmid, P. Blaha, U. Diebold and G. S. Parkinson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 75440 CrossRef .
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chakraborty and T. Pradeep, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 8208–8271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wan, L. Ren, H. Su, G. Li, S. Malola, S. Lin, Z. Tang, H. Häkkinen, B. K. Teo, Q. Wang and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3278–3281 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Q. Sun, R. Bai, X. Li, G. Guo and J. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7484–7487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Pei, J. He, K. Liu, W. Qi, X. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Gao, J. He, J. Zhao, J. Hu, T. Chan, Z. Li, G. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10870–10875 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, C. Zhang, X. Gao, C. Du, Z. Zhuang and W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 627–634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, G. Yu, L. Zheng, C. Zhang, H. Li, T. Wang, P. An, M. Liu, X. Qiu, W. Chen and W. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 966–973 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, T. Wang, A. S. Jalilov, B. I. Yakobson, S. Wei and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3785–3791 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Wan, H. B. Wu, B. Y. Guan, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1901349 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, K. Sun, J. Henzie, X. Hao, C. Li, T. Takei, Y. Kang and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5848–5852 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bao, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Mao, L. Xie, Z. Jiang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15364–15370 RSC .
Z. Chen, G. Cao, L. Gan, H. Dai, N. Xu, M. Zang, H. Dai, H. Wu and P. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8866–8872 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kwak, W. Choi, Q. Tang, M. Kim, Y. Lee, D. Jiang and D. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14723 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Wu, W. Zhou, Z. Kou, S. J. Pennycook, J. Xie, C. Guan and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20214–20223 RSC .
S. Yuan, Z. Pu, H. Zhou, J. Yu, I. S. Amiinu, J. Zhu, Q. Liang, J. Yang, D. He, Z. Hu, G. Van Tendeloo and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, G. Hu, K. Kwak, M. Kim, D. Jiang, J. Choi and D. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44645–44653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, C. Wu, J. Zhang, P. Yan, J. Tian, X. Shen, T. T. Isimjan and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8865–8872 RSC .
H. Hu, F. M. D. Kazim, Q. Zhang, K. Qu, Z. Yang and W. Cai, Chemcatchem, 2019, 11, 4327–4333 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, H. Wang, M. Ming, W. Luo, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, D. Gao, J. Bi and G. Fan, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11487–11492 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, C. Hu, G. Wang, Z. Zou, H. Yang and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 12, 5594–5601 CrossRef .
S. Ye, F. Luo, T. Xu, P. Zhang, H. Shi, S. Qin, J. Wu, C. He, X. Ouyang, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104301 CAS .
M. Hu, M. Ming, C. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Gao, J. Bi and G. Fan, Chemsuschem, 2018, 11, 3253–3258 CAS .
J. J. Gao, P. Du, Q. H. Zhang, X. Shen, F. K. Chiang, Y. R. Wen, X. Lin, X. J. Liu and H. J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, R. Jin, Y. Song, H. Zhang, S. D. House, J. C. Yang and R. Jin, Small, 2017, 13, 1701519 CrossRef .
A. Khataee, M. Haddad Irani-nezhad, J. Hassanzadeh and S. Woo Joo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 515, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bliem, J. E. S. van der Hoeven, J. Hulva, J. Pavelec, O. Gamba, P. E. de Jongh, M. Schmid, P. Blaha, U. Diebold and G. S. Parkinson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2016, 113, 8921–8926 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qi, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, M. Qiao, R. Jin, Y. Li, Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, N. Zhang, C. Xie, Q. He, D. Jiang, G. Yu, Y. Li and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. Huang, C. Dong, C. Chen, R. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, F. Hu, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Lu and Q. Wang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, G. Xia, P. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Li, R. Shi, J. Su and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13378–13383 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ju, T. Brülle, M. Favaro, L. Perini, C. Durante, O. Schneider and U. Stimming, Chemelectrochem, 2015, 2, 547–558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Zhang, Z. Tian, X. Zhou, Z. Zheng, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16459–16466 RSC .
T. Reier, Z. Pawolek, S. Cherevko, M. Bruns, T. Jones, D. Teschner, S. Selve, A. Bergmann, H. N. Nong, R. Schlögl, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13031–13040 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Choi, S. Xie, M. Shao, J. H. Odell, N. Lu, H. C. Peng, L. Protsailo, S. Guerrero, J. Park, X. Xia, J. Wang, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3420–3425 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoon, S. Bang, J. Park, J. Kim, H. Baik, H. Yang and K. Lee, Crystengcomm, 2015, 17, 6843–6847 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, L. Wu and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11770–11773 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, Y. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Luo, M. A. Khan, L. Zhang, D. Ye, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 104511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, P. Wang, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700886 CrossRef .
S. Xie, H. Tsunoyama, W. Kurashige, Y. Negishi and T. Tsukuda, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1519–1523 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X. Dou, K. Zheng and J. Xie, Part. Part. Syst. Char., 2015, 32, 613–629 CrossRef .
J. Fang, B. Zhang, Q. Yao, Y. Yang, J. Xie and N. Yan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 322, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, L. Chen, P. Song, X. Wu, A. Wang and J. Yuan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 8839–8846 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1232–1239 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Su, P. Jiang, G. Xia and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3596–3601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Song and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965–7972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700191 CrossRef .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y. W. Li, C. Shi, X. D. Wen and D. Ma, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, Q. Chen, H. Li, Q. Ouyang and J. Zhao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 80, 398–404 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C. Dong, R. Liu, C. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H. C. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and J. H. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, I. B. Perry, G. Lu, P. Liu and S. L. Buchwald, Science, 2016, 353, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, W. Chen, C. Jia, L. Zheng, J. Dong, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yan, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705369 CrossRef .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
Y. Han, Y. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R. Shen, Y. Zhu, W. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alarawi, V. Ramalingam and J. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 1–23 CrossRef .
D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T. Sham, M. Gu, L. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef .
X. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. Lu, T. Chan, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chao, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, X. Zheng, Y. Qu, Q. Xu and X. Hong, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 26, 4019–4024 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yang, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900653 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Q. Xu, P. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Du, S. Chu and J. Wang, Chemcatchem, 2018, 10, 946–950 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, S. Lee, H. E. Kim, A. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Ye, J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16038–16042 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Kwon, M. Kim, J. Grote, S. J. Cho, M. W. Chung, H. Kim, D. H. Won, A. R. Zeradjanin, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, M. Choi, H. Kim and C. H. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16198–16205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guan, Y. Feng, J. Wan, X. Yang, L. Fang, X. Gu, R. Liu, Z. Huang, J. Li, J. Luo, C. Li and Y. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800697 CrossRef .
J. N. Tiwari, A. M. Harzandi, M. Ha, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, P. Thangavel, A. N. Singh, P. Sharma, S. S. Chandrasekaran, F. Salehnia, J. W. Jang, H. S. Shin, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900931 CrossRef .
J. Ji, Y. Zhang, L. Tang, C. Liu, X. Gao, M. Sun, J. Zheng, M. Ling, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103849 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Ji, X. Yan, W. Liu, Y. Huang, K. Wang, P. Jin, X. Yao and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5255–5262 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y. Su, X. Quan, W. Choi, G. Zhang, N. Liu, B. Kim, S. Chen, H. Yu and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, Y. Guan, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, J. Li, Z. Jiang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11783–11789 RSC .
C. H. Chen, D. Wu, Z. Li, R. Zhang, C. G. Kuai, X. R. Zhao, C. K. Dong, S. Z. Qiao, H. Liu and X. W. Du, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803913 CrossRef .
X. Pan, S. Lu, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Duan, H. Zhu, H. Gu, S. Wang and M. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4911–4919 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunitski, N. Eicke, P. Huber, J. Köhler, S. Zeller, J. Voigtsberger, N. Schlott, K. Henrichs, H. Sann, F. Trinter, L. P. H. Schmidt, A. Kalinin, M. S. Schöffler, T. Jahnke, M. Lein and R. Dörner, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Bronsted, Chem. Rev., 1928, 5, 231–338 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Evans and M. Polanyi, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 11 RSC .
P. Sabatier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1911, 44, 1984–2001 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Pidko, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4230–4234 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Jian Cai	Jian Cai received his Bachelor's degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2018, and is currently pursuing his doctorate in the College of Sciences, Shanghai University. His research interests include the synthesis of noble metal catalysts and their application in fuel cells and perovskite electrocatalysis for water-splitting techniques.
Rida Javed	Rida Javed received her Bachelor's degree in Physical Chemistry from Hazara University Mansehra, Pakistan, and M.Phil. in Physical Chemistry from the NCE, University of Peshawar, Pakistan. Currently, she is working as a PhD Scholar under the supervision of associate Professor Hongbin Zhao at Shanghai University. Her research interests are focused on electrode materials from biomaterials for energy storage devices and electrocatalysis.
Daixin Ye	Daixin Ye received her PhD from Fudan University in 2015 and worked at the University of Gothenburg between 2015 and 2019 as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2019, she joined Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the application of nanomaterials and nanotechnology in biosensing and electrochemical energy conversion and storage. She was awarded the “Shanghai Young Oriental Talent” in 2019 and has published more than 20 academic papers and edited two books.
Hongbin Zhao	Hongbin Zhao received his PhD from Shanghai Jiaotong University in 2009 and completed his postdoctoral research at Shanghai University between 2009 and 2011. Since 2011, he has remained at Shanghai University in addition to working for a year in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo, Canada, from 2014 to 2015 as a visiting scholar (Shanghai Pujiang Talent). He is currently an associate professor at Shanghai University, and his research interests focus on electrode materials for fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulphur batteries and supercapacitors. He was awarded the “Shanghai Pujiang Talent” award and has published more than 70 academic papers, 1 edited book, 2 book chapters and 6 patents. In addition, he has also organized more than 5 academic research projects and one application project.
Jiujun Zhang	Jiujun Zhang is a professor at Shanghai University and a principal research officer (Emeritus) and technical core competency leader at the National Research Council of Canada Energy (NRC). Dr Zhang received his B.S. and M.Sc. in Electrochemistry from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 30 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion. In addition, he is also an adjunct professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo.

 	Fig. 1  Geometric and electronic structures of single atom, nanocluster, and nanoparticle.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Computational models of Pt1–C3N1, two Pt1–C2 and two Pt1–C1N1 moieties. White: H; gray: C; blue: N; purple: Pt. (b) Calculated adsorption energies of H2O and H on the surfaces of Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2 and Pt1–C1N1. (c) Calculated PDOS of the Pt d orbital of clean surfaces, H 1s of hydrogen adsorbed on Pt sites and Pt d-orbital of Pt sites with adsorbed hydrogen (denoted as *Pt d-orbital), from left to right, respectively. The gray, red and blue colours represent the Pt1–C3N1, Pt1–C2-1, and Pt1–C2-2 surfaces, respectively. The DOS peaks of the H 1s-Pt 5d antibonding state are indicated by the arrows. Note that the sharp peak ∼−1 eV for Pt1–C2-2 represents the bonding rather than antibonding state, as it corresponds to the prominent Pt d-band in the *Pt d-orbital PDOS (partial density of states). (d) Schematic DOS illustration of the interaction between Pt and H, the H 1s states split into bonding and antibonding states. With four-coordinate Pt evolving to two-coordinate, the corresponding antibonding states upshift to higher energy with lower occupancy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the synthesis of Ru NCs/BNG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) High-magnification HAADF-STEM images of Pt-AC/DG-150 (Pt-AC is highlighted with yellow circles); (b) the Pt size distribution; (c) XANES and (d) EXAFS spectra of Pt-AC/DG-100, Pt-AC/DG-150 and Pt foil; (e) linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the HER on Pt-AC/DG-X and commercial Pt/C (20%) in a N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution; the loading amounts of Pt on glassy carbon are 0.67, 1.01, 2.06, 3.43 and 20 μg cm−2 for Pt-AC/DG-X and commercial Pt/C, respectively; (f) Tafel plots; (g) LSV curves of the HER on Pt-AC/DG-150 at 0 and 5000 accelerated durability test cycles; all the electrochemical measurements were corrected with iR compensation by using CHI software. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2020 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Structure of Ru NCs/BNG; (b) LSV curves of Ru NCs/BNG, Ru NPs/NG, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH at 2 mV s−1 with iR correction; (c) Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CeO2 porous nanorods and the subsequent confinement of Pd nanoclusters for the HER; (b) XANES spectra and (c) EXAFS spectra of Pd NCs@CeO2, PdO, and Pd powder, respectively; (d) LSV curves for the HER; (e) comparison of current densities from Pd NCs@CeO2 and Pt/C in the potential range from −0.14 to −0.44 V; (f) LSV curves of the HER on Pd NCs@CeO2; (g) comparison of current densities from Pd NCs@CeO2. All the polarization curves were obtained in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM images and atomic configuration diagrams for PtRu@RFCS-6h and (b) PtRu/RFCS; (c) the polarization curves (iR compensated) and (d) the corresponding comparisons of the onset overpotential (η) and η values obtained at current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2; (a–d) reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing. (e) The polarization curves for PtRu NCs/BP and Pt/C; (f) the Ru K-edge XANES spectra of PtRu NCs and PtRu NCs/BP; (e and f) reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of Pt/NiS@Al2O3; (b) and (c) normalized Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt/NiS@Al2O3 in comparison with Pt foil; (d–f) HAADF-STEM images of Pt/NiS@Al2O3 showing the doping sites of Pt atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration for the synthesis of Pt-GDY1 and Pt-GDY2; reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of the Pt1/NPC catalyst: (A) resultant NPC substrate, (B) PtCl62− ions adsorbed on the NPC, and (C) Pt single atoms anchored on the NPC; reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 ACS. (c) Synthetic scheme of Pt SASs/AG; reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019 RSC Publishing. (d) Synthetic mechanism for Pt1/N–C; reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020 Nature Springer.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of ALD synthesis of Pt–Ru dimers on N-doped carbon nanotubes. Gray: C; blue: N; yellow: Pt; and red: Ru. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis illustration of the SA-Ru–MoS2 electrocatalysts; (b) linear sweep voltammograms of pure MoS2 and samples with different Ru contents in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1; reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Synthesis of electrocatalyst [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN; (d) HER polarization curves (iR-compensated) (1: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C); 1′: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@GN]/GN (750/750 °C); 2: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/C3N4 (650/650 °C); 3: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (850/750 °C); 4: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C) where less phosphorus was used; 5: [Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx@GN]/GN (750/750 °C) where more phosphorus was used; 6: Ru/GO(750/750 °C); Pt/C: commercial 20 wt% Pt); reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
