Improving the functionality of carbon nanodots: doping and surface functionalization  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA04813G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04813G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11582-11603Improving the functionality of carbon nanodots: doping and surface functionalization

        
          
            Y. 
            Park†
a, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Yoo†
a, 
      
        
          
            B. 
            Lim
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            W. 
            Kwon
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            S.-W. 
            Rhee
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), 77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang, South Korea 37673. E-mail: srhee@postech.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-54-279-8619;   Tel: +82-54-279-2265
bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Sookmyung Women's University, 100 Cheongpa-ro 47-gil, Seoul, South Korea 04310. E-mail: wkwon@sookmyung.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-2077-7399;   Tel: +82-2-2077-7398
Received 
      8th June 2016
    , Accepted 27th June 2016First published on 27th June 2016AbstractDistinct from conventional carbon nanostructures, such as fullerene, graphene, and carbon nanotubes, carbon nanodots (C-dots) exhibit unique properties such as strong fluorescence, high photostability, chemical inertness, low toxicity, and biocompatibility. Various synthesis routes for C-dots have been developed in the last few years, and now intense research efforts have been focused on improving their functionality. In this aspect, doping and surface functionalization are two major ways to control the chemical, optical, and electrical properties of C-dots. Doping introduces atomic impurities into C-dots to modulate their electronic structure, and surface functionalization modifies the C-dot surface with functional molecules or polymers. In this review, we summarize recent progress in doping and surface functionalization of C-dots for improving their functionality, and offer insight into controlling the properties of C-dots for a variety of applications ranging from biomedicine to optoelectronics to energy.Y. ParkYoonsang Park received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in 2014. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at POSTECH. His research interests include synthesis of luminescent carbonaceous nanomaterials (carbon nanodots, graphene quantum dots, carbon nitrides, etc.) and their application in optoelectronics and bioimaging.J. YooJounghyun Yoo received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at POSTECH. His research interests focus on luminescent carbonaceous and siliceous nanomaterials and their application in optoelectronics, bioimaging, and therapeutics.B. LimBoram Lim received her B.S. in Chemistry from Sookmyung Women's University in 2016. She is currently pursuing her M.S. in Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University. Her research interests focus on nanomaterials and structures for sensors and transistors.W. KwonWoosung Kwon received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering with a minor in Physics (2010) and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering (2013) from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). After postdoctoral research at Stanford University, he joined the faculty of Sookmyung Women's University, where he is now serving as an assistant professor of chemical and biological engineering. His research interests include (1) development of functional, biocompatible nanomaterials for theragnostic and optoelectronic applications, (2) advancement of functionality of nanomaterials through atomic doping and molecular conjugation, and (3) study of the effect of nanomaterials on physiological and biochemical processes in living organisms to address nanotoxicological issues.S.-W. RheeShi-Woo Rhee received his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1984. After two years of postdoctoral research at MIT, he joined the faculty of Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in 1986. He currently holds a joint appointment in the Department of Chemical Engineering at POSTECH as professor emeritus and in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University as the chair professor. His current research interests are carbon materials for electrode applications, fluorescent carbon nanomaterials for optoelectronic devices, and materials for electronic and solar cell devices. He has published more than 200 peer-reviewed journal articles and edited two books in the field of materials engineering.
1. Introduction
Carbon nanodots (C-dots), fluorescent carbon spheres with sizes of ca. 1–10 nm, have received tremendous attention due to their numerous outstanding properties.1–3 Since their discovery by Scrivens et al. via purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs),1 a variety of synthesis methods have been developed to improve the optical properties and functionality of C-dots,2,3 including arc discharge, laser ablation, electrochemical oxidation, solvothermal carbonization, templated carbonization, and microwave irradiation. Furthermore, the excellent electron donating/accepting abilities, chemical inertness, biocompatibility, and strong fluorescence make C-dots valuable in a variety of fields including biomedicine, optoelectronics, sensing, photovoltaics, and photocatalysis.
Although C-dots have shown great potential in various applications, their properties still need to be improved by tuning the chemical structure of their core and surface. For instance, C-dots contain abundant carbonyl groups on their surface, which not only impart high water solubility but also lead to aggregation. Furthermore, the light absorption range of C-dots is mainly confined to UV–blue wavelengths, and their photoluminescence (PL) is limited to a short-wavelength (blue–green) region. These facts are often indicated as major limitations of C-dots to compete with organic fluorophores or inorganic nanocrystals that have been conventionally used in the past few decades.
Many research groups have made efforts to improve the functionality of C-dots, with doping and surface functionalization being two major ways of controlling their chemical, optical, and electrical properties. Doping (incorporating atomic impurities into carbon cores) creates n-type and p-type carriers, changing the electronic structures of C-dots. Surface functionalization (tuning the functional groups on the surface of C-dots) can create or change the surface states, as well as endow C-dots with a variety of functionalities by conjugation with functional molecules or polymers, which can extend their application range.
In this review, we introduce doping and surface functionalization methods that have so far been developed to improve the functionality of C-dots for various applications. In Section 2, the chemical and electronic structures of C-dots and the related optical properties are described. In Section 3, various doping methods for tuning the optical properties of C-dots are introduced. Section 4 covers surface functionalization of C-dots for multiple purposes, ranging from characterization to application. We hope that this review provides valuable information on methods for controlling the properties of C-dots and eventually promotes the use of C-dots in a variety of science and engineering fields.
2. Chemical and electronic structures of C-dots
2.1. Theoretical models for chemical structures of C-dots
So far, various models for visualizing the chemical structure of C-dots have been proposed. C-Dots are commonly described in terms of a carbogenic core with surface functional groups. Elemental analysis by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) commonly indicated high oxygen content due to the oxidized core and/or surface functional groups. For instance, in the wet oxidation of candle soot, the chemical composition of purified C-dots (36.8% C; 5.9% H; 9.6% N; 44.7% O) was vastly different from that of raw candle soot (91.7% C; 1.8% H; 1.8% N; 4.4% O), having a significantly higher oxygen content, partly due to the presence of carbonyl groups.3,4 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy of C-dots revealed the presence of carboxylic functional groups on their surface. For C-dots prepared using the laser ablation/passivation method, the stretching vibrations of CO bonds (1623 cm−1) together with the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of C–O–C moieties (around 1300 cm−1 and 1200 cm−1, respectively) were detected in the FT-IR spectra.5 Similarly, FT-IR spectra of C-dots prepared via purification of SWNTs showed the presence of surface carboxyl functional groups.1 Recently, C-dots with non-carboxyl functionalities have been synthesized, with their chemical structure confirmed by FT-IR and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).6–10
Although the surface functional groups of C-dots have been successfully identified, the precise structure of the carbogenic core is still debatable. One reason for this is that various synthesis routes for C-dots lead to intrinsically different C-dots, depending on the types of reactants or reaction conditions, making any qualitative comparison between such different C-dots almost impossible. For example, the lattice fringes of X-ray diffraction planes of diamond-like and graphitic carbon lie very close to each other, rendering unambiguous assignment.2 Thus, many structural models of the C-dot core suggested the following classification: diamond-like structure,5 graphite structure with sp3 defects,11–18 graphite oxide structure,19 amorphous carbon structure,20–26 and graphitic cluster structure.6,7,27–29

2.1.1. Diamond-like structure. 
Hu et al. prepared two types of C-dots (passivated/non-passivated by polymer (PEG200N)) using the laser ablation/passivation method.5 The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image showed that the C-dots have the size of ∼2 nm and are well-dispersed (Fig. 1a). Both types of C-dots showed the same selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. The ratio of the ring radius squares was 3:8:11:16:19, implying a diamond-like structure, and the rings corresponded to the {111}, {220}, {311}, {400}, and {331} planes of the diamond structure. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image showed variable lattice spacings within 0.2–0.23 nm (Fig. 1c).
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM image of the PEG200N passivated C-dots and direct photograph of the sample under a 365 nm UV lamp (the inset is the SAED pattern of the C-dots). (b) TEM image of the bare surface C-dots and direct photograph of the sample under a 365 nm UV lamp. (c) HR-TEM image of the PEG200N passivated C-dots. (d) The size distribution of the PEG200N passivated C-dots. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.2. Graphite structure. 
Bao et al. reported a lattice spacing of ca. 0.325 nm for C-dots obtained by electrochemical etching of carbon fibers, which corresponds to the (002) facet of graphite (Fig. 2d–f).11 The corresponding XPS C1s spectra showed a peak centered at 284.5 eV, assigned to graphitic sp2 carbons (Fig. 2g and h). Hola et al. reported C-dots with controlled size and surface chemistry synthesized from three gallate esters with different alkyl chain lengths (lauryl, propyl and methyl).13 In Raman spectroscopy, the intensity ratios of the D and G bands (ID/IG) decreased in the order lauryl > propyl > methyl. The authors suggested that this trend was most likely due to the influence of the alkyl chain length on the graphitization of the carbogenic core. In FT-IR spectra, typical C–H stretching vibrations (2930 and 2840 cm−1) were also observed, attributable to the remaining sp3 defects.
 Fig. 2  (a–c) TEM images of C-dots obtained at the applied potential of 0.5 V (denoted as C-dots@0.5V), 1.5 V (denoted as C-dots@1.5V), and 2.5 V (denoted as C-dots@2.5V), respectively. (d–f) HR-TEM images of C-dots@0.5V, C-dots@1.5V, and C-dots@2.5V, respectively. (g and h) C1s high-resolution XPS spectra of C-dots@0.5V and C-dots@0.5V–2.5V, respectively, with identification of peaks by curve fitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.1.3. Graphite oxide structure. 
Bourlinos et al. synthesized C-dots by thermal decomposition of different ammonium citrate salts, where the citrate part served as a source of carbon, while ammonium provided the covalently attached surface modifier.19 Pyrolysis of neat citric acid in the absence of ammonium salts resulted in a completely insoluble carbogenic solid, which shared a common stoichiometry with graphite oxide. In addition, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of C-dots exhibited two superimposed broad reflections: one at 0.49 nm, consistent with disordered carbon, and another at 0.35 nm, implying the presence of densely packed phenyls within the polymeric corona. Based on those experiments, the authors suggested that the cores consist of carbonized intermediates with a highly defective structure of co-existing aromatic and aliphatic regions, in analogy with graphite oxide or the interrelated carbogenic networks of lignite, coal, and humic substances.


2.1.4. Amorphous carbon structure. 
Recently, numerous studies have revealed that C-dots are mainly composed of amorphous carbon.20–26 Liu et al. fabricated polyethylenimine (PEI) functionalized C-dots by a one-step microwave-assisted pyrolysis.26 The XRD pattern of C-dots displayed a broad diffraction peak at 2θ = 18.3°, suggesting an amorphous nature. C-Dots fabricated by pyrolysis also showed similar results.24 The Raman spectrum of C-dots showed only a weak G band at 1557 cm−1, and the XRD pattern exhibited one broad reflection centered at 0.43 nm. Both results indicated the presence of disordered carbon. Liu et al. synthesized C-dots using surfactant-modified silica spheres.20 The absence of discernible lattice structures in the corresponding HR-TEM image indicated that the resultant C-dots are amorphous.


2.1.5. Amorphous carbon structure with graphitic clusters. 
According to Oberlin's paper dealing with the dependence of graphitization on temperature, a graphitic cluster model is plausible.6,7,27–29 The paper showed that the temperature generally employed for C-dot synthesis is not high enough to form a fully graphitized nanostructure, leading to the formation of graphitic clusters with ca. 5–8 aromatic rings instead. In this regard, Kwon et al. described C-dots as paracrystalline carbon, composed of angstrom-sized graphitic clusters surrounded by amorphous carbon frames.6 In their previous report, C-dots were synthesized by soft-template carbonization27 and then subjected to structural analysis (Fig. 3a). The corresponding HR-TEM images suggested that the C-dots are composed of graphitic (sp2) clusters distributed in an amorphous (probably oxygenic) carbon matrix (Fig. 3b). The Raman spectra showed much more clear-cut D and G bands compared to amorphous carbon, but possessed no 2D peak and exhibited a more prominent D band compared to graphite. Thus, it is likely that the C-dots fall into the category of multi-crystalline or amorphous carbon, but contain a significant amount of sp2 clusters. Zhu et al. came to a similar conclusion for hydrothermally obtained C-dots.28 Based on HR-TEM images, most particles consist of amorphous carbon without any lattices; very few particles possess well-resolved lattice fringes (Fig. 4). The XRD patterns also displayed a broad peak centered at around 2θ = 25° (corresponding to the lattice spacing of 0.34 nm), attributed to highly disordered carbon (Fig. 4c). The presence of sp2 carbons was also inferred from the 1H NMR spectrum. In the 13C NMR spectrum, signals between 30 and 45 ppm, corresponding to aliphatic (sp3) carbons, and signals between 100 and 185 ppm, indicative of sp2 carbons, were observed.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the soft-template synthesis of C-dots. (b) HR-TEM image of as-obtained C-dots. The white solid lines and arrows indicate the lattice plane distance. The dotted red and green circles divide graphitic clusters and amorphous (or oxygenic) carbon matrices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 4  (a) A synthesis route of C-dots (represented as CDs in the figure) using citric acid and ethylenediamine. (b) TEM (upper) and HR-TEM (lower) images of the C-dots. (c) XRD pattern of C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 

2.2. Electronic structures of C-dots

2.2.1. Electronic structures of organic molecules. 
Since C-dots are mainly composed of organogenic elements (e.g., C, O, and N), their electronic transitions are closely related to those of organic molecules. According to the orbital theory, electrons in organic molecules occupy various molecular orbitals (MOs) created by chemical bonding. The MOs fall into three types: bonding, antibonding, and nonbonding. Bonding MOs have lower energy than the parent atomic orbitals (AOs) due to constructive interactions. In contrast, antibonding MOs have higher energy than the parent AOs, due to destructive interactions. Nonbonding MOs have the same energy as the parent AOs due to symmetry-related lack of interaction. In organic molecules, orbitals are commonly further classified based on the symmetry of rotation around the internuclear axis: σ (symmetrical) and π (asymmetrical). In conclusion, five MO types are found in organic molecules: σ, π, n (nonbonding), σ*, and π*, where the asterisk superscript denotes antibonding orbitals. The sum of all electron-filled orbitals in a molecule is called its electronic state. Since a molecule can have various electronic configurations, a variety of electronic states with different energy levels exists. Electronic transitions take place when an electron is excited to a higher energy state by light absorption. For instance, an electronic transition can occur by transferring an electron from the σ bonding orbital to the σ* antibonding orbital, denoted as σ → σ*. Likewise, the following electronic transitions exist: σ → π*, π → π*, n → π* and n → σ*. Each transition corresponds to a typical absorption range in UV-vis spectroscopy: σ → σ* (∼125 nm), n → σ* (150–250 nm), π → π* (200–400 nm), n → π* (400–700 nm). The σ → σ* transition requires very high energy (absorption maximum at 125 nm) and is not observed in typical UV-vis spectra. The n → σ* transition occurs in saturated compounds containing lone pairs, but these transitions are also rarely observed due to the high energy required. In most cases, the absorption spectroscopy of organic molecules is focused on detecting n → π* and π → π* transitions, due to their easily accessible transition energies. The molar absorptivities of the n → π* transitions are usually relatively low (due to the low transition dipole moments), ranging from 10 to 100 L mol−1 cm−1. The π → π* transitions generally have molar absorptivities between 1000 and 10000 L mol−1 cm−1, ca. 100 times higher than those of n → π* transitions.


2.2.2. Electronic structures of C-dots. 
Similar to organic molecules, C-dots exhibit σ → σ*, σ → π*, π → π*, n → π*, and n → σ* transitions, closely related to the chemical structures of C-dots. The π-states of C-dots can be attributed to aromatic sp2-hybridized carbons in their core. Some studies have shown that the energy gap between π-states gradually decreases as the number of aromatic carbons increases, just as in the case of π-conjugation in organic molecules.30,31 The n-states of C-dots can be attributed to functional groups containing electron lone pairs, such as carbonyls, amines, amides, and thiols. If the functional groups carrying lone pairs are bonded to aromatic sp2-hybridized carbons, electron transitions from the n-states of the functional groups to the π*-states of the aromatic carbons can happen. The interaction between π- and n-states in C-dots can also be affected by the extent of orbital overlap and electron withdrawing/donating abilities of functional groups. The electronic structures of C-dots and the related electronic transitions are deeply linked to their optical properties, represented by light absorption and luminescence.

2.3. Optical properties of C-dots

2.3.1. Light absorption of C-dots. 
C-dots typically exhibit strong light absorption in the UV region with a tail extending into the visible range.2 The maximum absorption peak at ∼230 nm may correspond to a π → π* transition involving aromatic sp2 carbons, and the tail starting from ∼300 nm can be assigned to an n → π* transition involving functional groups with electron lone pairs.32,33 Recently, several papers have reported that surface functional groups of aromatic compounds can play a major role in determining the light absorption properties of C-dots.34


2.3.2. PL of C-dots. 
One of the most attractive optical properties of C-dots is their PL. Although the chemical and electronic structures of C-dots vary depending on the synthesis methods used, most of the C-dots exhibit a similar range of PL, which mainly covers the blue region (corresponding to wavelengths from 400 to 500 nm). The origin of PL is still debatable, with several theories proposed to explain the generation and recombination of electron–hole pairs. Here, we introduce two important theories explaining the origin of C-dot PL: the quantum confinement effect and the defective state emission.
2.3.2.1 Quantum confinement effect. 
Li et al. claimed that the strong emission of C-dots originates from a quantum-sized graphite fragment.31 The authors purified the as-synthesized C-dots by simple column chromatography to obtain different-sized particles with a narrow size distribution, which showed different emission colors (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Typical sized C-dots optical images illuminated under white (left: daylight lamp) and UV light (right: 365 nm). (b) PL spectra of typical sized C-dots: the red, black, green, and blue lines are the PL spectra for blue-, green-, yellow-, and red-emission C-dots, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
Theoretical calculations were also performed to investigate the relationship between luminescence and cluster size. Fig. 6 shows the dependence of the energy gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) on the size of the graphene fragments. As the fragment size increases, the gap gradually decreases, in agreement with a previous study.30 A gap energy corresponding to transitions in the visible light range can be assigned to graphene fragments with a diameter of 14–22 Å, which agrees well with the visible light emission of C-dots, having diameters of less than 3 nm. Thus, it was concluded that the strong emission of C-dots arises from the quantum-sized graphite structure itself, instead of the carbon–oxygen surface.
 Fig. 6  (a) Relationship between the C-dots size and the PL energies. (b) HOMO–LUMO gap dependence on the size of the graphitene fragments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
Furthermore, the as-synthesized C-dots were treated with hydrogen plasma to remove the oxygen from the graphite surface, in order to confirm that the strong emission of C-dots is due to the quantum-sized graphite fragment. A series of control experiments showed no obvious change in the C-dot PL spectra before and after hydrogen plasma treatment. The insensitivity of the Raman spectra to hydrogen plasma treatment also suggests that the graphite fragment of C-dots remained largely intact.
2.3.2.2 Defective state emission. 
Hu et al. reported that the origin of luminescence was attributed to carboxylate ligands on the surface of C-dots,5 and performed surface passivation experiments with normal C-dots, using PEG200N and perchloric acid as surface ligands. Weak fluorescence was detected for both samples, but the peak shapes and positions were completely different from those of normal C-dots (Fig. 7). Furthermore, PL intensities of the two samples were much weaker than that of normal C-dots. Pure PEG200N and the product of its reaction with perchloric acid hardly emit light when irradiated by a laser; therefore the authors believed that the surface state of the C-dots might play an important role in the observed PL.
 Fig. 7  PL and PL excitation (PLE) spectra of sample A (the supernatant from the suspension of graphite in PEG200N), R1 (pure PEG200N irradiated by laser for 2 h) and R2 (a mixture of PEG200N and perchloric acid heated to 120 °C and held for 72 h), PL spectra were recorded under 350 nm light excitation, while PLE spectra were acquired by exciting the samples with the strongest absorption wavelength in the PLE spectra. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Wang et al. used transient absorption spectroscopy and time-resolved PL spectroscopy to reveal the origin of the green luminescence observed for C-dots.35 According to the change of surface functional groups during chemical reduction experiments, the green luminescence emission centers emerging in C-dots were unambiguously assigned to special edge states consisting of several carbon atoms on the edge of a carbon backbone and CO functional groups (carbonyl and carboxyl). It was suggested that competition between different emission centers and traps dominates the optical properties of C-dots.

3. Doping
Doping is an effective method for modulating the intrinsic properties of C-dots. By introducing atomic impurities (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus, boron, etc.) into C-dots, their electronic structure can be changed, generating n-type or p-type carriers. Therefore, their electronic and optical properties, closely related to the HOMO–LUMO energy gaps, can be tuned by using certain types and amounts of dopants. Furthermore, recent research revealed that doping could greatly enhance the quantum yield of C-dots. For these reasons, numerous research efforts have been directed at searching for dopants and developing doping processes over the last decade.
3.1. Nitrogen doping
Nitrogen is a typical dopant due to its five valence electrons and an atomic size comparable to that of carbon. In C-dots, nitrogen atoms serve as n-type impurities providing excess electrons, which results in an upward shift of the Fermi level and a change in optical properties.36–39 So far, various nitrogen-containing compounds have been tried as precursors for nitrogen doping of C-dots.38–128
Zhang et al. prepared N-doped C-dots via a one-pot solvothermal route by using CCl4 and NaNH2 as starting materials.38 Experimental results showed that the emission wavelength of C-dots could be efficiently tuned by adjusting the nitrogen doping concentration, and the authors claimed that nitrogen doping dominates the optical properties of the C-dots, rather than the size effect. Xu et al. proposed a facile and general carbonization and extraction procedure for preparing a series of N-doped C-dots with different nitrogen contents, using 3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-L-alanine (L-DOPA), L-histidine, and L-arginine as model precursors.40 They argued that nitrogen bonding disorders the carbon hexagonal rings and creates emissive energy traps. As a result, the PL intensity of N-doped C-dots was dependent on the nitrogen content, and N-doped C-dots showed brighter PL than non-doped C-dots and oxidized N-doped C-dots. Guo et al. synthesized highly luminescent nitrogen-containing carbogenic polymer dots (NPDs) through a microwave-assisted ethanol thermal approach using polybromopyrroles (PBPs) as the starting material.41 The NPDs emitted strong blue luminescence around 470 nm under excitation at 360 nm showing a high quantum yield of 24% after simple surface reduction by NaBH4.
Some researchers studied the availability of nitrogen-doped C-dots for a wide range of applications such as photocatalysis, biochemical sensing, bioprobes, bioimaging, optoelectronic devices, etc. Ma et al. synthesized water-soluble fluorescent N-doped C-dots by a facile one-pot ultrasonic reaction between glucose and ammonium hydroxide.42 In a study of their photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation, the N-doped C-dots showed higher catalytic activity for the photodegradation of methyl orange compared to the non-doped C-dots, implying their considerable application potential in environmental protection (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  (a) The scheme for the formation process of the N-doped C-dots (represented as N-doped CQDs in the figure). (b) Relationship between methyl orange concentration and reaction time for different catalysts (C-dots are represented as CDs in the figure). Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chen et al. claimed that highly luminescent N-doped C-dots (quantum yield of 15.7%) could be synthesized by a facile one-step hydrothermal treatment of folic acid.43 The N-doped C-dots were found to be a highly efficient and sensitive chemosensor for selective Hg2+ detection, exhibiting a detection limit of 0.23 μM. The sensitive and selective Hg2+ detection by the presented “turn-off” fluorescent sensor was achieved by fluorescence quenching (Fig. 9), which may be attributed to the surface/molecular states of the quantum dots and/or the Hg2+-induced conversion of the special functional group (–CONH–) from a spirolactam to an open-ring amide structure.
 Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of the N-doped C-dots in aqueous solution upon addition of various concentrations of Hg2+ (from top to bottom: 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 70 and 75 μM), excitation at 360 nm. (b) The dependence of PL intensity on the concentration of Hg2+ ions within the range of 0–75 μM, and the inset shows the linear relationship between the PL intensity and Hg2+ concentration. Reprinted from ref. 43, Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier. 
Wang et al. have synthesized N-doped C-dots of less than 3 nm size via a facile one-pot route by reacting melamine and glycerol in the presence of an acid catalyst.47 The N-doped C-dots were used to sensitize TiO2 solar cells, showing comparable performance to CdSe and InAs quantum dots at their early development stage. More significantly, the C-dot sensitized solar cell is responsive to near-IR irradiation, owing to the energy upconversion ability of the N-doped C-dots. Kwon et al. reported the preparation of nitrogen-rich C-dots by emulsion-templated carbonization of polyacrylamide.48 The authors fabricated large-scale (20 × 20 cm) freestanding luminescent C-dot films based on a poly(methyl methacrylate) matrix. The obtained films are low-cost, fully flexible, easily scalable, thermally stable, eco-friendly, and mechanically robust. Furthermore, white LEDs using these films as color-converting phosphors and InGaN blue LEDs as illuminators were demonstrated. Fig. 10 shows the emission spectrum and CIE (Commission Internationale d'É clairage) chromaticity coordinates of the white LED. Such white LEDs exhibit no temporal degradation of their emission spectrum under practical operation conditions.
 Fig. 10  (a) Emission spectrum of a white LED using a CND-10000 film as a color-converting phosphor and an InGaN blue (400 nm) LED as an illuminant. (b) CIE (Commission Internationale d'É clairage) chromaticity coordinates (x, y) calculated from the emission spectrum. (c) Photograph of an exemplary device under operation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.2. Phosphorus doping
Phosphorus, which belongs to group 15 of the periodic table, can act as an n-type impurity in C-dots. Unlike nitrogen, the phosphorus atom is larger than the carbon atom. Thus, it can form substitutional defects in the carbon cluster and behave as an n-type donor, thereby modifying the electronic and optical properties.129 Several kinds of P-doped C-dots were produced using phosphorus-containing precursors, such as phosphorous tribromide,129 triphenylphosphine,106 monosodium phosphate,29 phosphoric acid,130etc.
Zhou et al. synthesized P-doped C-dots by a solvothermal method using phosphorous tribromide and hydroquinone as precursors.129 The as-prepared P-doped C-dots exhibited strong blue fluorescence with a quantum yield of up to 25% (Table 1). It was suggested that the coexistence of defect sites and isolated sp2 carbon clusters could efficiently increase the band gap into UV-vis light regions and give rise to stronger visible fluorescence than the single sp2 carbon clusters. The fluorescence enhancement may also originate from the isolated sp2 carbon clusters, since the incorporation of phosphorus into C-dots creates more isolated sp2 carbon clusters, with the number of these clusters increasing concomitantly with the phosphorus content. Toxicity and bioimaging experiments showed that P-doped C-dots have low cell toxicity and excellent biolabeling ability.
Table 1 The fluorescence quantum yields and lifetimes of C-dots and P-doped C-dots. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry




Sample

λ
ex (nm)

Φ
f

 (%)

τ

 (ns)





a The fluorescence quantum yields in ethanol at their respective excitation wavelength.
b The average lifetimes.





C-Dots
368
3.4
8.4


P-Doped C-dots
372
25.1
5.0




Sarkar et al. demonstrated the effects of phosphorus doping by comparing non-doped C-dots with phosphorus-doped C-dots.29 Doping the non-doped C-dots with phosphorus caused a red shift of the maximum emission wavelength from 420 to 470 nm and enhanced their fluorescence intensity as well as quantum yields by up to 10%.
3.3. Boron dopings
Boron has only three valence electrons, i.e., one less than carbon. Thus, if a boron atom is introduced in a carbon cluster, p-type carriers are generated inside C-dots, changing their electronic structures and optical properties.106,131–134
Shan et al. reported that fluorescent B-doped carbon quantum dots were prepared by a facile one-pot solvothermal route using BBr3 as the boron source and hydroquinone as the carbon source131 (Fig. 11). B-Doped C-dots exhibit bright blue fluorescence with a maximum emission peak at 368 nm, whereas non-doped C-dots show weak green emission with a maximum at 440 nm. The maximum fluorescence quantum yield of B-doped C-dots is 14.8%, which is considerably higher than that of C-dots (3.4%). It was proposed that the large emission blue shift of B-doped C-dots compared to non-doped C-dots might be attributed to the strong electron-withdrawing character of boron, since it is a well-known electron-deficient Lewis acid. Taking advantage of the effective fluorescence quenching effect of hydrogen peroxide, induced by charge transfer between doped boron atoms and hydrogen peroxide, a sensitive fluorescence analytical system for hydrogen peroxide was established based on B-doped C-dots. Sadhanala et al. synthesized B-doped C-dots from sucrose as the carbon source and boric acid as the boron source by using a simple hydrothermal method at 180 °C.132 It was shown that the C-dot size and boron doping level could be controlled by simply varying the reaction time; the quantum yield was found to increase from 0.5% to 2.7% after boron doping. In contrast to the results of Shan et al., the PL peaks of B-doped C-dots are red-shifted as the reaction time is increased, which suggests that the size effect dominates over the influence of boron concentration.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the synthesis of B-doped C-dots and glucose-sensing mechanisms based on B-doped C-dots and H2O2. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another type of B-doped C-dots was produced by microwave heating of an aqueous solution of citric acid, boric acid, and urea by Bourlinos et al.133 They demonstrated for the first time that boron doping causes a significant enhancement of the non-linear optical response compared to non-doped C-dots. This result is in line with previous studies, which reported a similar effect on the non-linear optical properties of boron-doped silicon nanocrystals.
3.4. Sulfur doping
Recently, S-doped C-dots have received great attention, since sulfur atoms can provide energy or emissive trap states for photoexcited electron capture, which modifies the electronic structure of C-dots.135 Numerous studies reported the synthesis of S-doped C-dots using sulfuric acid,136 sodium hydrosulfide,87 sodium thiosulfate,137 waste frying oil,138 dodecanethiol,106 ethane-sulfonic acid,57 and 2,2′-(ethylenedithio)diacetic acid91 as sulfur sources.
Chandra et al. developed a facile route for the first-time synthesis of isolated S-doped C-dots from thiomalic acid (TMA) via pyrolysis in the presence of conc. H2SO4 (98%) followed by isolation and polymerization with excess NH4OH.136 The synthesized S-doped C-dots show excellent water dispersibility, high photostability, and negligible toxicity, exhibiting a high quantum yield of 11.8% at 340 nm excitation at pH 8. Due to the presence of sulfur atoms in their interior, S-doped C-dots using phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron transporting layer exhibit a wide band gap of 4.43 eV with a high open circuit voltage (VOC) of 617 mV and a fill factor (FF) of as high as 37%. The J–V characteristics of this hybrid photovoltaic cell are presented in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  (a) J–V characteristics under dark and photo conditions of the hybrid cell made by C-dots (donor) and PCBM (acceptor). (b) The corresponding plot of power density against voltage. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang et al. synthesized S-doped C-dots by a one-step hydrothermal reduction and in situ doping using oxidized C-dots and sodium hydrosulfide.87 The excitation and emission wavelengths of these S-doped C-dots were red-shifted to 418 and 539 nm compared to oxidized C-dots, which exhibit excitation and emission wavelength of 397 and 482 nm, respectively. The authors claimed that the emission wavelength of heavily doped C-dots is related to the electronegativity of heteroatoms. Similar to fluorescent dyes, the fluorescence spectrum of C-dots was red-shifted when they were doped by sulfur. This can be attributed to the low electronegativity of sulfur, which can act as an electron donor. Synthesis of S-doped C-dots via a simple and straightforward hydrothermal reaction using sodium citrate and sodium thiosulfate as precursors was suggested by Xu et al.137 As the sulfur to carbon precursor ratio increased, more sulfur was doped into the carbon dots, increasing their quantum yield. The as-prepared S-doped C-dots exhibit maximum fluorescence at 440 nm with a quantum yield of 67%, which is the highest value observed for S-doped C-dots.
3.5. Co-doping
So far, single-element doping has shown great potential for controlling the intrinsic properties of C-dots, but it also has several limitations. For instance, one of the major limitations of single-element-doped C-dots is that their light emission spectra are confined to the blue–yellow range.139 Several researchers suggested that such disadvantages of single-element doping can be overcome by doping two or more atoms simultaneously, which is called co-doping.39,106,135,139–160 The light absorption and emission behavior of co-doped C-dots could be affected by the synergistic effect of different elements.135

3.5.1. Nitrogen/sulfur. 
Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped C-dots (N,S-doped C-dots) have been frequently investigated, since nitrogen has an atomic radius close to that of carbon, and sulfur has an electronegativity similar to that of carbon.140 Yu et al. synthesized N,S-doped C-dots via a one-step hydrothermal treatment using citric acid (CA) as a carbon precursor and L-cysteine as a nitrogen and sulfur source.141 The introduced sulfur atoms could enhance the effect of nitrogen atoms on the properties of the doped carbon nanomaterials through a cooperative effect. For the N,S-doped C-dots, the introduced sulfur atoms were able to eliminate the O-states (kind of surface states caused by oxygen presence in C-dots) and enhance the N-state (new kind of surface states caused by nitrogen doping) (Fig. 13). Therefore, the N,S-doped C-dots showed a high fluorescence quantum yield (73%) and excitation-independent emission. The maximum excitation and emission wavelengths of the aqueous N,S-doped C-dot solution are 345 and 415 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 13  Representation for the fluorescence mechanism of O-doped C-dots, N-doped C-dots, and N,S-doped C-dots. (1): electrons excited from the ground state and trapped by the surface states. (2): excited electrons return to the ground state via a non-radiative route. (3): excited electrons return to the ground state via a radiative route. O-Doped C-dots, N-doped C-dots and N,S-doped C-dots are represented as O-CDs, N-CDs and N,S-CDs in the figure, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
Sun et al. developed a simple method for a large-scale synthesis of N,S-doped C-dots using carbonization and etching of hair fibers by sulfuric acid.142 Higher reaction temperature favored the formation of N,S-doped C-dots with smaller size, higher S content, and longer PL wavelength. The obtained N,S-doped C-dots exhibited good luminescence stability, nanosecond lifetime, low toxicity, good biocompatibility, and high water solubility. N,S-Doped C-dots with a quantum yield of 54.4% were hydrothermally synthesized using α-lipoic acid and ethylenediamine by Ding et al.143 It was argued that the doped nitrogen formed CN and C–N bonds, which significantly enhanced the fluorescence efficiency, and the co-doped sulfur was found to synergistically enhance the effect of nitrogen doping by providing more opportunities to form CN bonds. Choi et al. reported the synthesis of N,S-doped C-dots by microwave-assisted pyrolysis of rice as a carbon source and N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) as a nitrogen and sulfur dopant.144 High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to separate the N,S-doped C-dots into fractions, which were collected and further characterized by mass spectrometry, UV-vis absorption, and PL spectroscopy, showing that the structural changes induced by doping with nitrogen and sulfur heteroatoms play a key role in regulating their PL properties. Wang et al. showed that introduction of nitrogen or sulfur atoms into graphite lattices could reduce the band gap of the nanoscale graphene structure, while co-doping with nitrogen and sulfur could reduce the band gap more efficiently.145 Experimental investigations confirmed that the N,S-doped C-dots can generate much higher photocurrents than the C-dots, N-doped C-dots, and S-doped C-dots. The prepared N,S-doped C-dots enhanced the photocurrent responses of TiO2 nanotube arrays by 50%, indicating that the N,S-doped C-dots can be used as an excellent photosensitizer for solar radiation collection and charge transport in the N,S-doped C-dots/TiO2 hybrid devices.


3.5.2. Boron/nitrogen. 
Jahan et al. demonstrated a facile hydrothermal oxidative synthesis route to highly fluorescent boron/nitrogen co-doped C-dots (B,N-doped C-dots).157 During this process, N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)glycine served as a nitrogen and carbon source, while boric acid (H3BO3) was used as an oxidizing agent under an atmosphere of N2. Upon excitation of the aqueous solution of C-dots, bright green PL was observed, with the emission peak centered at ∼500 nm and a quantum yield of 11.44%. Han et al. synthesized B,N-doped C-dots by a combustion flame technique, using boric acid and pyrrole as precursors.106 The B,N-doped C-dots have a maximum emission wavelength of 524 nm, and exhibit excitation-independent PL behavior. The as-prepared B,N-doped C-dots show high catalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), comparable to that of commercial Pt/C.


3.5.3. Phosphorus/nitrogen. 
Han et al. also synthesized phosphorus/nitrogen co-doped C-dots (P,N-doped C-dots) by a combustion flame technique, using triphenylphosphine and pyrrole as precursors.106 The P,N-doped C-dots exhibit maximum emission intensity at 523 nm, while B,N-doped C-dots exhibit an excitation-independent PL behavior. Similar to B,N-doped C-dots, P,N-doped C-dots show excellent ORR performance, compared with non-doped C-dots. P,N-doped C-dots with a satisfactory quantum yield have been prepared via one-step acidic oxidation of pumpkin by H3PO4 at low temperature (90 °C) by Gong et al.158 The as-synthesized P,N-doped C-dots exhibit fluorescence around 550 nm with a quantum yield of 9.42% without surface passivation, and have excitation wavelength dependent PL behavior. It was observed that P,N-doped C-dots are superior fluorescent bioimaging agents due to their excellent solubility and ultralow toxicity. In addition, P,N-doped C-dots display a notably large Stokes shift of 125 nm with good reversibility and could effectively avoid the influence of autofluorescence in biological systems. Zhang et al. prepared nitrogen- and phosphorus-doped C-dots by hydrothermal carbonization of adenosine-5′-triphosphate.159 The quantum yield of P,N-doped C-dots excited at 340 nm was as high as 23.5%. The P,N-doped C-dots have remarkable advantages of high sensitivity, rapid response time, wide response range, and high biocompatibility, making them suitable for in vivo reactive oxygen species (ROS)/reactive nitrogen species (RNS) detection and biological imaging.


3.5.4. Nitrogen/sulfur/phosphorus. 
Zhuo et al. reported a simple and green approach to prepare water-soluble nitrogen/sulfur/phosphorus co-doped carbon dots (N,S,P-doped C-dots) by a one-step hydrothermal treatment of cucumber juice.160 It was found that a higher reaction temperature favors the formation of N,S,P-doped C-dots with smaller size and longer PL wavelength.

3.6. Other atoms (Si, Ge, Se, Gd, and Tb)
In addition to the previously mentioned elements, many other elements such as Si, Ge, Se, Gd, Tb, etc. have been used as dopants to change the optical, electrochemical, and biological properties of C-dots for their versatile application.87,161–166
Qian et al. developed a simple solvothermal method to synthesize Si-doped C-dots using SiCl4 and hydroquinone.161 The as-prepared Si-doped C-dots have maximum fluorescence at 382 nm with a quantum yield of up to 19.2%, owing to fluorescence enhancement by the introduced silicon atoms. The Si-doped CQDs exhibit excellent multifunctional sensing performance in the determination of Fe(III), H2O2, and melamine.
C-Dots doped with Ge were prepared for the first time via carbonation synthesis using citric acid and bis-(2-carboxyethylgermanium(IV)sesquioxide) (Ge-132) by Yuan et al.162 (Fig. 14). The as-prepared Ge-doped C-dots exhibited excitation-independent PL, which could help to avoid autofluorescence in bioimaging applications. Additionally, Ge-doped C-dots have low cell toxicity, good biocompatibility, high intracellular delivery efficiency, and stability and could be used for detection of mercury(II) ions with excellent selectivity in a complex medium.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the formation process of Ge-doped C-dots by carbonization and its further applications for Hg2+ detection. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang et al. reported that Se-doped C-dots were obtained by a one-step hydrothermal reduction of oxidized C-dots with NaHSe. Se-doped C-dots have maximum emission intensity at 563 nm with a quantum yield of 19%, and exhibit yellow luminescence under UV irradiation.87 Just as in the case of S-doped C-dots, the authors claimed that the red-shifted emission wavelength of Se-doped C-dots was related to the low electronegativity of selenium.
Some researchers fabricated gadolinium-doped C-dots for medical applications, especially for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).163,164 In the study by Bourlinos et al., Gd-doped C-dots were synthesized via pyrolysis of a mixture of gadopentetic acid with tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) and betaine hydrochloride in air at 250 °C.163 The obtained Gd(III)-doped carbon dots have uniform particle size (3–4 nm) and exhibit bright fluorescence, strong T1-weighted MRI contrast, and low cytotoxicity. Gong et al. reported that Gd-doped C-dots could be prepared by a one-step microwave-assisted polyol method using sucrose and Gd2O3.164 The obtained Gd-doped C-dots exhibited unique green PL with a quantum yield of 5.4%, and were an excellent T1 contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images of water and serial dilutions of Gd-doped C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al. claimed that Tb-doped C-dots were first prepared by simply heating a mixture of terbium(III) nitrate pentahydrate and citric acid at 190 °C.165 The as-prepared Tb-doped C-dots exhibited excitation wavelength dependent emission (blue fluorescence), having high reproducibility and selectivity for detecting 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) in complex water samples. A summary of doped C-dots is presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of representative doped C-dots




Doping element
Carbon source
Doping agent
Maximum emission wavelength (nm)
Quantum yields (%)
Ref.




Nitrogen
CCl4, glucose, folic acid, glycerol, etc.
NaNH2, NH4OH, melamine, etc.
390–560
1.5–93.3

38–128



Phosphorus
Hydroquinone, citric acid, etc.
PBr3, NaH2PO4, etc.
372–470
10–65

29, 106, 129 and 130



Boron
Hydroquinone, sucrose, etc.
BBr3, H3BO3, etc.
368–680
0.5–14.8

106 and 131–134



Sulfur
Thiomalic acid, sodium citrate, etc.
H2SO4, sodium thiosulfate, etc.
378–539
3.66–67

57, 87, 91, 106 and 136–138



Nitrogen/sulfur
Citric acid, etc.

L-Cysteine (N, S), ethylenediamine (N), α-lipoic acid, H2SO4 (S), etc.
415
54.4–73

106, 135 and 139–156



Boron/nitrogen

N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)glycine, etc.
H3BO3 (B), C4H5N (N), etc.
500–524
11.44

106 and 157



Phosphorus/nitrogen
Pyrrole, adenosine triphosphate, etc.
Pyrrole (N), triphenylphosphine, H3PO4 (P), etc.
406–550
9.42–59

39, 106, 158 and 159



Nitrogen/sulfur/phosphorus
Cucumber juice (N, S, P)
450–571
3.25

160



Silicon
Hydroquinone
SiCl4
382
19.2

161



Germanium
Citric acid
Ge-132
465
8.9

162



Selenium
Chinese ink
NaHSe
563
19

87



Gadolinium
Tris, betaine hydrochloride, sucrose
Gadopentetic acid, Gd2O3
445, 521
5.4

163 and 164



Terbium
Citric acid
Terbium(III) nitrate pentahydrate
450
—

165





4. Surface functionalization
Surface functionalization with various molecules (e.g., organic/inorganic molecules, polymers, ions, metals, DNA, proteins, etc.) is an effective pathway for tailoring the properties of C-dots. Surface functionalization is a multipurpose method that has been used in various research fields, including energy structure engineering, mechanical property engineering, sensor applications, bioapplications, photocatalytic applications, etc.
4.1. Electronic structure engineering
So far, many studies have shown that the optical properties of C-dots are highly dependent on their surface states. These surface states, including emissive surface states and defect sites, are closely related to the energy structure of C-dots, which determine excitation/emission wavelengths and quantum yields. In this regard, many surface functionalization methods have been investigated for engineering the energy structures of C-dots.
A bare C-dot surface contains many defect sites, such as dangling bonds, non-radiative states, radicals, etc. These defect sites make C-dots defenseless to external contaminants, which may cause poor photostability and low quantum yields. Surface passivation is one of the surface functionalization methods developed to enhance the optical properties of C-dots. By introducing a thin passivating layer on the C-dot surface, their photostability and quantum yields are remarkably increased. Passivation of C-dots to improve their quantum efficiency was first conducted by the Sun group. In 2006, Sun et al. first discovered the beneficial effect of C-dot surface passivation. They synthesized surface-passivated C-dots with diamine-terminated oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol) H2NCH2(CH2CH2O)nCH2CH2CH2NH2 (average n ∼ 35, PEG1500N).167 In a typical reaction, PEG1500N was mixed with an acid-treated particle sample, and the mixture was heated to 120 °C for 72 h. After the reaction, the mixture was cooled to room temperature and dispersed in water, followed by centrifuging for 30 min. The obtained colored but homogeneous supernatant contained PEG1500N-passivated C-dots (Fig. 16). The resulting C-dots showed high photostability to continuously repeated irradiation for several hours with high quantum yields (from 4% to more than 10%). Wang et al. synthesized blue fluorescent C-dots using citric acid as a carbon source and hyperbranched polyethylenimine (PEI) as a surface passivation agent.168 The resultant C-dots showed strong blue fluorescence with a quantum yield of up to 24.3% and high photo- and metal-stability, attributed to the protective surface passivation layer formed by PEI.
 Fig. 16  Aqueous solution of the PEG1500N-attached C-dots (a) excited at 400 nm and photographed through band-pass filters of different wavelengths as indicated, and (b) excited at the indicated wavelengths and photographed directly. (c) The colored but homogeneous supernatant contained the C-dots with PEG1500N species attached to the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
Lu et al. generated ionic liquid (IL) passivated C-dots from graphite electrodes using IL-assisted electrochemical exfoliation.169 ILs improved the nanoparticle dispersion and diminished the quenching effects due to interparticle interactions, resulting in a quantum yield of 2.8–5.2%. Inorganic shell passivation could also improve the quality of C-dots. Liu et al. reported a novel wet-chemistry-based route towards C-dots by employing surfactant-modified silica spheres as carriers.20 The resulting C-dots showed good biocompatibility and high quantum yields of ∼11–15% for a wide range of pH values from 5 to 9. Gao et al. found an interesting phenomenon that Ag+ exhibited an enhancement effect on the photoluminescence of C-dots, which is a quite different way to the usual quenching effects of metal ions on the fluorescence of C-dots.170 Based on their proposed mechanism, Ag+ ions could be reduced to Ag0 clusters on the surface of the C-dots, which can efficiently enhance the fluorescence intensity of the C-dots. In 2010, the Sun group synthesized PEG1500N-passivated C-dots for a more rigorous control of the functionalization reaction conditions and fractionated them on an aqueous gel column.171 The most fluorescent fractions achieved quantum yields close to 60%, comparable to those of the best commercial CdSe/ZnS QDs in solution and brighter at the individual dot level. After a year, they reported C-dots surface-passivated by a combination of inorganic and organic moieties.172 In detail, doping the surface of the precursor C-dots with inorganic salts, such as ZnS or ZnO, followed by functionalization with PEG1500N molecules led to the formation of surface-doped carbon dots. Coupled with gel column fractionation, the most fluorescent C-dots exhibited fluorescence emission quantum yields of up to 78%.
Surface functionalization can also change the excitation/emission characteristics by introducing new emissive surface states on C-dots, which can interact with the intrinsic band gap core via electron and/or energy transfer.6,7,11–14,21,173 The Pang group prepared luminescent C-dots by electrochemical etching of carbon fibers and observed red-shifted emission of the C-dots with a high degree of surface oxidation.11 They speculated that surface oxidation would create emissive surface states, which are considered responsible for C-dot PL. Different surface states could introduce different emission sites, resulting in variable intensities of the emission spectra (Fig. 17). The same group reported a series of C-dots exhibiting various emission wavelengths ranging from 430 to 610 nm by varying the degree of surface oxidation or their size.12
 Fig. 17  Illustration of emission from C-dots along with the variation of surface oxidation degree. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
Hola et al. reported the synthesis of alkyl chain passivated C-dots with controlled size and surface chemistry from simple gallate molecular precursors.13 The alkyl chains on the C-dot surface were readily converted to carboxylate groups via mild base hydrolysis and induced red-shifted emission (from 402 to 440 nm) due to COO− surface states. Recently, Ding et al. synthesized C-dots with tunable PL and a quantum yield of up to 35% in water using a hydrothermal method and silica column chromatography.21 Although these samples had similar distributions of particle size and graphite structure in their carbon cores, the surface states varied between the samples, especially the degree of oxidation. Therefore, the red shift (440 to 625 nm) observed for their emission peaks was ascribed to a gradual reduction of their band gaps with increasing incorporation of oxygen species into their surface structures. Introduction of new surface states using organic molecules was conducted by Kwon et al.6 Surface functionalization with para-substituted anilines endowed C-dots with new energy levels, exhibiting long-wavelength (up to 650 nm) PL of very narrow spectral widths with high quantum yields of ca. 20% (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Schematic of surface functionalization and molecular structures of para-substituted anilines used in the functionalization of C-dots. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission. 
Introduction of surface states also changes excitation-(in)dependent characteristics.7,14 Nie et al. prepared two types of C-dots with either excitation-independent blue emission or distinctive excitation-dependent full-color emission from chloroform (CHCl3) and diethylamine (DEA) by varying the reaction time.14 Diversified surface states obtained at longer reaction times resulted in excitation-dependent behavior. The opposite phenomenon was observed by Li et al.7 They varied the passivation degree of surface traps on C-dots by changing their surface coverage with amino groups. Amino-poor C-dots had various surface states (terminated with various groups) and exhibited excitation-dependent behavior, whereas C-dots with surfaces rich in amino-groups exhibited excitation-independent behavior due to amino-passivated surface states (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Surface-state engineering of C-dots with excitation dependent and excitation-independent luminescent properties. C-Dots (represented as L-CDs in the figure) with various surface states (terminated with various groups) emit excitation-dependent light. C-Dots with surfaces rich in amino-groups exhibit excitation-independent behavior because of passivated surface states. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission. 
4.2. Sensing
Surface functionalization allows the synthesis of a variety of C-dots for sensing applications by changing their surface functional groups, which act as a receptor. Specifically, surface functionalized C-dots are widely used for detecting ions in vivo and in vitro: Hg2+,174 Cu2+,175–177,183 Zn2+,178 Fe3+,25,179 Be2+,7 Pt4+,180 Cr4+,181 Cd2+,182etc. In 2010, Gonçalves et al. developed a Hg2+ biosensor based on functionalized C-dots.174 C-Dots were synthesized by direct laser ablation of carbon targets and functionalized with NH2–(polyethylene glycol) (PEG200) and N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). Functionalization with PEG200 and NAC allowed the synthesis of a nanosensor sensitive to micromolar concentrations of Hg2+ and Cu2+ and the solution pH. In 2012, Dong et al. developed a more selective sensor for Cu2+ by synthesizing C-dots functionalized with branched poly(ethylenimine) (BPEI).183 BPEI is a well-known receptor capable of selectively capturing traces of copper ions (Cu2+);184 therefore, the BPEI-functionalized C-dots served as a good fluorescent probe for sensitive and selective sensing of Cu2+ ions.175 Zhang et al. developed an in vivo fluorescent nanosensor for Zn2+ based on C-dots functionalized with a quinoline derivative.178 The nanosensor demonstrated high selectivity and a rapid response towards Zn2+ (within 1 min), with a detection limit as low as 6.4 nM. Although much research had been done on C-dot-based sensors for heavy metal detection, the use of similar systems for anion detection is relatively scarce. In 2013, Liu et al. synthesized [Zr(H2O)2EDTA]-modulated luminescent C-dots as fluorescent probes for fluoride detection.185 In 2015, Baruah et al. reported sensitive and selective fluoride ion detectors based on C-dots functionalized with β-cyclodextrin and calix[4]arene-25,26,27,28-tetrol.186 The functionalized C-dots showed increased PL intensity exclusively in the presence of F−, with a minimum detection limit of ∼6.6 M.
Recently, the detection range of C-dot-based sensors was extended to various molecules.8,15,187–192 Shen et al. fabricated fluorescent C-dots modified with boronic acid for non-enzymatic glucose sensing applications.8 The functionalized C-dots were obtained by one-step hydrothermal carbonization of phenylboronic acid. The addition of glucose selectively led to the assembly and fluorescence quenching of the C-dots (Fig. 20), which could be used for quantifying glucose in the range of 9–900 μM. Beyond that, various surface modification methods for C-dots were developed to detect specific molecules such as dipicolinic acid,15 methyl parathion,187 water,188 quercetin,189 nifedipine,190 ascorbic acid,191m-phenylenediamine,192etc.
 Fig. 20  (a) One-step “synthesis-modification integration” strategy for fabrication of boronic acid functionalized C-dots. (b) Working principle for glucose sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Functionalized C-dots for nanoparticle detection were developed by the Valcárcel group.9 They developed a simple procedure involving amidation of passivated C-dots with cysteamine, which showed enhanced photoluminescent properties and had thiol-terminated groups on their surface (Fig. 21). The high affinity of thiol groups for gold atoms allowed development of a selective photoluminescent probe for gold nanoparticles based on static quenching. A selective detection method for citrated silver nanoparticles based on C-dots functionalized with amine-terminated groups via an amidation reaction was also reported.193 C-Dot sensors for determination of water-soluble C60 fullerenes have also been developed by the Valcárcel group.194 C-dots functionalized with carboxymethyl-β-cyclodextrin showed fluorescence quenching, owing to the non-covalent self-assembly of functionalized C-dots and C60, making possible the quantification of the latter.
 Fig. 21  Synthesis route for raw carbon dots (represented as r-CDs in the figure), their subsequent passivation with acetone and final functionalization with cysteamine. Reprinted from ref. 9, Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier. 
4.3. Enhancement of mechanical property
C-Dots without surface functionalization showed low dispersibility and restricted solubility, which limit their potential applications. Surface functionalization enables the high dispersibility of C-dots in various solvents, including organic ones.19,24,195 Bourlinos et al. synthesized surface-functionalized C-dots by thermal decomposition of either different ammonium citrate salts or 4-aminoantipyrine.19 In the ammonium citrate route, the citrate unit served as the source of carbon, while the ammonium provided the covalently attached surface modifier. Thus, carbonization of different ammonium citrates resulted in different C-dot properties, e.g., using octadecyl ammonium citrate resulted in organophilic nanoparticles, whereas carbonization of the 2-(2-aminoethoxy)-ethanol salt resulted in hydrophilic nanoparticles. In the 4-aminoantipyrine route, the obtained particles also showed high dispersibility in solvents such as DMSO, DMF, and CF3CH(OH)CF3. The authors also developed a method for making functionalized C-dots highly dispersible in water and photostable in the long term, using thermal oxidation of a salt precursor prepared from the acid–base reaction of tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) and betaine hydrochloride to form the corresponding ammonium carboxylate complex.195 Superhydrophobic C-dots in liquid and solid phases were presented by Wang et al., obtained via surface functionalization of water-soluble C-dots with amine-functionalized polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS–NH2) by chemical bonding.24
Surface functionalization also allowed C-dots to form solid-state architectures.24,196,197 Wang et al. first used an organosilane as a coordinating solvent to synthesize highly luminescent C-dots (quantum yield = 47%).24 The reaction proceeded through pyrolysis of anhydrous citric acid in N-(β-aminoethyl)-γ-aminopropyl methyldimethoxysilane (AEAPMS) (Fig. 22). These surface methoxysilyl groups could be directly fabricated into a hybrid fluorescent film or monolith by simple heating in the absence of any additional polymers or inorganic compounds. The change of C-dot morphology was investigated by other researchers. Wang et al. have created a flexible, free-standing, and transparent ionogel by the combination of a carboxyl-functionalized IL with organosilane-functionalized C-dots.196 This C-dot ionogel exhibited thickness-dependent emission tunability at a single excitation wavelength, based on the combination of light reabsorption and the excitation-dependent PL of organosilane-functionalized C-dots dispersed in the ionogel at a high concentration (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram for the preparation of photoluminescent C-dots (represented as CDs in the figure), flexible CDs film, and CDs/silica particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the C-dot-ionogel using Si–C-dots through sol–gel processing in the presence of an IL [Carb-Bim]Br. (b) Photographs of the free-standing pellets of the C-dot-ionogel, which are both transparent and flexible. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
4.4. Bioapplication
Surface functionalization of C-dots introduces an effective linkage to connect C-dots to biological systems. In addition, biocompatibility and nontoxicity encourage the investigation of C-dot bioapplications, such as bioimaging, biosensing, drug delivery, theranostics, etc. In vivo bioimaging and biosensing based on functionalized C-dots was investigated by various researchers.10,14,16,22,23,25,167,168,176,178,188,198–210 The first work on C-dots for bioimaging applications was reported by the Sun group.167 In this paper, the authors synthesized PEG1500N-passivated C-dots via laser ablation and passivation. Confocal microscopy images of E. coli ATCC 25922 cells labeled with the passivated C-dots were obtained (Fig. 24a–d). Shortly afterwards, they reported two-photon luminescence microscopy imaging of the C-dots internalized in human cancer cells.198 The C-dots were passivated with poly(propionylethylenimine-co-ethylenimine) (PPEI-EI) and exhibited strong luminescence based on two-photon excitation in the near-infrared region. Finally the two-photon luminescence microscopy imaging of the C-dots internalized in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells using excitation by 800 nm laser pulses was demonstrated (Fig. 24e).
 Fig. 24  Confocal microscopy images of E. coli ATCC 25922 cells labeled with the C-dots: (a) λEX = 458 nm, detected with a 475 nm long pass filter; (b) λEX = 477 nm, detected with a 505 nm long pass filter; (c) λEX = 488 nm, detected with a 530 nm long pass filter; and (d) λEX = 514 nm, detected with a 560 nm long pass filter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (e) Representative two-photon luminescence image (800 nm excitation) of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells with internalized C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
The Tian group integrated an organic molecule specific for Cu2+ ions, N-(2-aminoethyl)-N,N,N′-tris(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)ethane-1,2-diamine (AE-TPEA), into a hybrid system composed of C-dots and CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (Fig. 25).199 In detail, the blue-fluorescent C-dots were hybridized with red-fluorescent CdSe/ZnS QDs to obtain a dual-emission fluorophore (CdSe@C nanohybrid), in which CdSe/ZnS QDs embedded in silica shells (CdSe@SiO2) were inert to Cu2+ ions and only served as reference signals for providing built-in correction to avoid environmental effects. Meanwhile, AE-TPEA, acting as a specific receptor for Cu2+ ions, was synthesized and conjugated with the responsive C-dot surface to form inorganic–organic CdSe@C-TPEA probes. The blue-fluorescent C-dots functionalized with AE-TPEA could selectively recognize Cu2+ ions, leading to blue fluorescence quenching, whereas the red fluorescence of CdSe@SiO2 particles stayed constant. Consequently, variation of the two fluorescence intensities showed a continuous change upon addition of Cu2+ ions, which could be successfully applied for imaging and biosensing of Cu2+ ions in living cells. In the same year, the group reported a C-dot-based inorganic–organic fluorescent probe for two-photon biosensing of physiological pH in living cells.200 The AE-TPY (4′-(aminomethylphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) molecules were bound to C-dots functionalized with –COOH and/or –OH groups to form the inorganic–organic nanosystem CD-TPY, using amidation catalysts such as sulfo-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide) and EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide) (Fig. 26). The CD-TPY probe has been successfully used in two-photon imaging and biosensing of pH gradients in living cells and tissues.
 Fig. 25  Dual-emission fluorescent sensing of Cu2+ ions based on a CdSe@C-TPEA nanohybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of a CD-TPY nanoprobe for two-photon pH imaging and biosensing. The receptor-AE-TPY binding onto C-dots was achieved through the condensation reaction of amino and carboxyl with NHS and EDC as catalysts. In the sensing process, the photochemical cycle was regulated by the protonation and deprotonation of N atoms with pH value change in the nanoprobe solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
Li et al. reported functionalized C-dots as nanoprobes for targeting cancer cells in vitro.211 In this work, they synthesized three passivated C-dot types with different polymer coatings: polymer 1, poly(ethylene glycol), H2NCH2-(CH2CH2O)nCH2CH2CH2NH2 (average n ∼ 35, PEG1500N); polymer 2, a triblock copolymer consisting of poly(ethylenimine)-b-poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(ethylenimine) (PEI-PEG-PEI, 5k-5k-5k); and polymer 3, a 4-arm, amine-terminated PEG (4-arm PEG, MW = 10k). The three C-dot types with the different polymer coatings were named CD2 (CD-PEG1500N), CD3 (CD-PEI-PEG-PEI), and CD4 (CD-4 arm PEG). All three CDs were further functionalized with human transferrin (Tf) through carbodiimide chemistry to target HeLa cancer cells in vitro (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Targeting HeLa cells with transferrin conjugated C-dots. Comparison of cells treated with (a) CD3 (top transmission and PL images) versus CD3-Tf (middle transmission and PL images) versus CD3-Tf incubated with cells pretreated with free Tf for 1 h (bottom transmission and PL images) and cells nonpretreated with free Tf; (b) CD4-Tf incubated with cells pretreated with free Tf for 1 h (top transmission and PL images) and cells nonpretreated with free Tf (bottom transmission and PL images). Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Theranostic drug delivery systems, representing a combination of medical therapy and bioimaging diagnostics, are paving the way for personalized medicine. A C-dot-based theranostic gene delivery system was reported by several researchers.17,26,212–216 Liu et al. synthesized polyethylenimine-functionalized C-dots (CD-PEI) via a one-step microwave-assisted pyrolysis of glycerol in the presence of branched PEI.26 The outer cationic polymer layer could mediate plasmid DNA transfection, thus CD-PEI could mediate gene transfection in COS-7 and HepG2 cells with high efficiency. In addition, the multicolor fluorescence of CD-PEI endowed CD-PEI with an intrinsic ability to combine the dual function of gene delivery and bioimaging. Karthik et al. constructed a photoresponsive nanodrug delivery system (DDS) using C-dots and a quinolone-based phototrigger.212 In this paper, they described the synthesis of a phototrigger-conjugated anticancer drug. The drug was covalently grafted onto the surface of C-dots using potassium tert-butoxide in dry THF. The functionalized C-dots were readily internalized inside the HeLa cells and showed precisely controlled drug release, killing the cancer cells upon irradiation by UV light (>365 nm).
Tang et al. also reported a drug delivery system obtained by direct coupling17 of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) with the C-dot surface, followed by trapping the guest drug molecules (DOX) within the PEG network and attaching them to the C-dot surface via π–π stacking (Fig. 28a and b). The efficient FRET between C-dots and DOX showed emission peaks at 498 and 595 nm. When DOX was released from the C-dot surface, the FRET signal (594 nm) between C-dots and DOX was reduced or quenched, thus displaying an enhanced emission at 498 nm. This change in the FRET signal allowed C-dot DDS for real-time monitoring and tracking of the fluorescent drug molecule release. Zheng et al. integrated oxaliplatin with C-dots (CD-Oxa) to form a theranostic system by means of a condensation reaction.213 The carboxyl group of Oxa(IV)–COOH was conjugated with CDs to form a theranostic nanomedicine (Fig. 28c). CD-Oxa integrated the optical properties of CDs and the anticancer function of oxaliplatin into a single unit, and showed multiple functions: (i) endocytosis-based drug carrier; (ii) controlled drug release by the intrinsically reducing environment of cancer cells; (iii) multicolor imaging ability of C-dots. Wu et al. developed a theranostic nanoagent that can be simultaneously used in lung cancer diagnosis and therapeutics.214 The synthesis route is briefly demonstrated as follows (Fig. 28d). In the diagnostic segment, C-dots were synthesized via microwave pyrolysis of glycerol and polyethylenimine (PEI). Free PEI molecules were then conjugated with PEI-Cdots using the environment-sensitive disulfide linkage, forming reducible PEI-Cdots (rPEI-Cdots). The positive charge on rPEI could electrostatically bind negatively charged siRNA molecules. The disulfide linkages between PEI molecules could be broken down by glutathione after the uptake of theranostic nanoagents by cancer cells, releasing therapeutic siRNAs into the cytosol to accomplish the therapeutic purpose. Folate, serving as a tumor-targeting molecule, was conjugated with the rPEI-Cdots/siRNA complex to form fc-rPEI-Cdots/siRNA multifunctional nanoagents.
 Fig. 28  (a) A schematic representation of the surface coupling chemistry for FRET-C-dot-DDS. (b) Proposed mechanism of the FRET-C-dot-DDS for drug delivery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Synthesis scheme for CD-Oxa and its applications in bioimaging and theranostics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Synthesis route of fc-rPEI-C-dots/siRNA multifunctional nanoagents. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission. 
4.5. Other applications
The surface functionalization strategy can be used in other applications such as photocatalysis,217–221 electrocatalysis,222,223 optoelectronics,224 and electrochemiluminescence.225,226 Photoreduction of CO2 under homogeneous reaction conditions in water using surface-functionalized C-dots was proposed by the Sun group.217 In this study, the C-dot surface was functionalized with oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol)diamine (PEG1500N) and subsequently doped with gold or platinum, concentrating the photogenerated electrons to enable more efficient CO2 reduction (Fig. 29a). Hu et al. synthesized C-dots by heating various carbon sources in HNO3 solution at reflux, with the oxygen-containing surface groups of the as-prepared C-dots subsequently selectively reduced by NaBH4, leading to new surface states.218 The authors claimed that the photocatalytic activity of C-dots was determined by surface states alone, more specifically by CO and COOH groups, and was not related to their size. Choi et al. developed efficient polymer optoelectronic devices by using C-dot-supported silver nanoparticles as plasmonic materials.224 The poly(ethylene glycol)-functionalized C-dots were photoexcited with ultraviolet irradiation in the presence of AgNO3 for reducing the Ag+ ions to form silver nanoparticles on the surface of the carbon dots. Wu et al. developed C-dot@Ag core–shell hybrid nanoparticles as an electrochemiluminescence (ECL) signal reporter for label-free sensitive and selective detection of cancer cells by using a poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) functionalized graphene-modified glassy carbon (GC) electrode (Fig. 29b).225 Wang et al. also showed the enhanced ECL of the nanoAg–C-dot composite and its application for sensitive detection of sulfide (S2−) ions.226
 Fig. 29  (a) Aqueous soluble PEG-functionalized C-dots before (left, fluorescent) and after (right, photocatalytic for CO2 reduction in aqueous solution) coating with metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the fabrication of a label-free electrochemiluminescent cytosensor. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Summary and outlook
C-Dots, as a type of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles, have recently enjoyed considerable attention due to their interesting properties, distinguishing them from conventional fluorescent materials such as organic fluorophores or inorganic nanocrystals. The major advantages of C-dots such as strong luminescence, non-toxicity, and biocompatibility make them promising materials for biomedicine, optoelectronics, sensing, photovoltaics, and photocatalysis. So far, many synthesis methods have been developed to improve the functionality of C-dots for various applications, with doping and surface functionalization considered to be two main methods for controlling the chemical, optical, and electrical properties of C-dots. With the help of doping and surface functionalization, the electronic structures of C-dots related to their light absorption and luminescence become tunable, extending the application range of C-dots.
Although many research groups have made efforts to improve the functionality of C-dots, several limitations still exist, hampering the use of C-dots in certain research fields. For bio-imaging, it would be very useful if C-dots exhibited light absorption and PL in a near-infrared region to avoid the auto-fluorescence of cells and tissues. Optoelectronic applications have required C-dots to exhibit high color-purity (narrow linewidth) luminescence and warm colors, such as amber and red, by tuning of their electronic structures. Recently, progress has been made to lift the aforementioned limitations of C-dots, achieving a certain level of success to prove the potential of C-dots in a variety of research areas. There is no doubt that C-dots will complement the weak points of organic fluorophores and inorganic nanocrystals, guaranteeing themselves a bright future.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Basic Science Research Program of the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2016R1C1B1011830) and the Sookmyung Women's University Research Grant (1-1603-2041).
Notes and references
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu and S.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230–24253 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Hu, K.-Y. Niu, J. Sun, J. Yang, N.-Q. Zhao and X.-W. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 484–488 RSC .
W. Kwon, S. Do, J.-H. Kim, M. S. Jeong and S.-W. Rhee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Zhang, S. A. Kulinich, Y. Liu and H. Zeng, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4976 CAS .
P. Shen and Y. Xia, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 5323–5329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano, M. C. Carrión and M. Valcárcel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 820, 133–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, N. Zhao, Z. Cheng and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6836–6842 RSC .
L. Bao, Z.-L. Zhang, Z.-Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D.-W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao, C. Liu, Z.-L. Zhang and D.-W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1663–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hola, A. B. Bourlinos, O. Kozak, K. Berka, K. M. Siskova, M. Havrdova, J. Tucek, K. Safarova, M. Otyepka, E. P. Giannelis and R. Zbori, Carbon, 2014, 70, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nie, M. Li, Q. Li, S. Liang, Y. Tan, L. Sheng, W. Shi and S. X.-A. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3104–3112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Xie, A. M. Kirillov, L. Liu, M. Yu, W. Liu and Y. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5036–5039 RSC .
E. J. Goh, K. S. Kim, Y. R. Kim, H. S. Jung, S. Beack, W. H. Kong, G. Scarcelli, S. H. Yun and S. K. Hahn, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 2554–2561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, B. Kong, H. Wu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Zhao and G. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6569–6574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, D. Ghosh, W. Chen, S. Pradhan, X. Chang and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2803–2809 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, D. Wu, S. Liu, K. Koynov, W. Knoll and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 4668–4671 CrossRef .
H. Ding, S.-B. Yu, J.-S. Wei and H.-M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, W. Jiang, L. Qiu, X. Jiang, D. Zuo, D. Wang and L. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6104–6113 RSC .
I. P.-J. Lai, S. G. Harroun, S.-Y. Chena, B. Unnikrishnana, Y.-J. Li and C.-C. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 228, 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Z. Xie, H. Zhang, C. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, L. Wei, X. Zheng and L. Xiao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, P. Zhang, X. Zhai, F. Tian, W. Li, J. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Wang and W. Liu, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 3604–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kwon, G. Lee, S. Do, T. Joo and S.-W. Rhee, Small, 2014, 10, 506–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, K. Das, M. Ghosh and P. K. Das, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65913–65921 RSC .
R. Q. Zhang, E. Bertran and S.-T. Lee, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1998, 7, 1663–1668 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S.-T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Lu, L. A. Somers and A. T. C. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 898–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, P.-C. Chen, A. P. Periasamy, Y.-N. Chen and H.-T. Chang, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 447–458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S.-J. Zhu, H.-Y. Wang, S.-N. Qu, Y.-L. Zhang, J.-H. Zhang, Q.-D. Chen, H.-L. Xu, W. Han, B. Yang and H.-B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ayala, R. Arenal, A. Loiseau, A. Rubio and T. Pichler, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 1843–1885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921–6939 RSC .
Y.-Q. Zhang, D.-K. Ma, Y. Zhuang, X. Zhang, W. Chen, L.-L. Hong, Q.-X. Yan, K. Yu and S.-M. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16714–16718 RSC .
S. Chandra, D. Laha, A. Pramanik, A. R. Chowdhuri, P. Karmakar and S. K. Sahu, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Wu, Y. Liu, X.-Z. Feng, X.-B. Yin, X.-W. He and Y.-K. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2276–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, L. Gai, J. Zhou, H. Jiang and Y. Tian, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 722–731 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, H. Ming, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 861–864 RSC .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ju, R. Zhang, S. He and W. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52583–52589 RSC .
J. Ju, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 228, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wu, X. Li, W. Wang, L. Wang, M. Gu and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15522–15525 RSC .
W. Kwon, S. Do, J. Lee, S. Hwang, J. K. Kim and S.-W. Rhee, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1893–1899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Q. Han, C. Jin, J. Zhang and B. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 141, 366–368 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, G. He, Z. Li, F. He, F. Gao, Y. Su, L. Zhang, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10307–10315 RSC .
S. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Fan, X. Wei, C. Hu, L. Wang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6320–6325 CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Ni and S. Kokot, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 91–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, T. Han, H. Ma, T. Yan, X. Pang, Y. Li and Q. Wei, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 889, 82–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Kim, H. W. Ho, C. L. Brown, S. L. Cresswell and Q. Li, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 6869–6876 RSC .
B. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Weng, Y. Liu, Z. Lu, C. M. Li and C. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 78, 23–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Yin, A. Jain and H. S. Zhou, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14270–14275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, X. Gong, M. Nan, Y. Liu, S. Shuang and C. Dong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 898, 116–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Liu, P. Liu, Y. Wang, T. An, H. Yang, D. Jing and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Meng, S. Wang, C. Li, W. Shi, J. Chen, J. Wang and R. Huang, Small, 2015, 11, 3575–3581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, Y. Jiang, J. Zhao, M. Miao, S. Cao, J. Fang and L. Shi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31250–31254 RSC .
T. Han, T. Yan, Y. Li, W. Cao, X. Pang, Q. Huang and Q. Wei, Carbon, 2015, 91, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tiwari, A. Ghosh, A. Santra, T. Das and S. Ghosh, Journal of Material Science and Mechanical Engineering, 2015, 2, 58–60 Search PubMed .
Q. Xu, J. Zhao, Y. Liu, P. Pu, X. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Gao, J. Chen and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 2571–2576 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Niu, Y. Li, R.-H. Zhu, D. Shan, Y.-R. Fan and X.-J. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 218, 229–236 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding and H.-M. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66528–66533 RSC .
J. Niu, H. Gao, L. Wang, S. Xin, G. Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Guo, W. Liu, X. Gao and Y. Wang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1522–1527 RSC .
X. Gong, W. Lu, M. C. Paau, Q. Hub, X. Wu, S. Shuang, C. Dong and M. M. F. Choi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 861, 74–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, S. Xu, J. Wan and P. Wu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2219–2226 RSC .
W. Wang, Y.-C. Lu, H. Huang, J.-J. Feng, J.-R. Chen and A.-J. Wang, Analyst, 2014, 139, 1692–1696 RSC .
J. Yu, C. Xu, Z. Tian, Y. Lin and Z. Shi, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 2083–2088 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Su, H. Geng, Z. Li, C. Yang, X. Li and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7477–7481 RSC .
H. Li, W. Kong, J. Liu, N. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 91, 66–75 CrossRef CAS .
F. Messina, L. Sciortino, R. Popescu, A. M. Venezia, A. Sciortino, G. Buscarino, S. Agnello, R. Schneider, D. Gerthsen, M. Cannasa and F. M. Gelardia, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2598–2605 RSC .
Y. Zhang, P. Cui, F. Zhang, X. Feng, Y. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Talanta, 2016, 152, 288–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, W.-J. Wang, X. Hai, Y.-L. Yu and J.-H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 387–393 RSC .
L. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 8902–8905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Teng, C. Ma, C. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, P. C. Moraiscd and H. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4631–4639 RSC .
Z. Zhang, S. Xu and P. Wu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 176–181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, P. Zhang, C. Huang, G. Liu, K. C.-F. Leung and Y. X. J. Wáng, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 8063–8073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qian, J. Ma, X. Shan, H. Feng, L. Shao and J. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2254–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. Yu, T. Bian, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Liu, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1922–1928 RSC .
Z.-Q. Xu, J.-Y. Lan, J.-C. Jin, P. Dong, F.-L. Jiang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28346–28352 Search PubMed .
Q.-Q. Shi, Y.-H. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, X.-B. Yin, X.-W. He and Y.-K. Zhangac, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1563–1566 RSC .
H. Yuan, J. Yu, S. Feng and Y. Gonga, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15192–15200 RSC .
H. Huang, C. Li, S. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Wang, T. Bai, Z. Shi and S. Feng, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 13542–13548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, S. Xu, Z. Yang, M. Shu, G. He, D. Huang, L. Zhang, L. Li, D. Cui and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15915–15923 RSC .
S. Yang, J. Sun, X. Li, W. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. He, G. Ding, X. Xie, Z. Kang and M. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8660–8667 CAS .
J. Tan, R. Zou, J. Zhang, W. Li, L. Zhang and D. Yue, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4742–4747 RSC .
Y. Jiang, B. Wang, F. Meng, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 452, 199–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Cui, L. Li and Z. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3058–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Do, W. Kwon, Y.-H. Kim, S. R. Kang, T. Lee, T.-W. Lee and S.-W. Rhee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 276–284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, Q. Lu, Y. Hou, M. Liu, H. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2195–2203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, F. Meng, B. Wang, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 3357–3360 RSC .
Y.-Q. Zhang, D.-K. Ma, Y.-G. Zhang, W. Chen and S.-M. Huang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, P. Chithaiah, S. Belawadi, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 383–391 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, X. Jin, J. Chen, Y. Hua, M. Cao, L. Zhang, J. Li, L. Zhang, J. Jin, C. Wu, A. Gong, W. Xu, Q. Shao and M. Zhang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2720 CrossRef .
H. Ding, P. Zhang, T.-Y. Wang, J.-L. Kong and H.-M. Xiong, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 205604 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, P. Sun, S. Cong, J. Wu, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Dai, Q. Yi and G. Zou, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Du, J. Yuan, M. Zhang, J. Li, Z. zhou, Z. Li, M. Cao, J. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Liu, A. Gong, W. Xu and Q. Shao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37536–37541 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Li, P. Liu, Y. Wang, T. An and H. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, T. Zhao, Z. Nie, Z. Miao, Y. Liu and S. Yao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2205–2211 RSC .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. Yang, J. Jiang, Y. Chi and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32791–32795 RSC .
J. Hou, J. Li, J. Sun, S. Ai and M. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37342–37348 RSC .
Z. Yang, M. Xu, Y. Liu, F. He, F. Gao, Y. Su, H. Wei and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1890–1895 RSC .
W. Wei, C. Xu, L. Wu, J. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3564 Search PubMed .
Y. Han, D. Tang, Y. Yang, C. Li, W. Kong, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5955–5962 RSC .
C. Zheng, X. An and J. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32319–32322 RSC .
T.-R. Kuo, S.-Y. Sung, C.-W. Hsu, C.-J. Chang, T.-C. Chiu and C.-C. Hu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, J.-J. Lv, D.-L. Zhou, N. Bao, Y. Xu, A.-J. Wang and J.-J. Feng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21691–21696 RSC .
Z. L. Wu, P. Zhang, M. X. Gao, C. F. Liu, W. Wang, F. Leng and C. Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2868–2873 RSC .
B.-X. Zhang, G.-Y. Zhang, H. Gao, S.-H. Wu, J.-H. Chen and X.-L. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7395–7400 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Liu, H. Luo and Y. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7648–7654 RSC .
A. Cayuela, C. Carrillo-Carrión, M. L. Soriano, W. J. Parak and M. Valcárcel, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 3178–3185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Tian, L. Jia and J.-S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15366–15373 RSC .
M. K. Barman, B. Jana, S. Bhattacharyya and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20034–20041 CAS .
G. Jiang, T. Jiang, H. Zhou, J. Yao and X. Kong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 9064–9068 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, G. Liang and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500002 Search PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Kong, S. Feng, J. Wang, L. Wang, J. Yang, F. Zhang, P. Wu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8151–8155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Do, W. Kwon and S.-W. Rhee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4221–4226 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Chen, M. Liang, L. Xu, S. Qi, H. Chen and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9846–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Niu and H. Gao, J. Lumin., 2014, 149, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barati, M. Shamsipur, E. Arkan, L. Hosseinzadeh and H. Abdollahi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 47, 325–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. D'souza, B. Deshmukh, J. R. Bhamore, K. A. Rawat, N. Lenka and S. K. Kailasa, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 12169–12179 RSC .
Y. H. Yuan, Z. X. Liu, R. S. Li, H. Y. Zou, M. Lin, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6770–6776 RSC .
F. Arcudi, L. Đorđević and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 2147–2152 CrossRef .
H. Peng, Y. Li, C. Jiang, C. Luo, R. Qi, R. Huang, C.-G. Duan and J. Travas-Sejdic, Carbon, 2016, 100, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Wei, Y. Xu, Y.-H. Li, X.-B. Yin and X.-W. He, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44504–44508 RSC .
Y. Ke, B. Garg and Y.-C. Ling, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 58329–58336 RSC .
J. Zhou, X. Shan, J. Ma, Y. Gu, Z. Qian, J. Chen and H. Feng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5465–5468 RSC .
S. Chandra, P. Das, S. Bag, D. Laha and P. Pramanik, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1533–1540 RSC .
X. Shan, L. Chai, J. Ma, Z. Qian, J. Chen and H. Feng, Analyst, 2014, 139, 2322–2325 RSC .
H. K. Sadhanala and K. K. Nanda, Carbon, 2016, 96, 166–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, G. Trivizas, M. A. Karakassides, M. Baikousi, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, A. Bakandritsos, K. Hola, O. Kozak, R. Zboril, I. Papagiannouli, P. Aloukos and S. Couris, Carbon, 2015, 83, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Q. Hao, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu and W. Lei, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 273–279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Shen, J. Wang and Y. Lu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 16368–16375 RSC .
S. Chandra, P. Patra, S. H. Pathan, S. Roy, S. Mitra, A. Layek, R. Bhar, P. Pramanik and A. Goswami, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2375–2382 RSC .
Q. Xu, P. Pu, J. Zhao, C. Dong, C. Gao, Y. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 542–546 CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Tian, L. Jia and J.-S. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 77, 775–782 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, L. Yang, W. Li, X. Wang, Y. Shang and B. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 1409–1416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhuang and Y. Ni, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 13004–13011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, R. Ban, P.-H. Zhang, G.-H. Wu, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Carbon, 2013, 64, 424–434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J.-S. Wei and H.-M. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13817–13823 RSC .
Q. Hu, M. C. Paau, Y. Zhang, X. Gong, L. Zhang, D. Lu, Y. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Yao and M. M. F. Choi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18065–18073 RSC .
H.-X. Wang, J. Xiao, Z. Yang, H. Tang, Z.-T. Zhu, M. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and H.-L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11287–11293 CAS .
Z. Fu, M. Yao, X. Niu and F. Cui, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 226, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Weng, B. Wang and C. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 223, 689–696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and J. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 20154–20159 RSC .
Y.-W. Zeng, D.-K. Ma, W. Wang, J.-J. Chen, L. Zhou, Y.-Z. Zheng, K. Yu and S.-M. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xue, L. Zhang, M. Zou, C. Lan, Z. Zhan and S. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 219, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, B. Yu and T. You, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 263–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y.-C. Lu, H. Huang, A.-J. Wang, J.-R. Chen and J.-J. Feng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 202, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xue, L. Zhang, Z. Zhan, M. Zou, Y. Huang and S. Zhao, Talanta, 2016, 150, 324–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Xiao, X. Wu, L. Lin, S. Weng, M. Chen, X. Cai and X. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 229, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, P. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 110 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Li, G. Li, T. An and H. Zhao, Carbon, 2015, 92, 339–347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jahan, F. Mansoor, S. Naz, J. Lei and S. Kanwal, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 10232–10239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, W. Lu, Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Shuang, C. Dong and M. M. F. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6813–6819 RSC .
Y. Gong, B. Yu, W. Yang and X. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 822–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Sun, K. Zhuo, H. Zhang and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54060–54065 RSC .
Z. Qian, X. Shan, L. Chai, J. Ma, J. Chen and H. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6797–6805 CAS .
Y. H. Yuan, R. S. Li, Q. Wang, Z. L. Wu, J. Wang, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16841–16847 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Bakandritsos, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, M. Krysmann, E. P. Giannelis, K. Polakova, K. Safarova, K. Hola and R. Zboril, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23327–23330 RSC .
N. Gong, H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Deng, X. Chen, L. Ye and W. Gu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10933–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Chen, Z. X. Liu, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2016, 141, 2676–2681 RSC .
F. Li, C. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Liu and F. Tian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3201–3205 RSC .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Xu and C. Zhang, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J.-X. Yang, J. Wang, A. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Lu, R. Zhang, S. He, J. Ju, M. Liu, L. Li and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2302–2309 RSC .
X. Wang, L. Cao, S.-T. Yang, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y.-P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anilkumar, X. Wang, L. Cao, S. Sahu, J.-H. Liu, P. Wang, K. Korch, K. N. Tackett II, A. Parenzan and Y.-P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2023–2027 RSC .
S. Chandra, S. H. Pathan, S. Mitra, B. H. Modha, A. Goswamic and P. Pramanik, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3602–3606 RSC .
H. Gonçalves, P. A. S. Jorge, J. R. A. Fernandes and J. C. G. Esteves da Silva, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145, 702–707 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, R. Wang, G. Li, C. Chen, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6220–6224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chena, Y. Li, K. Lv, W. Zhong, H. Wang, Z. Wu, P. Yi and J. Jiang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 224, 298–306 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, C. Wang, L. Li, H. Wang, K. Liu, K. Wang and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27262–27270 CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Pan, X. Cheng, L. Zhang, J. Chen, M.-J. Lib and C. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5020–5027 RSC .
D. Wang, J. Liu, J.-F. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500439 Search PubMed .
B. B. Campos, M. M. Oliva, R. Contreras-Cáceres, E. Rodriguez-Castellón, J. Jiménez-Jiménez, J. C. G. Esteves da Silva and M. Algarra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 465, 165–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Hu, Y. Li, H.-P. Wei, X.-S. Li, X.-H. Zhang, S.-M. Chen and X.-Q. Chen, Talanta, 2015, 134, 16–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, Y.-K. Li, M.-L. Chen and J.-H. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2015, 26, 1496–1501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, R. Wang, H. Li, J. Shao, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 50, 2810–2815 CrossRef .
I. Y. Goon, C. C. Zhang, M. Lim, J. J. Gooding and R. Amal, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12247–12252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Liu, L. Lin, X.-X. Wang, L. Jiao, M.-L. Cui, S.-L. Jiang, W.-L. Cai, L.-H. Zhang and Z.-Y. Zheng, Analyst, 2013, 138, 278–283 RSC .
U. Baruah, N. Gogoi, G. Majumdar and D. Chowdhury, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 117, 377–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, J. Dong, H. Zhu, X. Teng, S. Ai and M. Mang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 20–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Guo, C. Yang, A. Iqbal, W. Liu, W. Qin, D. Yan and H. Guo, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 5547–5554 RSC .
Y. Zou, F. Yan, T. Zheng, D. Shi, F. Sun, N. Yang and L. Chen, Talanta, 2015, 135, 145–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jalili and M. Amjadi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 74084–74090 RSC .
L. Li, C. Wang, J. Luo, Q. Guo, K. Liu, K. Liu, W. Zhao and Y. Lin, Talanta, 2015, 144, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, Y. Yu and J. Chen, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 1133–1139 RSC .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano and M. Valcárcel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 872, 70–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano and M. Valcárcel, Analyst, 2016, 141, 2682–2687 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zboril, J. Petr, A. Bakandritsos, M. Krysmann and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 6–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Kalytchuk, Y. Zhang, H. Shi, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1412–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, C. Zhang, Z. Du, H. Li, L. Zhang and W. Zou, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42667 Search PubMed .
L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. a. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S.-Y. Xie and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318–11319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhu, Q. Qu, X. Shao, B. Kong and Y. Tian, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 7297–7301 CrossRef .
B. Kong, A. Zhu, C. Ding, X. Zhao, B. Li and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5844–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Krishna, C. Radhakumary and K. Sreenivasan, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 9482–9488 RSC .
W.-J. Wang, X. Hai, Q.-X. Mao, M.-L. Chen and J.-H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16609–16616 CAS .
Z. Zhou, Q. Wang, J. Wang and C. C. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 93, 671–680 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, S. Zhou, Y. Dong, J. Wang, X. Ge and L. Sui, Luminescence, 2015, 30, 867–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Jung, E. Shin and B.-S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, S. Xu, C. Niu, M. Li, D. He, Z. Lu, L. Ma, N. Na, F. Huang, H. Jiang and J. Ouyang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 64, 119–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kiran and R. D. K. Misra, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2015, 103, 2888–2897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. Ling, H. Wang, J. Zou, K. Wang, X. Xiao and M. Yang, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 7792–7798 RSC .
D. Liu, F. Qu, X. Zhao and J. You, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17979–17987 CAS .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1903–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. Liu, K. Koynov, D. Wu, A. Best, R. Kumar, A. Bonoiu and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12062–12068 CAS .
S. Karthik, B. Saha, S. K. Ghosh and N. D. P. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10471–10473 RSC .
M. Zheng, S. Liu, J. Li, D. Qu, H. Zhao, X. Guan, X. Hu, Z. Xie, X. Jing and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3554–3560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Wu, H.-C. Wu, C.-H. Kuan, C.-J. Lin, L.-W. Wang, C.-W. Chang and T.-W. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, F. Du, P. Liu, Z. Chen and J. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6889–6897 CAS .
M. S. Khan, S. Pandey, A. Talib, M. L. Bhaisare and H.-F. Wu, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 134, 140–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett II and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, R. Tian, L. Wu, Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Liu and S. Cao, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, Y. Ding, Q. Chang, J. Yang and K. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 774–777 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Guo, C. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10004–10012 CAS .
J. Xu, S. Sahu, L. Cao, C. E. Bunker, G. Peng, Y. Liu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, M. J. Meziani, H. Qian and Y.-P. Sun, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 16141–16147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12558–12564 RSC .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J.-W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J.-R. Jeong, I.-W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B.-S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, J. Wang, J. Ren, W. Li and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5675–5677 RSC .
Z.-X. Wang, C.-L. Zheng, Q.-L. Li and S.-N. Ding, Analyst, 2014, 139, 1751–1755 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Y. Park	Yoonsang Park received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in 2014. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at POSTECH. His research interests include synthesis of luminescent carbonaceous nanomaterials (carbon nanodots, graphene quantum dots, carbon nitrides, etc.) and their application in optoelectronics and bioimaging.
J. Yoo	Jounghyun Yoo received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at POSTECH. His research interests focus on luminescent carbonaceous and siliceous nanomaterials and their application in optoelectronics, bioimaging, and therapeutics.
B. Lim	Boram Lim received her B.S. in Chemistry from Sookmyung Women's University in 2016. She is currently pursuing her M.S. in Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University. Her research interests focus on nanomaterials and structures for sensors and transistors.
W. Kwon	Woosung Kwon received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering with a minor in Physics (2010) and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering (2013) from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). After postdoctoral research at Stanford University, he joined the faculty of Sookmyung Women's University, where he is now serving as an assistant professor of chemical and biological engineering. His research interests include (1) development of functional, biocompatible nanomaterials for theragnostic and optoelectronic applications, (2) advancement of functionality of nanomaterials through atomic doping and molecular conjugation, and (3) study of the effect of nanomaterials on physiological and biochemical processes in living organisms to address nanotoxicological issues.
S.-W. Rhee	Shi-Woo Rhee received his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1984. After two years of postdoctoral research at MIT, he joined the faculty of Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in 1986. He currently holds a joint appointment in the Department of Chemical Engineering at POSTECH as professor emeritus and in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University as the chair professor. His current research interests are carbon materials for electrode applications, fluorescent carbon nanomaterials for optoelectronic devices, and materials for electronic and solar cell devices. He has published more than 200 peer-reviewed journal articles and edited two books in the field of materials engineering.

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM image of the PEG200N passivated C-dots and direct photograph of the sample under a 365 nm UV lamp (the inset is the SAED pattern of the C-dots). (b) TEM image of the bare surface C-dots and direct photograph of the sample under a 365 nm UV lamp. (c) HR-TEM image of the PEG200N passivated C-dots. (d) The size distribution of the PEG200N passivated C-dots. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) TEM images of C-dots obtained at the applied potential of 0.5 V (denoted as C-dots@0.5V), 1.5 V (denoted as C-dots@1.5V), and 2.5 V (denoted as C-dots@2.5V), respectively. (d–f) HR-TEM images of C-dots@0.5V, C-dots@1.5V, and C-dots@2.5V, respectively. (g and h) C1s high-resolution XPS spectra of C-dots@0.5V and C-dots@0.5V–2.5V, respectively, with identification of peaks by curve fitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the soft-template synthesis of C-dots. (b) HR-TEM image of as-obtained C-dots. The white solid lines and arrows indicate the lattice plane distance. The dotted red and green circles divide graphitic clusters and amorphous (or oxygenic) carbon matrices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A synthesis route of C-dots (represented as CDs in the figure) using citric acid and ethylenediamine. (b) TEM (upper) and HR-TEM (lower) images of the C-dots. (c) XRD pattern of C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Typical sized C-dots optical images illuminated under white (left: daylight lamp) and UV light (right: 365 nm). (b) PL spectra of typical sized C-dots: the red, black, green, and blue lines are the PL spectra for blue-, green-, yellow-, and red-emission C-dots, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Relationship between the C-dots size and the PL energies. (b) HOMO–LUMO gap dependence on the size of the graphitene fragments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  PL and PL excitation (PLE) spectra of sample A (the supernatant from the suspension of graphite in PEG200N), R1 (pure PEG200N irradiated by laser for 2 h) and R2 (a mixture of PEG200N and perchloric acid heated to 120 °C and held for 72 h), PL spectra were recorded under 350 nm light excitation, while PLE spectra were acquired by exciting the samples with the strongest absorption wavelength in the PLE spectra. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The scheme for the formation process of the N-doped C-dots (represented as N-doped CQDs in the figure). (b) Relationship between methyl orange concentration and reaction time for different catalysts (C-dots are represented as CDs in the figure). Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of the N-doped C-dots in aqueous solution upon addition of various concentrations of Hg2+ (from top to bottom: 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 70 and 75 μM), excitation at 360 nm. (b) The dependence of PL intensity on the concentration of Hg2+ ions within the range of 0–75 μM, and the inset shows the linear relationship between the PL intensity and Hg2+ concentration. Reprinted from ref. 43, Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Emission spectrum of a white LED using a CND-10000 film as a color-converting phosphor and an InGaN blue (400 nm) LED as an illuminant. (b) CIE (Commission Internationale d'É clairage) chromaticity coordinates (x, y) calculated from the emission spectrum. (c) Photograph of an exemplary device under operation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 


C-Dots	368	3.4	8.4
P-Doped C-dots	372	25.1	5.0

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the synthesis of B-doped C-dots and glucose-sensing mechanisms based on B-doped C-dots and H2O2. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) J–V characteristics under dark and photo conditions of the hybrid cell made by C-dots (donor) and PCBM (acceptor). (b) The corresponding plot of power density against voltage. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Representation for the fluorescence mechanism of O-doped C-dots, N-doped C-dots, and N,S-doped C-dots. (1): electrons excited from the ground state and trapped by the surface states. (2): excited electrons return to the ground state via a non-radiative route. (3): excited electrons return to the ground state via a radiative route. O-Doped C-dots, N-doped C-dots and N,S-doped C-dots are represented as O-CDs, N-CDs and N,S-CDs in the figure, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the formation process of Ge-doped C-dots by carbonization and its further applications for Hg2+ detection. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images of water and serial dilutions of Gd-doped C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

Nitrogen	CCl4, glucose, folic acid, glycerol, etc.	NaNH2, NH4OH, melamine, etc.	390–560	1.5–93.3	
38–128

Phosphorus	Hydroquinone, citric acid, etc.	PBr3, NaH2PO4, etc.	372–470	10–65	
29, 106, 129 and 130

Boron	Hydroquinone, sucrose, etc.	BBr3, H3BO3, etc.	368–680	0.5–14.8	
106 and 131–134

Sulfur	Thiomalic acid, sodium citrate, etc.	H2SO4, sodium thiosulfate, etc.	378–539	3.66–67	
57, 87, 91, 106 and 136–138

Nitrogen/sulfur	Citric acid, etc.	
L-Cysteine (N, S), ethylenediamine (N), α-lipoic acid, H2SO4 (S), etc.	415	54.4–73	
106, 135 and 139–156

Boron/nitrogen	
N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)glycine, etc.	H3BO3 (B), C4H5N (N), etc.	500–524	11.44	
106 and 157

Phosphorus/nitrogen	Pyrrole, adenosine triphosphate, etc.	Pyrrole (N), triphenylphosphine, H3PO4 (P), etc.	406–550	9.42–59	
39, 106, 158 and 159

Nitrogen/sulfur/phosphorus	Cucumber juice (N, S, P)	450–571	3.25	
160

Silicon	Hydroquinone	SiCl4	382	19.2	
161

Germanium	Citric acid	Ge-132	465	8.9	
162

Selenium	Chinese ink	NaHSe	563	19	
87

Gadolinium	Tris, betaine hydrochloride, sucrose	Gadopentetic acid, Gd2O3	445, 521	5.4	
163 and 164

Terbium	Citric acid	Terbium(III) nitrate pentahydrate	450	—	
165


 	Fig. 16  Aqueous solution of the PEG1500N-attached C-dots (a) excited at 400 nm and photographed through band-pass filters of different wavelengths as indicated, and (b) excited at the indicated wavelengths and photographed directly. (c) The colored but homogeneous supernatant contained the C-dots with PEG1500N species attached to the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustration of emission from C-dots along with the variation of surface oxidation degree. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of surface functionalization and molecular structures of para-substituted anilines used in the functionalization of C-dots. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 19  Surface-state engineering of C-dots with excitation dependent and excitation-independent luminescent properties. C-Dots (represented as L-CDs in the figure) with various surface states (terminated with various groups) emit excitation-dependent light. C-Dots with surfaces rich in amino-groups exhibit excitation-independent behavior because of passivated surface states. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) One-step “synthesis-modification integration” strategy for fabrication of boronic acid functionalized C-dots. (b) Working principle for glucose sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Synthesis route for raw carbon dots (represented as r-CDs in the figure), their subsequent passivation with acetone and final functionalization with cysteamine. Reprinted from ref. 9, Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram for the preparation of photoluminescent C-dots (represented as CDs in the figure), flexible CDs film, and CDs/silica particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the C-dot-ionogel using Si–C-dots through sol–gel processing in the presence of an IL [Carb-Bim]Br. (b) Photographs of the free-standing pellets of the C-dot-ionogel, which are both transparent and flexible. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Confocal microscopy images of E. coli ATCC 25922 cells labeled with the C-dots: (a) λEX = 458 nm, detected with a 475 nm long pass filter; (b) λEX = 477 nm, detected with a 505 nm long pass filter; (c) λEX = 488 nm, detected with a 530 nm long pass filter; and (d) λEX = 514 nm, detected with a 560 nm long pass filter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (e) Representative two-photon luminescence image (800 nm excitation) of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells with internalized C-dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Dual-emission fluorescent sensing of Cu2+ ions based on a CdSe@C-TPEA nanohybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of a CD-TPY nanoprobe for two-photon pH imaging and biosensing. The receptor-AE-TPY binding onto C-dots was achieved through the condensation reaction of amino and carboxyl with NHS and EDC as catalysts. In the sensing process, the photochemical cycle was regulated by the protonation and deprotonation of N atoms with pH value change in the nanoprobe solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 27  Targeting HeLa cells with transferrin conjugated C-dots. Comparison of cells treated with (a) CD3 (top transmission and PL images) versus CD3-Tf (middle transmission and PL images) versus CD3-Tf incubated with cells pretreated with free Tf for 1 h (bottom transmission and PL images) and cells nonpretreated with free Tf; (b) CD4-Tf incubated with cells pretreated with free Tf for 1 h (top transmission and PL images) and cells nonpretreated with free Tf (bottom transmission and PL images). Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) A schematic representation of the surface coupling chemistry for FRET-C-dot-DDS. (b) Proposed mechanism of the FRET-C-dot-DDS for drug delivery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Synthesis scheme for CD-Oxa and its applications in bioimaging and theranostics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Synthesis route of fc-rPEI-C-dots/siRNA multifunctional nanoagents. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Aqueous soluble PEG-functionalized C-dots before (left, fluorescent) and after (right, photocatalytic for CO2 reduction in aqueous solution) coating with metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the fabrication of a label-free electrochemiluminescent cytosensor. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
