Rational design of integrated electrodes for advancing high-rate alkaline electrolytic hydrogen production  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02374A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02374A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 12764-12787Rational design of integrated electrodes for advancing high-rate alkaline electrolytic hydrogen production

        
          
            Zi-Hao 
            Dong
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Zhe 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tang 
            Tang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ze-Cheng 
            Yao
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Dongping 
            Xue
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            Niu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Jianan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jin-Song 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *acd
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100190, China
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
cUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
dDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, China
Received 
      24th March 2022
    , Accepted 15th May 2022First published on 16th May 2022AbstractThe goal of global carbon peak and neutrality calls for the green production of hydrogen via water electrolysis powered by renewables. Alkaline electrolysis cells (AEC) are receiving more attention since they can economically produce hydrogen at a large scale without the need for expensive catalysts. Developing advanced integrated electrodes from earth-abundant materials is crucial for driving this technique, however they suffer from poor catalytic activity and durability under industrial current densities. This review herein focuses on the rational design of integrated electrodes to advance alkaline electrocatalytic hydrogen production (AEHP). The representative strategies are first introduced, including modulating the electronic structure and harnessing the synergy from multi-components for improving activity as well as constructing the tri-phase interfaces with appropriate surface hydrophilic/aerophobic properties. For cost-competitive hydrogen production, the cost-effective scalable production of such integrated electrodes is discussed, which should be simultaneously considered when improving the electrode performance. Moreover, such integrated electrodes could be applied to the emerging water electrolysis systems such as anode-replacing hydrogen production and decoupled AEC for boosting AEHP. Finally, the review provides an outlook of the remaining challenges and emerging research topics in the future, including the standard evaluation of catalytic performance, precise identification of genuine catalytic sites at working conditions, accurate theoretical modeling and AI-assisted catalyst screening, and external-fields coupled AEC, etc. The new insights and knowledge provided regarding these aspects will help fill the existing gaps between scientific communities and industries and open up opportunities for bringing this promising technology into reality.Jianan ZhangJianan Zhang received her BSc (2005) and PhD (2010) from Jilin University. She was a visiting researcher at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S.A. After working at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in Japan from 2018 to 2019, she currently works at Zhengzhou University as a full professor. Her research interest focuses on atomically-dispersed metal-active materials for energy storage and conversion.Jin-Song HuJin-Song Hu received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from ICCAS in 2005, then joined ICCAS as Assistant Professor, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2007. After working at Harvard University from 2008 to 2011, he moved back to ICCAS as Full Professor. His research currently focuses on developing new functional nanomaterials for efficient electrochemical energy conversion and solar energy conversion.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the over-exploitation and use of traditional carbon-based energy sources have brought about severe global environmental issues and climate change, calling for alternative energy sources with no carbon emission. Hydrogen features high energy densities and pollution-free characteristics, and is deemed as an alternative energy carrier.1 Nowadays, the annual H2 demand is over 70 million tonnes per year (Mt per year), which is mainly going into oil refining (over 52%) and ammonia production (over 42%).2 However, traditional hydrogen production can release about 830 Mt of CO2 per year, equivalent to the annual quota of CO2 emission in Indonesia and the UK. Unlike hydrogen produced from fossil fuels, water-to-hydrogen through electrolysis can eliminate air pollutants or greenhouse gases.3 Moreover, water electrolysis can be powered by wind, hydropower, solar, or nuclear energy for cost-effective hydrogen production. As for the efficient use of hydrogen, H2 in high purity can be further utilized in fuel cells for vehicles, transportation, distributed power, etc., realizing a highly appealing clean energy cycle according to Fig. 1.4–6
 Fig. 1  Clean energy-driving water splitting for hydrogen production and its applications. 
Generally, a water electrolyzer can be classified into alkaline electrolysis cell (AEC), proton exchange membrane electrolysis cell (PEMEC), and solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) based on electrolytes and the cell structure.7 Due to the solid ion-conducting ceramic electrolyte requiring an operating condition higher than 500 °C, the limitation of catalyst degradation under high-temperature remains intractably challenging.8 SOECs are currently in the pilot stage and have not been widely commercialized yet. Although the high temperature offers SOECs with ultrahigh power density, the SOEC possesses a stack lifetime of <10000 h, which is much shorter than that of PEMFC (20000–60000 h) and AEC (60000–90000 h).7 However, the noble metal-based catalysts with a scarce reserve and high cost are currently non-replaceable in PEMEC. Varieties of non-precious materials cannot be utilized as catalysts, causing the cost of the PEMEC to stay at quite a high level. Compared with the aforementioned devices, the concept of AEC can be traced to 1789 and has been successfully commercialized for decades.9 AEC features a relatively large capacity and long system lifespan (60000–90000 h). Alkaline electrolytes such as KOH allow the use of low-cost non-precious transitional metal catalysts. For example, iron-group compounds have demonstrated their practicability in AEC, enabling a lower capital cost (Fig. 2). Despite these merits, it cannot be denied that AEC still suffers from low operating current densities (typically lower than 0.6 A cm−2), and its performance and stack life still need to be further improved.
 Fig. 2  Structural diagrams and characteristics of three typical kinds of electrolysis cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. 
Typical alkaline water electrolysis involves two electrocatalytic reactions: hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode.10 These two half-reactions both involve multiproton coupling and electron participation, which requires that the electrocatalysts should have high intrinsic catalytic activity and abundant active sites. HER typically involves two steps: the formation of adsorbed H atoms (Hads) and subsequent H2 formation.11 The Hads originate from H2O (in alkali) dissociation in the Volmer step, followed by H2 formation via either the Heyrovsky step or the Tafel step.12 Two Hads tend to directly combine to produce H2 (Tafel step) under high Hads coverage; otherwise, H2 will prefer to be released through the Heyrovsky step. Alkaline HER typically experiences a slow Volmer process since Hads can only be generated from water dissociation, resulting in more sluggish reaction kinetics than in acidic HER.13 Compared with HER, OER involves four-electron reactions and more transitional intermediates (OH*, O*, OOH*, etc.) from Fig. 3, resulting in more sluggish kinetics and much larger overpotentials.14–16 Transitional metal (oxy)hydroxides such as nickel or cobalt (oxy)hydroxides have shown excellent OER activity in alkali, but the reaction kinetics still needs to be promoted for further lowering the operational voltage of high-rate AECs.17–19
 Fig. 3  Reaction pathways for alkaline HER and OER. 
Although extensive efforts have been invested in improving the catalytic activity by designing integrated electrodes in the past couple of years,20–23 few articles have highlighted the catalyst design and modulation strategies of electrodes toward high-rate alkaline electrocatalytic hydrogen production (AEHP). Thus, this article focuses on expounding the current challenges and potential solutions for high-rate AEHP with emphasis on the structure design and activity regulation of integrated electrodes. After introducing requirements for advancing high-rate AEHP, specific modulation strategies for integrated electrodes, including improving the intrinsic catalytic activity, regulating the electrode structures, and developing low-cost and scalable preparation methods, are comprehensively discussed. Under the above considerations of integrated electrodes, more emerging catalytic systems for AEHP, including anode-replacing hydrogen production and decoupled AEC, are subsequently introduced, aiming to provide more potential solutions in the area of electrocatalytic hydrogen generation. The remaining challenges and gaps between scientific communities and industrial visions are eventually discussed, and discussed in this review.
2 Catalyst requirements for advancing high-rate AEHP
2.1 Developing integrated catalytic electrodes
Various non-precious transitional metal-based catalysts have displayed decent electrocatalytic performance in alkaline electrolytes.24–27 An appreciable amount of these catalysts is investigated in the powdery form and evaluated by coating catalysts on various supports, leading to the following possible issues when working at high current densities (HCDs). The adhesion between supports and catalysts is still not strong enough for practical water electrolysis even when using a polymer binder. Such catalysts will inevitably be shed from the support under continuous high-load gas evolution.28 Meanwhile, the polymer binder and gathered gas bubbles around the electrode surface may block the surface active sites and cause charge and mass transfer issues, thus degrading the catalytic efficiency, especially under large potential regions. Furthermore, the commonly used carbon supports may experience corrosion at high oxidation potential, causing a sharp decline in the catalytic performance.29–31 These issues of powdery catalysts restrict their application in HCDs.
The above issues can be greatly optimized when loading highly-active catalytic materials onto non-precious commercial substrates such as metal meshes, metal foams, metal foils, carbon cloth, graphite plates, and other monolithic substrates (i.e., cellulose paper32 and metal-modified paper33) for constructing robust integrated electrodes (Fig. 4). The construction of integrated electrodes covers more considerations of compositional, structural, and functional compatibility between substrates and loading catalytic materials. Unlike the conventional composite electrodes whose elevated catalytic activity can be originated from increased catalytic sites and electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) after material modification, the “integration” effect moreover emphasizes the systematic integration manifested in structural design (porosity regulation, interface wettability modulation, etc.) and performance optimization (improved catalytic activity as well as durability).
 Fig. 4  Common elements and substrates for developing integrated electrodes. 
More specific “integration” effects of developing integrated electrodes for advancing AEHP reflect in the aspects of (i) the in situ growth strategy enables robust interfacial contact and electron interaction between the catalytic materials and the support, facilitating charge transfer, avoiding catalyst shedding, and enhancing the durability of electrodes; (ii) three-dimensional (3D) array-like structures are beneficial for creating and exposing more catalytic sites accessible to reactions at triple-phase interfaces; (iii) hierarchical structure with excellent interface wettability can not only allow fast mass diffusion but also expedite gas release and alleviate active site blocking during HCDs; (iv) simultaneously regulating the crystalline structure, morphology, and composition of the catalysts through specific strategies can optimize the electron structure, further enhancing the intrinsic catalytic activity and boosting reaction kinetics of catalytic electrodes. In general, developed integrated electrodes usually possess superior catalytic activity and durability than powdery catalysts, rendering the design of the integrated electrodes quite essential for impelling the process of high-rate AEHP.
2.2 Improving the intrinsic catalytic activity and durability
Although integrated electrodes feature the above merits, the catalytic activity and durability for high-rate AEHP still need to be promoted, bringing up stricter demands for specific regulation strategies. Take the optimized mechanism of alkaline HER for example: alkaline HER performance can be boosted by introducing active sites capable of promoting water dissociation to form composite catalysts such as Pt/Ni(OH)2,34 Ni/NiO,35 and V–CoP/CeO2.36 These catalysts all exhibit superior intrinsic catalytic performance than their single counterparts. The oxygen-containing parts are commonly incorporated for accelerating the alkaline Volmer step to generate the Hads, while the other active sites with low energy barriers for subsequent Heyrovsky and Tafel steps are designed to facilitate hydrogen formation.37 Meanwhile, the strategy of elemental doping can optimize the reaction kinetics between the catalysts and the reaction intermediates, which is also testified to effectively boost the intrinsic catalytic activity.
The standing durability of integrated electrodes is quite a pivotal issue but is typically neglected; it should be paid more consideration for advancing more practical and commercial AEHP applications. Loaded catalysts on the electrode matrix may experience various unfavorable microstructure and compositional evolutions during continuous operation, severely bringing down the stability.14,18,38 Take the phenomenon of electrochemical structure transformation during catalysis as an example: metal phosphides, sulfides, and nitrides have been demonstrated to experience structural transformation to oxygen-rich compounds or even completely metal (oxy)hydroxides during OER. The performance of these catalysts originates from the evolved oxygen-containing compounds or decent heterostructures of MX/MOx (X = S, P, N, etc.) after on-site electrochemical activation.38,39 Based on the identified active OER performance of metal oxyhydroxides, Xu and Wang et al. incorporated inactive zinc into CoOOH and investigated the transformation of the OER mechanism from the adsorbate evolution mechanism (AEM) to the lattice oxygen oxidation mechanism (LOM), and discussed the impact of the altered mechanism on the OER performance.40 The introduction of Zn can alter pristine electron configurations, producing oxygen non-bonding (ONB) states; meanwhile, the oxygen holes can be generated, benefiting from zinc with insufficient electron donation. The neighboring oxidized oxygens in Co–Zn oxyhydroxide can form the oxygen-containing intermediate through ONB holes rather than the hybridization of metal–oxygen bonds, and Co–Zn oxyhydroxide can achieve the OER mechanism conversion from AEM to LOM. Accordingly, the activity and durability of Co–Zn oxyhydroxide were greatly optimized. But whether the durability of the above MX/MOx structure can resist the shock of industrial-grade current remains questionable.
Not only in OER, but structural and chemical transformations of electrocatalysts can also take place during HER. A typical example is the exploration and understanding of metal phosphides' evolution during H2 production. Metal phosphides were initially considered to be stable under alkaline HER, while later investigations manifested that their surfaces also underwent chemical changes to some degrees.41,42 P-Substituted metal chalcogenides also experience a similar transformation.43 For example, introducing P into CoSe2 can induce more vacancies around Co but P will gradually leach out; then, initial catalysts will gradually change into metallic cobalt under HER conditions. Such structural and morphological transformation may boost the reaction kinetics at the beginning, but it is uncontrollable and may result in the degradation of the catalyst durability at HCDs. Therefore, the loaded electrocatalysts and electrode matrix should be both electrochemically and mechanically stable, which is the priority of achieving high-rate AEHP.
Furthermore, the bubble effect also greatly influences the catalytic processes at HCDs by blocking triple-phase interfaces and peeling off active materials from current collectors, poisoning the durability of integrated electrodes. Creating a porous electrode structure can benefit mass transfer and bubble release, acting on the enhancement of the catalytic activity and durability. Besides, regulating the interface wettability of integrated electrodes can significantly influence the catalytic performance. Electrodes with hydrophilic and aerophobic characters possess relatively much more steady triple-interface areas and faster gas desorption during catalysis, and are therefore crucial for promoting catalytic activity and durability.
In short, strategies for developing robust integrated electrodes to achieve efficient and stable AEHP should concentrate on aspects of improving intrinsic activity and simultaneously regulating the electrode structures. More specifically, elemental doping and multicomponent synergy can improve the intrinsic activities, while designing porous and hydrophilic/aerophobic electrodes can optimize AEHP via the aspect of regulating the electrode structure (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Regulating strategies toward integrated electrodes for improving high-rate AEHP. 
3 Regulating strategies of integrated electrodes for advancing high-rate AEHP
The electrocatalytic performance can be affected by both the intrinsic activity of the catalysts and the surrounding environments. Appropriate electronic structures and optimized adsorption ability of the intermediates can greatly boost the catalysts' intrinsic activity. The surrounding environments including electrolyte media, electrode morphology, microstructure, wettability, etc., jointly affect the accessibility of catalytic sites, mass transfer, and product release during water electrolysis. Therefore, regulating the catalyst composition, crystalline structure, surface states, etc. for improving their intrinsic catalytic activity (Section 3.1) and modulating the structure of integrated electrodes (Section 3.2) are both significant for developing efficient electrocatalysts for high-rate AEC. Moreover, the cost-effective strategies for the scalable production (Section 3.3) of the abovementioned integrated electrodes are also required for promoting the commercialization of AECs.
3.1 Strategies for improving the intrinsic catalytic activity
The enhancement of the intrinsic catalytic activity can be realized through elemental doping as well as harnessing the synergy from multicomponent design. These strategies can tune the electronic structure of the active sites and tune the binding energy of the reaction intermediates, further optimizing the reaction kinetics. Moreover, designing the multicomponent active sites to separately target every step of the electrocatalytic reactions is more beneficial for efficient AEHP because it enables the selection of the specific catalytic centers with high activity for each step compared with a single sites for all the steps.

3.1.1 Electronic modulation by elemental doping. 
The intrinsic activity is determined by the energy barriers of the reaction intermediates, which are dependent on the electronic states of the catalytic center. The electronic structure can be effectively modulated by doping hetero-elements including non-metal (N, S, P, B, etc.) and various transition-metal elements.44 Also, doping is not restricted to single elements; doping multiple elements can more delicately tune the electronic state of the catalytic center and the binding energies of key intermediates for further boosting its intrinsic activity.
Boosting HER by elemental doping. 
Cation doping, as an effective method for improving the intrinsic HER activity of electrocatalysts, has been widely verified in Fe-doped CoP,45 Fe-doped Ni3S2 (ref. 46) and Mo-doped Ni2P.47 The prepared Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP possessed the morphology of holey nanorods according to Fig. 6a. Mo doping together with a porous structure endows Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP with excellent HER performance. The displayed activity of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP can surpass that of Pt wire at 188 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6b). More impressively, the corresponding overpotentials to achieve 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 were merely 240 and 294 mV, respectively. The obtained current density of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP (1077 mA cm−2) at 300 mV was about 7.7 times higher than that of Ni2P (140 mA cm−2) (Fig. 6c), demonstrating that Mo doping significantly improved the intrinsic activity of Ni2P.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP. (b) Measured HER performance in 1 M KOH. (c) Compared current densities of serial catalytic electrodes at 300 mV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (d) Illustration of the generated P-doped Fe3O4 on iron foam (P–Fe3O4/IF). (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of P–Fe3O4/IF and the compared catalysts toward HER in 1 M KOH. (f) Stability curves of NiFe LDH/IF‖P–Fe3O4/IF and NF‖NF electrolyzers operating at 10 A cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) HAADF-STEM image of O, Cu–CoP. (h) Compared alkaline HER performance of O, Cu–CoP nanowire, and other samples. (i) Free energies of the HER diagram on CoP and O, and Cu co-doped CoP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Non-metal heteroatom (anion) doping is also beneficial for optimizing alkaline HER. For example, the intrinsic activity of Fe3O4 can be greatly enhanced by P doping. P doping can induce the generation of an inverse spinel structure, while inner Fe–O–P bonding (Fig. 6d) tuned the reaction kinetics of pristine Fe3O4.48 The octahedral Fe sites effectively accelerated the Volmer step to dissociate water into H* in alkaline conditions, while P sites with ΔGH* of just 0.01 eV were responsible for the adsorption/desorption of hydrogen intermediates. Therefore, P–Fe3O4/IF exhibited significantly enhanced electrocatalytic performance than Fe3O4/IF and the other control samples. It outperformed commercial Pt/C at HCDs, according to Fig. 6e. When coupling NiFe LDH/IF and P–Fe3O4/IF to construct an overall electrolyzer, just a voltage of 1.58 V can afford 500 mA cm−2. Moreover, the electrolyzer demonstrated extraordinary durability of over one thousand hours at 1000 mA cm−2. At industrial conditions of water splitting (60 °C, 10 A cm−2 in 6.0 M KOH), this electrolyzer can be sustained for 25000 s with a steady voltage of 4.9 V (Fig. 6f).
Metal and nonmetal (cation and anion) co-doping can greatly promote the HER activity of pristine catalysts, which has been verified in the O and Cu co-doped CoP system.49 Copper (brown) and oxygen (orange) atoms were well doped into the lattice of CoP (Fig. 6g) without changing its pristine crystalline structure. Co-doped O, Cu–CoP substantially upgraded the HER activity up to 10 times higher than that of the undoped ones. In addition, the O, Cu–CoP-2 catalyst with a Cu doping ratio of 5.6% exhibited the most superior activity, requiring 72 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2, according to Fig. 6h. Theoretical calculations proved that water dissociation and subsequent hydrogen release steps were both optimized on O, Cu–CoP. The adsorption energy ΔGH–OH* on O, Cu–CoP-2 was 0.34 eV (nearly half of that of pristine CoP (0.62 eV)), indicating the greatly facilitated water dissociation. The H* adsorption energy on the O, Cu–CoP-2 surface was only 0.04 eV, corroborating the fast kinetics for subsequent hydrogen generation (Fig. 6i).
Optimized OER by elemental doping. 
Similar to HER, OER processes with slow reaction kinetics can also be improved through the elemental doping strategy. Various metal oxides with cation doping such as Fe-doped NiCr2O4,50 Fe, V co-doped Ni(OH)2,51 and ternary Ni–Fe–Mo (oxy)hydroxides52 displayed promoted OER performance compared with their undoped counterparts. The promoted performance was attributed to the optimized electron conductivity and accelerated reaction kinetics. For instance, Fe-doped NiCr2O4 required 228 mV to drive 20 mA cm−2, which is obviously smaller than that of pure NiCr2O4 (276 mV). Introducing V into NiFe (oxy)hydroxide to form Ni3Fe1−xVx nanosheets (NSs) can boost the OER process (Fig. 7a).51 After V doping, the reactions for intermediates of OH* and O* are more feasible than the undoped catalysts; the free energies are more feasible than those of the undoped catalysts, which can be identified by the binding energies listed in Fig. 7b.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of Ni3Fe1−xVx NSs on CFP. (b) Calculated binding energies of OOH*, O*, and OH* absorbed on the V sites. (c) LSV curves of Ni3Fe1−xVx and other electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Crystal structures and corresponding free energies of OER pathways of pure FeOOH and various Se-doped FeOOH. (e) Performance comparison of FeOOH(Se)/IF and other OER electrocatalysts. (f) OER performance of FeNiOOH(Se)/IF electrode with Ni, Se dual doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
The smallest theoretical overpotential for the V-doped model is 0.25 V, manifesting the effect of V for optimizing the OER mechanism. Therefore, Ni3Fe1−xVx with Fe and V dual doping manifested greatly enhanced OER performance, as shown in Fig. 7c. Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 displayed the most superior OER performance among the as-prepared binary and ternary samples, demanding 291 mV to achieve 500 mA cm−2.
Besides cation doping, anion doping was also reported to improve the OER. For example, our group has demonstrated that Se-doping can boost the OER activity of iron-based (oxy)hydroxides.53 DFT calculations were first carried out to explore the specific influences of Se-doping on the OER reaction kinetics of FeOOH. As shown in Fig. 7d, FeOOH–Se1 and FeOOH–Se2 represented the Se substitution for O atoms in the top and sub-surfaces, respectively. The calculation results suggested that such Se-doping reduced the energy barrier from *O to *OOH from 3.20 eV for FeOOH to 1.45 eV for FeOOH–Se1 or 1.83 eV for FeOOH–Se2. Se-doped FeOOH with sufficient active sites was prepared from FeSe nanosheet array precursor through an on-site electrochemical transformation (experiencing a couple of OER scanning cycles). Electrochemical measurements showed that such Se doping significantly enhanced the OER performance compared with that of pure FeOOH, endowing it with more superior OER activity than that of Co or Ni-based counterparts (Fig. 7e). Furthermore, combining a small amount of Ni cation doping (3.3 at%) to form FeNiOOH(Se)/IF, the overpotential of such an electrode to afford 500 mA cm−2 was merely 348 mV (Fig. 7f), demonstrating that dual doping was effective for improving the OER performance.


3.1.2 Multicomponent synergy. 
Synergy effect for optimizing alkaline HER. 
Mono-component catalysts usually have single physicochemical properties and limited active sites; their catalytic abilities are also unsatisfactory. Benefiting from tunable structures, increased active sites, and synergy effects along with various components, developing multicomponent electrocatalysts can exhibit more excellent performance.54 Hybrid electrocatalysts can be composed of various materials including metal hydroxides,55–57 metal phosphides,58,59 metal sulfides,60 and metal nitrides,61 demonstrating the universal feasibility of this strategy for boosting the catalytic performance. Designing multicomponent catalysts together with morphology and structural engineering is favorable for improving the reaction kinetics while exposing more active sites. The strong interactions around the atomic interfaces will significantly affect the local electron densities and thus the adsorption/desorption energies and reaction pathways.65 The alkaline Volmer step of H* generation is much more difficult,13 and multicomponent synergies can accelerate the reaction kinetics of alkaline HER by introducing the specific active site to promote water dissociation. For example, we have reported that designing MoNi4/MoO3−x hybrid nanorods on nickel foam with 3D open network and improved electron transport considerably boosted the alkaline HER through such a synergy effect.62 The two components of MoNi4 and MoO3−x were in situ generated through the partial decomposition of the NiMoO4 precursor, while leaving the nanorod body unchanged to maintain the robust mechanical durability. MoO3−x sites accelerated the Volmer step to produce, H* while the neighboring MoNi4 showed fast H* adsorption and H2 desorption through the Heyrovsky and Tafel steps (Fig. 8a). Thus, such bicomponent MoNi4/MoO3−x nanorod arrays showed superior HER performance and could steadily deliver 1000 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of about 150 mV (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Structural diagram and the HER mechanism of the prepared MoNi4/MoO3−x catalyst. (b) HER performance of MoNi4/MoO3−x and contrast catalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Structural diagram of the designed Ni3S2@MoS2/FeOOH for optimized alkaline HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (d) HRTEM image of 1T-MoSe2/NiSe. (e) Identification of 1T-MoSe2 and its crystal structure. (f) Contrastive HER performance of serial catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
This multicomponent strategy is also applicable to other materials systems. For example, our group designed MoS2/Ni3S2 nanowire arrays and coupled them with water-dissociation-active FeOOH, appreciably boosting the alkaline HER performance (Fig. 8c).63 Moreover, the synergy effect from multicomponent active sites can also be integrated with other performance-enhancing strategies. It is well known that the phase transformation of metal dichalcogenides from 2H-phase to 1T-phase can enhance their HER activity. Therefore the synergy effect between the 1T-phase MoSe2 and NiSe (active for water dissociation) was investigated.64 More impressively, the metastable 1T-phase was simultaneously achieved through the electron injection effect from NiSe nanowire cores, obtaining the heterostructure of 1T-MoSe2/NiSe, as shown in Fig. 8d. The interplanar angle of 72° was characteristic of the (021) and (300) planes of NiSe, while the lattice spacing of 0.80 nm could be attributed to the (002) plane of 1T-MoSe2. The 1T phase was evidenced by atomic-resolution TEM images in Fig. 8e. Benefiting from the high intrinsic activity and improved conductivity of 1T-MoSe2 for H* adsorption/desorption as well as the synergy effect from NiSe component for promoting water dissociation, 1T-MoSe2/NiSe displayed excellent HER activity, as shown in Fig. 8f.
Synergy effect for optimizing OER and water splitting. 
Regulation of high-rate OER electrocatalysts through a multicomponent strategy has been demonstrated in the combination of metal hydroxides and spinel oxides, such as CoNi-LDH/CoFe2O4 (ref. 69) and NiFe-LDH/NiCo2O4.70 The catalyst combinations were then extended to a variety of compounds such as MoS2/Ni3S2,71 Fe(PO3)2/Ni2P,72 Ni/NiFeMoOx,73 and Cu@NiFe-LDH.74 Specifically, Zhao's group designed Ni/γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticle (Ni–Fe NP) with abundant Ni–O–Fe bridge along with the interface for highly efficient OER.75 The coupling of Fe2O3 and Ni induced a synergistic effect for accelerating the OER reaction kinetics; the sample revealed the smallest theoretical overpotential of 0.28 V, and the corresponding voltage to achieve 500 mA cm−2 was merely 1.55 V. Metal–organic framework (MOF)-derived materials are universally utilized as electrocatalysts, but constructing integrated electrodes with hierarchical structures remains challenging. Jiang's group thus developed a versatile strategy for designing rod-structure CoO@CoNC on various substrates such as nickel foam, metal meshes, and metal foils.66 Take the nickel foam as an example: well-aligned CoO nanorods were firstly grown on the nickel substrate to form Ni@CoO. Then, CoO functioned as the self-sacrificial templates for the in situ growth of the MOF precursor, and Ni@CoO@CoNC with well-preserved morphology could be generated after subsequent calcination (Fig. 9a). Well-aligned nanorod arrays are uniformly distributed on the nickel substrate, and the length of the nanorods was preserved, as seen in Fig. 9b. Benefiting from the optimized mass and gas transport from the nanorod array, and increased accessibility of the active sites from carbon incorporation, the Ni@CoO@CoNC electrode exhibited the most superior OER activity among contrastive catalytic electrodes, requiring 309 mV to afford 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structural diagram of the derived Ni@CoO@CoNC electrode from in situ MOF growth and pyrolysis. (b) SEM and TEM (inset) figures of Ni@CoO@CoNC. (c) OER performance of Ni@CoO@CoNC and contrastive catalytic electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) The device of overall water splitting assembled by Co4N–CeO2/GP both as the cathode and the anode. (e) Contrastive polarization curves of various electrocatalysts driving the two-electrode electrolyzer. (f) Chronopotentiometry curves of the water-splitting electrolyzers in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) The free energy diagrams of the NiMoOx/NiMoS heterostructure for OER (inset: free energy for H* adsorption). (h) Durability of NiMoOx/NiMoS operating at a voltage of 1.75 V in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group. 
Other modulation strategies could be incorporated into the multicomponent catalyst to further enhance the intrinsic catalytic activity and performance. It is reported that amorphous catalysts may provide more catalytic sites and abundant defects and vacancies for accelerating the OER, compared with crystalline ones. Li et al. recently coupled crystalline Ni nanoparticles with amorphous NiFeMoOx nanosheets to construct a bicomponent Ni/NiFeMoOx OER electrocatalyst.73 The coupled catalyst showed better electronic conductivity than both crystalline Ni and amorphous NiFeMoOx samples, and displayed much enhanced OER performance than those of the control catalysts, illustrating the possibility of simultaneously harnessing multicomponent synergy and crystallinity regulation for optimizing OER.
Developing bifunctional electrocatalysts is of great interest for concurrently realizing efficient HER and OER.76 Harnessing the synergy effect from the multicomponent catalyst is also effective to boost the catalytic performance for both the reactions. For instance, combining Co4N with CeO2 could give an efficient bifunctional catalyst for high-rate overall water splitting (Fig. 9d).67 The excellent HER performance was ascribed to the optimized alkaline water dissociation and hydrogen formation along with the interfaces of Co4N and CeO2. During OER, the CeO2/Co3O4 structure was generated from the surface reconstruction, lowering the reaction barriers of oxygen intermediates and thus boosting the OER activity. Accordingly, the assembled Co4N–CeO2‖Co4N–CeO2 electrolyzer required small voltages of 1.507 and 1.728 V for driving 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, which are lower than those for Co4N‖Co4N and Pt/C‖RuO2 electrolyzers (Fig. 9e). Impressively, the Co4N–CeO2‖Co4N–CeO2 electrolyzer also exhibited attractive durability. When operated at 500 mA cm−2, it showed only a slight activity decay of ∼8.8% after continuous electrolysis for 50 h (Fig. 9f), which was much more superior than that of Co4N‖Co4N (31.6% of decay) and Pt/C‖RuO2 (45.5% of decay). The catalytic activity remained ∼89.6% even after operating at 1000 mA cm−2. Similarly, NiMoOx/NiMoS heterostructure arrays prepared via oxygen-plasma and post hydrogenation strategy enabled efficient overall water splitting.68 The modulation of the electronic structure along the interfaces of NiMoOx/NiMoS optimized the reaction kinetics toward HER and OER. The hydrogen adsorption energy (ΔGH*) shrunk to 0.003 eV (inset in Fig. 9g), which was much less than that of MoOx/MoS2 (0.422 eV) and NiOx/Ni3S2 (0.074 eV). As for OER, NiMoOx/NiMoS simultaneously changed the potential rate-determining step (PDS) from the *O → *OOH process (at the Ni3S2/MoS2 interface) to the *OOH → O2 process, as shown in Fig. 9g. The synergistic regulation of the reaction kinetics for both HER and OER provided bicomponent NiMoOx/NiMoS with enhanced intrinsic activity. The resultant two-electrode electrolyzer demonstrated outstanding catalytic activity and durability under industrial current densities in view of the stable operation at the current density of 500 mA cm−2 without appreciable degradation at a small voltage cost of 1.75 V for over 500 h (Fig. 9h).

3.2 Structural modulation of the integrated electrodes
High-rate water splitting requires high-speed mass transfer processes and high-flux electron transport, calling for the delicate design of electrodes in both geometric structures and surface wettability. Generally, a suitable porous structure can provide sufficient spaces and passages for the exchange of ions and reactants as well as gas diffusion. Besides, the interface wettability is also vital for facilitating these processes happening at the solid–liquid–gas tri-phase interfaces.
The hydrophilic surface state would allow for the easy access of electrolyte and reacting species, and thus the maximal use of exposed active sites. Interface wettability is also vital for facilitating these processes happening at the solid–liquid–gas tri-phase interfaces. The hydrophilic surface state would allow for the easy access of the electrolyte and the reacting species, thus the maximal use of the exposed active sites, while the aerophobic design of the whole electrodes would greatly favor the bubble release from the electrode surface rather than block the active sites for accessing the reactants.

3.2.1 Modulation of the porous structure. 
Designing porous structures is critical for the utilization of integrated electrodes in large current electrolyzers. First, the porous structure increases the surface area to accommodate more catalytic sites accessible for reactions. Second, a suitable porous structure can appreciably promote electrolyte transfer and the diffusion of the produced O2/H2 bubbles.79 Recently, the effectiveness of pore engineering in enhancing the electrocatalytic performance of the integrated electrodes has been demonstrated by numerous catalysts with well-designed porous structures. Chemical etching is widely utilized to achieve porosity in catalysts. For example, the free-standing 3D nanoporous Co2P-integrated electrode (denoted as np-Co2P) could be fabricated by electrochemically etching away the Co phase in H2SO4 solution from Co80P20 alloy ribbons with two crystalline phases of cobalt and Co2P, while leaving abundant nanopores and relatively stable Co2P as an interconnected electrode skeleton (Fig. 10a).77 The pore size and porosity could be easily tailored by the processing conditions of the melt spinning rate (Fig. 10b inset). It was found that the resultant np-Co2P electrodes with nanoporous diameters of about 30 nm (Fig. 10b) exhibited much enhanced HER activities in alkaline media compared with the pore-free and other nanopore counterparts. np-Co2P with ∼30 nm pores required ∼15 mV along with a low Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1 (Fig. 10c and d).
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the selective etching fabrication route for np-Co2P. (b) The TEM image of nanoporous Co2P obtained at a cooling rate of 5k rpm (inset: the relationship between the rotation rates and pore sizes). (c) LSV curves and (d) Tafel slopes of serial nanoporous Co2P electrodes in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) SEM image of the Co3Mo/Cu cross-section (scale bar is 200 nm). (f) PDOS of Co, Mo in pure Co3Mo, and HO–Co3Mo samples. (g) Corresponding current densities of the Co3Mo/Cu electrode and contrastive electrodes at the given overpotential of −100 mV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
Similarly, porous Co3Mo/Cu catalysts were prepared via a chemical dealloying process.78 By immersing the multicomponent precursor Cu8Co3Mo1Al88 (comprised of α-Al, CuAl2, Co3Mo, etc.) in concentrated and heated KOH electrolyte, α-Al phase in sub-micrometer size and Al component of CuAl2 phase were successively dissolved, resulting in a Cu nanoframework with 300 nm macroporous channels and 25 nm nanopores (Fig. 10e). Co3Mo nanoparticles were spontaneously separated from the Cu matrix and exposed on the surface due to their relatively high stability, further serving as catalytic sites for HER. The resultant Co3Mo/Cu integrated electrode with a hierarchically nanoporous structure not only possessed high-density accessible Co3Mo catalytic sites on the surface but also facilitated electron transport and mass transfer. Considering that the surface of the catalyst is always bonding with the hydroxyl groups in alkali, the partial density of states (PDOS) of the bare Co3Mo surface and OH*–Co3Mo surface (HO–Co3Mo) were therefore compared and demonstrated in Fig. 10f. Co–Co–Mo hollow sites in HO–Co3Mo showed the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) of −0.36 eV, which is remarkably weaker than that of pure Co3Mo (−0.77 eV). As a result, it exhibited excellent HER catalytic activities with less than 100 mV to achieve 400 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10g). Besides, the seamless interface between Co3Mo and Cu endowed it with superior HER durability, as indicated by the negligible fluctuation of the current densities during 1000 h of continuous potentiostat measurement.
In addition, the sacrificial template method is another common strategy to introduce a porous structure in electrocatalysts. Zhao et al. exploited a colloidal template method to synthesize carbon plate (CP)-supported porous cobalt oxides with a unique honeycomb morphology.80 Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) microspheres were firstly self-assembled on the CP substrate to obtain PMMA/CP, followed by the intake of Co(NO3)2 into the void spaces. After removing PMMA templates by subsequent calcination, Co3O4/CP with a 3D porous structure was obtained. It was further doped with phosphorus to achieve P-doped cobalt oxides (Co:Pi/CoOx/CP) through microwave-induced plasma doping. The obtained electrode displayed a well-distributed honeycomb-like porous structure with ordered macropores with a size of about 200 nm and abundant surface defects (Fig. 11a). Benefiting from the macropores as diffusion channels and abundant exposed active sites, Co:Pi/CoOx/CP exhibited enhanced OER activity than those of non-porous structures. It could continuously deliver 100 mA cm−2 at a steady overpotential of 373 mV (Fig. 11b) for 100 h. Hydrogen bubbles can also serve as a soft template to fabricate porous electrocatalysts with no need for subsequent template removal.81
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of 3D Co:Pi/CoOx/CP (the inset is its structural diagram). (b) OER performance of 3D Co:Pi/CoOx/CP and contrastive electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of NiCuP (inset is a cross-sectional image of the deposited NiCuP layer). (d) LSV curves of NiCuP and contrastive electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Prepared process of laser-treatment Ni–Fe electrodes. (f) The surface morphology and microstructure of the electrode after laser treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
Chen et al. reported that hydrogen bubble assisted electrodeposition strategy for preparing porous NiCu alloy foam on stainless steel. After low-temperature phosphorization, NiCuP nanofoam with a hierarchical porous structure was obtained. This electrode had several macropores with diameters of ∼5–8 μm distributed across the surface (Fig. 11c) as well as several nanopores with diameters of about 40 nm. The hierarchical porosity exposed several active sites while maintaining effective mass transfer, leading to excellent OER and HER activity (Fig. 11d) and a nearly 100% faradaic efficiency toward overall water splitting. The pulsed laser ablation technique is also an effective method of creating porous catalytic electrodes. Matthias et al. exploited laser-structured nickel–iron electrodes according to the process in Fig. 11e, and the electrode displayed excellent OER performance.82 Ratios of nickel to iron can be adjusted by the deposition time of the Fe layer; the latter laser treatment can enhance realistic catalytic areas, thus optimizing mass transfer and gas release. The surface of the NiFe/Ni electrode after laser treatment reveals a highly jagged morphology with micrometer pores (Fig. 11f), enriching the electrode with abundant ECSA areas; thus, the electrode merely requires 249 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2. This femtosecond laser technique can further be utilized to produce more multicomponent alloy electrodes with porous surfaces, such as the ternary nickel–molybdenum–iron porous alloy,83 which can produce more available alloy electrodes with various metal combinations and can be further utilized as catalytic electrodes for boosting electrocatalytic hydrogen production.
In short, pore engineering is a relatively general strategy for HER/OER electrode design. The key lies in the rational design of synthetic methods to achieve multimodal pore distribution to simultaneously improve mass transfer/gas evolution while accommodating sufficient active sites, as well as precisely control the pore sizes and distributions and correlate the pore size and distribution with catalyst performance. Besides, the pore engineering strategies should be compatible with other effective modulation strategies for constructing advanced electrodes for water splitting under high current conditions.


3.2.2 Modulation of interface wettability (hydrophilic/aerophobic electrode). 
Water splitting occurs at the three-phase interface, including the reactions occurring at the tri-phase interface, where the gas bubbles evolve and need to be detached.89 On the one hand, given that the reactants are coming from the aqueous electrolyte, the favorable hydrophilicity of the catalysts' surface would improve the access of reactive ions to the surface active sites and decrease the interfacial ohmic resistance. On the other hand, the aerophobic design of the whole electrode will benefit the rapid release of the produced H2/O2 from the electrode surface, avoiding the build-up of gas bubbles to block the active sites.90–92 Consequently, combining the hydrophilic surface and aerophobic electrodes design will not only directly facilitate mass transfer and reaction kinetics of water splitting but will also promptly free the active sites from the gas bubbles and thus enhance the electrocatalytic processes, especially at high current densities. Surfaces with a specific water contact angle (θw) lower than 5° and bubble contact angle (θb) higher than 150° are generally termed as superhydrophilic and superaerophobic, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 12a.84 The affinity of the designed catalyst electrodes toward electrolytes and gas bubbles can be regulated by controlling their surface state, microstructure, composition, or surface morphology. For example, Li et al. applied a vapor-phase conversion to partially transform NiFe hydroxide to NiFe phosphate.85 The obtained NiFe/NiFe:Pi exhibited a θw of ∼44°, which is much smaller than that of pristine NiFe hydroxide (∼129°), indicating better water wettability (Fig. 12b and c). It was noted that such NiFe/NiFe:Pi subsequently became superhydrophilic under high potential polarization conditions. The measured θw was close to 0°. It enabled NiFe/NiFe:Pi electrode with an overpotential of 340 mV to deliver 300 mA cm−2, demonstrating its potential for high-rate water splitting. Other strategies for improving the surface hydrophilicity include controllable phosphorization93,94 and sulfuration89 of the catalytic electrodes.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of superhydrophilic and superaerophobic solid surfaces in air and water, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Measured water contact angles on (b) NiFe and (c) NiFe/NiFe:Pi electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Adhesive force tests of gas bubbles on different catalyst surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Photos of the formed H2 bubbles on Pt foil and MoS2/Mo2C electrodes (scale bars: 1 mm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. (f) Multistep chronoamperometric response curves for Ni2P/NF electrodes (overpotential ranging from 240 to 650 mV). (g) Images of the generated hydrogen bubbles on pure NF and Ni2P/NF electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
For the evaluation of the aerophobic properties of the electrodes, more intuitive observations reflect the discrepancies on the bubble adhesive forces and bubble sizes. Zhang et al. reported that the prepared Ni–Mo alloy nanosheet on Ni foam demonstrated comparable HER activity to commercial Pt/C.86 However, the hydrogen adhesion force on the Ni–Mo alloy was as small as 2 μN, which was much lower than that on the Pt/C electrode (29 μN), as shown in Fig. 12d. The lower bubble-electrode interaction along with ultrathin 2D morphology endowed Ni–Mo catalysts with accelerated HER reaction kinetics. Moreover, the bubble affinity can also be more visually displayed by the sizes of evolved gas bubbles on the electrodes. Luo et al. compared the bubble adhesion behavior during HER on two model catalysts of Pt foil and MoS2/Mo2C.87 As the current increased (from left to right in Fig. 12e), the diameters of the half-produced H2 bubbles on Pt foil grew rapidly to larger than 0.5 mm and formed a dense gas layer covering the catalyst surface. In contrast, only sparsely distributed bubbles smaller than 0.2 mm were observed on the MoS2/Mo2C surface, suggesting rapid bubble release. As a result, MoS2/Mo2C exhibited extraordinary HER performance. It required much lower overpotentials of 220 mV and 227 mV to achieve 1000 mA cm−2 in alkaline and acidic media, respectively. Besides, it is known that gas accumulation on the electrode surfaces will hinder mass and charge transfer, especially under large current densities for high-rate water splitting. The construction of superaerophobic electrodes will help to resolve this issue. Yu et al. developed a Ni2P nanoarray on nickel foam (Ni2P/NF),88 which displayed outstanding alkaline HER activity and stability (Fig. 12f). The potentials remained relatively stable during multistep chronoamperometric measurement (100–2500 mA cm−2). The bubble images showed that the generated hydrogen bubbles left the surface of the superaerophobic Ni2P/NF within 207.9 ms, while they were easily pinned on pure nickel foam (Fig. 12g). The much-weakened surface-bubble interaction enabled superaerophobic Ni2P/NF with remarkable capabilities of gas release, thus enhancing the catalytic durability at large current densities.

3.3 Developing low-cost and scalable preparation methods
The preparation of high-performance integrated electrodes typically involves multiple steps such as time-consuming hydrothermal and high-energy calcination steps, resulting in low feasibility of the scalable production of these electrodes for practical applications. The production cost and scale-up of the designed integrated electrodes should be taken into consideration for industrial AEC electrolyzers and advancing its large-scale application for hydrogen production. Thus, attempts concerning low-cost and scalable synthetic strategies for the production of electrocatalytic electrodes have been made in the past several years, including but not limited to room-temperature coprecipitation methods, scalable ambient electrodeposition methods, and on-substrate chemical conversion.

3.3.1 Room-temperature coprecipitation. 
Non-precious metal-based layered double hydroxides (LDH), (oxy)hydroxides, carbonate hydroxides, etc., usually feature excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability. However, the preparation of these compounds with desirable compositions and morphologies typical required time-consuming hydrothermal processes at certain temperatures, bringing about excess energy consumption and additional commercial cost. Our group developed a simple and rapid co-precipitation strategy for the preparation of metal hydroxide electrodes with a sandwich-type morphology of the nanosheet arrays vertically aligning on the double sides of conductive graphene support.
As shown in Fig. 13a,95 the composites of Ni-doped Co(OH)2 on graphene (NiCo-HS@G) can be easily obtained via an ammonia-assisted coprecipitation process in 5 min at room temperature. The adsorbed metal cations of Co2+ and Ni2+ function as the nucleation sites on the defects of graphene. The ion diffusion and growth kinetics can be controlled by the stirring speed. At a suitable stirring speed (e.g., 1000 rpm), the vertically aligned nanosheet arrays of the hydroxides can be achieved uniformly on the two sides of the graphene substrate, according to Fig. 13b and c. The tight contact between the hydroxide nanosheet and graphene, as well as the in-plane charge transport from the vertically-aligned structure ensure efficient electron transfer for NiCo-HS@G. The nanosheet array structure not only offers abundant catalytic sites by exposing more surface area but also provides sufficient passages for fast mass transfer and substance exchange while facilitating gas release. Also, the ratio of different metal elements can be easily tuned through the concentration of the source materials. Coprecipitation enables the introduction of Ni2+ into Co(OH)2, improving the electronic structure of the Co center, favoring the adsorption energies of the oxygen species, thus improving the OER kinetics and activity. Therefore, NiCo-HS@G exhibited the most superior OER performance among the contrast samples of IrO2, Co-HS@G, and NiCoHS, requiring merely 302 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13d). This strategy can be easily extended to prepare other bimetallic analogs, such as CoFe-hydroxide96 and NiFe-hydroxide,97 demonstrating its universality and potential application in fabricating other integrated electrodes at low cost.
 Fig. 13  Graphic illustration of convenient and quick synthetic routes. (a) Rapid coprecipitation with the assistance of ammonia. (b) Low-magnification and (c) Magnified SEM images of NiCo-HS@G. (d) OER performance of serial catalysts with 90% iR-compensation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


3.3.2 Universal ambient electrodeposition. 
Another convenient and scalable strategy is electrodeposition, which can operate at ambient conditions and end in minutes without the need for calcination and other processes.98,99 Electrodeposition can be carried out on diverse conductive substrates to produce metal hydroxides,100 metal hydroxyl-phosphate,101 metal phosphides,102 metal sulfides, metal, and alloys103 as electrocatalysts. Various combinations of substrates and targeted catalysts make this method quite popular for constructing HER and OER catalysts. The strong interaction between the substrates and the deposited coatings endows the electrocatalysts with excellent durability. For example, the conventional synthesis of metal phosphides generally involves the growth of precursors on the substrates, followed by the phosphorization processes with phosphorus-containing sources such as red phosphorus or NaH2PO2, which usually generates toxic substances such as phosphorus steam or PH3.45,47,104–106 For example, Jiang's group designed CoP/rGO-T catalysts through a three-step approach, including the growth of ZIF-67 precursor, thermal annealing to form Co3O4, and the final phosphorization to generate CoP/rGO-T.107 In contrast, electrodeposition can avoid time-consuming phosphorization processes and toxic gas release while obtaining metal phosphides with decent structural design and catalytic performance.108 Besides, elemental doping, distribution, and composition for improving the intrinsic activity of catalytic sites can be easily achieved by simply regulating the plating solutions and the deposition conditions to investigate the relationship between the catalyst composition and performance. For instance, the relationship between the amounts of S, P in FeCoNiPxSy and the corresponding catalytic performance for water splitting were revealed by adjusting the electrodeposition time and the ratios of S and P in plating sources.109 Moreover, the crystallinity of the catalysts could also be modulated by tuning the electrodeposition conditions to investigate their influence on the catalytic performance.
In 2017, our group developed efficient AEC electrodes through the electrodeposition method. The commercial NiAl alloy plate was directly used as the electrode skeleton, followed by the chemical etching of the Al component in alkaline solution to generate Ni(OH)2 nanoplate arrays on the surface of (Ni(OH)2/NiAl). Ni(OH)2/NiAl then served as a hierarchical scaffold for the electrodeposition of NiMo and NiFe composites as highly-active catalytic sites for HER and OER, respectively (Fig. 14a). Consequently, the electrolyzer assembled by NiMo/Ni(OH)2/NiAl and NiFe/Ni(OH)2/NiAl electrodes displayed superior performance for overall water splitting.110 To further improve the electrocatalytic performance under high current densities, a two-step deposition strategy including anion intercalation and subsequent catalyst deposition was developed to increase catalyst loading and substrate–catalyst interaction.111 As shown in Fig. 14b, a positive potential was firstly applied to graphite paper electrodes for accommodating NO3− ions. The current polarity was then reversed to carry out cathodic electrodeposition. The pre-incorporation of NO3− into the graphite layer enabled the formation of more OH− during cathodic reduction (NO3− + H2O + 2e− → NO2− + 2OH−), which further combined with metal ions to produce metal hydroxides.111 This general synthetic method displayed universality in the preparation of a series of alkaline earth metals (Mg), transitional metals (Mn, Ni, Co, Fe, etc.), and even lanthanides (La and Ce) hydroxides. The deposited electrode achieved a high mass loading of the metal hydroxides above 23 mg cm−2 on graphite, while maintaining its superhydrophilic and superaerophobic nature for accelerated mass transfer and gas release. For example, the Ni(OH)2/CeO2 bimetallic hybrid demonstrated superior OER activity, requiring merely 177 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2. This catalytic electrode also displayed excellent durability, exhibiting no obvious performance degradation over 300 h at 1000 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 14  (a) Electrodeposition of highly-active NiMo and NiFe materials on Ni(OH)2/NiAl foil to realize high-rate hydrogen production, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) General anion intercalation-assisted electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.3.3 On-substrate chemical conversion. 
Apart from the abovementioned low-cost synthetic approaches, in situ electrochemical or chemical conversion are other alternatives for rapidly preparing electrocatalysts for high-rate water splitting. For example, the pre-catalyst of FeS nanosheets grown on iron foam could be in situ electrochemically transformed into efficient HER and OER-catalysts.112 Fe@FeOx core–shell catalysts could be in situ generated during HER testing. The synergy effect between the binary components improved the HER intrinsic activity while in situ processing produced abundant active sites. As for OER, the amorphous FeOx coating layers evolved from FeS were demonstrated to be efficient catalytic sites. Such pre-catalysts can also be used to construct hierarchical electrodes with micro–nano hybrid structures via chemical conversion. We reported an autogenous growth strategy for fabricating high-performance low-cost Fe-based electrodes for high-rate OER.113 FeS microsheet arrays were prepared on commercial iron foam while acting as the Fe sources, which ensured robust contact between the electrode substrate and the catalyst. A following controlled chemical conversion transformed the surface of the FeS microsheets into vertically aligned NiFe(OH)x nanosheet arrays through 5 min treatment in Ni2+ solution at room temperature, according to Fig. 15a. This conversion not only generated more active NiFe(OH)x sites accommodating the FeS microsheets, while maintaining conductive FeS for electron transport. The resulting NiFe(OH)x/FeS/IF electrode could steadily deliver 1000 mA cm−2 at 332 mV, demonstrating superior OER activity and durability.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of NiFe(OH)x/FeS/IF generated from on-site chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Illustration of the in situ formation of NiFe-hydroxide nanoarrays on iron electrodes through chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The formation process of NiFe2O4−xSex/NiOOH on commercial stainless steel via chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. 
Moreover, commercial substrates such as stainless steel and iron foam can also be directly converted into active and durable catalytic electrodes via in situ chemical etching and conversion, thus significantly decreasing the production cost of the AEC electrodes. Liu et al.114 reported that commercial iron foam could be directly corroded in the aqueous solution with dissolved oxygen to form Fe2+ at the anodic sites via galvanic corrosion, which would be further oxidized into Fe3+. Fe3+ spontaneously combined with other divalent metal ions (such as Ni2+) to generate Fe-containing metal layered double hydroxides (LDH), as shown in Fig. 15b. Eventually, this cost-effective process could transform the surface of the commercial iron substrate into bimetallic LDH nanosheet-connected structures with strongly coupled interfaces as highly active OER catalysts. Such electrodes could stably operate at 1000 mA cm−2 for over 6000 h under an applied voltage of about 1.8 V, suggesting the remarkable OER activity and durability. Besides, commercial stainless steel can also be in situ transformed into robust OER catalysts. We recently found that a simple alkaline etching could produce NiOOH nanosheet arrays decorated with NiFe2O4 nanoparticles on stainless steel, as illustrated in Fig. 15c.115 After the selective selenization of NiFe2O4 into NiFe2O4−xSex while keeping NiOOH nanosheet arrays as a robust and active scaffold, the highly-active NiFe2O4−xSex/NiOOH OER electrodes were achieved. Taking advantage of the enhanced intrinsic activity from modulated electronic structure and hierarchical structures for mass transfer and gas management, such stainless steel-derived electrodes also exhibited remarkable OER activity in terms of a small overpotential of 259 mV to steadily drive 500 mA cm−2.

4 Emerging catalytic reactions for advancing AEHP
The abovementioned strategies have demonstrated their capability for the scalable preparation of integrated electrodes with highly active and abundant electrocatalytic sites as well as the engineered hierarchical geometric structures for the management of mass/electron transport and gas evolution. These designed integrated electrodes with specific modulation strategies can be applied not only to conventional alkaline electrolysis cells (AEC) for hydrogen production but can also be extended to other catalytic systems for advancing high-rate AEHP such as anode-replacing hydrogen production and decoupled AEC. It is worth noting that these catalytic systems are still catalyzed by the above-constructed integrated electrodes, and this part is still highly relevant to our topic of boosting practical AEHP.
4.1 Anode-replacing hydrogen production
The conventional anodic reaction of AEC is the oxidation of hydroxide ions into oxygen. It involves multistep electron transfers and the adsorption/desorption of multiple species, thus suffering from slow kinetics. Compared with HER, OER requires several times larger overpotential, accounting for the large electricity consumption and hydrogen cost. Developing anode-replacing reactions that are thermodynamically more favorable than OER will significantly lower the anodic overpotential and thus the cell voltage and electricity consumption, especially in the case when the anodic product is value-added chemicals. Therefore, the exploration of suitable value-added reactions at the anode would advance the conventional water splitting process and might simultaneously target other energy-related applications.116–118

4.1.1 Anodic oxidation of CO for electrochemical water–gas shift (EWGS). 
Industrial water–gas shift reaction for hydrogen production requires high temperature (180–250 °C) and high pressure (1–6 MPa), resulting in huge energy consumption. The generated hydrogen gas is usually mixed with many other impure gases such as CO2, CO, and CH4. Deng et al. recently reported that the room-temperature generation of high-purity hydrogen can be achieved through electrochemical water–gas shift (EWGS).119 This process can be decoupled into the cathodic hydrogen evolution and anodic CO oxidation reactions (Fig. 16a).
 Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of conventional water–gas shift (WGS) and electrochemical water–gas shift (EWGS). (b) Schematic diagram of triple-phase interfaces on the PTFE-decorated Pt surface. (c) Contrastive H2O adsorption on Pt@CNTs and Pt/C samples with or without PTFE decoration. (d) LSV curves of Pt2.7Cu@CNTs and other samples for CO oxidation (all modified with 1.5 μg cm−2 PTFE). (e) Hydrogen production yields and corresponding faradaic efficiency on anodic Pt@CNTs and Pt2.7Cu@CNTs catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. 
The catalytic performance of anodic CO oxidation is restricted by the low water solubility of CO and the scarcity of CO-tolerant electrocatalysts, leading to the low faradaic efficiency of EWGS. The authors deposited a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) layer on Pt@CNTs catalysts to increase the CO concentration near the local surface. The coexistence of CNTs and PTFE made the catalyst surface more hydrophobic, benefiting CO diffusion and adsorption at triple-phase interfaces, according to Fig. 16b and c. By further modifying the catalyst into PtCu@CNTs to downshift the d-band center of Pt and reduce CO adsorption energies, the interaction between the catalyst and CO was promoted. It was found that the Pt2.7Cu@CNTs catalyst exhibited ∼0 V onset potential for CO oxidation, and it merely required a potential of less than 1.3 V to achieve 200 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16d). Compared with Pt@CNTs (Fig. 16e), the Pt2.7Cu@CNTs catalyst could deliver 70 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V (twelve times higher than commercial Pt/C). Meanwhile, the faradaic efficiency for hydrogen production on Pt2.7Cu@CNTs is higher than that of Pt@CNTs at identical potentials, demonstrating the greatly promoted hydrogen generation of Pt2.7Cu@CNTs.


4.1.2 Anodic oxidation of small molecules for promoting hydrogen production. 
Another anodic replacing reaction is the oxidation of low-cost organic small molecules, such as urea and hydrazine. The oxidation of these molecules takes place at lower theoretical thermodynamic potentials than water oxidation.116,117,120–122 The urea oxidation reaction (UOR) possesses a much lower potential (0.37 V vs. RHE) than OER (1.23 V vs. RHE), enabling remarkably increased oxidative current densities at the same potentials and thus the cell voltage of overall electrolyzer.123 For instance, crystalline/amorphous Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx catalyst124 was prepared on nickel foam by combining template-assisted electrodeposition and post-soaking strategies. The Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF electrode exhibited lower UOR overpotential than that of pure OER (Fig. 17a). When assembled into Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF‖Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF cell for urea-assisted two-electrode electrolysis in 1 M KOH/0.5 M urea, this electrolyzer required only 1.42 V to deliver 10 mA cm−2 from Fig. 17b, lower than that of pure water splitting (1.65 V). The catalytic performance can be well maintained for over 40 h even at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 17c). The downside of UOR is that the oxidation of urea may release the greenhouse gas CO2 and even the poisonous gas CO.
 Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of the UOR and OER performance of the Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF catalytic electrode. (b) Contrastive performance of the Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF‖Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF cell toward pure water splitting (1 M KOH) and urea-assisted water electrolysis (1 M KOH + 0.5 M urea). (c) Long-term durability of urea-assisted water electrolysis at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 without iR compensation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Self-powered system integrated with DHzFC and OHzS units for hydrogen production, using Fe–CoS2 and Pt/C as catalysts and 1.0 M KOH plus 0.1 M hydrazine as the electrolyte. (e) Polarization curves for OHzS with various electrodes (Pt/C, CoS2, or Fe–CoS2). (f) Durability test of the self-powered system with 5.3 M hydrazine, operating at a voltage of 0.7 V and ambient temperature (inset: corresponding H2 and N2 yields). Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 
To resolve this issue, the hydrazine oxidation reaction (HzOR) was then developed to replace UOR and OER in the anode.120 HzOR possessed a more negative standard potential (−0.33 V vs. RHE) compared with UOR and the products are harmless nitrogen and water, enabling the overall hydrazine splitting (OHzS) to be highly effective for improving the efficiency of H2 production. Moreover, hydrazine can also serve as the cathodic ingredient for direct hydrazine fuel cells (DHzFC), offering opportunities for realizing a self-powered H2 generation system that only consumes hydrazine. Liu et al. reported a self-powered system with the integration of DHzFC and OHzS,125 as shown in Fig. 17d. The system utilized Fe-doped CoS2 as the bifunctional electrocatalyst. Compared with pure CoS2 and Pt/C catalysts, OHzS using Fe–CoS2 as both the electrodes exhibited superior performance, which only required 0.95 V to achieve 500 mA cm−2 (Fig. 17e). For the self-powered hydrogen production system, an impressive H2 production rate of 9.95 mmol h−1 with a high faradaic efficiency of 98% and stability of 20 h was achieved under a small voltage of 0.7 V (Fig. 17f). The produced gas mixtures of hydrogen and nitrogen through HzOR are also safer than those of hydrogen and oxygen generated from pure water splitting. These facts demonstrated that such a system might be interesting for outdoor portable applications in the future although its disadvantage lies in the use of harmful hydrazine.


4.1.3 Anodic oxidation of organics for value-added products. 
The abovementioned anodic replacing reactions commonly require the consumption of other chemicals to reduce the electricity consumption, leading to the cost concerns about the additional chemicals versus the saved electricity. A more preferable option is the exploration of replacing reactions with less overpotential while generating value-added products. Quite a few examples have been recently reported, including the oxidation of biomass-derived organics into value-added chemicals at the anode site of AEC, as shown in Fig. 18a. For instance, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), one of the classic furan compounds, can be electrochemically oxidized into 2,5-furan dicarboxylic acid (FDCA). FDCA is an important polymer monomer, having great potential for replacing terephthalic acid.126 Therefore, combining HMF oxidation as the anode with HER cathode in AEC will not only improve the energy conversion efficiency and lower cell voltages for hydrogen production but can also simultaneously produce high-value chemicals.127
 Fig. 18  (a) Scheme for using biomass oxidation to produce value-added products at the anode in AEC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) LSV curves of anodic oxidation reaction on the Ni2P anode with or without adding THIQ (1a) (scanning rate: 5 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH). (c) Mechanism for conversion from 1a to 2a on the Ni2P electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) LSV curves of water electrolysis with or without adding aloe extract (AE) (scanning rate: 5 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another example is the oxidation reaction from tetrahydroisoquinolines (THIQs (1a)) to dihydroisoquinolines (DHIQs (2a)). Huang et al. reported that the Ni2P electrode could efficiently catalyze this reaction at a low overpotential to boost alkaline HER.128 As shown in Fig. 18b, when adding THIQ, the anodic reaction was greatly accelerated on the Ni2P electrode. The current density dramatically uplifts at about 1.32 V, significantly lower than that of O2 evolution for pure water splitting (∼1.48 V). The experimental data evidenced that NiIIIOOH was generated on the surface of Ni2P at the applied voltage. NiIII could oxidize 1a into 2a and itself was reduced into NiII, which was subsequently oxidized back to NiIII at an applied potential (Fig. 18c). Coupling the redox of NiII/NiIII with the electrochemical conversion from 1a into 2a effectively accelerated the anodic reaction kinetics, further boosting the hydrogen production process.
Similarly, Hao et al. used the oxidation reaction of aloe extract (AE) (AOR) to replace anodic OER for accelerating alkaline water splitting.129 Compared with the cell voltage of 1.63 V to achieve 20 mA cm−2 in the electrolyzer assembled with Fe-doped CoP on carbon cloth (Fe–CoP/CC) as the catalysts, only 1.51 V (120 mV less) was needed to acquire the same current density with the addition of 5 mL aloe extract (AE) (Fig. 18d). Moreover, Sun's group systematically investigated the influence of five representative biomass-derived organic additives on the corresponding oxidation reactions, where the porous Ni3S2 nanospheres on Ni foam (Ni3S2/NF) were used as bifunctional electrocatalysts.130 The onset voltage was reduced from ∼1.50 V (without organic additives) to ∼1.35 V (after 10 mM biomass addition) and the current densities rose quickly, indicating that these organic molecules featured more favorable reaction kinetics than pure OER.
All the above attempts open up opportunities for promoting hydrogen production via AEC using the oxidation of low-cost organics, especially biomass-derived organics, to replace OER while simultaneously producing value-added chemicals.

4.2 Decoupled AEC for accelerating hydrogen production
Generally, HER and OER take place simultaneously in conventional water electrolysis, leading to the produced H2 and O2 having to be separated such as via an ion exchange membrane. In 2013, Cronin's group introduced the concept of using redox mediators (RDM) as an electron-coupled-proton buffer (ECPB) to decouple water electrolysis, and polyoxometalate H3PMo12O40 was selected as the ECPB.132 In this way, H2 and O2 were generated at separate times, enabling the separate collection. Some ECPBs have been investigated in such decoupled water electrolysis, including quinone derivatives133 and silicotungstic acid.134 But these mediators all worked at highly acidic electrolytes because the proton exchange membrane cannot be utilized for AEC.
Recently, Sun's group demonstrated a decoupled alkaline HER and accelerated its reaction kinetics by integrating HMF oxidation.135 HMF oxidation was selected as the replacing reaction for OER. Na4[Fe(CN)6] (ER) was chosen as the redox mediator. Co–P electrode and Ni foam (NF) were selected as the HER and HMF oxidation electrodes, respectively. The decoupled reactions happening during the two steps are depicted in Fig. 19a. In step 1, ER was oxidized into ER+ at the carbon electrode and HER takes place at the Co–P electrode. In step 2, HMF was oxidized into FDCA at the NF electrode and ER+ was simultaneously reduced into ER. The introduction of ER dramatically shifted the LSV curves of the Co–P‖C electrolyzer toward positive directions during step 1, obviously optimizing hydrogen production (Fig. 19b). The anodic LSV curves on NF during step 2 were then collected and compared (Fig. 19c). The Ni‖C electrolytic cell with ER only required a small voltage of 0.66 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2, greatly lowering than that without ER (nearly 2.5 V). More impressively, only 0.37 V was required to achieve 10 mA cm−2 when HMF was added to the anode side, giving an additional voltage drop of 0.29 V. These insights provide great possibilities for electrolyzer design by decoupling AEC together with organic upgradation.
 Fig. 19  (a) Diagram of electrolyzer design by integrating HER with HMF oxidation in 1 M NaOH (Na4[Fe(CN)6] was introduced into the chamber with the carbon electrode). (b) Comparative LSV curves of Co–P‖C H-cells with or without adding 0.3 M ER. (c) Comparative LSV curves of Ni‖C H-cells whether with ER+ or HMF addition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic mechanism of the cell integrating HER and NiOOH–Zn battery. (e) The curves of cell voltage versus time during H2 generation (black line) and the discharging process of the NiOOH–Zn battery (red line) (inset: cycling profiles of step 1 and step 2′). Applied current for H2 generation and discharging process of NiOOH–Zn battery are both 200 mA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
Interestingly, the OER processes in decoupled AEC can also be replaced by the discharge step of a Zn–NiOOH battery.136 As depicted in Fig. 19d, the oxidation of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH and the HER took place in step 1. The formed NiOOH coupled with a Zn plate, forming a battery in step 2′. The NiOOH–Zn battery exhibited a discharging voltage of 1.6 V, according to Fig. 19e. With this figuration, the HER and the battery discharging could be repeatedly cycled (inset of Fig. 19e), offering opportunities for achieving renewables-to-hydrogen conversion.
5 Summary and outlook
Performance-benign and low-cost integrated electrodes are crucial for achieving scalable hydrogen production through high-rate AEHP. In this review, the advantages and necessities of developing integrated electrodes were first introduced. To face the challenges for practical AEHP, the modulating strategies were elaborated for improving the intrinsic electrocatalytic performance and designing suitable electrode structures, giving insights into the internal relationships among the intrinsic activity, electrode structure, and catalytic performance. To further advance more pathways of high-rate AEHP, several emerging catalytic reactions, including anode-replacing hydrogen production and decoupled AEC, are also summarized and discussed. Elemental doping and multicomponent synergy can enhance the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts by influencing the local electron density to optimize the adsorption/desorption energies and reaction kinetics of the intermediates. Hierarchically porous structures with appropriate surface hydrophilic/aerophobic properties aim at the optimization of the surrounding environments around the tri-phase interfaces for electrocatalytic reactions, aiming for amplifying the utilization of active sites, facilitating the mass transfer and gas diffusion/release.
Although great progress has been made in this field, there is still a gap between scientific communities and industries. The new insights into the following aspects may be helpful and open up opportunities for bringing this promising technology to reality.
5.1 Standard evaluation of the catalytic performance
Establishing benchmark electrochemical testing criteria is essential for reliably evaluating and comparing the catalytic performance of electrocatalysts. The counter electrode, preparation of catalyst electrodes, catalyst loading, testing chamber, testing conditions including scanning rate and direction, the configuration of electrodes, and testing environments all appreciably influence the electrochemical measurements as well as the results obtained from polarization curves and stability tests. The current publications report the catalyst performance on the basis of the set-ups of each research group, which differs significantly from group to group. Setting up standard evaluation programs and materials for integrated electrodes and powder electrocatalysts will be able to present the catalyst performance data under the unified conditions, enabling convincing comparisons among various catalysts and thus helping to understand the structure–activity relationships and explore new efficient electrocatalysts.
Moreover, there are some concerns during the catalyst evaluation that should be paid more attention to. For example, Pt and other active or erodible materials should not be used as counter electrodes when evaluating the HER catalyst performance in electrolytic cells without proton exchange membranes since Pt can dissolve in the electrolyte and redeposit onto working electrodes. Even a trace amount of Pt will greatly improve the HER activities, giving the false evaluation of the catalysts.137,138 For OER, many catalytic electrodes will experience oxidation and transformation at the OER processes. Such oxidation reaction will contribute to the recorded current, especially at the onset stage, when using the forward-sweeping mode, causing the overestimation of the OER activity at relatively low current regions.139 In addition, the large scanning rate during LSV testing will result in the response of the background current, especially for the integrated electrodes. The benchmark scanning rate should be restricted such as one less than 10 mV s−1. As for the correction level of iR, powder catalysts coated onto the electrode substrates possessed large contact resistance between the catalysts and the matrix; thus, the improper iR-compensation would give an inaccurate evaluation of the catalyst performance. Besides, integrated electrodes with specific thickness and porosity can possess catalyst loading, leading to inaccurate performance evaluation based on the geometric electrode area. The mass-specific activities and ECSA-normalized activities will be helpful for evaluation in these cases.
5.2 Precise identification of genuine catalytic sites under the working conditions
Water splitting reactions take place at tri-phase interfaces under given potentials, involving the cycles of the adsorption/desorption of reactants, intermediates, and products, which are significantly affected by the chemical states and local environments of the active sites. The electron transfer processes accompanying the reactions as well as the adsorption/desorption of immediate dynamically affect the chemical states of the active sites. The common ex situ characterizations identify the active sites and their chemical environments under zero potential and dry conditions. Such differences between ex situ characterization conditions and in situ reaction conditions cause considerable changes in the chemical states and local chemical environments of the active centers. Therefore, the ex situ identification of the active sites cannot reflect their genuine chemical status, which may mislead the design and modulation of catalytic sites for improving their performance. This calls for the development of in situ electrochemical characterization techniques for the precise identification of genuine active sites under working conditions of practical water electrolysis. Moreover, several metal sulfides, nitrides, phosphides, etc., materials have been developed as pre-catalysts for water electrolysis. They will inevitably evolve into complex oxygen-containing compounds. The precise identification of the in situ evolved active sites and the influences of the surrounding doping elements will not only help to understand the evolutionary processes and the reaction mechanism but also may guide the further optimization of pre-catalysts for enhancing the catalyst performance. The operando spectroscopic techniques such as electrochemically compatible in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, IR, and Raman spectroscopy together with atomic-resolution electron transmission microscopy will advance the research in this area.
5.3 Accurate theoretical modeling and AI-assisted catalyst screening
Most of the theoretical modelings on electrocatalytic processes for water electrolysis are based on single-crystalline structural models, which are established from ex situ characterization. The disparities between the ideal theoretical models and realistic catalytic systems may lead to an inaccurate correlation between modeling conclusions and experimental results. For example, (1) the established structural mode is usually based on the single-crystalline lattice, while the real catalyst surface is frequently in incomplete lattice structure or even in amorphous structure due to the evolution in the working conditions and the dynamic process. This leads to the results of the calculations may not presenting the real situation. (2) In most cases, the structural mode is set up based on the ex situ characterizations at non-working conditions, causing the proposed catalytic centers to be not the genuine ones and thus giving incorrect modeling. This calls for the precise identification of the real active sites under practical conditions via operando techniques. (3) Most modelings focused on the lattice mode alone and seldom consider the interaction between the substrate and the catalytic centers, which may neglect the influence of the substrate or the sub-surface on the electronic structure of surface-active sites. (4) Currently, a majority of modelings are performed in a vacuum. The influences of electrolytes, applied potentials, and local fields are ignored for simplifying the calculations. However, these local environments considerably affect the electronic structure of the active site and the adsorption/desorption of the intermediates. The new feasible theoretical modeling modes and methods are desperately required to approach near-real conditions in simulations. Lastly, benefiting from the rapid development in big-data processing and computational capability, the AI-assisted and machine learning-based computational screening techniques together with the materials-genetic group techniques have opened up tremendous opportunities for exploring new efficient materials for advanced water electrolysis, which brings about promising possibilities to break through the current bottlenecks in the fields.
5.4 Challenges for filling the gaps between scientific research and industrial applications
Tremendous electrocatalysts with delicately designed active sites and structures have been reported in the literature. The scientific communities focus more on the elaborate design and modulation of active sites, and the understanding of the underlying catalytic mechanisms to approach the limit of catalyst activity and discover new insights in the field. The optimizing strategies illustrated above have proved the effect for promoting hydrogen production; however, these strategies somehow possess deficiencies in commercial applications. For example, composition regulations through elemental doping and multicomponent synergy are effective for promoting the intrinsic catalytic abilities but doping elements and the modified components for high-performance catalysts largely rely on trials and errors. However, the electrocatalyst search space is too large to explore exhaustively, finding more effective predictions and screening methods such as machine learning, which can accelerate the discovery of advanced electrocatalysts.140 As for the design of the electrode structure, the features of porosity and interface wettability can alter along with the changes in the microstructures in the catalysts, severely poisoning the catalytic performance under high-rate AEC. Designing robust catalysts structure with both chemical and mechanical durability is hence important for practical devices. Anode-replacing reaction requires the extra addition of other biomass to lower the overall voltage of AEC; these biomasses are much more expensive than pure water. This shows that the economic efficiency of the anode-replacing reactions may be greatly lower than that of traditional AEC, showing that the anode-replacing reaction with more commercial prospects is a new challenge for the water electrocatalysis research community. Decoupled AEC can separate hydrogen production and other energy-related processes through two independent processes but the current density output for hydrogen production is relatively low, which cannot meet the requirements of hydrogen production through high-rate AEC. It hence requires the design of advanced electrolyzers.
In contrast, the industry has paid more attention to the low-cost scalable production of the electrodes and their durability for shrinking capital costs. The exploration of cost-effective and facile methods for preparing robust integrated electrodes with highly-active sites from earth-abundant materials sources should be paid more attention to when the researchers develop new catalyst electrodes for AECs. Moreover, a majority of catalysts for water electrolysis in the literature are evaluated only through a three-electrode system in a single or H-type electrolyzer. The testing conditions are far from the practical working industrial conditions, which may give misleading or unreliable results.141–143
Besides the abovementioned aspects, there is still more room for emerging research topics in this area. For example, localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR),144 seawater electrolysis,145 and bipolar membranes electrolysis146 are all efficient optimizing pathways for high-rate hydrogen production. It is worth noting that these regulating strategies should be considered synergistically with the attention on scalable cost-effective production to construct the integrated electrodes to fulfill the requirements for practical alkaline water electrolysis. There are also plenty of opportunities for introducing a range of external fields to raise the electrocatalytic efficiency while maintain suitable capital costs, such as photo-assisted and magnetic field-assisted electrochemical water electrolysis. Directly coupling renewable energy such as solar or thermal energy and hydropower with water electrolysis via solar cells or thermoelectricity may enable water electrolysis as efficient an energy storage and conversion platform for districts with ample solar energy, thermal energy, and hydropower sources. The electrode and electrolyzer design should be correspondingly adapted. Unlike the AECs working in alkaline electrolytes, designing electrocatalysts and electrodes that can efficiently work in wide pH regions or even neutral media will bring about more options for specific application scenarios.
Despite high-rate AEHP facing numerous challenges (Fig. 20), ongoing experimental and theoretical investigations for optimizing the catalysts and electrolyzers has great chances of advancing more commercial applications of electrocatalytic hydrogen production, accelerating the achievement of a sustainable and green energy society.
 Fig. 20  Challenges and perspectives of advancing high-rate AEHP and beyond. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020YFB1505801), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22025208, 22075300, and 21902162), the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the DNL Cooperation Fund, CAS (DNL202008) and the China National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX2021319).
References
S. Z. Baykara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 10605–10614 CrossRef CAS .

          IEA, The Future of Hydrogen, IEA, Tokyo, Japan,  2019 Search PubMed .
D. Çelik and M. Yıldız, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 23395–23401 CrossRef .
I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 1954–1971 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Holladay, J. Hu, D. L. King and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 244–260 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rostami, M. D. Manshadi, A. H. Farajollahi and M. Marefati, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 13693–13709 CrossRef CAS .
R. d. Levie, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 476, 92–93 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 57–69 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702774 CrossRef .
H. J. Song, H. Yoon, B. Ju and D. W. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2002428 CrossRef .
C. Spori, J. T. H. Kwan, A. Bonakdarpour, D. P. Wilkinson and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5994–6021 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Guo, Z. Fang, H. Li, D. Fernandez, G. Henkelman, S. M. Humphrey and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13225–13234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, X. Zhu and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7371–7379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601275 CrossRef .
F. Guo, Y. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Ai and X. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 684–692 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808167 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang and B.-J. Ni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14971–15005 RSC .
J. Joo, T. Kim, J. Lee, S. I. Choi and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806682 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, Y. Sun, X. Du, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, C. Yan, Y. Yan, G. Zou, W. Wu, R. Lu, Y. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803367 CrossRef .
Z. Zheng, L. Yu, M. Gao, X. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ma, L. Wu, J. Zhu, X. Meng, J. Hu, Y. Tu, S. Wu, J. Mao, Z. Tian and D. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Min, W. Yang, Y. Lian, L. Lin, K. Feng, Z. Deng, M. Chen, J. Zhong, L. Xu and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8882–8892 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6707–6732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yi, G. Weinberg, M. Prenzel and M. Greiner, Catal. Today, 2017, 295, 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
L. Castanheir, L. Dubau, M. Mermoux, G. Berthomé and N. Caqué, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2258–2267 CrossRef .
T. Wu, M. Han, X. Zhu, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2344–2347 RSC .
A. Sahasrabudhe, H. Dixit, R. Majee and S. Bhattacharyya, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2014 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hao, R. Wu, H. Huang, X. Ou, L. Wang, D. Sun, X. Ma and Y. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 102–110 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic and D. Strmcnik, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. L. Zhao and Q.-H. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 27–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, R. M. Liu and L. F. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909618 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tang, L. Ding, Z. C. Yao, H. R. Pan, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107479 CrossRef .
S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2956–2966 CrossRef .
O. Mabayoje, A. Shoola and B. R. Wygant, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Gao, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Q. Gan, X. Li, Y. Zhong and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 2848–2853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H.-C. Chen, C.-S. Hsu, T.-S. Lin, C.-J. Chang, S.-C. Chang, L.-D. Tsai and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Singh, U. T. Nakate, P. Bhuyan, J. Chen, D. T. Tran and S. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9067–9079 RSC .
L. M. Cao, Y. W. Hu, S. F. Tang, A. Iljin, J. W. Wang, Z. M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800949 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Zhang and Z. Wu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4550–4559 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, I. K. Mishra, Y. Xie, H. Zhou, J. Sun, J. Zhou, Y. Ni, D. Luo, F. Yu, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 492–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Shang, H. Ren, J. Chi, H. Fu, B. Dong, C. Liu and Y. Chai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, G. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Li, Y. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2750–2756 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Li, G. Cui and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5462–5465 RSC .
J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Qin, Z. Zhao, M. K. Alam, Y. Ni, F. Robles-Hernandez, L. Yu, S. Chen, Z. Ren, Z. Wang and J. Bao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 546–554 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, W. J. Jiang, Z. Wei, T. Tang, J. Ma, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7005–7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Li, R. Y. Ge, P. P. Lan, J. Yang, J. Feng, Y. Li, S. Li, B. Liu and W. X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10493–10502 RSC .
X. Xiao, X. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Song, D. Huang, L. Yu, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, M. Wang, Y. Shen and Z. Ren, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900796 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, G. Du, D. Han, Y. Hao, W. Zhao, Y. Fan, Q. Su, S. Ding and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27639–27650 RSC .
E. Enkhtuvshin, K. M. Kim, Y.-K. Kim, S. Mihn, S. J. Kim, S. Y. Jung, N. T. Thu Thao, G. Ali, M. Akbar, K. Y. Chung, K. H. Chae, S. Kang, T. W. Lee, H. G. Kim, S. Choi and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27332–27346 RSC .
J. Sun, M. Ren, L. Yu, Z. Yang, L. Xie, F. Tian, Y. Yu, Z. Ren, S. Chen and H. Zhou, Small, 2019, 15, 1804272 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, Z. Sun, S. Li, X. Nie, Y. Liu, E. Wang and Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22129–22139 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Li, R. Si, G. D. Li, W. Li, D. P. Liu, D. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606200 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, S. Jiao, Z. Wang, M. Lu, D. Chen, Y. Kang, G. Pang and S. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17202–17211 RSC .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z. H. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zheng, K. Guo, W.-J. Jiang, T. Tang, X. Wang, P. Zhou, J. Du, Y. Zhao, C. Xu and J.-S. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 1004–1012 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y.-Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W.-J. Jiang, Q.-H. Zhang, Y.-G. Yang, L. Gu, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800317 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, Y. Huang, J. Sun, Z. Zhu, R. J. Nielsen, R. He, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard III, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, W. Zhang, L. Jiao, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Chem, 2017, 2, 791–802 CAS .
H. Sun, C. Tian, G. Fan, J. Qi, Z. Liu, Z. Yan, F. Cheng, J. Chen, C. P. Li and M. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910596 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Gao, B. Zhang, S. Cao, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Sun and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Li, S. Sirisomboonchai, A. Yoshida, X. An, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19221–19230 RSC .
Z. Wu, Z. Zou, J. Huang and F. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26283–26292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, J. Sun, R. He, S. Chen, C. W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5607–5611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Li, G. Zhang, W. T. Lu and F. F. Cao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902034 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1820–1827 RSC .
B. H. R. Suryanto, Y. Wang, R. K. Hocking, W. Adamson and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Q. Chen, Q. Chen, Q. Wu, Z. Xu, T. Zheng, W. Li, D. Cui, Z. Duan, J. Zhang, J. Li, H. Li, Z. Wang, J. Wang and Z. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 11110–11120 RSC .
Y. W. Tan, H. Wang, P. Liu, C. Cheng, F. Zhu, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2951–2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, Y. T. Zhou, R. Q. Yao, W. B. Wan, X. Ge, W. Zhang, Z. Wen, X. Y. Lang, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Zhu, Y.-P. Liu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, X. Chen, T. Zhao, X. Bo, Z. Su and C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9971–9978 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, K. Goh, O. Birer, H. E. Karahan, J. Chang, S. Zhai, X. Chen and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4401–4408 RSC .
M. Koj, T. Gimpel, W. Schade and T. Turek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 12671–12684 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hoffmann, L. Hoffmann, W. Schade, T. Turek and T. Gimpel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 541, 148481 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. George, S. Chidangil and S. D. George, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601088 CrossRef .
Y. Li and C. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2535–2541 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, L. Tang, U. Khan, Q. Yu, H. M. Cheng, X. Zou and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 269 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, Z. Y. Yu, X. L. Zhang, Y. R. Zheng, Y. Duan, Q. Gao, R. Wu, B. Sun, M. R. Gao, G. Wang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7537–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shan, J. Liu, H. Mu, Y. Xiao, B. Mei, W. Liu, G. Lin, Z. Jiang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1659–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Y. Li, X. Lei, J. Liu and X. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 294–298 RSC .
H. Li, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Sun, L. Song and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2452 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, P. Wan, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 2492–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and C. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5659–5666 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600236 CrossRef .
T. Tang, W.-J. Jiang, S. Niu, N. Liu, H. Luo, Q. Zhang, W. Wen, Y.-Y. Chen, L.-B. Huang, F. Gao and J.-S. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704594 CrossRef .
T. Tang, W.-J. Jiang, L.-P. Yuan, S. Niu, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11573–11581 RSC .
X. Zou, Y. Liu, G. D. Li, Y. Wu, D. P. Liu, W. Li, H. W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700404 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shen, M. Wang, L. Zhao, P. Zhang, J. Jiang and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, P. Zou, A. Nairan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Liu, S. Hu, F. Kang, H. J. Fan and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 86–95 RSC .
Z. Lei, J. Bai, Y. Li, Z. Wang and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35837–35846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6251–6254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang and M. A. Ashraf, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 30533–30546 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Sun, F. Qin, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard 3rd, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2551 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Ma, H. Jin, F. Xia, H. Xu, J. Zhu, R. Qin, H. Bai, B. Shuai, W. Huang, D. Chen, Z. Li, J. Wu, J. Yu and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26852–26860 RSC .
H. Xu, J. Zhu, P. Wang, D. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, Q. Ma, H. Bai, R. Qin, J. Ma and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24677–24685 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. X. Zhou and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Ma, C. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Wang, X. Zong and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9926–9935 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, W. J. Jiang, T. Tang, Y. Zhang, J. H. Li and J. S. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700084 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, H. Sun, X. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Zhao, H. Li, W. Xie, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2373 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Liu, W. Li, L. Gu, H. Liu, P. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Zhang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1139–1152 CAS .
S. Niu, W. J. Jiang, T. Tang, L. P. Yuan, H. Luo and J. S. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902180 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, X. Liang, L. Gu, Y. Zhang, G. D. Li, X. Zou and J. S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2609 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, J.-J. Wang, Y. Zou, L.-W. Jiang, X.-L. Liu, W.-J. Jiang, H. Liu and J.-S. Hu, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Y. Li, J. Wang, B. Cao, Y. Yu, C. Zhou, G. Zhang, Z. Wang and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21084–21093 RSC .
J. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, S. Niu, H. T. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Jiang, W. Q. Huang, J. S. Hu and W. P. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Qian, Z. Li, Y. Zhu and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, H.-Y. Su, R. Chen, L. Yu, J. Dong, C. Ma, S. Wang, J. Li, F. Yang, J. Xiao, M. Zhang, D. Ma, D. Deng, D. H. Zhang, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Xu, F. Huang, L. Qu, J. Li, K. A. Owusu, Z. Liu, Z. Lin, B. Xiang, X. Liu, K. Zhao, X. Liao, W. Yang, Y. B. Cheng and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900390 CrossRef .
X. Zhai, Q. Yu, G. Liu, J. Bi, Y. Zhang, J. Chi, J. Lai, B. Yang and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27424–27433 RSC .
Y. Song, Z. Ji, S. Zhao, T. Wang, J. Liu and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10417–10426 RSC .
X. Zhu, X. Dou, J. Dai, X. An, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Tao, J. Zhao, W. Chu, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12465–12469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, F. Lin, Y. Yao and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902703 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. He, S. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Zhao, J. Luo, G. Hu, X. Sun and Y. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4365 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, R. Boonstra, I. M. Terrero Rodriguez and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 386–390 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, Y. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12014–12017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hao, L. Yang, D. Liu, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, Y. Yang and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5710–5713 RSC .
B. You, X. Liu, N. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13639–13646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 403–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13656–13659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, N. Jiang, B. Hu, X. Liu, F. Z. Song, G. Q. Han, T. J. Jordan, T. B. Hanson, T. L. Liu and Y. J. Sun, Chem, 2018, 4, 637–649 CAS .
L. Chen, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, M. Fang, H. Wang, S. Yip, H.-Y. Cheung, F. Wang, C.-Y. Wong, S. T. Chu and J. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13080–13086 RSC .
Z. Shi, K. Nie, Z.-J. Shao, B. Gao, H. Lin, H. Zhang, B. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, X.-M. Cao, P. Hu, Q. Gao and Y. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1262–1271 RSC .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ahn and A. Manthiram, Small, 2020, 16, 2002511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Li, S. Yang, J. Liu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18945–18954 RSC .
J. Yuan, X. Cheng, H. Wang, C. Lei, S. Pardiwala, B. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Wang, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, W. C. Hu, G. Y. Xu, C. Wang and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10713–10717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, M. Klingenhof and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 933–942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Oener, M. J. Foster and S. W. Boettcher, Science, 2020, 369, 1099–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Jianan Zhang	Jianan Zhang received her BSc (2005) and PhD (2010) from Jilin University. She was a visiting researcher at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S.A. After working at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in Japan from 2018 to 2019, she currently works at Zhengzhou University as a full professor. Her research interest focuses on atomically-dispersed metal-active materials for energy storage and conversion.
Jin-Song Hu	Jin-Song Hu received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from ICCAS in 2005, then joined ICCAS as Assistant Professor, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2007. After working at Harvard University from 2008 to 2011, he moved back to ICCAS as Full Professor. His research currently focuses on developing new functional nanomaterials for efficient electrochemical energy conversion and solar energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Clean energy-driving water splitting for hydrogen production and its applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural diagrams and characteristics of three typical kinds of electrolysis cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 3  Reaction pathways for alkaline HER and OER.	 

 	Fig. 4  Common elements and substrates for developing integrated electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Regulating strategies toward integrated electrodes for improving high-rate AEHP.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP. (b) Measured HER performance in 1 M KOH. (c) Compared current densities of serial catalytic electrodes at 300 mV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (d) Illustration of the generated P-doped Fe3O4 on iron foam (P–Fe3O4/IF). (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of P–Fe3O4/IF and the compared catalysts toward HER in 1 M KOH. (f) Stability curves of NiFe LDH/IF‖P–Fe3O4/IF and NF‖NF electrolyzers operating at 10 A cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) HAADF-STEM image of O, Cu–CoP. (h) Compared alkaline HER performance of O, Cu–CoP nanowire, and other samples. (i) Free energies of the HER diagram on CoP and O, and Cu co-doped CoP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of Ni3Fe1−xVx NSs on CFP. (b) Calculated binding energies of OOH*, O*, and OH* absorbed on the V sites. (c) LSV curves of Ni3Fe1−xVx and other electrocatalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Crystal structures and corresponding free energies of OER pathways of pure FeOOH and various Se-doped FeOOH. (e) Performance comparison of FeOOH(Se)/IF and other OER electrocatalysts. (f) OER performance of FeNiOOH(Se)/IF electrode with Ni, Se dual doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structural diagram and the HER mechanism of the prepared MoNi4/MoO3−x catalyst. (b) HER performance of MoNi4/MoO3−x and contrast catalysts in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Structural diagram of the designed Ni3S2@MoS2/FeOOH for optimized alkaline HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (d) HRTEM image of 1T-MoSe2/NiSe. (e) Identification of 1T-MoSe2 and its crystal structure. (f) Contrastive HER performance of serial catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structural diagram of the derived Ni@CoO@CoNC electrode from in situ MOF growth and pyrolysis. (b) SEM and TEM (inset) figures of Ni@CoO@CoNC. (c) OER performance of Ni@CoO@CoNC and contrastive catalytic electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) The device of overall water splitting assembled by Co4N–CeO2/GP both as the cathode and the anode. (e) Contrastive polarization curves of various electrocatalysts driving the two-electrode electrolyzer. (f) Chronopotentiometry curves of the water-splitting electrolyzers in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 copyright 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) The free energy diagrams of the NiMoOx/NiMoS heterostructure for OER (inset: free energy for H* adsorption). (h) Durability of NiMoOx/NiMoS operating at a voltage of 1.75 V in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the selective etching fabrication route for np-Co2P. (b) The TEM image of nanoporous Co2P obtained at a cooling rate of 5k rpm (inset: the relationship between the rotation rates and pore sizes). (c) LSV curves and (d) Tafel slopes of serial nanoporous Co2P electrodes in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) SEM image of the Co3Mo/Cu cross-section (scale bar is 200 nm). (f) PDOS of Co, Mo in pure Co3Mo, and HO–Co3Mo samples. (g) Corresponding current densities of the Co3Mo/Cu electrode and contrastive electrodes at the given overpotential of −100 mV. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of 3D Co:Pi/CoOx/CP (the inset is its structural diagram). (b) OER performance of 3D Co:Pi/CoOx/CP and contrastive electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of NiCuP (inset is a cross-sectional image of the deposited NiCuP layer). (d) LSV curves of NiCuP and contrastive electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Prepared process of laser-treatment Ni–Fe electrodes. (f) The surface morphology and microstructure of the electrode after laser treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of superhydrophilic and superaerophobic solid surfaces in air and water, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Measured water contact angles on (b) NiFe and (c) NiFe/NiFe:Pi electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Adhesive force tests of gas bubbles on different catalyst surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Photos of the formed H2 bubbles on Pt foil and MoS2/Mo2C electrodes (scale bars: 1 mm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. (f) Multistep chronoamperometric response curves for Ni2P/NF electrodes (overpotential ranging from 240 to 650 mV). (g) Images of the generated hydrogen bubbles on pure NF and Ni2P/NF electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Graphic illustration of convenient and quick synthetic routes. (a) Rapid coprecipitation with the assistance of ammonia. (b) Low-magnification and (c) Magnified SEM images of NiCo-HS@G. (d) OER performance of serial catalysts with 90% iR-compensation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electrodeposition of highly-active NiMo and NiFe materials on Ni(OH)2/NiAl foil to realize high-rate hydrogen production, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) General anion intercalation-assisted electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of NiFe(OH)x/FeS/IF generated from on-site chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Illustration of the in situ formation of NiFe-hydroxide nanoarrays on iron electrodes through chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The formation process of NiFe2O4−xSex/NiOOH on commercial stainless steel via chemical conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of conventional water–gas shift (WGS) and electrochemical water–gas shift (EWGS). (b) Schematic diagram of triple-phase interfaces on the PTFE-decorated Pt surface. (c) Contrastive H2O adsorption on Pt@CNTs and Pt/C samples with or without PTFE decoration. (d) LSV curves of Pt2.7Cu@CNTs and other samples for CO oxidation (all modified with 1.5 μg cm−2 PTFE). (e) Hydrogen production yields and corresponding faradaic efficiency on anodic Pt@CNTs and Pt2.7Cu@CNTs catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of the UOR and OER performance of the Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF catalytic electrode. (b) Contrastive performance of the Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF‖Ni(OH)2–NiMoOx/NF cell toward pure water splitting (1 M KOH) and urea-assisted water electrolysis (1 M KOH + 0.5 M urea). (c) Long-term durability of urea-assisted water electrolysis at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 without iR compensation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Self-powered system integrated with DHzFC and OHzS units for hydrogen production, using Fe–CoS2 and Pt/C as catalysts and 1.0 M KOH plus 0.1 M hydrazine as the electrolyte. (e) Polarization curves for OHzS with various electrodes (Pt/C, CoS2, or Fe–CoS2). (f) Durability test of the self-powered system with 5.3 M hydrazine, operating at a voltage of 0.7 V and ambient temperature (inset: corresponding H2 and N2 yields). Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Scheme for using biomass oxidation to produce value-added products at the anode in AEC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) LSV curves of anodic oxidation reaction on the Ni2P anode with or without adding THIQ (1a) (scanning rate: 5 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH). (c) Mechanism for conversion from 1a to 2a on the Ni2P electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) LSV curves of water electrolysis with or without adding aloe extract (AE) (scanning rate: 5 mV s−1, electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Diagram of electrolyzer design by integrating HER with HMF oxidation in 1 M NaOH (Na4[Fe(CN)6] was introduced into the chamber with the carbon electrode). (b) Comparative LSV curves of Co–P‖C H-cells with or without adding 0.3 M ER. (c) Comparative LSV curves of Ni‖C H-cells whether with ER+ or HMF addition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic mechanism of the cell integrating HER and NiOOH–Zn battery. (e) The curves of cell voltage versus time during H2 generation (black line) and the discharging process of the NiOOH–Zn battery (red line) (inset: cycling profiles of step 1 and step 2′). Applied current for H2 generation and discharging process of NiOOH–Zn battery are both 200 mA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Challenges and perspectives of advancing high-rate AEHP and beyond.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
