“Functional upcycling” of polymer waste towards the design of new materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00689H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00689H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 4755-4832“Functional upcycling” of polymer waste towards the design of new materials†

        
          
            Olga 
            Guselnikova
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Oleg 
            Semyonov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Elizaveta 
            Sviridova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roman 
            Gulyaev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alina 
            Gorbunova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dmitry 
            Kogolev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrii 
            Trelin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yusuke 
            Yamauchi
          
          
        
      bde, 
      
        
          
            Rabah 
            Boukherroub
          
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Pavel 
            Postnikov
          
          
        
      *ac
aResearch School of Chemistry and Applied Biomedical Sciences, Tomsk Polytechnic University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. E-mail: guselnikovaoa@tpu.ru; postnikov@tpu.ru
bResearch Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan
cDepartment of Solid-State Engineering, Institute of Chemical Technology, Prague 16628, Czech Republic
dAustralian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
eDepartment of Materials Process Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan
fUniversité de Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-France, IEMN, UMR CNRS 8520, F-59000 Lille, France
Received 
      10th October 2022
    First published on 5th July 2023AbstractDiversification of polymer waste recycling is one of the solutions to improve the current environmental scenario. Upcycling is a promising strategy for converting polymer waste into molecular intermediates and high-value products. Although the catalytic transformations into small molecules have been actively discussed, the methods and characteristics of upcycling into new materials have not yet been addressed. Recently, the functionalisation of polymer wastes (polyethylene terephthalate bottles, polypropylene surgical masks, rubber tires, etc.) and their conversion into new materials with enhanced functionality have been proposed as an appealing alternative for dealing with polymer waste recycling/treatment. In this review, the term 'functional upcycling' is introduced to designate any method of post-polymerisation modification or surface functionalisation without considerable polymer chain destruction to produce a new upcycled material with added value. This review explores the functional upcycling strategy with detailed consideration of the most common polymers, i.e., polystyrene, poly(methyl methacrylate), polyethylene, polypropylene, polyurethane, polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinyl chloride, polycarbonate, and rubber. We discuss the composition of plastic waste, reactivity, available physical/chemical agents for modification, and the interconnection between their properties and application. To date, upcycled materials have been successfully applied as adsorbents (including CO2), catalysts, electrode materials for energy storage and sensing, demonstrating a high added value. Importantly, the reviewed reports indicated that the specific performance of upcycled materials is generally comparable or higher than that of similar materials prepared from virgin polymer feedstock. All these advantages promote functional upcycling as a promising diversification approach against the common postprocessing methods employed for polymer waste. Finally, to identify the limitations and suggest future scope of research for each polymer, we comparatively analysed the aspects of functional upcycling with those of chemical and mechanical recycling, considering the energy and resource costs, toxicity of the used chemicals, environmental footprint, and the value added to the product.
Olga Guselnikova
Dr Olga Guselnikova received her PhD degree in chemistry from the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague (Czech Republic) and Tomsk Polytechnic University (Russia) in 2019. She is a fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, and a sub-group leader of “functional materials” at Tomsk Polytechnic University. Her research interests are related to surface chemistry for functional materials. This means that she is applying her background in organic chemistry to materials science: plasmonic and polymer surfaces are hybridized with organic molecules to create high-performance elements and devices.
Yusuke Yamauchi
Yusuke Yamauchi received his PhD degree from Waseda University in 2007 and subsequently established his research group at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS). In 2017, he moved to the University of Queensland where he currently serves as a professor and senior group leader at the School of Chemical Engineering and the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN). He is also a distinguished professor at Nagoya University and an ERATO Research Director at the JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics. His area of expertise is inorganic material nanoarchitectonics.
Rabah Boukherroub
Dr Rabah Boukherroub received his PhD degree in chemistry from the University Paul Sabatier in Toulouse, France. He is currently a research director at the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) and a group leader at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), Lille, France. He is an Editor for ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. His research interests are in the area of functional materials, surface chemistry, and photophysics of semiconductor/metal nanostructures with emphasis on biosensors, nanomedicine, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. He is also a co-founder of BioNaMeris, a biotech firm specialized in sustainable aquaculture.
Pavel Postnikov
Prof. Pavel S. Postnikov completed his doctorate in organic chemistry with theoretical and practical insights in diazonium chemistry at the Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russia, in 2011. In 2021, he successfully passed the habilitation procedure at the Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry, RAS, Russia (organic and physical chemistry). He serves as an associate editor of Chemistry Africa journal. His research interests are plastic recycling, composite materials, surface chemistry, plasmon catalysis, hypervalent iodine, and diazonium salts.
1. Introduction
Plastic-based products have become deeply ingrained in daily life activities owing to their intensive usage in almost every aspect of human life (packaging, vehicles, medicine, etc.). However, the widespread mismanagement of plastic products has resulted in environmental pollution because their usage lifespan is several times shorter than their decomposition period or end-of-life cycle. In 2019, the total amount of polymer waste reached 370 million tons (Mt).1,2 Moreover, plastic pollution has become unavoidable because of the lifestyle transformations induced by the COVID-19 pandemic. During this challenging period, the extensive usage of personal protective equipment (e.g., masks, gloves, and suits) and the packaging materials in food and goods delivery resulted in extremely high growth of plastic waste. Consequently, in 2021, 11 Mt of plastic waste was solely attributed to the pandemic.3 Therefore, the forecasted amount of polymer waste by 2050 was not on track, and the amount of plastic waste can increase by up to 1100 Mt annually.4,5 According to,2 less than 10% of plastic waste is recycled, making the related issues especially remarkable. To this end, the scientific progress in the field of plastic recycling has achieved promising results. Thus, several review articles and books have been published to provide a general overview of the basic issues of plastic recycling: identification, sorting, separation, and environmental and economic aspects.6–11 Despite the immense significance of these issues, new experimental strategies should be discovered to reverse the momentum and render polymer recycling advantageous.
In this regard, a careful analysis of the existing research literature enables the classification of methods employed in polymer management into several general strategies (Fig. 1). The most essential parameters for selecting an appropriate polymer recycling/treatment strategy include energy and resource costs, environmental impact (toxicity of used chemicals, CO2 release, and environmental poisoning by microplastics (MP)), and the added value of the product.
 Fig. 1  Classification of strategies for polymer waste treatment based on C–X/C–C bond cleavage and analysis of each strategy: (a) landfilling; (b) mechanical recycling; (c) functional upcycling; (d) chemical re-/upcycling; and (e) incineration. 
The negative impact of waste on the environment should be minimised at the processing stage and the amount of energy and chemicals should be reduced, especially considering that the production of virgin polymers consumes energy and generates a carbon footprint. However, the most common strategies of polymer waste management – incineration and landfilling – do not completely follow this concept. Although incineration can partially recover energy in a short time, such processes induce significant negative environmental effects.12,13 Additionally, these processes release solid micro/nanoparticles containing toxic elements that have been recognised as hazardous to the environment.14 Nevertheless, this strategy is beneficial in comparison to landfilling because it provides opportunity for particular energy recovery from polymer waste incineration. Although landfills do not emit greenhouse gases, the plastic waste persists on the earth in an unrecycled form,15 thereby creating health and environmental issues. Thus, both these primitive strategies – incineration and landfilling – do not generate high-value products from polymer waste and have a significant negative effect on the surrounding environment. Therefore, a balance should be maintained between energy and chemical consumption, CO2 emissions, and increased added value of products. The latest reviews have underlined the significance of high-value recycled materials within the circular economy framework.14,16,17
According to extensive research and published articles on polymer waste management, the strategies can be classified into four categories: (i) primary (landfilling); (ii) secondary (mechanical); (iii) tertiary (chemical), and (iv) quaternary (incineration for energy recovery) (Fig. 1).18 Alternatively, suggesting from a chemical perspective, these strategies could be classified based on the bond (C–X/C–C) cleavage degree in the primary polymer chain (Fig. 1), which is directly related to the amount of CO2 released, MP poisoning, and energy and resource costs. According to the proposed classification, the C–X/C–C bond cleavage proceeds extremely slowly during landfilling and the polymer waste remains on the planet in its original form without any utilisation or practical purpose (Fig. 1a).
In contrast to landfilling (Fig. 1e), incineration enables energy restoration; however, the energy requirement should be considered for all processes including the complete degradation of C–X/C–C bonds in polymer chains (for instance, 80–140 kcal mol−1 for C–C/CC bonds).19 Previously, recycling polymer waste conserved 2–3 times more energy than that generated by incinerating plastic waste.11 Moreover, incineration releases greenhouse gases and toxins, making it the least environmentally friendly strategy.
Moving forward to mechanical recycling, this strategy involves polymer waste transformation into lower quality polymer products through mechanical processes such as melting, re-granulating, grinding, and compounding (Fig. 1b).20–22 Alternatively, mechanically processed polymer waste can be combined with other materials such as sand and wood to create new building materials.23–26 However, the raw plastic waste needs to be highly pure and uniform.22 As a result, mechanical recycling does not release CO2 (or releases a negligible amount) because of the extremely low degree of C–X/C–C bond cleavage, which is beneficial for the environment. However, polymer quality deteriorates due to the shortening of the polymer chain via thermal treatment during processing.27–29 Nonetheless, this method does not resolve the issues of recycling polymer mixtures and thermosets. In particular, its major limitations include deteriorated properties of final products, technological complexity of processing, and low added value of building materials.
The opposite approach to mechanical recycling is chemical treatment, which involves the partial destruction of the C–X/C–C bonds, i.e., depolymerisation of polymers to monomers or preparation of new small molecules (Fig. 1d).11,14,30 Although depolymerisation with subsequent repolymerisation yields polymer products with improved quality compared with mechanically recycled ones, the full cleavage of C–X/C–C bonds requires a higher amount of energy, especially for polyolefins, or utilisation of expensive catalysts.14,22,31 Despite the high added value of monomers and new small molecules (chemical additives, waxes, and lubricants),14,32,33 the energy and feedstock cost of chemical recycling raises doubts on the financial efficiency of this model.
1.1. Upcycling concept: catalytic techniques versus material design
In search of a more value-effective approach for solving the polymer waste problem, Gunter Pauli introduced the definition of 'upcycling' in 1999,34 which has recently gained popularity. According to ref. 11 and 32, chemical upcycling is an approach in which new value-added molecules, polymers, or materials are prepared through chemical methods and/or functional (surface) modification of the parent polymer. For instance, thermochemical catalytic methods such as pyrolysis and thermal cracking32,33,35 are utilised to prepare value-added fuels and hydrocarbon feedstock (Fig. 1d and 2). In this case, complete polymer chain destruction occurs, which requires a substantial amount of energy. The fundamental principles and trends of catalysis can be reasonably applied to these transformations.36 In contrast to catalytic techniques leading to depolymerisation, only partial C–X/C–C bond cleavage or post-polymerisation modification is required for the preparation of new materials.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of chemical and functional upcycling and obtained products. 
The design of functional materials to some extent differs from the principles of catalysis that require complete depolymerisation (Fig. 2). In catalysis, the complete C–X/C–C bond cleavage requires homogenous organocatalysts37,38 or complex heterogeneous catalytic systems utilising rare-earth metals (e.g., Pd and Ru) along with expensive ligands39,40 and long reaction period to attain high conversion and selectivity. Despite catalytic fundamentals being important, post-polymerisation modification and surface chemistry principles are dominant for functional upcycling (Fig. 2). If chemical upcycling generates new molecules, for the design of functional materials, the intrinsic properties of the primary polymer chain should be preserved, and its properties are tailored for specific applications. The distinction between chemical and functional upcycling has not been clearly defined previously, as functional upcycling is a relatively recent development and lacks detailed formulation.
For instance, the surface of waste polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles,41 polypropylene (PP) surgical masks,42 tyre rubber,43 and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tubes44 were chemically treated to generate new functional groups with partial cleavage of C–X/C–C bonds. However, the major component of the bulk polymer remained conserved. Furthermore, the treated PET, PP, rubber and PVC were transformed into adsorbents of insecticides and ions.41–43 The practical implementation of this strategy is relatively affordable as it requires low energy resources, does not release CO2, and provides a considerably high added value. It represents a considerable example of a balance between environmental pollution, resources, and added value.
1.2. Introducing functional upcycling
Based on the above discussion, we introduce a new term – 'functional upcycling' – in the framework of this review (Fig. 1c and 2). Functional upcycling of polymers is a new method of post-polymerisation modification or surface functionalisation without sufficient polymer chain (C–X/C–C) cleavage, and the new upcycled material exhibits specific enhanced properties compared with the pristine polymer. Functional upcycling converts polymeric waste by altering the surface properties or transformations of the primary polymer chain to produce new materials for specific applications. The additional functional groups are immobilised onto the polymer surface via covalent or noncovalent bonding (e.g., hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals forces). The functional upcycling strategy aims to repurpose waste plastics into materials with additional functions and value. In this case, the resulting material such as a sorbent, catalyst, antimicrobial material, or membrane may provide a higher added value than the fuel or the original polymer (Fig. 3).45–48
 Fig. 3  Generalised concept of functional upcycling. 
The following requirements should be fulfilled to realise ‘functional upcycling’:
1. Functional upcycling applies chemical, physical and/or biological methodologies to post-polymerisation modification or surface modification without sufficient decomposition of the main polymer chains in bulk material;
2. During functional upcycling, a major part of the resulting material is a waste polymer with the conservation of primary polymeric chains;
3. The presence of additional functional groups should be confirmed by at least one analytical method;
4. Functional upcycling yields a new material with a specific function, or at least, high potential for applications;
5. The prepared material should exhibit an added value.
Owing to partial C–X/C–C bond cleavage in functional upcycling, the reagents and solvent costs along with energy costs (due to reduced heating and additional pressure) are reduced. Moreover, both CO2 emissions and MP release could be suppressed. Milder functionalisation conditions for polymer waste reduce the cost of the process and increase the added value of the upcycled material (Fig. 1c and 3). Upcycled materials are aimed at solving problems in various life cycles, for instance, sorbents can be used for capturing ecotoxicants,43,49 which contributes positively to the environment. Based on circular economy aspects, environmentally-friendly and cost-effective approaches have emerged as a new trend for solving polymer waste problems.14,17
To realize functional upcycling of plastic waste, each stage of waste disposal needs to be addressed. Thus far, the most commonly reported sources for functional upcycling include postconsumer wastes such as PET bottles,41 PP face masks,42,50,51 polystyrene (PS) foam, and rubber tyres.43 Despite the challenges involved in sorting postconsumer waste for functional upcycling owing to the complex mixture of food and other waste plastics, researchers generally are prone to use such waste after a simple precleaning process owing to its high availability in laboratory experiments. Upon addressing the challenge of scaling up functional upcycling, more convenient and cleaner post-industrial waste plastics can be tested. Regardless, the waste should be sorted, pre-treated, or even preliminarily undergo mechanical treatment. In addition to surface properties, the initial size and shape of plastic waste must be adapted to ensure the applicability of the value-added product. After shaping plastic to the required state, it should undergo functional upcycling. Commonly, the bulk contamination from plastic waste is removed by cleaning with water/ethanol/acetone and drying. Furthermore, depending on the polymer and intended application, the treatment methods can be categorized into surface functionalization, or bulk modification through post-polymerisation processes. In the case of surface treatment, waste can be used with minimal pre-treatment,47,52 manually machined to centimetre-scale pieces,53,54 extruded to produce granulates or powder,43,55 or shaped into fibers by electrospinning.56 Alternatively, plastic waste is dissolved/treated with reagents for functionalisation,57–59 relevant organic solvents, or their mixtures such as dichloromethane,45,59 chloroform, xylene/toluene51,60 with the addition of ethyl acetate and hexane.61
In this review, we provide an overview of the 'functional upcycling' strategy with detailed consideration of the most common polymers (PS, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), PE, PP, polyurethane (PU), PET, PVC, polycarbonate (PC), and rubber). We reviewed these polymers (PET, PE, PVC, PP, and PS) according to their plastic code numbering, starting with PET involved in a number of reactions owing to the presence of aryl and ester groups. Furthermore, we overviewed PU and PMMA as they bear specific codes. Finally, we end the discussion with less common polymers, e.g., rubber and PC, which are promising for functional upcycling. For each polymer, we briefly introduce its mechanical and chemical re-/upcycling strategies to identify the challenges and comparatively analyse their potential for functional upcycling (discussed in ESI†). Thereafter, we analyse the structure of each polymer and its reactivity, which enabled us to consider the possible surface transformation for both new and waste polymers. We discuss the recent examples of functional upcycling, focusing on the application of upcycled products for each polymer. Moreover, we reviewed the functionalisation strategies of certain commercial polymers that can be successfully utilised for the functional upcycling of wastes. The reported examples can serve as a guide for readers interested in exploring the first attempts of functional upcycling of these polymers. More importantly, we compared the functionality and applicability of the recycled products with those of the recently reported analogues prepared from new materials to conclude the perspectives of functional upcycling strategy. Finally, functional upcycling was evaluated for industrial implementation and compared with mechanical and chemical re-/upcycling.
2. Overview of the functional upcycling strategy for different polymers
2.1. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)

2.1.1. General remarks. 
PET is the most common thermoplastic polymer resin of the polyester family, and it is widely used in the production of clothing, water-storage tanks, and food-related products.62–64 The widespread applicability of PET is attributed to its mechanical strength65 combined with hydrophobicity,66 transparency,67 thermoplasticity, thermal stability,68 and availability.69
In 2019, 30.5 Mt of PET was produced, and in 2024, this number is expected to increase up to 35 Mt.70 Although PET can be considered an ideal recyclable plastic, only 30% of all PET waste is recycled every year,71,72 and the remaining 70% is disposed in landfills, incinerated, or becomes a contaminant and source of MP.73
The relevant choice of recycling approaches for PET wastes currently encounters challenges related to the properties of virgin PET,62–64,74 which are altered by in-use aging and the presence of additives depending on the previous application.75 As such, the structural characteristics of waste PET plastic may deteriorate over time under exposure to solar radiation, temperature,76 and mechanical stress.77 In particular, the physical properties such as morphology, crystallinity, and surface area are primarily affected by aging.78 The variations in chemical structures during aging result in the formation of hydroxyl groups via hydrolysis79,80 and cyclic oligomers, especially through thermal degradation. To prevent aging, various additives are applied: ultraviolet (UV) stabilisers (benzophenone and benzotriazole),81 antioxidants (boric acid and brominated flame retardants), lead compounds, amides of fatty acids, and pigments.82 However, the composition of the PET plastic waste should be determined to prevent the occurrence of undesired variations in the reactivity of the catalytic systems applied for re-/upcycling and to control the possible leakage during re-/upcycling. Regardless, the normal aging process can lead to the formation of the required functional groups for further modification, thereby rendering the upcycling strategies more desirable in comparison with chemical re-/upcycling.
Based on related reviews, the common mechanical83–85 (Section S1.1 in ESI†) and chemical re-/upcycling86–88 (Section S1.2 in ESI†) techniques are briefly discussed in Section S1 (ESI†), and the functional upcycling method is compared with other methods of PET waste recycling.


2.1.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.1.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PET is a product of condensation between ethylene glycol (EG) and terephthalic acid (TA). The simplest technique of functional upcycling of waste PET is the deposition of an additional layer via noncovalent interactions. For instance, the dip-coating of PET membranes onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) provides superoleophilic and superhydrophobic properties to the material.89 A coating of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane was applied for the creation of membranes for distillation.90 Despite the questionable stability of noncovalent coatings, the authors demonstrated excellent recycling ability up to 10 times for oil–water separation. In particular, the membranes for oil–water separation were prepared from waste PET through in situ deposition of ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) and the reduction of zinc nitrate, followed by the modification with hydrophobic groups to increase affinity toward oils.91,92
Although noncovalent methods can be easily implemented, the resulting materials suffer from poor stability of the coating. Therefore, covalent methods are expected to produce more stable materials. In general, most methods that introduce specific properties to the PET surface are associated with the conversion of the polymer backbone to the available reactive groups by treating with nucleophilic species similar to chemical recycling (Section S1.2 in ESI†) (Fig. 4a). Note that physical methods such as plasma treatment have been investigated for the surface activation and release of active –OH/–COOH groups.93–96
 Fig. 4  Functionalisation of PET: (a) surface hydrolysis;93–96 (b) growth of metal–organic framework;41,97,98 (c) surface aminolysis;99–102 (d) free radical polymerisation;53,103–105 (e) atom transfer radical polymerisation;106–108 (f) transesterification46,109 and (g) hydroarylation.110 
Surface hydrolysis and growth of metal–organic frameworks. 
The major product of PET hydrolysis is TA87 which is widely used for preparing an enormous family of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). The concept of applying PET for preparing MOFs triggered a fascinating novel direction in polymer re-/upcycling by combining the modern trends in chemical science.111 Indeed, in the case of preparation of powdered MOFs, complete hydrolysis of the polymer backbone is required, which relates such approaches to chemical recycling (Section S1.2 in ESI†). Nevertheless, we discuss the preparation of MOFs by chemical recycling from waste PET because of the following reasons. First reason is that MOFs are functional compounds that serve materials in the adsorption/separation and decomposition of toxins.111–113 Secondly, MOFs are of vital importance in science and technology because of their high surface area and controlled porosity.114–116 BASF company successfully markets MIL-53(Al) type terephthalate MOFs, which is a considerable example showing the increasing demand for MOFs.117 However, the large-scale production of TA by common oxidation of petroleum-derived xylenes is currently limited by high expenditure.
The TA derived from PET hydrolysis can be utilised to prepare several types of terephthalate-based MOFs such as MIL (Materials Institute Lavoisier) and UiO (University of Oslo). For instance, an MIL-type was produced by heating an aqueous mixture of waste PET chips to 200 °C in the presence of trivalent metal salts (e.g., AlCl3·6H2O, VCl3, CrCl3·6H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O, Ga(NO3)3·9H2O, and CrCl3·6H2O). The metal salts served as sources of metal ions for MOFs and accelerated the depolymerisation of PET. This strategy enabled the successful synthesis of the powders of MIL-type MOFs.118–124 In addition, a range of UiO-66 powders was prepared by in situ hydrolysis and ZrO2 addition,123 and a detailed review of synthesising MOFs from PET has been recently published.111,124
In this context, de Vos et al. applied surface hydrolysis to release carboxylic groups on PET surfaces without complete polymer chain destruction and transformed the final product from powdered MOFs to PET-based materials.97,125 They extended the aforementioned procedure to grow MIL-53(Al) and UiO-66(Zr) as a reactor on the waste PET bottle itself. Consequently, MOFs were directly formed on the surface of hydrolysed PET by binding the released carboxylic groups on the surface (Fig. 4b).97 Subsequently, our research group improved the procedure: acid hydrolysis was used for partial depolymerisation of waste PET chips for further growth of UiO-66 on the surface. We prepared a PET-based hybrid material with covalently bound UiO-66 on the surface for the adsorptive removal,41 catalytic degradation of toxins,98 separation of aromatic chlorinated contaminants125 or subsequent carbonization for improved photothermal properties.126 Recently, Barakzehi et al. used commercial PET fibers for the surface-assisted growth of Al2(BDC)3 for flexible supercapacitor application. PET fabric was pre-treated with NaOH aqueous solution to partially depolymerise the surface of the PET fibers, followed by MOF formation.127 This technology could be easily transferred to waste PET fabric.
Surface aminolysis. 
The surface aminolysis involves the interaction of hydrolysed or non-hydrolysed PET surfaces with aliphatic amines such as 4-amino-1-butanol,128 diethylenetriamine (DTA),101 ethylenediamine (EDA),99,100,102 triethylenetetramine,129,130 under catalytic conditions (sodium/zinc acetate or bases) or simple heating (Fig. 4c and Table 1(4)). Surface aminolysis can be also realized via NH3 plasma treatment101 (Table 1(4)). Amino groups formed during aminolysis can serve as active centres for further organic transformations (Fig. 4c and Table 1(5)),131–133 and enhancing the antibacterial properties and biocompatibility.93,133,134
Table 1 Overview of functional upcycling systems for PET: experimental conditions, functional group, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




PDMS: polydimethylsiloxane; NPs: nanoparticles; EDA: ethylenediamine; DTA: diethylenetriamine; APTES: (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane; ATRP: atom transfer radical polymerisation; PNIPAM: poly(N-isopropylacrylamide); and PDMAEMA: poly(2-(dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate).




1
Non-covalent interactions
Immobilisation of PDMS
Cross-linked PDMS



Hydrophobicity, improved mechanical stability
Oil–water separation

89



Immobilisation of ZnO, followed by hydrophobisation
ZnO



Hydrophobicity, chemical resistance against strong acid, alkali, and salt solution
Oil–water separation

91







2
Plasma oxidation
Air plasma
Hydroxyl/carboxyl



Hydrophilicity, increased roughness
Fibers for clothing with enhanced dyeability

96



O2 plasma
Hydroxyl/carboxyl



Hydrophilicity, improved biocompatibility
Antibacterial properties

93







3
Surface hydrolysis, followed by MOFs growth
Hydrolysis, followed by UiO-66 growth and Ag NPs immobilisation
UiO-66/Ag NPs



Increased surface area, catalytic activity
Photocatalytic degradation of paraoxon-ethyl

98



Hydrolysis, followed by UiO-66 growth
UiO-66



Increased surface area, centers for specific adsorption
Removal of imidacloprid

41







4
Surface aminolysis
Aminolysis by EDA
Amino



Improved thermal stability, enhanced dyeability
Antibacterial clothing with enhanced durability

99



Amination by 4-amino-1-butanol
Butanolamine



Increases surface area, improved thermal stability
Dispersing agents for cement

128



Plasma-assisted aminolysis using DTA or EDA
DTA or EDA



Hydrophilicity, biocompatibility
Sterilization effect against Pseudomonas aeruginosa

101







5
Surface polymerisation
APTES grafting, attachment of Br-containing initiator, ATRP of PNIPAM
PNIPAM



Controlled wettability
Filtration materials, sensors

132



Dopamine deposition, attachment of Br-containing initiator, ATRP of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate
Polycarboxybetaine



Hydrophilicity, hemocompatible and antibiofouling properties
Antibiofouling materials

107







6
Transesterification
Treatment by phenol, 4-chlorophenol, and hydroxyquinone
Esters of phenol, 4-chlorophenol and hydroxyquinone



Enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions
Removal of Cu2+ ions

46



7
Hydroarylation
Hydroarylation by methyl propiolate in the presence of [Au]/AgSbF6
1,2-Substituted methyl acrylate



Hydrophilicity
Modification of the transition temperature, melt viscosity, and wettability

110





Surface polymerisation. 
Simple radical polymerisation has been extensively performed on PET fabric, fibers, and films. To generate radicals on the PET surface, it was treated with γ-irradiation,103,104 ozone,53 or peroxides.105 This technology enables the polymerisation of common monomers such as vinyl acetate103 and acrylic acid (AA).104
Nonetheless, the number of monomers and structures of the resulting polymers is substantially limited for radical processes. Therefore, more advanced atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP) has been applied for post-polymerisation modification of waste PET. ATRP is characterized by a large selection of monomers, initiators, and control over the polymer structure. In the case of PET, surface ATRP has been carried out by preliminary covalent grafting of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) to couple with the bromoalkyl initiator, followed by the growth of poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) brushes (Fig. 4e).106,107 Alternatively, temperature-responsive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) was polymerised using the same strategy106 to ensure the suitability of PET for filtration materials, tissue scaffolds, and sensors requiring robust microfibers. Recently, more functional statistical copolymers composed of poly(butyl acrylate) and poly(styren-azobenzene) were grafted by ATRP to prepare a photoresponsive material.108
Other chemical transformations. 
As described previously in chemical recycling (Section S1.2 in ESI†), PET can be transformed into appropriate functional derivatives by surface transesterification. For instance, poly(L-lactic acid) moieties were introduced to the waste PET surface in o-nitrophenol as a solvent in the presence of dibutyltin oxide as a catalyst.109 Other common transesterification agents include phenols (phenol, 4-chlorophenol, and hydroxyquinone) at temperatures higher than the phenol melting point (Fig. 4f and Table 1(6)).46
Recently, Azoulay et al. demonstrated a new method for PET post-polymerisation functionalisation: a gold-catalysed intermolecular hydroarylation of PET with alkynes. This catalytic condition enables direct functionalisation of phenylene rings with 1,2-substituted methyl acrylate (Fig. 4g and Table 1(7)).110 Although this process is advantageous in terms of high chemoselectivity and mild conditions, the catalyst preparation is complicated. The functionalised products exhibited significant variations of their important physical properties such as the tangent modulus, melt viscosity, and wettability. The correlations between Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data were consistent with the high chemoselectivity of the process.
The most common methods for characterizing the synthesised materials include FTIR, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and other spectroscopic methods. The chemical functionalisation of polymer backbones has been commonly demonstrated using NMR spectroscopy. Finally, the formation of hybrid materials with MOFs requires additional characterization by X-ray diffraction (XRD) to validate the crystallinity of the MOF phases.
2.1.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The functional upcycling of PET waste produces new high-performance materials for antibacterial applications, sorbent and catalyst technologies, and design of materials with enhanced mechanical properties. In contrast to other polymer waste (e.g., PVC and rubber), functional upcycling of PET into functional materials has garnered considerable research attention.
Antibacterial applications. 
The functional upcycling of waste PET enables the design of materials with antibacterial and sterilization properties via plasma-induced aminolysis,101 surface-assisted polyacrylic acid (PAA) polymerisation,104 or incorporation of zinc oxide NPs.91,92 Despite various action mechanisms, the performance of these materials is not inferior to that of similar materials prepared from virgin PET.135,136 Nevertheless, the application of plastic waste for medical devices in contact with the human body is elusive owing to the absence of regulatory documentation. Thus, functionally upcycled PET has been applied in certain alternative purposes. For instance, upcycled waste PET can be used for food packaging according to recently established regulations,137 and production of textiles138,139 and sportswear.140
Adsorbents. 
One of the main applications of upcycled PET is adsorption and removal of a wide range of metal ions (Cr3+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, Zn2+, and Hg2+). Waste PET can be transformed into flakes, fibers, or aerogels. The adsorption capacity of such materials can be enhanced by grafting additional functional groups (e.g., chitosan) for the effective removal of Cr6+ ions from aqueous solutions with an efficiency of up to 110 mg mg−1.54 The alternative strategy is the copolymerisation of waste PET and PAA, followed by surface treatment with EDA to provide chelating properties. The fibers synthesised with a high content of ligand groups could remove Cu2+ and Ni2+ ions from water with an efficiency of up to 100 mg g−1.105 Waste PET can be upcycled to an aerogel coated with polydopamine (PD or PDA) to form a binder layer with polyethyleneimine. Consequently, a composite 3D aerogel bearing amino groups can effectively remove Pb2+, Hg2+ and Zn2+ ions from water with an efficiency of ∼96 mg g−1.56 The transesterification of PET with phenolic compounds46 exhibited enhanced adsorption of Cu2+ ions with 63 mg g−1 adsorption capacity in aqueous media compared to the waste PET. The removal efficiency of functional materials from PET waste is comparable to that of polymeric sorbents developed recently for eliminating heavy metal ions, with a sorption capacity of up to 100 mg g−1.141 The scope of contaminants has been broadened to dyes via surface aminolysis of PET bottles, after which the prepared PET hydrogel enables the removal of anionic Congo Red with an absorption capacity of ∼500 mg g−1.129
Upcycling of PET via formation of hybrid materials with surface MOFs is advantageous in terms of adsorptive application owing to the high surface area of the resulting composites. Our group demonstrated that PET@UiO-66 could remove imidacloprid with high adsorption capacity (4.5 mg g−1; Fig. 5a and Table 1(3)).41 Compared to mineral sorbents (1 mg g−1),142 PET@UiO-66 exhibited considerable technical advantages beyond the convenient sorbents: sustainable and affordable preparation, high adsorption capacity and rate, 100 times enhanced permeability compared to UiO-66 powder, and the possibility for application in fixed-bed columns. In addition, the previously developed material was used to deposit Ag NPs for removal and the photocatalytic degradation of paraoxon-ethyl (Table 1(3)).98
 Fig. 5  Application of functionalised PET waste: (a) removal of imidacloprid using PET@UiO-66, adapted with permission from ref. 41; (b) preparation of textile from waste PET by aminolysis, adapted from ref. 96, 99, 102 and 144; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PET with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations of analysis in Section S1 (ESI†). 
Finally, PET membranes, prepared by electrospinning of waste PET, followed by the hydrophobisation of the surface with PDMS or organic groups, can separate oil–water mixtures (Table 1(1)).89,91 These membranes were distinguished by high flux (∼20000 L m−2 h−1) and a high separation efficiency (>98%) for up to ten cycles, thereby displaying potential industrial applications.89
Enhancement of mechanical properties. 
The enhancement of thermomechanical properties of waste PET by compounding with low-cost waste validates their potential as ideal candidates for pavement engineering applications.103 Yang et al. showed how PET aggregates were treated using three different types of oxidizing agents such as H2O, H2O2, and Ca(ClO)2 for improved mechanical properties of concrete with coarse aggregates.143 Alternatively, the PET granules functionalised with butyl amine displayed improved flowability, setting period, and compressive strength of the cement paste to produce a value-added material.128 Functional upcycling alleviates the issues related to landfills, such as waste PET plastics, and converts these wastes into new value-added materials for constructing durable pavements.
Textile application. 
PET is widely used in the textile industry owing to excellent washability, wearability, antiwrinkle characteristics, and processability.83 Its replacement with upcycled materials is growing, as these are more affordable and display the same chemical structure as the virgin PET fibers. The fundamental experimental strategy is based on surface aminolysis, followed by other chemical transformations. The attachment of D-glucose,102 hydroxypropyltrimethyl ammonium chloride,96 nanocrystalline cellulose144 or ethylenediamine99 makes the PET surface more hydrophilic with enhanced hygroscopic properties (Fig. 5b). Consequently, the coloration of such upcycled fabric can be easily achieved – the fabric is economically dyed in a single bath and single stage. Moreover, the upcycled PET fabric is capable of withstanding multiple washing cycles.
Energy-related application. 
Waste PET bottles can be upcycled into triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) for energy harvesting by fabricating nanofiber-based aerogel using electrospinning and surface-assisted polymerisation. The obtained peak voltage (67.7 V) and current (9.4 μA) as performance characteristics are higher than those reported in several recent studies based on porous films or aerogels.145 Other energy-related devices include supercapacitors prepared from virgin PET.127 Interestingly, this strategy can be readily transferred to waste PET fabric. Barakzehi et al. grew MIL-53(Al) MOFs on PET fabric (Yazdbaf Co textile), followed by the immobilisation of graphene oxide for subsequent reduction and pyrrole polymerisation.127 This material serves as a flexible symmetrical solid-state supercapacitor with a capacitance volume of 510 mF cm−2.


2.1.3. Conclusions. 
PET is one of the most extensively studied polymers in the re-/upcycling industry compared to others. Therefore, mechanical (Section S1.1 in ESI†) and chemical (Section S1.2 in ESI†) recycling processes have remained highly diversified. A list of companies (e.g., Unilever, TakaTaka Solutions, and Beier) are already performing mechanical recycling on an industrial scale with a short time period and low cost (Fig. 5c). Although the mechanical recycling strategy has demonstrated undeniable success, chemical methods are actively developing and depolymerisation has been realised under various conditions. In general, chemical recycling of PET can provide valuable feedstock for the synthesis of various chemicals (Fig. 5c) including MOFs. However, this technique encounters several limitations such as high energy cost, undesirable product formation, and low-quality feedstocks. In search for more environmentally friendly conditions, new depolymerisation methods have been developed in the last five years, namely, electrochemical and photocatalytic processes (Section S1.2 in ESI†). Although these processes permit depolymerisation at room temperature, their selectivity is still underdeveloped. Therefore, the actual progress of chemical recycling is substantially high, and developed technologies are awaiting transfer to an industrial scale.
For diversification, certain chemical re-/upcycling methods have been transferred to functional upcycling for obtaining functional materials with an added value (Fig. 5c). The functional upcycling of PET waste represents a new sustainable and technological solution for waste PET processing and is promising for the development of new functional materials with desired properties and a diverse range of applications (e.g., antibacterial materials, adsorbents, and composites with enhanced adsorption properties). A special place is occupied by upcycling to PET coated with MOF-layers, because these porous compounds significantly improve the functionality and allow PET upcycling products to compete in the market. Thus, despite the significant achievements, the broad application field of PET makes it advisable to develop new functionalisation approaches for functional upcycling to incorporate a wide toolbox of organic functional groups in a controlled manner.

2.2. Polyethylene (PE)

2.2.1. General remarks. 
PE is the most consumed polymer worldwide and present approximately 35% of the total plastic waste streams with an annual global consumption of 104.4 Mt.71,146 Depending on the production process and consequent chemical structure and properties, PE can be segmented into three types: high-density polyethylene (HDPE) – linear; low-density polyethylene (LDPE) – branches containing both short- and long-chain branches; and linear low-density – linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) with mostly short-chain branches.
Based on the data analysis presented in the Eunomia report for Europe in 2018, an estimated 80% of rigid HDPE sold in the market ends up as waste, and from this waste, up to 41% is sorted and recycled.147 In 2018, the postconsumer HDPE output in Europe was estimated to supply 8% of the total European converter demand for HDPE resin. As estimated, approximately 62% of household and commercial PE flexible films (LDPE and LLDPE) was collected in Europe, among which ∼40% films were acquired from commercial streams with a recycling rate of ∼20%.148 Thus, PE is one of the most recyclable polymers. Nevertheless, the recycling methods are still limited to simple physical treatments.
PE waste polymers were found to be close to the virgin PE after aging.51 The variations in the structure, such as degradation and oxidization with the formation of carboxyl/hydroxyl groups, were observed only after exposure to harsh environmental conditions (e.g., sunlight, heat, oxidants, air, and humidity).149 In terms of bulk properties, PE loses its plasticity and transitions into an entirely brittle mechanical behaviour.150 The oxidative variations in the waste polymer structure can influence the reactivity of PE waste for re-/upcycling, especially adsorption.149,151 The commonly added stabiliser for PE are phenolic and amine antioxidants, hydrophobic organic chemicals, and polybrominated diphenyl ethers.152,153 Although the content level of PE stabilisers is low and does not exceed 1%, they can significantly influence the reactivity of certain catalytic systems used for re-/upcycling.154
Based on the corresponding reviews,20,155,156 the common mechanical (Section S2.1 in ESI†) and chemical re-/upcycling (Section S2.2 in ESI†) is discussed in Section S2 (ESI†). Accordingly, we conducted a comparative analysis of the benefits and limitations of functional upcycling with those of other PE recycling methods.


2.2.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.2.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PE comprises long chains of ethylene (–CH2–CH2–) subunits produced by ethylene polymerisation (Fig. 6). The chemical structure of the polymer evidently limits the application of mild methods for its surface functionalisation owing to the inertness of C–H bonds. Thus, until 2013, only a few modification approaches were explored157 and further developments in the search of rational pathways for PE re-/upcycling yielded the design of novel approaches for PE functionalisation.
 Fig. 6  Functionalisation of PE: (a) radical grafting of polymers;158,159 (b) oxidation;160,161 (c) grafting in presence of organic peroxides and maleic anhydride (MAH);162 (d) amination;163–165 (e) thermal xanthylation;166 (f) halogenation;167 and (g) Ni, Rh organometallic catalysis.168–170 
The simplest approach for the functionalisation of waste PE-based materials is through the sorption of active components via noncovalent bonding such as layer-by-layer assembly,161,171 spin coating,172–174 or entrapment of active components by swelling in appropriate solvents, such as supercritical CO2.175
Physical treatment has been used for generating radicals on the PE surfaces. Generally, such methods have been extensively used for the surface polymerisation and preparation of graft polymers on the PE surface. For instance, application of γ-irradiation on PE substrates in the presence of monomers can realise radiation-induced grafting (co)polymerisation of N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone,158N,N-dimethylamino ethyl methacrylate,176 vinyl trimethoxysilane,159 glycidyl methacrylate (GMA),177,178 and allylamine179 (Fig. 6a and Table 2(3)). Alternatively, PE/PP fabric can be activated by electron beam-induced180 GMA polymerisation and subsequent coupling with N-dimethyl-D-glucamine, triethylamine, and alkylation. The same monomer GMA was attached to PE/PP fibers by plasma-initiated grafting (Fig. 6a and Table 2(4)).181 Both types of polymer activation produced the design of new materials for environmental applications.
Table 2 Overview of functional upcycling systems for PE: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




AA: acrylic acid; DMDAAC: dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride; PAA: polyacrylic acid; PP: polypropylene; MAH: maleic anhydride; DMAEMA: N,N-dimethylamino ethyl methacrylate; GMA: glycidyl methacrylate; TMOS: trimethoxysilane; NVP: N-vinyl pyrrolidone; MPC: 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine; PMA: 2-(N-ethylanilino)ethyl methacrylate; GPTES: (3-glycidyloxypropyl)triethoxysilane; HMDA: 1,6-hexanediamine; and DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid.




1
Peroxide-induced on-surface radical polymerisation
Radical polymerisation AA and DMDAAC using benzoyl peroxide as initiator
PAA and DMDAAC



Hydrophilicity
Water superabsorbent

51



Radical polymerisation of AA using benzoyl peroxide as initiator
PAA



Higher pore density
Water superabsorbent

61







2
Reactive extrusion
Reactive extrusion mixed with MAH and dicumyl peroxide
MAH



Enhanced compatibility between PP and the nanofiller
Mechanical properties (stiffness and elongation)

192



Reactive extrusion using MAH, butanediol and dicumyl peroxide
Ester cross-linkers



—
Covalent adaptable networks

162







3
Graft-polymerisation under irradiation
γ-Ray-induced polymerisation of DMAEMA
DMAEMA



Enhanced adsorption towards Au3+ ions
Au3+ ions adsorption and reduction performance

176



γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, amine coupling and imprinting of copper ions into poly(divinylbenze) matrix
Cavities in poly(divinylbenzene) with high affinity to Cu2+ ions



Cavities with high affinity to Cu2+ ions
Cu2+ ions adsorption

193



γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of vinyl trimethoxysilane
SiO2 layers



Increased surface polarity
Separators for lithium-ion batteries

159



Electron-beam polymerisation of polyvinylamine, glycidol

N-methyl-D-glucamine ligands



Enhanced adsorption toward boron
Boron adsorption

194



Electron-beam polymerisation of NVP
Poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone)



Enhanced adsorption toward iodine
Iodine adsorption

158



Electron-beam polymerisation of glycidymethacrylate, grafting of amines
Alkylamines



Enhanced adsorption toward boron, CO2
Boron, CO2 adsorption; biodiesel catalyst

180



Photo-induced polymerisation of MPC and PMA
Poly(MPC-co-PMA)



Hydrophilicity
Antifouling property

195







4
Plasma-initiated polymerisation
Air plasma-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, followed by coupling with 4-aminobenzoic acid
4-Aminobenzoic acid moieties



Enhanced adsorption towards metal cations
Cu2+, Co2+, Cr3+, Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions adsorption

181





Plasma-induced polymerisation of allylamine
Poly(allylamine)



Hydrophilicity, improved cell adhesion
Materials for cell adhesion

196







5
Surface oxidation
O2 plasma treatment, followed by formation of phenol-formaldehyde polycondensation
Phenol-formaldehyde resin



Enhanced electrolyte wettability (hydrophilicity) and ionic conductivity
Separators for lithium-ion batteries

197



Oxidation by piranha solution or ozone, conjugation with chitosan or vanillin
Chitosan or vanillin



Wettability; antibacterial properties
Antibacterial

161,198



Ozonolysis, reduction and silanisation
Alkylsilanol



Positive charge
Antibacterial

190



Oxidation by corona discharge, silanisation and 1,6-hexanediamine
Alkylsilanol and hexanediamine moieties



Enhanced adhesion to DNA oligonucleotide
Bio-sensor (detection of the DNA of the insect Hermetia illucens)

160



Oxidation under xenon light (85 °C)
Hydroxyl



Hydrophilicity
Adsorption of methylene blue

199







6
Metal-catalysed functionalisation
Rh-assisted oxidation
Borane



—
—

168



Ni-assisted oxidation
Hydroxyl



Hydrophilicity
Macroinitiators to graft polycaprolactones

169



Ru-assisted oxidation
Hydroxyl/carbonyl



Hydrophilicity
Improvement of adhesiveness toward metal and paint

170





The physical methods of surface activation have been widely applied for the covalent grafting of small molecules or oxidation of the polymer backbone. The most common activation techniques include γ-ray irradiation, plasma treatment (oxygen, ammonia, and SO2 + H2O),171 or corona treatment (UV light + air)160,182 (Fig. 6b and Table 2(5)). After interaction with water or air, the formed hydroxyl or carboxyl groups can be involved in secondary transformations through allyl modification, N-ethyl-N′-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide (EDC/NHS) coupling, silanization, etc.
Furthermore, the chemical activation of the C–H bond is possible. The covalent modification of the PE backbone is similar to that of PP and involves oxidation or interaction with radical and radicaloid species. For instance, waste PE can be converted to covalent adaptable networks (CANs) via reactive extrusion in the presence of organic peroxides and MAH (Fig. 6c and Table 2(2)).162 In addition, benzoyl peroxide has been applied for the graft polymerisation of AA and dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride (DMDAAC) directly on the PE surface (Fig. 6a and Table 2(1)).51
The radical transformation of C–H bonds has been conducted for grafting small molecules and functional groups. Similar to PP, N-centered radicals and nitrenes derived from diazo compounds have been successfully grafted on the PE surface (Fig. 6d).163–165 Moreover, sulphur-containing groups have been introduced by xanthylation (formation of C–S bond) under blue-light irradiation (Fig. 6e).166 Radical halogenation of PE has been realised for introducing reactive halogens (Fig. 6f).167,183–185
Not less important, PE can be functionalised via oxidation of C–C and C–H bonds under various conditions to form hydroxyl or carboxyl groups. Thus, oxidation has been performed by treatment with nitric186 or chromic acid,187 potassium permanganate, potassium persulfate, benzoyl peroxide188 or ozone161,189,190 (Fig. 6b and Table 2(5)). Recently, milder conditions have been employed for oxidation, wherein benzaldehyde and O2 were used for aerobic auto-oxidation by generating reactive radical intermediates for both C–H activation and exclusive carbonyl formation on PE (Fig. 6b).191
Note that functional upcycling methods involve the best practice from classic synthetic procedures including the utilisation of transition metal-based catalysts for transforming PE chains. The Hartwig group has contributed significantly to this area by utilising Ni, Rh, or Ru catalysts for directly introducing reactive groups such as hydroxyl, amino, borane or carbonyl groups to the PE chain (Fig. 6g).168–170
Overall, the methods applied for characterizing modified PE are similar to those used for other polyolefins. However, the solubility of PE is limited, which sufficiently restricts the application of solution-based techniques. In the case of post-polymerisation functionalisation of PE chains, NMR and gel permeation chromatography (GPC) are used to characterize the changes in the molecular weight distribution and chemical structure of a polymer, while XPS and FTIR continue to be the fundamental methods for studying surface properties and chemical composition.
2.2.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
Mechanical and chemical recycling (Sections S2.1 and S2.2 in ESI†) of PE waste is a widespread approach, even though, recently, the research focus has started shifting toward functional upcycling. The most extensively studied application field is superwetting or adsorbent materials. For example, waste PE films have been employed to develop a novel amphoteric superabsorbent resin through polymerisation with AA and DMDAAC for water adsorption (Fig. 7a and Table 2(1)).51 The prepared material is a promising superwetting gel for agriculture, horticulture, and wastewater treatment. Superabsorbent hydrogels have been synthesised via polymerisation of waste PE with PAA (Table 2(1)).61 Resulting polymer have comparable water absorbency to that of newly prepared acrylic materials.200
 Fig. 7  Application of functionalised PE waste: (a) for water sorption, adapted from;51 (b) comparison of functional upcycling of PE with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S2, ESI.† 
Another idea, suggested by Garofalo et al., is to upgrade the mechanical properties of PE bags (with PP traces) by applying a nanotechnology-based strategy. In particular, various amounts of copolyamide or MAH were attached using a reactive extrusion process, and the developed functionalisation strategy enhanced the stiffness and ductility of PE (Table 2(2)).192,201
Despite the limited number of examples of PE functional upcycling, several studies have utilised commercially available PE to fabricate functional materials. Herein, we overview these examples to inspire scientists for implementing these strategies for upcycling of waste PE to produce new functional materials. Based on commercial PE materials, several functionalisation approaches have been applied, highlighting the adsorption applications of metal ions such as Au3+, Cu2+ (Table 2(3)),176,193 (Table 2(4)),181 boron (Table 2(3)),194 iodine (Table 2(3)),158 CO2 (Table 2(3)),180 and organic pollutants (pesticides and antibiotics) (Table 2(5)).149,199,202,203 The most common substrates include PE–PP nonwoven fibers or fabrics and films.
Across all strategies of PE functionalisation, numerous studies have been dedicated for designing antimicrobial, antifouling, and antioxidant surfaces for biomedical applications.204 The modern regulatory acts for medical devices (ISO 10993)205 do not regulate the source of plastic. However, additional sterilization and decontamination is required prior to the upcycling process affecting the mechanical and surface properties of PE and the additives released from PE.206–208 Potentially, functional upcycling of waste PE could be implemented in limited cases such as for designing noninvasive devices for skin or mucosal use (UPS class I and II); however it is essential to validate the biocompatibility of the upcycled materials according to the ISO 10993 and USP procedures. Certain strategies for modifying PE could be employed for functional upcycling via fabrication of noninvasive devices owing to the antifouling and antibacterial properties (cyclodextrins and polymers bearing phosphorylcholine groups) (Table 2(3)),178,195 antibacterial properties (polymers + antibiotic, quaternary ammonium salts, and metal NPs) (Table 2(5, 6)),190,209,210 and improved wettability and adhesion properties (allylamine) (Table 2(4)).196
As discussed, PE is the major polymer used for food packaging, where active elements could remove/preserve the growth of undesired molecules causing spoilage.211,212 To design functional materials for active food packaging, upcycled PE must conform to the specific regulations on plastic materials and objects intended to be in contact with food items. EC 10/2011 regulates the content of monomers and additives in plastic and overall migration limits.213 Currently, various desired functionalities are introduced in commercial PE, such as antimicrobial properties (chitosan, chitosan + pullulan, quaternary ammonium salts, and metal-fumed silica) (Table 2(5)),161,190,198 antioxidant activity (chitosan),171 ethylene scavenging behavior214 (halloysite nanotubes), oxygen scavenging behavior (pyrogallol, zero valent iron particles, and gallic-acid).215–217 We believe that these methods will be successfully implemented for functional upcycling of waste PE.
The wide electronic application of PE composites is related to lithium-ion batteries, where porous polyolefin films composed of PE are used as separators owing to their electrochemical stability, inertness, and mechanical strength. Various functionalisation strategies of commercially available PE separators can be implemented to improve heat stability and interfacial compatibility (e.g., phenolic resin and vinyl trimethoxysilane) (Table 2(3, 5)).159,197 The functionalisation of raw and commercially used PE for lithium-ion separator application has been reviewed,174,218 and the reported approaches on raw PE can be implemented for waste and commercially used PE materials.
Hartwig et al. have reported on the improvement of adhesiveness of PE toward metal and dyes without affecting their thermal stability or mechanical strength.170 The effect has been achieved by applying selective catalytic oxidation of PE.169,170 Furthermore, the authors developed a facile approach towards PE hydroxylation for enhancing the wetting properties and using the obtained product for graft polymerisation of lactones.169 The improvement of mechanical and rheological properties was achieved by Zhu et al. using a large-scale one-pot method for recycling PE into CANs, which can undergo dynamic exchange in response to external stimuli and can be used in the biomedical field and shape memory.219 The prepared PE materials exhibited clearly improved mechanical (e.g., tensile strength, Young modulus, and yield strength) and rheological (e.g., creep resistance) properties at elevated temperatures. Importantly, the obtained materials can be readily reprocessed, recycled, and 3D-printed to create opportunities for sustainable and high-performance PE materials.


2.2.3. Conclusions. 
As the most consumed polymer worldwide, PE is highly desired to be recycled. Both chemical and mechanical methods of PE recycling are thoroughly investigated (Fig. 7b and Section S2 in ESI†). Unlike other plastics, PE is often recycled with the same function: canisters become new canisters and films are regenerated into new films; however, the added value through such recycling is questionable. The added value of mechanically recycled products (Section S2.1 in ESI†) is extremely low, and therefore, the low price associated with mechanical recycling does not render this strategy reasonable for the future. In comparison, the chemical recycling of PE (Section S2.2 in ESI†) to valuable products such as dicarboxylic acids or gaseous and liquid hydrocarbons is considered promising and most feasible for industrial implementation in the near future (Fig. 7b). Although the high pyrolysis temperature and the release of greenhouse gases limit its industrial implementation, the chemical recycling strategy is widely promoted. Nonetheless, the prolongation of lifespan renders the functional upcycling of PE highly desirable in terms of circular economy as it offers a higher added value to the final materials. However, the inertness of the C–C bond limits the functional upcycling of PE and necessitates harsh and costly methods for designing high-valuable materials. Thus, only a few research studies have focused on the functional upcycling of waste PE. Thus, the functional upcycling of PE is highly desired, and further developments are required in large-scale functionalisation for competitiveness.

2.3. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)

2.3.1. General remarks. 
PVC is a multifunctional, low-cost polymer that ranks 3rd in terms of global plastic production after PE and PP.220 PVC is distinguished from other polymers by strength, flame resistance, stiffness, durability, workability, and relatively low cost. Annually, nearly 50 Mt of PVC is produced at an annual increasing rate of ∼4%.221–224 Most manufactured PVC is widely applied in building and construction, electrical wire insulation, and disposable medical devices, with minor applications in packaging, clothing, leisure, sports, and other industries.1,225–227 Globally, most PVC waste is found in stores and landfills, and till 2008, only 0.2 Mt of PVC was recycled using mechanical and chemical pathways.228,229 By 2017, European Vinyl-Plus recycled 0.64 Mt of PVC, which will reach 1 Mt by 2030.230 Nevertheless, the major challenge of using PVC is the presence of chlorine in its structure, which can evolve during landfilling or incineration. Another critical challenge is the impossibility to incinerate PVC with other types of plastic because of (i) the required elevated temperature ≥1100 °C, and (ii) the reduced recycling ratio of plastics via deterioration of the structure.231,232
The chemical structure of PVC is modified during utilisation233 due to environmental exposure to sunlight, heat, moisture, oxygen, pollutants, mechanical stresses, and biological growth.234 The chemical variations often occur on the surface layer and include autoxidation, HCl release, peroxidation, chain scission, cross-linking, etc.233,235,236 Most PVC materials intensively absorb sunlight and actively undergo photolysis and photooxidation. The oxidation aging can hinder nucleophilic substitution or other reactions for re-/upcycling owing to the generation of oxygen-containing groups.228,235,237 The addition of thermal stabilisers could prevent the photodegradation of PVC.232 To accomplish application diversity, PVC contains multiple additives such as lubricants, impact-modifiers, flame retardants, reinforcing agents, stabilisers, fillers, colorants, antioxidants and plasticisers, which can be released during aging and affect further recycling processes20,230,238,239 through the possible side-reactions or poisoning of catalysts.20,154 Furthermore, the upcycling of aged PVC waste can create toxicity-related issues and release phthalate plasticisers, which are restricted because of their toxic effects.20,206,230,240
Through various recycling strategies, mechanical recycling is hindered by the release of Cl-containing chemicals, as detailed in Section S3.1 (ESI†) and the following reviews.20,241 The alternative chemical re-/upcycling approach is summarised in Section S3.2 (ESI†) and in certain previous studies.40,226,242–244


2.3.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.3.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PVC is a polymer chain comprising (–CH2–CHCl–) units produced from vinyl chloride (Fig. 8). The presence of chlorine, the major limiting factor for chemical re-/upcycling, serves as the key advantage for functional upcycling owing to its ability to interact with a wide range of nucleophiles. In general, PVC functionalisation is performed using two principal approaches: (i) post-polymerisation modification process consuming the reactants in the dissolved state or melt, and (ii) surface modification, where the bulk material does not participate in the reaction.
 Fig. 8  Functionalisation of PVC: (a) azidation;44 (b) amination;245 (c) UV-irradiation or oxidation;246,247 (d) radical on-surface polymerisation;248 (e) cyanation/thiocyanation;44,249 (f) thiolation,250 and (g) elimination/hydroxylation.225,228–231 
Post-polymerisation modification is commonly based on nucleophilic substitution (SN2), where Cl is exchanged with various nucleophiles (e.g., S, N, O, and I), thereby modifying the polymer backbone.251,252 Such methods require preliminary crushing or powdering of waste PVC to obtain the necessary shape granules for enhancing the dissolution rate or melting. Thus, the surface modification approaches are more reliable for recycling PVC.
PVC surface modification is represented by a range of physical and chemical methods such as plasma253 and flame treatment,254 UV-irradiation,246 gamma rays,248,255–257 corona258 and glow247 discharge, atomic layer or vapor deposition,259,260 grafting,261 and nucleophilic substitution on the surface of the material262 (Fig. 8 and Table 3). Certain modification methods have been developed to enhance the mechanical characteristics and improve the interfacial properties of PVC surface for various applications, including antibiofouling materials.227 These methods have been tested primarily on commercially available PVC sources such as medical grade PVC, sheets and tubes, and urinary catheters. Nonetheless, only a handful of reports have been published on PVC waste functionalisation.254
Table 3 Overview of commercial PVC functionalisation for future perspective waste upcycling: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




PSU: polysulfone; AAC: azide–alkyne cycloaddition; EDA: ethylenediamine; MEA: monoethanolamine; DEA: diethanolamine; DETA: diethylenetriamine; and GO: graphene oxide.




1
Thiolation
Thiolation by 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane, conjugation with polyhexamethylenediamine guanidinium chloride
Polyhexamethylenediamine, guanidine hydrochloride



Activity against P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, A. baumannii and B. subtilis
Antimicrobial surface

267



Thiolation by L-cysteine, membrane formation with polysulfone and filling with TiO2
Membrane with amino and carboxyl groups and TiO2



Rejection toward As5+ ions
Filtration membrane

282







2
Azidation
Azidation by NaN3, AAC with alkynes with different functional groups (CF3, pyridine, etc.)
Different functional groups (CF3, pyridine, etc.)



Retaining mechanical flexibility and translucency
Potential application as antifouling surface

44



Azidation by NaN3, AAC with substituted diiron complexes
Diiron carbonyl complex



Enhanced conductivity, positive shift in reduction potential
Electrodes for proton reduction

283







3
Thiocyanation
Thiocyanation by NaSCN
Thiocyanate



Hydrophilicity, biocompatiblity, reduced retention of S. epidermidis and S. aureus
Antibiofouling materials

273







4
Radical on-surface polymerisation
γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of N-vinylimidazole
Poly(n-vinylimidazole)



Inhibit the growth of S. aureus, hemocompatibility
Bactericidal surface

255



γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, conjugation with lysozyme or acylase by EDA
Lysozyme (LYS) or acylase (ACY)



Hindered Staphylococcus aureus adhesion; Quorum sensing inhibition
Reduced bacteria adhesion on the surface and preventing biofilm formation

248



γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of 4-vinyl pyridine, conjugation with sulfobetaine methacrylate
Poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate)



Hydrophilicity, proteins antofouling
Antifouling surface properties

257







5
Oxygen glow discharge
Surface oxidation by oxygen glow discharge
Hydroxyl/carboxyl



Hydrophilicity, hindered P. aeruginosa adhesion
Reduced surface bacterial adhesion

247







6
Amination
Amination by EDA, hexamethylene diisocyanate with subsequent polyethylene glycol grafting
Polyethylene glycol



Decreasing platelet adhesion, improved blood compatibility
Antifouling surface properties

275



Amination by aliphatic amines (MEA/DEA/EDA/DETA), formation of composite with mesoporous silica
Amino and mesoporous silica



Hydrophobicity, enhanced adsorption capacity for CO2
CO2 sorbent

270



Amination by polyethylenimine
Amino(polyethyleneimine)



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pt4+ ions, acid-tolerance
Pt4+ ions extraction

245



Amination by EDA, sulfuric acid
Sulfonic



Improved proton conductivity, ion exchange capacity, increased water-uptake
Proton conducting membrane

284



Amination by triethylenetetramine, polymerisation with piperazine and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbonyl trichloride
Polyamide



Increased water flux, increased rejection of Na2SO4
Nanofiltration membrane with possible application for desalination

285



Amination by triethylenetetramine, polymerisation with piperazine graphene oxide and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbonyl trichloride
Polyamide and GO



Improved water permeability, Congo red rejection, improved antifouling
Nanofiltration membrane for desalination

274







7
Dechlorination
Dechlorination by H2O or NaOH
Elimination and hydroxylation



Hydrogen source
CO2 reduction

225





Among all strategies, SN2 is the most effective approach for creating functional materials because of its economic advantages over other methods. The most common nucleophilic reagents are azides (Fig. 8a and Table 3(2)),44,263–265 thiols (Fig. 8f and Table 3(1)),227,250,266–268 amines (Fig. 8b and Table 3(6)),269–272 and less frequently, –CN or –SCN modification (Fig. 8e and Table 3(3)).44,249,273 These approaches were implemented on synthesised or commercial powder PVC and its commercial sheets and tubes. In certain instances, the reaction with nucleophiles leads to a relatively low conversion of functional groups, which can be improved by the addition of phase-transfer catalysts.249
Azide- or amine-terminated PVC can be implemented as a platform for subsequent functionalisation.263,274,275 PVC–N3 was mostly transformed via Cu-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC ‘click chemistry’) for the bulk PVC276 or on its surface.44,277–279 The copper-free ‘click’ reaction was also reported.280 As an alternative to classic 'click' chemistry approaches, e.g., sulfur fluoride exchange (SuFEx), one-step reaction was used for introducing thiols, antibacterial agents, and ionic liquids by tethering benzophenone groups to the PVC surface.281 The general chemical modification methods of PVC have been previously overviewed in detail.252 Although such 'click' methods have been generally implemented with the Sigma-Aldrich PVC, these methods can be applied on various devices.44
Recent studies have reported the dechlorination process of PVC, wherein the reaction proceeds through parallel elimination (E2) and SN2.225,228 The technological approach follows the interaction with sources of –OH as NaOH228 or water225 (Fig. 8g and Table 3(7)). The degree of dechlorination increased up to nearly 100% at 300 °C in water225 and at 190 °C in NaOH.228 Although authors postulated that this process can be envisioned as a promising method for treating PVC waste, they did not mention sources of PVC waste in their studies.
2.3.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
Despite the diverse toolbox of functional upcycling methods, no evidence has been reported for PVC waste processing. Considering the reactivity of PVC and available transformations (discussed in Section S2.3.2.1), PVC waste can be involved in functional upcycling. Therefore, we consider the examples of the functionalisation of commercially available PVC for functional materials (Table 3). The discussion of these reports can capture the interest of researchers for using PVC waste to produce new functional materials.
Generally, functionalised PVC has been used to design new materials for removing toxicants, separation membranes, catalysts, electrochemical and antimicrobial applications267,270,283,286,287 (Fig. 9a). The preparation of sorbents commonly requires a post-polymerisation modification of PVC to increase the loading of functional groups. For instance, Ganin et al. reported a method for post-polymerisation modification PVC amination to form composites with mesoporous silica (Fig. 9b and Table 3(6)).270 This material possessed a high surface area for CO2 capture and enhanced hydrophobicity for humid environment application. This technology enables the utilisation of waste PVC instead of a commercial PVC, which is highly promising. Jin et al. demonstrated that upcycled PVC can be employed to convert hydrogen carbonate (as a CO2 model source) to formate under hydrothermal conditions with 16% yield and 100% selectivity. The proposed strategy represents a new green approach for CO2 conversion simultaneously with PVC waste upcycling (Table 3(7)).225
 Fig. 9  Application of functionalised PVC waste: (a) antimicrobial application – modification of flexible PVC by nucleophilic substitution and subsequent reactions, adapted from ref. 267; (b) CO2 capture – amination of PVC by EDA, adapted from ref. 270; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PVC with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S3 (ESI†); ***Reported only in commercial polymers. 
Yun et al. reported an example of amination, where PVC–polyethyleneimine (PEI) fibers were fabricated by dissolving both polymers, followed by the partial substitution of chlorine with the amino groups of PEI (Table 3(6)).245 The fibers were successfully employed for Pt4+ ion extraction with higher efficiency than commercial sorbents.
Although PVC acts as an insulator, functional upcycling can produce materials with unusual application in electrochemistry. Liu et al. enhanced the proton reduction activity of diiron complexes through covalent grafting to the PVC backbone using 'click' reaction with preliminary azidation (Table 3(2)).283
PVC plastics are nearly ideal materials for designing membranes due to their stability in acid or base media, enhanced mechanical properties, and availability.288 Currently, PVC-based membranes are widely used as proton exchange membranes, contaminant separators, and battery separators.286,289–294 Chemical modification of membranes commonly occurs through the formation of C–N and C–S bonds on the PVC surface. The attached functional group determines further application: L-cystein enables As5+ ion capture (Table 3(1)),282 sulfonated EDA was applied for proton-conductive membranes (Table 3(6)),284 polyamide and graphene oxide-polyamide for desalination materials (Table 3(6)),274,285 and trimethylamine improves membrane permeability and rejection with suitable antibacterial properties.295
Currently, commercial PVC is actively involved in the functionalisation cycle for further bio-related applications. Although waste PVC cannot be applied for catheter fabrication due to the strict regulations on medical plastics operating in contact with the human body,205 it can be applied in alternative fields. For instance, after sterilization and appropriate regulations, PVC can be upcycled to introduce bactericidal or antifouling properties for coatings or the creation of antibacterial surfaces. Upcycled PVC can be used as containers for storage205 because of the ability to reduce leaching additives.280,296 In particular, treatment of PVC with γ-rays facilitates grafting of various polymers on the PVC surface to enhance the bactericidal (Table 3(4))255 and antifouling properties (Table 3(4)),257 while reducing bacterial adhesion (Table 3(4)).248 Furthermore, oxygen glow discharge reduces bacterial adhesion via the generation of –COOH and –OH groups (Table 3(5)).247 As such, nucleophilic substitution methods offer similar applications in the design of antifouling or antimicrobial PVC-based materials. In the near future, we anticipate the transfer of bactericidal/antifouling technologies to PVC waste. For example, the VinylplusMed project was launched in 2021 to recycle PVC-composed medical waste and promote the idea of accelerating sustainability in healthcare.297


2.3.3. Conclusions. 
Despite the variability in methods for modification and chemical recycling of PVC (Section S3.2 in ESI†), the current status of functional upcycling is far from its technological realization (Fig. 9c). Potentially, functional upcycling can overcome one of the key limitations, i.e., leaching of dangerous plasticisers from PVC into the environment.280,296,298 Moreover, the existing mechanical (Section S3.1 in ESI†) and chemical (Section S3.2 in ESI†) approaches do not correspond to the concept of circular economy and sustainable development in terms of carbon footprint, energy consumption, and contamination of surrounding media. Due to these reasons, functional upcycling should be the fundamental goal for further utilisation of PVC.

2.4. Polypropylene (PP)

2.4.1. General remarks. 
PP is the second most used polymer worldwide after PE and accounts for almost 20% of the total plastic volume, with 75 Mt per year in waste streams.71,299 The market volume was expected to reach almost 100 Mt by 2029. Based on the data analysis reported in Eunomia 2018 for Europe, only up to 28% of the rigid PP is sorted and transferred for reprocessing. The postconsumer PP output in Europe in 2018 was estimated to supply only 3% of the total European conversion demand of PP resin.148
The major application areas of PP include packaging and industrial fields because of its exceptional properties such as high resistance, moisture barrier, flexibility, toughness, high durability, and lightweight.300 Additionally, PP is used for surgical equipment, drugs, auto components, and cosmetics. COVID-19 has significantly affected PP consumption, as billions of single-use face masks (FMs) – composed of nonwoven PP fabric – are used worldwide on a daily basis.301 In India and USA, more than 3 kilotons of PP waste are produced from FM per week, and incinerating these masks is not ideal from the standpoints of circular economy and carbon footprint.302 Thus, the management and treatment of PP waste has emerged as a significant problem. For this reason, scientists are devising new eco-friendly technologies to manage this waste.
Compared with other polymers, PP is prone to aging and undergoes degradation and oxidization only under harsh environmental conditions to yield carboxyl/hydroxyl groups upon exposure to sunlight, heat, oxidants, air, and humidity,303 which consequently alters its reactivity.42 The aging of PP results in increased crystallinity, formation of surface cracks, and embrittlement.304 The added photostabiliser and thermal stabiliser can affect the reactivity of PP during re-/upcycling. The most common ones are phenolic antioxidants (radical scavenger) and phosphorus antioxidants (peroxide decomposition agents), used as thermal stabilisers and UV absorbers, and hindered amines are used as UV stabilisers.305 Therefore, the composition of PP waste should be evaluated before developing a relevant re-/upcycling strategy.
The previous achievements in the field of mechanical recycling (Section S4.1 in ESI†) are summarised in the following reviews20 (Section S4, ESI†). Although chemical recycling (Section S4.2 in ESI†) has been reviewed as a separate chapter in recent publications,155,156 we further compared the functional upcycling method with other methods of PP waste recycling based on these reviews.


2.4.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.4.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PP is a typical polyalkane containing 2-methylethylene units (–CH2–CH2(–CH3)–) produced by propylene polymerisation (Fig. 10). Similar to chemical recycling (Section S4.2 in ESI†), the low reactivity of the C–H bonds requires harsh conditions or relatively high energy input for transformation. Nevertheless, most upcycling methods do not involve the functionalisation of the C–H bond, and instead, rely on relatively weak noncovalent interactions with the surface of PP.
 Fig. 10  Functionalisation of PP: (a) thermal xanthylation;306 (b) radical grafting of polymers;307–309 (c) heteroradicals functionalisation;167,310 (d) sulfonation;311 (e) grafting under physical treatment;312,313 (f) oxidation;42,314,315 (g) grafting of C-centered radicals;316 and (h) diazirine modification through carbene intermediate.317 
As discussed earlier, the widespread application of PP FMs make them the most common waste candidate for functional upcycling. Most upcycling approaches are based on noncovalent interactions such as dip-coating,49,52,318 electrospraying,319 soaking,50 drop-casting,320,321 sputtering,322 on-surface preparation of NPs323 and layer-by-layer assembly.324 The common approaches have been improved by applying supercritical CO2 as a solvent for impregnating the active components into surface layers.325 Additionally, laser-induced deposition of few-layer graphene-like structures on nonwoven FMs has been described.326,327
Despite the simplicity and convenience of noncovalent approaches, the leakage of active components to the surrounding media limits their widespread application, which can be resolved via covalent modification. Thus, the sulfonation of PP in concentrated sulfuric acid has been implemented to improve their thermal,328,329 adsorption performance330 or electrochemical properties311 (Fig. 10d and Table 4(2)).
Table 4 Overview of functional upcycling systems for PP: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




PANI NPs: polyaniline nanoparticles; PEDOT:PSS: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate; PD: polydopamine; LDH: layered double hydroxides; NBR: acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber; DCP: dicumyl peroxide; MAH: maleic anhydride; BTCEAD: bis(2,2,2-trichloroethyl)azodicarboxylate; NHPI: N-hydroxyphthalimide; PEGMA: poly(ethylene glycol)methacrylate; PPEGMA: poly(poly(ethylene glycol)methacrylate); UV: ultraviolet; AA: acrylic acid; and PFTS: 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane.




Non-covalent approaches


1
Adsorption techniques
pET28a(p):EGFP-anchor peptide Immobilisation
Functional protein



Adhesion promoters
A platform for medical diagnostic and microfluidic devices

318



Electrospraying of gum rosin microspheres
Gum rosin microspheres



Hydrophobicity
Hydrophobic surfaces

319



Deposition of PANI NPs
PANI



Enhanced adsorption towards humic acid
Adsorption of humic acid

49



Immobilisation of epoxy resin composite loaded with SiO2
SiO2 impregnated in epoxy resin matrix



Hydrophobicity
Adsorption/purification of water-in-oil emulsions

52



Hydrothermal synthesis of ZnS on PP surface
ZnS



Enhanced sensitivity towards H2O2
Gas sensor

323



Synthesis of MAF-6 crystals on PP surface
MAF-6



Hydrophobicity
Adsorption/purification of water-in-oil emulsions

50



Deposition of PEDOT:PSS/porphyrins
PEDOT:PSS/porphyrins



Enhanced conductivity
Sensors for volatile compounds in breath

320



Immobilisation of graphene/Ca3Co4O9−δ composite
Graphene/Ca3Co4O9−δ



Redox centers for the storage of charge
Supercapacitor

321



Sputtering of gold and polypyrrole microcones formation
Polypyrrole microcones



Enhanced electrical conductivity
Supercapacitor

322



Deposition of PD, followed by layered double hydroxides formation
PD and LDH



Enhanced adsorption toward anionic compounds
Adsorption of anionic compounds

324



Impregnation of quaternised N-halamine polysiloxane
Quaternised N-halamine polysiloxane



Biocidability
Antibacterial

325



Laser-induced deposition of few layered graphene
Few layered graphene



Superhydrophobicity, enhanced surface temperature after solar illumination
Photothermal properties, self-cleaning

326 and 327







Covalent approaches


2
Sulfonation
Sulfuric acid
Sulfonic and carboxylic



Hydrophilicity, enhanced ionic interaction with methylene blue
Adsorbents for methylene blue

330



Fuming sulfuric acid
Sulfonic



Enhanced electrolyte wettability, facile ion transport
Separator for rechargeable batteries

311







3
Radical grafting
Reactive extrusion of PP and NBR in presence of DCP
NBR/MAH



Enhanced mechanical properties
Mechanical properties (tensile and barrier properties)

307



Grafting of BTCEAD using NHPI, followed by polymerisation of PEGMA
PPEGMA



Enhanced electrolyte wettability
Separators for lithium-ion batteries

309



UV-induced grafting of AA in the presence of benzophenone, followed by biopolymers coupling (starch, cellulose, and chitosan)
Biopolymers



Hydrophilicity, enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions
Adsorption of metal ions Cu2+

333







4
Physical methods for surface functionalisation
Pulsed plasma deposition of vinylbenzyl chloride, followed by coupling with dimethylaminomethyl-calixarene
Dimethylaminomethyl-calixarene



Enhanced adsorption and selectivity towards Cr6+ ions
Adsorption of Cr6+ ions

312



γ-Ray irradiation in acetonitrile, followed by amidoximation
Cyano and amidoxyl



Enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions
Adsorption of Cu2+ ions

331



Ion-beam assisted polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, followed by n-octylamine treatment
Octyl



Hydrophobicity
Oil adsorbents

313



Surface oxidation using oxygen plasma, followed by silanisation using PFTS
Perfluorooctylsilyl



Adjusted polarity
Triboelectric nanogenerator

314



Oxidation under UV-radiation
Hydroxyl



Enhanced adsorption towards Pb2+, Cd2+, and Sr2+ ions
Adsorption of Pb2+, Cd2+, and Sr2+ ions

42







5
Oxidation by highly reactive oxidants
Oxidation by ozone, followed by soaking in solvents (hexane, decane, and heptane)
Alkanes



Hydrophobicity
Oil adsorbents

315





Another approach of surface functionalisation utilises the interaction of reactive radicals with C–H bonds. For instance, a composite material from MAH and PP and acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR)307 has been formed during the extrusion of polymer mixtures in the presence of dicumyl peroxide (DCP) at 180 °C (Fig. 10b and Table 4(3)).307,308 Some azodicarboxylates are also able to interact with the PP surface to generate active sites for further polymerisation of poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (Fig. 10b and Table 4(3)).309
An exciting approach has been developed for covalent grafting of a photosensitiser through treatment with a carbene source (diazirine) (Fig. 10h).317 To the best of our knowledge, this is a relatively more moderate method for the covalent functionalisation of PP surfaces. As reported, C–C bonds can be generated during thermal-assisted grafting of bis(phenylsulfonyl)ethylene in combination with photocatalysts (Fig. 10g).316
In addition to chemical treatment, the modification techniques based on physical approaches are widely applied because of their facile accessibility and versatility. Hydroxyl (O–H) groups on PP masks and meshes have been introduced by oxygen plasma treatment314 or UV-irradiation42 (Fig. 10f and Table 4(5)). The formation of active sites using high-energy sources such as γ-ray radiation,331,332 electron beam,313 UV333 and plasma312 allows for the covalently attachment of different organic molecules (e.g., acrylonitrile, polymethyl acrylate, PS, GMA, AA, and benzyl chloride) to the PP surface (Fig. 10e and Table 4(4)).
The discussion on possible routes for PP upcycling is not complete without the consideration of methods for modifying virgin polymers. Such pathways can be notably used for creating new materials from PP waste.
First, the modification procedures aim to oxidise the C–C backbone using catalytic (for instance, Rh-catalysed borylation followed by hydroxylation334) or stoichiometric regimes (potassium persulfate in water dispersion335). In addition, ozone treatment methods have been applied for surface hydroxylation (Fig. 10f and Table 4(5)).315
A variety of functionalisation approaches for PP are based on the interaction with radicals or active species, including the heteroatomic radicals (Fig. 10c). For instance, azido groups have been grafted on the PP surface via reaction with a hypervalent iodine reagent – azidoiodane. Subsequently, azido groups have been applied for azide–alkyne cycloaddition (Fig. 10c).310 Sulfur-containing reactive groups have been grafted through thermal-assisted xanthylation in the presence of peroxide (Fig. 10a).306 Furthermore, PP undergoes thermo- and light-induced radical halogenation using N-haloamides, which has been used to prepare fluorinated,336 chlorinated, and brominated PP (Fig. 10c).167
The methods employed for the characterization of composite and hybrid materials derived from PP are limited to spectroscopic techniques (XPS, FTIR, and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)). Nevertheless, the specific modification approaches presume the application of other methods for the characterization of immobilized materials (such as XRD for MOFs or elemental analysis).
2.4.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The enormous generation of PP waste after the start of COVID-19 pandemic has created additional challenges for plastic waste management. Owing to this reason, the majority of studies dedicated to the functional upcycling of PP waste focuses on the application of FM.
The hydrophobic nature of PP fibers enables the implementation of functionalised waste FMs for oil–water separation processes. Nevertheless, the achievement of high performance for separation requires additional functionalisation of the PP surface with hydrophobic components. To date, various techniques have been adopted including the formation of composite with superhydrophobic epoxy resin/SiO2 (Table 4(1)),52 immobilisation of superhydrophobic fluorine-free MAF-6 (Fig. 11a and Table 4(1)),50 or treatment with heptane (Table 4(5)).315 Upcycled PP waste can be used for water purification as well as for selective gas capture from various gas mixtures. Wang et al. reported the separation of propene and propane using ZIF-8 MOFs immobilised on PP membranes.337 Despite using commercially available membranes, such an approach provides a perspective for the functional upcycling of PP waste.
 Fig. 11  Application of functionalised PP waste: (a) for an oil–water separation process, reprinted with permission from ref. 50; copyright 2022, Elsevier, (b) enhanced mechanical properties, adapted from ref. 307; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PP with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S4, ESI.† 
In addition to separation application, functional upcycling of PP can considerably enhance the sorption performance. In principle, the simple upcycling of FMs through UV-aging improves their adsorption capacity and promotes their application in removing metal ions from water (Table 4(4)).42 Using this strategy, Badyal et al. developed a multistage procedure for creating a composite material from PP fabric via pulsed plasma coating with poly(vinylbenzyl chloride), followed by covalent grafting of calixarene (Table 4(4)).312 The prepared membrane is able to selectively entrap Cr6+ oxoanions, making it attractive for point-of-use application in geographic regions lacking appropriate wastewater treatment plants or flawed environmental monitoring systems. Independently, PP fabric has been coated with electroconductive polyaniline (PANI) for adsorbing humic acid (Table 4(1)).49
PP-based materials are an attractive platform for the preparation of multitarget adsorbents. Thus, layer-by-layer assembly of polydopamine has been implemented for the immobilisation of layered double Ni–Al hydroxide films on PP chips for the adsorption of organic dyes and pharmaceuticals (Table 4(1)).324 Furthermore, enhanced vapor (NH3, CH2O, and H2O2) adsorption has been demonstrated on waste PP fibers loaded with ZnS, which is an even more challenging application (Table 4(1)).323 In addition to the removal of vapors, upcycled PP provides an interesting platform for vapor sensing. The functionalisation of PP waste with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) and porphyrins enables the design of a sensor for ethanol, water, hexane, toluene, acetone, acetic acid, and triethylamine (Table 4(1)).320
To develop novel eco-friendly technologies for utilising waste FMs, scientists have been inspired to design electronic devices. For instance, the deposition of gold with a polypyrrole coating (Table 4(1)),322 and the use of Ca3Co4O9-δ perovskite and graphene ink (Table 4(1))321 have been demonstrated as methods to create novel materials for supercapacitors. Sulfonated PP is applied as a separator for aqueous rechargeable batteries and exhibits remarkable safety and electrochemical performance (Table 4(2)).311
In addition, several surface engineering methods have been applied for preparing composites with enhanced mechanical properties (tensile/elongation). The preparation of blends with NBR via additional cross-linking provides enhanced thermomechanical properties and improved tensile and barrier properties (Fig. 11b and Table 4(3)).307
Evidently, across all strategies of PP functionalisation, numerous studies have focused on fabricating antimicrobial and antiviral surfaces. Despite the variability of methods and promising achievements in this field, the applicability of such approaches to PP upcycling remains a challenge because of the actual impossibility of reusage of personal protective masks. Although several strategies are employed to reuse FM by decontamination or disinfection, these procedures reduce the efficiency of the FMs.338 To avoid overabundant citations, we refer to recent reviews dedicated to preparing PP-based fibers with improved properties.338–344


2.4.3. Conclusions. 
The abundance of PP in the current market necessitates re-/upcycling as a crucial step for further development in polymer utilisation. The chemical inertness of PP (similar to PE) limits the successful implementation of chemical processes requiring sufficient energy consumption or harsh reaction conditions (Section S4.2 in the ESI†). Nevertheless, chemical recycling is considered promising and the most feasible approach for industrial implementation in a short period (Section S4.2 in the ESI†), (Fig. 11c). However, the prolongation of lifespan increases the demand of functional upcycling of PP in terms of circular economy owing to the higher added value cost of the final materials. Although these developed approaches can partially resolve the problem of PP upcycling, this aspect requires further investigation. To date, a majority of methods for upcycling are associated with the sorption of functional components via relatively weak interactions, which increases the chances for leakage. Moreover, the fiber structure of FMs can be easily fragmented and release large quantities of PE nanoplastics and microplastics, causing significant health risks during re-/upcycling.345 Despite the emergence of covalent modification approaches, their application as industrial technologies is still far from realisation. Thus, further exploration of novel strategies for the selective functionalisation of PP surfaces will significantly impact future developments of PP upcycling to yield high added value products for the circular economy and maximization of PP lifespan (Fig. 11c).

2.5. Polystyrene (PS)

2.5.1. General remarks. 
PS accounts for approximately 10 wt% of the total plastic waste produced annually in the last ten years due to its high abundance as an industrial, packaging, and household polymer.71,346 By 2024, it is forecasted to grow to an expected production capacity of 15.68 Mt.347 The most common forms of PS include solid blocks, films, and expanded foams. Primarily, 30–50% of the plastic waste is associated with electronic equipment and energy production and transfer.348 The most important challenge in PS collection and recycling is related with low-density PS-based materials.20 Although the Alliance of Foam Packaging Recyclers has reported that the recycling rate for postconsumer and postcommercial PS in the United States has increased from 20% in 2008 to 28% in 2010,349 it is relatively less than that of most solid polymer wastes.
The structure of PS-based plastic waste can significantly differ from virgin PS because of aging during the utilisation cycle. PS undergoes degradation upon exposure to sunlight, heat, oxidants, air, and humidity.350 In terms of bulk properties, PS loses its mechanical and tensile properties under the effect of UV light and heat.350,351 As such, light induces the generation of radicals via oxidation, inducing cross-linking accompanied by chain scissions. The oxidative variations in the waste polymer structure can affect the reactivity of PS waste for re-/upcycling. To overcome or restrict this deterioration in reactivity, (photo)stabilisers are used to reduce unwanted interactions and ensure acceptable lifespan under outdoor exposure conditions. The most common applications include flame retardants, UV absorbers, excited-state quenchers, peroxide decomposers, and radical scavengers.352 Although the content of PS stabilisers does not exceed 5%, they can significantly affect the reactivity of certain catalytic systems used for re-/upcycling through chemical transformations.353
The most recent developments in recycling PS-based plastics are summarised in ref. 348 and 354. The common methods of mechanical20 (Section S5.1 in ESI†) and chemical re-/upcycling29,33,355 (Section S5.2 in ESI†) are briefly discussed in Section S5 (ESI†) based on the corresponding reviews and used for comparatively analysing the upcycling approaches.


2.5.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.5.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PS is a long hydrocarbon chain with phenyl groups linked to alternating carbon atoms composed of styrene monomers obtained from liquid petrochemicals. The presence of relatively electron-rich phenyl rings facilitates the introduction of functional groups (e.g., sulfonic, acyl, alkyl, nitro, perfluoroalkyls, etc.) via common electrophilic substitution (Fig. 12a and c), offering ample opportunities for further chemical modification tailored to specific applications.
 Fig. 12  Functionalisation of PS: (a) nitration;48 (b) sulfonation using different sources of electrophilic;59,356–360 (c) Friedel–Crafts acylation/alkylation;361–363 (d) formation of hydrazones;364 (e) cross-linking reaction;365–367 (f) radical trifluoromethylation;368,369 (and g) hydroarylation.110 
The nitration of PS has been applied to fabricate materials with enhanced dielectric properties for energy storage applications.48 The reaction proceeds under moderate conditions using a mixture of sulfuric and nitric acids as nitrating agents (Fig. 12a and Table 5(1)).
Table 5 Overview of functional upcycling systems for PS: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




MAH: maleic anhydride; EBT: eriochrome black T; MB: methylene blue; ST: safranine T; CR: Congo red; and PEI: polyethyleneimine.




1
Nitration
Mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids
Nitro



Improved discharge energy density, breakdown strength
Dielectric for energy storage

48







2
Sulfonation
Concentrated sulfuric acid
Sulfonic



Acidity, increased catalytic activity
Catalyst for cyclization

357



Acidity, increased catalytic activity
Biomass conversion

59



Silica-sulfuric acid
Sulfonic
Enhanced ion-exchange capacity
Purification of solutions of Zn2+ and Cu2+ ions

358,360



Sulfur trioxide with triethyl phosphate and acetyl sulfate
Sulfonic
Acidity, increased catalytic activity
Catalyst for biodiesel synthesis and xylose to furfural dehydration

359







3
Acylation with secondary transformations
Acylation by MAH in the presence of AlCl3 followed by amination with tetraethylenepentamine
Maleic groups cross-linked by tetraethylenepentamine



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward EBT
Adsorbent to recover organic dyes

361



Acylation by MAH in the presence of AlCl3
Maleic group



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, ST, Cu2+ ions, increased specific surface area
Adsorbent to recover cationic dyes and heavy metals

362



Acylation by succinic anhydride in the presence of AlCl3 followed by amination with dopamine hydrochloride
Dopamine



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, CR; increased specific surface area
Adsorbent for organic dyes removal

363



Acylation by acetyl chloride in the presence of AlCl3 and interaction with phenyl hydrazine
Hydrazones



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward phenol
Adsorbent for phenol removal

364







4
Alkylation followed by cross-linking
Alkylation by formaldehyde in the presence of AlCl3 followed by cross-linking
Polymers



Enhanced specific area and porosity
O2/N2 separation

377



Alkylation by formaldehyde acetal in the presence of FeCl3 followed by cross-linking
Polymer



Enhanced specific area and porosity
Water purification and CO2 capture

366



Alkylation by dichloroalkanes in the presence of AlCl3 followed by cross-linking
Polymer



Enhanced specific area and porosity
CO2 capture

365 and 378



Alkylation by dichloroalkanesin the presence of FeCl3 followed by cross-linking
Polymer



Enhanced specific area, porosity and adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions
Hg2+ ions removal

376







5
Oxidation, followed by formation of composites
Oxidation by chromic acid and PEI Immobilisation
Carboxy, polyimines



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward humic acid
Humic acid removal

60







6
Radical trifluoromethylation
Photocatalytic generation of ˙CF3
Trifluoromethyl



Hydrophobicity
Superhydrophobic surface

368 and 369







7
Hydroarylation
Hydroarylation by methyl propiolate in the presence of [Au]/AgSbF6
1,2-Substituted methyl acrylate



Hydrophobicity, enhanced modulus and melt viscosity
Modification of physical properties

110





PS sulfonylation is the most extensively studied reaction due to the simplicity of the chemical process (Fig. 12b and Table 5(2)).360,370 The most common and easy-to-use reagent for PS sulfonylation is sulfuric acid, which was first reported in 1999.371 Following studies investigated more moderate reaction conditions such as silica–sulfuric acid (Fig. 12b and Table 5(2))358 and acetyl sulfate (Fig. 12b and Table 5(2)).359 Additionally, electrostatic interactions between sulfonic groups and NH2 moieties of organosilanes are used to deposit PS-sulfonic on SiO2 using the sol–gel method (Fig. 12b).359
The second common reaction is the Friedel–Craft acylation/alkylation of PS waste catalysed by common Lewis acids (AlCl3 and FeCl3) or ZnO under microwave irradiation.355 Acylation of PS surfaces is performed using succinic or MAHs (Fig. 12c and Table 5(3)),361–363,372,373 acetyl chloride,364 and acetic anhydride.374 Moreover, acylation is often employed in the formation of reactive centers for grafting amines (e.g., dopamine, hydrazone, and tetraethylenepentamine) for the target application (Fig. 12d). The alkylation of PS can be used for cross-linking using additional reagents to prepare hyper-cross-linked polymers (HCPs) with high porosity and surface areas (Fig. 12e and Table 5(4)).375,376 The common external cross-linking reagents include formaldehyde366,377 or halogen-containing compounds such as dichloroalkane (dichloromethane and 1,2-dichloroethane),365 carbon tetrachloride,378 or α,α′-dichloro-p-xylene, and (4,4′-bis(chloromethyl)-1,1′-biphenyl).376,378
Leibfarth et al. pioneered the functionalisation of PS waste (Fig. 12f and Table 5(6)),368,369 with a fundamental idea of upcycling through nonselective trifluoromethylation (or fluoroalkynylation) of the PS backbone using photocatalytically-generated radical species from the available trifluoroacetic anhydride in the presence of Ru-based or organic photocatalysts. Currently, the proposed approach can be considered straightforward for preparing hydrophobic polymers from PS wastes. In addition to typical electrophilic or radical substitution, the PS surface is oxidised by relatively strong oxidants such as chromic acetic solution, which results in the formation of carboxylic groups for further electrostatic interaction with PEI (Table 5(5)).60
Similar to PET,46 Azoulay et al. demonstrated a gold-catalysed intermolecular hydroarylation between alkyne derivatives and PS, resulting in the direct functionalisation of phenyl rings through 1,2-substituted methyl acrylate (Fig. 12g and Table 5(7)).110 The solubility of PS and derivatives enables a wide range of techniques for characterizing the obtained materials. The bulk modification has been evaluated by NMR spectroscopy, GPC, or simple titration when acidic groups are introduced. For the surface modification of PS, common observational methods such as FTIR, XPS, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with EDS have been implemented to analyse the surface composition and properties.
2.5.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The functional upcycling of PS results in the generation of new high-performance materials. The most common class is high-adsorption capacity adsorbents for metal ions, dyes, drugs, CO2, and phenols (Fig. 13a and Table 5(3, 4, 5)).45,57,60,362–365 For the negatively charged surface caused by the presence of sulfo or carboxylic groups, various types of toxins and ions such as cationic toxins, metal ions (Table 5(3)),360,362,379,380 and cationic dyes (Table 5(3))45,363 can be successfully removed. Conversely, the positively charged amino groups present on the surface can facilitate the capture of anionic dyes45 or phenols via hydrogen bonding (Table 5(3)).364 In addition, the presence of relatively electron-rich aryls inducing dipole interactions with CO2 or CO2-philic amine groups is favorable for CO2 capture and utilisation in the separation of a N2/CH4 mixture.381 The adsorption capacity for metal ions on PS waste-derived adsorbents ranges from 5–65 mg g−1,362,379,380 which is less than or comparable to that of modern polymer composite adsorbents,382,383 but higher than that of cross-linked high-power field (HPF) membranes produced from PS and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP),384 sulfonated fly ash,385 or magnetic carbon nanotube (CNT)-based aerogels.386
 Fig. 13  Application of functionalised PS waste: (a) modification of PS by 1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic anhydride for adsorption of dyes, adapted from ref. 45; (b) sulfonation of PS waste for catalytic application in biomass valorization, adapted from ref. 359; and (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PS with mechanical and chemical strategies *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S5, ESI.† 
As the adsorption capacity for dyes is significantly high (1000–2300 mg g−1),45,363 it generally outperforms the hyperbranched polymers387 and three-dimensional graphene-based macrostructures.388,389 The adsorption capacity of PS grafted with hydrazone for phenol is 178 mg g−1 (Table 5(3)),364 which is comparable or even superior to that of previously published ion-exchange resins (92 mg g−1)390 or molecular-imprinted polymers (86 mg g−1).391
The adsorption capacity for CO2 of hyper-cross-linked waste PS was 2–2.52 mmol g−1 at 1 bar (Table 5(4)).365,366,378 An increased capacity of 11 mmol g−1 was registered at 10 bar,367 which is comparable to that of activated carbon materials,392 zeolites, and certain MOFs.393,394 Ghaemi et al. demonstrated another application of HCP waste PS for O2/N2 separation with an adsorption capacity of 12.78 and 7.67 mmol g−1 for O2 and N2, respectively, at 5 °C and 10 bar. This material overperforms waste polycarbonate HCP, silica gel, and zeolite adsorbents in terms of adsorption capacity (Table 5(4)).377
An alternative application of sulfonated PS waste is its use as an acidic catalyst for transformation of readily available and affordable sugars into immensely significant furfuryl alcohols (Fig. 12b, 13b and Table 5(2))59,359,395 as well as in biodiesel synthesis (Fig. 13b),359 furfural oxidation to maleic and succinic acids, and cyclization of (+)-citronellal (Fig. 12b and Table 5(2)).357 Lim et al. demonstrated that PS food boxes can be easily converted into acidic homogeneous or cross-linked porous heterogenous polymeric catalysts under mild reaction conditions (Table 5(2)).59 Notably, the degree of sulfonation in waste-derived catalysts (∼30%) is less than that in the commercially available poly(4-styrenesulfonic acid). Nevertheless, the yields of converting 5-hydroxymethylfurfural were comparable under identical reaction conditions. Granados et al. reported the high technological performance of SiO2-attached sulfonated PS as a catalyst, distinguished by the ease of separation from the reaction mixture and reutilisation.359
The photocatalytic C–H fluoroalkylation of PS holds high potential for achieving high surface energy for superhydrophobic, anti-icing, and antifouling materials. An increase in the water contact angle from 94 to 111° is demonstrated on fluorinated PS films (Table 5(6)).368,369 Considering a functionalisation degree of 30 mol%, this approach holds great potential as a foundation for future applications in corrosion resistance, anti-icing, anti-fogging, anti-bacterial, and self-cleaning applications.
Finally, Chen et al. developed a process for PS waste foam acetylation using acetic anhydride to improve the quality of crude oil. In particular, the addition of the prepared material reduces the viscosity and the pour point of the crude oil by up to 84.6% and 8.8 °C, respectively.374


2.5.3. Conclusions. 
The development of straightforward approaches for re-/upcycling of PS remains a crucial issue for modern technology. Through various recycling strategies, it has been observed that mechanical recycling (Section S5.1 in ESI†) and landfills do not offer materials with a high added value (Fig. 13c). Although chemical recycling (Section S5.2 in ESI†) is presently gaining momentum, it still involves harsh reaction conditions for processing. Therefore, functional upcycling is a promising alternative for PS waste utilisation, which promotes the design of functional materials outperforming commercially available analogues. To advance in this direction, scientists have to design novel approaches for converting PS wastes into valuable materials with specific properties and applications.

2.6. Polyurethane (PU)

2.6.1. General remarks. 
PU is the sixth most used polymer worldwide (8% of produced plastics) with an annual production volume of 18 Mt.396 PU-based polymers are primarily classified into foams and in denominated coatings, adhesives, sealants, and elastomers (CASEs). PUs are petrochemical-based polymers composed of carbamate (urethane) units, where the structure of units predetermines the properties of the polymer. Nevertheless, the chemical structure of the polymer backbone causes serious hazards to the environment due to the potential formation of isocyanates, cyanic acid, and dioxins during degradation/recycling. The major application fields of PU include furniture (33%), construction (13%), electronics and appliances (11%), automobiles (10%), etc.1 Although PU generates a significant amount of waste, landfilling is the first choice for waste disposal in several countries accounting for ∼30.8% of the total waste volume.397,398 In turn, 39.5% is recovered through energy recovery processes and only 29.7% is recycled. Thus, the development of rational approaches for re-/upcycling of PU is a vital task for modern chemical engineering.
The functional upcycling of waste PU (WPU) should be performed considering the variations in structures and properties associated with aging. Depending on the applications, the performance degradation of PU can range from the deterioration of mechanical properties to the destruction of the chemical structure of the polymer. This is specifically important for PU exposed to air, under UV-irradiation, or under heating in a humid environment.399 The thermal degradation proceeds according to the radical chain mechanism at the α-position of the ether bridge. Additionally, the oxidation process – initiated by free radicals from hydroperoxides – results in the formation of carbonyl groups or chain scission.400 Thermal degradation generally includes the release of toxic gases. Accordingly, to avoid this degradation, ready-to-use polymers contain stabilisers such as flame retardants, antioxidants, UV absorbers, excited-state quenchers, peroxide decomposers, and radical scavengers.400,401 Although the content of PU stabilisers does not exceed 10%,400 they can significantly affect the reactivity of certain catalytic systems applied for chemical re-/upcycling. Thus, the development of functional upcycling techniques, which are independent of the presence of additives, represents a challenging task.
The earlier achievements of PU waste disposal are summarised in ref. 396, 402, and 403 (Section S6 in the ESI†). Herein, the functional upcycling approaches are compared with the mechanical and chemical re-/upcycling methods based on its description given in Section S6 (Sections S6.1 and S6.2 in ESI†).


2.6.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.6.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
As discussed earlier, PU is a polycondensation product containing carbamate units (Fig. 14). In principle, the fundamental pathways for modification should include a wide range of surface transformations via the partial cleavage of C–O or C–N bonds through surface hydrolysis, glycolysis, and aminolysis.404 However, the chemical transformations of the PU (Section S6.2 in ESI†) surface differ from the chemical upcycling methods (Section S6.2 in ESI†). Although the fundamental aim of chemical recycling is to cleave the PU backbone, the PU surface chemistry primarily seeks to attach the functional groups.
 Fig. 14  Functionalisation of PU: (a) on-surface radical polymerisation;405,406 (b) surface hydrolysis followed by diazotization and secondary transformations;407–409 (c) functionalisation with diphenyl diisocyanate followed by silanisation;410 and (d) diazonium surface functionalisation for surface hydrophobization.411,412 
One of the most applicable methods for functional upcycling of PU is the immobilisation of various active groups (including polymeric ones) on its surface. PU has a perfect adhesive property towards a wide range of polymers. For instance, PANI NPs can be immobilised on the PU surface via oxidative polymerisation (Table 6(3)).413 A similar route was adopted for the immobilisation of PD using self-polymerisation on both waste and commercial PU under normal conditions (Fig. 14a and Table 6(3));414 however, the polymer layer was not attached covalently. In addition to polycondensation, free radical polymerisation can be used to create composite polymeric materials on the PU surface. Thus, lauryl methacrylate and/or hexadecane (HD) were copolymerised in the presence of cross-linkers and benzoyl peroxide as an initiator for the surface modification of waste PU (Table 6(1)).405 Polymerisation on the PU surface has emerged as a common strategy for functional upcycling.414–416
Table 6 Overview of functional upcycling systems for PU: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




NPs: nanoparticles; EDC/NHS: N-ethyl-N′-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide; PD: polydopamine; PANI: polyaniline; CNTs: carbon nanotubes; and CNFs: cellulose nanofibers.




1
On-surface radical polymerisation
Lauryl methacrylate, hexadecane, and benzoyl peroxide as an initiator, Fe3O4 NPs
Poly(lauryl methacrylate)-co-polyhexadecene, Fe3O4



Enhanced adsorption capacity for diesel and crude oil
Removal of oils

405







2
Chemical transformation of surface PU chains
Partial hydrolysis with subsequent diazotization and interaction with O-ethyl dithiocarbonate

O-Ethyl dithiocarbonate



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions
Removal of Hg2+ ions

409



Oxidation by Jone's reagent (CrO3 + H2SO4), EDC/NHS activation and treatment by fatty acid coupled with chitosan
Carboxyl, fatty acids



Cytotoxicity and antibacterial towards Gram-negative bacteria
Antibacterial coatings

415







3
On-surface Immobilisation of active layers via electrostatic forces
Dopamine on-surface polymerisation in presence of FeCl3
PD, Fe(OH)3



Hydrophilicity, enhanced oil separation
Oil–water separation

414



Coating by SiO2 with subsequent silanisation using octadecyltrimethoxysilane
Octadecyl



Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation
Oil–water separation

417



Aniline on-surface polymerisation
PANI



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions
Removal of Hg2+ ions

413



Treatment by CNTs and CNFs, aniline polymerisation
CNTs, CNFs, PANI



Hydrophilicity, high tensile strength and Young's modulus, stretchability, high specific capacitance, high energy density
All-solid-state supercapacitors

47







4
Surface modification by organic reagents
Surface modification by 4,4′-methylenediphenyl diisocyanate, followed by silanisation with hexadecyltrimethoxysilane
Hexadecyl



Hydrophobicity, chemical and high-temperature resistance
Gas pre-dehydration

410



Diazonium surface modification by 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)benzenediazonium tosylate, followed by Fe3O4 NPs treatment
3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene



Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation
Oil–water separation

411



Diazonium surface modification by 4-(heptadecafluorooctyl)diazonium salts, MoS2
4-(Heptadecafluorooctyl)phenyl



Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation
Oil–water separation

412





The other covalent modification techniques are represented by the surface hydrolysis of the PU treated with a hydrochloric acid solution under reflux for 2 h (Fig. 14b).407 The formed free amino groups in conserved PU foams can undergo diazotization, azo coupling, and other reactions typical for aromatic amines.408 For instance, Páez-Hernández et al. demonstrated PU diazotization followed by coupling with O-ethyl dithiocarbonate (Fig. 14b and Table 6(2)).409 Alternatively, PU was treated with 4,4′-methylene diphenyl diisocyanate to introduce reactive –NCO groups, which provides an excellent structural basis for surface modification with hexadecyltrimethoxysilane using triethanolamine as a catalyst (Fig. 14c and Table 6(4)).410
More recently, electrostatic interactions have been used to recycle waste PU and transform it into functional material. SiO2 NPs have been deposited on PU by dipping (Table 6(3))417via electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding.418 Furthermore, this material was coated with octadecyltrimethylsiloxane for oil–water separation. Alternatively, waste PU foam has been used as a substrate for a supercapacitor (Table 6(3))47 formed by deposition of CNTs and cellulose nanofiber (CNF) suspension to interact with PU for further surface chemical transformations.47,419,420
Although the functional upcycling of PU is gaining momentum, the chemistry of commercially available PU products is quite diverse. Therefore, we will explore further examples of virgin PU functionalisation considering its potential applicability to waste PU. Ellison and Dichtel used dibutyltin dilaurate as a cross-linking agent for PU foams/films to enable their reprocessing at elevated temperatures via dynamic carbamate exchange reactions. Commercial cross-linked PU foams were continuously reprocessed using twin-screw extrusion to remove the gaseous filler and produce PU filaments or films with elastomeric or rigid thermoset mechanical properties.55
Only a few examples of diazonium modification of PU are reported, while the versatility of substituents in diazonium salts enables the covalent attachment with fluorinated or amino functional groups (Fig. 14d and Table 6(4)).406,411,412 These groups can provide additional functionality to PU or used in advanced surface chemistry.
The influence of oxidation in PU waste functionalisation is another reaction that requires further investigation. The surface of commercially available PU stents was first oxidised by the Jones reagent (CrO3 + H2SO4) to form a –COOH group to promote EDC/NHC coupling with chitosan fatty acids (stearic acid, oleic acid, and linoleic acid) to prevent bacterial colonization (Fig. 14b and Table 6(2)).415 Potentially, recycled polyols can be grafted to waste PU, providing functional materials from both waste components.421 Chun reported a unique and promising upcycling approach in which recycled polyols from waste PU foams (prepared by thermal depolymerisation at 200 °C) were grafted onto PU to improve its properties, e.g., tensile strength, shape recovery, low-temperature flexibility, and water compatibility.421
Several available methods such as XPS, FTIR, or EDS can be used to characterize the surface functionalisation of the PU surface.


2.6.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The functional upcycling of PU leads to the generation of new high-performance materials, especially high-capacity adsorbents for metal ions or oil–water separation. A common strategy for selective oil removal is hydrophobization of the surface using poly(lauryl methacrylate), polyhexadecene, or long alkyl chains (Tables 6(1, 3)).405,417 The adsorption capacity of upcycled sponges is comparable to that of sponges prepared from virgin PU (Table 6(4)).411,412 Conversely, PU has been functionalised using PD and Fe(OH)3 to hydrophilize hydrophobic PU (Table 6(3)).414 Owing to the superhydrophilicity, water can be immediately trapped in the hierarchical surface structure of Fe(OH)3@PDA@WPU.
To remove toxic Hg2+ ions, the PU surfaces were grafted with PANI (Table 6(3))413 or O-ethyl dithiocarbonate (Table 6(2))409 to achieve a removal efficiency of up to 94–98% with high stability of functional sponges. Although the removal efficiency of upcycled materials is less than that of similar materials derived from non-waste PU,422,423 the development of more advanced functionalisation approaches can improve it.
Only a single study has used PU sponge as a base for flexible, all-solid-state supercapacitors to create a 3D skeleton of flexible electrodes (Table 6(3)).47 The surface functionalisation with carbon materials enabled the preparation of materials featuring excellent flexibility, and its capacitance deviated seldom under various bending deformations. Furthermore, after surface modification, the porous structure of PU foams can become a perfect base for electronic applications.
Another promising application of PU films is packaging materials.424 Experiments have demonstrated the reasonable hydrophobicity of the PU surface of the accumulated sponge packing layer in air. The functional upcycling of PU waste through SiO2 coating promotes the formation of a specific packaging layer, expected to be an ideal candidate filler for gas pre-dehydration in large-scale practical applications.
Furthermore, based on the examples of commercial PU functionalisation using polymers, we suggest that upcycled PU can be applied in active biomaterials with antifouling406 or antibacterial (Table 6(2))415 properties by attaching active polymers or fatty acids (Fig. 15). However, the possibility of using upcycled plastic in medical applications is highly controversial. Plastics in a medical device are subject to several requirements and tests before use. According to ISO 10993, all plastic materials must be sterilised and tested for biocompatibility, cytotoxicity, sensitivity, and chemical and lipid resistance. Although the modern regulatory acts on medical devices (ISO 10993 and UPC classes IV) do not state the requirement of a designated source of plastic, the possibility of using functional upcycling is still open. Nevertheless, the functionalised PU with an antibacterial layer can be used in devices or coatings that are not in contact with the body. A biocompatibility test is not required, but compliance with sterilization requirements is necessary.
 Fig. 15  Comparison of functional upcycling of PU with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S6, ESI.† 


2.6.3. Conclusions. 
The analysis of published data indicates that both chemical and mechanical methods (Section S6 in the ESI†) are energy-intensive in terms of high temperature and pressure (Fig. 15). Moreover, the value added by mechanically recycled products is appallingly low (Section S6.1 in the ESI†). Therefore, even the low price of mechanical recycling does not ensure the sustainability of this strategy in the future. The chemical recycling of PU (Section S6.2 in the ESI†), especially glycolysis, is promising and has already been applied on a larger scale because of the reactivity of PU in condensation reactions. However, the limitations of chemical recycling include variations in process parameters for PU wastes, high temperatures, use of aggressive reagents, and low tolerance to contamination in the postconsumer materials (Section S6.2 in the ESI†). For PU, functional upcycling differs significantly from chemical upcycling in terms of the chemical composition of the surface: complete depolymerisation does not occur, and an additional functional layer is grafted (Fig. 15). Functional upcycling of PU can be considered as a diversification pathway, although further development in large-scale functionalisation is required for competitiveness.

2.7. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)

2.7.1. General remarks. 
PMMA is a homopolymer and 0.26 Mt of it was produced in 2020 in Europe, growing at a constant rate of 4% per annum.2,425 PMMA is characterised by transparency, lightweight, durability, UV tolerance, chemical and weather resistance, safety, nontoxicity, polishability, and moderate scratch resistance. Thus, PMMA has been widely applied in the building and infrastructure sector, mostly as a substitute of transparent glass (Plexiglas®, Perspex®, and others), in addition to the automotive industry, electronics (display and touch screens), and also as lenses for glasses, houseware, leisure, sports, medical industries and others.425–429 According to MMA two project, only around 0.008 Mt PMMA is recycled annually in Europe.430,431
During application, PMMA materials are affected by environmental stresses such as moisture, oxygen/ozone, light, and temperature, which can cause chemical (hydrolysis, chain-scission, etc.) and physical changes (surface roughening, plasticization, etc.).432–436 In total, it can serve a lifespan of up to 20 years under various environmental conditions.436,437 This stability is reached by the addition of dyes, plasticisers, comonomers, UV absorbers, antioxidants, retardants, and compatibilisers.436,438,439 In spite of the low level of additives,440 they can leach from PMMA during utilisation and alter the reactivity in re-/upcycling processes. Apart from leaching, additives can contribute to additional light absorption in addition to intrinsic PMMA light absorption below 260 nm. Therefore, the fundamental aging mechanism of PMMA is photooxidation440 that occurs via the chain-scission, cross-linking, photolysis of ester group and branching.437,441 These alterations in the chemical structure varies the glass transition temperature and diminishes its toughness.437
Mechanical recycling of PMMA is seldom practiced owing to the deterioration of optical and mechanical properties442,443 and briefly discussed in Section S7.1 (ESI†). The chemical recycling approaches (Section S7.2 in ESI†) of PMMA waste involve primarily pyrolysis, gasification and carbonization, as reported in the followed reviews,29,444 based on which we further compare functional upcycling with other methods of PMMA waste recycling.


2.7.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.7.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
PMMA is a thermoplastic composed of (–CH2–C(CH3)(CO2CH3)–) structural units (Fig. 16). The presence of ester groups in the structure extending 1–2 Å from the backbone helps various post-modifications or surface functionalisation through preliminary hydrolysis with the formation of reactive –COOH groups.445 The functionalisation of PMMA can be performed using various chemical and physicochemical methods, either with the dissolution of the polymer (post-polymerisation modification) or without it (surface modification). Direct physical methods such as coating are restricted by the weak adhesion of the PMMA surface.446 Therefore, surface or bulk modification is more frequently adapted. Surface modification is more preferable for waste upcycling owing to the absence of an additional shaping stage, and requires lower amounts of precursors. Moreover, unlike chemical re-/upcycling, the presence of small amounts of additives in the polymer does not affect the upcycling process.
 Fig. 16  Functionalisation of PMMA: (a) direct aminolysis,447 (b) hydrolysis,448 followed by (c) amination,448 (d) esterification,449 (e) alkylation,450 (f) silanisation451 and (g) grafting/cross-linking;452 (h) modification by high reactive radicals;453 and (i) physical and chemical activation.454 
The ester group provides a wide range of possible approaches including nucleophilic substitution such as hydrolysis and aminolysis.445,455–460 The functional –CO2CH3 groups on the surface are typically less reactive in direct aminolysis than in bulk. Accordingly, more active reagents with high nucleophilicity, such as lithium amides, are applied for the modification (Fig. 16a and Table 7(4)).447,461,462 Commonly, surface methods involve two stages to introduce the desirable functional groups on the PMMA surface (Fig. 16). The first stage involves the generation of reactive carboxylic or hydroxylic species for further reactions. For –COOH groups, surface hydrolysis is widely applied through treatment with acids448,463 or bases464–466 (Fig. 16b). Ester groups can be transformed to –CH2OH by reduction with lithium aluminum hydride (LAH).445 As the introduction of –OH/–COOH groups imparts a hydrophilic property to the surface, wettability is the simplest method for analysis. Furthermore, FTIR and XPS are used to study the surface composition of functionalised PMMA.
Table 7 Overview of mostly commercial PMMA functionalisation for future perspective waste upcycling: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




UV: ultraviolet; EDA: ethylenediamine; NPs: nanoparticles; EDC/NHS: N-ethyl-N′-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LSPR: localised surface plasmon resonance; SERS: surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy; PAMAM: poly(amidoamine); PEI: polyethyleneimine; BSA: bovine serum albumin; dsDNAs: double stranded deoxyribonucleic acids; PGMA: poly(glycidyl methacrylate); HBsAg: Hepatitis B surface Antigen; PEGMEMA: poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate; and PEG: polyethylene glycol.




1
UV-mediated degradation
UV-exposure
Hydroxyl/carboxyl



Hydrophilicity, increased electroosmotic flow
Microfluidic devices

476



Controllable gradient UV-irradiation
Hydroxyl/carboxyl



Hydrophilicity, increased fluorescence signal toward cardiac Troponin I
Microfluidic devices

477







2
Modification by high reactive radicals
H3PO2/HCl + diazonium salts
Aryl (nitro, carboxyl, sulfonic, thiol, polyfluorinated)



Different functional groups for wettability and amphiphilicity switching
Wettability control

453, 495 and 496



3
Physical or chemical hydrolysis followed by amination
Acid hydrolysis, amination with cysteamine or EDA for Au NPs Immobilisation
Amine, Au NPs



Increased sensitivity against Concanavalin A
Biosensor (Concanavalin A)

448



Air plasma-assisted hydrolysis, EDC/NHS coupling of green fluorescent protein
Protein GFP



Biocompatibility, sensitivity against C. trachomatis
Microfluidic devices, bioassay

467



Atmospheric pressure plasma treatment, amination by hexamethylene diamine, Au NPs
Amine, Au NPs



Plasmonic activity
Possible LSPR and SERS based sensing

485



Acid hydrolysis, amination by PAMAM, Au NPs
Amine, Au NPs



Plasmonic activity
Plasmonic sensors

463



Alkaline hydrolysis, amination by PEI, glutaraldehyde treatment and BSA Immobilisation
Amine, BSA



Ability to bind proteins
Protein Immobilisation for microfluidic devices

465







4
Direct aminolysis
Aminolysis by N-lithioethylenediamine or N-lithiodiaminopropane, amination by n-octadecane-1-isocyanate

n-Octadecane-1-isocyanate



Hydrophobicity, ability to perform heterogeneous enzyme cleavage of dsDNAs
Microelectrophoresis devices

461



Aminolysis, UV-grafting of PGMA and protein Immobilisation
PGMA



Ability to bind proteins, sensitivity for detection of hepatitis B virus biomarker (HBsAg)
HBsAg detection in human serum

486



Aminolysis by hexamethylenediamine, treatment by glutaraldehyde and BSA
BSA



Ability to bind proteins
Microfluidic devices

465







5
–OH/–COOH group formation, followed by alkylation
O2 plasma, alkylation with subsequent atom transfer radical polymerisation with PEGMEMA
PEG



Reduced nonspecific adsorption of proteins, hydrophilicity, enhanced separation efficiency for proteins and peptides
Microchips for proteins and peptides analysis

450



6
–OH/–COOH group formation, followed by silanisation
Water-vapor plasma, octadecyltrichlorosilane or bromoundecyltrichlorosilane
Octadecyltrichlorosilane and bromoundecyltrichlorosilane



Hydrophobicity, control of electroosmotic flow
Microfluidic capillary electrophoretic system

473



O2 plasma treatment, heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl trichlorosilane
Heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl trichlorosilane



Hydrophobicity, improved generation of aqueous droplets
Microfluidic devices

472



Chemical reduction by LiAlH4 and silanisation
Silanes with fluorine, amino, and thiol



Different functional group for attachment of biomolecules, decreased non-specific adsorption
Microfluidic devices

445







7
–OH/–COOH formation followed by esterification
Dissolution and alkaline hydrolysis, cross-linking by diethanolamine with PMMA and complexation with Ca2+, Mg2+
Hydroxyl, amino, poly(magnesium/calcium methacrylate)-co-poly (methyl methacrylate)



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Zn2+ ions
Zn2+ ions adsorbent

483



Dissolution and alkaline hydrolysis, cross-linking by diethanolamine with PMMA and complexation with Ca2+, pektin
Beads from poly(calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate), pektin and CaCl2



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Zn2+ ions
Zn2+ ions adsorption

449





Active functional groups can be generated via surface activation through hybrid methods, including air,467 argon,468 oxygen450,451,454,469–472 or water vapor plasma,473 UV-irradiation474–479 or ozone etching452,480 (Fig. 16i and Table 7(1, 3, 5, 6)). Although these solvent-free methods can be considered a 'greener' approach for surface modification, the selectivity of surface group transformation is relatively low, which hinders the subsequent modification stages.463
After the initial formation of carboxyl or hydroxyl groups on the surface, the second step involves the introduction of specific properties via secondary modification. For instance, hydroxylated PMMA surfaces can be modified using common organosilanes (Fig. 16f and Table 7(6)),445,451,454,472,473,481,482 by transesterification with diethanolamine (Fig. 16d and Table 7(7)),449,483 alkylation for further functionalisation (Fig. 16e and Table 7(5)),450 and radical graft polymerisation (Fig. 16g).452 The nature of these modified surfaces has been surveyed utilising contact angle measurements to assess the variations in wetting properties through XPS, FTIR, and secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS).
However, the majority of the publications are dedicated to simple amination of the activated surface (–OH and –COOH) groups (Fig. 16c and Table 7(3)). These processes, realised under mild conditions, mostly at room temperature (RT), generally require EDC/NHS activation.467 In particular, amination has been performed with various compounds: ethylenediamine,448,484 hexamethylenediamine,465,485–489 cysteamine,448 cystamine,479 and aminophenylboronic acid.490 In addition, such an approach can be extended to amine-containing polymers: poly(amidoamine),463 PEI,489,491–494 aminated polyethylene glycol,466 and other aminated compounds.489
Despite the prevalence of the two-step methods, the application of diazonium salts453,495,496 or nitrene precursors497 has been developed as a direct approach to introduce the functional groups (Fig. 16h and Table 7(2)).


2.7.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The majority of the publications have dedicated their attention to the modification of commercial PMMA (Plexiglas®, Goodfellow® and other trademarks). As PMMA is primarily applied in the construction and infrastructure sector, after its end-of-life cycle, this waste does not differ substantially from its corresponding virgin materials. Thus, the methods of PMMA functionalisation should be unaffected by the initial application of the material. The methods used in functionalising virgin materials can be readily adopted for treating the PMMA waste.
Generally, waste polymers serve as a basis for the creation of sorbents for various ecotoxicants. PMMA is not an exception and its aminated waste has been applied to remove metal ions (Zn2+) (Table 7(7)).449,483 Jakóbik-Kolon et al. prepared a microporous PMMA sorbent through alkaline hydrolysis and cross-linking using diethanolamine with Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions.483 Microporous PMMA exhibited 87.7 mg g−1 adsorption capacity for Zn2+. Furthermore, this sorbent was immobilised on pectin-based beads to conduct column-scale removal of Zn2+ ions and a slightly decreased adsorption capacity was recorded (50.2 mg g−1).449 Compared to commercially available materials (clinoptilolitic zeolite and granulated activated carbon), PMMA-based sorbents achieved higher sorption capacities under neutral pH conditions (4–7).498
Owing to its wide range of physical and chemical properties, listed in Section 2.7.1, commercial PMMA is used to design various microfluidic devices, arrays, or sensors (Table 7(4)).461,487 These developments started at the beginning of the 2000s. McCarley et al. modified commercial PMMA via amination using lithiated diamine and demonstrated that the HaeIII restriction endonuclease enzyme can be covalently immobilised on the surface for the effective microdigestion of double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA) (Table 7(4)).461 Thereafter, Cheng et al. reported the fabrication of chips from commercial PMMA using CO2 laser patterning, followed by reduction with LAH and modification with silanes (Table 7(6)).445 The functionalisation of PMMA using organosilane with preliminary plasma irradiation improved the PMMA bonding properties for microchips with a more stable aqueous droplet flow (Table 7(6))472 or for better control of electroosmotic flow (Table 7(6)).473 The sensitivity of PMMA to light irradiation promotes the substitution of dangerous lithium compounds or high-energy plasma for softer UV-irradiation. Such a modification resulted in higher electroosmotic flow inside the microfluidic devices (Table 7(1)).476,477 The complete overview of PMMA modification for microchips and microfluidic devices has been summarised in recent reviews.499,500
The versatile chemistry of PMMA permits multistep surface functionalisation for sensing applications. As such, the aminolysis of PMMA, followed by poly(glycidyl methacrylate) grafting, has been applied as an effective approach for designing a fluorescence sensor (Table 7(4)).486 In contrast, green fluorescent protein immobilisation has been used to fabricate microfluidic antibody assay devices for detecting clinically significant concentrations of Chlamydia trachomatis specific antibodies (Fig. 17b and Table 7(3)).467 In addition to fluorescence sensors, a plasmonic sensor for Concanavalin A has been synthesized by chemisorption of Au NPs on amino- or thiol-terminated PMMA (Fig. 17a and Table 7(3)).448,463,486 Alternatively, Au NPs can be a source of electrochemical signals for nucleic acid sensing.479
 Fig. 17  Application of functionalised PMMA waste: (a) modification of PMMA optical fibers by acid hydrolysis, followed by amination and Au NP immobilisation, adapted from ref. 448; (b) air plasma-assisted –OH/–COOH group formation, followed by EDC/NHS coupling and chemisorption of the green fluorescent protein (GFP), adapted from ref. 467; and (c) – comparison of functional upcycling of PMMA with mechanical and chemical strategies. *The qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations made from analysis in Section S7 in ESI;† ***Reported only on the commercial polymers. 


2.7.3. Conclusions. 
Compared to other polymers, the chemical recycling of PMMA (Section S7.2 in ESI†) can be considered as one of the simplest processes from a technological perspective. In addition, PMMA depolymerisation proceeds more easily compared to PE, PP, and PVC without requiring expensive catalytic systems. Despite this, the high temperature of the process requires sufficient consumption of fossil fuels, resulting in a considerable carbon footprint. After depolymerisation, the derived product does not have any added value compared to virgin polymers (Fig. 17c). Therefore, alternative functional upcycling becomes extremely vital in the modern era of circular economy and sustainability. Moreover, PMMA is a near-ideal polymer for functional upcycling owing to the beneficial physical properties of its bulk material and high reactivity of the surface layers. Such a combination enables significant performance across a wide range of applications including microfluidic devices, arrays, separators, and sensors for various chemicals or biomolecules. Considering the ambitious plans for the reutilisation of polymers in Europe, the further development of upcycling methods is expected to play a key role in a sustainable market in the frame of a circular economy.

2.8. Rubber

2.8.1. General remarks. 
Synthetic rubber is an artificial elastomer derived from petroleum by-products. Styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), prepared by copolymerisation of styrene and 1,3-butadiene, is the most widely used synthetic rubber. The widespread applicability of rubbers is related to their unique properties such as abrasion resistance and aging stability, which can be additionally modulated using additives or fillers. SBR is primarily used for tyre and footwear production,501 coatings, and adhesives.502
The global SBR capacity was 7.92 Mt in 2019, which is expected to increase to 8.57 Mt by 2024.503 More than 50% of the SBR waste is disposed of into garbage or landfills without recycling.504
In 2019, Weber and Kroll reported that ∼300 million tyres were disposed in the USA in 2017, resulting in 4 Mt of tyre waste, from which approximately 3.4 Mt was returned to the market and 16.15% was landfilled.505 From the recycled waste, ∼45% was used as rubber fuel in pulp and paper plants, cement kilns, and industrial boilers, 25% was crushed to obtain crumb rubber solutions, 8% was used for construction infrastructure work, and 3% was exported.
The major challenges of rubber re-/upcycling are associated with its complex composition and the presence of numerous additives. Another difficulty is its tendency to oxidize during storage leading to a decrease in tensile strength, elongation, and tear strength as well as discoloration and a loss of elasticity and flexibility.506 To avoid this, the inclusion of various additives such as stabilisers, antioxidants, and antiozonants in the production of tyre rubbers makes them nonbiodegradable, resistant to photochemical degradation, chemical reagents, and high temperatures.507 Moreover, the presence of double bonds and active allylic hydrogen in the polymer chains results in the intensification of the aging process when exposed to heat, oxygen, light, and ozone.508 Such processes are connected with the cleavage of polymer chains and the formation of additional cross-links and oxygen-containing groups.509 This can reduce the lifespan of rubber products by reducing its elasticity, increasing its hardness, and degrading its mechanical stability.510
The other common ingredients of tyres are natural and synthetic rubbers, carbon black, metal, textile fabric, and additives.511 In addition, tyres contain steel cord and nylon, polyester, and cellulose fibers, which must be separated from rubber when recycling waste tyres.511 Thus, recycling used tyres is a technologically, economically, and environmentally challenging task.
Based on the corresponding reviews, the common mechanical501,512,513 (Section S8.1 in ESI†) and chemical re-/upcycling514,515 methods (Section S8.2 in ESI†) for rubber are briefly discussed in Section S8 (ESI†). Accordingly, we comparatively analysed functional upcycling with other methods of rubber waste recycling.


2.8.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.8.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
Waste tyre rubber (WTR), primarily constituted by SBR, is a product of copolymerisation of styrene and 1,3-butadiene (Fig. 18).516
 Fig. 18  Functionalisation of rubber: (a) electrophilic halogenation using ICl or Br2, followed by amination;43,517 (b) oxidation using ozone or NOX;518–520 (c) thiol–ene coupling;521,522 and (d) sulfonation using electrophilic reaction.516,523 
The introduction of reactive functional groups into the polymer structure would enable further chemical modification to prepare a material with specific properties. The presence of double bonds and aromatic rings in the polymer backbone facilitates electrophilic addition and substitution reactions. The oxidation potential of the CC bonds for forming carboxyl or carbonyl groups is demonstrated by their treatment with nitrous oxide,518 and ozone519,520 (Fig. 18b). Moreover, rubber can be treated with Wijs' reagent for the formation of vicinal dihalogenides, followed by aminolysis using polyamines (EDA, DTA, or pentaethylenehexamine (PHA)) (Fig. 18a and Table 8(1))43,517 under microwave irradiation. Another example of an electrophilic reaction is sulfonation using H2SO4 or a H2SO4/HNO3 mixture (Fig. 18d and Table 8(3)).516,523
Table 8 Overview of functional upcycling systems for rubber: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




EDA: ethylenediamine; ATRP: atom transfer radical polymerisation; MAH: maleic anhydride; MB: methylene blue; MO: methyl orange; TC: tetracycline; APTMACl: (3-acrylamidopropyl)trimethylammonium chloride; and PFTS: 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane.




1
Halogenation
ICl, aminolysis with polyamine
Amine modified, Cl− as ion exchangeable site



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward NO3− ions
Adsorbent for the removal of NO3− ions from water

517



Halogenation using Br2, aminolysis with EDA
Amine modified, Cl− as ion exchangeable site



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward F− ions
Adsorbent for the removal of F− ions from water

43



Halogenation by Br2, aminolysis with L-lysine
Amino acid



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pb2+ ions
Adsorbent for the removal of Pb2+ ions from water

526







2
Grafting of radical initiator
Immobilisation ATRP initiator, ATRP of MAH
Carboxyl in grafted polymer



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pb2+ ions
Adsorbent for the removal of Pb2+ ions from water

527







3
Sulfonation
Sulfonation by concentrated sulfuric acid
Sulfonic



Enhanced thermal stability, negative zeta potential, enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, MO and TC
Adsorbent for the removal of MB, MO, and TC from water

516



Sulfonation by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids
Sulfonic



Increased surface area, enhanced adsorption capacity toward boron
Adsorbent for the removal of boron from water

523







4
On-surface polymerisation
Polymerisation of APTMACl
Amide and N+(CH3)3



Enhanced adsorption capacity toward arsenite As3+ ions and arsenate As5+ ions
Adsorbent for the removal of arsenite As3+ ions and arsenate As5+ ions from water

524







5
Silanisation
Oxidation by H2O2, PFTS
Perfluorooctyl



Enhanced efficient energy harvesting behavior; increased maximum open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current
Triboelectric nanogenerator

525





As an alternative approach, thiol–ene reaction can be used for the transformation of CC bonds to the corresponding thiols (Fig. 18c).521,522 For instance, the WTR surface can be modified with various polymers, e.g., poly(3-acrylamidopropyl)trimethylammonium chloride (p(APTMACl)), through an addition reaction on the CC bond in the rubber structure through –CH2–S– bond formation (Table 8(4)).524 Such approaches have been applied only to virgin polymers, but can be widened to waste products without any limitation.
Recently, a new strategy has been proposed: rubber oxidation to generate oxygen-containing species that react with trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (PFTS).525 Consequently, the prepared composite was applied for the design of a TENG. Although, the strategy has been reported only for PFTS, it can be readily extended to other silanes (Table 8(5)).
Owing to the inferior solubility of rubber, the characterization of upcycled materials is limited to spectroscopic techniques such as XPS or FTIR along with the elemental analysis of the bulk material.
2.8.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
The materials from recycled WTR are primarily implemented as adsorbents for anions, metal ions, and dyes. Kotatha et al. demonstrated that WTR grafted with quaternary ammonium groups exhibits a much higher adsorption capacity for nitrate (NO3−) and fluoride (F−) ions compared to unmodified WTR (Fig. 19a and Table 8(1)).43,517 In addition, the adsorbent can be regenerated similarly to an ion-exchange resin. Although the modified ground rubber in the above-cited study exhibited a relatively low adsorption capacity (∼2–3.5 mg g−1), the removal ability of the modified WTR is comparable to that of commercial resins.517
 Fig. 19  Application of functionalised rubber waste: (a) adsorbent for fluoride ion removal, adapted from;43 (b) adsorbent for the removal of MB, MO, and TC, adapted from ref. 516; and (c) comparison of functional upcycling of rubber with mechanical and chemical strategies. *The qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling. **Concluded from basic considerations made from analysis in Section S8 in ESI.† 
Functionalised WTR with APTMACl, containing –N+(CH3)3 functional groups, is assessed for capturing harmful As3+ and As5+ ions (0.99 mg g−1) (Table 8(4)).524 The resulting material demonstrates excellent sorption capacity in a column adsorption method to eliminate arsenic derivatives from wastewater (0.33–0.46 mg g−1) and deliver desorption efficiency, which ensures the effectiveness and reusability of this sorbent. As an additional example, WTR is modified using lysine to eliminate Pb2+ ions (18.35 mg g−1) (Table 8(1)).526 Another path followed for producing adsorbents for Pb2+ ions is associated with the modification with MAH, which enhances the adsorption capacity (up to 144.3 mg g−1) (Table 8(2)).527 Note that the adsorption capacity of WTR modified with MAH for Pb2+ ions is larger than that of palm shell-based activated carbon,528 palm shell-activated carbon,529S. alterniflora activated carbon,530 commercial activated carbon (ST1000),530 tamarind wood-activated carbon,531 dead marine algae biomass,532 and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PU21.533
The modification with sulfuric acid results in the formation of adsorbents with a high capacity towards organic dyes and antibiotics, namely, methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and tetracycline (TC) from water (Fig. 19b and Table 8(3)).516 The maximum adsorption capacity was approximately 833, 588, and 303 mg g−1 for MB, MO and TC, respectively, which was higher than that of activated charcoal,534 bamboo charcoal,535 activated carbon,536 CNTs,537 graphene,538 graphene oxide,539,540 and MOF-235.541
A similar approach was adopted to generate adsorbents for the removal of boron (Table 8(3)).523 In this case, the WTR adsorbents were prepared by treatment with a solution of nitric acid, sulfuric acid, or a mixture of acids. At an initial concentration of 17.5 mg L−1 of boron in water, the adsorption capacity of pristine WTR, chemically-modified WTR, and nano-WTR was 16.72, 13.81, and 12.70 mg g−1, respectively. As the highest adsorption capacity was recorded for boron with WTR compared to other adsorbents reported in the literature, we can conclude that WTR is an excellent cost-effective material. Thus, the development of multifunctional adsorbents for the removal of organic pollutants from wastewater using upcycled WTR may lead to development of new technologies with sustainable economic and environmental impacts in resource-limited areas.


2.8.3. Conclusions. 
Conclusively, the common methods for rubber recycling are connected with mechanical processes or pyrolysis (Fig. 19c and Section S8 in ESI†). Despite the efficiency of such technologies, they are still far from achieving the modern trends in sustainability and resource efficiency. The functional upcycling of rubber was recently included in the arsenal of available tools, primarily focusing on the design of adsorbents, which creates an avenue for further development.

2.9. Polycarbonate (PC)

2.9.1. General remarks. 
In the past few decades, PC has emerged as a cornerstone of modern technology owing to its widespread applications in daily life and technology. PC has acquired its own stature among other plastics owing to its temperature and impact resistance, in addition to its optical properties.542,543 PC is a common polycondensation product resulting from the reaction between bisphenols (or bis-alcohols) and a carbonate source. From the vast family of PCs, poly(bisphenol A carbonate) or PC, produced from bisphenol A (BPA) via conjugation with carbonic acid derivatives, is the most commonly used PC material544–546 that is distinguished by its lightweight, ductility, transparency, thermal and flame resistance, high mechanical strength, and high stability against diverse environmental conditions.547,548 Its toughness and chemical resistance determine its applicability in electronics (smartphones and computers), optical data-storage devices (compact discs (CDs) and digital versatile disks (DVDs)), packaging (food and beverages), automotive (headlights), construction and infrastructure (panels, windows, housing and sheeting).549,550 Although BPA is a possible xenoestrogen, over 6 Mt of PC was produced in 2019.14,551 PC does not have its own resin identification code. Almost the same amount of produced PC ends up in landfills or is incinerated, thereby increasing the relevance of developing functional upcycling including CDs and DVDs as a source of waste.17,545 Landfilling or incineration is increasingly costly or inconvenient (owing to BPA release in the environment), and Mt of polymer waste end up in soils and oceans, causing major pollution, which should stimulate the rapid development of new strategies to process waste PC.
PC-based plastic waste tends to degrade after exposure to sunlight, oxygen, elevated humidity, and temperature.552,553 First, the mechanical properties and coloration are compromised after degradation.552–554 Second, PC degradation causes hydrolysis and cleavage of the primary polymer chains,554 which can be facilitated by heating under environmental conditions.553 However, the aforementioned chemical transformations related to degradation can form the basis for further functional upcycling owing to the formation of polar carbonyl, carboxyl, and alkoxyl groups.555,556
Similar to other polymers, chemical re-/upcycling of PC is hampered by the additives present in the polymer. In the case of PC, common additives include flame retardants such as decabromodiphenyl ether,557 triphenyl phosphate,558 and tetrabromobisphenol A,558 as well as plasticisers such as di-n-octyl phthalate.557 Additionally, a lacquer layer or protective coating is often required to improve its stability.559 Generally, PC is used in complex devices with a substantially high content of dyes or reflective layers (such as aluminum, gold, or silver560) which presents challenges in various re-/upcycling processes. Therefore, careful cleaning, delamination, or exfoliation561 is necessary before performing any re-/upcycling, as the presence of additives and complex mixtures significantly hinders the process.
Through various recycling strategies, the mechanical recycling of PC is less frequent than that for other plastics owing to the deterioration of mechanical properties and BPA leaching17 (Section S9.1 in ESI†). The popular mechanical recycling methods are briefly discussed in Section S9.1 (ESI†). Accordingly, the functional upcycling is further compared with other methods of PC waste recycling based on the published reviews.562–564 As discussed in Section S9.2 (ESI†), the chemical recycling of PC wastes is a rapidly growing field. Overall, hydrolysis, alcoholysis, aminolysis, pyrolysis,565 and hydrogenolysis566 are the most developed methods compared to upcycling. However, chemical re-/upcycling of industrial PC is currently at the initial stage of development owing to its harsh experimental conditions, hazardous solvents, CO2 release, low selectivity, and separation problem, among other factors. Thus, the functional upcycling is further compared with other methods of PC waste recycling based on these reviews.545,567–569


2.9.2. Functional upcycling. 
2.9.2.1. Structure of the polymer, active groups, and functionalisation agents. 
The specific reactivity of the PC chain is governed by its two main structural units – bisphenol and carbonate linker (O–C6H4–C(CH3)2–C6H4–O–CO) (Fig. 20). Compared to PP and PE, PC is more reactive owing to the presence of three available functionalisation sites: methyl groups, carbonate groups, and aromatic rings (Fig. 20).570 In the context of this review, we will discuss the methods of upcycling PC that have been tested on waste and commercial PC optical disks and sheets.
 Fig. 20  Functionalisation of PC: (a) nitrene functionalisation;571–573 (b) surface hydrolysis;574–577 (c) surface amination;548,578–581 (d) surface phosphorylation;582 (e) nitration583–588/sulfonation586/chloromethylation;588 (f) Friedel–Crafts alkylation for hyper-cross-linking;377and (g) UV-irradiation or plasma or ozone.586,589–594 
First, we consider the strategies that are used for transforming the methyl groups of PC. A long-established reagent for PC functionalisation is 1-fluoro-2-nitro-4-azidobenzene (FNAB), which serves as a source of reactive nitrene species that can attack the methyl groups of PC chains (Fig. 20a and Table 9(1)).571 Under UV-irradiation, the azido group of FNAB is transformed into a highly reactive nitrene that can bind with the inert polymer surface. Moreover, the active F-substituent in FNAB, currently a part of the polymer, remains intact. This strategy has been used to attach various proteins to the PC surface.571,572
Table 9 Overview of mostly commercial PC functionalisation for future perspective waste upcycling: experimental conditions, functional groups, and application






Reaction
Modification reagent
Functional groups
Structure of the product
Added properties
Application
Ref.




FNAB: 1-fluoro-2-nitro-4-azidobenzene; UV: ultraviolet; NPs: nanoparticles; EDA: ethylenediamine; EDC: N-ethyl-N′-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide; CDTPA: cyano-4-[(dodecylsulfanylthiocarbonyl)sulfanyl]pentanoic acid; METAC: (2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl]-trimethylammonium chloride; HEMA: 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate; PEGMA: poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate; MAPTAC: 3-((methacryloylamino)propyl)trimethylammonium chloride; SPMK: 3-sulfopropyl methacrylate potassium salt; NaMA: sodium methacrylate; MPC: 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine; SBMA: (2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl)dimethyl-(3-sulfopropyl)ammonium hydroxide; HMDA: hexamethylenediamine; PEI: polyethylenimine; NHS: N-hydroxysuccinimide; PAH/PSS: poly(allylamine)/poly(styrene-sulfonate); PEG: polyethylene glycol; feS. typhi-HRP: Salmonella typhimurium antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase; DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid; DCM: dichloromethane; FDA: formaldehyde dimethyl acetal; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; GPTMS: (3-glycidoxypropyl)methyldiethoxysilane; APTMS: (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane; and TMA: trimethylaluminum.




1
Nitrene functionalisation
Treatment by FNAB under UV-irradiation followed by protein coupling
Protein



Ability to bind proteins
Potential application in biosensors, immunoassay and microarrays

571







2
Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis followed by silanisation by 3-(aminopropyl) triethoxysilane and Ag NPs Immobilisation
Ag NPs



Enhanced fluorescence
Fluorescein isothiocyanate human serum albumin sensor

574







3
Amination
Amination with EDA, EDC coupling with CDTPA followed by surface-initiated polymerisations of various monomers
Chains of different polymers



Hydrophilicity
Anti-fogging coating

548



Amination with 1,5-pentyldiamine or pentylamine
Amino



—
—

578



Amination with HMDA
Amino



Enhanced adsorption capacity and surface area
Adsorbents for Hg2+ ions removal

579



Amination with different amines and coupling with 5-(furan-2-ylmethylene)-2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4,6-dione as a photochrome
Photochrome



Visible light-stimulated photochromic properties
—

581



Amination with dodecylamine
Dodecylamine



Hydrophobicity
Hydrophobic microfluidic device

602



Amination with PEI, EDC/NHS coupling with enzymes or diglycidyl linking with enzymes
Enzyme



Enzymatic reactions
Microreactors surface

570



Amination by poly(allylamine) followed by PSS deposition
PAH/PSS



High hydrophilicity and stable generation of oil-in-water emulsions
Hydrophilic microfluidic device

603







4
Phosphorylation
Coupling with dichloro-(N,N)-diisopropylaminophosphate and different ligands derived from PEG-adducts
Appropriate ligand



—
Molecular screener

582







5
Nitration
Nitration by nitric and sulfuric acids
Nitro



Enhanced adsorption capacity
Adsorbents for Hg2+ ions removal

583



Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids followed by reduction by Na2S2O4
Nitro and amino



Hydrophilicity
Reduced bacterial adhesion of E. coli, P. vulgaris, S. aureus

584



Nitration by nitric acid, reduction by NaBH4 followed by coupling with glutaraldehyde and S. typhi-HRP
Specific antibody against S. typhi–S. typhi-HRP



Sensitivity against S. typhi
Detection of S. typhi

585



Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids
Nitro



Hydrophilicity
Improved epithelia cell adhesion

586



Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, reduction by NaBH4 followed by EDC/NHS coupling of carboxylated hapten
Hapten



Ability to bind immune-response molecules, sensitivity
Immunoassays

587



Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, reduction by NaBH4 followed by coupling with glutaraldehyde and DNA array
DNA



Sensoric properties
Biological analytical device

588







6
Sulfonation
Sulfonation by K2Cr2O7, sulfuric acid
Sulfonic



Hydrophilicity
Attachment of epithelial cells for reconstituting a highly differentiated cell tissue

586







7
Chloromethylation
Chloromethylation by DCM
Chloromethyl groups



Ability to bind oligonucleotides
Possible biological analytical device

588







8
Alkylation
Alkylation by FDA, FeCl3
Macro-mesoporous structure



Enhanced adsorption capacity and surface area
Adsorbent for O2/N2 separation

377







9
Plasma or UV-mediated oxidation
Treatment by O2 plasma, followed by EDC/NHS coupling of DNA oligo
DNA



Ability to detect PCR amplified DNA products
Microarray platform for analysis of biological samples

591



UV-irradiation and treatment by ozone, EDC/NHS-coupling of DNA
DNA



Ability to detect DNA hybridization
Chip-based biosensing devices

590



Treatment by corona air discharge or O2 plasma
Carbonyl and carboxyl



Hydrophilicity
Improved cell adhesion

586



Treatment by ammonia radio frequency plasma
Amide



Hydrophilicity
Improved cell adhesion

586



UV/ozone treatment followed by silanisation with GPTMS or APTMS
Epoxy or amine



Enhanced adhesive properties
Adhesive for industrial implementation

592



Treatment by O2 plasma followed by azido-substituted thiophene radical polymerisation and Huisgen reaction with alkynes
Alkyl, aryl or perfluoroalkyl



Hydrophilic, hydrophobic, oleophobic, parahydrophobic properties or fluorescent features
Water harvesting, oil–water separation membrane or in anti-bioadhesion

589



UV/ozone treatment, EDC/NHS coupling of DNA
DNA



Ability to bind DNA
Possible biological analytical device

593



Treatment by UV, silanisation by 3-(aminopropyl) triethoxysilane and Ag NPs immobilisation
Ag NPs



Enhanced fluorescence
Fluorescein isothiocyanate human serum albumin sensor

574



O2 plasma treatment followed by TMA immobilisation
Al2O3 layer



Enhanced stability against chemical corrosion
Surface protection layer

594





Overall, most methods are associated with the chemical modification of carbonate moieties. Thus, the partial surface hydrolysis of the PC with SnCl2575 or NaOH576,577 results in the formation of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups (Fig. 20b and Table 9(2)) on the surface. These polar groups on PC reduce the surface energy and strengthen the hydrophilicity and adhesion. Moreover, such terminal functional groups are promising moieties for further modification.591
The carbonate groups in the polymer structure are capable of participating in nucleophilic addition reactions with N-centered nucleophiles via surface amination. Amines and diamines can react with PC under very mild conditions (in water/alcohol solutions at temperatures below 70 °C) without requiring complicated equipment (Fig. 20c and Table 9(3)),548,578–581 unlike plasma-based methods.595 The grafted amino groups represent a reactive platform for post-functionalisation: Bachand et al. introduced polyethylene glycol to create an antifouling surface through facile conversion of the amine to a maleimide.580 In addition to amines, phosphate groups have been introduced by surface phosphorylation reactions with dichloro-(N,N)-diisopropylaminophosphate (Fig. 20d and Table 9(4)).582
Electron-rich aryl moieties in PC can be readily transformed to appropriate derivatives via electrophilic substitution (Fig. 20e and Table 9(5–7)). For instance, PC sulfonation has been performed by simple PC immersion into a K2Cr2O7 and H2SO4 mixture,586 which results in the hydrophilization of the surface (Fig. 20e and Table 9(6)). The presence of S-containing groups was confirmed from the appearance of the S 2p XPS signal. Moreover, PC has been nitrated using nitric acid or its mixture with sulfuric acid at ∼50 °C (Fig. 20e and Table 9(5)).583,585–587 However, such methods are discouraged by a relatively low functionalisation degree570,588 and the use of aggressive chemicals that generate toxic greenhouse NO2. Nitrogen-containing groups can be further reduced by sodium borohydride to amino.587 As a greener alternative, PC can be alkylated by Friedel–Crafts reaction using formaldehyde dimethyl acetal for further cross-linking using Lewis acids (e.g., FeCl3 at 45 °C) (Fig. 20f and Table 9(8)).377 Finally, the same reaction was applied to introduce chloromethyl moieties using ZnCl2 as a milder Lewis acid (Fig. 20e and Table 9(7)).588
Furthermore, the PC surface can be subjected to plasma treatment for unselective conversion of the surface groups (Fig. 20g and Table 9(9)).570,591,594 In particular, new polar hydroxyl or carboxylic groups evolved upon treatment with air,596 argon,597 oxygen598 plasma. Potentially, amino groups in PC can be introduced with exposure to ammonia plasma.595 UV/ozone treatment is similar to plasma methods because it generates carboxylic and/or hydroxylic groups.590,592,593,599–601 Although plasma and UV-based methods enable the generation of polar groups that can be further transformed, upcycled PC commonly suffer from low resistance against temperature and solvents.


2.9.2.2. Application of functional materials and comparison with previously reported materials. 
Optical disks (e.g., CDs and DVDs) and other electronic waste are one of the most available sources of PC for functional upcycling. Low et al. have demonstrated that nitrated PC disks can be used as a sorbent to remove Hg2+ ions from tap, lake, and mountain water (Fig. 21a and Table 9(5)).579,583 Despite the relatively moderate adsorption capacity of PCs (0.289 mg g−1) compared to carbon materials,604 PC can be used as a sustainable sorbent for wastewater treatment. The developed chemistry of PC (Fig. 20) enables a wide range of opportunities for secondary functionalisation to attach more selective ligands, thereby rendering this direction promising for further research.
 Fig. 21  Application of functionalised PC waste: (a) adsorbent for Hg2+ ions removal, adapted from;583 and (b) comparison of functional upcycling of PC with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S9, ESI;† ***Reported only on commercial polymers. 
Alternatively, waste PC has been alkylated and cross-linked to produce adsorbents for O2/N2 mixtures (Table 9(8)).377 The maximum adsorption capacities of O2/N2 are 3.68 and 2.69 mmol g−1, respectively, which are significantly less than those for hyper cross-linked PS waste.377 The inferior performance of cross-linked PC can be explained by the underdeveloped porosity and low surface area. Therefore, for adsorbent application, the surface area of the PC waste requires sufficient enhancement.
PC is an optimal material for various microfluidic applications in biomedical analytical devices. In general, plastic waste can be used to design microfluidic devices.605,606 However, in this case, the mechanical properties of the waste PC should be conserved. To date, only commercial PC has been utilised, with the most common sources being new optical disks (Table 9(3, 5, 7, 9)),548,588,590,591 filters (Table 9(5)),585 and membranes (Table 9(5, 6, 9)).586 Although wettability and adhesion are essential characteristics required for microfluidic devices, PC is neither decisively hydrophobic nor hydrophilic (Table 9(3)).603 Therefore, wettability can be varied depending on the functionalisation agent. Thus, commercial PC has been functionalised with hydrophilic amino, nitro, oxygen-containing, sulfonic groups, and polymer brushes to regulate its wettability and adhesion towards fog (Table 9(3)),548 oil (Table 9(3, 9)),589,603 bacteria (Table 9(5)),584 and cells (Table 9(5, 6, 9)).586 Alternatively, hydrophobic aliphatic chains have been affixed to PC (Table 9(3, 9)),589,602 and these methods can be further transferred to waste PC to produce certain microfluidic devices. However, biomedical analytical devices based on optical response such as colorimetric or fluorescent sensors require transparency (Table 9(5, 9)),571,574,585,587,591 which cannot be achieved in certain cases of waste PC compared to more transparent PMMA (Section 2.7).
The mechanical properties and stability of PC can be modified by functional upcycling of PC for improved durability of any functional device. The preliminary ultraviolet/ozone (UVO) treatment followed by covalent binding with Al2O3 forms a protection layer (Table 9(9))594 against acetone etching. Alternatively, UVO pre-treated PC has been modified using a silane coupling agent to improve its adhesion and mechanical properties, i.e., shear strength increased up to ∼165% compared to bare PC (Table 9(9)).592


2.9.3. Conclusions. 
Despite the availability of various strategies for recycling PC, mechanical recycling (Section S9.1 in ESI†) is limited owing to the leaching of toxic BPA (Fig. 21b). However, the intrinsic reactivity of the primary chain of PC enables the use of waste in chemical re-/upcycling processes. Both the BPA and carbonate can be recovered through hydrolysis, alcoholysis, aminolysis, and thiolysis (Section S9.2 in ESI†). However, these processes require sophisticated catalysts and high temperatures, resulting in significant carbon footprints owing to the consumption of fossil fuels in such processes. As such, CO2 emissions are common during recycling owing to the presence of a carbonyl moiety in the PC structure. Although the functional upcycling of PC is still not adequately developed, transferring the experimental procedures of chemical upcycling, as reported in ref. 578, can assist in designing new materials such as adsorbents. Additionally, the fine control of the wetting/adhesion properties of PC can be beneficial for selective interactions with specific molecules.

3. Major application fields: comparison of value-added performance with existing materials produced from non-waste sources
In the previous chapters, we discussed the application of upcycled polymers (PET, PE, PVC, PP, PS, PU, PMMA, rubber, and PC), based on which we can elucidate the major application fields of upcycled polymers.
Owing to the high impact of polymer upcycling on environmental science and technology, waste-based materials are widely used as adsorbents and membranes for removing persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and oil–water separation.45,405 Another promising direction is associated with the design of materials related to energy applications: supercapacitors,47 energy storage,56 and TENGs.56 In addition, upcycled polymers can be used for catalyst design,59,357 textile industry,99 advanced construction materials,512 and materials with controlled wettability.96,369
All these fields imply the requirement of high-value-added materials produced using complex technology to effectively fulfil real human needs. Unfortunately, the definition of added value has not been formulated thus far owing to the difficulties in calculating the actual value/price of the materials/devices synthesised from waste polymers based on the available scientific data. Therefore, to quantitatively understand the added value of waste-derived materials, we will discuss the most common application fields, considering the complexity of preparation, affordability, and actual need of these materials based on market analysis, and ultimately, compare the performances of waste-derived and non-waste-sourced materials in terms of functionality and composition. Unsurprisingly, waste-derived materials with specific performance are more affordable than those prepared from virgin resources.
3.1. Adsorbents
For all polymers, the primary application field is adsorbents or materials for oil–water separation. The most common adsorbates include oils, metal ions, dyes, and other POPs such as humic acid,49 phenols,364 anions (F− and NO3−),43,517 and TC516 (Table 10). As such, POPs are toxic chemicals that adversely affect the human health and environment on a global scale.607 Based on the analysis of market reports of 2020,608,609 the global market for adsorbents was worth USD 3.9 billion, and USD 613 million for oil–water separators,. By 2027, these markets are expected to reach USD 5.9 billion (adsorbents) and USD 790.5 million (oil–water separators) at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 4–6% during the forecast period.
Table 10 Comparison of adsorbents prepared from waste polymers and non-waste materials




Adsorbent


Source
Adsorbent
Adsorbate
Adsorption capacity, mg g−1
Working conditions
Ref.




MB: methylene blue; MG: malachite green; HPF: hollow PS fiber; PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone; MMA/AAm: methacrylic acid/acrylamide; HD-LM: hexadcene-laurylmethacrylate; NPs: nanoparticles; CNTs: carbon nanotubes; WTR: waste tyre rubber; MO: methyl orange; TC: tetracycline; PAA: polyacrylic acid; LLDPE-g-PAA: linear low-density polyethylene-g-poly(acrylic acid); and PGMA: poly(glycidyl methacrylate).




Polystyrene


Waste
PS-1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic acid
MB, safranine T, and MG
859.9, 1036.7, and 1197.3
pH (2–12)

45



Commercial
Cross-linked HPF membrane from PS and PVP
MB
346
pH > 7

384



Natural
Sulfonated coal fly
MG
233
pH > 8

385







Polyethylene terephthalate


Waste
PET treated by hydroxyquinone
Cu2+
62
pH = 6.5

46



Commercial
PET/copolymer MAA/AAm
Cu2+
31
pH = 4

612







Polyurethane


Waste
HD-LM-nanomagnetite coated PU
Crude oil
132 × 103
Oil–water separation

405



Commercial
3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene coated PU loaded by magnetic NPs
Pump oil
48 × 103
Oil–water separation

411







Poly(methyl methacrylate)


Waste
Round beads from pektin + CaCl2 and cross-linked poly(calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate)
Zn2+
50.2
pH (3–6)

449



Waste
Cross-linked poly(magnesium/calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate)
Zn2+
87.7
pH (4–7)

483



Natural
Lignocellulosic biomass-based adsorbent
Zn2+
2.7
pH = 5

615



Commercial
Nitrogen-functionalised multiwalled CNTs
Zn2+
33
pH = 4.5–5.5

613



Commercial
Agarose grafted with PMMA
Zn2+
34.3
pH (6–8)

614







Rubber


Waste
Sulfonated carbonaceous WTR
MB, MO, TC
833, 588, and 303
pH = 10, 3.6

516



Commercial
Activated carbon (Darco® G-60)
TC
290
pH = 6

616



Natural

Pinus taeda-derived activated biochar
TC
275
pH = 6

616







Polyethylene


Waste
PS@PAA
Water
450 × 103
—

61



Waste
PE/PS@PAA
Water
900 × 103
—

61



Commercial
LLDPE-g-PAA + kaolin and halloysite nanotubes
Water
600 × 103
—

617







Polypropylene


Waste
PP (face mask) modified with superhydrophobic fluorine-free MAF-6
Straight-run diesel fuel
24 × 103 for diesel
Oil–water separation, pH = 4–10

50



Commercial
PP@PGMA coupled with n-octylamine
Straight-run diesel fuel
14 × 103 for diesel and gasoline
Oil–water separation

313





The market of adsorbents and oil–water separators is driven by innovations in oil and gas processing and socioeconomic advancements. These materials are applicable in multifarious industries: petrochemical, pharmaceutical, automobile, construction, and chemical industries. Moreover, stringent environmental regulations on the quality of water, soil, and food have prompted industries to develop more advanced functional materials.610 However, several adsorbents and separator materials available in the market, with beneficial aspects in removing oils and POPs, are expensive or they do not fulfil every requirement of their specified application.607 Although the common adsorbent materials (e.g., carbon, silica and alumina, and zeolites) require an average level of technological intervention for the design and manufacturing of an industrial product, more selective or ultrahigh-surface-area sorbents typically require a more advanced level of chemical technologies to improve their performance.611
All the waste polymers considered herein can be upcycled as adsorbents or oil–water separating devices, and in more instances, water purification ability is comparable or even outperforms that of the recently reported nonrecycled materials (Table 10). To compare their performance, this review considers the adsorption capacity as the fundamental indicator and the operating conditions are also specified. Upcycled PET after transesterification with hydroxyquinone46 has been designed to remove metal ions (Cu2+) from water with 62 mg g−1 maximum adsorption capacity. In comparison, fibrous adsorbents, prepared by graft copolymerisation of a methacrylic acid (MAA)/acrylamide (AAm) monomer mixture onto commercial PET fibers, exhibited two times lower adsorption capacity.612 A similar situation has been observed in the case of Zn2+ removal using upcycled PMMA,449i.e., the adsorption capacity is higher than that of well-known adsorbents,613,614 and it is more affordable than biomass-based materials.615 However, all upcycled, commercial-based, and natural-based adsorbents are highly dependable on the pH of working solutions. The common POPs, dyes, and drugs can be removed using upcycled PS45 and rubber516 in a wide pH range. In comparison, cross-linked HPF membranes from PS and PVP,384 activated carbon (Darco® G-60), activated biochar616 or sulfonated coal fly385 displayed lower adsorption capacity and a narrow working pH range.
PU waste foams and PP fabric – from a used surgical mask coated with a hydrophobic layer – have been applied for oil–water separation. Their polymer surface selectively absorbs diesel (24 g g−1)50 or crude oil (132 g g−1)405via hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions and rejects water. Although similar adsorbents – prepared from the commercially available PU sponge411 and PP nonwoven313 fabric – exhibited comparable adsorption capacity, the final cost of the waste-derived adsorbents was lower. For example, our recent findings emphasised the benefits of MOF-coated PP fabric by calculating the expected costs of the proposed adsorbent for oil. The estimated prime cost for 1m2 was USD 4.7, which was within the price range of the commercially available fabric adsorbents.50
In contrast to PU and PP, waste PE packaging material is used for preparing superabsorbent hydrogels via surface-assisted polymerisation of AA.61 In the case of PE,61 water absorbency of PE@PAA is slightly less than that of PE/PS@PAA coupled with kaolin and halloysite nanotubes via emulsion polymerisation.617 However, on combining PS and PE waste, the water absorbency exceeds that of the nonrecycled materials and becomes applicable for saline solution.
The comparative analysis of adsorbents and oil–water separators reveals that functional materials, prepared from waste polymers, are on a similar technological level as materials prepared from commercially available films, fabrics, and sponges (Table 10). Although the performance variations of the aforementioned materials can be attributed to the surface chemistry of the waste and new polymers, our main aim is to demonstrate that waste polymer can be used for designing high-performance adsorbents and oil–water separators. In principle, functional upcycling offers the possibility of using waste for preparing adsorbents, thereby making them more affordable with the same level of the advanced production technology. However, to realise this practical application for adsorbent producers, detailed and precise procedures should be established for purification, sorting, and pre-treatment to readily access polymer waste with the required level of quality.
3.2. CO2 utilisation
The materials used for CO2 capture are highly valuable in the field of adsorbents because of environmental concerns (total emission reached 36.3 gigatonnes in 2021618). To reduce carbon emissions, the global market size of CO2 utilisation is estimated to grow from USD 3.75 billion in 2021 to USD 7 billion in 2030.619 One of the driving factors for market growth is the development of technologies that can convert CO2 into value-added chemicals such as urea and cyclic carbonates, polymers (PC and PU), and fuels (methanol and formic acid).620,621
The moderate efficiency and selectivity of commercially available CO2-capturing materials (e.g., activated carbon, zeolites, and silica) is limiting their large-scale application to reduce atmospheric CO2 concentration.622 Consequently, the development of more selective adsorbents with an extremely high surface area can overcome these limitations for more advanced chemical technologies.393,623
The most recent review of Lim et al. discussed the possibility of using waste plastics as a low-cost platform to synthesise functional materials for CO2 capture and utilisation.623 The large majority of the discussed examples are related to the chemical strategies of plastic re-/upcycling. For instance, a variety of MOFs can be prepared from PET (Section 2.1.2.1) by chemical upcycling for further CO2 capture111,624 and transformation to CO,625 or cyclic carbonates.119 Alternatively, PET can be upcycled to porous activated carbon626–628 for CO2 capture. Moreover, waste PU foam has been chemically upcycled to yield oxygen-rich and nitrogen-rich materials.629,630 The discussed strategies create new vistas for plastic re-/upcycling into functional materials with the desired adsorption capacity, porosity, stability, and selectivity for carbon capture and utilisation.
However, only a few examples can be cited forf functional upcycling, including the recent application of waste PS,365,366,378 commercial PVC270 and PE.180
First, waste PS was used as a base to prepare a mixed-matrix membrane (MMM) for CO2/N2 separation.631 Compared to other ZIF-8 based materials, the PS membrane containing ZIF-8 provided channels for CO2 transport and delivered competitive CO2-separation performance with α(CO2/N2) = 43.9.632 In contrast to noncovalent methods, the waste PS was functionalised using amino groups to increase the capacity for CO2 adsorption via chemosorption mechanism.633 Alternatively, a hyper-cross-linking strategy has been adopted for waste PS.365,366,378 The presence of relatively electron-rich phenyl rings induces dipole interactions with CO2 and increases its selectivity over N2 and CH4.634 The adsorption capacity is higher than that of commercial-based adsorbents365,378,635 and comparable to that of certain zeolites and MOFs393 (Table 11).
Table 11 Comparison of CO2 adsorbents prepared from waste polymers with similar ones prepared from non-waste materials




Adsorbent


Source
Adsorbent
Adsorption capacity, mmol g−1
Adsorption selectivity ratio (CO2 over N2)
Application conditions
Ref.




Polystyrene


Waste
Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – 1,2-dichloroethane)
1.987
23.4 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)
273 K, 1.13 bar

365



Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – carbon tetrachloride)
2.521
37.8 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)
273 K, 1.0 bar

378



Commercial
Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – octavinylsilsesquioxane)
1.84
—
273 K, 1.13 bar

636



MOFs (ZIF-8; ZIF-67; Zn/Co-ZIF)
0.5; 0.526; 0.727
—
273 K, 1.0 bar

637



Natural
Zeolites ZSM-5
2.37
∼72 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)
273 K, 1.0 bar

638





Commercial PVC has been upcycled via amination of PVC and loading on silica materials to enhance its surface area with an adsorption capacity of 0.5 mmol g−1.270 Related to the adsorption of CO2, Yoshioka and Jin reported the reduction of hydrogen carbonate (as a CO2 model source) to formate using dechlorinated PVC under hydrothermal conditions in water.225 The proposed strategy represents a new green approach for CO2 conversion with simultaneous recycling of PVC waste.
In addition, commercial-grade PE–PP fibers have been upcycled using electron beam-induced polymerisation (glycidymethacrylate or N-vinylformamide) and subsequent coupling with different amines to yield a material with an adsorption capacity of up to 4.52 mmol g−1 under ambient conditions.180,639–641
The limited number of examples of functional upcycling of plastic can be broadened by considering rational strategies to enhance CO2 capture, which have been investigated in ref. 642 or related reviews. Thus, we suggest considering the (i) importance of chemical interactions between CO2 and surface groups and (ii) surface area of materials. The grafting of N-containing superbases and heteroaromatic ring systems381,643 to plastic waste can provide polar and nucleophilic active sites for CO2 chemisorption. These strategies can be implemented by aminolysis of waste PET (Section 2.1.2, Fig. 4c and Table 1(4)) and PMMA (Section 2.7.2, Fig. 16a and Table 7(4)), azidation/amination/cyanation of PVC (Section 2.3.2, Fig. 8a, b, e and Table 3(2, 6)), surface hydrolysis of PU (Section 2.6.2, Fig. 14b and Table 6(4)), formation of hydrozones of PS (Section 2.5.2, Fig. 12d and Table 5(3)), halogenation/amination/thiol–ene coupling of rubber (Section 2.8.2, Fig. 18a, c and Table 8(1)) and amination/oxidation/halogenation of PE/PP (Sections S2.2.2 and S2.4.2, Fig. 6b, d, f, 10f and Tables 2(5, 6) and 4(5)).
To increase the surface area as the secondary significant factor, plastic waste can be physically recycled to fibers/aerogels (applicable for PET, PS, PC) or already fibrous materials (PP masks or hospital bed sheets50) with high exterior surface areas, minimal pressure dips, and flexibility can be utilised.644 Alternatively, plastic-based composites with high-surface-area materials, e.g., MOFs645 or mesoporous silica bear potential for CO2-related applications.
3.3. Energy-related devices
Another common application field of upcycled polymers is energy-related systems, especially supercapacitors47,322 and TENGs (Table 12).56,525 Although supercapacitors store and release energy by reversible adsorption/desorption of ions at the interface, a TENG is a type of mechanical energy harvester that converts the kinetic energy generated from vibrations (including the motion of human, machine, and automobile) into electric energy.646,647 Both these types of charge-storage devices are crucial for a sustainable future. Owing to the urgent need of replacing fossil fuels with renewable sources, energy-storage systems that capture and store electricity from renewable sources have attracted attention.646 This has been proven by the estimated five-fold increase in global supercapacitor market size, growing at a CAGR of 23.5% from 2022 to 2030.648 The energy device market is driven by their increasing penetration in hybrid vehicles, energy harvesting, and consumer electronics products. The related driving factors include superior power density and longer product life-cycle, regardless of the capacitor charge cycle. Simultaneously, the high initial costs of materials and the lack of knowledge of supercapacitors act as the limiting factors.649,650 Therefore, the preparation of low-cost supercapacitors with high efficiency can enhance their scale of applicability. TENGs have not yet matured to the commercialization stage, but significant progress has been achieved since their discovery in 2012 by Wang et al.651 The use of waste polymers for designing TENGs can accelerate their development because of the initial low cost of these devices.
Table 12 Comparison of energy-related materials prepared from waste polymers and non-waste materials




Supercapacitors


Source
Material
Capacitance at current density
Electrolyte
Energy density
Cycling stability
Ref.




CNTs: carbon nanotubes; CNFs: cellulose nanofibers; PANI: polyaniline; PAA–PEO: poly(acrylic acid)–poly(ethylene oxide); PVA: polyvinyl alcohol; PEI: polyethylenimine; PD: polydopamine; and PDMS: polydimethylsiloxane.




Polyurethane


Waste
PU@CNTs@CNFs@PANI
284.2 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1
1 M H2SO4
25.3 W h kg−1
97.8% after 1000 cycles

47



Commercial
PU-based organo/hydrogel electrolyte
57.9 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
Water/acetonitrile
5.65 mW h cm−3
∼94.5% after 500 cycles

652



Synthesised
CNT-coated PU-poly(ε-caprolactone)
37 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
(PAA-PEO) hydrogel
3.4 W h kg−1
∼96.5% after 10000 cycles

653







Polypropylene


Waste
PP (face mask) sputtering of gold and polypyrrole microcones formation
219.1 mF cm−2 at 1mA cm−2
PVA/H2SO4
19.5 μW h cm−2
92.1% after 10000 cycles

322



Commercial
Polypyrrole-graphene oxide on PP films
104.4 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2
H3PO4/PVA
2.6 μW h cm−2
84.9% after 10000 cycles

654







Triboelectric nanogenerators


Source
Material
Maximum voltage (V)
Power density (mW m−2)
Maximum current (μA)
Ref.




Polyethylene terephthalate


Waste
PET/PEI/PD
67.7
5.47
9.4

56



Commercial
Silk fibroin/rice paper
34
21.6
0.32

655



Commercial
Velvet fabric/CNTs/PEI
119
3.2
12.6

656



Commercial
PDMS/nickel telluride
197
1.89
9.6

657



Rubber


Waste
Fluorinated wasted rubber powder
265
4.6
75

525



Commercial
All-in-one rubber
80
107
11

658





Among the overviewed polymers waste, PU sponge and PP fabrics have been used for supercapacitor application (Table 12). An additional conductive layer has been deposited on the polymer base: CNTs@CNFs@PANI on PU47 and Au and polypyrrole microcones on PP.322 Overall, the capacitance values suggest the similar performance level of the waste-derived supercapacitors, regardless of the direct comparison with their analogues from nonrecycled PU and PP,652–654 which manifest a complex behaviour owing to the dissimilar current density, electrolyte, and other parameters.
TENGs are another type of devices compared to supercapacitors, which harvest and convert vibration energy into electric energy. The increased surface-charge density is an essential factor that can be manipulated according to the degree of surface roughness and chemical properties. In the case of PET,56 waste-based aerogel provides a surface roughness paired with a dense amine-rich surface to reach a maximum voltage of 67.7 V at a power density of 5.47 mW m−2. The fluorinated TENG, prepared from waste rubber, exhibited exceptional characteristics: 265 V maximum voltage at 75 μA current.525 The rubber waste-based TENG can directly drive 100 commercial light emitting diodes without any energy-storing device. These TENGs demonstrate superior performance compared to commercial material-based devices,656,657 including virgin rubber.658 Therefore, we can conclude that waste-derived TENGs are relatively low-cost devices for sustainable energy harvesting and provide significant opportunities for extending waste utilisation (Table 12).
Other application fields (e.g., catalysts, sensors, textiles, building materials, and antibacterial materials) of functionally upcycled polymers are more diversified and determined by the initial properties of the polymers (Sections S2.1–S2.9). Simultaneously, the functionality of the prepared materials is defined by the surface chemistry; therefore, effective functional upcycling is impossible without a diverse toolbox of functionalisation techniques, which have been detailed in Sections S2.1–S2.9. Thus, to construct a functional device from waste polymers, the initial polymer properties and their surface chemistry should be equivocally considered. However, the limited number of existing reports on functional upcycling primarily revealed that such devices are not inferior in terms of the main indicators of the given applications. Despite all the advantages of using polymer waste such as strong market competitiveness and application potential, a more detailed cost analysis of each case is required to estimate the profitability of upcycling in industrial applications.
4. Conclusions and outlook
4.1. Conclusions
In conclusion, we can explicitly confirm that the upcycling of polymer wastes is emerging as a central strategy in the modern world. Currently, the society is experiencing widespread environmental and economic challenges associated with polymer lifespan after implementation in technological processes or daily life. For a sustainable future, scientific and engineering communities have to encounter the challenges posed by ‘polymer waste’ management and processing using the recent progress in advanced chemistry and materials science. In this regard, significant effort has been invested during the past decades, although only less than 10% of overall plastic is recycled or upcycled currently.659 Among the wide range of methods employed for polymer processing and (re)utilisation, sufficient progress has been achieved during the previous years in chemical and mechanical recycling compared to the traditional borderline landfilling and incineration. Recently, chemical recycling methods have been extended for upcycling, defined by Sardon14 as ‘the use of plastic waste as a feedstock for the synthesis of value-added products, being polymers, molecules or materials’.
In the framework of this review, we clarified the significant difference between chemical and functional upcycling. In chemical upcycling, the transformations of the main polymer chain are predominant, whereas in functional upcycling, the post-polymerisation functionalisation and surface modification methods are primarily applied. Consequently, 'functional upcycling' is introduced as a method for functionalising waste polymer surfaces or primary polymer chains without sufficient chain destruction to produce a new upcycled material with an added value. Although the research has been ongoing in this field over the past 5–10 years, the concept of 'functional upcycling' has not been formulated earlier with precise principles. Therefore, this strategy is extremely novel and under-investigated. This research comprehensively reviewed the nine most common large-scale polymers: PET, PE, PVC, PP, PS, PU, PMMA, rubber, and PC. These polymers have already been processed by functional upcycling or can be potentially upcycled by leveraging a wide chemical toolbox. For the unperturbed introduction of functional upcycling, we first provided the general information of the production, application, and recycling volumes of each polymer. Thereafter, we briefly overviewed the mechanical and chemical re-/upcycling methods (mainly presented in ESI†), including the recent trends with relevant references to specific reviews. Finally, we discussed the functionalisation of polymers in terms of the structure of each polymer, chemical groups involved, and the reagent toolbox. This information is imminently essential for scientists pursuing the development of the functional upcycling strategy. Where applicable, we overviewed the utilisation of the value-added upcycled material and compared the performance with previously reported materials from non-waste sources. The strategy of functional upcycling is entirely multidisciplinary, because knowledge in organic chemistry, surface analysis, material engineering, and the specific application field is required. Therefore, in this review, we performed systematization of various aspects of functional upcycling. In conclusion, for each polymer, we compared the mechanical, chemical, and functional re-/upcycling based on the required amount of energy, cost, environmental effects, and value-added cost.
4.2. Challenges and outlook
Generally, both chemical and mechanical methods are energy-intensive because the entire volume of the waste polymer should be processed (based on analysis in ESI†). In the case of mechanical recycling, the added value is substantially low owing to the relatively low-cost application of waste polymers in the construction and infrastructure sector (Sections S1.1–S9.1 in ESI†). Frequently, chemical methods are promising and have already been applied on a larger scale (Sections S1.2–S9.2 in ESI†). However, these techniques encounter several limitations such as high temperatures, use of aggressive reagents, solvents, and complicated catalysts in large volumes, and low tolerance to contamination. Therefore, chemical strategies are energy-intensive and yield significantly negative environmental effects by releasing large quantities of toxic and hazardous substances into the environment.660 Moreover, such approaches are poorly fitted to the demands of the modern circular economy. As such, functional upcycling differs meaningfully from chemical upcycling in terms of chemical composition: complete depolymerisation does not occur and additional functional groups are grafted. In the case of surface grafting without plastic dissolution, reagents and energy are required in smaller amounts, and CO2 is almost not generated during this process. However, if dissolution is required for both chemical and functional methods (lower solvent volume is required), the sustainability of solvents is essential for fulfilling the principles of circular economy and green chemistry. Commonly, chlorinated or dipolar aprotic solvents such as N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), are used in the dissolution of plastic,661 which are often hazardous to human health and the environment. Sustainable solvents can constitute a comprehensive solution; for instance, methyl lactate, ethyl lactate, Cyrene™, PolarClean®, natural organic carbonates, ionic liquids, vegetable oil, and others, have reported adequate compatibility with various polymers.662 However, most current research focusing on reaction solvents is indirectly diminishing the developmental progress of solvents used in plastic re-/upcycling.662 Despite these challenges, functionally upcycled materials with a high added value have been successfully used as adsorbents, catalysts, and electrode materials for energy storage as well as sensors. Importantly, we demonstrated that the specific performance of upcycled materials is often within or higher than the level of similar materials prepared from virgin feedstock. All these advantages make functional upcycling a promising diversification approach to the common polymer waste post-processing methods.
However, the functional upcycling strategy is currently at the beginning of the developmental track and several challenges need to be solved in the near future. First, despite the abundance and reactivity of PMMA and PVC, the number of reported examples is limited. In addition, the high rigidity of PE and PP chains limits the ease of implementing functional upcycling realization. Therefore, in addition to rare examples, this review reports on cases of functionalisation of commercial polymers, which can be further adapted to plastic waste. Moreover, numerous types of plastic waste have not been tested so far. In particular, there is a genuine need to upcycle epoxy composites, stimuli-responsive polymers, and special polymers such as polyether ether ketone, polysulfones, and highly reinforced composites. The polymer blends commonly used in both postconsumer and post-industrial waste sources are widely applied in packaging, such as PP/PE,663 PET/PVC,664 PMMA/PVC,665 and PET/rubber.666 To realise functional upcycling of such polymer mixtures, specific chemical properties of each polymer should be considered. Another promising development pathway is the combination of various waste sources; for instance, the TA from PET can be combined with the aluminum derived from waste lithium-batteries to synthesise MIL-53(Al).667
According to the findings of this review, adsorbents and energy-storage devices are the most common application fields for upcycled polymers. However, a further increase in the added value is expected because plastic waste can be upcycled to more advanced materials such as selective adsorbents or separators for gases, energy production devices, sensors, and microfluidic systems. However, as these devices do not require large-scale upcycling, functional upcycling is more suitable for low and average volumes of plastic waste. Despite the utilisation of plastic wastes in various fields such as PET (antibacterial materials, adsorbents, textile, and energy harvesting materials), further diversification to advanced applications is anticipated. However, this context raises the question of precisely defining the ‘added value’. Regardless of an intuitive understanding as ‘additional valuable function of the materials, which is higher than that obtained from monomers produced by depolymerisation’, a more precise definition and relevant metrics are required. For example, life-cycle assessment, techno-economic assessment, and material flow analysis can aid in realistically evaluating the economic feasibility of functional upcycling.
Another challenge pertains to transferring certain chemical recycling strategies on post-polymerisation and surface techniques and discovering the functionalisation for polymer wastes from the relevant implementation of developed methods. From the perspective of sustainability, such an experimental pathway is definitely appealing because of the sufficient economy of energy and reagents. The replenishment of the toolbox for controlling the surface properties of waste will open a new perspective in the application of functionally upcycled materials. In addition to transferring the chemical strategies, scaling up from the laboratory examination to the pilot scale of the existing and new suggested methods can be appealing for adapting functional upcycling to technology. In this case, large scale post-industrial waste will be involved in functional upcycling.
Although functional upcycling cannot substitute mechanical and chemical re-/upcycling operating large-tonnage plastic waste streams (ESI†), we believe that the functional upcycling strategy can combine the major advantages of chemical re-/upcycling (high added value) and mechanical recycling (low environmental effects) to create new functional materials and solve global challenges. We do not intend to impose this strategy as a panacea; instead, we encourage a mindful analysis of each polymer structure and its properties to select the optimal strategy of re-/upcycling, where functional upcycling is a promising alternative to existing methods.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research has been financially supported by the Ministry of High Education and Science of Russian Federation No. 075-15-2022-244 (Russian-French project in the frame of PHC “Kholmogorov”. R. B. acknowledges financial support from the CPER “Wavetech”).
References

An analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data, https://plasticseurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/2019-Plastics-the-facts.pdf, accessed October 2022 Search PubMed .

Reducing Consumer Food Waste Using Green and Digital Technologies, https://unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/reducing-consumer-food-waste-using-green-and-digital-technologies.pdf, accessed October 2022 Search PubMed .
Y. Peng, P. Wu, A. T. Schartup and Y. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2111530118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. M. Letcher, Introduction to plastic waste and recycling, Plastic waste and recycling: environmental impact, societal issues, prevention, and solutions, Academic Press, Cambridge,  2020 Search PubMed .

          R. Geyer, Production, use, and fate of synthetic polymers, Plastic waste and recycling: environmental impact, societal issues, prevention, and solutions, Academic Press, Cambridge,  2020 Search PubMed .
D. J. da Silva and H. Wiebeck, Prog. Rubber, Plast. Recycl. Technol., 2020, 36, 284–303 CrossRef .
A. Dorigato, Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res., 2021, 4, 53–69 CAS .

          V. Goodship, Management, Recycling and Reuse of Waste Composites, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge,  2009 Search PubMed .

          D. S. Achilias, Recycling of the Hardwood Kraft Pulp, Material Recycling-Trends and Perspectives, InTech, Croatia,  2012 Search PubMed .
F. A. Cruz Sanchez, H. Boudaoud, S. Hoppe and M. Camargo, Addit. Manuf., 2017, 17, 87–105 CAS .
A. Rahimi and J. M. García, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 1–11 CrossRef .
L. Lebreton and A. Andrady, Palgrave Commun., 2019, 5, 1–11 CrossRef .
J. Morris, J. Hazard. Mater., 1996, 47, 277–293 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jehanno, J. W. Alty, M. Roosen, S. De Meester, A. P. Dove, E. Y.-X. Chen, F. A. Leibfarth and H. Sardon, Nature, 2022, 603, 803–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nanda and F. Berruti, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 1433–1456 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cañete Vela, T. Berdugo Vilches, G. Berndes, F. Johnsson and H. Thunman, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 365, 132674 CrossRef .
H. Chen, K. Wan, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4123–4136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okan, H. M. Aydin and M. Barsbay, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 8–21 CrossRef CAS .

          B. deB. Darwent, Bond dissociation energies in simple molecules, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC,  1970 Search PubMed .
Z. O. G. Schyns and M. P. Shaver, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, 42, 2000415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui and E. Forssberg, J. Hazard. Mater., 2003, 99, 243–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ragaert, L. Delva and K. Van Geem, Waste Manage., 2017, 69, 24–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fonseca-Valero, A. Ochoa-Mendoza, J. Arranz-Andrés and C. González-Sánchez, Composites, Part A, 2015, 69, 94–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. S. Ribeiro, A. C. Meira-Castro, F. G. Silva, J. Santos, J. P. Meixedo, A. Fiúza, M. L. Dinis and M. R. Alvim, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2015, 104, 417–426 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, W. Li, X. Hao, G. Zong, X. Yi, J. Xu, R. Ou and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2022, 18, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yazdanbakhsh, L. C. Bank, K.-A. Rieder, Y. Tian and C. Chen, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2018, 128, 11–21 CrossRef .
I. Vollmer, M. J. F. Jenks, M. C. P. Roelands, R. J. White, T. Harmelen, P. Wild, G. P. Laan, F. Meirer, J. T. F. Keurentjes and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15402–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Shuaib and P. T. Mativenga, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 120, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Lange, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 15722–15738 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chanda, Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res., 2021, 4, 133–150 CAS .
T. Thiounn and R. C. Smith, J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 58, 1347–1364 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Wei, Y. Yang, S. Xu, D. Deng and Y.-Z. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 69, 369–388 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Worch and A. P. Dove, ACS Macro Lett., 2020, 9, 1494–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Pauli, UpCycling, Chronik Verlag im Bertelsmann LEXIKONVerlag GmbH, Munchen,  1999 Search PubMed .
L. T. J. Korley, T. H. Epps, B. A. Helms and A. J. Ryan, Science, 2021, 373, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Wang and L. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4137–4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Tan, L. Goh, D. Safanama, W. W. Loh, N. Ding, S. W. Chien, S. S. Goh, W. Thitsartarn, J. Y. C. Lim and D. W. H. Fam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 24468–24474 RSC .
K. Saito, C. Jehanno, L. Meabe, J. L. Olmedo-Martínez, D. Mecerreyes, K. Fukushima and H. Sardon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13921–13926 RSC .
C. Jia, S. Xie, W. Zhang, N. N. Intan, J. Sampath, J. Pfaendtner and H. Lin, Chem Catal., 2021, 1, 437–455 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Kosloski-Oh, Z. A. Wood, Y. Manjarrez, J. P. de Los Rios and M. E. Fieser, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1084–1129 RSC .
O. Semyonov, S. Chaemchuen, A. Ivanov, F. Verpoort, Z. Kolska, M. Syrtanov, V. Svorcik, M. S. Yusubov, O. Lyutakov, O. Guselnikova and P. S. Postnikov, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 22, 100910 CrossRef .
L. Lin, B. Yuan, B. Zhang, H. Li, R. Liao, H. Hong, H. Lu, J. Liu and C. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 439, 135613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rungrodnimitchai and D. Kotatha, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 282, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Beveridge, H. M. Chenot, A. Crich, A. Jacob and M. G. Finn, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10407–10412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Xie, S. Xue, H. Ye, M. Liu, W. Shi and Y. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 276, 119435 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Ungureanu, D. Bulgariu, A. M. Mocanu and L. Bulgariu, Water, 2020, 12, 2624 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Xia, W. Wu, J. Zhao, X. Xue, C. Ao, J. Zhang, X. Deng, X. Zhang, W. Zhang and C. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, C. Din, S. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Luo, D. Zhang and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137281 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. S. Goh, F. Wang and S. P. Yeap, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2022, 19, 8945–8956 CrossRef CAS .
O. Guselnikova, O. Semyonov, M. Kirgina, A. Ivanov, A. Zinoviev and P. Postnikov, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 107105 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Zhang and F.-S. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 331, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Li, L. Han, M. Dong, Z. Zeng and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 5180–5188 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Nguyen, A. Rangel, D. W. Grainger and V. Migonney, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Khorram, A. Mousavi and N. Mehranbod, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2366–2377 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sheppard, K. Jin, L. S. Hamachi, W. Dean, D. J. Fortman, C. J. Ellison and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 921–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, P. K. Maji and K.-L. Goh, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 413, 127409 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Chang, C.-C. Lu, C.-W. Lin, K.-S. Wang, M.-W. Lee and S.-H. Liu, Chemosphere, 2022, 288, 132619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Martínez and S. P. Dydio, Trends Chem., 2023, 5, 249–351 CrossRef .
C. W. S. Yeung, W. W. Loh, H. H. Lau, X. J. Loh and J. Y. C. Lim, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 21, 100524 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, R. Bai and Y. P. Ting, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 1861–1867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ismail, M. Irani and Z. Ahmad, J. Elastomers Plast., 2013, 45, 536–550 CrossRef .
N. Malik, P. Kumar, S. Shrivastava and S. B. Ghosh, Int. J. Plast. Technol., 2017, 21, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sargent, N. Brown, B. D. Jensen, S. P. Magleby, W. G. Pitt and L. L. Howell, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 115047 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nisticò, Polym. Test., 2020, 90, 106707 CrossRef .
Y. Celik, M. Shamsuyeva and H. J. Endres, Polymers, 2022, 14, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Ying, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Xu and C. Li, Polymer, 2021, 234, 124246 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Ezzat and Z. T. A. Ali, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2022, 32, e00404 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, D. Ju, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Yang, H. Zhang and L. Dong, Fibers Polym., 2016, 17, 1540–1549 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Prontera, G. Sico, M. Montanino, A. De Girolamo Del Mauro, P. Tassini, M. G. Maglione, C. Minarini and P. Manini, Materials, 2019, 12, 2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Production capacity of polyethylene terephthalate worldwide from 2014 to 2024, https://www.statista.com/statistics/242764/global-polyethylene-terephthalate-production-capacity, accessed October 2022 Search PubMed .
R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck and K. L. Law, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1207–1221 Search PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Ma, X. Shen, Y. Zhai, T. Zhang, C. Ji and J. Hong, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 260, 110062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Gao, L. Yu, J. Zhang and H. Sun, Environ. Int., 2019, 128, 116–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, J. Li, C. Sun, L. Zhang, F. Jiang, W. Cao and L. Zheng, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2019, 144, 61–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, L. Qian, H. Wang, X. Zhan, K. Lu, C. Gu and S. Gao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 3579–3588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, R. Mao, S. Ma, X. Guo and L. Zhu, Water Res., 2020, 174, 115634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Shih, Y.-H. Wang, Y.-J. Chen, H.-A. Chen and A. Y.-C. Lin, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 32494–32504 RSC .
M. Lang, X. Yu, J. Liu, T. Xia, T. Wang, H. Jia and X. Guo, Sci. Total Environ, 2020, 722, 137762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Panowicz, M. Konarzewski, T. Durejko, M. Szala, M. Łazińska, M. Czerwińska and P. Prasuła, Materials, 2021, 14, 3833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chaouch, F. Dieval, D. Le Nouen, A. Defoin, N. Chakfe and B. Durand, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 113, 2813–2825 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. L. Sait, L. Sørensen, S. Kubowicz, K. Vike-Jonas, S. V. Gonzalez, A. G. Asimakopoulos and A. M. Booth, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 268, 115745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sánchez, Biotechnol. Adv., 2020, 40, 107501 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Awaja and D. Pavel, Eur. Polym. J., 2005, 41, 1453–1477 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Nait-Ali, X. Colin and A. Bergeret, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2011, 96, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sadeghi, Y. Marfavi, R. AliAkbari, E. Kowsari, F. Borbor Ajdari and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Circ. Econ., 2021, 3, 1–18 CrossRef .
J. Payne and M. D. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4041–4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Barnard, J. J. Rubio Arias and W. Thielemans, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3765–3789 RSC .
K. Ghosal and C. Nayak, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 1974–1992 RSC .
H. N. Doan, P. Phong Vo, K. Hayashi, K. Kinashi, W. Sakai and N. Tsutsumi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 103921 CrossRef CAS .
G.-R. Xu, X.-C. An, R. Das, K. Xu, Y.-L. Xing and Y.-X. Hu, J. Water Process. Eng., 2020, 36, 101351 CrossRef .
Q. Xiong, Q. Tian, X. Yue, J. Xu, X. He, F. Qiu and T. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2022, 61, 11804–11814 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vázquez, P. Vanegas, C. Cruzat, N. Novoa, R. Arrué and E. Vanegas, Polymers, 2021, 13, 3763 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Ramires, L. Mirenghi, A. R. Romano, F. Palumbo and G. Nicolardi, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 51, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Markkula, J. A. Hunt, F. R. Pu and R. L. Williams, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 34, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
M. Parvinzadeh and I. Ebrahimi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 4062–4068 CrossRef CAS .
F. Abdelghaffar, R. A. Abdelghaffar, U. M. Rashed and H. M. Ahmed, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 28949–28961 CrossRef PubMed .
W. P. R. Deleu, I. Stassen, D. Jonckheere, R. Ameloot and D. E. De Vos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9519–9525 RSC .
O. Semyonov, D. Kogolev, G. Mamontov, E. Kolobova, A. Trelin, M. S. Yusubov, O. Guselnikova and P. S. Postnikov, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133450 CrossRef CAS .
V. Popescu, A. Muresan, O. Constandache, G. Lisa, E. I. Muresan, C. Munteanu and I. Sandu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 16652–16663 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lorusso, Y. Feng, J. Schneider, L. Kamps, N. Parasothy, T. Mayer-Gall and W. Ali, Nano Sel., 2022, 3, 594–607 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Mora-Cortes, A. N. Rivas-Muñoz, M. G. Neira-Velázquez, J. C. Contreras-Esquivel, P. Roger, Y. N. Mora-Cura, G. Soria-Arguello, E. D. Bolaina-Lorenzo, R. Reyna-Martínez, A. Zugasti-Cruz and R. I. Narro-Céspedes, J. Appl. Chem. Biotechnol., 2022, 97, 3001–3010 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohe, Y. Yoshimura, I. Abe, M. Ikeda and Y. Shibutani, Text. Res. J., 2007, 77, 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lubna, K. S. Salem, M. Sarker and M. A. Khan, J. Polym. Environ., 2018, 26, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ping, M. Wang and G. Xuewu, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2011, 80, 567–572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Xu, C. Cheng, Y. Meng and A. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 193–194, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Özçam, K. E. Roskov, R. J. Spontak and J. Genzer, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5855–5864 RSC .
X. Jin, J. Yuan and J. Shen, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 145, 275–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pessoni, N. Delorme and L. Billon, Eur. Polym. J., 2021, 156, 110608 CrossRef CAS .
I. Acar, A. Kaşgöz, S. Özgümüş and M. Orbay, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng., 2006, 45, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. King, S. B. Hunt, L. J. Hamernik, L. E. Gonce, J. S. Wiggins and J. D. Azoulay, JACS Au, 2021, 1, 1342–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shanmugam, C. Chuaicham, A. Augustin, K. Sasaki, P. J. J. Sagayaraj and K. Sekar, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 15776–15794 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Hu, T. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, Y. Sun, X. Gu, C. Gu, J. Luo and B. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 429, 128271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ahmadijokani, H. Molavi, M. Rezakazemi, S. Tajahmadi, A. Bahi, F. Ko, T. M. Aminabhavi, J.-R. Li and M. Arjmand, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2022, 125, 100904 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. “Joe”. Zhou and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415–5418 RSC .
D. Yang and B. C. Gates, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1779–1798 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 1–14 CrossRef .
M. Gaab, N. Trukhan, S. Maurer, R. Gummaraju and U. Müller, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 157, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Karam, A. Miglio, S. Specchia, N. El Hassan, P. Massiani and J. Reboul, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 2750–2758 RSC .
S.-H. Lo, D. Senthil Raja, C.-W. Chen, Y.-H. Kang, J.-J. Chen and C.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9565–9573 RSC .
A. M. Al-Enizi, M. Ubaidullah, J. Ahmed, T. Ahamad, T. Ahmad, S. F. Shaikh and M. Naushad, Composites, Part B, 2020, 183, 107655 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cho, S. Yong Lee, J.-W. Choi, S.-H. Kim and K.-W. Jung, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 279, 119719 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dyosiba, J. Ren, N. M. Musyoka, H. W. Langmi, M. Mathe and M. S. Onyango, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2016, 10, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Ribadeneyra, J. King, M. M. Titirici and P. Á. Szilágyi, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 1330–1333 RSC .
P. He, Z. Hu, Z. Dai, H. Bai, Z. Fan, R. Niu, J. Gong, Q. Zhao and T. Tang, ChemSusChem, 2023, 16(2), e202201935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gulyaev, O. Semyonov, G. V. Mamontov, A. A. Ivanov, D. M. Ivanov, M. Kim, V. Švorčík, G. Resnati, T. Liao, Z. Sun, Y. Yamauchi, P. S. Postnikov and O. Guselnikova, ACS Mater. Lett., 2023, 5, 1340–1349 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kogolev, O. Semyonov, N. Metalnikova, M. Fatkullin, R. D. Rodriguez, P. Slepicka, Y. Yamauchi, O. Guselnikova, R. Boukherroub and P. S. Postnikov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 1108–1115 RSC .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 336, 135743 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meawad and S. Ibrahim, Waste Manage., 2019, 85, 563–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chan and A. Zinchenko, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106129 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bech, T. Meylheuc, B. Lepoittevin and P. Roger, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2172–2183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Noel, B. Liberelle, L. Robitaille and G. De Crescenzo, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22(8), 1690–1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Özçam, K. E. Roskov, J. Genzer and R. J. Spontak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 59–64 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lv, Q. Zhou, T. Zhi, D. Gao and C. Wang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 118, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xin, P. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Shi, J. Yuan and J. Shen, Langmuir, 2018, 35(5), 1788–1797 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, R. Li, D. Huang, X. Ren and T.-S. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng. C., 2018, 85, 123–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Zhang, K. Mahmood, Y. Jin, C. Huang, Z. Huang, S. Zhang and W. Ming, Prog. Org. Coat., 2021, 157, 106296 CrossRef CAS .
Commission Regulation (EU) 2022/1616 of 15 September 2022 on recycled plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foods, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 282/2008 (Text with EEA relevance), accessed November 2022.
Textile types, https://www.apexmills.com/textiles/, accessed November 2022.

          X. Song, J. Padrão, A. I. Ribeiro and A. Zille, Antimicrobial Textiles from Natural Resources, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge,  2021 Search PubMed .
Why using antimicrobials in sportswear can increase sustainability, https://www.sanitized.com/why-using-antimicrobials-in-sportswear-can-increase-sustainability/, accessed November 2022.
F. Shakerian, K. H. Kim, E. Kwon, J. E. Szulejko, P. Kumar, S. Dadfarnia and A. M. H. Shabani, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 83, 55–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. Socías-Viciana, E. González-Pradas, M. Saifi, M. Ureña-Amate, F. Flores-Céspedes and M. Fernández-Pérez, Pest Manage. Sci., 2003, 59, 1162–1168 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Lee, S. C. Paul, S. Y. Kong, S. Susilawati and X. Yang, Adv. Civ. Eng., 2019, 2019, 6942052 Search PubMed .
M. Zaman, H. Liu, H. Xiao, F. Chibante and Y. Ni, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 91, 560–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, L. Fang, H. Guo, K. Yang, Z. Cai, M. A. B. Meador and S. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706365 CrossRef .
Market volume of polyethylene worldwide, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1245162/polyethylene-market-volume-worldwide/, accessed October 2022.
HDPE & PP market in Europe, https://www.plasticsrecyclers.eu/_files/ugd/dda42a_af3450baf16f4cbea8c19891a3b50426.pdf, accessed October 2022.
Flexible polyethylene recycling in Europe, https://www.plasticsrecyclers.eu/_files/ugd/dda42a_5e1c67451b2f49adaa79a00afa045f06.pdf, accessed October 2022.
Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li, Y. Liu, S. Xia and J. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126412 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fairbrother, H.-C. Hsueh, J. H. Kim, D. Jacobs, L. Perry, D. Goodwin, C. White, S. Watson and L.-P. Sung, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2019, 165, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Jia, Q. Gao, S. Han, Y. Yu and L. Sun, Chemosphere, 2023, 311, 136833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brocca, E. Arvin and H. Mosbæk, Water Res., 2002, 36, 3675–3680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rani, W. J. Shim, G. M. Han, M. Jang, Y. K. Song and S. H. Hong, Sci. Total Environ, 2017, 579, 745–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Hinton, P. A. Kots, M. Soukaseum, B. C. Vance, D. G. Vlachos, T. H. Epps and L. T. J. Korley, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 7332–7339 RSC .
Q. Hou, M. Zhen, H. Qian, Y. Nie, X. Bai, T. Xia, M. Laiq Ur Rehman, Q. Li and M. Ju, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chu, W. Tu, S. Yang, C. Zhang, Q. Li, Q. Zhang and J. Chen, SusMat, 2022, 2, 161–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. G. Franssen, J. N. H. Reek and B. de Bruin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5809 RSC .
F. Ye, C. Huang, X. Jiang, W. He, X. Gao, L. Ma, J. Ao, L. Xu, Z. Wang, Q. Li, J. Li and H. Ma, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2020, 203, 111021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sheng, X. Xie, Z. Sun, M. Zhao, B. Gao, J. Pan, Y. Bai, S. Song, G. Liu, T. Wang, X. Huang and J. He, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 5212–5221 CrossRef CAS .
E. Daniso, B. Maroh, S. Feldbacher, I. Mühlbacher, S. Schlögl and P. Melpignano, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 552, 149408 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Zemljič, O. Plohl, A. Vesel, T. Luxbacher and S. Potrč, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 495 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, S. Ma, J. Qiu, A. Tian, Q. Li, X. Xu, B. Wang, N. Lu, Y. Liu and J. Zhu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2931–2937 RSC .
H. Zhou, S. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Li, C. M. Plummer, S. Wang, W.-H. Sun and Y. Chen, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 3510–3515 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bateman and D. Y. Wu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 84, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS .
O. Krupka, V. Smokal, M. Wilczek, M. Kostrzewa, V. Syromyatnikov and A. Kolendo, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2008, 497, 323–334 CAS .
J. B. Williamson, W. L. Czaplyski, E. J. Alexanian and F. A. Leibfarth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Plummer, H. Zhou, W. Zhu, H. Huang, L. Liu and Y. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1309–1317 RSC .
H. Chen, S. Schlecht, T. C. Semple and J. F. Hartwig, Science, 2000, 287, 1995–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bunescu, S. Lee, Q. Li and J. F. Hartwig, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 895–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. G. Malollari, A. Uliana, D. Sanchez, P. B. Messersmith and J. F. Hartwig, Chem, 2021, 7, 137–145 CAS .
T. K. Glaser, O. Plohl, A. Vesel, U. Ajdnik, N. P. Ulrih, M. K. Hrnčič, U. Bren and L. Fras Zemljič, Materials, 2019, 12, 2118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toselli, A. Saccani and F. Pilati, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 258, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saccani, M. Toselli, F. Pilati, D. Fabiani and F. Palmieri, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2011, 96, 2080–2087 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3857–3886 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, C. Yang and Q. Han, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47614 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Ao, X. Yang, C. Ling, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. Yu, R. Shen, H. Ma and J. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 44955 Search PubMed .
V. S. Neti, S. Das, S. Brown, C. J. Janke, L.-J. Kuo, G. A. Gill, S. Dai and R. T. Mayes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 10826–10832 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. B. Nava-Ortiz, G. Burillo, A. Concheiro, E. Bucio, N. Matthijs, H. Nelis, T. Coenye and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 1398–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pérez-Calixto, G. González-Pérez, N. Dionisio, E. Bucio, G. Burillo and L. García-Uriostegui, MRS Commun., 2019, 9, 264–269 CrossRef .
M. Mahmoud Nasef, T. M. Ting, A. Abbasi, A. Layeghi-moghaddam, S. Sara Alinezhad and K. Hashim, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 118, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
F. Özmen, S. Korpayev, P. A. Kavaklı and C. Kavaklı, React. Funct. Polym., 2022, 174, 105234 CrossRef .
M. Lindner, N. Rodler, M. Jesdinszki, M. Schmid and S. Sängerlaub, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 135, 45842 CrossRef .
K. Friese, B. Hößelbarth, J. Reinhardt and R. Newe, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1996, 234, 119–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng, Y.-H. Lee, G. Strong, A. M. LaPointe, A. L. Kocen, Z. Qu, G. W. Coates, S. L. Scott and M. M. Abu-Omar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 13926–13936 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chanunpanich, A. Ulman, Y. M. Strzhemechny, S. A. Schwarz, A. Janke, H. G. Braun and T. Kraztmuller, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2089–2094 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Garaeva, A. A. Aydin, A. Aydin, B. Yalçin, P. A. Fatullaeva and A. A. Medzhidov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2010, 83, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Briggs, V. J. I. Zichy, D. M. Brewis, J. Comyn, R. H. Dahm, M. A. Green and M. B. Konieczko, Surf. Interface Anal., 1980, 2, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Roy, P. Surekha and C. Rajagopal, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 122, 2765–2773 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, G. He, W. Huang and X. Yin, Polym. Compos., 2021, 42, 6599–6610 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fadida, Y. Kroupitski, U. M. Peiper, T. Bendikov, S. Sela and E. Poverenov, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 122, 294–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Q. Teo, C. W. S. Yeung, T. T. Y. Tan, W. W. Loh, X. J. Loh and J. Y. C. Lim, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6287–6294 RSC .
E. Garofalo, L. Di Maio, P. Scarfato, F. Di Gregorio and L. Incarnato, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2018, 152, 52–63 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. F. Othman, S. Selambakkannu, T. A. Tuan Abdullah, H. Hoshina, S. Sattayaporn and N. Seko, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Afolabi, M. M. Nasef, N. A. Hadi Sapiaa, N. Y. Harun, T. M. Ting and T. T. Hui, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2021, 182, 109362 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Chen, K. Fukazawa, Y. Inoue and K. Ishihara, Langmuir, 2018, 35, 1312–1319 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Aziz, N. De Geyter, H. Declercq, R. Cornelissen and R. Morent, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 271, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Q. Gu, H.-J. Xue, Z.-W. Li, J.-C. Song and Z.-Y. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2021, 483, 229155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buslovich, B. Horev, V. Rodov, A. Gedanken and E. Poverenov, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2655–2661 RSC .
H. You, B. Huang, C. Cao, X. Liu, X. Sun, L. Xiao, J. Qiu, Y. Luo, Q. Qian and Q. Chen, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2021, 167, 112287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Thombare, S. Mishra, M. Z. Siddiqui, U. Jha, D. Singh and G. R. Mahajan, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 185, 169–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garofalo, L. Di Maio, P. Scarfato, F. Di Gregorio and L. Incarnato, Polymers, 2019, 11, 830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li, F. Wang, S. Xia and J. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123808 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, H. Sui, L. Xu, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Z. Zhou, Environ. Pollut., 2022, 307, 119434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Olmos and J. González-Benito, Polymers, 2021, 13, 613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. R. Sastri, Plastics in Medical Devices, William Andrew Publishing, Norwich, 2nd edn,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Paluselli, V. Fauvelle, F. Galgani and R. Sempéré, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 53, 166–175 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Machado Rodrigues, E. K. Kerstner Baldin, C. P. Fontoura, L. M. Leidens, R. A. Barbieri, R. Frassini, C. de Fraga Malfatti, M. Roesch-Ely, C. A. Figueroa and C. Aguzzoli, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 3243–3255 RSC .
S. Kheirabadi and A. Sheikhi, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2022, 38, 100695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cattò, F. Secundo, G. James, F. Villa and F. Cappitelli, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 4003 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xing, X. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Che, W. Li, Y. Bai and K. Li, Prog. Org. Coat., 2012, 73, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Duncan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 363, 1–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Videira-Quintela, O. Martin and G. Montalvo, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2021, 109, 230–244 CrossRef CAS .
Commission Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 of 14 January 2011 on plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with food, http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2011/10/2016-09-14, accessed November 2022.
J. Joung, A. Boonsiriwit, M. Kim and Y. S. Lee, LWT, 2021, 145, 111309 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Gaikwad, S. Singh and Y. S. Lee, Food Sci. Biotechnol., 2017, 26, 1535–1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Gaikwad, S. Singh and Y. S. Lee, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 111, 186–195 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Ahn, K. K. Gaikwad and Y. S. Lee, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133(43), 44138 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Ke, K. Shen, L. Zhu and C. Yuan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 7, 2100772 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Gu, M. Ma, Y. Liu and M. Chen, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 1760–1766 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Khandare, D. R. Chaudhary and B. Jha, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2021, 169, 112566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zichittella and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 24291–24297 CrossRef .
J. D. Fonseca, G. Grause, T. Kameda and T. Yoshioka, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2015, 117, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zichittella, A. Ceruti, G. Guillén-Gosálbez and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem, 2022, 8, 883–885 CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Zhou, F. Li, H. Liu and J. Yang, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 154, 104584 CrossRef .
L. Lu, H. Zhong, T. Wang, J. Wu, F. Jin and T. Yoshioka, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 352–358 RSC .
J. Yu, L. Sun, C. Ma, Y. Qiao and H. Yao, Waste Manage., 2016, 48, 300–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. McCoy, N. J. Irwin, J. G. Hardy, S. J. Kennedy, L. Donnelly, J. F. Cowley, G. P. Andrews and S. Pentlavalli, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 97, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadat-Shojai and G.-R. Bakhshandeh, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2011, 96, 404–415 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Cheng, L. Zhang, X. Y. Chen and Z. J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miliute-Plepiene, A. Fråne and A. M. Almasi, Clean. Eng. Technol., 2021, 4, 100246 CrossRef .
T. Yoshioka, T. Kameda, S. Imai and A. Okuwaki, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2008, 93, 1138–1141 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wienchol, A. Szlęk and M. Ditaranto, Energy, 2020, 198, 117352 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiang, S. Chen, J. Zhang and R. Chai, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2010, 51, 624–631 CrossRef .
N. Merah, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2007, 191, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Rabinovitch, J. W. Summers and W. E. Northcott, J. Vinyl Addit. Technol., 1993, 15, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
A. González, J. M. Pastor and J. A. De Saja, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1989, 38, 1879–1882 CrossRef .
R. Chai, S. Chen and J. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 3376–3384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iles, A. Martin and C. M. Rosen, Ethics Chem., 2021, 279–316 CAS .
M. Ito and K. Nagai, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2007, 92, 260–270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ügdüler, K. M. Van Geem, M. Roosen, E. I. P. Delbeke and S. De Meester, Waste Manage., 2020, 104, 148–182 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Janajreh, M. Alshrah and S. Zamzam, Sustain. Cities Soc., 2015, 18, 13–20 CrossRef .
D. Braun, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 2171–2195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, Y. Wang, L. Ke, L. Dai, Q. Wu, K. Cobb, Y. Zeng, R. Zou, Y. Liu and R. Ruan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 254, 115243 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Anuar Sharuddin, F. Abnisa, W. M. A. Wan Daud and M. K. Aroua, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 115, 308–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Bediako, S. W. Park, J.-W. Choi, M.-H. Song and Y.-S. Yun, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Haishima, K. Isama, C. Hasegawa, T. Yuba and A. Matsuoka, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2013, 101, 2630–2643 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Balazs, K. Triandafillu, Y. Chevolot, B.-O. Aronsson, H. Harms, P. Descouts and H. J. Mathieu, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Costoya, L. E. Velázquez Becerra, H. I. Meléndez-Ortiz, L. Díaz-Gómez, C. Mayer, A. Otero, A. Concheiro, E. Bucio and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Int. J. Pharm., 2019, 558, 72–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kameda, Y. Fukuda, G. Grause and T. Yoshioka, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Salavagione, G. Martínez and C. Ballesteros, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9754–9760 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guarrotxena, G. Martínez and J. Millán, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1996, 34, 2387–2397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moulay, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 303–331 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. K. Chu, J. Ji, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, R. K. Y. Fu, P. C. T. Ha and Q. Yan, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 44–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Wang, J. Fu, L. Zhang, C. Luo and Y. Liu, Waste Manage., 2015, 45, 112–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Meléndez-Ortiz, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, A. Concheiro, V. M. Jiménez-Páez and E. Bucio, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 119, 37–43 CrossRef .
L. Duarte-Peña, F. López-Saucedo, A. Concheiro, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and E. Bucio, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2022, 193, 110005 CrossRef .
L. Duarte-Peña and E. Bucio, Polymers, 2022, 14, 1185 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Dumitrascu, G. Borcia and G. Popa, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2001, 81, 2419–2425 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Wang, Y.-Y. Han, K.-C. Yang, M.-J. Chen, H.-C. Lin, C.-K. Lin and Y.-T. Hsu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2016, 305, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
E. O. Polat, O. Balci, N. Kakenov, H. B. Uzlu, C. Kocabas and R. Dahiya, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. M. McGinty and W. J. Brittain, Polymer, 2008, 49, 4350–4357 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ma, N. A. Chaniotakis and M. E. Meyerhoff, Anal. Chem., 1988, 60, 2293–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Martínez, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 2476–2486 CrossRef .
J. Sacristán, H. Reinecke and C. Mijangos, Polymer, 2000, 41, 5577–5582 CrossRef .
J. Sacristán, C. Mijangos, H. Reinecke, S. Spells and J. Yarwood, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 6134–6139 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, B. F. L. Lai, J. N. Kizhakkedathu and D. E. Brooks, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 1432–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Villanueva, J. A. González, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, S. Teves and G. J. Copello, Mater. Sci. Eng. C., 2016, 67, 214–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lamanna and N. D’Accorso, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 121, 951–956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, M. S. M. Rawat and C. S. Pande, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 118, 876–880 CAS .
G. Sneddon, J. C. McGlynn, M. S. Neumann, H. M. Aydin, H. H. P. Yiu and A. Y. Ganin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11864–11872 RSC .
D. M. Eckmann, I. Y. Tsai, N. Tomczyk, J. W. Weisel and R. J. Composto, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 108, 44–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nayak, M. S. Jyothi, R. G. Balakrishna, M. Padaki and A. M. Isloor, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25492–25502 RSC .
N. R. James and A. Jayakrishnan, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2205–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Chen, K. Chen, Y. Huang and C. Xiao, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 604, 118064 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balakrishnan, D. S. Kumar, Y. Yoshida and A. Jayakrishnan, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3495–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pawlak, G. Mistlberger and E. Bakker, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12796–12801 RSC .
J.-W. Guo, Z.-Y. Lin, C.-J. Chang, C.-H. Lu and J.-K. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Guo, Z.-Y. Lin, B.-R. Huang, C.-H. Lu and J.-K. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 3486–3496 RSC .
J. Lafarge, N. Kébir, D. Schapman, V. Gadenne and F. Burel, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 2779–2790 CrossRef CAS .
A. Earla and R. Braslau, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 666–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Y. Dong, S. Zhang, Z. Wu and H. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 858–861 RSC .
V. Nayak, R. Geetha Balakrishna, M. Padaki and K. Soontarapa, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 347–358 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Xiao, X. Ru and X. Liu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1211–1219 RSC .
J. T. S. Allan, L. E. Prest and E. B. Easton, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 489, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, H. Liu, Y. Sun, Q. Huang, W. Li, K. Chen, W. Shu and C. Xiao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 280, 119964 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ahmad and C. Guria, J. Water Process. Eng., 2022, 45, 102466 CrossRef .
M. S. M. Eldin, H. A. El Enshasy, M. El Sayed, S. El Sayed, B. Haroun and E. A. Hassan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 124, E27–E36 CrossRef .
Q. F. Alsalhy, F. H. Al-Ani, A. E. Al-Najar and S. I. A. Jabuk, Chem. Eng. Process., 2018, 130, 262–274 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Che, Z. Zhu, N. Chen and X. Zhai, Mater. Des., 2015, 87, 1047–1055 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghazanfari, D. Bastani and S. A. Mousavi, J. Water Process. Eng., 2017, 16, 98–107 CrossRef .
B. Bartoszewicz, S. Dąbrowska, A. Lewenstam and J. Migdalski, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 274, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Mu, W. Zhang, S. Zhao and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 596, 117724 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, D. Shi, H. Zhang and X. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 620, 118947 CrossRef CAS .
N. Angulakshmi and A. M. Stephan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Xie, H. Chen and X. Lu, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 548, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Windels, T. Diefenhardt, N. Jain, C. Marquez, S. Bals, M. Schlummer and D. E. De Vos, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 754–766 RSC .
PVC Medical device recycling, https://pvcmed.org/sustainability/recycling/, accessed November 2022.
K. W. Lee, J. W. Chung and S.-Y. Kwak, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 2045–2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Market volume of polypropylene worldwide, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1245169/polypropylene-market-volume-worldwide/, accessed October 2022.
C. Meran, O. Ozturk and M. Yuksel, Mater. Des., 2008, 29, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
D. Coclite, A. Napoletano, S. Gianola, A. del Monaco, D. D’Angelo, A. Fauci, L. Iacorossi, R. Latina, G. L. Torre, C. M. Mastroianni, C. Renzi, G. Castellini and P. Iannone, Front. Med., 2021, 7, 594269 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Selvaranjan, S. Navaratnam, P. Rajeev and N. Ravintherakumaran, Environ. Challenges, 2021, 3, 100039 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, G. Yu, B. Wang, F. Li, H. Liu and W. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2023, 441, 129816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. He, L. N. Ni, D. Musajan, L. Guan and M. Yimit, Strength Mater., 2021, 53, 34–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Mousavi-Fakhrabadi, S. Ahmadi and H. Arabi, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2022, 198, 109882 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Williamson, C. G. Na, R. R. Johnson, W. F. M. Daniel, E. J. Alexanian and F. A. Leibfarth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12815–12823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Varghese P. J., D. A. David, A. Karuth, J. F. M. Jafferali, S. Begum P. M., J. J. George, B. Rasulev and P. Raghavan, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 4791–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Yao, Y. Wang, H. Huang, W. Jing, J. Yin and G. Costa, Polymer, 2001, 42, 5549–5557 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, F.-S. Yue, Y.-M. Zhao, S.-S. Wang, Y.-C. Li, G. Li and X.-C. Ge, Eur. Polym. J., 2021, 152, 110487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and C. W. Bielawski, Polym. Int., 2016, 66, 70–76 CrossRef .
S. Kim, X. Yang, K. Yang, H. Guo, M. Cho, Y. J. Kim and Y. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bieber, E. Ozcelik, H. J. Cox, C. J. Ottley, J. K. Ratan, M. Karaman, M. Tabakci, S. K. Beaumont and J. P. S. Badyal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 52136–52145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Ji, W. Chen and J. Wei, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3860–3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, Y. Zheng, S. Ma, D. Wang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 48–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, Y. Kim, W. Lee and C. Nam, Chemosphere, 2022, 303, 135186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Plummer, H. Zhou, S. Li, H. Zhong, Z. Sun, C. Bariashir, W.-H. Sun, H. Huang, L. Liu and Y. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 3325–3333 RSC .
T. J. Cuthbert, S. Ennis, S. F. Musolino, H. L. Buckley, M. Niikura, J. E. Wulff and C. Menon, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 19029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rübsam, B. Stomps, A. Böker, F. Jakob and U. Schwaneberg, Polymer, 2017, 116, 124–132 CrossRef .
C. Pavon, M. Aldas, E. Rayón, M. P. Arrieta and J. López-Martínez, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 24, 101812 CrossRef CAS .
L. Di Zazzo, G. Magna, M. Lucentini, M. Stefanelli, R. Paolesse and C. Di Natale, Chemosensors, 2021, 9, 356 CrossRef .
R. Mendoza, J. Oliva, K. P. Padmasree, A. I. Oliva, A. I. Mtz-Enriquez and A. Zakhidov, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 46, 103818 CrossRef .
W. Zuo, L. Zang, Q. Liu, J. Qiu, M. Lan and C. Yang, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 634, 128020 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Wang, Z. F. Wu, M. Zhang, Z. J. Qin, L. Wang, F. R. Zhong and H. M. Duan, J. Electron. Mater., 2022, 51, 3843–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, W. Zhang and Z. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, P. Yu, C. Feng, Y. Wang, Q. Han and Q. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 683–691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, Z. Zhu, J. Lin, C. F. Cheung, V. L. Lu, F. Yan, C.-Y. Chan and G. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6213–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, S. Xu, Z. Wang, K. Xue, J. Su, Y. Song, S. Chen, C. Zhu, B. Z. Tang and R. Ye, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12045–12053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Robertson, A. Güillen Obando, J. Emery and Z. Qiang, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 12278–12287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lee, M. Eui Lee, S.-S. Kim, H.-I. Joh and S. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 105, 268–277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bakry and S. M. Elmesallamy, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2022, 57, 2374–2392 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Ul Hassan, S. Taimur and T. Yasin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 720–730 CrossRef .
O. Foster, A. H. Soeriyadi, M. R. Whittaker, T. P. Davis and C. Boyer, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 2102–2111 RSC .
O. A. Hernández-Aguirre, A. Núñez-Pineda, M. Tapia-Tapia and R. M. Gómez Espinosa, J. Chem., 2016, 2016, 2742013 Search PubMed .
C. Bae, J. F. Hartwig, N. K. Boaen Harris, R. O. Long, K. S. Anderson and M. A. Hillmyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Petruš, M. Korčušková, F. Kučera and J. Jančář, Mater. Today Commun., 2022, 31, 103428 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, D. Yuan, X. Xia, H. Yu, S. Zhang, C. Li, Q. Miao, F. Zhu, Q. Huang, J. Yi and Z. Zhao, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 26, 102058 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Wei, L. Lyu, Q. Hou, J. Caro and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20915–20919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Seidi, C. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, C. Li and H. Xiao, Small, 2021, 17, 2102453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Babaahmadi, H. Amid, M. Naeimirad and S. Ramakrishna, Sci. Total Environ, 2021, 798, 149233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, Y. Sun, X. Yao, K. Subramanian, C. Ling, H. Wang, S. S. Chopra, B. B. Xu, J. Wang, J. Chen, D. Wang, H. Amancio, S. Pramana, R. Ye and S. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 9, 2102189 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Saha, X. Wang, R. Padhye and S. Houshyar, OpenNano, 2022, 7, 100046 CrossRef .
S. M. Imani, L. Ladouceur, T. Marshall, R. Maclachlan, L. Soleymani and T. F. Didar, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12341–12369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tuñón-Molina, K. Takayama, E. M. Redwan, V. N. Uversky, J. Andrés and Á. Serrano-Aroca, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 56725–56751 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mallakpour, E. Azadi and C. M. Hussain, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 55, 101480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, F. Chen, H. Xu, H. Jiang, J. Liu, P. Li, C. C. Chen and K. Pan, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 288, 117748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Capricho, K. Prasad, N. Hameed, M. Nikzad and N. Salim, Polymers, 2022, 14, 5010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Production capacity of polystyrene worldwide from 2018 to 2024, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1065889/global-polystyrene-production-capacity/, accessed October 2022.
S. Thakur, A. Verma, B. Sharma, J. Chaudhary, S. Tamulevicius and V. K. Thakur, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2018, 13, 32–38 CrossRef .
Plastic Marine Debris, http://www.epspackaging.org/, accessed October 2022.
N. A. Weir, P. Kutok and K. Whiting, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1989, 24, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Tao, X. Zhou, L. Song, G. Jie and Y. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 352, 92–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yousif and R. Haddad, SpringerPlus, 2013, 2, 1–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Hahladakis, C. A. Velis, R. Weber, E. Iacovidou and P. Purnell, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 344, 179–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Uttaravalli, S. Dinda and B. R. Gidla, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2020, 137, 140–148 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. S. Yeung, J. Y. Q. Teo, X. J. Loh and J. Y. C. Lim, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1660–1676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Xu, H. Wei, T. Huo and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 5439–5443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. P. Ribeiro, R. R. S. Pinto, K. A. da Silva Rocha and C. G. Vieira, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2021, 12, 4695–4702 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Sułkowski, K. Nowak, A. Sułkowska, A. Wolińska, W. M. Bajdur, D. Pentak and B. Mikuła, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 2417–2424 CrossRef .
N. Alonso-Fagúndez, V. Laserna, A. C. Alba-Rubio, M. Mengibar, A. Heras, R. Mariscal and M. L. Granados, Catal. Today, 2014, 234, 285–294 CrossRef .
A. T. K. Tran, T. T. Pham, Q. H. Nguyen, N. T. T. Hoang, D. T. Bui, M. T. Nguyen, M. K. Nguyen and B. Van der Bruggen, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104302 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Xie, H. Ye, W. Li, W. Shi and Y. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 289, 120669 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ye, Z. Xie, W. Li, Y. Pu, M. Liu, Y. Wen and Y. Liu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, 139, 51868 CrossRef .
Y. Pu, Z. Xie, H. Ye and W. Shi, Water Sci. Technol., 2021, 83, 2192–2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Siyal, S. Q. Memon, S. Parveen, A. Soomro, M. I. Khaskheli and M. Y. Khuhawar, J. Chem., 2013, 2013, 842435 Search PubMed .
Z. Fu, J. Jia, J. Li and C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 323, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, A. Akram, B. Comesaña-Gándara, X. Dong, Q. Ge, K. Wang, S.-P. Sun, B. Jin and C. H. Lau, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 2586–2593 CrossRef CAS .
F. Maleki, A. Ghaemi and G. Mir Mohamad Sadeghi, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2023, 42, e13954 CAS .
S. E. Lewis, B. E. Wilhelmy and F. A. Leibfarth, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4914–4919 RSC .
S. E. Lewis, B. E. Wilhelmy and F. A. Leibfarth, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6270–6277 RSC .
W. W. Sułkowski, K. Nowak, A. Sułkowska, A. Wolińska, W. M. Bajdur, D. Pentak and B. Mikuła, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2010, 523, 218–227 Search PubMed .
Y. Inagaki, M. Kuromiya, T. Noguchi and H. Watanabe, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 4171–4175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H.-M. Li, Eur. Polym. J., 2005, 41, 823–829 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Coustet and M. S. Cortizo, Polym. J., 2011, 43, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Slaný, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zang, Y. Li and G. Chen, Polymers, 2021, 13, 2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Yu, X. Wang, L. Wang, B. Zhao, L. Hao, W. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Chen and Q. Wu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2023, 408, 137102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Hua, X. Dong, C. Chen, Y. Duan and H. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 285, 119791 CrossRef CAS .
F. Maleki, H. Mashhadimoslem, A. Ghaemi and G. Mir Mohamad Sadeghi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2022, 292, 126779 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu, I. M. A. Mohamed, J. Li and C. Liu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 97, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ruziwa, N. Chaukura, W. Gwenzi and I. Pumure, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2528–2537 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bekri-Abbes, S. Bayoudh and M. Baklouti, J. Polym. Environ., 2006, 14, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Lee, I. S. Youn, M. Saleh, J. W. Lee and K. S. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10925–10933 RSC .
E. A. Gendy, J. Ifthikar, J. Ali, D. T. Oyekunle, Z. Elkhlifia, I. I. Shahib, A. I. Khodair and Z. Chen, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105687 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, X. Huang, Z. Tang, Q. Huang, F. Niu and X. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3562–3582 RSC .
X. Lu, H. Wang, J. Chen, L. Yang, T. Hu, F. Wu, J. Fu and Z. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133650 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dash, H. Chaudhuri, R. Gupta and U. G. Nair, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5897–5905 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Chen, T. Yuan, H. Huang, Z. Sui, R. Du, X. Li, Y. Lu and Q. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 232–236 RSC .
Y. Ahmadi and K.-H. Kim, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 302, 102633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, P. R. Chang, P. Zheng, F. Zhao and X. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 240, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, Y.-E. Miao, C. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7584–7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, H. Zha, X. Jin and S. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 195–196, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Ndunda and B. Mizaikoff, Analyst, 2016, 141, 3141–3156 RSC .
D. Qian, C. Lei, E. M. Wang, W. C. Li and A. H. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pardakhti, T. Jafari, Z. Tobin, B. Dutta, E. Moharreri, N. S. Shemshaki, S. Suib and R. Srivastava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34533–34559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Cho, D. A. Yang, J. Kim, S. Y. Jeong and W. S. Ahn, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Campos Molina, R. Mariscal and M. López Granados, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 75, 164–179 CrossRef CAS .
D. Simón, A. M. Borreguero, A. de Lucas and J. F. Rodríguez, Waste Manage., 2018, 76, 147–171 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Danso, J. Chow and W. R. Streit, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2019, 85, e01095–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Polyurethane Market Size, Growth & Trends Report, 2022-2030, https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/polyurethane-pu-market, accessed October 2022.
N. Yarahmadi, A. Vega and I. Jakubowicz, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2017, 138, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Chattopadhyay and D. C. Webster, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 1068–1133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, X. Li, D. Liu, Y. Jiang and Z. Sun, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 169405 Search PubMed .
A. Kemona and M. Piotrowska, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Zia, H. N. Bhatti and I. Ahmad Bhatti, React. Funct. Polym., 2007, 67, 675–692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, R. Dewil, L. Appels, R. Ansart, J. Baeyens and Q. Kang, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 278, 111527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Keshawy, R. K. Farag and A. Gaffer, Egypt. J. Pet., 2020, 29, 67–73 CrossRef .
A. R. G. Srinivas, R. Hilali, M. Damavandi, J. Malmstrom, D. Barker, E. Weatherall, G. Willmott and J. Travas-Sejdic, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Youssef, A. E. M. Hussein, M. H. Taha and M. M. El-Maadawy, Russ. J. Inorg. Chem., 2022, 67, 1058–1068 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Dmitrienko, O. A. Sviridova, L. N. Pyatkova, E. N. Myshak, O. V. Shelmenkova and Y. A. Zolotov, Mendeleev Commun., 2000, 10, 244–245 CrossRef .
J. F. Flores-Aguilar, C. A. Galán-Vidal, J. A. Rodríguez, J. G. Alvarado-Rodríguez and M. E. Páez-Hernández, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 16, 1005–1014 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, K. Wang, B. W. Biney, W. Li, W. Li, K. Chen, H. Liu and A. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 643, 128694 CrossRef CAS .
O. Guselnikova, A. Barras, A. Addad, E. Sviridova, S. Szunerits, P. Postnikov and R. Boukherroub, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 240, 116627 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yu, D. Mathias, S. Lu, W. Xu, M. Naushad, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 238, 116420 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Vali, M. Baghdadi and M. A. Abdoli, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6612–6622 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ao, L. Jiang, Q. Wang, X. Xue, J. Gai, W. Zhang and C. Lu, J. Environ.
Manage., 2022, 315, 115140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ecevit, E. Silva, L. C. Rodrigues, I. Aroso, A. A. Barros, J. M. Silva and R. L. Reis, Materials, 2022, 15, 1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, C. P. Chiu, Y. Zhu, C. Y. Tang, H. Long, W. Qarony, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, W. H. Lo and Y. H. Tsang, Appl. Energy, 2017, 206, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, K. Chen, B. Wiafe Biney, K. Wang, H. Liu, A. Guo and W. Xia, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 610, 970–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, C. Liu and Z. Ma, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 648, 129364 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Lavall, J. A. de Sales, R. S. Borges, H. D. R. Calado, J. C. Machado, D. Windmöller, G. G. Silva, R. G. Lacerda and L. O. Ladeira, Quim. Nova, 2010, 33, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Wang, B. Huang, X. Xue, M. Li, W. Zhang and C. Lu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2022, 61, 13083–13091 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Kim, J. W. Choi, Y.-C. Chung and B. C. Chun, Fibers Polym., 2017, 18, 842–851 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, M. C. Tekell, Y. Huang, K. Bertelsmann, M. Lau and D. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802108 CrossRef .
S. Ahmed, J. Brockgreitens, K. Xu and A. Abbas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606572 CrossRef .
G. Campanella, M. Ghaani, G. Quetti and S. Farris, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 46, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dahdouh, S. Amokrane, R. Murillo, E. Mekatel and D. Nibou, J. Polym. Environ., 2019, 28, 271–283 CrossRef .
S. Ozlem, E. Aslan-Gürel, R. M. Rossi and J. Hacaloglu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 100, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ali, K. J. B. A. Karim and N. A. Buang, Polym. Rev., 2015, 55, 678–705 CrossRef CAS .
V. Popescu, C. Vasile, M. Brebu, G. L. Popescu, M. Moldovan, C. Prejmerean, L. Stănuleţ, C. Trişcă-Rusu and I. Cojocaru, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 483, 432–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Godiya, S. Gabrielli, S. Materazzi, M. S. Pianesi, N. Stefanini and E. Marcantoni, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 231, 1012–1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. van der Heijden, presented in part at the Virtual Workshop on Polymer Recycling, September, 2020, https://www.mmatwo.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/MMAtwo-Virtual-Workshop_S-van-der-Heijden.pdf, accessed October 2022.
European Comission, country report Belgium 2020, https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/2020-european_semester_country-report-belgium_en.pdf, accessed October 2022.
W. Yin, Z. Xie, Y. Yin, J. Yi, X. Liu, H. Wu, S. Wang, Y. Xie and Y. Yang, Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res., 2019, 2, 82–87 Search PubMed .
L. Lv, H. Lin and T. Jin, Polym. Test., 2021, 93, 106991 CrossRef CAS .
N. Siampiringue, J.-P. Leca and J. Lemaire, Eur. Polym. J., 1991, 27, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, C. C. Chen and J. A. Sauer, Polymer, 1985, 26, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Miller, J. D. Carloni, D. K. Johnson, J. W. Pankow, E. L. Gjersing, B. To, C. E. Packard, C. E. Kennedy and S. R. Kurtz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 165–180 CrossRef CAS .
X. Colom, T. García, J. J. Sunol, J. Saurina and F. Carrasco, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2001, 287, 308–312 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sridharan, M. Kumar, M. Saha, M. B. Kirkham, L. Singh and N. S. Bolan, Sci. Total Environ, 2022, 824, 153828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Kitahara and H. Nakata, Sci. Total Environ, 2020, 736, 139694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Babo, J. L. Ferreira, A. M. Ramos, A. Micheluz, M. Pamplona, M. H. Casimiro, L. M. Ferreira and M. J. Melo, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Çaykara and O. Güven, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 65, 225–229 CrossRef .
M. Sponchioni and S. Altinok, Towards Circular Economy: Closing the Loop with Chemical Recycling of Solid Plastic Waste, 2022, 269–287 Search PubMed .

          E. Esmizadeh, S. Khalili, A. Vahidifar, G. Naderi and C. Dubois, Handbook of Ecomaterials,  2019, pp. 2977–3009 Search PubMed .
E. Moens, K. De Smit, Y. Marien, A. Trigilio, P. Van Steenberge, K. Van Geem, J.-L. Dubois and D. D’hooge, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Cheng, C.-W. Wei, K.-H. Hsu and T.-H. Young, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 99, 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schulz, P. Munzert and N. Kaiser, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2001, 142–144, 507–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Tao, M. W. Lubeley and T. A. Desai, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 88, 215–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, K. H. Wong and A. M. Granville, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 492, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jakóbik-Kolon, A. Szybaj, K. Mitko and J. Bok-Badura, Molecules, 2017, 22, 2274 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, T. Pan, A. T. Woolley and M. L. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 6948–6955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Riau, D. Mondal, G. H. F. Yam, M. Setiawan, B. Liedberg, S. S. Venkatraman and J. S. Mehta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21690–21702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kim, I. S. Park, H. D. Park, W. R. Wee, J. H. Lee, K. D. Park, S. H. Kim and Y. H. Kim, J. Cataract Refractive Surg., 2001, 27, 766–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Guselnikova, P. Postnikov, P. Sajdl, R. Elashnikov, V. Švorčík and O. Lyutakov, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 5, 1701182 CrossRef .
V. Sunkara and Y.-K. Cho, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 411, 122–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Singh, A. Ullah Mirza, S. Ahmad Bhat, A. Kareem and N. Nishat, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 132, 108817 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, A. U. Mirza, A. H. Mondal, K. Mukhopadhyay and N. Nishat, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, 139, 51749 CrossRef .
N. Singh, H. Madhav, S. Yadav and G. Jaiswar, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 136, 47116 CrossRef .
H. Madhav, P. Singh, N. Singh and G. Jaiswar, Macromol. Res., 2017, 25, 689–696 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, H. Madhav, N. Singh, G. Jaiswar and N. Nishat, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2022, 62, 824–831 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kulsharova, N. Dimov, M. P. C. Marques, N. Szita and F. Baganz, New Biotechnol., 2018, 47, 31–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Henry, T. J. Tutt, M. Galloway, Y. Y. Davidson, C. S. McWhorter, S. A. Soper and R. L. McCarley, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 5331–5337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Dominick, B. T. Berhane, J. S. Mecomber and P. A. Limbach, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376, 349–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Divagar, J. Saumey, J. Satija and V. V. R. Sai, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 1428–1436 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sharifi, S. Mahmoudzadeh, M. M. Islam, D. Koza, C. H. Dohlman, J. Chodosh and M. Gonzalez-Andrades, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 7, 1900767 CrossRef .
R. Khnouf, D. Karasneh and B. A. Albiss, Electrophoresis, 2015, 37, 529–535 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Patel, R. G. Thakar, J. Wong, S. D. McLeod and S. Li, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 2890–2897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sathish, N. Ishizu and A. Q. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46350–46360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Thakur, D. Vennerberg, S. A. Madbouly and M. R. Kessler, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6677 RSC .
X. Wen, H. He and L. J. Lee, J. Immunol. Methods, 2009, 350, 97–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rezaei, B. Shokri and M. Sharifian, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360, 641–651 CrossRef CAS .
B. Subramanian, N. Kim, W. Lee, D. A. Spivak, D. E. Nikitopoulos, R. L. McCarley and S. A. Soper, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7949–7957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ben Amor, G. Baud, M. Jacquet, G. Nansé, P. Fioux and M. Nardin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 153, 172–183 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Long, S. Prakash, M. A. Shannon and J. S. Moore, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4104–4109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Zangmeister and M. J. Tarlov, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6901–6904 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. McCarley, B. Vaidya, S. Wei, A. F. Smith, A. B. Patel, J. Feng, M. C. Murphy and S. A. Soper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 127, 842–843 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wei, B. Vaidya, A. B. Patel, S. A. Soper and R. L. McCarley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16988–16996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, Y. Liu, C. Liu, X. Li, L. Chen, C. Duan and J. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1508–1518 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sreenivasan, V. Raj and P. R. Hari, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 127, 330–334 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nugen, P. J. Asiello, J. T. Connelly and A. J. Baeumner, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2428–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Shah, J. Geist, L. E. Locascio, M. Gaitan, M. V. Rao and W. N. Vreeland, Electrophoresis, 2006, 27, 3788–3796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Usman, M. H. Othman, A. F. Ismail, M. A. Rahman, J. Jaafar, Y. O. Raji, T. H. El Badawy, A. O. Gbadamosi and T. A. Kurniawan, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2020, 95, 3300–3315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Tennico, M. T. Koesdjojo, S. Kondo, D. T. Mandrell and V. T. Remcho, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 143, 799–804 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jakóbik-Kolon, A. Milewski, D. Zdybał, K. Mitko, E. Laskowska, A. Mielańczyk and J. Bok-Badura, Materials, 2017, 10, 755 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Nelson, M. Perry, S.-M. He, D. L. Zechel and J. H. Horton, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 78, 61–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vasanthakumari, Z. Khosravi, V. V. R. Sai and C.-P. Klages, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2016, 36, 1067–1083 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Hu, Z. Lu and C. M. Li, MedChemComm, 2010, 1, 132 RSC .
F. Fixe, M. Dufva, P. Telleman and C. B. V. Christensen, Nucleic Acids Res., 2004, 32, 9e–99 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Fixe, M. Dufva, P. Telleman and C. B. V. Christensen, Lab Chip, 2004, 4, 191 RSC .
Y. Bai, C. G. Koh, M. Boreman, Y.-J. Juang, I.-C. Tang, L. J. Lee and Sh-T. Yang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9458–9467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Azkune, L. Ruiz-Rubio, G. Aldabaldetreku, E. Arrospide, L. Pérez-Álvarez, I. Bikandi, J. Zubia and J. Vilas-Vilela, Sensors, 2018, 18, 34 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Saha, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2018, 78, 198–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, W.-C. Huang and S.-T. Yang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2007, 98, 328–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kitagawa, K. Kubota, K. Sueyoshi and K. Otsuka, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2006, 7, 558–565 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Q. Lin, T. Jin, C. Shen, J. Tang, Y. Han and H. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3597–3604 RSC .
M. M. Chehimi, A. Lamouri, M. Picot and J. Pinson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 356–363 RSC .
O. Guselnikova, J. Svanda, P. Postnikov, Y. Kalachyova, V. Svorcik and O. Lyutakov, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 4, 1600886 CrossRef .
S. K. Arya, P. Kongsuphol and M. K. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 542–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Minceva, R. Fajgar, L. Markovska and V. Meshko, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2008, 43, 2117–2143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shakeri, N. A. Jarad, S. Khan and T. F. Didar, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2022, 1209, 339283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pattanayak, S. K. Singh, M. Gulati, S. Vishwas, B. Kapoor, D. K. Chellappan, K. Anand, G. Gupta, N. K. Jha, P. K. Gupta, P. Prasher, K. Dua, H. Dureja, D. Kumar and V. Kumar, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2021, 25(12), 1–28 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sienkiewicz, H. Janik, K. Borzędowska-Labuda and J. Kucińska-Lipka, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 147, 560–571 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Il’in and A. K. Rezova, Int. Polym. Sci. Technol., 2015, 42, 35–44 CrossRef .
Production capacity of styrene-butadiene-rubber worldwide in 2020 and 2025, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1063647/styrene-butadiene-rubber-production-capacity-globally/, accessed October 2022.
B. S. Thomas and R. C. Gupta, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 1323–1333 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Bamigboye, D. E. Bassey, D. O. Olukanni, B. U. Ngene, D. Adegoke, A. O. Odetoyan, M. A. Kareem, D. O. Enabulele and A. T. Nworgu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 283, 124581 CrossRef .
S. Poompradub, T. Luthikaviboon, S. Linpoo, R. Rojanathanes and P. Prasassarakich, Polym. Bull., 2011, 66, 965–977 CrossRef CAS .
B. Adhikari, D. De and S. Maiti, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 909–948 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Vinod, S. Varghese and B. Kuriakose, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2002, 75, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Munteanu, M. Brebu and C. Vasile, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2005, 89, 501–512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, L. Wei, H. Wei, J. Zheng and G. Huang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 53596–53603 RSC .
S. Ramarad, M. Khalid, C. T. Ratnam, A. L. Chuah and W. Rashmi, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 72, 100–140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Siddika, M. A. A. Mamun, R. Alyousef, Y. H. M. Amran, F. Aslani and H. Alabduljabbar, Constr. Build. Mater., 2019, 224, 711–731 CrossRef .
Ł. Zedler, S. Wang and K. Formela, Sci. Total Environ, 2022, 836, 155636 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sathiskumar and S. Karthikeyan, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2019, 22, e00125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Battista, A. Gobetti, S. Agnelli and G. Ramorino, Environ. Technol. Rev., 2020, 10, 1–25 Search PubMed .
M. T. Islam, R. Saenz-Arana, C. Hernandez, T. Guinto, M. A. Ahsan, D. T. Bragg, H. Wang, B. Alvarado-Tenorio and J. C. Noveron, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3070–3082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rungrodnimitchai and D. Kotatha, React. Funct. Polym., 2019, 136, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Dubkov, S. V. Semikolenov, D. P. Ivanov, D. E. Babushkin, G. I. Panov and V. N. Parmon, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2012, 97, 1123–1130 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cataldo, O. Ursini and G. Angelini, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 803–810 CrossRef CAS .
X.-W. Cao, J. Luo, Y. Cao, X.-C. Yin, G.-J. He, X.-F. Peng and B.-P. Xu, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2014, 109, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Manhart, D. Lenko, I. Mühlbacher, A. Hausberger, R. Schaller, A. Holzner, W. Kern and S. Schlögl, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 66, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Manhart, R. Kramer, R. Schaller, A. Holzner, W. Kern and S. Schlögl, Macromol. Symp., 2016, 365, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
E. Babiker, M. A. Al-Ghouti, N. Zouari and G. McKay, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102948 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imyim, T. Sirithaweesit and V. Ruangpornvisuti, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 166, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, H. Fan, J. Ma, C. Wang, Y. Zhao and S. Lei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1957–1964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Liao, Q. Deng, W. Guo and Z. Zeng, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2017, 95, 1456–1462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Luo, G. Chen, M. Xie and Z. Yu, Iran. Polym. J., 2010, 19(3), 207–218 CAS .
M. K. Aroua, S. P. P. Leong, L. Y. Teo, C. Y. Yin and W. M. A. W. Daud, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 5786–5792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Issabayeva, M. K. Aroua and N. M. N. Sulaiman, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 2350–2355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li and X. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 2810–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Acharya, J. N. Sahu, C. R. Mohanty and B. C. Meikap, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 149, 249–262 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jalali, H. Ghafourian, Y. Asef, S. Davarpanah and S. Sepehr, J. Hazard. Mater., 2002, 92, 253–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Chang, R. Law and C.-C. Chang, Water Res., 1997, 31, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Iqbal and M. N. Ashiq, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 139, 57–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liao, Z. Zhan, J. Dai, X. Wu, W. Zhang, K. Wang and S. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 496–505 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmoudi, N. Hamdi, A. Kriaa and E. Srasra, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 86, 1294–1300 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Song, X. Liu, L. Yang, F. Pan and J. Lv, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 178, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Du, J. Sun, Y. Jiao, G. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, W. Zhang, K. Wang, H. Zhu and D. Wu, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 90, 197–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Robati, B. Mirza, M. Rajabi, O. Moradi, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal and V. K. Gupta, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 687–697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Hu, S. M. Shah and X. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 368, 540–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Haque, J. W. Jun and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 507–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Kazanjian, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng., 1973, 2, 123–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Davis and J. H. Golden, J. Macromol. Sci., Chem., 1969, 3, 49–68 CAS .
E. V. Antonakou and D. S. Achilias, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2012, 4, 9–21 CrossRef .
J. G. Kim, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4830–4849 RSC .
S. Fukuoka, M. Kawamura, K. Komiya, M. Tojo, H. Hachiya, K. Hasegawa, M. Aminaka, H. Okamoto, I. Fukawa and S. Konno, Green Chem., 2003, 5, 497–507 RSC .
H. J. Jung, S. Park, H. S. Lee, H. G. Shin, Y. Yoo, E. R. Baral, J. H. Lee, J. Kwak and J. G. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4301–4306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fromel and C. W. Pester, Macromolecules, 2022, 55, 4907–4915 CrossRef CAS .
T.-W. Jiang, K. S. K. Reddy, Y.-C. Chen, M.-W. Wang, H.-C. Chang, M. M. Abu-Omar and C.-H. Lin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 2429–2440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Brouwer, J. Bogerd and J. Hoover, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 71, 558–566 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Wang, R. Wang, K. Wang, S. Pang, Z. Zhong, Y. Sun, R. Ruan and A. J. Ragauskas, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 386, 121970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Diepens and P. Gijsman, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2007, 92, 397–406 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Cheng, H. Keskkula and D. R. Paul, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1992, 45, 531–551 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ram, O. Zilber and S. Kenig, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1985, 25, 535–540 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yaghoubi, N. Taghavinia and E. K. Alamdari, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 1562–1568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Waste Manage., 2020, 110, 43–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, S. Liu and Z. Pan, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2011, 96, 1405–1410 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grause, N. Tsukada, W. J. Hall, T. Kameda, P. T. Williams and T. Yoshioka, Polym. J., 2010, 42, 438–442 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Kirkpatrick, C. Antwi and R. S. Martin, Anal. Methods, 2010, 2, 811 RSC .
M. Binczyk, M. Nowak, M. Skrobanska, B. Tylkowski, T. Runka and R. Jastrzab, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2015, 13, 841–845 CrossRef .
M. Avella-Oliver, R. Puchades, S. Wachsmann-Hogiu and A. Maquieira, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 252, 657–662 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu and L. Montalvo, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 280, 124355 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saikia and J. de Brito, Constr. Build. Mater., 2012, 34, 385–401 CrossRef .
G. Kaur and S. Pavia, J. Build. Eng., 2020, 31, 101341 CrossRef .
T. Lee, S. Jung, K. Baek, Y. F. Tsang, K.-Y. A. Lin, Y. J. Jeon and E. E. Kwon, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 423, 126992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Westhues, J. Idel and J. Klankermayer, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat9669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Gilbert, M. L. Polo, J. M. Maffi, J. F. Guastavino, S. E. Vaillard and D. A. Estenoz, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 3284–3317 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. A. Aguirre-Villegas, R. D. Allen, X. Bai, C. H. Benson, G. T. Beckham, S. L. Bradshaw, J. L. Brown, R. C. Brown, V. S. Cecon, J. B. Curley, G. W. Curtzwiler, S. Dong, S. Gaddameedi, J. E. García, I. Hermans, M. S. Kim, J. Ma, L. O. Mark, M. Mavrikakis, O. O. Olafasakin, T. A. Osswald, K. G. Papanikolaou, H. Radhakrishnan, M. A. Sanchez Castillo, K. L. Sánchez-Rivera, K. N. Tumu, R. C. Van Lehn, K. L. Vorst, M. M. Wright, J. Wu, V. M. Zavala, P. Zhou and G. W. Huber, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 8899–9002 RSC .
Y. Liu and X. Lu, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 3256–3268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ogończyk, P. Jankowski and P. Garstecki, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2743–2748 RSC .
U. Bora, P. Sharma, S. Kumar, K. Kannan and P. Nahar, Talanta, 2006, 70, 624–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Kannoujia, S. Kumar and P. Nahar, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2012, 114, 402–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nahar, N. M. Wali and R. P. Gandhi, Anal. Biochem., 2001, 294, 148–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aslan, P. Holley and C. D. Geddes, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2846 RSC .
P. Jankowski, D. Ogończyk, L. Derzsi, W. Lisowski and P. Garstecki, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2013, 14, 597–604 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dauginet, A.-S. Duwez, R. Legras and S. Demoustier-Champagne, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 3952–3957 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lam, A. Soetanto and R. Amal, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 11, 1971–1979 CrossRef .
S. Singh, Y. Lei and A. Schober, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3454–3460 RSC .
S. A. Abdallah, K. S. Tay and K. H. Low, Desalin. Water Treat., 2021, 231, 229–243 CrossRef CAS .
V. VanDelinder, D. R. Wheeler, L. J. Small, M. T. Brumbach, E. D. Spoerke, I. Henderson and G. D. Bachand, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5643–5649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh, P. Mai, J. Borowiec, Y. Zhang, Y. Lei and A. Schober, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 180207 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. La Clair and M. D. Burkart, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 3244 RSC .
S. A. Abdallah, K. S. Tay and K. H. Low, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 17, 4161–4170 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vani, S. Thomas, V. Prabhawathi, T. Boobalan, S. N. Sawant and M. Doble, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 108, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jain, S. Chattopadhyay, R. Jackeray, C. K. V. Z. Abid, G. S. Kohli and H. Singh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 31, 37–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Dewez, A. Deren, P. G. Rouxhet, Y.-J. Schneider and R. Legras, Surf. Interface Anal., 1991, 17, 499–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tamarit-López, S. Morais, M.-J. Bañuls, R. Puchades and Á. Maquieira, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1954–1963 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-J. Bañuls, F. García-Piñón, R. Puchades and Á. Maquieira, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 665–672 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Godeau, S. Amigoni, T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 387, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Wang, L. M. L. Ou and H.-Z. Yu, Anal. Chem., 2006, 79, 426–433 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tamarit-López, S. Morais, R. Puchades and Á. Maquieira, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 2573–2580 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, J. H. Heo, B. Lee, H. H. Cho, T. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 17773–17779 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and R.-X. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Park, K. Bae, J. W. Kim, G. B. Lee, B.-H. Choi, M. H. Lee and J. H. Shim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600340 CrossRef .
S. J. Chang, S. M. Kuo, J. W. Lan and Y. J. Wang, Artif. Cells, Blood Substitutes, Biotechnol., 1999, 27, 229–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yaghoubi and N. Taghavinia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9836–9839 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gomathi, C. Eswaraiah and S. Neogi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 1557–1566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Adachi, S. S. Latthe, S. W. Gosavi, N. Roy, N. Suzuki, H. Ikari, K. Kato, K. Katsumata, K. Nakata, M. Furudate, T. Inoue, T. Kondo, M. Yuasa, A. Fujishima and C. Terashima, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 917–923 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Witek, Nucleic Acids Res., 2006, 34, e74–e74 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Welle and E. Gottwald, Biomed. Microdevices, 2002, 4, 33–41 CrossRef .
R. O. F. Verkuijlen, M. H. A. Van Dongen, A. A. E. Stevens, J. Van Geldrop and J. P. C. Bernards, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 290, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jankowski, D. Ogonczyk, A. Kosinski, W. Lisowski and P. Garstecki, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 748–752 RSC .
L. Derzsi, P. Jankowski, W. Lisowski and P. Garstecki, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1151–1156 RSC .
K. Kadirvelu, M. Kavipriya, C. Karthika, N. Vennilamani and S. Pattabhi, Carbon, 2004, 42, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, C.-W. Chan, Y. Wang, X. Yao, X. Mu, X. Lu, J. Zhou, Z. Cai and K. Ren, Lab Chip, 2019, 19, 2915–2924 RSC .
A. M. D. Wan, D. Devadas and E. W. K. Young, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 253, 738–744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Varsha, P. Senthil Kumar and B. Senthil Rathi, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Global Adsorbents Market is Flourishing, https://www.blueweaveconsulting.com/press-release/global-adsorbents-market-is-flourishing-projected-to-reach-worth-usd-5-9-billion-in-2027, accessed October 2022.
Oil Water Separator Market by Application, https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/oil-water-separator-market-198124988.html#:~:text=The%20global%20oil%20water%20separator%20market%20is%20projected%20to%20reach,global%20oil%20water%20separator%20market, accessed October 2022.
S. Shao, Z. Hu, J. Cao, L. Yang and D. Guan, Bus Strategy Environ., 2020, 29, 1465–1478 CrossRef .
T. Zhou, G. Che, L. Ding, D. Sun and Y. Li, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 121, 115678 CrossRef CAS .
R. Coşkun, C. Soykan and M. Saçak, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2006, 49, 107–114 CrossRef .
O. A. Oyetade, A. A. Skelton, V. O. Nyamori, S. B. Jonnalagadda and B. S. Martincigh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 188, 174–187 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pourmand, M. M. Sanagi, A. A. Naim, W. A. Wan Ibrahim and U. Baig, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 3215–3223 RSC .
L. Sellaoui, D. I. Mendoza-Castillo, H. E. Reynel-Ávila, B. A. Ávila-Camacho, L. L. Díaz-Muñoz, H. Ghalla, A. Bonilla-Petriciolet and A. B. Lamine, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 365, 305–316 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jang, S. Yoo, Y.-K. Choi, S. Park and E. Kan, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 259, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irani, H. Ismail and Z. Ahmad, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 131, 40101 Search PubMed .
Global Energy Review: CO2 Emissions in 2021, https://www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2021-2, accessed January 2023.
Carbon Dioxide Utilization Market, https://www.precedenceresearch.com/carbon-dioxide-utilization-market, accessed January 2023.
P. R. Yaashikaa, P. Senthil Kumar, S. J. Varjani and A. Saravanan, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
O. Guselnikova, P. Postnikov, J. Kosina, Z. Kolska, A. Trelin, V. Svorcik and O. Lyutakov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8462–8469 RSC .
A. Saravanan, P. Senthil Kumar, D.-V. N. Vo, S. Jeevanantham, V. Bhuvaneswari, V. Anantha Narayanan, P. R. Yaashikaa, S. Swetha and B. Reshma, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 236, 116515 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Q. Teo, A. Ong, T. T. Y. Tan, X. Li, X. J. Loh and J. Y. C. Lim, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6086–6099 RSC .
D. Panda, S. Patra, M. K. Awasthi and S. K. Singh, J. Chem. Educ., 2020, 97, 1101–1108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, X. Qiu, B. Han, S. Liang and Z. Lin, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2021, 8, 390–398 RSC .
B. Kaur, R. K. Gupta and H. Bhunia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 282, 146–158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, S. Li, S. Jeon, S. Deng, L. Zhao and K. B. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Yuan, S. Deng, X. Zeng, Z. Yu, S. Li and K. Li, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6836–6845 RSC .
C. Ge, J. Song, Z. Qin, J. Wang and W. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18849–18859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ge, D. Lian, S. Cui, J. Gao and J. Lu, Processes, 2019, 7, 592 CrossRef CAS .
G.-L. Zhuang, H.-H. Tseng, P. Uchytil and M.-Y. Wey, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 25, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Hu and J. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3399–3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Erzina, O. Guselnikova, R. Elashnikov, A. Trelin, D. Zabelin, P. Postnikov, J. Siegel, A. Zabelina, P. Ulbrich, Z. Kolska and M. Cieslar, J. CO2 Util., 2023, 69, 102416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaliva, G. S. Armatas and M. Vamvakaki, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2690–2695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, L. Li, W. Yang, S. Feng and H. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 12987–12993 RSC .
Y. Yang, B. Tan and C. D. Wood, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15072–15080 RSC .
K. Zhou, B. Mousavi, Z. Luo, S. Phatanasri, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 952–957 RSC .
Q. Liu, P. He, X. Qian, Z. Fei, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Tang, M. Cui, X. Qiao and Y. Shi, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 13933–13941 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Zubair, M. M. Nasef, N. A. Mohamad, E. Abouzari-Lotf, T. M. Ting and E. C. Abdullah, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2020, 171, 108727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahmoud Nasef, A. Abbasi and T. M. Ting, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2014, 103, 72–74 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rojek, L. Gubler, M. M. Nasef and E. Abouzari-Lotf, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 5925–5934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Wang, Q. Xin and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6794–6816 RSC .
Y. Chai, Q. Chen, C. Huang, Q. Zheng, M. North and H. Xie, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4871–4877 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Ge, J. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, J. Mi, W. Cai, Y. Lai and Y. Feng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137099 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, L. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Wang, C. Yang, R. Li and G. Wu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 292, 109723 CrossRef .
W.-G. Kim, D.-W. Kim, I.-W. Tcho, J.-K. Kim, M.-S. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 258–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. Qi, J. Yang, Z. Bo, F. Huang, M. S. Islam, X. Lu, L. Dai, R. Amal, C. H. Wang and Z. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1854–1896 RSC .
Energy storage market, https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/energy-storage-market?gclid=CjwKCAjwsfuYBhAZEiwA5a6CDL2Ytyq3JqnmPQ8rUfn4kOvEysLgMvNwDQ0eAq5TdYVbEURjV6Z1GRoCIQgQAvD_BwE, accessed October 2022.
H. Xia, G. Qu, H. Yin and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15358–15372 RSC .
X. Tong, Z. Tian, J. Sun, V. Tung, R. B. Kaner and Y. Shao, Mater. Today, 2021, 44, 78–104 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mu, X. Huang, W. Wang, X. Tian, Z. An and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 14, 622–632 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, X. Fang, Q. Pang, W. Huang and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17456–17465 RSC .
N. Wang, G. Han, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, H. Song and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 490–500 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Li, J. Tian, B. Shi, Y. Zou, H. Ouyang, C. Zhao, L. Zhao, R. Sun, H. Zheng, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801895 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-Y. Feng, Z. Xia, B. Sun, X. Jing, H. Li, X. Tao, H.-Y. Mi and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16916–16927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, Z. Lyu, D.-H. Kim and D. J. Kang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106536 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Natarajan, S. Finger, J. Lacayo-Pineda, E. S. Bhagavatheswaran, S. S. Banerjee, G. Heinrich and A. Das, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 4054–4064 CrossRef CAS .
UN environment programme, https://www.unep.org/interactives/beat-plastic-pollution/#:~:text=Of%20the%20seven%20billion%20tonnes,per%20cent%20has%20been%20recycled, accessed October 2022.
Throwing Away the Future: How Companies Still Have It Wrong on Plastic Pollution “Solutions”, https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/how-companies-still-have-it-wrong-on-plastic-pollution-solutions/, accessed January 2023.
A. Figoli, T. Marino, S. Simone, E. Di Nicolò, X.-M. Li, T. He, S. Tornaghi and E. Drioli, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4034–4059 RSC .
A. Zhenova, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 895–901 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Reddy, T. Okuda, S. Nakai, W. Nishijima and M. Okada, Waste Manage., 2011, 31, 1848–1851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Evstatiev, S. Fakirov, B. Krasteva, K. Friedrich, J. A. Covas and A. M. Cunha, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2002, 42, 826–835 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Suresh, S. Mohanty and S. K. Nayak, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 149, 863–873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Tong and W. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 242, 919–930 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lagae-Capelle, M. Cognet, S. Madhavi, M. Carboni and D. Meyer, Materials, 2020, 13, 441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cs00689hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Olga Guselnikova
	Dr Olga Guselnikova received her PhD degree in chemistry from the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague (Czech Republic) and Tomsk Polytechnic University (Russia) in 2019. She is a fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, and a sub-group leader of “functional materials” at Tomsk Polytechnic University. Her research interests are related to surface chemistry for functional materials. This means that she is applying her background in organic chemistry to materials science: plasmonic and polymer surfaces are hybridized with organic molecules to create high-performance elements and devices.

Yusuke Yamauchi
	Yusuke Yamauchi received his PhD degree from Waseda University in 2007 and subsequently established his research group at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS). In 2017, he moved to the University of Queensland where he currently serves as a professor and senior group leader at the School of Chemical Engineering and the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN). He is also a distinguished professor at Nagoya University and an ERATO Research Director at the JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics. His area of expertise is inorganic material nanoarchitectonics.

Rabah Boukherroub
	Dr Rabah Boukherroub received his PhD degree in chemistry from the University Paul Sabatier in Toulouse, France. He is currently a research director at the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) and a group leader at the Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), Lille, France. He is an Editor for ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces. His research interests are in the area of functional materials, surface chemistry, and photophysics of semiconductor/metal nanostructures with emphasis on biosensors, nanomedicine, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis. He is also a co-founder of BioNaMeris, a biotech firm specialized in sustainable aquaculture.

Pavel Postnikov
	Prof. Pavel S. Postnikov completed his doctorate in organic chemistry with theoretical and practical insights in diazonium chemistry at the Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russia, in 2011. In 2021, he successfully passed the habilitation procedure at the Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry, RAS, Russia (organic and physical chemistry). He serves as an associate editor of Chemistry Africa journal. His research interests are plastic recycling, composite materials, surface chemistry, plasmon catalysis, hypervalent iodine, and diazonium salts.

 	Fig. 1  Classification of strategies for polymer waste treatment based on C–X/C–C bond cleavage and analysis of each strategy: (a) landfilling; (b) mechanical recycling; (c) functional upcycling; (d) chemical re-/upcycling; and (e) incineration.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of chemical and functional upcycling and obtained products.	 

 	Fig. 3  Generalised concept of functional upcycling.	 

 	Fig. 4  Functionalisation of PET: (a) surface hydrolysis;93–96 (b) growth of metal–organic framework;41,97,98 (c) surface aminolysis;99–102 (d) free radical polymerisation;53,103–105 (e) atom transfer radical polymerisation;106–108 (f) transesterification46,109 and (g) hydroarylation.110	 


1	Non-covalent interactions	Immobilisation of PDMS	Cross-linked PDMS	

	Hydrophobicity, improved mechanical stability	Oil–water separation	
89

Immobilisation of ZnO, followed by hydrophobisation	ZnO	

	Hydrophobicity, chemical resistance against strong acid, alkali, and salt solution	Oil–water separation	
91



2	Plasma oxidation	Air plasma	Hydroxyl/carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity, increased roughness	Fibers for clothing with enhanced dyeability	
96

O2 plasma	Hydroxyl/carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity, improved biocompatibility	Antibacterial properties	
93



3	Surface hydrolysis, followed by MOFs growth	Hydrolysis, followed by UiO-66 growth and Ag NPs immobilisation	UiO-66/Ag NPs	

	Increased surface area, catalytic activity	Photocatalytic degradation of paraoxon-ethyl	
98

Hydrolysis, followed by UiO-66 growth	UiO-66	

	Increased surface area, centers for specific adsorption	Removal of imidacloprid	
41



4	Surface aminolysis	Aminolysis by EDA	Amino	

	Improved thermal stability, enhanced dyeability	Antibacterial clothing with enhanced durability	
99

Amination by 4-amino-1-butanol	Butanolamine	

	Increases surface area, improved thermal stability	Dispersing agents for cement	
128

Plasma-assisted aminolysis using DTA or EDA	DTA or EDA	

	Hydrophilicity, biocompatibility	Sterilization effect against Pseudomonas aeruginosa	
101



5	Surface polymerisation	APTES grafting, attachment of Br-containing initiator, ATRP of PNIPAM	PNIPAM	

	Controlled wettability	Filtration materials, sensors	
132

Dopamine deposition, attachment of Br-containing initiator, ATRP of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate	Polycarboxybetaine	

	Hydrophilicity, hemocompatible and antibiofouling properties	Antibiofouling materials	
107



6	Transesterification	Treatment by phenol, 4-chlorophenol, and hydroxyquinone	Esters of phenol, 4-chlorophenol and hydroxyquinone	

	Enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions	Removal of Cu2+ ions	
46

7	Hydroarylation	Hydroarylation by methyl propiolate in the presence of [Au]/AgSbF6	1,2-Substituted methyl acrylate	

	Hydrophilicity	Modification of the transition temperature, melt viscosity, and wettability	
110


 	Fig. 5  Application of functionalised PET waste: (a) removal of imidacloprid using PET@UiO-66, adapted with permission from ref. 41; (b) preparation of textile from waste PET by aminolysis, adapted from ref. 96, 99, 102 and 144; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PET with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations of analysis in Section S1 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 6  Functionalisation of PE: (a) radical grafting of polymers;158,159 (b) oxidation;160,161 (c) grafting in presence of organic peroxides and maleic anhydride (MAH);162 (d) amination;163–165 (e) thermal xanthylation;166 (f) halogenation;167 and (g) Ni, Rh organometallic catalysis.168–170	 


1	Peroxide-induced on-surface radical polymerisation	Radical polymerisation AA and DMDAAC using benzoyl peroxide as initiator	PAA and DMDAAC	

	Hydrophilicity	Water superabsorbent	
51

Radical polymerisation of AA using benzoyl peroxide as initiator	PAA	

	Higher pore density	Water superabsorbent	
61



2	Reactive extrusion	Reactive extrusion mixed with MAH and dicumyl peroxide	MAH	

	Enhanced compatibility between PP and the nanofiller	Mechanical properties (stiffness and elongation)	
192

Reactive extrusion using MAH, butanediol and dicumyl peroxide	Ester cross-linkers	

	—	Covalent adaptable networks	
162



3	Graft-polymerisation under irradiation	γ-Ray-induced polymerisation of DMAEMA	DMAEMA	

	Enhanced adsorption towards Au3+ ions	Au3+ ions adsorption and reduction performance	
176

γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, amine coupling and imprinting of copper ions into poly(divinylbenze) matrix	Cavities in poly(divinylbenzene) with high affinity to Cu2+ ions	

	Cavities with high affinity to Cu2+ ions	Cu2+ ions adsorption	
193

γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of vinyl trimethoxysilane	SiO2 layers	

	Increased surface polarity	Separators for lithium-ion batteries	
159

Electron-beam polymerisation of polyvinylamine, glycidol	
N-methyl-D-glucamine ligands	

	Enhanced adsorption toward boron	Boron adsorption	
194

Electron-beam polymerisation of NVP	Poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone)	

	Enhanced adsorption toward iodine	Iodine adsorption	
158

Electron-beam polymerisation of glycidymethacrylate, grafting of amines	Alkylamines	

	Enhanced adsorption toward boron, CO2	Boron, CO2 adsorption; biodiesel catalyst	
180

Photo-induced polymerisation of MPC and PMA	Poly(MPC-co-PMA)	

	Hydrophilicity	Antifouling property	
195



4	Plasma-initiated polymerisation	Air plasma-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, followed by coupling with 4-aminobenzoic acid	4-Aminobenzoic acid moieties	

	Enhanced adsorption towards metal cations	Cu2+, Co2+, Cr3+, Cd2+ and Pb2+ ions adsorption	
181


	Plasma-induced polymerisation of allylamine	Poly(allylamine)	

	Hydrophilicity, improved cell adhesion	Materials for cell adhesion	
196



5	Surface oxidation	O2 plasma treatment, followed by formation of phenol-formaldehyde polycondensation	Phenol-formaldehyde resin	

	Enhanced electrolyte wettability (hydrophilicity) and ionic conductivity	Separators for lithium-ion batteries	
197

Oxidation by piranha solution or ozone, conjugation with chitosan or vanillin	Chitosan or vanillin	

	Wettability; antibacterial properties	Antibacterial	
161,198

Ozonolysis, reduction and silanisation	Alkylsilanol	

	Positive charge	Antibacterial	
190

Oxidation by corona discharge, silanisation and 1,6-hexanediamine	Alkylsilanol and hexanediamine moieties	

	Enhanced adhesion to DNA oligonucleotide	Bio-sensor (detection of the DNA of the insect Hermetia illucens)	
160

Oxidation under xenon light (85 °C)	Hydroxyl	

	Hydrophilicity	Adsorption of methylene blue	
199



6	Metal-catalysed functionalisation	Rh-assisted oxidation	Borane	

	—	—	
168

Ni-assisted oxidation	Hydroxyl	

	Hydrophilicity	Macroinitiators to graft polycaprolactones	
169

Ru-assisted oxidation	Hydroxyl/carbonyl	

	Hydrophilicity	Improvement of adhesiveness toward metal and paint	
170


 	Fig. 7  Application of functionalised PE waste: (a) for water sorption, adapted from;51 (b) comparison of functional upcycling of PE with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S2, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 8  Functionalisation of PVC: (a) azidation;44 (b) amination;245 (c) UV-irradiation or oxidation;246,247 (d) radical on-surface polymerisation;248 (e) cyanation/thiocyanation;44,249 (f) thiolation,250 and (g) elimination/hydroxylation.225,228–231	 


1	Thiolation	Thiolation by 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane, conjugation with polyhexamethylenediamine guanidinium chloride	Polyhexamethylenediamine, guanidine hydrochloride	

	Activity against P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, A. baumannii and B. subtilis	Antimicrobial surface	
267

Thiolation by L-cysteine, membrane formation with polysulfone and filling with TiO2	Membrane with amino and carboxyl groups and TiO2	

	Rejection toward As5+ ions	Filtration membrane	
282



2	Azidation	Azidation by NaN3, AAC with alkynes with different functional groups (CF3, pyridine, etc.)	Different functional groups (CF3, pyridine, etc.)	

	Retaining mechanical flexibility and translucency	Potential application as antifouling surface	
44

Azidation by NaN3, AAC with substituted diiron complexes	Diiron carbonyl complex	

	Enhanced conductivity, positive shift in reduction potential	Electrodes for proton reduction	
283



3	Thiocyanation	Thiocyanation by NaSCN	Thiocyanate	

	Hydrophilicity, biocompatiblity, reduced retention of S. epidermidis and S. aureus	Antibiofouling materials	
273



4	Radical on-surface polymerisation	γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of N-vinylimidazole	Poly(n-vinylimidazole)	

	Inhibit the growth of S. aureus, hemocompatibility	Bactericidal surface	
255

γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, conjugation with lysozyme or acylase by EDA	Lysozyme (LYS) or acylase (ACY)	

	Hindered Staphylococcus aureus adhesion; Quorum sensing inhibition	Reduced bacteria adhesion on the surface and preventing biofilm formation	
248

γ-Rays-induced polymerisation of 4-vinyl pyridine, conjugation with sulfobetaine methacrylate	Poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate)	

	Hydrophilicity, proteins antofouling	Antifouling surface properties	
257



5	Oxygen glow discharge	Surface oxidation by oxygen glow discharge	Hydroxyl/carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity, hindered P. aeruginosa adhesion	Reduced surface bacterial adhesion	
247



6	Amination	Amination by EDA, hexamethylene diisocyanate with subsequent polyethylene glycol grafting	Polyethylene glycol	

	Decreasing platelet adhesion, improved blood compatibility	Antifouling surface properties	
275

Amination by aliphatic amines (MEA/DEA/EDA/DETA), formation of composite with mesoporous silica	Amino and mesoporous silica	

	Hydrophobicity, enhanced adsorption capacity for CO2	CO2 sorbent	
270

Amination by polyethylenimine	Amino(polyethyleneimine)	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pt4+ ions, acid-tolerance	Pt4+ ions extraction	
245

Amination by EDA, sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	

	Improved proton conductivity, ion exchange capacity, increased water-uptake	Proton conducting membrane	
284

Amination by triethylenetetramine, polymerisation with piperazine and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbonyl trichloride	Polyamide	

	Increased water flux, increased rejection of Na2SO4	Nanofiltration membrane with possible application for desalination	
285

Amination by triethylenetetramine, polymerisation with piperazine graphene oxide and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbonyl trichloride	Polyamide and GO	

	Improved water permeability, Congo red rejection, improved antifouling	Nanofiltration membrane for desalination	
274



7	Dechlorination	Dechlorination by H2O or NaOH	Elimination and hydroxylation	

	Hydrogen source	CO2 reduction	
225


 	Fig. 9  Application of functionalised PVC waste: (a) antimicrobial application – modification of flexible PVC by nucleophilic substitution and subsequent reactions, adapted from ref. 267; (b) CO2 capture – amination of PVC by EDA, adapted from ref. 270; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PVC with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S3 (ESI†); ***Reported only in commercial polymers.	 

 	Fig. 10  Functionalisation of PP: (a) thermal xanthylation;306 (b) radical grafting of polymers;307–309 (c) heteroradicals functionalisation;167,310 (d) sulfonation;311 (e) grafting under physical treatment;312,313 (f) oxidation;42,314,315 (g) grafting of C-centered radicals;316 and (h) diazirine modification through carbene intermediate.317	 


Non-covalent approaches
1	Adsorption techniques	pET28a(p):EGFP-anchor peptide Immobilisation	Functional protein	

	Adhesion promoters	A platform for medical diagnostic and microfluidic devices	
318

Electrospraying of gum rosin microspheres	Gum rosin microspheres	

	Hydrophobicity	Hydrophobic surfaces	
319

Deposition of PANI NPs	PANI	

	Enhanced adsorption towards humic acid	Adsorption of humic acid	
49

Immobilisation of epoxy resin composite loaded with SiO2	SiO2 impregnated in epoxy resin matrix	

	Hydrophobicity	Adsorption/purification of water-in-oil emulsions	
52

Hydrothermal synthesis of ZnS on PP surface	ZnS	

	Enhanced sensitivity towards H2O2	Gas sensor	
323

Synthesis of MAF-6 crystals on PP surface	MAF-6	

	Hydrophobicity	Adsorption/purification of water-in-oil emulsions	
50

Deposition of PEDOT:PSS/porphyrins	PEDOT:PSS/porphyrins	

	Enhanced conductivity	Sensors for volatile compounds in breath	
320

Immobilisation of graphene/Ca3Co4O9−δ composite	Graphene/Ca3Co4O9−δ	

	Redox centers for the storage of charge	Supercapacitor	
321

Sputtering of gold and polypyrrole microcones formation	Polypyrrole microcones	

	Enhanced electrical conductivity	Supercapacitor	
322

Deposition of PD, followed by layered double hydroxides formation	PD and LDH	

	Enhanced adsorption toward anionic compounds	Adsorption of anionic compounds	
324

Impregnation of quaternised N-halamine polysiloxane	Quaternised N-halamine polysiloxane	

	Biocidability	Antibacterial	
325

Laser-induced deposition of few layered graphene	Few layered graphene	

	Superhydrophobicity, enhanced surface temperature after solar illumination	Photothermal properties, self-cleaning	
326 and 327



Covalent approaches
2	Sulfonation	Sulfuric acid	Sulfonic and carboxylic	

	Hydrophilicity, enhanced ionic interaction with methylene blue	Adsorbents for methylene blue	
330

Fuming sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	

	Enhanced electrolyte wettability, facile ion transport	Separator for rechargeable batteries	
311



3	Radical grafting	Reactive extrusion of PP and NBR in presence of DCP	NBR/MAH	

	Enhanced mechanical properties	Mechanical properties (tensile and barrier properties)	
307

Grafting of BTCEAD using NHPI, followed by polymerisation of PEGMA	PPEGMA	

	Enhanced electrolyte wettability	Separators for lithium-ion batteries	
309

UV-induced grafting of AA in the presence of benzophenone, followed by biopolymers coupling (starch, cellulose, and chitosan)	Biopolymers	

	Hydrophilicity, enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions	Adsorption of metal ions Cu2+	
333



4	Physical methods for surface functionalisation	Pulsed plasma deposition of vinylbenzyl chloride, followed by coupling with dimethylaminomethyl-calixarene	Dimethylaminomethyl-calixarene	

	Enhanced adsorption and selectivity towards Cr6+ ions	Adsorption of Cr6+ ions	
312

γ-Ray irradiation in acetonitrile, followed by amidoximation	Cyano and amidoxyl	

	Enhanced adsorption towards Cu2+ ions	Adsorption of Cu2+ ions	
331

Ion-beam assisted polymerisation of glycidyl methacrylate, followed by n-octylamine treatment	Octyl	

	Hydrophobicity	Oil adsorbents	
313

Surface oxidation using oxygen plasma, followed by silanisation using PFTS	Perfluorooctylsilyl	

	Adjusted polarity	Triboelectric nanogenerator	
314

Oxidation under UV-radiation	Hydroxyl	

	Enhanced adsorption towards Pb2+, Cd2+, and Sr2+ ions	Adsorption of Pb2+, Cd2+, and Sr2+ ions	
42



5	Oxidation by highly reactive oxidants	Oxidation by ozone, followed by soaking in solvents (hexane, decane, and heptane)	Alkanes	

	Hydrophobicity	Oil adsorbents	
315


 	Fig. 11  Application of functionalised PP waste: (a) for an oil–water separation process, reprinted with permission from ref. 50; copyright 2022, Elsevier, (b) enhanced mechanical properties, adapted from ref. 307; (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PP with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S4, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 12  Functionalisation of PS: (a) nitration;48 (b) sulfonation using different sources of electrophilic;59,356–360 (c) Friedel–Crafts acylation/alkylation;361–363 (d) formation of hydrazones;364 (e) cross-linking reaction;365–367 (f) radical trifluoromethylation;368,369 (and g) hydroarylation.110	 


1	Nitration	Mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids	Nitro	

	Improved discharge energy density, breakdown strength	Dielectric for energy storage	
48



2	Sulfonation	Concentrated sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	

	Acidity, increased catalytic activity	Catalyst for cyclization	
357

Acidity, increased catalytic activity	Biomass conversion	
59

Silica-sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	Enhanced ion-exchange capacity	Purification of solutions of Zn2+ and Cu2+ ions	
358,360

Sulfur trioxide with triethyl phosphate and acetyl sulfate	Sulfonic	Acidity, increased catalytic activity	Catalyst for biodiesel synthesis and xylose to furfural dehydration	
359



3	Acylation with secondary transformations	Acylation by MAH in the presence of AlCl3 followed by amination with tetraethylenepentamine	Maleic groups cross-linked by tetraethylenepentamine	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward EBT	Adsorbent to recover organic dyes	
361

Acylation by MAH in the presence of AlCl3	Maleic group	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, ST, Cu2+ ions, increased specific surface area	Adsorbent to recover cationic dyes and heavy metals	
362

Acylation by succinic anhydride in the presence of AlCl3 followed by amination with dopamine hydrochloride	Dopamine	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, CR; increased specific surface area	Adsorbent for organic dyes removal	
363

Acylation by acetyl chloride in the presence of AlCl3 and interaction with phenyl hydrazine	Hydrazones	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward phenol	Adsorbent for phenol removal	
364



4	Alkylation followed by cross-linking	Alkylation by formaldehyde in the presence of AlCl3 followed by cross-linking	Polymers	

	Enhanced specific area and porosity	O2/N2 separation	
377

Alkylation by formaldehyde acetal in the presence of FeCl3 followed by cross-linking	Polymer	

	Enhanced specific area and porosity	Water purification and CO2 capture	
366

Alkylation by dichloroalkanes in the presence of AlCl3 followed by cross-linking	Polymer	

	Enhanced specific area and porosity	CO2 capture	
365 and 378

Alkylation by dichloroalkanesin the presence of FeCl3 followed by cross-linking	Polymer	

	Enhanced specific area, porosity and adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions	Hg2+ ions removal	
376



5	Oxidation, followed by formation of composites	Oxidation by chromic acid and PEI Immobilisation	Carboxy, polyimines	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward humic acid	Humic acid removal	
60



6	Radical trifluoromethylation	Photocatalytic generation of ˙CF3	Trifluoromethyl	

	Hydrophobicity	Superhydrophobic surface	
368 and 369



7	Hydroarylation	Hydroarylation by methyl propiolate in the presence of [Au]/AgSbF6	1,2-Substituted methyl acrylate	

	Hydrophobicity, enhanced modulus and melt viscosity	Modification of physical properties	
110


 	Fig. 13  Application of functionalised PS waste: (a) modification of PS by 1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic anhydride for adsorption of dyes, adapted from ref. 45; (b) sulfonation of PS waste for catalytic application in biomass valorization, adapted from ref. 359; and (c) comparison of functional upcycling of PS with mechanical and chemical strategies *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S5, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 14  Functionalisation of PU: (a) on-surface radical polymerisation;405,406 (b) surface hydrolysis followed by diazotization and secondary transformations;407–409 (c) functionalisation with diphenyl diisocyanate followed by silanisation;410 and (d) diazonium surface functionalisation for surface hydrophobization.411,412	 


1	On-surface radical polymerisation	Lauryl methacrylate, hexadecane, and benzoyl peroxide as an initiator, Fe3O4 NPs	Poly(lauryl methacrylate)-co-polyhexadecene, Fe3O4	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity for diesel and crude oil	Removal of oils	
405



2	Chemical transformation of surface PU chains	Partial hydrolysis with subsequent diazotization and interaction with O-ethyl dithiocarbonate	
O-Ethyl dithiocarbonate	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions	Removal of Hg2+ ions	
409

Oxidation by Jone's reagent (CrO3 + H2SO4), EDC/NHS activation and treatment by fatty acid coupled with chitosan	Carboxyl, fatty acids	

	Cytotoxicity and antibacterial towards Gram-negative bacteria	Antibacterial coatings	
415



3	On-surface Immobilisation of active layers via electrostatic forces	Dopamine on-surface polymerisation in presence of FeCl3	PD, Fe(OH)3	

	Hydrophilicity, enhanced oil separation	Oil–water separation	
414

Coating by SiO2 with subsequent silanisation using octadecyltrimethoxysilane	Octadecyl	

	Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation	Oil–water separation	
417

Aniline on-surface polymerisation	PANI	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Hg2+ ions	Removal of Hg2+ ions	
413

Treatment by CNTs and CNFs, aniline polymerisation	CNTs, CNFs, PANI	

	Hydrophilicity, high tensile strength and Young's modulus, stretchability, high specific capacitance, high energy density	All-solid-state supercapacitors	
47



4	Surface modification by organic reagents	Surface modification by 4,4′-methylenediphenyl diisocyanate, followed by silanisation with hexadecyltrimethoxysilane	Hexadecyl	

	Hydrophobicity, chemical and high-temperature resistance	Gas pre-dehydration	
410

Diazonium surface modification by 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)benzenediazonium tosylate, followed by Fe3O4 NPs treatment	3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene	

	Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation	Oil–water separation	
411

Diazonium surface modification by 4-(heptadecafluorooctyl)diazonium salts, MoS2	4-(Heptadecafluorooctyl)phenyl	

	Hydrophobicity, enhanced water separation	Oil–water separation	
412


 	Fig. 15  Comparison of functional upcycling of PU with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S6, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 16  Functionalisation of PMMA: (a) direct aminolysis,447 (b) hydrolysis,448 followed by (c) amination,448 (d) esterification,449 (e) alkylation,450 (f) silanisation451 and (g) grafting/cross-linking;452 (h) modification by high reactive radicals;453 and (i) physical and chemical activation.454	 


1	UV-mediated degradation	UV-exposure	Hydroxyl/carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity, increased electroosmotic flow	Microfluidic devices	
476

Controllable gradient UV-irradiation	Hydroxyl/carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity, increased fluorescence signal toward cardiac Troponin I	Microfluidic devices	
477



2	Modification by high reactive radicals	H3PO2/HCl + diazonium salts	Aryl (nitro, carboxyl, sulfonic, thiol, polyfluorinated)	

	Different functional groups for wettability and amphiphilicity switching	Wettability control	
453, 495 and 496

3	Physical or chemical hydrolysis followed by amination	Acid hydrolysis, amination with cysteamine or EDA for Au NPs Immobilisation	Amine, Au NPs	

	Increased sensitivity against Concanavalin A	Biosensor (Concanavalin A)	
448

Air plasma-assisted hydrolysis, EDC/NHS coupling of green fluorescent protein	Protein GFP	

	Biocompatibility, sensitivity against C. trachomatis	Microfluidic devices, bioassay	
467

Atmospheric pressure plasma treatment, amination by hexamethylene diamine, Au NPs	Amine, Au NPs	

	Plasmonic activity	Possible LSPR and SERS based sensing	
485

Acid hydrolysis, amination by PAMAM, Au NPs	Amine, Au NPs	

	Plasmonic activity	Plasmonic sensors	
463

Alkaline hydrolysis, amination by PEI, glutaraldehyde treatment and BSA Immobilisation	Amine, BSA	

	Ability to bind proteins	Protein Immobilisation for microfluidic devices	
465



4	Direct aminolysis	Aminolysis by N-lithioethylenediamine or N-lithiodiaminopropane, amination by n-octadecane-1-isocyanate	
n-Octadecane-1-isocyanate	

	Hydrophobicity, ability to perform heterogeneous enzyme cleavage of dsDNAs	Microelectrophoresis devices	
461

Aminolysis, UV-grafting of PGMA and protein Immobilisation	PGMA	

	Ability to bind proteins, sensitivity for detection of hepatitis B virus biomarker (HBsAg)	HBsAg detection in human serum	
486

Aminolysis by hexamethylenediamine, treatment by glutaraldehyde and BSA	BSA	

	Ability to bind proteins	Microfluidic devices	
465



5	–OH/–COOH group formation, followed by alkylation	O2 plasma, alkylation with subsequent atom transfer radical polymerisation with PEGMEMA	PEG	

	Reduced nonspecific adsorption of proteins, hydrophilicity, enhanced separation efficiency for proteins and peptides	Microchips for proteins and peptides analysis	
450

6	–OH/–COOH group formation, followed by silanisation	Water-vapor plasma, octadecyltrichlorosilane or bromoundecyltrichlorosilane	Octadecyltrichlorosilane and bromoundecyltrichlorosilane	

	Hydrophobicity, control of electroosmotic flow	Microfluidic capillary electrophoretic system	
473

O2 plasma treatment, heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl trichlorosilane	Heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl trichlorosilane	

	Hydrophobicity, improved generation of aqueous droplets	Microfluidic devices	
472

Chemical reduction by LiAlH4 and silanisation	Silanes with fluorine, amino, and thiol	

	Different functional group for attachment of biomolecules, decreased non-specific adsorption	Microfluidic devices	
445



7	–OH/–COOH formation followed by esterification	Dissolution and alkaline hydrolysis, cross-linking by diethanolamine with PMMA and complexation with Ca2+, Mg2+	Hydroxyl, amino, poly(magnesium/calcium methacrylate)-co-poly (methyl methacrylate)	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Zn2+ ions	Zn2+ ions adsorbent	
483

Dissolution and alkaline hydrolysis, cross-linking by diethanolamine with PMMA and complexation with Ca2+, pektin	Beads from poly(calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate), pektin and CaCl2	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Zn2+ ions	Zn2+ ions adsorption	
449


 	Fig. 17  Application of functionalised PMMA waste: (a) modification of PMMA optical fibers by acid hydrolysis, followed by amination and Au NP immobilisation, adapted from ref. 448; (b) air plasma-assisted –OH/–COOH group formation, followed by EDC/NHS coupling and chemisorption of the green fluorescent protein (GFP), adapted from ref. 467; and (c) – comparison of functional upcycling of PMMA with mechanical and chemical strategies. *The qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations made from analysis in Section S7 in ESI;† ***Reported only on the commercial polymers.	 

 	Fig. 18  Functionalisation of rubber: (a) electrophilic halogenation using ICl or Br2, followed by amination;43,517 (b) oxidation using ozone or NOX;518–520 (c) thiol–ene coupling;521,522 and (d) sulfonation using electrophilic reaction.516,523	 


1	Halogenation	ICl, aminolysis with polyamine	Amine modified, Cl− as ion exchangeable site	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward NO3− ions	Adsorbent for the removal of NO3− ions from water	
517

Halogenation using Br2, aminolysis with EDA	Amine modified, Cl− as ion exchangeable site	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward F− ions	Adsorbent for the removal of F− ions from water	
43

Halogenation by Br2, aminolysis with L-lysine	Amino acid	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pb2+ ions	Adsorbent for the removal of Pb2+ ions from water	
526



2	Grafting of radical initiator	Immobilisation ATRP initiator, ATRP of MAH	Carboxyl in grafted polymer	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward Pb2+ ions	Adsorbent for the removal of Pb2+ ions from water	
527



3	Sulfonation	Sulfonation by concentrated sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	

	Enhanced thermal stability, negative zeta potential, enhanced adsorption capacity toward MB, MO and TC	Adsorbent for the removal of MB, MO, and TC from water	
516

Sulfonation by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids	Sulfonic	

	Increased surface area, enhanced adsorption capacity toward boron	Adsorbent for the removal of boron from water	
523



4	On-surface polymerisation	Polymerisation of APTMACl	Amide and N+(CH3)3	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity toward arsenite As3+ ions and arsenate As5+ ions	Adsorbent for the removal of arsenite As3+ ions and arsenate As5+ ions from water	
524



5	Silanisation	Oxidation by H2O2, PFTS	Perfluorooctyl	

	Enhanced efficient energy harvesting behavior; increased maximum open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current	Triboelectric nanogenerator	
525


 	Fig. 19  Application of functionalised rubber waste: (a) adsorbent for fluoride ion removal, adapted from;43 (b) adsorbent for the removal of MB, MO, and TC, adapted from ref. 516; and (c) comparison of functional upcycling of rubber with mechanical and chemical strategies. *The qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling. **Concluded from basic considerations made from analysis in Section S8 in ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 20  Functionalisation of PC: (a) nitrene functionalisation;571–573 (b) surface hydrolysis;574–577 (c) surface amination;548,578–581 (d) surface phosphorylation;582 (e) nitration583–588/sulfonation586/chloromethylation;588 (f) Friedel–Crafts alkylation for hyper-cross-linking;377and (g) UV-irradiation or plasma or ozone.586,589–594	 


1	Nitrene functionalisation	Treatment by FNAB under UV-irradiation followed by protein coupling	Protein	

	Ability to bind proteins	Potential application in biosensors, immunoassay and microarrays	
571



2	Hydrolysis	Hydrolysis followed by silanisation by 3-(aminopropyl) triethoxysilane and Ag NPs Immobilisation	Ag NPs	

	Enhanced fluorescence	Fluorescein isothiocyanate human serum albumin sensor	
574



3	Amination	Amination with EDA, EDC coupling with CDTPA followed by surface-initiated polymerisations of various monomers	Chains of different polymers	

	Hydrophilicity	Anti-fogging coating	
548

Amination with 1,5-pentyldiamine or pentylamine	Amino	

	—	—	
578

Amination with HMDA	Amino	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity and surface area	Adsorbents for Hg2+ ions removal	
579

Amination with different amines and coupling with 5-(furan-2-ylmethylene)-2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4,6-dione as a photochrome	Photochrome	

	Visible light-stimulated photochromic properties	—	
581

Amination with dodecylamine	Dodecylamine	

	Hydrophobicity	Hydrophobic microfluidic device	
602

Amination with PEI, EDC/NHS coupling with enzymes or diglycidyl linking with enzymes	Enzyme	

	Enzymatic reactions	Microreactors surface	
570

Amination by poly(allylamine) followed by PSS deposition	PAH/PSS	

	High hydrophilicity and stable generation of oil-in-water emulsions	Hydrophilic microfluidic device	
603



4	Phosphorylation	Coupling with dichloro-(N,N)-diisopropylaminophosphate and different ligands derived from PEG-adducts	Appropriate ligand	

	—	Molecular screener	
582



5	Nitration	Nitration by nitric and sulfuric acids	Nitro	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity	Adsorbents for Hg2+ ions removal	
583

Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids followed by reduction by Na2S2O4	Nitro and amino	

	Hydrophilicity	Reduced bacterial adhesion of E. coli, P. vulgaris, S. aureus	
584

Nitration by nitric acid, reduction by NaBH4 followed by coupling with glutaraldehyde and S. typhi-HRP	Specific antibody against S. typhi–S. typhi-HRP	

	Sensitivity against S. typhi	Detection of S. typhi	
585

Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids	Nitro	

	Hydrophilicity	Improved epithelia cell adhesion	
586

Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, reduction by NaBH4 followed by EDC/NHS coupling of carboxylated hapten	Hapten	

	Ability to bind immune-response molecules, sensitivity	Immunoassays	
587

Nitration by mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, reduction by NaBH4 followed by coupling with glutaraldehyde and DNA array	DNA	

	Sensoric properties	Biological analytical device	
588



6	Sulfonation	Sulfonation by K2Cr2O7, sulfuric acid	Sulfonic	

	Hydrophilicity	Attachment of epithelial cells for reconstituting a highly differentiated cell tissue	
586



7	Chloromethylation	Chloromethylation by DCM	Chloromethyl groups	

	Ability to bind oligonucleotides	Possible biological analytical device	
588



8	Alkylation	Alkylation by FDA, FeCl3	Macro-mesoporous structure	

	Enhanced adsorption capacity and surface area	Adsorbent for O2/N2 separation	
377



9	Plasma or UV-mediated oxidation	Treatment by O2 plasma, followed by EDC/NHS coupling of DNA oligo	DNA	

	Ability to detect PCR amplified DNA products	Microarray platform for analysis of biological samples	
591

UV-irradiation and treatment by ozone, EDC/NHS-coupling of DNA	DNA	

	Ability to detect DNA hybridization	Chip-based biosensing devices	
590

Treatment by corona air discharge or O2 plasma	Carbonyl and carboxyl	

	Hydrophilicity	Improved cell adhesion	
586

Treatment by ammonia radio frequency plasma	Amide	

	Hydrophilicity	Improved cell adhesion	
586

UV/ozone treatment followed by silanisation with GPTMS or APTMS	Epoxy or amine	

	Enhanced adhesive properties	Adhesive for industrial implementation	
592

Treatment by O2 plasma followed by azido-substituted thiophene radical polymerisation and Huisgen reaction with alkynes	Alkyl, aryl or perfluoroalkyl	

	Hydrophilic, hydrophobic, oleophobic, parahydrophobic properties or fluorescent features	Water harvesting, oil–water separation membrane or in anti-bioadhesion	
589

UV/ozone treatment, EDC/NHS coupling of DNA	DNA	

	Ability to bind DNA	Possible biological analytical device	
593

Treatment by UV, silanisation by 3-(aminopropyl) triethoxysilane and Ag NPs immobilisation	Ag NPs	

	Enhanced fluorescence	Fluorescein isothiocyanate human serum albumin sensor	
574

O2 plasma treatment followed by TMA immobilisation	Al2O3 layer	

	Enhanced stability against chemical corrosion	Surface protection layer	
594


 	Fig. 21  Application of functionalised PC waste: (a) adsorbent for Hg2+ ions removal, adapted from;583 and (b) comparison of functional upcycling of PC with mechanical and chemical strategies. *Qualitative analysis is based on limited examples of upcycling; **Concluded from basic considerations from analysis in Section S9, ESI;† ***Reported only on commercial polymers.	 



Polystyrene
Waste	PS-1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic acid	MB, safranine T, and MG	859.9, 1036.7, and 1197.3	pH (2–12)	
45

Commercial	Cross-linked HPF membrane from PS and PVP	MB	346	pH > 7	
384

Natural	Sulfonated coal fly	MG	233	pH > 8	
385



Polyethylene terephthalate
Waste	PET treated by hydroxyquinone	Cu2+	62	pH = 6.5	
46

Commercial	PET/copolymer MAA/AAm	Cu2+	31	pH = 4	
612



Polyurethane
Waste	HD-LM-nanomagnetite coated PU	Crude oil	132 × 103	Oil–water separation	
405

Commercial	3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene coated PU loaded by magnetic NPs	Pump oil	48 × 103	Oil–water separation	
411



Poly(methyl methacrylate)
Waste	Round beads from pektin + CaCl2 and cross-linked poly(calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate)	Zn2+	50.2	pH (3–6)	
449

Waste	Cross-linked poly(magnesium/calcium methacrylate)-co-poly(methyl methacrylate)	Zn2+	87.7	pH (4–7)	
483

Natural	Lignocellulosic biomass-based adsorbent	Zn2+	2.7	pH = 5	
615

Commercial	Nitrogen-functionalised multiwalled CNTs	Zn2+	33	pH = 4.5–5.5	
613

Commercial	Agarose grafted with PMMA	Zn2+	34.3	pH (6–8)	
614



Rubber
Waste	Sulfonated carbonaceous WTR	MB, MO, TC	833, 588, and 303	pH = 10, 3.6	
516

Commercial	Activated carbon (Darco® G-60)	TC	290	pH = 6	
616

Natural	
Pinus taeda-derived activated biochar	TC	275	pH = 6	
616



Polyethylene
Waste	PS@PAA	Water	450 × 103	—	
61

Waste	PE/PS@PAA	Water	900 × 103	—	
61

Commercial	LLDPE-g-PAA + kaolin and halloysite nanotubes	Water	600 × 103	—	
617



Polypropylene
Waste	PP (face mask) modified with superhydrophobic fluorine-free MAF-6	Straight-run diesel fuel	24 × 103 for diesel	Oil–water separation, pH = 4–10	
50

Commercial	PP@PGMA coupled with n-octylamine	Straight-run diesel fuel	14 × 103 for diesel and gasoline	Oil–water separation	
313



Polystyrene
Waste	Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – 1,2-dichloroethane)	1.987	23.4 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)	273 K, 1.13 bar	
365

Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – carbon tetrachloride)	2.521	37.8 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)	273 K, 1.0 bar	
378

Commercial	Cross-linked PS (cross-linking reagent – octavinylsilsesquioxane)	1.84	—	273 K, 1.13 bar	
636

MOFs (ZIF-8; ZIF-67; Zn/Co-ZIF)	0.5; 0.526; 0.727	—	273 K, 1.0 bar	
637

Natural	Zeolites ZSM-5	2.37	∼72 (CO2:N2 ratio – 15:85)	273 K, 1.0 bar	
638




Polyurethane
Waste	PU@CNTs@CNFs@PANI	284.2 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1	1 M H2SO4	25.3 W h kg−1	97.8% after 1000 cycles	
47

Commercial	PU-based organo/hydrogel electrolyte	57.9 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	Water/acetonitrile	5.65 mW h cm−3	∼94.5% after 500 cycles	
652

Synthesised	CNT-coated PU-poly(ε-caprolactone)	37 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	(PAA-PEO) hydrogel	3.4 W h kg−1	∼96.5% after 10000 cycles	
653



Polypropylene
Waste	PP (face mask) sputtering of gold and polypyrrole microcones formation	219.1 mF cm−2 at 1mA cm−2	PVA/H2SO4	19.5 μW h cm−2	92.1% after 10000 cycles	
322

Commercial	Polypyrrole-graphene oxide on PP films	104.4 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2	H3PO4/PVA	2.6 μW h cm−2	84.9% after 10000 cycles	
654



Polyethylene terephthalate
Waste	PET/PEI/PD	67.7	5.47	9.4	
56

Commercial	Silk fibroin/rice paper	34	21.6	0.32	
655

Commercial	Velvet fabric/CNTs/PEI	119	3.2	12.6	
656

Commercial	PDMS/nickel telluride	197	1.89	9.6	
657

Rubber
Waste	Fluorinated wasted rubber powder	265	4.6	75	
525

Commercial	All-in-one rubber	80	107	11	
658

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cs00689h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
