Strong and reversible modulation of carbon nanotube –silicon heterojunction solar cells by an interfacial oxide layer   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP23639G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP23639G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8391-8396Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStrong and reversible modulation of carbon nanotube–silicon heterojunction solar cells by an interfacial oxide layer†

        
          
            Yi 
            Jia
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Feiyu 
            Kang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peixu 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xuchun 
            Gui
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Luhui 
            Zhang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Enzheng 
            Shi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      *b
aGraduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, 518055, P. R. China
bKey Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: wdh-dme@tsinghua.edu.cn
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn
dState Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Physics and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China
Received 
      18th November 2011
    , Accepted 16th April 2012First published on 16th April 2012AbstractDeposition of nanostructures such as carbon nanotubes on Si wafers to make heterojunction structures is a promising route toward high efficiency solar cells with reduced cost. Here, we show a significant enhancement in the cell characteristics and power conversion efficiency by growing a silicon oxide layer at the interface between the nanotube film and Si substrate. The cell efficiency increases steadily from 0.5% without interfacial oxide to 8.8% with an optimal oxide thickness of about 1 nm. This systematic study reveals that formation of an oxide layer switches charge transport from thermionic emission to a mixture of thermionic emission and tunneling and improves overall diode properties, which are critical factors for tailoring the cell behavior. By controlled formation and removal of interfacial oxide, we demonstrate oscillation of the cell parameters between two extreme states, where the cell efficiency can be reversibly altered by a factor of 500. Our results suggest that the oxide layer plays an important role in Si-based photovoltaics, and it might be utilized to tune the cell performance in various nanostructure–Si heterojunction structures.
Introduction
Developing high performance photovoltaics requires careful control of the interface between active components, where the built-in electric field is established and critical processes such as charge separation and acceleration take place.1–3 Interfacial structure and morphology in polymeric and dye-sensitized solar cells have been studied.4–7 For solar cells incorporating nanostructures, the interface becomes more important due to the increased surface area and somewhat complex interactions between the nanostructures and polymeric matrix.8–9 In this regard, methods such as tailoring the band-gap, surface engineering and thermal annealing are frequently used to create a sharp interface with intimate contact and an appropriate energy band distribution.10–12
We have been exploring carbon nanotube (CNT)–Si heterojunction solar cells since 2007, and have steadily pushed the power conversion efficiency up to 13.8%.13–16 Our main strategy toward higher device performance focused on CNT films (versus Si). This involved the synthesis of uniform single-walled and double-walled nanotube networks with high transparency and electrical conductivity, and controlled acid doping of CNT films to further tune their electronic properties. Oxidation of the Si surface was found to influence the cell performance.15 Rinzler’s group studied electronic modulation on CNT films and depletion of Si substrates, which improved the cell efficiencies to 12%.17,18 Previous results in this area demonstrated that the CNT–Si solar cell is a promising model for practical applications if the cell performance can be further improved.
For Si-based photovoltaics, one of the structural advantages is that an oxide layer can be conveniently grown on its surface by thermal or chemical oxidation, with controlled thickness on an atomic scale. Growth of a thin oxide layer turns the device into a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure with improved device characteristics.1,19 When a CNT film is brought into contact with a Si substrate, the presence of an oxide layer on the Si surface changed the charge transport mechanism from thermionic emission to tunneling.20,21
Here, we demonstrate the unexpected strong modulation of solar cell characteristics in a CNT–Si heterostructure by the controlled formation of an interfacial oxide layer. Through progressive air exposure resulting in the growth of an oxide layer with incremental thickness, we have continuously improved the cell efficiency from 0.5% to 8.8% and systematically investigated the diode properties and key parameters such as output current, voltage and cell efficiency. We found an optimal oxide thickness of about 1 nm for stable performance. By simply introducing or removing the oxide layer at the CNT–Si interface using selected acid vapors, we observed fast and significant oscillation of the cell efficiency (between 0.013% and 6.5%) that is reversible for many cycles.
Results and discussion
In our model, a highly porous CNT network consisting of mainly single-walled nanotubes is directly deposited onto an n-type silicon wafer to fabricate the heterojunction (Fig. 1a and b). An average film thickness of 10 to 20 nm was measured by scanning the CNT network with an atomic force microscope (AFM). The film thickness corresponds to the diameters of CNT bundles in the network (Fig. 1c and d). The CNT–Si interface is responsible for separation of electrons and holes excited in the bulk Si crystal, and each device was made on an active window area (0.09 cm2) of exposed Si surrounded by 300 nm of thermal oxide (for insulation) prepared by photolithography. Because the CNT film is so thin and porous, it is possible for us to control the growth of an oxide layer on the Si surface by placing the cell in air at a stable temperature (25 °C) and humidity (<5%). Air infiltration and attack at pore sites results in continuous oxide growth with increasing thickness (as illustrated in Fig. 1a), and the oxide effects can be understood based on the resulting solar cell performance.
 Fig. 1  Controlled oxide formation in a CNT–Si solar cell. (a) Illustration of the oxide growth process at the interface between a CNT film and n-Si substrate, when the cell was stored in air. (b) High resolution transmission electronic microscopy image of an as-grown single-walled CNT film. (c) AFM image of a purified CNT film. (d) AFM scanning of the CNT film showing a thickness of 10–20 nm. 
We have monitored the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of a CNT–Si cell for an oxide growth period of 140 h. The surface was initially in a pristine state after removing the native oxide on the Si surface using HF. This was followed by air exposure at controlled temperature and humidity at an average oxide growth rate of 0.6 Å per 10 h (measured by Auger spectroscopy, as discussed below). Fig. 2a shows the gradual shift of J–V curves to improved cell performances with increasing oxidation times, under standard illumination conditions (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). The corresponding cell parameters in the light and dark conditions after different oxidation times are summarized in Table S1.† The cell without oxide (oxidation time = 0) shows an initial open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.18 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.4 mA cm−2, a poor fill factor (FF) of 23%, and a calculated power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.5%. Upon oxide growth, there is a consistent improvement in Voc and FF, while Jsc doubled in 26 h and then stabilized at about 24 mA cm−2. After 140 h, the cell reached a Voc of 0.54 V, a FF of 67%, and an efficiency of 8.8%. Compared to the initial state, the growth of a thin oxide layer (<1 nm) in the CNT–Si cell resulted in significant enhancement in cell performance, and an approximately 17-fold increase in cell efficiency. However, further oxide growth up to 251 h resulted in slight decreases in both the fill factor and cell efficiency, indicating that the optimal oxide thickness is probably located at less than 1 nm (Fig. 2b). We also studied a control sample made from a silicon wafer with a stable native oxide layer (2–3 nm, stored in air for one year) and found that the cell efficiency was very low (1.44%). However, when we removed the native oxide by HF and placed the cell in air for 60 h (forming a very thin oxide of <1 nm), the efficiency returned to 5.5%, indicating that a thick stable native oxide layer is not suitable for use in CNT–Si solar cells (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  Oxide growth and influence on solar cell performance. (a) J–V characteristics of a CNT–Si solar cell after storage in air for different periods up to 140 h. (b) Recorded cell parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF, η) over a storage period of 251 h. (c) J–V characteristics of a CNT–Si solar cell with 2–3 nm oxide layer (black), after removing oxide layer and stored in air for 60 h (red). 
The cell with native oxide (2–3 nm) showed similar Voc and Jsc values compared to the cell with thinner oxide (<1 nm), however, the fill factor (15.6%) was much lower than the latter (55.8%). Therefore we believe the primary reason for cell performance reduction is that the thick interface oxide layer hinders charge transport resulting in significantly increased series resistance.
To determine the oxide thicknesses at different times (0 h, 26 h, 49 h, 97 h, and 140 h), five control samples were made using the same processes. The process involved depositing CNT films on silicon wafers and storing them in air under the same conditions for different periods of time (0 h, 26 h, 49 h, 97 h, 140 h). After that, the CNT films were stripped from the silicon substrate and the atomic concentrations of Si and oxygen at the wafer surface were determined by Auger spectroscopy. The results show a continuous increase of oxygen concentration relative to Si, indicating the growth of the oxide (SiOx) layer on the silicon surface. The SiOx thickness is determined by the terminal point where the oxygen concentration (in percentage) drops to <20% or the Si concentration increases to >80%, for example, the oxide thickness after 140 h growth is about 8.7 Å at a sputtering rate of 1 nm min−1 (Fig. 3a). The oxide growth rate is about 0.18 Å h−1 in the first 26 h oair exposure, and after that slows down to 0.04 Å h−1, with an average rate of about 0.06 Å h−1 in 140 h. In real CNT–Si devices, the thickness of the oxide layer formed at the exposed Si area might be slightly different compared to the oxide formed underneath the CNTs, so the measured thickness represents an average value throughout the active device area. Therefore the systematic change of J–V characteristics (Fig. 2a) is strongly related to the formation and continuous growth of an oxide layer at the CNT–Si interface.
 Fig. 3  Mechanism study. (a) Auger spectra of CNT–Si cells after growing oxide in air for different times. The oxide thicknesses at each time are indicated. (b) Logarithmic I–V curves of CNT–Si heterojunctions with and without the oxide layer measured from room temperature (300 K) to low temperature (50 K). (c) Calculated reverse saturation current densities (J0) corresponding to cells after different oxidation times. Inset, plots of reverse current density in the negative bias region (around −1 V) for the fresh cell (0 h) and after 140 h storage in air. (d) Calculated shunt and series resistances of those cells. 
Due to the growth of SiOx layer at the Si surface, the CNT–Si junction has been converted from a metal–semiconductor (MS) to a MIS structure. Dark J–V curves of CNT–Si heterojunctions with and without the oxide layer were recorded at temperatures from 50 K to 300 K in the forward bias region (Fig. 3b). For thermionic emission, the theoretical formula22 is  log(I) = log(I0) + qV/nkT(1)and for tunneling, the equation22 is  log(I) = log(I0) + αV(2)
Where T is the absolute temperature, k is Boltzmann’s constant, q is the charge of an electron, I0 is the saturation current, and α is a constant related to the tunneling barrier of the junction. The main difference between the two mechanisms is that in thermionic emission, the log(I)–V curve slope (q/nkT) is dependent on temperature, while in tunneling mechanism the slope (α) is insensitive to temperature. As the high bias region of log(I)–V curve is typically affected by series resistance (Rs), we selected the low bias region (corresponding current from 1 × 10−6 to 1 × 10−4 A) to study the transport mechanisms of CNT–Si heterojunctions with and without the oxide layer. Fig. 3b shows a parallel shift of the log(I)–V curves from the heterojunction with an oxide layer at different temperatures, and nearly constant slopes in the lower forward-bias regions. This indicates that the main transport mechanism is a mixture of thermionic emission and tunneling in the CNT–oxide–Si heterojunction. In contrast, the log(I)–V curves of CNT–Si heterojunctions without oxide in Fig. 3b show temperature related changes in the curves’ slopes, revealing the main transport mechanism is thermionic emission in the oxide free CNT–Si heterojunction.
To obtain key parameters by fitting the I–V curves, we first calculated the values of series resistance and shunt resistance (Rsh) based on the reciprocal of slopes in the dark I–V curves at the high voltage (0.5–1 V) and reversed bias regions. The remaining variables (n and I0) were then fitted from the dark I–V curves of cells with different oxide thicknesses using the Shockley Equation (see the Experimental section for details), and J0 was calculated by J0 = I0/S where S is the active device area (0.09 cm2). Significantly, J0 of the cell after 140 h of oxidation had dropped by 4 orders of magnitude compared with that of the cell without oxide (from 94 down to 5 × 10−3 μA cm−2) (Fig. 3c). This also can be seen from the dark J–V curves in the small reverse bias region, for example, the J value at −1 V has decreased from 79 μA cm−2 to 0.5 μA cm−2 after 140 h of oxidation (inset of Fig. 3c). At the same time, the diode rectification ratios (at ± 1 V) increased from 2.1 × 103 to 2.8 × 105, and the ideality factors improved from 3.3 to 1.4 (Table S1†). In a thicker SiOx layer and with an increasing proportion of tunneling in the carrier transport, the thermionic emission of charge carriers (a major part of J0) over the potential barrier height will be suppressed.23,24 This may result from a combination of several factors (tunneling plus surface passivation) that are responsible for cell improvement. The effect of surface passivation was also observed in a similar device structure by another group.21 The presence of an oxide layer can also increase the potential barrier height and passivate the CNT–Si interface, leading to enhanced shunt resistance (Rsh) and diode properties. Consequently, during the oxide growth, shunt resistance increases remarkably from 0.01 to 3 MΩ while series resistance remains in a stable range (30–40 Ω) (Fig. 3d). It shows that the introduced tunneling transport through the oxide does not increase Rs, and the slight decrease of Rs in the first 8 h might be caused by oxygen doping25 on CNTs and subsequent reduction of their sheet resistance.
Our results show that the solar cell performance is very sensitive to the oxide thickness, and can therefore be controlled by the introduction and removal of an interfacial oxide layer. This was demonstrated by a simple process where the cell was placed upside down to face HF vapor (to etch the oxide layer) and HNO3 vapor (to grow the oxide layer), alternatively (illustrated in Fig. 4a). The acid vapor treatments caused significant changes in the J–V characteristics of the same heterojunction cell. A CNT–oxide–Si cell with 1 nm-thick oxide shows an initial Voc of 0.51 V, Jsc of 24.8 mA cm−2, FF of 51% and η of 6.5%. After HF etching for 15 s, the cell parameters immediately decreased to Voc = 0.10 V, Jsc = 0.5 mA cm−2, FF = 25% and η = 0.013%, and the J–V curve shifted to close to the origin of the coordinates (Fig. 4b). We note that the cell efficiency after oxide removal decreased by 500 fold. However, after HNO3 vapor oxidation for 90 s, the Voc and Jsc recovered to their original values and the J–V curve shifted correspondingly. The recovered cell efficiency is about 5.4%, slightly lower than original value (6.5%) due to a decrease of FF. We attribute the performance recovery by HNO3 treatment to the formation of oxide layer on the HF-etched Si surface (with an estimated thickness in the range of 0.5–1 nm), rather than the modification of CNT films. Measurements on the CNT film show a modest change in film conductivity between HNO3 and HF treatments (from 327 to 303 Ω sq−1), indicating that the film resistance change is not the main reason for solar cell efficiency change (Fig. S2a and S2b†). Dark J–V curves show an inhibition of reverse current and improvement in diode behavior after HNO3 oxidation (Fig. 4c) that is similar to the effects observed in cells after oxide growth in air (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 4  Modulation of solar cells by interfacial oxide growth and removal. (a) Reversible treatments by HF and HNO3 vapors to etch and grow the oxide layer at the CNT–Si interface. (b) J–V curves of a cell with interfacial oxide (CNT–oxide–Si), after removal of oxide by HF vapor (CNT–Si), and after reformation of the oxide layer by HNO3 vapor. Arrows indicate each process. (c) Dark J–V curves of cells after HF and HNO3 vapor treatments, respectively. Inset, magnified view in the negative bias region (−1 V). (d) J–V curves of a cell by alternatively treating with HF and HNO3 vapors for 6 cycles. (e) Voc and cell efficiency (η) recorded after each HF and HNO3 vapor treatment, respectively. The horizontal bar indicates the length of HF (15 s) and HNO3 treatments (90 s). 
The modulation of solar cell performance appears to be reversible after repeated acid treatments. In a CNT–Si cell that was treated by HF and HNO3 vapors alternatively for 6 cycles, strong oscillation in J–V curves between states of high performance and complete degradation was observed (Fig. 4d). Specifically, the value of Voc dropped to <0.2 V after HF etching and then recovered to >0.5 V after HNO3 oxidation, in a time scale from tens of seconds to several minutes. At the same time, the cell efficiencies switched between <0.1% and >5% at the two states, respectively (Fig. 4e). Although the performance of the HF-etched CNT–Si cell degraded completely, HNO3 oxidation of the Si surface could quickly return the cell to high performance. Successful modulation of J–V characteristics over many cycles indicates that HF and HNO3 can be used for the controllable and reversible removal and growth of an oxide layer in the CNT–Si heterojunction structure.
Conclusions
We demonstrated that the performance of CNT–Si heterojunction solar cells is extremely sensitive to interfacial oxide, and can be modulated by controllably growing silicon oxide at the interface. The presence of a thin oxide layer with an optimal thickness of about 1 nm can suppress the reverse saturation current and lead to a mixture of thermionic emission and tunneling carrier transport. This results in significantly improved cell characteristics and high efficiency. Formation or removal of the oxide layer to switch the cell efficiency could be realized by simple chemical etching and oxidation. It is possible to tune the solar cell behavior by accurately controlling the oxide growth process, and such an effect might be applicable for Si-based heterojunction cells involving other nanostructures (e.g. graphene, nanowires).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (no. 51072005). We also appreciate the financial support from Guangdong Province Innovation R&D Team Plan and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2011M500310).
References

          A. L. Fahrenbruch and R. H. Bube, Fundamentals of Solar Cells, Academic press, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .

          T. Soga, Nanostructured materials for solar energy conversion, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, Interface materials for organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2512 RSC .
A. Orimo, K. Masuda, S. Honda, H. Benten, S. Ito, H. Ohkita and H. Tsuji, Surface segregation at the aluminum interface of poly(3-hexylthiophene)/fullerene solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043305 CrossRef .
S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip, O. Acton, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Interfacial modification to improve inverted polymer solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5113–5119 RSC .
B. A. Gregg, Interfacial processes in the dye-sensitized solar cell, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, L. D. Wang, Y. Geng, B. B. Ma, Y. F. Zhu, H. P. Dong and Y. Qiu, Effects of an intercalation nanocomposite at the photoanode/electrolyte interface in quasi-solid dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17986–17992 CAS .
K. H. Yu and J. H. Chen, Enhancing solar cell efficiencies through 1-D nanostructures, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dillon, Carbon nanotubes for photoconversion and electrical energy storage, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6856–6872 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, L.-J. Li and J. Kong, Work function engineering of graphene electrode via chemical doping, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2689–2694 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Li, V. P. Kunets, V. Saini, Y. Xu, E. Dervishi, G. J. Salamo, A. R. Biris and A. S. Biris, Light-harvesting using high density p-type single wall carbon nanotube/n-type silicon heterojunctions, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1407–1414 CrossRef .
J. Jo, S. S. Kim, S. I. Na, B. K. Yu and D. Y. Kim, Time-dependent morphology evolution by annealing processes on polymer:fullerene blend solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Wei, Y. Jia, Q. K. Shu, Z. Y. Gu, K. L. Wang, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo, A. Y. Cao and D. H. Wu, Double-walled carbon nanotube solar cells, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2317–2321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, Q. K. Shu, X. C. Gui, Y. Q. Zhu, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, B. B. Ma, L. D. Wang, W. J. Liu, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo and D. H. Wu, Nanotube-silicon heterojunction solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4594–4598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, P. X. Li, X. C. Gui, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu, L. H. Zhang, A. Y. Cao and Y. Xu, Encapsulated carbon nanotube-oxide-silicon solar cells with stable 10% efficiency, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133115 CrossRef .
Y. Jia, A. Y. Cao, X. Bai, Z. Li, L. H. Zhang, N. Guo, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, Achieving high efficiency silicon-carbon nanotube heterojunction solar cells by acid doping, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1901–1905 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wadhwa, B. Liu, M. A. McCarthy, Z. C. Wu and A. G. Rinzler, Electronic junction control in a nanotube-semiconductor Schottky junction solar cell, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5001–5005 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wadhwa, G. Seol, M. K. Petterson, J. Guo and A. G. Rinzler, Electrolyte-induced inversion layer Schottky junction solar cells, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2419–2423 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Pulfrey, MIS solar-cells: a review. IEEE T, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1978, 25, 1308–1317 CrossRef .
A. Behnam, J. L. Johnson, Y. Choi, M. G. Ertosun, A. K. Okyay, P. Kapur, K. C. Saraswat and A. Ural, Experimental characterization of single-walled carbon nanotube film-Si Schottky contacts using metal-semiconductor-metal structures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243116 CrossRef .
A. Behnam, N. A. Radhakrishna, Z. Wu and A. Ural, Electronic properties of metal-semiconductor and metal-oxide-semiconductor structures composed of carbon nanotube film on silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 233105 CrossRef .
C. W. Liang and S. Roth. Electrical, optical transport of GaAs/carbon nanotube heterojunctions, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1809–1812 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Fonash, Role of interfacial layer in metal-semiconductor solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 46, 1286–1289 CrossRef .
S. J. Fonash, Outline and comparison of possible effects present in a metal-thin-film-insulator-semiconductor solar cell, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 3597–3602 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins, K. Bradley, M. Ishigami and A. Zettl, Extreme oxygen sensitivity of electronic properties of carbon nanotubes, Science, 2000, 287, 1801–1804 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23639gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Controlled oxide formation in a CNT–Si solar cell. (a) Illustration of the oxide growth process at the interface between a CNT film and n-Si substrate, when the cell was stored in air. (b) High resolution transmission electronic microscopy image of an as-grown single-walled CNT film. (c) AFM image of a purified CNT film. (d) AFM scanning of the CNT film showing a thickness of 10–20 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Oxide growth and influence on solar cell performance. (a) J–V characteristics of a CNT–Si solar cell after storage in air for different periods up to 140 h. (b) Recorded cell parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF, η) over a storage period of 251 h. (c) J–V characteristics of a CNT–Si solar cell with 2–3 nm oxide layer (black), after removing oxide layer and stored in air for 60 h (red).	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism study. (a) Auger spectra of CNT–Si cells after growing oxide in air for different times. The oxide thicknesses at each time are indicated. (b) Logarithmic I–V curves of CNT–Si heterojunctions with and without the oxide layer measured from room temperature (300 K) to low temperature (50 K). (c) Calculated reverse saturation current densities (J0) corresponding to cells after different oxidation times. Inset, plots of reverse current density in the negative bias region (around −1 V) for the fresh cell (0 h) and after 140 h storage in air. (d) Calculated shunt and series resistances of those cells.	 
log(I) = log(I0) + qV/nkT	(1)
log(I) = log(I0) + αV	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Modulation of solar cells by interfacial oxide growth and removal. (a) Reversible treatments by HF and HNO3 vapors to etch and grow the oxide layer at the CNT–Si interface. (b) J–V curves of a cell with interfacial oxide (CNT–oxide–Si), after removal of oxide by HF vapor (CNT–Si), and after reformation of the oxide layer by HNO3 vapor. Arrows indicate each process. (c) Dark J–V curves of cells after HF and HNO3 vapor treatments, respectively. Inset, magnified view in the negative bias region (−1 V). (d) J–V curves of a cell by alternatively treating with HF and HNO3 vapors for 6 cycles. (e) Voc and cell efficiency (η) recorded after each HF and HNO3 vapor treatment, respectively. The horizontal bar indicates the length of HF (15 s) and HNO3 treatments (90 s).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23639g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
