Nitrogen-containing porous carbons: synthesis and application  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2TA00028H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00028H
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 999-1013Nitrogen-containing porous carbons: synthesis and applicationWenzhong Shen* and Weibin Fan*State Key Laboratory of Coal Conversion, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan, Shanxi, P.R. China. E-mail: shenwezh2000@yahoo.com; fanwb@sxicc.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-351-4041153;   Tel: +86-351-4053091Received 22nd August 2012, Accepted 23rd August 2012First published on 2nd October 2012AbstractNitrogen-containing porous carbon materials are ubiquitous with a wide range of technologically important applications, including separation science, heterogeneous catalyst supports, water purification, electrochemistry, as well as the developing areas of energy generation and storage applications. To date, a variety of approaches has been developed and applied to introduce nitrogen into the carbon matrix. It is important and necessary to design and control a hierarchical porous structure and the surface chemical groups of nitrogen-containing porous carbons for their applications. In this work, we summarize and compare recently reported routes for the preparation of nitrogen-containing porous carbon materials and the effect of nitrogen groups on its applications in adsorption, electrochemistry, catalysis/catalyst supports and hydrogen storage properties.Wenzhong ShenDr Wenzhong Shen obtained his Ph.D degree from the Institute of Coal Chemistry (ICC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Now he is an associate professor of ICC. His research activity is the synthesis of porous carbon materials, especially in the control of pore structure and design of surface properties.Weibin FanDr Weibin Fan acquired his Ph.D degree in the ICC of CAS in 1998. From 1999 to 2001, he conducted a postdoctoral fellowship in the Catholic University of Leuven of Belgium under the guidance of Profs. Robert A. Schoonheydt and Bert M. Weckhuysen. After that, he moved to Japan and joined Prof. Takashi Tatsumi's group. This is made possible by the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) and the Japan Agency of Science and Technology (JST). At the end of 2007, he returned to ICC and got a full professor position. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization and application of porous materials.1. IntroductionRecently, much attention has been paid to the preparation of porous carbon materials for both practical and fundamental interests. They are extensively used as electrode materials for batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors, as sorbents for separation processes and gas storage, and as supports for many important catalysts.1–3 According to the pore diameter, porous carbon materials can be classified as microporous (diameter <2 nm), mesoporous (2 nm < diameter < 50 nm), and/or macroporous (diameter >50 nm) carbons.Conventional porous carbon materials are synthesized by pyrolysis and physical or chemical activation of organic precursors at elevated temperatures.4 In addition, hard-template and soft-template approaches are also widely utilized to obtain ordered porous carbons.5The properties of porous carbon materials depend to a large extent not only on the raw material and their surface structure and porosity but also on the heteroatoms built into their structures. The most important and widely introduced heteroatoms are oxygen and nitrogen on the porous carbon surface. The acidic character of porous carbons surfaces is closely related to their oxygen-containing surface groups,6,7 which are mainly present on the outer surface or at the edge of the basal plane and contribute to the chemical nature of the carbon. In contrast, the basicity of porous carbon is associated with: (i) resonating-electrons of carbon aromatic rings that attract protons, and (ii) basic surface functionalities that are capable of binding with protons.8–11Nitrogen functionalities generally provide basic properties, which can enhance the interactions between the carbon surface and acid molecules, such as dipole–dipole, hydrogen bonding, covalent bonding, and so on.12 The possible structures of the nitrogen functionalities include amides, imides, lactames, pyrrolic and pyridinic groups,13,14 as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1  Types of functional nitrogen-containing groups on the surface: (a) pyrrole, (b) primary amine, (c) secondary amine, (d) pyridine, (e) imine, (f) tertiary amine, (g) nitro, (h) nitroso, (i) amide, (j) pyridone, (k) pyridine-N-oxide and (l) quaternary nitrogen. Adapted with the permission of ref. 15. Copyright 2009, Elsevier. Originally, interest in nitrogen-rich carbonaceous materials has been mainly focused on their use as adsorbents in industry and in environmental protection.16–19 In this aspect, nitrogen-containing porous carbons with high surface area are recently receiving a great deal of attention due to their specific structures and unique properties.20–22 For example, they show enhanced adsorption capacity of anions, resulting from a positively charged carbon surface, and improved thermal stability by incorporating heteroatoms when they are used as catalytic supports.23 Since nitrogen-rich carbonaceous materials were found to exhibit an increasing capacity for acid gases,24–26 this type of material has been widely investigated and utilized for the reduction of oxygen in fuel cells and supercapacitors27–32 and the preparation of highly selective gas-separation membranes.33 The scheme for the synthesis and applications of nitrogen-containing porous carbons is shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2  Current and potential applications of nitrogen-containing porous carbons. This review aims to give a brief introduction to the field and the future possibilities of nitrogen-containing porous carbons by summarizing recent research progress on the preparation, characterization and applications of nitrogen-containing porous carbon materials.2. SynthesisNitrogen-containing functional groups can be introduced through either reaction with nitrogen-containing reagents (such as NH3, nitric acid and amines) or carbonization/activation of nitrogen-rich carbon precursors, such as polyacrylonitrile, melamine, quinoline pitch, urea-polymer, and so on.34–422.1 Post-treatment processingNH3 has been by far the most frequently used reagent to introduce nitrogen into porous carbons, used alone or after preoxidation of the carbon with HNO3 (amination) or NH3–air gas mixtures (ammoxidation). HCN, HNO3, N,N-dimethylethanolamine, N,N-dimethylpropanediamine, urea, dicyanodiamine, N,N-dimethylformamide, melamine, and polyaniline have also been used to nitrogenate porous carbons. Depending on the reagent used, the process was conducted either in gas (ammonia, hydrogen cyanide, and amines) or liquid (nitric acid, urea amines, and ammonia) phase. Generally, the process consisted of a single nitrogenation stage or of two successive steps, in which porous carbon was first oxidized in liquid phase and then nitrogenated in gas or liquid phase.The nitrogenation treatment of the porous carbon material influenced both its surface chemical nature and porous structure, in a form and to an extent that depends on its structure and the chemical agent and experimental method used.43When the carbon materials are treated with ammonia at high temperatures, ammonia will decompose to free radicals such as ˙NH2, ˙NH, and atomic hydrogen and nitrogen. These free radicals attack the carbon to form nitrogen-containing functional groups.44 These radicals can etch carbon fragments, leading to increased porosity, and can also replace oxygen-containing species on the carbon to form surface groups such as –NH2, –CN, pyrrolic and quaternary nitrogen, thus functionalizing the surface.45Ammonia reacts with carboxylic acid sites present in the carbon to form ammonium salts, then transforms into surface amide, imide and nitrile species during heat treatment, and even isocyanate species at high temperature, as shown in Fig. 3.46,47 Fig. 3  Scheme for the formation of lactams, imides, amides, and amines during the heat treatment of carbon materials with ammonia. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA. The ether-like oxygen on the surface of porous carbon can be converted into imine and pyridine groups through reaction with ammonia, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Fig. 4  Reaction scheme for conversion of chemisorbed oxygen (ether-like) into imine and pyridine surface groups in the reaction with ammonia. Adapted with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 1991, Elsevier. The amount of nitrogen introduced into the processed carbon depends also on the temperature of ammoxidation. It was found that the ammoxidation is its most intense in the first hour of the process. Ammoxidation at 350 °C causes an increase in the basic character of the surface.49Pietrzak et al. investigated the effect of carbonization temperature on the nitrogen-containing groups formed through the reaction of ammonia or urea with coal. It has been shown that the carbonization temperature determines the amount of incorporated nitrogen. Nitrogen introduced at 500–700 °C presents mainly as pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, and imine, amine and amide groups on the surface of porous carbon. During the KOH-activating process at 800 °C, nitrogen was transformed into pyridonic nitrogen and quaternary-N. The introduction of nitrogen in the activation step leads to a slight decrease in surface area, while pyrrolic-N groups were formed at 350 °C when bituminous coal was ammoxidised with a mixture of ammonia.50,51Titirici et al. synthesized ordered mesoporous carbon with SBA-15 as hard template by hydrothermally carbonizing oxygen-rich precursors such as sugar and furfuryl alcohol. These oxygen-containing functional groups can further react with 3-chloropropylamine to form amino-modified hexagonally ordered carbons, the amount of N in which reaches 4 mmol per gram.52Aminocaproic acid can also form chemical bonds with carboxylic groups on carbon surfaces, resulting in a change in microstructure and an increase in the amount of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing groups with increasing concentration of aminocaproic acid through its further polycondensation.53 Linear terminal diamines has been proved to directly anchor on the porous carbon in sizable amounts (>5%) at 140 °C. Terminal –NH2 groups not engaged in amide bonds are free to further react with other species and show well-defined proton adsorption behavior.54Generally, ammoxidation of porous carbons leads to a decrease in their surface area and pore volume despite the fact that a further heat treatment could improve their textural parameters.55 In particular, nitrogen-containing functional groups developed in such a way are often unstable and the nitrogen is mainly distributed on the surface. To avoid this disadvantage, nitrogen-containing precursors with controllable nitrogen amounts are used to prepare porous carbons. In this way, easily polymerized monomers of acrylonitrile and pyrrole are the best candidates.56–582.2 Direct synthesis from nitrogen-containing precursorsTemplating route and physical and chemical activation of nitrogen-rich carbon precursors are the primary approaches to obtain nitrogen-containing porous carbons.2.2.1. Templating routes. Silica sieves such as zeolite 13X, SBA-15 and MCM-48 are widely selected as templates to obtain ordered porous carbons. Structurally different nitrogen-containing porous carbon materials were prepared with different porous silicas and colloidal particles.N-doped porous carbons prepared using zeolite 13X or zeolite Y as template and acetonitrile as carbon source via chemical vapor deposition at 550–1000 °C contain 5–8 wt% nitrogen, have high surface areas (1170–1920 m2 g−1) and pore volumes (0.75–1.4 cm3 g−1), and exhibit structural ordering replicated from the zeolite templates.59With SBA-15 as a hard template, nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon with highly ordered two dimensional hexagonal structures and 26.5 wt% nitrogen content could be synthesized using diaminobenzene as carbon and nitrogen sources and ammonium peroxydisulfate as oxidant.60 Polypyrrole as the nitrogen-containing carbon precursor led to a high content of nitrogen retained in the carbon surface (C/N = 8.3). Pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen groups were the dominant surface functional species.61 When amino-glucose is used as precursor, nitrogen atoms play an active role in the synthesis process and are strongly bonded to the carbon structure in heterocycles or nitrile functional groups. The nitrogen content of the obtained materials can be controlled between 2 and 5 wt%.62The pore structure of highly ordered mesoporous carbons could be controlled by changing templates. With pyrrole as both carbon and nitrogen precursor, nitrogen-containing carbon materials having hexagonal and onion-like structures were prepared when CMK-3 and OCM-0.75 were used as templates, respectively.63 Another series of structurally different nitrogen-containing mesoporous carbons has been synthesized from polyacrylonitrile by Jaroniec and his coworkers using ordered and disordered mesoporous silica templates.64 Recently, well-ordered N-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon materials were successfully synthesized by Xia and Mokaya via chemical vapor deposition of the carbon precursor of acetonitrile on various mesoporous silica templates.65 It is noteworthy that this type of material exhibits high levels of graphitic character.The pore sizes of nitrogen-containing porous carbons also depend on the employed templates. Two-dimensional mesoporous carbon nitride with tunable pore sizes has been prepared using SBA-15 materials with different pore diameters as templates through a simple polymerization reaction between ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride. The scheme for the synthesis was shown in Fig. 5. The nitrogen content could be controlled by simply adjusting the weight ratio of ethylenediamine to carbon tetrachloride.66 Fig. 5  Scheme for the preparation of mesoporous CN with SBA-15 as template. Adapted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA. Five years ago, a highly ordered three-dimensional mesoporous carbon-nitride-based hybrid material with a surface area of 810 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 0.81 cm3 g−1 was prepared through the polymerization of ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride inside three-dimensional cage-type mesoporous silica of SBA-16. The prepared material possibly has a cage-type porous structure, as illustrated in Fig. 6.67 Fig. 6  Schematic structure of a mesoporous carbon nitride-based hybrid material. Adapted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. It is worth noting that a uniform porous graphitic carbon nitride with a highly ordered pore array of 260 nm in size was prepared by condensing cyanamide (CN–NH2) around a colloidal silica crystalline array template. This material has a stoichiometric composition of C3N4. The atomic structure of a single graphitic-C3N4 layer is shown in Fig. 7. The C3N4 network structure consists of tri-s-triazine rings (C6N7) cross-linked by trigonal N atoms.68 Fig. 7  Atomic structure of a single graphitic-C3N4 layer. Nitrogen atoms occupy two different types of positions in the layer, labeled α and β respectively in the figure. Adapted with the permission of ref. 68, Copyright 2007, Elsevier. 2.2.2. Pyrolysis and carbonization of nitrogen-containing carbon precursors. Nitrogen-containing precursors could retain many nitrogen groups after pyrolysis, carbonization or activation. Polyacrylonitrile is commonly used as precursor to prepare nitrogen-containing porous carbons, and especially activated carbon fibers, through carbonization and activation with steam, CO2, H3PO4, KOH or metal salts.69–71 In this way, Tascón et al. prepared activated carbon fiber from Nomex [poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide)] and poly(p-phenylene terephthalamide).72,73 The activation by H3PO4, H3PO4–CO2, CO2 or steam converted amide groups from the polymer precursor into complex and heterogeneously distributed nitrogen functionalities. Nitrogen atoms are present in the 6-membered rings located at the edges of condensed polyaromatic systems as pyridine-like sp2 nitrogen, or in the interior by replacing one carbon atom and bonding to three neighboring carbon atoms. The occurrence of pyridine-like sp2 nitrogen, hypothetically related to pyridinic cycle bearing oxygen substituents or intracyclic oxygen atoms, could be correlated with the degree of oxidation of the carbon surface.In general, the diameter of the activated carbon fiber is about several tens of micrometers. Electrospinning of polymers is a very successful method for preparing fibers with diameters from submicro- to nanometer sizes. Electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-based nanofibers with a uniform diameter of ca. 800 nm has been carbonized and steam-activated to produce activated carbon nanofiber with tailored microporosity and abundant nitrogen-containing functional groups (22 wt%) as highly efficient adsorption sites.74Porous carbon nanofibers were prepared through electrospinning a blend solution of polyacrylonitrile and poly(L-lactide)75 or polyvinylpyrrolidone76 and subsequent carbonization at different temperatures and in different atmospheres. By altering the ratio of polyacrylonitrile to polyvinylpyrrolidone in the mixture, the pore size and pore distribution of porous polyacrylonitrile nanofibers could be easily controlled after polyvinylpyrrolidone was removed by water from the bicomponent nanofibers.The structures and morphologies of the resultant porous carbons are closely related to the preparation process; the oxidization conditions highly affect the structure of polyacrylonitrile-activated carbon fibers, as illustrated in Fig. 8. Fig. 8  Possible evolution process of PAN fiber structure in the oxidation and steam activation. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2010, Elsevier. As for the synthesis of nitrogen-rich CNx (x = 1.2–1.7) network materials using triazido-s-heptazine as a single-source precursor, rapid decomposition yields spongelike porous powders, while slow decomposition results in faceted amorphous monoliths.78 Other morphological porous carbons, such as foam, honeycomb and film, could be also synthesized by carbonizing/activating nitrogen-containing carbon precursors. Nitrogen-containing foam carbon could be prepared by impregnating polyimide precursor. Poly(amide acid) imidized at 200 °C gave polyurethane/polyimide composite foams, which could be transformed into polyimide foams by heating at >400 °C, and further into carbon foams at temperatures higher than 800 °C. Foams carbonized at 1000 °C were graphitized but retained foam characteristics, even when the heat treatment temperature reached 3000 °C.79 Carbonization and activation of melamine resin or melamine resin/carbon aerogel composites can synthesize nitrogen-rich carbon materials, which have a highly porous nanometer-sized honeycomb structure and a high specific surface area (>1680 m2 g−1).80 When vinylpyridine resin was carbonized and activated with steam, the nitrogen atoms in the carbon structure behaved as polar sites and were situated in the six-membered rings of the polyaromatic structures.19Porous carbon films were prepared through the pyrolysis of poly(urethane-imide) films. The thermally less stable urethane domains decomposed at 300 to 400 °C, while porous polyimide films were pyrolyzed at 900 °C for 1 h to give porous carbon films.81Nitrogen-containing natural products can be also used as carbon precursors to prepare porous carbons. The nitrogen-doped carbon with an N content >5% obtained from marine chitin (poly-β-(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine) biomass showed a highly textured, moderate surface area (>300 m2 g−1) and high pore volume (>0.6 cm3 g−1). The nanoscale morphology and accessible interconnected pore structure (pore diameter >10 nm) were retained after carbonization.82Pyrolysis of nitrogen-containing precursor leads to a uniform distribution of heteroatoms in the bulk of the material. Appropriate selection of the nitrogen precursor and adjustment of the weight ratio of carbon carrier and nitrogen enables one to prepare porous carbons with controlled microporosity and surface basicity.832.3 Other approachesIn addition to heat treatment, plasma was also employed to introduce nitrogen into porous carbons. Huang et al. modified viscose-based activated carbon fibers using dielectric-barrier discharge plasma. Nitrogen was used as the feed gas to create nitrogen radicals. After nitrogen plasma modification, the pore structure parameters of the viscose-based activated carbon fibers was decreased, and the surface was etched and became rough. In comparison with the heat treatment method, more nitrogen atoms were incorporated into the aromatic rings.84Hydrothermal carbonization is not a new method, but it is an important technique for the manufacture of various carbonaceous materials and hybrids. This technique is usually conducted in pure water at mild temperatures (<200 °C) inside closed containers under autogenous pressure.85Homogeneous and monodisperse hollow carbon microspheres functionalized with amino and hydroxyl groups were synthesized by decomposing a 2,4,6-tribromophenol–ferrocene mixture in the presence of ammonia via a one-step solvothermal process at 250 °C for 24 h. The formed ammonia can not only accelerate the formation of carbon spheres by neutralizing the HBr produced from debromination of 2,4,6-tribromophenol, but can also stabilize the formed dangling bonds. Thus, it is not only a surface-functionalizing material but also a pore-forming component.86Treatment of natural nitrogen-containing molecules such as amino acids or proteins with glucose or aminated saccharides, e.g. chitosan or glucosamine, under hydrothermal conditions resulted in the formation of nitrogenated materials (N content was 8–10 wt%). This type of N-containing material has an increased level of aromatic character.87 The nitrogen content can also be retained after further calcination at higher temperatures. The nitrogen-doped materials have been proved to have superior electrical conductivity performance88 and high thermal diffusivity properties.89In summary, nitrogen-containing porous carbon can be obtained through impregnation of nitrogen-compounds or reaction with NH3 at high temperature. The nitrogen functional groups are located on the surface, and have wide uses. However, the low content and the instability of nitrogen-containing species is a severe problem. In addition, the nitrogenation of porous carbon affects both its surface chemical nature and porous structure at high temperature. In contrast, nitrogen-containing porous carbons derived from nitrogen-rich carbon precursors through physical or chemical activation have high nitrogen content and stability. The nitrogen incorporated into the carbon matrix endows some special properties to the porous carbons such as semiconductor characteristics, pseudocapacitance and oxidation/reduction activity. However, the pore structure is difficult to control during the physical and/or chemical activation. Thus, a templating approach was employed to synthesize highly ordered nitrogen-containing porous carbons with controllable structure and tunable pore size, although the procedures are complex and tedious.2.4 Transformation and decomposition of nitrogen-containing groupsThe treatment temperature and the precursor structure markedly affect the structures of nitrogen-containing groups and the transformation of porous carbons. Nitrogen-containing functional groups were generated on the surface of partially oxidized porous carbons via post-treatment in ammonia. Nitrile, lactam, imide and amine-type functional groups are formed below 300 °C, while pyridine-type nitrogen groups are generated between 300 °C and 500 °C. When the treatment was conducted at temperatures higher than 500 °C, pyridinic, pyrrolic and quaternary-type nitrogen groups are the dominating species. It was found that about 38% of the oxygen functional groups can react with ammonia below 500 °C.90Nitrogen functionalities such as pyridones, protonated pyridinic-N and pyridinic N-oxides are converted to pyridinic-N under mild pyrolysis conditions, and pyrrolic-N is converted to pyridinic-N during carbon structural development.13,19,91,92 Pyrolysis at higher temperatures results in the formation of pyridinic-N located at the edge of the graphene layers or quaternary-N in the interior of the graphene layers.13,19,93,94 The thermal stability of nitrogen functional groups decreased in the order: –C(N-quaternary) > –C(N-pyridinic) > –C(NH pyrrolic) > –C(NO).Pyridine N-oxide surface groups desorb NO and form N2via surface reactions at low temperature. Pyrrolic and pyridinic functional groups decompose and react with surface species to give NH3, HCN, and N2 as desorption products, but most of the pyrrolic groups are preferentially converted to pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen. Approximately 15–40 wt% of the original nitrogen was retained in the carbons, mainly as quaternary nitrogen after heat treatment at 1400 °C.95The types of nitrogen-containing groups could be adjusted by changing the precursors or ingredients. For example, the use of 3-hydroxy aniline and melamine yielded organic xerogels with a higher N content at the periphery than in the bulk of the primary particles, due to the strong hydrophobic character of the amino groups. The organic xerogel had a homogeneous N distribution when 3-hydroxy pyridine was used as an ingredient. After carbonization, the obtained carbon xerogels contained a high number of nitrogen-containing groups, which include three or four types of nitrogen functionality: pyridinic, pyrrolic and/or pyridonic, and quaternary-N. In contrast, the use of melamine or 3-hydroxy pyridine resulted in the transformation of the pyrrolic-N functionality solely into pyridonic-N. In the case of 3-hydroxy aniline, the pyrrolic-N functionality was formed from both pyrrolic-N and pyridonic-N. Generally, the quaternary-N content was higher at higher carbonization temperatures due to the increased molecular condensation degree.96 The carbon xerogels can be also prepared from melamine or urea incorporated into the polymer matrix by the sol–gel method. When melamine was used, nitrogen atoms were incorporated into the surface in the form of pyridine, pyrrolic/pyridine, quaternary nitrogen, and pyridine-N-oxide groups, while the pyrrolic/pyridine and quaternary nitrogen functionalities dominate the samples prepared from urea.973. ApplicationsDue to their high surface areas and well-developed porous structures, and the presence of different types of functional groups on their surfaces, nitrogen-containing porous carbons have been applied in many areas: (1) protection of natural environment by removing sulfur compounds, nitrogen oxides and carbon dioxide; (2) purification of wastewater by removing heavy metal ions, aromatic compounds and dye molecules; (3) storage of energy; (4) use of catalysis or catalyst supports, and (5) manufacture of electrodes for electrochemical capacitors and high-capacity cells and batteries.15,22,50,55,98–1033.1 Purification of wastewaterThe adsorption of aqueous metal ion species on acidic oxygen functional groups mainly involves an ion exchange mechanism with proton displacement, while that on nitrogen-containing groups occurs via a coordination mechanism.The nitrogenation of porous carbons can increase its basicity. This is beneficial for the adsorption of acidic materials and heavy metals and for the improvement of its performance as a catalyst or catalyst support. The basicity of porous carbon, in general, is attributed to delocalized electrons and electron-donating groups that behave as Lewis bases. The introduction of nitrogen into porous carbon significantly increases its surface polarity, and hence, its specific interaction with polar adsorbates.104The removal of heavy metal ions, such as Cr3+, Zn2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, Ag+ and Hg2+, has attracted much attention due to their high toxicity. Nitrogen-containing porous carbons showed high adsorption capacities for these metal ions because of their coordination to nitrogen-containing groups.106 The removal of Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+ and Hg2+ by some porous carbons is listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Some N-enriched carbon materials for water purification reported in the literature

N-enriched carbon materialsNitrogen content (wt%)Nitrogen groupsAdsorbateAdsorption amount (mmol g−1)Ref.Ammonium humate based carbon2.4CN, C–N, N–HCu2+0.54105Pb2+0.27PAN porous carbon8.0Pyridinic, pyridonic, indolic, pyrrolicCd2+0.32106Hg2+1.2PAN activated carbon fiber11Pyrone, pyridinic, pyridonicCu2+0.3577Pb2+0.16Commercial activated carbon—N–H, C–N, aromatic amine, cyclic amidePhenol24.4114In addition, monodispersed and multigram-scale nitrogen-doped magnetic carbon nanoparticles107–109 prepared through carbonization of multigram-scale polypyrrole nanoparticles110–112 exhibited enhanced and selective adsorption capacity for different heavy metal ions owing to their high surface areas and high content of nitrogen. These showed an adsorption capacity for Cr3+ ion as high as 10 times that of naphthalenesulfonic acid-containing activated carbon.Nitrogen-containing porous carbons with high aromatization degree displayed higher adsorption capacities for phenol. The π–π interactions between the phenol ring and the graphene layers on the porous carbon surface are mainly responsible for the selective adsorption of phenol from aqueous solution,113 and the adsorption amount reached 24.4 mmol g−1.114Nitrogen-containing groups in porous carbons are responsible for the increase of pHPZC and surface basicity, and as a result, the adsorption properties for organic acid were improved. For example, the adsorption capacity for uric acid of ammonia-treated porous carbon reached 2 mmol g−1.1153.2 Electrochemical applicationsExtensive research has been carried out on supercapacitors, which are attractive energy-storage devices due to their higher power density and higher efficiency than lithium-ion batteries.116 The materials used as supercapacitors should fulfill the following requirements: (1) a high conductivity for assuring a high power density; (2) an adequate pore size distribution consisting mainly of nanopores with an average pore size smaller than 1 nm, which can enhance the capacitance either in organic or aqueous electrolytes;117,118 (3) a large number of surface functionalities that could undergo fast redox reactions in order to increase the capacitance through pseudo-capacitive processes when working in aqueous electrolytes.116,119The presence of heteroatomic functionalities such as oxygen and nitrogen gives carbon materials acid/base character, thus enhancing the capacitance by the pseudocapacitive effect,24–26,120,121 which generally originates from faradaic interactions between the ions of electrolytes resulting from the substitution of heteroatoms122,123 and the carbon electrode surface. Generally, the nitrogen functionalities have basic character, inducing electron-donor properties.124 In addition, doping of heteroatoms into carbon materials also strengthens the wettability of the interface between the electrolyte and electrodes. An increasing number of papers focus on the doping of nitrogen into carbons for improving the electronic conductivity or capacitance behavior.23,26,31,48,121,125 Suitably developed pores and positively charged nitrogen atoms make nitrogen-decorated porous carbon a promising material for the electrodes of high-performance supercapacitors.126 The capacitive performance of some potential nitrogen-rich carbon materials reported in the literature were listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Capacitive performance of some N-enriched carbon materialsa

Carbon and nitrogen precursorsNitrogen content (wt%)Nitrogen groupsElectrolyteCapacitance (F g−1)Ref.a Note: N-Q, N-5, N-6 and N-O represent quaternary-N, pyrrolic-N, pyridinic-N and pyridine-N-oxide, respectively.Polyacrylonitrile7.2N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O1 M H2SO42011211 M TEABF496Melamine-formaldehyde7N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O1 M EC–DMC–LiPF4159127Acrylonitrile–propylene6N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O1 M H2SO4340128Ethylene diamine–carbon tetrachloride0.7N–H6 M KOH318129Urea–brown coal0.2–5.6N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O6 M KOH3411304 M H2SO4300Bombyx mori silk17.5N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O1 M TEABF4–PC41.5131Polypyrrole4.3N-Q, N-5, N-60.5 M H2SO4240132Polyacrylonitrile18.6N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O1 M H2SO4210133Melamine polymer∼24N-Q, N-6, N-O6 M KOH84311 M TEABF4–PC371 M H2SO4201Melamine12.7N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O6 M KOH280481 M H2SO41521 M TEABF4–PC92In alkaline electrolyte, the high nitrogen content in porous carbon before activation and the combined effect of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing functional groups make the pseudocapacitance contribution to the overall electrochemical capacitance. In organic electrolyte, nitrogen- and oxygen-containing functional groups also give pseudocapacitance contributions to the capacitance, but high nitrogen content has a negative effect on the electrochemical performance.134 In aqueous electrolytes, the nitrogenated surface functional groups on the polyacrylonitrile-based nanofiber paper involved in redox reactions, give a high pseudo-faradaic contribution. This is particularly true for the N functionalities located at the edges of the graphitic layers, which show the highest activity.71Pyridinic and pyridinic-N-oxide nitrogen species have effects on the specific capacitance due to the positive charge, and thus, improved electron transfer at high current loadings,135 while the quaternary nitrogen on the carbon surface increases the hydrophilicity and wettability of carbon.136 Moreover, some certain N-doped functional groups can enhance the electronic conductivity of carbon materials for electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs).42,98,122 This makes N-doped carbon materials promising EDLC electrode materials that are used practically as power sources/energy-storage devices to supply/deliver pulsed current. It is noteworthy that nitrogen-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon with a high conductivity shows much higher anodic electrocatalytic activity than the other materials.137,138The N-modified porous carbon capacitor exhibits an enhanced capacitance, high-rate capability and high capacitance stability with high coulombic efficiency. The presence of surface amides on porous carbon imparts not only hydrophilic coverage for the formation of a double-layer (double-layer capacitance), but also active sites for redox reaction (pseudocapacitance).139 These unique N-containing functional groups have been found to be the electrocatalytic sites for the ORR in fuel cells.26,140–142 The nitrogen-containing defects of hollow carbon nanoparticles show higher electrocatalytic activity than conventional platinum catalysts for the reduction of I3− to I− in dye-sensitized solar cells.143 Nitrogen functionalities incorporated into the carbon network take part in the reversible reactions to keep electrons on the surface of the electrode and adsorb more negative charges due to its positive charges from the less conjugated π-electrons.144 Nitrogen-containing porous carbons also show excellent detection properties for metal ions in solution. PANI coated on a mesoporous carbon electrode exhibited a high physical stability within 30 cycles, a good linearity between current and concentration from 1 × 10−8 to 1 × 10−6 M for Cu2+ and from 2 × 10−8 to 1 × 10−6 M for Pb2+ with detection limits of 6 × 10−9 M and 4 × 10−9 M, respectively.1453.3 Gas adsorption and separationAir quality control technologies usually use microporous carbon adsorbents to remove volatile organic chemicals from contaminated gas streams. In addition to the specific surface area, pore size distribution, and surface functional groups of the adsorbent, the chemical properties of the adsorbate such as polarity also strongly influence the adsorption process. Nitrogen-containing porous carbons show excellent adsorption properties for polar or acidic gas molecules.3.3.1 Formaldehyde adsorption. Formaldehyde is one of the main pollutants in indoor air, mainly coming from decorating materials. Although its concentration is commonly relatively low (<20 ppm), it can cause symptoms. Therefore, it is necessary to take effective measures to remove it.The adsorption of formaldehyde on porous carbon depends on the interactions between formaldehyde and the amino groups on its surface. The adsorbed amount of formaldehyde increases with increasing introduced amino groups.146,147 In the presence of water, the adsorption capacity of a porous carbon for formaldehyde is firmly related to the density of its surface basic functional groups.148Polyacrylonitrile-based activated carbon fibers show a high adsorption capacity for formaldehyde.149 For example, electrospun polyacrylonitrile-based activated carbon nanofibers with shallow microporosity and nitrogen-containing functional groups provided highly efficient adsorption sites, which could preferentially adsorb formaldehyde in a humid environment. Theier adsorption capacity for formaldehyde reached 0.48 mmol g−1 (relative humidity, 50%; formaldehyde concentration, 11 ppm; breakthrough time, 630 min).74Rayon-based activated carbon fibers modified with NH2-containing P-aminobenzoic acid resulted in a significant increase in the adsorption capacity (10 mmol g−1) and an elongation of the breakthrough time (600 min) for removing formaldehyde.1503.3.2 H2S adsorption. Porous carbon for the adsorption of H2S or for the selective oxidation of H2S to sulfur is highly dependent on its porosity and surface basicity and the structure of the polymer precursor used for grafting.151 Incorporation of nitrogen into the porous carbon enhances its surface basicity. This favors the dissociation of H2S, the attraction of HS− ions via electrostatic interactions152 and the oxidation of H2S in the presence of water.1533.3.3 Gas separation. Nitrogen-containing porous carbon membranes display excellent gas separation properties. It has been shown that activation of porous carbon with ammonia is a unique method to improve the separation performance of ordered mesoporous carbon membranes. The increase in their porosity and the functionalization of their surface resulted in the improvement of their gas permeance for selective separation of C3H6/N2 and CO2/N2. In some cases, the selectivity increased by a factor of 2.33 Very recently, Dai et al. prepared a new type of nitrogen-rich carbon with slit-like pores and specific surface areas of more than 500 m2 g−1 by changing the carbonization temperature and content of ionic liquids containing a cross-linkable anion. It exhibits high adsorption capacity for CO2 and selectivity for CO2/N2 separation.1543.3.4 NO2 adsorption. Nowicki and Pietrzak reported that the adsorption capacity of NO2 on nitrogen-rich porous carbons obtained from sub-bituminous coal by ammoxidation at 350 °C reached 66.8 mg g−1.155 Deliyanni and Bandosz prepared a nitrogen-containing carbon material by modifying wood-based activated carbon with dimethylamine,156 in which nitrogen hydrogen-bonds to oxygen-containing groups. This material shows increased NO2 adsorption capacity and decreased NO emission.3.3.5 Adsorption desulfurization. Nitrogen-containing groups in porous carbon could promote the chemical transformation (oxidation) of dibenzothiophene and 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene in simulated diesel and improve the role of the oxygen of the surface groups in the reactive adsorption.157 Introduction of imide groups to activated carbon fiber enhances its adsorption capacity for CS2 molecules at ambient temperature, and the value reached 40 mmol g−1.158Begin et al. found that the pyridinic and pyrridonic–pyrrolic groups are sited at the edges of the graphene layers. These nitrogen-containing groups are responsible for the basic character of polyacrylonitrile-based porous carbon. Its SO2 adsorption capacity in the initial stage is proportional to the atomic percentage of these two types of basic nitrogen species, but is not correlated with its pore volume despite the fact that the amount of adsorbed SO2 increases with increasing micropore volume at high nitrogen concentration.1593.3.6 H2O adsorption. The presence of nitride-like species, aromatic N-imines or chemisorbed nitrogen oxides in activated carbon fibers was found to favor the adsorption of water vapor or benzene. The quaternary nitrogen also has a higher affinity towards H2O molecules,160 but this is not true for pyridine-N groups.1613.4 CO2 captureReduction of the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is currently a hot topic because CO2 is considered to be a severe greenhouse gas.162,163 In addition, a high concentration of CO2 is harmful to humans, especially in space-limited chambers like submarines and space ships. Capture and storage of CO2 from the flue exhausts of power plants, being a major source of CO2 emissions, has received much attention during the past decade due to the global warming issue.Among the conventional methods of cryogenic distillation, chemical solvent scrubbing and adsorption, separation processes based on solid adsorbents are considered to be one of the most efficient approaches in terms of both cost and recycling performance. In this context, a number of structurally different porous solids such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), porous silicas, zeolites and porous carbons have been used as CO2 adsorbents. Both the texture and surface chemical properties of the adsorbents influence thier CO2 capture performance.It has been shown that the adsorption of acidic CO2 gas can be enhanced by introducing basic functionalities in the absorbents, and that amino groups contribute significantly to the high capacity for CO2 due to their favored interactions.164Nitrogen-rich hierarchically structured porous carbon is a potential candidate for CO2 capture because of its easy handling, abundant basic sites (interacting with CO2 molecules), shape-selectivity, high surface area (micropores), easy mass transfer to the adsorption sites (mesopores), and reduced pressure drop (macropores).165 Some nitrogen-containing porous carbons used for CO2 adsorption in the literature were listed in Table 3.
Table 3 CO2 adsorption capacities of some nitrogen-containing porous carbons at 25 °C and 1 atm

Carbon and nitrogen precursorsNitrogen content (wt%)Nitrogen groupsCapacity (mmol g−1)Ref.Melamine-formaldehyde3.15C–NC, pyrrole, pyridine, oxidized N2.25166Carboxylic acid derived carbon and grafting tris(2-aminoethyl)amine10.75NH2, C–N, CONH4.10167Phenol-formaldehyde and basic amino acid1.91NH, CH2–NH–CH23.13168EDA and CTC17.8C–N, N–H2.90169Polyacrylonitrile8.3NH, C–NC4.5073Yeast5.3C–NH–C, C–NC, –NH4.76170Ammonia modified activated carbon4.6NH1.71171Pevida and coworkers prepared a series of highly porous carbons from melamine-formaldehyde resins with fumed silicas having pore sizes of 7 nm and 14 nm as templates. These porous carbons have high nitrogen contents. The carbonization temperature during the synthesis step controls the amount of nitrogen functional groups. An increase in carbonization temperature led to a decrease in triazine nitrogen groups, which was suggested to account for the decreased CO2 affinity.166Zhao et al. reported that amine-rich carbonaceous materials derived from glucose showed a very high CO2 uptake, reaching 4.1 mmol g−1 at 25 °C and 1 atm. Since these carbon materials have low specific surface areas (<10 m2 g−1) and no microporosity, the high CO2 uptake is thus attributed to the large amount of grafted oligoamine moieties. After the sample was stored for 14 months, the CO2 uptake reduced by 10–15%.167In the case of separation of nitrogen from CO2, a large pore volume is beneficial because it increases nitrogen adsorption and presumably also adsorption rate, while high amino group density increases CO2 adsorption capacity. The high selectivity is due to both the amino group density and the intrinsic pore size of the nitrogen-containing molecular cage structure.172–174Sevilla et al. synthesized highly porous N-doped carbons using KOH as the activating agent and polypyrrole as the carbon precursor. This material is characterized by two virtues: (1) the presence of a large number of nitrogen functional groups (the N content reaches 10.1 wt%), most of which are pyridonic-N species with a small proportion of pyridinic-N species; (2) narrower micropore sizes. As a consequence, it shows a high CO2 adsorption rate (95% CO2 uptake in 2 min) and a high adsorptive selectivity (CO2/N2 = 12) for CO2. It can also be easily regenerated.175 The physical adsorption capacity for CO2 markedly decreases with increasing temperature. Therefore, the chemical adsorption of CO2 plays a main role at high temperature. In terms of structural stability, recyclability and fabricability, nitrogen-containing porous carbons, especially synthetic polymer-based carbons, are promising for application in CO2 capture in industry.3.5 Hydrogen storagePorous carbon materials as hydrogen storage materials have received much attention because of their attractive adsorption properties resulting from their large surface area, micropore structure and low mass density.176 However, the adsorption capacity for hydrogen was not determined by the surface area and pore volume, but by the pore structure at low operation temperature (−196 °C). Compared to the textural properties of porous carbons, the nitrogen content has a minor effect on the adsorption of hydrogen.59,177,178–183 Regardless of this, N-doping could be beneficial at low coverage (low hydrogen uptake) but detrimental at high coverage (high hydrogen uptake).184 Introduction of nitrogen into carbon materials altered their electronic properties. The nitrogen-containing functional groups on the surface were involved in the electrochemical adsorption process (at 35 °C).177,180,181,183 Zhu et al. predicted that nitrogen might attract the electrons of the neighboring carbon atoms, making them electron deficient, and consequently capable of adsorbing hydrogen at the optimum N/C ratio. However, at high nitrogen content, nitrogen would have a negative effect on the hydrogen adsorption due to the increase in electron-rich sites.144 Nevertheless, when nickel existed with nitrogen, the hydrogen storage capacity was impaired in the electrosorption process.1803.6 Catalytic reactionThe development of new basic solid materials is a rapidly expanding area, as base-catalyzed reactions are of increasing interest in both academic and industrial applications. In heterogeneous catalysis, the introduction of nitrogen into the graphitic structure of carbon materials induces basic surface properties.185,186 The nitrogen-containing groups on the surface of porous carbons played an important role in catalyzing reactions or in increasing the dispersion of active components/promoters, and thus, the activity.As a catalyst support, nitrogen-containing porous carbon could provide basic sites, and consequently improve the dispersion of catalyst particles and enhance the interactions of the support and catalyst particles. Meanwhile, the textural features (pore structure and nitrogen in carbon skeleton) also played an important role in the catalysis reaction. The performances of some nitrogen-containing porous carbons as catalysts or catalyst supports reported in the literature are listed in Table 4.
Table 4 Properties of N-enriched carbon materials as catalysts or catalyst supports in the literaturea

Catalyst/catalyst supportN content (wt%)N groupsCatalytic reactionProperties of catalyst/catalyst supportRef.a Note: N-Q, N-5, N-6 and N-O represent quaternary-N, pyrrolic-N, pyridinic-N and pyridine-N-oxide, respectively.Nickel on nitrogen-doped carbon nanospheres3.0–3.9N-4Butyronitrile hydrogenationNickel deposited on nitrogen-doped surfaces, delivered higher reaction rates by weakening the adsorption strength of the CN group187N-5N-6N-OPorous carbons impregnating m-phenylenediamine3.1–5.2N-4NO reduction with NH3Impregnated nitrogen atoms promoting adsorption of NO and activating the adsorbed species17N-5N-6N-OPt nanoparticles on carbon nitride nanotubes16.1NHCyclohexene hydrogenationMostly Pt with better dispersion at the outside wall188C–NCNPt on nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanospheres4C–NOxygen reduction, methanol oxidationHigh dispersion of small Pt nanoparticles189N-QN-5N-6OC–NPalladium on porous carbon modified by diethylamine1.0–1.6NH2Hydrogen oxidationHighest palladium dispersion190N-O amide amineAmine-functionalized carbon materials5.2–6.8NH2 CNH C–NKnoevenagel condensationTextural features and surface basic properties191Mesoporous g-C3N460C–N CN–CPhotochemical reduction of waterLarge surface, semiconductor characteristics, enhancing the light harvesting ability192 and 193Mesoporous carbon nitride33CN–CTransesterification of β-keto estersProviding basicity and highly stable194sp2 C–NPd@Carbon nitride60C–N CN–CPhenol hydrogenationSemiconductor–metal heterojunction, stable and uniform dispersion of Pd195Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes2.6N-4Oxidation of H2SHigh surface area, good thermal conductivity, active nitrogen sites promoting activated oxygen species formation196N-5N-6N-O4. Summary and perspectivesThe nitrogenation of porous carbons affected not only their surface chemical nature but also their pore structure. The degree of influence depends on the initial porous carbon, the chemical agent, and the experimental method used. Meanwhile, the nitrogen-containing groups are usually unstable and distributed on the surface of porous carbon by the post treatment. Despite the wide difference in size, surface charge and polarity, nitrogenated porous carbons generally possess higher adsorption capacities for acid gases and metal ions than the pure products. For amine-modified solids, the main drawback is the possible loss of ammonia associated with the temperature needed for regeneration and the energy-intensive nature of the regeneration process.197 Incorporation of nitrogen into the carbon framework results in an increase in stability of the adsorbents in terms of volatile and thermal loss of nitrogen, and the nitrogen in a uniform distribution of nitrogen atoms in the bulk carbon materials, but also ensures improved adsorption/absorption for acidic gases.13,19 The surface area and nitrogen content of a carbon matrix are determined by the conditions employed in the carbonization process.162,198,199From a practical point of view, two of the biggest challenges for CO2 absorption nowadays are: (1) how to selectively absorb CO2 from a flow mixture of different gases; (2) how to absorb CO2 at a relatively high temperature. It is common that the generated waste gas mixture in industry is at high temperature, and it is very complicated and not practical if the temperature of the gas mixture needs to be significantly lowered before CO2 absorption treatment.Synthesis of hierarchical nitrogen-containing porous carbon materials is another exciting research area owing to the application potential in adsorption, catalysis, separation technology, and energy storage and conversion. In the adsorption processes, the high selectivity and adsorption capacity are two important issues for nitrogen-containing porous carbons. The pore structure and surface chemical groups are related to their properties. Therefore, how to control the kinds and amounts of nitrogen functional groups is the primary task in the synthesis of porous carbons.In electronic applications, a suitable distribution of pore sizes from micropores (<2 nm) to mesopores (2–50 nm) for a given surface area can provide high capacitance values because the opened mesopores can enhance the diffusion of ions to the active surface. Nitrogen atoms incorporated into a carbon matrix also enhance its conductivity, which makes the interfacial charge transfer easier. At the same time, some reductive nitrogen groups anchored on the porous carbon surface improve its wettability and produce pseudocapacitance or electrocatalytic sites for ORR in fuel cells. N-doped porous carbons exhibit higher electrocatalytic activity, higher stability and stronger CO tolerance, compared to conventional platinum catalysts for oxygen reduction reactions,27,200 showing great prospects for use in fuel cells as a substitute for noble metals.As for catalysts and catalyst supports, the special nitrogen-containing groups are responsible for their selectivity and catalytic activity. Hierarchical porous carbons with high nitrogen contents are particularly attractive in catalysis and adsorption, due to their relatively large surface areas, low diffusion resistance and fast mass transfer, and consequently, improvement of their activities and selectivities.201 From a catalytic point of view, rich active sites are of extreme importance. This means that high nitrogen-doping levels are desired. Thus, the synthesis of nitrogen-containing porous carbons with controllable pore structure and adjustable nitrogen groups through self-assembly and carbonization of appropriate carbon precursors is an effective approach. We think that the general procedures and principles for preparing nitrogen-containing carbons and their applications reviewed in this article may provide readers with the necessary background and ideas to develop more effective fabrication methods and explore more uses by systematically studying their physicochemical properties.AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this work by the National Basic Research Program of China (nos 2011CB201403 and 2012CB626806) and the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (2011DFA51980).ReferencesS. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2001, 412, 169 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Liang, Z. J. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wan, Y. F. Shi and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 932 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Yang, Adsorbents: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  2003 Search PubMed .Y. Wan, H. F. Yang and D. Y. Zhao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 423 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Barton, M. J. B. Evans, E. Halliop and J. A. F. MacDonald, Carbon, 1997, 35, 1361 CrossRef CAS .C. O. Ania, J. B. Parra and J. J. Pis, Adsorpt. Sci. Technol., 2004, 22, 337 Search PubMed .M. A. Montes-Morán, D. Suárez, J. A. Menéndez and E. Fuente, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1219 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Jia, B. Xiao and K. M. Thomas, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 470 CrossRef CAS .M. F. R. Pereira, S. F. Soares, J. J. M. Orfoa and J. L. Figueiredo, Carbon, 2003, 41, 811 Search PubMed .Y. El-Sayed and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3213 CrossRef CAS .W. Shen, Z. Li and Y. Liu, Recent Pat. Chem. Eng., 2008, 1, 27 Search PubMed .J. R. Pels, F. Kapteijn, J. A. Moulijn, Q. Zhu and K. M. Thomas, Carbon, 1995, 33, 1641 CrossRef CAS .M. Abe, K. Kawashima, K. Kozawa, H. Sakai and K. Kaneko, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5059 CrossRef .R. Pietrzak, Fuel, 2009, 88, 1871 CrossRef CAS .T. Otowa, Y. Nojima and T. Miyazaki, Carbon, 1997, 35, 1315 CrossRef .M. C. Huang and H. Teng, Carbon, 2003, 41, 951 CrossRef CAS .E. Raymundo-Pinero, D. Cazorla-Amoros and A. Linares-Solano, Carbon, 2003, 41, 1925 CrossRef CAS .A. Bagreev, J. A. Menendez, I. Dukhno, Y. Tarasenko and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2004, 42, 469 CrossRef CAS .J. Ozaki, S. Tanifuji, N. Kimura, A. Furuichi and A. Oya, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1324 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Meier, R. Andrews, D. Jacques, K. B. Cassity and D. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4143 RSC .J. L. Delgado, M. A. Herranz and N. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1417 RSC .J. Lahaye, G. Nanse, A. Bagreev and V. Strelko, Carbon, 1999, 37, 585 CrossRef .K. Jurewicz, K. Babeł, A. Ziółkowski, H. Wachowska and M. Kozłowski, Fuel Process. Technol., 2002, 77–78, 191 CrossRef CAS .K. Jurewicz, K. Babeł, A. Ziółkowski and H. Wachowska, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1491 CrossRef CAS .K. Jurewicz, K. Babeł, A. Ziółkowski and H. Wachowska, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 269 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS .X. Q. Wang, J. S. Lee, Q. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Wang and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2178 CrossRef CAS .D. Hulicowa, J. Yamashita, Y. Soneda, H. Hatori and M. Kodama, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1241 CrossRef CAS .F. Béguin, K. Szostak, G. Lota and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2380 CrossRef CAS .D. Hulicowa, M. Kodama and H. Hatori, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2318 CrossRef CAS .W. Li, D. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Shi, Y. Wan, J. Huang, J. Yang, D. Zhao and Z. Jiang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 569 .S. M. Mahurin, J. S. Lee, X. Wang and S. Dai, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 368, 41 CrossRef CAS .F. Stoeckli, T. A. Centeno, A. B. Fuertes and J. Muñiz, Carbon, 1996, 34, 1201 CrossRef CAS .M. C. B. López, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2000, 34, 171 CrossRef CAS .P. J. M. Carrott, J. M. V. Nabais, M. M. L. R. Carrott and J. A. Pajares, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1543 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Mangun, K. R. Benak, J. Economy and K. L. Foster, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1809 CrossRef CAS .C. U. Pittman, Jr, G. R. He, B. Wu and S. D. Gardner, Carbon, 1997, 35, 317 CrossRef CAS .N. Alexeyeva, E. Shulga, V. Kisand, I. Kink and K. Tammeveski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 648, 169 CrossRef CAS .E. Raymundo-Piñero, D. Cazorla-Amorós, A. Linares-Solano, J. Find, U. Wild and R. Schlögl, Carbon, 2002, 40, 597 CrossRef CAS .J. Machnikowski, B. Grzyb, J. V. Weber, E. Frackowiak, J. N. Rouzaud and F. Béguin, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 423 CrossRef CAS .D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Seredych, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 438 CrossRef CAS .J. Rivera-Utrilla, M. Sanchez-Polo, V. Gomez-Serrano, P. M. Alvarez, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz and J. M. Dias, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 187, 1 Search PubMed .B. Stohr, H. P. Boehm and R. Schlogl, Carbon, 1991, 29, 707 CrossRef .H. P. Boehm, G. Mair, T. Stoehr, A. R. de Rincon and B. Tereczki, Fuel, 1984, 63, 1061 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Shafeeyan and W. M. A. W. Daud, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2010, 89, 143 Search PubMed .J. Zawadzki and M. Wiśniewski, Carbon, 2003, 41, 2257 CrossRef CAS .D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Kodama, S. Shiraishi, H. Hatori, Z. H. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1800 CrossRef CAS .R. Pietrzak, H. Wachowska, P. Nowicki and K. Babel, Fuel Process. Technol., 2007, 88, 409 Search PubMed .R. Pietrzak, H. Wachowska and P. Nowicki, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 1275 CrossRef CAS .R. Pietrzak, K. Jurewicz, P. Nowicki, K. Babeł and H. Wachowska, Fuel, 2010, 89, 3457 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3412 RSC .V. A. Likholobov, L. G. P'yanova, A. I. Boronin, S. V. Koshcheev, A. N. Salanov, O. N. Baklanova, O. A. Knyazheva and A. V. Veselovskaya, Prot. Met. Phys. Chem. Surf., 2011, 47, 181 Search PubMed .M. Longhi, V. Bertacche, C. L. Bianchi and L. Formaro, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4130 CrossRef CAS .P. Nowicki, R. Pietrzak and H. Wachowska, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2205 Search PubMed .C. M. Yang, C. Weidenthaler, B. Spliethoff, M. Mayanna and F. Schueth, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 355 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Fuertes and T. A. Centeno, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1079 RSC .M. Lezanska, J. Wloch and J. Kornatowski, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2008, 174B, 945 Search PubMed .Z. Yang, Y. Xia, X. Sun and R. Mokaya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18424 CrossRef CAS .N. Liu, L. Yin, C. Wang, L. Zhang, N. Lun, D. Xiang, Y. Qi and R. Gao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3579 CrossRef CAS .S. Shrestha and W. E. Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1665 CrossRef CAS .R. Gadiou, A. Didion, R. I. Gearba, D. A. Ivanov, I. Czekaj, R. Kötz and C. Vix-Guterla, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 1808 CrossRef CAS .M. Lezanska, P. Pietrzyk and Z. Sojka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1208 CrossRef CAS .M. Kruk, B. Dufour, E. B. Celer, T. Kowalewski, M. Jaroniec and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9216 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia and R. Mokaya, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1553 CrossRef CAS .A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 816 CrossRef CAS .A. Vinu, P. Srinivasu, D. P. Sawant, T. Mori, K. Ariga, J. S. Chang and S. H. Jhung, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4367 CrossRef CAS .S. Hwang, S. Lee and J. S. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 5656 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Su, T. H. Ko and J. H. Lin, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 108, 3610 Search PubMed .W. Shen, S. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14036 RSC .E. J. Ra, E. Raymundo-Pinero and Y. H. Lee, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2984 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Boudou, Ph. Parent, F. Suárez-García, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2452 CrossRef CAS .A. Castro-Muniz, F. Suárez-García, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 361, 307 Search PubMed .K. J. Lee, N. Shiratori, G. H. Lee, J. Miyawaki, I. Mochida, S. H. Yoon and J. Jang, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4248 CrossRef CAS .L. Ji, A. J. Medford and X. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2009, 47, 493 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, X. Li, C. Wang, S. Fu, Y. Liu and C. Shao, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2009, 294, 673 CrossRef CAS .M. A. A. Zainia, Y. Amano and M. Machida, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 552 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Miller, J. R. Holst and E. G. Gillan, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 2767 CrossRef CAS .M. Inagaki, T. Morishita, A. Kuno, T. Kito, M. Hirano, T. Suwa and K. Kusakawa, Carbon, 2004, 42, 497 CrossRef CAS .C. Qin, X. Lu, G. Yin, Z. Jin, Q. Tan and X. Bai, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 126, 453 Search PubMed .T. Takeichi, Y. Yamazaki, M. Zuo, A. I. A. Matsumoto and M. Inagaki, Carbon, 2001, 39, 257 CrossRef CAS .R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645 RSC .J. Machnikowski, B. Grzyb, H. Machnikowska and J. V. Weber, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 82, 113 Search PubMed .H. C. Huang, D. Q. Ye and B. C. Huang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 9533 Search PubMed .M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103 RSC .L. Lai, G. Huang, X. Wang and J. Weng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3145 CrossRef CAS .N. Baccile, G. Laurent, C. Coelho, F. Babonneau, L. Zhao and M. M. Titirici, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8976 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, N. Baccile, S. Gross, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3778 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, R. Crombez, F. P. Caballero, M. Antonietti, J. Texter and M. M. Titirici, Polymer, 2010, 51, 4540 CrossRef CAS .S. Kundu, W. Xia, W. Busser, M. Becker, D. A. Schmidt, M. Havenith and M. Muhler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4351 RSC .Q. Zhu, S. L. Money, A. E. Russell and K. M. Thomas, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 2149 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Jones, Q. Zhu and K. M. Thomas, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1123 Search PubMed .H. Schmiers, J. Friebel, P. Streubel, R. Hesse and R. Köpsel, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1965 CrossRef CAS .K. Laszlo, E. Tombacz and K. Josepovits, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1217 CrossRef CAS .B. Xiao, J. P. Boudou and K. M. Thomas, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3400 Search PubMed .M. Perez-Cadenas, C. Moreno-Castilla, F. Carrasco-Marın and A. F. Perez-Cadenas, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 466 CrossRef CAS .H. F. Gorgulho, F. Gonçalves, M. F. R. Pereira and J. L. Figueiredo, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2032 Search PubMed .M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1475 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Figueiredo and M. F. R. Pereira, Catal. Today, 2010, 41, 35 Search PubMed .J. Przepiorski, M. Skrodzewicz and A. W. Morawski, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 225, 235 CrossRef .A. W. Chen, F. S. Cannon and J. R. Rangel-Mendez, Carbon, 2005, 43, 581 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Stavropoulos, P. Samaras and G. P. Sakellaropoulos, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 151, 414 Search PubMed .A. Bagreev, J. A. Menendez, I. Dukhno, Y. Tarasenko and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2005, 43, 208 Search PubMed .J. Rivera-Utrilla, M. Sanchez-Polo, V. Gomez-Serrano, P. M. Alvarez, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz and J. M. Dias, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 187, 1 Search PubMed .A. D. Budaeva and E. V. Zoltoev, Fuel, 2010, 89, 2623 CrossRef CAS .B. Xiao and K. M. Thomas, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3892 Search PubMed .H. Yoon, S. Ko and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1468 RSC .B. Choi, H. Yoon, I. S. Park, J. Jang and Y. E. Sung, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2496 CrossRef CAS .K. Y. Shin, J. Y. Hong and J. Jang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 190, 36 Search PubMed .H. Yoon and J. Jang, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11484 Search PubMed .H. Yoon and J. Jang, Small, 2005, 1, 1195 CrossRef CAS .R. Ansari and N. K. Fahim, React. Funct. Polym., 2007, 67, 367 CrossRef CAS .E. Lorenc-Grabowska, G. Gryglewicz and J. Machnikowski, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 4480 Search PubMed .J. Przepiórski, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, B135, 453 Search PubMed .C. Liu, X. Liang, X. Liu, Q. Wang, L. Zhan, R. Zhang, W. Qiao and L. Ling, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 6701 Search PubMed .B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors, Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .E. Raymundo-Piñero, K. Kierzek, J. Machnikowski and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2498 CrossRef CAS .J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760 CrossRef CAS .E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Hsieh and H. Teng, Carbon, 2002, 40, 667 CrossRef CAS .G. Lota, B. Grzyb, H. Machnikowska, J. Machnikowski and E. Frackowiak, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 53 CrossRef CAS .E. Frackowiak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1774 RSC .K. Y. Kang, S. J. Hong, B. I. Lee and J. S. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1105 Search PubMed .C. Vagner, G. Finqueneisel, T. Zimmy, P. Burg, B. Grzyb, J. Machnikowski and J. V. Weber, Carbon, 2003, 41, 2847 Search PubMed .J. P. Paraknowitsch, J. Zhang, D. Su, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 87 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kim, I. Y. Jang, K. C. Park, Y. C. Jung, T. Oka, S. Iinou, Y. Komori, T. Kozutsumi, T. Hashiba, Y. A. Kim and M. Endo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhao, Z. Jiang, W. Li, D. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Shi, Y. Wan and G. Wang, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1757 CrossRef CAS .F. Beguin, C. O. Ania, V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Pinero and J. B. Parra, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1828 CrossRef CAS .J. Jiang, Q. Gao, K. Xia and J. Hu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 118, 28 CrossRef CAS .K. Jurewicz, R. Pietrzak, P. Nowicki and H. Wachowska, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5469 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kim, Y. Abe, T. Yanagiura, K. C. Park, M. Shimizu, T. Iwazaki, S. Nakagawa, M. Endo and M. S. Dresselhaus, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2116 CrossRef CAS .F. Su, C. K. Poh, J. S. Chen, G. Xu, D. Wang, Q. Li, J. Lin and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 717 RSC .X. Yang, D. Wu, X. Chen and R. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8581 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, Q. Gao and J. Hu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 131, 89 CrossRef CAS .J. I. Kim and S. J. Park, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 2184 Search PubMed .W. Kim, M. Y. Kang, J. B. Joo, N. D. Kim, I. K. Song, P. Kim, J. R. Yoon and J. Yi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2125 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202 CrossRef CAS .K. K. R. Datta, V. V. Balasubramanian, K. Ariga, T. Mori and A. Vinu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3390 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Hsieh, H. Teng, W. Y. Chen and Y. S. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4219 Search PubMed .Z. Shi, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Wang and D. Wilkinson, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 1905 CrossRef CAS .J. Ozaki, N. Kimura, T. Anahara and A. Oya, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1847 CrossRef CAS .Y. H. Lee, Y. F. Lee, K. H. Chang and C. C. Hu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 50 CrossRef CAS .R. Jia, J. Chen, J. Zhao, J. Zheng, C. Song, L. Li and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10829 RSC .Z. H. Zhu, H. Hatori, S. B. Wang and G. Q. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16744 CrossRef CAS .Z. Guo, S. Li, X. Liu, Y. P. Gao, W. W. Zhang and X. P. Ding, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 128, 238 Search PubMed .S. Tanada, N. Kawasaki, T. Nakamura, M. Araki and M. Isomura, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 214, 106 Search PubMed .R. Rivelino, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 161 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Carter, L. E. Katz, G. E. Speitel, Jr and D. Ramirez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 6498 Search PubMed .Y. Song, W. Qiao, S. H. Yoon, I. Mochida, Q. Guo and L. Liu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 106, 2151 CrossRef CAS .H. Rong, Z. Liu, Q. Wu, D. Pan and J. Zheng, Cellulose, 2010, 17, 205 Search PubMed .T. J. Bandosz, M. Seredych, J. Allen, J. Wood and E. Rosenberg, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2500 Search PubMed .M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 946 Search PubMed .M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4704 Search PubMed .P. F. Fulvio, J. S. Lee, R. T. Mayes, X. Wang, S. M. Mahurin and S. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13486 RSC .P. Nowicki and R. Pietrzak, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 166, 1039 Search PubMed .E. Deliyanni and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1837 CrossRef CAS .M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 227 Search PubMed .W. Shen, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Guo and Y. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 308, 20 Search PubMed .B. Grzyb, A. Albiniak, E. Broniek, G. Furdin, J. F. Mareche and D. Begin, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 118, 163 Search PubMed .P. X. Hou, H. Orikasa, T. Yamazaki, K. Matsuoka, A. Tomita, N. Setoyama, Y. Fukushima and T. Kyotani, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5187 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Chiang, C. Y. Lee and H. C. Lee, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 101, 199 CrossRef CAS .A. Douglas and R. Costas, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2005, 40, 321 CrossRef CAS .C. Azar, K. Lindgren, E. Larson and K. Mollersten, Clim. Change, 2006, 74, 47 CrossRef CAS .A. Arnone, Nature, 1974, 247, 143 Search PubMed .G. Hao, W. Li and A. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6447 RSC .C. Pevida, T. C. Drage and C. E. Snape, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1464 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, Z. Bacsik, N. Hedin, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 840 CrossRef CAS .G. Hao, W. Li, D. Qian and A. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 853 CrossRef CAS .Q. Li, J. Yang, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Q. Wu, S. S. Park, C. S. Ha and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 632 CrossRef CAS .W. Shen, Y. He, J. Li, S. Zhang and W. Fan, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1274 Search PubMed .M. S. Shafeeyan, W. M. A. W. Daud, A. Houshmand and A. Shamiri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3936 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jin, B. A. Voss, A. Jin, H. Long, R. D. Noble and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6650 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jin, B. A. Voss, R. D. Noble and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6348 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jin, B. A. Voss, R. McCaffrey, C. T. Baggett, R. D. Noble and W. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 874 RSC .M. Sevilla, P. Valle-Vigón and A. B. Fuertes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2781 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Thomas, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 389 CrossRef CAS .S. Giraudet, Z. Zhu, X. Yao and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8639 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia, R. Mokaya, D. M. Grant and G. S. Walker, Carbon, 2011, 49, 844 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zheng, Q. Gao and J. Jiang, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2968 CrossRef CAS .S. Giraudet and Z. Zhu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 398 Search PubMed .K. Y. Kang, B. I. Lee and J. S. Lee, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1171 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia, G. S. Walker, D. M. Grant and R. Mokaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16493 CrossRef CAS .J. Germain, J. M. J. Frechet and F. Svec, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4989 RSC .Y. Xia, G. S. Walker, D. M. Grant and R. Mokaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16493 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Fraile, J. I. Garcıa and J. A. Mayoral, Catal. Today, 2000, 57, 3 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ono, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 406 CrossRef CAS .A. Nieto-Márquez, D. Toledano, P. Sánchez, A. Romero and J. L. Valverde, J. Catal., 2010, 269, 242 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Bian, Z. Ma and W. G. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8668 CrossRef CAS .F. Su, Z. Tian, C. K. Poh, Z. Wang, S. H. Lim, Z. Liu and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 832 CrossRef CAS .V. Z. Radkevich, T. L. Senko, K. Wilson, L. M. Grishenko, A. N. Zaderko and V. Y. Diyuk, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 335, 241 CrossRef .R. M. Freire, A. H. Morais Batista, A. G. Souza Filho, J. M. Filho, G. D. Saraiva and A. C. Oliveira, Catal. Lett., 2009, 131, 135 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680 CrossRef CAS .X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76 CrossRef CAS .X. Jin, V. V. Balasubramanian, S. T. Selvan, D. P. Sawant, M. A. Chari, G. Q. Lu and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7884 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, J. Yao, H. Li, D. Su and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2362 CrossRef CAS .K. Chizari, A. Deneuve, O. Ersen, I. Florea, Y. Liu, D. Edouard, I. Janowska, D. Begin and C. Pham-Huu, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 102 CrossRef CAS .J. K. You, H. Park, S. H. Yang, W. H. Hong, W. Shin, J. K. Kang, K. B. Yi and J. N. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 4223 CrossRef CAS .C. Weidenthaler, A. H. Lu, W. Schmidt and F. Schuth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88, 238 Search PubMed .B. Su, X. S. Zhao, L. Lv and Z. Zhou, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2821 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tang, B. L. Allen, D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13200 CrossRef CAS .C. Song, J. Du, J. Zhao, S. Feng, G. Du and Z. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1524 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Wenzhong Shen	Dr Wenzhong Shen obtained his Ph.D degree from the Institute of Coal Chemistry (ICC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Now he is an associate professor of ICC. His research activity is the synthesis of porous carbon materials, especially in the control of pore structure and design of surface properties.
Weibin Fan	Dr Weibin Fan acquired his Ph.D degree in the ICC of CAS in 1998. From 1999 to 2001, he conducted a postdoctoral fellowship in the Catholic University of Leuven of Belgium under the guidance of Profs. Robert A. Schoonheydt and Bert M. Weckhuysen. After that, he moved to Japan and joined Prof. Takashi Tatsumi's group. This is made possible by the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) and the Japan Agency of Science and Technology (JST). At the end of 2007, he returned to ICC and got a full professor position. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization and application of porous materials.

 	Fig. 1  Types of functional nitrogen-containing groups on the surface: (a) pyrrole, (b) primary amine, (c) secondary amine, (d) pyridine, (e) imine, (f) tertiary amine, (g) nitro, (h) nitroso, (i) amide, (j) pyridone, (k) pyridine-N-oxide and (l) quaternary nitrogen. Adapted with the permission of ref. 15. Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current and potential applications of nitrogen-containing porous carbons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme for the formation of lactams, imides, amides, and amines during the heat treatment of carbon materials with ammonia. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reaction scheme for conversion of chemisorbed oxygen (ether-like) into imine and pyridine surface groups in the reaction with ammonia. Adapted with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 1991, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme for the preparation of mesoporous CN with SBA-15 as template. Adapted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic structure of a mesoporous carbon nitride-based hybrid material. Adapted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Atomic structure of a single graphitic-C3N4 layer. Nitrogen atoms occupy two different types of positions in the layer, labeled α and β respectively in the figure. Adapted with the permission of ref. 68, Copyright 2007, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Possible evolution process of PAN fiber structure in the oxidation and steam activation. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

Ammonium humate based carbon	2.4	CN, C–N, N–H	Cu2+	0.54	105
Pb2+	0.27
PAN porous carbon	8.0	Pyridinic, pyridonic, indolic, pyrrolic	Cd2+	0.32	106
Hg2+	1.2
PAN activated carbon fiber	11	Pyrone, pyridinic, pyridonic	Cu2+	0.35	77
Pb2+	0.16
Commercial activated carbon	—	N–H, C–N, aromatic amine, cyclic amide	Phenol	24.4	114


Polyacrylonitrile	7.2	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	1 M H2SO4	201	121
1 M TEABF4	96
Melamine-formaldehyde	7	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	1 M EC–DMC–LiPF4	159	127
Acrylonitrile–propylene	6	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	1 M H2SO4	340	128
Ethylene diamine–carbon tetrachloride	0.7	N–H	6 M KOH	318	129
Urea–brown coal	0.2–5.6	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	6 M KOH	341	130
4 M H2SO4	300
Bombyx mori silk	17.5	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	1 M TEABF4–PC	41.5	131
Polypyrrole	4.3	N-Q, N-5, N-6	0.5 M H2SO4	240	132
Polyacrylonitrile	18.6	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	1 M H2SO4	210	133
Melamine polymer	∼24	N-Q, N-6, N-O	6 M KOH	84	31
1 M TEABF4–PC	37
1 M H2SO4	201
Melamine	12.7	N-Q, N-5, N-6, N-O	6 M KOH	280	48
1 M H2SO4	152
1 M TEABF4–PC	92

Melamine-formaldehyde	3.15	C–NC, pyrrole, pyridine, oxidized N	2.25	166
Carboxylic acid derived carbon and grafting tris(2-aminoethyl)amine	10.75	NH2, C–N, CONH	4.10	167
Phenol-formaldehyde and basic amino acid	1.91	NH, CH2–NH–CH2	3.13	168
EDA and CTC	17.8	C–N, N–H	2.90	169
Polyacrylonitrile	8.3	NH, C–NC	4.50	73
Yeast	5.3	C–NH–C, C–NC, –NH	4.76	170
Ammonia modified activated carbon	4.6	NH	1.71	171


Nickel on nitrogen-doped carbon nanospheres	3.0–3.9	N-4	Butyronitrile hydrogenation	Nickel deposited on nitrogen-doped surfaces, delivered higher reaction rates by weakening the adsorption strength of the CN group	187
N-5
N-6
N-O
Porous carbons impregnating m-phenylenediamine	3.1–5.2	N-4	NO reduction with NH3	Impregnated nitrogen atoms promoting adsorption of NO and activating the adsorbed species	17
N-5
N-6
N-O
Pt nanoparticles on carbon nitride nanotubes	16.1	NH	Cyclohexene hydrogenation	Mostly Pt with better dispersion at the outside wall	188
C–N
CN
Pt on nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanospheres	4	C–N	Oxygen reduction, methanol oxidation	High dispersion of small Pt nanoparticles	189
N-Q
N-5
N-6
OC–N
Palladium on porous carbon modified by diethylamine	1.0–1.6	NH2	Hydrogen oxidation	Highest palladium dispersion	190
N-O amide amine
Amine-functionalized carbon materials	5.2–6.8	NH2 CNH C–N	Knoevenagel condensation	Textural features and surface basic properties	191
Mesoporous g-C3N4	60	C–N CN–C	Photochemical reduction of water	Large surface, semiconductor characteristics, enhancing the light harvesting ability	192 and 193
Mesoporous carbon nitride	33	CN–C	Transesterification of β-keto esters	Providing basicity and highly stable	194
sp2 C–N
Pd@Carbon nitride	60	C–N CN–C	Phenol hydrogenation	Semiconductor–metal heterojunction, stable and uniform dispersion of Pd	195
Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes	2.6	N-4	Oxidation of H2S	High surface area, good thermal conductivity, active nitrogen sites promoting activated oxygen species formation	196
N-5
N-6
N-O

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
