Quantitative analysis of the factors limiting solar power transduction by Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 in biological photovoltaic devices   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02531G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02531G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4690-4698Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsQuantitative analysis of the factors limiting solar power transduction by Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 in biological photovoltaic devices†

        
          
            Paolo 
            Bombelli‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Robert W. 
            Bradley‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Amanda M. 
            Scott
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Philips
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alistair J. 
            McCormick
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sonia M. 
            Cruz
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Anderson
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kamran 
            Yunus
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Derek S. 
            Bendall
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Petra J. 
            Cameron
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Julia M. 
            Davies
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Alison G. 
            Smith
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Howe
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Adrian C. 
            Fisher
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, New Museums Site, Pembroke Street, Cambridge, CB2 3RA, United Kingdom
bDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Hopkins Building, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 1QW, United Kingdom. E-mail: ch26@cam.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)1223 333688
cDepartment of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 3EA, United Kingdom
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
Received 
      16th June 2011
    , Accepted 6th September 2011First published on 27th September 2011AbstractRecent advances in fuel cell (FC) and microbial fuel cell (MFC) research have demonstrated these electrochemical technologies as effective methods for generating electrical power from chemical fuels and organic compounds. This led to the development of MFC-inspired photovoltaic (BPV) devices that produce electrical power by harvesting solar energy through biological activities of photosynthetic organisms. We describe the fabrication of a BPV device with multiple microchannels. This allows a direct comparison between sub-cellular photosynthetic organelles and whole cells, and quantitative analysis of the parameters affecting power output. Electron transfer within the photosynthetic materials was studied using the metabolic inhibitors DCMU (3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea) and methyl viologen (1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride). These experiments suggest that the electrons that cause an increase in power upon illumination leave the photosynthetic electron transfer chain from the reducing end of photosystem I. Several key factors limiting performance efficiency, including density of the photosynthetic catalyst, electron carrier concentration, and light intensity were investigated.

Broader context
Microbial fuels cells have received increasing attention as possible sources of renewable energy. In principle, they rely on heterotrophic microorganisms metabolizing exogenous organic molecules and supplying electrons to an electrode, providing a source of electrical energy. Because of the need for exogenous metabolites (although these can be provided from waste materials) there has been increasing interest in the use of photosynthetic microorganisms in similar fuel cells. These organisms do not require an organic substrate and can use light energy to oxidize water and provide electrons, some of which may ultimately (and perhaps very indirectly) be lost from the cell to an external anode. Under dark conditions, the microorganisms may also provide electrons by metabolism of substrates within the cell. Fuel cells containing photosynthetic microorganisms are known as photosynthetic microbial fuel cells, biophotovoltaic devices, or BPVs. Power output from these devices is low, and a much better understanding of their functioning is needed in order to improve output. This paper describes the construction and use of a multi-channel BPV for the quantitative study of factors limiting power output. It also describes the use of inhibitors to investigate the original source within the photosynthetic electron transfer chain of light-dependent electrons.

Introduction
Providing sufficient energy for a growing world population is currently one of our greatest global challenges. Development of new technologies to exploit renewable sources of energy is vital for meeting future power demands. Within the more specific context of electricity production, several non-biological technologies have been developed, and two of these are closely related to BPV technology. Photovoltaic panels (PVs) harness solar light, and transduce it to electrical energy. Fuel cells (FCs) can be employed to generate electricity more efficiently from remaining traditional energy sources, or used with hydrogen to generate electricity with no greenhouse gas production.
Although PVs demonstrate high efficiencies of light energy conversion (up to 50% in the laboratory and ca. 10% for the majority of commercial silicon PVs),1 the fabrication and installation of PV solar farms is generally very expensive.2 Similarly, FCs show excellent fuel utilisation (up to 80% of energy conversion), but they frequently need to operate at elevated temperatures, require high-purity fuels, and employ expensive precious metal catalysts. Thus, high costs are a key obstacle to the wider utilisation of large scale PVs and FCs for power generation.
Recently, biological components have been introduced into FCs, giving rise to microbial fuel cells (MFCs).3 These bio-electrochemical devices can function at room temperature, consume organic compounds (including biological waste materials) as fuel, and catalyse the process of fuel oxidation using microbial organisms, which are comparatively inexpensive. More recent developments aim to operate MFCs as solar cells, integrating phototrophic biological components into the electrochemical apparatus to establish a new generation of solar cells: biological solar panels.4 These can be referred to as biological photovoltaic (or biophotovoltaic) devices (BPV). Although BPVs function similarly to MFCs, electrical energy is transduced from light energy by the light harvesting apparatus of photosynthetic organisms, instead of being produced by metabolising organic fuels.5–7

        BPV technology was initially established by combining photosynthetic hydrogen-evolving microbes with hydrogen FCs.8 This two-stage process was initiated through photo-production of hydrogen gas by algae, which was then utilised to generate electrical power in a FC device.9–11 Successive efforts have focused on the direct generation of photocurrent, and to this end BPV devices have been fabricated that incorporate various combinations of the components of photosynthesis, including photosynthetic pigments,12photosystem complexes13–16 and thylakoid membranes.17 Sub-cellular photosynthetic components are likely to be advantageous in terms of power output per unit volume compared to whole organisms, as fewer membrane barriers are present to inhibit electron transfer. However, once removed from their proper physiological context, sub-cellular systems can provide power for only a limited period of time, after which the performance of the photosynthetic material decays. Extended operating times can be achieved, but only through the use of techniques that protect the material but concurrently limit energy production.16
Early investigations into BPVs demonstrated a direct light-driven power output from whole photosynthetic organisms using intact cyanobacterial cells.18,19 Although these studies showed promise, the requirements of anaerobic conditions in the anode, oxygen enrichment at the cathode, and an applied bias potential limited the further exploitation of these devices. More recently, a nano-anode was inserted directly into the chloroplast stroma of a single, immobilized cell of the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to harvest electrons from the thylakoid membrane.20 Although this single cell technique is clearly an unsuitable strategy for scaling up, the investigation demonstrated a high current density (20 A m−2) and illustrated the potential performance of whole cells in BPV devices. With the focus on achieving durable and robust performance, BPVs based on multiple-cell systems, including cyanobacteria21,22 and more complex plants,23–25 have been shown capable of improved electrogenic activity.
Although significant progress has been made in the BPV field, the current literature is generally lacking quantitative data, and demonstrations of the principles of operation are limited to a particular setting. Furthermore, a molecular characterisation of the biological processes involved in light-dependent electron flow from the site of water photolysis to the exterior of the cell is still missing. This characterisation will be required for future optimisation of the efficiency of BPV devices. We report here the construction of a multi-channel micro-platform for studying BPV function. Our device is equipped with three independent channels that allow simultaneous generation of experimental replicates using minimal amounts of biological materials and reagents. We have used the device to compare quantitatively the behaviour of isolated plant thylakoids and intact cells of oxygenic photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria). We have studied the effects on power output of photosynthetic electron transfer chain (PETC) inhibitors and changes in key parameters in the device.
Results and discussion
Construction and operation of BPV device
The device described in this investigation operates as a microbial fuel cell, generating electrical power by harnessing the photosynthetic activity of biological material. The prototype device and its internal structure are described in Fig. 1a–c. The principal components for operation of the anodic half-cell are biological material able to harness light energy to perform water photolysis, an electron carrier (ferri/ferrocyanide, [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−) for shuttling electrons between the biological material and anode, and a light source. Although ferri/ferrocyanide would be unsuitable for large-scale, sustainable devices, its low cost, the fact that ferrocyanide is not oxidised by molecular oxygen to any significant extent, and its well-characterised properties make it suitable for use in an experimental device. The overall chemical reactions can be summarised in four steps (see below). However, it is likely that at least some of the electrons generated at the photosynthetic machinery are not lost directly through the cell surface, but passed through one or more intracellular intermediates (i.e. between steps 1 and 2).
 Fig. 1  
(a) Principles of operation of a BPV device. Within the anodic chamber (4) the photosynthetic material releases electrons as a consequence of photosynthetic and other metabolic activity. An electron carrier (5) shuttles these electrons from the photosynthetic material to the anode (3), Simultaneously, protons (H+) diffuse from the anodic chamber across the proton exchange membrane (7) into the cathodic membrane. After reaching the anode, electrons travel through an external load (8) to the cathode (5), where they are combined with oxygen and protons to re-form water. (b) Photograph of the actual device. (c) Exploded view of a BPV device. The upper clamp (2) permits light to enter the anodic chamber of the BPV. The lower clamp (9) has holes to allow oxygen to contact the cathode and water to escape. 
(1) Electron generation at the photosynthetic apparatus:

          2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
(2) Electron excretion at the cell surface:
4e− + 4[Fe(CN)6]3− → 4[Fe(CN)6]4−
(3) Electron transfer at the anode:

          4[Fe(CN)6]4− → 4[Fe(CN)6]3− + 4e−
(4) Electron transfer at the cathode:
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
The prototype biological photovoltaic cell described in this investigation has several advantages over previous experimental BPV devices:
(i) Previous devices generally operate using a “macro” anodic chamber (from 125 ml to 2 l), resulting in a large consumption of chemicals and biological material in each experiment.7,21,22,26 Our BPV device operates with just 150 μl in each channel, minimising the amount of materials needed. Additionally, having three independent channels facilitates performing multiple simultaneous experiments in order to make more accurate quantitative analyses.
(ii) Existing BPVs often require an input of extra energy in addition to light. These requirements include inert gas purging to keep the anodic chamber anoxic and/or oxygen gas purging in the cathodic chamber27,28 to facilitate the reformation of water, and in some cases a bias potential applied to polarise the electrodes and improve the electron flux between anode and cathode.7 In contrast, our device works without any additional energy supply, and the entire power output is solely a result of metabolic activity.
(iii) Finally, in previous publications, the devices are configured for investigating one type of biological material, such as subcellular photosynthetic membranes17,29 or whole cells.21,22,26 Our device allows us to carry out a direct comparison of both types of material (Fig. 2 and Table 1), and indeed different photosynthetic organisms (data not shown).
 Fig. 2  Representative power output traces from spinach thylakoid membranes (red line) and Synechocystis (black line). The blue line shows the power output of Synechocystiscells that had been autoclaved, the green line Synechocystis without electron carrier, and the purple line the power output without cells. Dark conditions are indicated by the black bar, illuminated conditions by the red bar. 
Table 1 Comparison of power output between spinach thylakoid membranes (n = 3) and Synechocystis (n = 8), ± standard error of the mean




 

                    nW (nmol Chl)−1 h−1

                    nW (nmol Chl)−1


Power increase gradient
Dark power output
Photo power output
Total power output





Synechocystis

0.64 ± 0.07
5.18 ± 0.60
4.10 ± 0.48
9.28 ± 0.92



                    Thylakoid membranes
                  
13.42 ± 1.16
0.15 ± 0.05
4.56 ± 0.64
4.71 ± 0.58




Comparison of thylakoid membranes and Synechocystis
The photosynthetic material is the core component of a BPV device. Sub-cellular photosynthetic components such as thylakoid membranes can efficiently catalyse the reduction of ferricyanide to ferrocyanide providing an abundant light-dependent flux of electrons. However, the lifetime of these membranes is very limited, whereas other studies have shown that whole photosynthetic cells have a long operational period. We carried out a direct comparison of the relative lifetimes and power outputs of a suspension of sub-cellular photosynthetic membranes (thylakoid membranes from Spinacia oleracea L.) and whole cells of the cyanobacteriumSynechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (hereafter referred to as Synechocystis). We chose this organism for analysis as it is a model organism for which a complete genome sequence and a wide range of genetic tools are available, which will facilitate future studies. Although the organism can tolerate moderately saline conditions (which would be expected to increase power output in a BPV device) we cultured it under freshwater conditions, since optimisation of power output was not an aim of this study, and the stress of growth under saline conditions may result in physiological disturbance.
The three-channel BPV device was used to quantify the electrical power produced by both types of biological material, using 5 mM ferricyanide to mediate electron transfer between the biological material and the anode. Spinach thylakoid membranes, prepared using the method of Peltier et al. (2002)30 and adjusted to a concentration of 40 (nmol Chl) ml−1, were injected into the device (anode area in each channel of 0.8 cm2) and the power output under dark conditions (reported as power density relative to chlorophyll concentration ± standard error of the mean) stabilised at zero. A graph of representative data is shown in Fig. 2 (red trace), and averaged data are presented in Table 1. Direct illumination by red light (emission peak at 625 nm) at 50 W m−2 resulted in a sharp increase in power (13.42 ± 1.16 nW (nmol Chl)−1 h−1) that produced a peak output of 4.71 ± 0.58 nW (nmol Chl)−1 (Table 1). This light dependent effect is referred to as photo power output. However, as observed in previous studies, the optimal photosynthetic activity of thylakoid membranes was limited to 30 to 90 min of illumination, after which the power output decayed.
When whole cells of Synechocystis at 40 (nmol Chl) ml−1 were used in the device, the photo power output increased more gradually (0.64 ± 0.07 nW (nmol Chl)−1 h−1) reaching a maximum of 9.28 ± 0.92 nW (nmol Chl)−1 in about six hours (Fig. 2, black trace). However, this power density was maintained for several hours. The slower increase in power output is consistent with the suggestion that ferricyanide is reduced by the electrogenic activity of trans-plasma membrane proteins,31–34 as it cannot cross the membrane.32,35 Thus, intracellular electron transfer routes restrict the ability of photosynthetic electrons to reduce the exogenous electron carrier. Moreover, the power density in the dark stabilised at 5.18 ± 0.60 nW (nmol Chl)−1 (dark power output). The fact that there is a dark power output indicates that the source of electrons in whole cells was not limited to direct supply from water photolysis, and that electrons were also being harvested from metabolic processes.36 Overall, the electrogenic activity from whole organisms is a combination of dark power output and light power output, and is referred to as total power output. In control experiments where either the photosynthetic material or ferricyanide was absent from the anodic chamber, or autoclaved Synechocystiscells were used, negligible power outputs were recorded (Fig. 2, other traces).
The comparison between isolated photosynthetic membranes and whole cyanobacterial cells suggests that thylakoid membranes could be useful for short-lived investigative experiments as photo-catalysts in BPV devices. However for more sustainable, longer lasting systems, the use of whole cells is advocated.
Use of inhibitors to probe the source of photo-power electrons
Chemical inhibitors can be used to block the transfer of electrons at specific points in the PETC (Fig. 3), thus providing information about the source and intracellular pathway of the photo-stimulated current.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the electron transfer pathways within a cyanobacterial cell and the anodic chamber of a BPV device. Dotted arrows show the route of electron transfer from the PETC to the anode. Wavy lines indicate light used by the PETC. Double solid lines indicate the site of action of photosynthetic inhibitors, labelled with a black background. Abbreviations: PSI/II: photosystem I/II; TMP: putative trans-membrane protein; SDH: succinate dehydrogenase; PC: plastocyanin; FD: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin-NADPH reductase; PQ: plastoquinone. 
The effects of the photosynthetic inhibitor DCMU were investigated, in order to determine the proportion of electrons that were generated by light-driven charge separation. DCMU prevents electron transfer between PSII and PQ.37 The presence of 15 μM DCMU completely abolished the light-dependent power output of isolated thylakoids (Fig. S1a†). A similar concentration of DCMU was shown in a Clark oxygen electrode to block photosynthetic oxygen production completely (Fig. S1b†).
A concentration of 15 μM DCMU decreased the photo power output of illuminated Synechocystiscells by 63 ± 17% of the inhibitor-free control value of 4.10 ± 0.48 nW (nmol Chl)−1 (Fig. 4a). The same concentration of DCMU was shown in a Clark oxygen electrode to block photosynthetic oxygen production essentially completely (Fig. 4b; 96 ± 3% inhibition from a control value of 861 ± 100 nmol O2 (nmol Chl)−1 h−1). The latter result indicates that the residual power output from DCMU-treated Synechocystiscells is unlikely to be the result of incomplete inhibition of linear electron transport.
 Fig. 4  Effect of photosynthetic inhibitors on (a) photo power output in the BPV (control n = 8, +DCMUn = 6, +MV (n = 3)), and (b)oxygen evolution rates of Synechocystis (control n = 3, +DCMUn = 3, +MV n = 3). The apparent consumption of oxygen that takes place when methyl viologen is present during photosynthesis is due to the formation of oxygen radicals from di-oxygen. Error bars are ± the standard error of the mean. 
Because the photosynthetic and respiratory chains in the thylakoid membrane of Synechocystis share the PQ pool,38 the photo power produced when DCMU is present (Fig. 4a) may come from electrons that were initially introduced into the PQ pool from the respiratory chain (Fig. 3) and subsequently used to reduce ferredoxinviaPSI (and possibly go on to form NADPHviaferredoxin-NADP reductase). Alternatively, cyclic photophosphorylation may increase the proportion of electrons generated by respiration that are available for BPV power production, as fewer dark-generated reducing equivalents need to be used for ATP generation. Although it might be argued that the increased power on illumination is due to an increase in oxygen concentration at the cathode, this seems unlikely as the cathode is separated from the photosynthetic material by a Nafion membrane and in similar systems (McCormick et al.52) the kinetics of change in oxygen concentration are different from the kinetics of change in power output. The Nafion membrane is also likely to protect the cathode from the effects of other materials produced from the photosynthetic microorganisms.
Exit point of photo-power electrons from the PETC
As shown by experiments using DCMU to block electron transfer from PSII, and as a consequence inhibit the function of the oxygen evolving complex, the water splitting event at the start of the PETC is the principal source in Synechocystis of the electrons that make up the photo power. However, the site from which the electrons leave the PETC for transfer to the cell exterior is as yet unidentified. Previous investigations based on mediator-less biofilms of Synechocystis22 concluded that the plastoquinone (PQ) pool is the site of electron leakage. This conclusion was based on the evidence from an experiment that used the inhibitor DBMIB to block transfer of electrons from the PQ pool to the cytochrome b6f complex;39,40 upon addition of 1 μM DBMIB to Nostoccells, power output increased.22
A similar effect was observed in our system (Fig. S2†). No power output was seen with Synechocystiscells alone. Using ferricyanide as an electron mediator allowed light-dependent power output, and this was increased by the inclusion of 200 μM DBMIB (Fig. S2a†). However, DBMIB with cells in the dark, but without ferricyanide, also allowed power output, indicating that DBMIB is able to function as an electron mediator in this system (Fig. S2b†). This is consistent with the fact that DBMIB is known to be redox active, with a midpoint potential of +170 mV in aqueous solution at pH 7,41 and can therefore accept electrons from the PQ pool.42 Thus DMBIB is not a suitable reagent to probe the source of electrons.
In addition, we investigated the effect of 1.5 mM methyl viologen (MV) on power output. MV easily crosses biological membranes and competes with NADP+ for photosynthetic electrons, thus inhibiting electron flow beyond PSI,43 and has also been shown partially to inhibit linear electron flow from PSII.44 When the BPV was operated with 1.5 mM MV, the photo power response was completely eliminated (0.04 ± 0.02 nW (nmol Chl)−1, Fig. 4a). The extremely low redox midpoint potential (−420 mV) of MV leads to rapid oxidation by oxygen, generating superoxide, thus, when 1.5 mM MV was included with the cell suspension the photosynthetic oxygen evolution as measured by a Clark electrode was masked by this effect (Fig. 4b). This result strongly suggests that the electrons that generate the photo power leave the PETC at the reductive side of PSI as ferredoxin or NADPH (Fig. 3). However, the pathway these electrons take through the cytoplasm and across the membrane is still unknown.
Quantitative analysis of key BPV elements using Synechocystis
Previous qualitative investigations17–19 have demonstrated that the BPV requires three key elements for producing electrical power: i) a microbial photo-active material, ii) an anodic electron shuttle, and iii) a light source. This device allowed a quantitative analysis of the performance of the device when these key conditions were varied.

Effect of photosynthetic cell density. 
Increasing the number of cells, with ferricyanide concentration and light intensity fixed at 5 mM and 50 W m−2 respectively, caused an increase in the peak photo power (Fig. 5a). The relationship was approximately linear, with an R2 value of 0.96. Increasing the concentration of cyanobacterial cells would, assuming the concentration of oxidised mediator is not limiting, increase the rate of ferricyanide reduction, which would translate as a proportional increase in electrical current and power output. However, we predict that this linear trend would not hold at very high concentrations of biological material; light penetration and mediator diffusion would both be adversely affected by increasing organism concentration. Indeed, decreasing returns from increasing organism density have been observed in MFCs.45 This micro-scale device has the inherent disadvantage of not being able to release the oxygen produced by photosynthesis, thus at very high cell densities the device dries out more quickly as oxygen bubbles push liquid out of the anodic chamber (Fig. S3a†). Once the anodic chamber is dry, power output drops rapidly to zero (Fig. S3b†).
 Fig. 5  Quantitative analysis of BPV key factors. For all data points except 150 Wm−2n ≥ 3, for 150 Wm−2n = 2. (a)BPV power output increases linearly with an increasing concentration of biological material, expressed as nmol chlorophyll per ml. (b) Effect of ferricyanide concentration on dark power output (filled squares) and total power output in the light (open circles). BPV peak power output increases with increasing ferricyanide concentration up to a maximum, and then power output falls off at high concentrations. Peak power is lower in the dark for all ferricyanide concentrations, and the maximum peak power occurs at a lower ferricyanide concentration. (c) Effect of light intensity on photo power output. There is no trend of increasing power with increasing light intensity. (d) The initial rate of increase in photo power is lower for lower light intensities. 


Effect of electron carrier concentration. 
The effect of changing the concentration of electron carrier (ferricyanide) was investigated, while maintaining cell density at 40 (nmol Chl) ml−1, and applying 50 W m−2 red light. Increasing the concentration of ferricyanide from 0.5 mM to 50 mM produced a bell-shaped response in power output in the light. The highest total power (16.4 ± 0.6 nW (nmol Chl)−1) was obtained when the concentration of ferricyanide was 25–35 mM, but power decreased with concentrations above 35 mM (Fig. 5b). This trend was repeated under dark conditions; the highest power density in the dark was 6.8 ± 0.5 nW (nmol Chl)−1, and was reached at a lower concentration of electron mediator (15 mM).
The effects of artificial electron carriers on cellular processes reported in the literature vary; some authors show inhibitory effects,31 and others demonstrate stimulation of plasma membrane proteins such as ferroreductase.32 Incubation of cells for 24 h (the time course over which the measurements in Fig. 5 were taken) with a range of concentrations of ferricyanide had no significant effect on light-dependent oxygen evolution in an oxygen electrode, with the exception of 50 mM ferricyanide (Fig. S4†). Incubation for 24 h with 50 mM ferricyanide caused a decrease in the oxygen evolution rate of approximately 35% compared to that at 20 or 30 mM ferricyanide, but this is insufficient to account directly for the approximately 60% decrease in light dependent power output between 25 mM and 50 mM ferricyanide seen in Fig. 5b.
The effects on power output of increasing ferricyanide concentration may be explained, at least in part, by effects on current and half-cell voltage. Ferricyanide ions are being reduced by unknown trans-membrane proteins (TMPs; Fig. 3) at the cell surface, that presumably have a concentration-dependent activity. When the concentration of ferricyanide is low, the availability of the oxidised form limits the rate at which the TMPs can reduce it, limiting the current. Increasing ferricyanide concentration would improve current production up to the point where the TMPs are working at maximum activity. After this point, the Nernst equation predicts that any increase in ferricyanide concentration would have a detrimental effect on half-cell voltage (as observed here), because of the higher ratio of ferri- to ferrocyanide.


Effect of light intensity. 
The effect of varying light intensity was investigated with the device set up with cells at a concentration of 40 nmol chlorophyll ml−1, and 5 mM ferricyanide. The photo power outputs are reported in Fig. 5c. Despite expecting that light intensity would have a direct effect on the photo power output, with a similar profile to a photosynthetic light saturation curve,46 even at very low light (2.3 W m−2) the peak power output was not significantly different from those from higher irradiances (one-way ANOVA; F(5,28) = 1.02, p > 0.4, f2 = 0.018). However, it took longer to reach peak power at lower light intensities (Fig. 5d). We interpret these data to mean that in this device the ability of the photosynthetic material to reduce ferricyanide is not limited by NADPH production by the PETC at the range of light intensities used here. Instead, it seems likely that the overall power output is limited downstream of the PETC, perhaps by the as yet unidentified TMP activity. Given long enough, the pool of reducing power will reach a concentration sufficient for ferricyanide reduction to take place at the maximum rate. At low light levels, the initial rate of BPV power increase is much lower, as the increase in reducing equivalent availability is slow. At higher light intensity the rate of reducing equivalent production by the PETC is high, so the initial rate of BPV power increase is also high, as the TMP activity reaches saturation more quickly. At low light intensity, the efficiency (measured by power output as a percentage of total incident power, rather than as a percentage of photosynthetically active radiation) corresponded to approximately 0.03%, which - although low - is higher than reported elsewhere.7

Conclusions
The prototype biophotovoltaic device described here permits the rapid production of replica experiments for quantitative investigation, with only small quantities required for operating each microchannel (ca. 150 μl). It is striking that thylakoid membranes can generate a photocurrent response 20 times more rapidly than whole cells (Table 1), despite there being fewer PSII complexes in the thylakoid preparation when normalised by chlorophyll concentration,43,47 and despite the relatively poor absorption by thylakoid membranes at 625 nm. This suggests that in a whole-cell system, the transport of reducing equivalents from the PETC to the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane is a major rate limiting step for power production. This is supported by the fact that increasing the cell density causes a linear increase in photocurrent responses (Fig. 5a). Further improvements in the design and materials of the physical BPV device are required to improve efficiency. These improvements might include: a mixed or flowing anodic chamber; choosing a more suitable anode material for accepting electrons from a mediator or direct transfer; or altering anode architecture to maximise surface area whilst minimising the distance for cell-anode electron transport.
The detailed analysis of the effects of cell density, electron mediator concentration and light intensity provides crucial information about the operation of the BPV device and creates a baseline for future improvements. The effects of changing ferricyanide concentration showed that electron carrier mass transport plays a central role in limiting device performance (Fig. 5b), emphasising the importance of balancing the concentration of mediator against the kinetic properties of the biological material to produce maximum power. Nevertheless other electrochemical components, such as the proton permeable membrane and the cathodic element, may also need to be considered.
Analysis of the effect of light intensity showed that, promisingly, even low photon flux can generate significant photocurrent output (Fig. 5c). With the present BPV system, the efficiency of energy transduction (light to electrical power) decreases at higher light levels. These observations probably reflect the relatively low light intensity required to saturate the electrogenic activity of the putative TMPs. This crucial limiting factor could perhaps be overcome through genetic manipulation or by exploiting alternative mechanisms of trans-membrane electron transport, such as conductive pili.48
Analysis of the effects of photosynthetic inhibitors demonstrated photolysis of water as the primary source of electrons for the observed photocurrent response, with the reductive end of PSI as the source of photosynthetic electrons. There was also a significant dark output from cyanobacterial cells that is probably due to respiratory and other metabolic processes. Further work will be required to identify the molecular mechanisms responsible for electron transfer across the cytoplasmic membrane, and the routes that reducing equivalents take from the PETC to the cytoplasmic membrane components.

        BPV represents an important, novel technology, and a potential biological alternative to traditional solar panels. The increasing number of publications dedicated to this technology reveals a growing interest in this promising opportunity. However, the economic benefits of bio-current production are unavoidably linked with the development of new effective devices. The BPV device described here allows us to identify important parameters for future improvements to this technology, and potentially allows inferences to be drawn about the intracellular metabolic state of the photosynthetic organism. Future studies to optimize the function of BPV devices should include analysis of the performance with different geometries, electrode materials, micro-organisms, electrolyte compositions and redox mediators.
Experimental

          BPV design
The BPV was built in a layered design, and contained three separate but identical electrochemical devices to allow execution of multiple independent experiments. Each cell consisted of several components. The base of the BPV was transparent 10 mm Perspex with holes to allow air to the cathode, on top of which was placed a 1 mm thick layer of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with slots cut to allow air to access the cathode, the PDMS providing a water-tight seal around the edge of the electrode materials. The carbon-platinum cathode impregnated on one side with Nafion (Ion Power, USA) was placed over the air-slots to form the base of the anodic chamber. The walls of the chambers were formed by channels cut in 2 mm transparent Perspex sheet with the anodic chamber of dimensions: 40 mm × 2 mm × 2 mm. Transparent indium tin oxide (ITO, 60 Ω sq−1) on plastic PET (Sigma-Aldrich) formed the top of the anodic chamber and was sealed in place by a layer of 1 mm thick PDMS and a final top layer of 10 mm transparent Perspex (Fig. 1). Cells were loaded into the device by way of 0.5 mm holes that fed into the ends of the chambers. The theoretical inner size of each chamber was 160 μl. Tolerances in construction and flexibility of the cathode membrane assembly resulted in actual loading volumes between 130 and 150 μl. The ITO was replaced for each experiment; the other components were washed with deionised H2O before re-use. Each strip of ITO extended out of one side of the BPV, and was attached by crocodile clips to the external circuit. The cathodes were linked to the external circuit on the opposite end of the BPV with contacts created by a strip of conductive carbon placed beneath the edge of the cathode, with copper used to reinforce the ends.
Bacterial strains, media, and growth conditions
All whole cell experiments were conducted on Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Synechocystiscells were grown autotrophically in 500 ml flasks at room temperature (23 °C) in BG-11 medium with 5 mM NaHCO3 under alternate (12 h/12 h) light/dark illumination (25 μmol photons m−2s−1) and kept continuously stirred at 50 rpm. For experimental use cells were harvested during exponential growth (approximately 2 × 106cells ml−1), and resuspended in fresh BG11 medium. Synechocystis was maintained on 1.5% agar plates (wt/vol) BG-11 medium under continuous illumination (25 μmol photons m−2s−1).
Preparation of photosynthetic membranes

          Thylakoid membranes from Spinacia oleracea were purified as previously described.30 The extract was resuspended and stored in a buffer containing 200 mM sucrose, 20 mM Tricine-NaOH pH 7.5, 3 mM MgCl2 and 10 mM KCl. The chlorophyll concentration in the thylakoid preparation was determined after extraction in methanol as described previously.49 The thylakoid membranes were diluted to a working concentration in buffer (10 mM KCl, 8 mM Tricine pH 7.7, 1 mM MgCl2 and 50 μM K3[Fe(CN)6]), and stored on ice before use in the BPV device in the same buffer.
Electrochemical characterisation of the BPV and measurement of power output

          Cyanobacterial
          cells were prepared for the BPV as follows: Cells were spun down for 15 min at 3000 g and resuspended to a known concentration of chlorophyll (40 (nmol Chl) ml−1, unless stated otherwise) in BG11 without ferric citrate to reduce redox contributions from this species. Potassium ferricyanide (ferricyanide) was added (5 mM, unless stated otherwise), and the suspension was left in the dark for 8–10 h, as this was found to decrease the initial equilibration time. The suspension was loaded into the device, and the amount in each channel was weighed. The channels were allowed to reach a stable voltage in the dark with an external resistance of 470 kΩ, before the light source (an array of red LEDs (OVL-5528 from Multicomp), emission peak at 625 nm) was introduced providing a known light intensity (50 W m−2 unless stated otherwise) in the anodic chamber. The experiment was conducted until the voltage in the light reached a stable value. Power output in the dark and light were recorded for different experimental conditions using a high resolution data logger (Pico Technology).
In order to characterize BPV devices and compare power, current, and voltage performance with similar systems, a series of external resistances ranging from 3 MΩ to 47 kΩ were applied to the device and the resulting drop in device potential was recorded. The measured steady state potential at each resistance can be related to current via Ohm's Law (1) and power (2). Power curves (a plot of electrical power output density against applied external resistance) show the maximum power output versus external resistance; at the peak power condition, Rint ≈ Rext, thus the power output of the device is maximised. As the internal resistance varies with device conditions (i.e.cell density, electron carrier concentration) specific power curves were generated for different parameters. (1) (2)
For all experimental conditions with cyanobacteria the maximum power occurred when using a 470 kΩ resistor. Measurements were made in triplicate, except where stated in the figure legends, as elsewhere (e.g.ref. 50 and 51).
O2electrode
Photolysis of water and respiration were measured as O2 exchanges in the presence of 5 mM NaHCO3 and 5 mM potassium ferricyanide using a Clark-type electrode (Hansatech) in a 2 ml chamber, at 25 °C. Illumination was provided by a halogen lamp. Light intensity and spectra were adjusted, as needed, by neutral and colour density filters (Lee Filters).
Abbreviations


            BPV
          biological photovoltaic
Chl
chlorophyll


            DBMIB
          
2,5-dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone


            DCMU
          
            3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea
          

            ETC
          
electron transfer chain
FC
fuel
            cell
          
MFCmicrobial fuel cell

            MV
          
methyl viologen, 1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride

            PETC
          photosynthetic electron transfer chain

            PQ
          
plastoquinone


            PSI
          
            photosystem I
          

            PSII
          
            photosystem II
          

            PV
          photovoltaic

            TMP
          
trans-membrane protein

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for funding provided by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and Ortus Energy Ltd.
References
N. Mason, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 281–283 CrossRef CAS .
P. Breeze, Business Insights, 2008, 114 Search PubMed .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, X. Huang, N. Boon, P. Liang and M. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1392–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, J. Kan, F. Mansfeld, L. T. Angenent and K. H. Nealson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1648–1654 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malik, E. Drott, P. Grisdela, J. Lee, C. Lee, D. A. Lowy, S. Gray and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 292–298 CAS .
R. S. Berk and J. H. Canfield, Appl. Microbiol., 1964, 12, 10–12 CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. Terlouw, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 81, 659–668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 6328–6333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Cho, T. J. Donohue, I. Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, K. D. McMahon and D. R. Noguera, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2008, 104, 640–650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amao and T. Komori, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 19, 843–847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maly, J. Masojidek, A. Masci, M. Ilie, E. Cianci, V. Foglietti, W. Vastarella and R. Pilloton, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 21, 923–932 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Ciesielski, A. M. Scott, C. J. Faulkner, B. J. Berron, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2465–2472 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, B. Esper, T. Kothe, S. Neugebauer, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1043–1047 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Ciesielski, F. M. Hijazi, A. M. Scott, C. J. Faulkner, L. Beard, K. Emmett, S. J. Rosenthal, D. Cliffel and G. Kane Jennings, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3047–3053 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lam, E. A. Johnson, M. Chiao and L. Lin, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2006, 15, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
N. Martens and E. A. H. Hall, Photochem. Photobiol., 1994, 59, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsujimura, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2001, 29, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ryu, S.-Jai Bai, J. S. Park, Z. Huang, J. Moseley, T. Fabian, R. J. Fasching, A. R. Grossman and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Pisciotta, R. B. Billmyre and I. V. Baskakov, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 939–946 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pisciotta, Y. Zou and I. V. Baskakov, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e10821 Search PubMed .
L. D. Schamphelaire, L. V. D. Bossche, H. S. Dang, M. Höfte, N. Boon, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3053–3058 CrossRef .
N. Kaku, N. Yonezawa, Y. Kodama and K. Watanabe, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers, J. F. H. Snel and C. J. N. Buisman, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 870–876 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2005, 68, 753–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Torimura, A. Miki, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 496, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yagishita, S. Sawayama, K.-Ichiro Tsukahara and T. Ogi, Science, 1997, 43, 177–180 CAS .
K. Lam, E. Irwin, K. Healy and L. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 480–487 CrossRef .
J.-B. Peltier, O. Emanuelsson, D. E. Kalume, J. Ytterberg, G. Friso, A. Rudella, D. A. Liberles, L. Söderberg, P. Roepstorff, G. von Heijne and K. J. van Wijk, Plant Cell, 2002, 14, 211–236 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Davey, D. J. Suggett, R. J. Geider and A. R. Taylor, J. Phycol., 2003, 39, 1132–1144 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baker, D. J. R. Lane, J. D. Ly, V. De Pinto and A. Lawen, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 4811–4819 CrossRef CAS .
E. Melgarejo, Plant Sci., 2002, 162, 753–759 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lynnes, T. L. M. Derzaph and H. G. Weger, Planta, 1998, 204, 360–365 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Taylor and R. H. Chow, Plant, Cell Environ., 2001, 24, 749–754 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497–508 CrossRef CAS .
W. Oettmeier and H. Soll, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1983, 724, 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schultze, B. Forberich, S. Rexroth, N. G. Dyczmons, M. Roegner and J. Appel, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2009, 1787, 1479–1485 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rich, S. Madgwick and D. Moss, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1991, 1058, 312–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Roberts, M. K. Bowman and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 7707–7716 CrossRef CAS .
K. Satoh, H. Koike, T. Ichimura and S. Katoh, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1992, 1102, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tyystjarvi, N. King, M. Hakala and E.-M. Aro, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1999, 48, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .

          D. O. Hall and K. K. Rao, Photosynthesis, Cambridge University Press, 6th edn,  1999 Search PubMed .
F. Da-Yong, J. Husen, B. James and C. Wahsoon, Eur. Biophys. J., 2009, 39, 191–199 CrossRef .

          I. A. Ieropoulos, EcoBot: Towards an Energetically Autonomous Robot, PhD thesis, University of the West of England,  2006.
H. M. Cho, L. J. Mancino and R. E. Blankenship, Biophys. J., 1984, 45, 455–461 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lundell, A. N. Glazer, A. Melis and R. Malkin, J. Biol. Chem., 1985, 260, 646–654 CAS .
Y. A. Gorby, S. Yanina, J. S. McLean, K. M. Rosso, D. Moyles, A. Dohnalkova, T. J. Beveridge, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. E. Culley, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini, E. A. Hill, L. Shi, D. A. Elias, D. W. Kennedy, G. Pinchuk, K. Watanabe, S. Ishii, B. Logan, K. H. Nealson and J. K. Fredrickson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS .
R. Porra, W. Thompson and P. Kriedemann, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1989, 975, 384–394 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, X. Huang, P. Liang, N. Boon, M. Fan, L. Zhanga and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 498–501 CAS .
F. Zhang, K. S. Jacobson, P. Torres and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1347–1352 CAS .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. G. Smith, A. C. Fisher and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/c1ee01965a .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee02531g‡ These authors have contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Microbial fuels cells have received increasing attention as possible sources of renewable energy. In principle, they rely on heterotrophic microorganisms metabolizing exogenous organic molecules and supplying electrons to an electrode, providing a source of electrical energy. Because of the need for exogenous metabolites (although these can be provided from waste materials) there has been increasing interest in the use of photosynthetic microorganisms in similar fuel cells. These organisms do not require an organic substrate and can use light energy to oxidize water and provide electrons, some of which may ultimately (and perhaps very indirectly) be lost from the cell to an external anode. Under dark conditions, the microorganisms may also provide electrons by metabolism of substrates within the cell. Fuel cells containing photosynthetic microorganisms are known as photosynthetic microbial fuel cells, biophotovoltaic devices, or BPVs. Power output from these devices is low, and a much better understanding of their functioning is needed in order to improve output. This paper describes the construction and use of a multi-channel BPV for the quantitative study of factors limiting power output. It also describes the use of inhibitors to investigate the original source within the photosynthetic electron transfer chain of light-dependent electrons.


 	Fig. 1  
(a) Principles of operation of a BPV device. Within the anodic chamber (4) the photosynthetic material releases electrons as a consequence of photosynthetic and other metabolic activity. An electron carrier (5) shuttles these electrons from the photosynthetic material to the anode (3), Simultaneously, protons (H+) diffuse from the anodic chamber across the proton exchange membrane (7) into the cathodic membrane. After reaching the anode, electrons travel through an external load (8) to the cathode (5), where they are combined with oxygen and protons to re-form water. (b) Photograph of the actual device. (c) Exploded view of a BPV device. The upper clamp (2) permits light to enter the anodic chamber of the BPV. The lower clamp (9) has holes to allow oxygen to contact the cathode and water to escape.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative power output traces from spinach thylakoid membranes (red line) and Synechocystis (black line). The blue line shows the power output of Synechocystiscells that had been autoclaved, the green line Synechocystis without electron carrier, and the purple line the power output without cells. Dark conditions are indicated by the black bar, illuminated conditions by the red bar.	 



Synechocystis
	0.64 ± 0.07	5.18 ± 0.60	4.10 ± 0.48	9.28 ± 0.92

                    Thylakoid membranes
                  	13.42 ± 1.16	0.15 ± 0.05	4.56 ± 0.64	4.71 ± 0.58

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the electron transfer pathways within a cyanobacterial cell and the anodic chamber of a BPV device. Dotted arrows show the route of electron transfer from the PETC to the anode. Wavy lines indicate light used by the PETC. Double solid lines indicate the site of action of photosynthetic inhibitors, labelled with a black background. Abbreviations: PSI/II: photosystem I/II; TMP: putative trans-membrane protein; SDH: succinate dehydrogenase; PC: plastocyanin; FD: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin-NADPH reductase; PQ: plastoquinone.	 

 	Fig. 4  Effect of photosynthetic inhibitors on (a) photo power output in the BPV (control n = 8, +DCMUn = 6, +MV (n = 3)), and (b)oxygen evolution rates of Synechocystis (control n = 3, +DCMUn = 3, +MV n = 3). The apparent consumption of oxygen that takes place when methyl viologen is present during photosynthesis is due to the formation of oxygen radicals from di-oxygen. Error bars are ± the standard error of the mean.	 

 	Fig. 5  Quantitative analysis of BPV key factors. For all data points except 150 Wm−2n ≥ 3, for 150 Wm−2n = 2. (a)BPV power output increases linearly with an increasing concentration of biological material, expressed as nmol chlorophyll per ml. (b) Effect of ferricyanide concentration on dark power output (filled squares) and total power output in the light (open circles). BPV peak power output increases with increasing ferricyanide concentration up to a maximum, and then power output falls off at high concentrations. Peak power is lower in the dark for all ferricyanide concentrations, and the maximum peak power occurs at a lower ferricyanide concentration. (c) Effect of light intensity on photo power output. There is no trend of increasing power with increasing light intensity. (d) The initial rate of increase in photo power is lower for lower light intensities.	 
	(1)
	(2)

            BPV
          	biological photovoltaic
Chl	
chlorophyll


            DBMIB
          	
2,5-dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone


            DCMU
          	
            3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea
          

            ETC
          	
electron transfer chain
FC	
fuel
            cell
          
MFC	microbial fuel cell

            MV
          	
methyl viologen, 1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride

            PETC
          	photosynthetic electron transfer chain

            PQ
          	
plastoquinone


            PSI
          	
            photosystem I
          

            PSII
          	
            photosystem II
          

            PV
          	photovoltaic

            TMP
          	
trans-membrane protein
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee02531g
‡ These authors have contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
