Solid-state synthesis of stable and color tunable cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals and the mechanism of high-performance photodetection in a ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC01306D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC01306D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8917-8934Solid-state synthesis of stable and color tunable cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals and the mechanism of high-performance photodetection in a monolayer MoS2/CsPbBr3 vertical heterojunction†

        
          
            Joydip 
            Ghosh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Larionette P. L. 
            Mawlong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Manasa 
            G. B.
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Pattison
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Theis
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Sudip 
            Chakraborty
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            P. K. 
            Giri
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, India. E-mail: giri@iitg.ac.in
bCentre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, India
cDiscipline of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Simrol, Indore-453552, India. E-mail: sudiphys@gmail.com; sudip@iiti.ac.in
dNanoscale Physics Research Laboratory, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
Received 
      13th March 2020
    , Accepted 16th May 2020First published on 18th May 2020AbstractHerein, we report on a facile room-temperature bulk scale solid-state synthesis of highly luminescent color-tunable CsPbX3 nanocrystals (NCs) with superior optoelectronic performance and exceptional ambient stability. The composition tuned all-inorganic perovskite NCs exhibit high photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield with adjustable emission color in the range 416–691 nm and high color purity (linewidth ∼14 nm). The as-grown NCs are highly stable up to seven months under ambient conditions, and the post-growth annealing results in reduced non-radiative recombination centers and improved PL quantum yield (∼95%) in the perovskite NCs. The low-temperature PL study reveals high exciton binding energy in the NCs, and the highly luminescent perovskite NCs were utilized for the demonstration of color-tunable light-emitting diodes with high luminous efficiency (∼42 lm W−1 for CsPbBr3). We further integrate the CsPbBr3 NCs on direct CVD grown large-area monolayer MoS2 on Si/SiO2 substrates and fabricate a vertical heterojunction photodetector (PD). For the first time, direct CVD grown large area 1L-MoS2 on Si/SiO2 has been utilized here to demonstrate a 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 PD of type-II heterojunction with high responsivity (24.3 A W−1 at 405 nm) and extremely fast photo-response with photocurrent growth and decay times of 5.5 μs and 24.0 μs, respectively. The superior performance of the heterojunction PD is attributed to the fast transfer of photogenerated electrons from CsPbBr3 NCs to monolayer MoS2 and n-doping of the MoS2. Our interpretation is fully supported by density functional theory based electronic structure calculations and Kelvin probe force microscopy measurements, which show direct evidence of the charge transfer at the MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction due to a type-II band alignment. Our results pave the way for the large-scale synthesis of highly stable and color-tunable CsPbX3 NCs and their application in bright LEDs and a high-performance photodetector with a fast response.
1. Introduction
Over the past few years, halide perovskite materials have emerged as a promising class of semiconductors, which are being studied extensively for their applications in solar cells and other optoelectronic devices, such as LED, photodetector, laser etc.1–7 All-inorganic metal halide perovskites with the structural formula of CsPbX3 nanocrystals (NCs) and quantum dots (QDs) (where X is a single or mixed halide (Cl, Br and I)) have attracted intensive attention with the superior optical performance of high photoluminescence quantum yield (PL QY), narrow full width at half maxima (FWHM), high photostability, wide color gamut and the extraordinary performance in LEDs, solar cells, photodetectors, etc.1,3,4,8–18 The widely explored synthesis strategy for CsPbX3 NCs is the hot injection method.19 However, the synthesis of perovskite NCs and QDs by hot injection involves complex time consuming experimental procedures.20 Several other synthesis methods, such as anion exchange, solvothermal synthesis, microwave-assisted synthesis, etc. have also been reported for the growth of perovskite NCs.20–22 The current synthesis strategies of CsPbX3 NCs are mostly limited to tedious methods that involve the use of toxic volatile organic solvents with high reaction temperature, inert gas atmosphere, and complicated apparatus. However, a facile, low cost, and room temperature synthesis process for CsPbX3 NCs in a solvent-free environment is still not well explored. Zhu et al. reported a solvent-free mechanosynthesis of composition tunable perovskite QDs by ball milling.23 However, to our knowledge, there is no report concerning the optimal and contamination-free solid-state synthesis of perovskite NCs/QDs with an in-depth analysis of its optical properties, including its improved stability and its direct application in high-performance optoelectronic devices, such as LEDs and photodetectors.
Interestingly, 2D materials especially transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2), tungsten disulfide (WS2), and tungsten diselenide (WSe2) exhibit interesting optical and electronic properties for different technological interests.24–26 Due to the high carrier mobility, unique optical properties, and superior mechanical flexibility, monolayer and few-layer TMDs have been widely applied in photodetectors (PDs) which show very fast response speed along with high photoresponsivity.27 However, the performances of these 2D TMD based PDs are limited by the low light absorbance of monolayer and few-layer TMDs. Thus, the integration of 2D TMD materials with other low-dimensional high light-harvesting materials, such as perovskite NCs/QDs, can lead to substantial enhancement in the light absorption resulting in high photoresponsivity along with fast response due to high carrier mobility in 2D TMDs.27–31 Recently, Wu et al. reported perovskite quantum dot-monolayer MoS2 based PDs with high responsivity due to the synergistic effect of the photogating mechanism and the modulation of the Schottky barrier.32 However, the device response was very slow.32 Note that the well-known wet transfer technique of MoS2 on Si/SiO2 suffers from poor interface and contamination issues, which results in inferior device performance. Thus, the direct CVD growth of monolayer MoS2 on Si/SiO2 and its application in MoS2/perovskite NC PDs is yet to be explored. Further, the reported PD devices have a planar type structure where both the electrodes are made on the perovskite layer, and as a result, the device response is rather slow. The effect of vertical heterojunction in the performance of perovskite-based PDs is least explored.
Herein, we report on a facile, room-temperature, nearly solvent-free, and bulk scale solid-state synthesis of highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs with emission over the entire visible region. The structural and the optical properties of the composition and color-tunable all-inorganic perovskite NCs were systematically studied. The origin of the high photoluminescence quantum yield (PL QY) is studied using low-temperature PL measurements. These NCs show superior ambient stability (CsPbBr3 NCs ∼7 months stability) due to the unique nearly solvent-free, solid-state synthesis process, which is significant compared to the reported stability of perovskite NCs synthesized by the well-known hot injection method. These highly luminescent perovskite NCs were utilized for the color-tunable light-emitting devices by employing NC composite films with PMMA on commercial UV LED chips, which show superior operational stability (>100 h). We further integrate our CsPbBr3 NCs with direct CVD grown monolayer MoS2 (1L-MoS2) on Si/SiO2 substrates and fabricate a vertical heterojunction PD. For the first time, direct CVD grown large area 1L-MoS2 on Si/SiO2 is utilized in a 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 vertical heterojunction PD, which shows the fastest photoresponse speed among those reported to date. Our 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 PD is a vertical type structure, where one Au electrode is connected to the CsPbBr3 NC film while the other electrode is connected to the 1L-MoS2 layer underneath. The type-II heterojunction PD fabricated here shows asymmetric photo I–V characteristics similar to that of a p–n junction with a very fast photoresponse. Note that the majority of the reported MoS2/CsPbBr3 PDs are the planar type where the electrodes are made on the CsPbBr3 layer, and the performance of the PD is limited by the transfer of photo-generated charges from CsPbBr3 to the electrodes, and the underlying MoS2 will have less influence on the charge transfer process in the absence of any gate bias. Interestingly, we show that the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs vertical heterojunction PD can operate at a very low bias (0.1 V) and the performance of the device is much better than the previous reports.31–34 We investigate the mechanism of high photoresponsivity and fast photoresponse in the heterojunction PD through KPFM analysis and first-principles DFT based electronic structure calculations. The DFT calculations showed clear evidence of charge transfer through the change in the density of states in the heterojunction. These results are further corroborated by steady-state and time-resolved PL and Raman analysis.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Materials
Lead(II) chloride (PbCl2, 99.99%, Sigma Aldrich), lead(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.999%, Sigma Aldrich), lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99%, Sigma Aldrich), cesium chloride (CsCl, >99.5%, Merck), cesium bromide (CsBr 99.999%, Sigma Aldrich) cesium iodide (CsI, 99.5%, Merck), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) powder (Sigma Aldrich), oleylamine (OAM, >98%, Sigma Aldrich), toluene (>99.0%,Merck), methyl acetate (>99.0%,Merck), molybdenum trioxide (MoO3, 99.5%, Sigma Aldrich) and sulfur powder (S, 99.95%, Sigma Aldrich). All the reagents were used as-received without any further purification.
2.2 Solid-state synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs
The desired amounts of cesium halide (CsX) and lead halide (PbX2) were added with 40 g zirconia balls of 5 mm diameter in a zirconia vial of 50 mL (Retsch) under ambient conditions and subsequently ball milled in a planetary mill (Retsch, Germany) at a rotation speed of 500 rpm for 2 h, which resulted in a fine powder of CsPbX3 of 0.8 mM. Next, 0.2 mL oleylamine (OAM) was added to the milling vial, and the milling process was continued for another 1 h for the surfactant-assisted formation of CsPbX3 NCs. Further, the synthesized product was dispersed in 20 mL of toluene. Next, the mixture was centrifuged for 10 min at 8000 rpm, and the precipitate was separated, discarded, and re-dispersed in toluene to obtain the final product. The final volume of NC dispersion was 20 mL. The as-prepared perovskite NC dispersion was stored under ambient conditions for further characterization.

          2.3
         Construction of color-tunable LEDs
2 mL of different CsPbX3 NCs dispersed in toluene was added with 0.5 g of PMMA power and subsequently mixed by vigorous stirring until the PMMA particles completely dissolved. Each of the solutions was drop cast on a low-cost commercial UV LED chip of emission wavelength 396 nm. The LEDs were operated at 3 V to obtain bright emission.
2.4 Growth of large-area single-layer MoS2 using the CVD method
Large area 1L-MoS2 was grown on an SiO2 layer (300 nm of SiO2 on Si wafer) using a one-step thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, similar to that in our earlier reports.24,35 In a typical process, a ceramic boat containing sulfur powder is positioned 15 cm upstream inside a quartz tube away from the position of the boat containing MoO3 powder in a two-zone muffle furnace.35 A quartz mask with circular openings was placed on the boat containing MoO3 powder, and Si/SiO2 substrates were kept over the mask. High-purity Ar gas (99.999%) served as the carrier gas throughout the experiment. Prior to the growth, high flow rate Ar (∼300 sccm) was purged inside the quartz tube to eliminate the surface-adsorbed impurities of the Si/SiO2 substrates. Afterward, the S source and MoO3 temperatures were raised to 150 and 700 °C at a rate of 15 and 3.5 °C min−1, respectively, and maintained for 5 min for the growth of MoS2 at an Ar flow rate of 10 sccm. Then, the system was allowed to cool down to room temperature at a cooling rate of 6.5 °C min−1. Note that the 1L-MoS2 film was grown on each substrate only on the portions of the substrate covered by the quartz mask, whereas the directly exposed regions were observed to be deposited with few-layer and multilayer MoS2. Note that the photodetector was fabricated on the monolayer region of MoS2.
2.5 Fabrication of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC photodetector
To fabricate the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 vertical type heterojunction photodetector, CsPbBr3 NC dispersion in toluene was drop cast on the large area 1L-MoS2 layer grown on Si/SiO2. Typically, 20 μL CsPbBr3 NC dispersion was drop cast on 1L-MoS2 grown on the Si/SiO2 substrate while placing it on a hotplate, and subsequently, it was annealed at 60 °C for 10 min to remove the residual toluene and produce a bright green color CsPbBr3 NCs film of diameter 2–3 mm. Further methyl acetate was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 30 s for removal of ligands and dried at 80 °C for 10 min. The thickness of the CsPbBr3 NCs film is found to be ∼80 nm. Next, a shadow mask was fixed carefully by using an optical microscope so that the one opening for electrode deposition was on the pristine 1L-MoS2 layer, while another opening is on the CsPbBr3 NCs film on 1L-MoS2. Note that the shining green color of CsPbBr3 NCs film is completely distinguishable from the 1L-MoS2 layer. Au electrodes of thickness ∼100 nm were deposited through a mask by thermal evaporation. For the fabrication of the pristine 1L-MoS2 PD, two Au electrodes were directly deposited on the 1L-MoS2 in the planar geometry. For comparison, a planar type PD was also fabricated on the heterojunction.
The details of the characterization techniques and computational methodology have been provided in the ESI,† Sections S1.1 and S1.2.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Synthesis strategy of CsPbX3 NCs
We adopted a solid-state synthesis method to grow stable perovskite NCs. Fig. S1 (ESI†) illustrates the synthesis steps of highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs by using the solid-state method. The most explored synthesis process for all inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite NCs and QDs is the hot injection method.36,37 In this multistep tedious, time-consuming process, different polar solvents such as DMSO and DMF, or organic surfactants/ligands like 1-octadecene (ODE), oleic acid (OA) are used to dissolve different raw reagents like Cs2CO3, CsOAc (cesium acetate), PbX2 (X = Cl, Br, I) metal salts by heating at high temperature.38 As the final colloidal NCs degrade in polar solvents, the final product is precipitated, centrifuged and stored in nonpolar organic solvents, such as hexane or toluene. However, the residue of polar solvents and organic surfactants/ligands may accelerate the degradation process of the NCs. In stark contrast, in our solid-state method, no solvent was used. In the 2nd step of the growth, a minimal amount of surfactant (oleylamine, OAM) was used to control the size of the NCs. High-speed mechanical mixing provides the required reaction energy in a similar way to heating or ultrasonication needed for the cocrystal formation. Kaupp et al. suggested a three-step reaction mechanism to explain the molecular solid reactivity.39,40 First, the raw reactants diffused through a mobile phase similar to the amorphous solid and chemical reaction followed; second, nucleation and growth of the product phase occurred, and finally, the product separated and unreacted reactant surface was exposed for further reaction cycles.40 In our case, we have explored a two-step mechanical reaction process for the growth of composition and color-tunable CsPbX3 perovskite NCs. The 1st phase of mixing for 2 h ensures the completion of the reaction, while the 2nd phase of OMA assisted mixing results in the formation of nearly monodispersed cubic shaped NCs. Note that in the case of single step OMA assisted milling (for 3 h), we observed the growth of perovskite NCs with a broad size distribution and with inferior optical properties (e.g., low PL QY and large FWHM of the PL spectrum). This may be due to the improper reaction, and crystal growth in single-step OMA assisted mixing. Note that the addition of OMA ligand in minute quantity plays an important role in functionalizing the surface of the NCs that exhibits strong fluorescence and better stability.23 We also varied OMA content from 0 mL to 0.4 mL and observed that 0.2 mL OMA shows the optimized growth of nearly monodispersed perovskite NCs with superior optical properties.
3.2 Morphology and structural analysis

3.2.1 FETEM analysis. 
The morphology of the as-grown all-inorganic perovskite NCs was studied using FETEM imaging. The FETEM images of CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 NCs are shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c), respectively. All the images show the cubic shaped morphology of the perovskite NCs.19 During the high energy electron beam irradiation in FETEM imaging, degradation of the CsPbI3 NCs was observed due to phase instability, as shown in Fig. 1(c).41 Fig. S2(a)–(c) (ESI†) depicts the size distributions of the respective perovskite NCs with the corresponding Gaussian fitting, as calculated from Fig. 1(a) to (c), respectively. The average particle size was observed to be 10.6 nm, 7.1 nm, 9.4 nm for CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 NCs. Fig. 1(d)–(f) shows the HRTEM lattice fringes of single CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 NCs. The lattice spacing of 0.28 and 0.40 nm for CsPbCl3 NCs correspond to the (200) and (110) planes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(d). The lattice spacing of 0.29 and 0.41 nm for CsPbBr3 NCs correspond to the (200) and (110) planes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(e), whereas for CsPbI3 0.43 nm lattice spacing corresponds to the (110) plane.14 The systematic increase in d spacing due to the halide ion substitution from Cl to I is consistent with the crystal structure.19,20 The HRTEM images reveal the cubic shape of perovskite NCs. Note that for CsPbI3 NCs, the cubic phase (α-phase) is very much a metastable phase, as the cubic polymorph is stable only above 315 °C.41 The TEM and HRTEM images of two mixed halide perovskite NCs are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Fig. S3(a) and (c) (ESI†) show the TEM images of CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 NCs and CsPbBr1.5I1.5 NCs, respectively, while Fig. S3(b) and (d) (ESI†) depict the corresponding HRTEM images of the NCs. Thus, the same cubic shaped morphology was retained for mixed halide NCs as single halide perovskite NCs. Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the FETEM image of CsPbBr3 NCs grown by one-step surfactant-assisted mixing. In the single-step process, the perovskite NCs were obtained with large size distribution and inferior PL yield.
 Fig. 1  TEM images of: (a) CsPbCl3 NCs, (b) CsPbBr3 NCs and (c) CsPbI3 NCs. HRTEM lattice fringe images of: (d) CsPbCl3 NCs, (e) CsPbBr3 NCs and (f) CsPbI3 NCs. (g and h) HAADF-STEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs. (i) High magnification HAADF-STEM image showing atomic columns in a CsPbBr3 NC. The FFT pattern shown in the right inset confirms the good crystallinity of the NCs. The lower left inset is the IFFT pattern showing the atomic positions in the crystal. 
The high-resolution surface morphology of perovskite NCs is further characterized by HAADF STEM analysis. Fig. 1(g) and (h) show the HAADF STEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs at different magnifications, which clearly depicts the cubic shape of the NCs. A high magnification HAADF-STEM image of CsPbBr3 NC is shown in Fig. 1(i). The right inset of Fig. 1(i) represents the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the CsPbBr3 NC image, which confirms the good crystalline quality of the NC. The left inset of Fig. 1(i) depicts the inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) pattern of CsPbBr3 NC representing the atomic resolution image of the crystal lattice.42 The elemental composition and distribution of the CsPbBr3 NCs were further characterized by HAADF STEM-EDS elemental mappings, as shown in Fig. S5(a)–(d) (ESI†). Fig. S5(a) (ESI†) shows the HAADF image of CsPbBr3 NCs, while Fig. S5(b)–(d) (ESI†) is the corresponding spatial mapping for elements Cs, Pb and Br, respectively. The corresponding EDS elemental spectra are shown in Fig. S5(e) (ESI†) revealing the presence of expected elements.


3.2.2 XRD and XPS analyses. 
The crystalline quality and phase of CsPbX3 NCs were studied using the XRD pattern.19,20,43 Depending upon the different temperatures, CsPbX3 crystallizes in orthorhombic, tetragonal, and cubic polymorphs of the perovskite lattice, while the cubic phase is the high-temperature (∼160–200 °C) synthesis state for all compounds.19,20 The comparison of the XRD pattern of CsPbX3 NCs film is shown in Fig. 2. Note that no impurity peak of raw reactants was observed in the XRD profiles (see Fig. 2(a)) confirming the proper reaction and full conversion of reactants in the solid-state reaction. Thus, the solid-state synthesis strategy produced perovskite NCs of high crystalline quality comparable to those prepared by the conventional hot-injection procedure but with the great advantages of the facile and green nearly solvent-free protocol. Interestingly, the XRD pattern confirms the cubic phase of all CsPbX3 NCs despite the room temperature synthesis process.20,44 This can be attributed to the high reaction energy in the pressure mediated synthesis process and local heating produced in the ball milling method. Note that the cubic phase (black phase) of CsPbI3 NCs is the metastable state, and at room temperature, it converts to the orthorhombic phase (yellow phase), while the cubic polymorphs of other NCs (CsPbCl3–CsPbBr3) retain stability over a few months. The XRD peaks marked as ‘*’ in Fig. 2(a) correspond to the orthorhombic phase of CsPbI3.45Fig. 2(b) shows the enlarged view of the XRD peak corresponding to (110) planes showing the systematic shift of the peak with changing composition. The systematic shift in the XRD peak was observed toward higher diffraction angles with the halide ion substitution from I to Br to Cl, which is attributed to the decreased radii of halide ions from I to Br and Cl.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD pattern of all-inorganic halide perovskite NCs (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) with different halide substitution. The peaks marked as ‘*’ correspond to the orthorhombic phase of CsPbI3. (b) Magnified view of the (110) normalized XRD peaks of different samples, which shows the shift in peak positions with changing compositions. 
Furthermore, XPS measurements were performed to investigate the chemical composition and environment of CsPbBr3 NCs. Fig. 3(a) depicts the survey scan XPS spectra of the CsPbBr3 NC film in the binding energy region 0–800 eV, revealing the presence of Cs, Pb, Br, O, and C.46 Carbon and oxygen were observed mainly due to the adsorption by the sample or chemisorbed OMA. Fig. 3(b) shows the Pb 4f core-level XPS spectrum with the corresponding fitting. The peaks with centers ∼136.9 eV and 141.7 eV represent Pb 4f7/2 and 4f5/2, while the separation of 4.8 eV between the two peaks indicate the Pb(II) state.46 The Cs 3d XPS spectrum shows two symmetric peaks with center ∼722.9 eV and 736.8 eV with a peak separation of 13.9 eV, indicating the Cs(I) state, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The broad Br 3d peak is fitted into two peaks (3d5/2, 3d3/2) with binding energies of 67.0 eV and 68.1 eV, as shown in Fig. 3(d). These results are consistent with the literature.46
 Fig. 3  (a) XPS survey scan spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) Pb 4f core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting. (c) Cs 3d core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting. (d) Br 3d core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting. 

3.3 Absorbance and photoluminescence studies
The solid-state synthesis strategy was expanded to synthesize CsPbX3 perovskite NCs with varied halide compositions/ratios. Fig. 4(a) shows the vertically stacked absorption spectra of different samples. From the absorption edges of the different NCs, it is clear that the optical band gap can be tuned from 415 to 670 nm, across almost the entire visible range, by adjusting the halide composition during the synthesis.
 Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra (stacked) of CsPbX3 NCs with different halide (X = Cl, Br, and I) compositions. (b) Comparison of the normalized PL spectra of different CsPbX3 NCs samples. (c) Comparison of PL quantum yields of different CsPbX3 NCs samples before annealing. (d) Normalized upconversion PL spectra of different CsPbX3 NCs samples using laser excitation of 632 nm. (e) Photographs of the colloidal dispersions of CsPbX3 NCs in toluene under UV light illumination (395 nm). 
The most attractive property of perovskite NCs and QDs is their strong color-tunable light emission. Fig. 4(b) shows the room-temperature normalized PL emission spectra of different CsPbX3 NC colloidal dispersions in toluene. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the PL emission can be tuned to cover the entire visible spectral range (from 416 to 691 nm) by adjusting the halide anions. The sharp PL peaks of each NC sample originates from the near band edge excitonic recombination. A careful analysis of the PL line shape revealed the presence of two additional peaks related to intrinsic defects in the NCs, besides the strong excitonic emission peak (see Fig. S6, ESI†).47 The contribution of the defects can be minimized with the help of post-growth annealing, as shown in Fig. S6(d) (ESI†). The as-grown CsPbX3 NCs dispersed in toluene exhibit very sharp PL peaks with FWHM of 12–31 nm for the excitonic emission. The FWHM of PL peak increases by changing the halide anion from Cl to I, which is possibly due to the size-induced inhomogeneous broadening. The NC size distribution from TEM imaging also suggests the same.
The strong PL emissions of CsPbX3 NCs were further characterized by PL QY measurements. The CsPbX3 NCs show very high PL QY of 8–88%, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The PL QY of the perovskite NCs synthesised by our facile solid-state method is comparable to that obtained by the well-known hot injection method.48 Note that after post-growth annealing, the PL QY is increased to 9–95% due to the reduction of nonradiative recombination centers/defects. Among all NCs, CsPbBr3 exhibits the highest PL QY of 95%, which is higher than obtained in the previous report, whereas the mixed halides exhibit considerably lower PL QYs.48 The PL QY, peak position, and FWHM of different NCs are tabulated in Table 1. We have further studied the photon upconversion by the as-synthesized perovskite NCs. Fig. 4(d) shows the normalized upconversion emission spectra for CsPbX3 NCs under 632nm CW diode laser excitation.49 Interestingly, we observed the characteristic band-edge exciton emissions from the perovskite NCs in the upconversion spectra, as shown in Fig. 4(d). This result depicts the excellent fluorescence properties of CsPbX3 NCs synthesized by the simple solid-state process. Fig. 4(e) shows the photographs of the colloidal dispersions of CsPbX3 NCs with different halide compositions in toluene under UV light irradiation of wavelength 395 nm, which shows color-tunable bright emission of each sample. Fig. S7 (ESI†) shows photographs of different NCs samples under ambient light.
Table 1 Summary of the PL spectral features and quantum yields of different perovskite NCs made by a solid-state process




Perovskite NCs
PL peak position (nm)
FWHM (nm)
PL quantum yield (%)




CsPbCl3
416
14
11


CsPbCl2Br
435
22
9


CsPbCl1.5Br1.5
451
25
21


CsPbClBr2
461
22
44


CsPbBr3
503
23
95


CsPbBr2I
537
25
41


CsPbBr1.5I1.5
557
32
13


CsPbBrI2
626
47
29


CsPbI3
690
35
63




We have further studied the long-term stability of our CsPbBr3 NCs. Due to the metastable phase of CsPbI3, it degrades within a few days, while the other NCs show stability over months. Among all the nine different perovskite NCs studied, the CsPbBr3 colloidal NCs in toluene show the highest stability of over 7 months of storage. Fig. S8 (ESI†) shows the comparison of the XRD pattern of as-grown and after 5 months of storage of CsPbBr3 NCs. The retained XRD peaks after 5 months of storage confirm the high stability of our CsPbBr3 NCs. Fig. 5(a) shows the comparison of PL spectra after 3 months, 5 months, and 7 months of storage under ambient conditions. The PL peak intensity was decreased by only 24% compared to the initial PL intensity after 7 months of storage under ambient conditions, which is significantly better than the reported stabilities.50,51 The left inset depicts the digital photograph showing the bright emission under UV light of CsPbBr3 NCs after 7 months of storage. We also studied the photostability and thermal stability of the CsPbBr3 NC film. Interestingly the PL intensity first increased for 1½ h and then reduced by ∼35% after 5 h of irradiation and then remained stable for 30 h of irradiation of 405 nm laser (see Fig. S9(a), ESI†). The initial increase in PL is due to the light-induced defect curing.7 Fig. S9(b) (ESI†) depicts the variation of the relative PL intensity of the CsPbBr3 NC film as a function of time when continuously heated at 85 °C. Here again, initially, the PL intensity increased due to the removal of the nonradiative centers, and then it decreased by ∼53% after 10 h of heating. Thus, the as-grown CsPbBr3 NCs show excellent photo- and thermal stability. Our results are significantly better than the reported stability of the solution-processed perovskite NCs. Zhang et al. reported that the coordination of different solvents used in the synthesis process played an important role in the stability of the perovskite NCs.52 In the hot injection method, different solvents, organic surfactants/ligands are used to dissolve the raw reactants. The residue of these solvents may lead to the poor stability of the perovskite NCs, while in our case, no organic solvent surfactants/ligands were used in the synthesis process.
 Fig. 5  (a) Evolution of the PL spectra of a colloidal dispersion of CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene after different storage times under ambient conditions. The inset shows the photograph of CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene under UV light after 7 months of storage. (b) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NC film. (c) Integrated PL intensity of CsPbBr3 NCs as a function of the inverse of temperature and its fitting with the Arrhenius equation. The inset shows the variation of FWHM of the excitonic peak with temperatures and its Boson fit. (d) TRPL decay profiles of CsPbX3 NCs with different halide (X = Cl, Br, and I) compositions. 
3.4 Low-temperature photoluminescence study
To investigate the origin of the high PL QY of the perovskite NCs, temperature-dependent PL measurements were carried out. PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NC film in the temperature range 80–300 K are shown in Fig. 5(b). The intensity of the PL peak increased systematically with the decrease in temperature, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The decrease in PL peak intensity of perovskite NCs with increasing temperature is mainly attributed to the thermal quenching of PL by carrier trapping at higher temperatures.7 At higher temperatures, the nonradiative deep level trap states are more active, and photogenerated excitons dissociate, which results in a decrease in PL intensity. With the decrease in temperature, the redshift of the PL peak is observed, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Typically, a semiconductor shows a blue shift in excitonic PL peak at low temperatures due to the electron–phonon interaction. However, CsPbBr3 shows an unusual redshift of PL emission, i.e., the bandgap increases with increasing temperature. This is attributed to the dominant contribution of lattice thermal expansion with a positive temperature coefficient as compared to the contribution of electron–phonon interaction.7,53
From the low-temperature PL analysis, we can estimate two important parameters, the exciton binding energy (Eb) and exciton–phonon scattering, which play an important role for the high PL QY for the NCs.7Fig. 5(c) shows the variation of integrated PL peak intensity with the inverse of temperature (1/T) fitted with the Arrhenius equation as follows: (1)where I0 is the integrated PL peak intensity at very low temperatures, A is a constant, Eb is the exciton binding energy, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. The exciton binding energy of CsPbBr3 NCs is obtained as 128.6 meV, which is comparable to/higher than the reported values for CsPbBr3 NCs.53–55 The high exciton binding energy of CsPbBr3 NCs implies that at room temperature thermal dissociation of the exciton is less probable resulting in the high PL QY (∼95%).55
The line width (FWHM) of the excitonic PL emission is increased with increasing temperature, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(c). The higher broadening is attributed to the enhanced exciton–phonon scattering and non-radiative decay of photogenerated excitons with the increase in temperature. The temperature-dependence of the emission linewidth is fitted by using the Boson model with the following equation: (2)where Γ0 is the inhomogeneous broadening constant, σ is the exciton-acoustic phonon coupling coefficient, Γop is the exciton-longitudinal optical phonon coupling coefficient or the Fröhlich coupling coefficient, and Eph is the optical phonon energy.53 From the fitting of temperature-dependent FWHM in the inset of Fig. 5(c), the obtained parameters for CsPbBr3 are given by Γ0 = 45.4 meV, σ = 2 μeV K−1, Γop = 66.4 meV, and Eph = 25.5 meV. The obtained parameters are comparable to the other reported CsPbBr3 NCs/QDs synthesized using the hot injection method.55 Thus, our results imply the versatility of perovskite NCs synthesized using the low-cost facile solid-state method with impressive optical properties.
3.5. Time-resolved photoluminescence study
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed to investigate the recombination kinetics of photogenerated charge carriers of the CsPbX3 colloidal NCs. Fig. 5(d) shows the TRPL decay profiles of different perovskite NCs monitored at the steady-state PL peak center of each sample fitted using a tri-exponential decay function as7 (3)where Ai and τi are the amplitudes and lifetimes, respectively. The emission lifetime can be interpreted to be the average time the fluorophore stays in the excited state and hence provides information on the emission dynamics of the fluorophore. The average lifetimes (τave) of TRPL decay profiles were estimated by using the relation (4)
The time constants (τi) and amplitudes (Ai) of TRPL decay profiles of different samples are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI†). The average lifetimes (τave) of the TRPL decay profiles were found to be 13.7 ns, 15.0 ns, 18.6 ns, 31.8 ns and 100.9 ns for CsPbCl3, CsPbCl1.5Br1.5, CsPbBr3, CsPbBr1.5I1.5 and CsPbI3 NCs, respectively. The average lifetimes decreased systematically with the widening of the bandgap of the perovskite NCs, and this is consistent with the literature.19 Note that the lower PLQYs of CsPbCl3 (∼11%) and CsPbI3 (∼63%) NCs than that of CsPbBr3 (∼95%) NCs and the difference of decay rates are attributed to the intrinsic optical properties of the halide perovskites.19,56
3.6 Applications in light emitting diodes
The color-tunable perovskite NCs with excellent PL QY and high stability are further utilized for their application in down-converted light-emitting diodes (LEDs).22,57 As-synthesized CsPbX3 NCs dispersed in toluene were mixed with PMMA and coated on a low-cost commercial UV LED chip with emission wavelength 395 nm. Fig. 6(a) shows the photographs of different fabricated CsPbX3 NCs LED devices. The fabricated LED devices emit different bright colors from the violet to the red region under 3 V of applied bias. The corresponding normalized electroluminescence (EL) emission spectra of different devices are shown in Fig. 6(b) depicting fully tunable luminescence from the violet to the red region. The CIE coordinates of the LED devices are found to be (0.15, 0.11), (0.16, 0.03), (0.16, 0.02), (0.16, 0.12), (0.08, 0.58), (0.25, 0.62), (0.28, 0.53), (0.66, 0.33) and (0.68, 0.30) for CsPbCl3, CsPbCl2Br, CsPbCl1.5Br1.5, CsPbClBr2, CsPbBr3, CsPbBr2I, CsPbBr1.5I1.5, CsPbBr2I and CsPbI3 NC perovskite LEDs, respectively, confirming full spectral tunability. Thus, our results indicate that the as-prepared low-cost CsPbX3 NCs are promising for future LED and display applications over the entire visible region. The luminous efficiency of the CsPbBr3 LED was measured to be ∼42 lm W−1, which is significant for their practical application. We have further studied the operational stability of the CsPbBr3 LED in ambient air without encapsulation. The variation of EL emission intensity as a function of time is shown in Fig. 6(c), and it confirms the significant operational stability of the CsPbBr3 LED up to ∼200 hours without any encapsulation. The lower insets in Fig. 6(c) show the images of the LEDs after continuous operation of 50 h and 200 h. Thus, the luminescence efficiency and stability of our LEDs are significantly high compared to that in the reported literature.58 The performance of the LED devices can be further improved using an encapsulation, better quality LED chips, and controlling the NC/PMMA films coated on the chip.
 Fig. 6  (a) Digital photographs of the fabricated LEDs using CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) perovskite NCs on a commercial UV chip. (b) The normalized emission spectrum of the fabricated CsPbX3 LED devices. (c) Relative EL emission intensity of CsPbBr3 LED as a function of operation (continuous) time. The inset shows the photographs of the LEDs after 50 hours and 200 hours of operation under ambient conditions. 
3.7 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs heterojunction photodetector
Among all the as-grown inorganic halide perovskite NCs, CsPbBr3 NCs show excellent stability with good crystallinity and high optical absorbance suitable for various optoelectronic applications. Taking advantage of the large absorption coefficient of perovskite NCs in the UV-visible region and fast carrier mobility of 1L-MoS2, we have integrated CsPbBr3 NCs with direct CVD grown large-area 1L-MoS2 on Si/SiO2 substrates, to achieve high-performance TMD-based photodetectors.34 Direct CVD grown large area 1L-MoS2 on an Si/SiO2 substrate is used here in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction PD. The optical microscope image of CVD grown large-area 1L-MoS2 is shown in Fig. S10(a) (ESI†), while Fig. S10(b) (ESI†) depicts the AFM image at the edge of the 1L-MoS2 film. Fig. S10(c) (ESI†) shows the corresponding height profile of the MoS2 layer. The flake height of 0.7 nm from the height profile confirms the formation of 1L-MoS2.24,35 The Mo 3d core-level XPS spectra show two strong peaks at ∼229.0 eV (Mo 3d5/2) and ∼232.1 eV (Mo 3d3/2), which are attributed to the 4+ valence state confirming the formation of 1L-MoS2 (see Fig. S11(a), ESI†).35 The Gaussian deconvolution of the S 2p core-level XPS spectrum of 1L-MoS2 is shown in Fig. S11(b), ESI.† The peaks at ∼161.9 eV (S 2p3/2) and ∼163.1 eV (S 2p1/2) are attributed to the divalent sulfide ions (S2−).24Fig. 7(a) shows a schematic illustration of the hybrid 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC vertical type heterojunction PD.34 The inset shows a cross-sectional FESEM image of the heterojunction PD showing the perovskite layer of thickness 80 nm. The optical microscope image of the device is shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs vertical heterojunction PD. The inset shows a cross-sectional FESEM image of the heterojunction PD showing the perovskite layer of thickness 80 nm. (b) Comparison of the Kubelka–Munk (K–M) functions of CsPbBr3 NC film, 1L-MoS2, and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC films on the SiO2 substrate as derived from the respective diffuse reflectance spectrum. (c) Comparison of the PL spectra of CsPbBr3 NC film and 1L-MoS2 on the SiO2 substrate. The inset shows a comparison of the TRPL decay profiles of the two samples. (d) Comparison of the Raman spectra of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs on the SiO2 substrate. The vertical dotted lines show the shift of Raman peaks associated with MoS2. The inset shows the comparison of the PL spectra of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs. 

Fig. 7(b) presents a plot of the Kubelka–Munk (K–M) function, F(R), which is related to the absorption coefficient/absorbance of SiO2/1L-MoS2, SiO2/CsPbBr3 NCs film, and the hybrid SiO2/1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs film.12,59 Three peaks are observed in the K–M function plot of pristine 1L-MoS2. Two peaks with centers ∼671 nm (A) and ∼621 nm (B) are attributed to the excitonic transitions between the spin–orbit split valence band and the conduction band at K and K′ points of the Brillouin zone, while the third peak (C) centered at ∼455 nm is associated with direct transitions from the deep valence band to the conduction band in 1L-MoS2.27,35 The CsPbBr3 NCs film shows a sharp absorption edge at ∼515 nm due to the band to band transition, as shown in Fig. 7(b). In the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC hybrid, enhanced absorption was observed in the UV-vis region as compared to the individual films due to the co-absorption of 1L-MoS2 and CsPbBr3 NCs films, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The enhanced optical absorption of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC hybrid film is utilized for efficient photodetection by the heterojunction PD.
The charge transfers and photogenerated carrier recombination dynamics in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction are further studied using steady-state and time-resolved PL measurements. Fig. 7(c) shows a comparison of the PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NC film and the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC film. Both the films show a PL peak of ∼512 nm corresponding to the near band edge exciton recombination in CsPbBr3. Interestingly, the PL peak intensity is quenched dramatically by ∼52% in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs film as compared to the bare CsPbBr3 NC film, as shown in Fig. 7(c), and it is attributed to the transfer of photogenerated carriers from CsPbBr3 to 1L-MoS2 at the heterojunction resulting in the decrease in radiative recombination in CsPbBr3 NCs.26,27 The TRPL decay profiles of the CsPbBr3 NC film and the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC film are shown in the inset of Fig. 7(c). The average decay constants were obtained to be 16.6 ns and 13.1 ns for CsPbBr3 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC films, respectively, using the fitted decay profiles. The shortening in the decay time constant in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid compared to the pristine film is attributed to the transfer of photogenerated charges from CsPbBr3 to 1L-MoS2 at the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 interface.11 The efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from CsPbBr3 to 1L-MoS2 results in the enhanced photocurrent (PC) with superior response time in the hybrid device.
The charge transfer and the doping effect of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction are further probed by Raman measurements. Fig. 7(d) shows a comparison of the Raman spectra of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3. Two major first-order Raman modes, E2g and A1g, are detected at ∼383.6 and ∼403.0 cm−1, respectively, which correspond to 1L-MoS2.24 The frequency difference (Δk) between the E2g and A1g modes of pristine 1L-MoS2 is observed to be 19.4 cm−1, which confirms the formation of monolayer MoS2.35 The E2g and A1g modes are attributed to the in-plane vibration of two S atoms with respect to the Mo atoms and out-of-plane vibration of only S atoms in opposite directions with respect to the Mo atoms, respectively.24 As shown in Fig. 7(d), we observed a relative redshift of the A1g peak of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 by ∼1.1 cm−1 with respect to that of the pristine 1L-MoS2, whereas no shift was detected in the E2g peak. Note that the doping state of 1L-MoS2 can be determined from the A1g mode because of the strong electron–phonon coupling along the c-axis.25 The redshift of the A1g peak is attributed to the higher n-type doping of 1L-MoS2 due to the electron transfer from CsPbBr3 to 1L-MoS2.25,60 Note that the as-grown 1L-MoS2 is lightly n-type due to the presence of charged impurities in the CVD growth process.24 Due to the charge transfer, MoS2 becomes more n-type, while CsPbBr3 becomes slightly p-type. A comparison of the PL spectra of the pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs heterostructure is shown in the inset of Fig. 7(d). The sharp increase in PL intensity below 550 nm corresponds to the high emission of perovskite NCs in the hybrid sample. The broadening and redshift of MoS2 PL peak by ∼18 nm in the heterojunction is attributed to the increase of trion spectral weight owing to the n-type doping effect of 1L-MoS2 in the hybrid system.60 We further fitted the PL spectrum of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs heterostructure with four peaks: the neutral exciton (A0), the B exciton, the trion (A−) and the bound exciton (X) (Fig. S13, ESI†).61 The A0 and B excitonic transitions are related to the direct bandgap transition at the K point in the Brillouin zone between the minimum of the conduction band and the valence band spin–orbit splitting. The photoexcited electron–hole pairs would bind with excess electrons to form A−. The formation of A− is attributed to the substrate-induced unintentional n-type doping of MoS2.24 Finally, the X band is ascribed to the radiative recombination of bound excitons at the defect trap states.61 In the heterostructure sample, we observed a decrease in the spectral weight of the A0 excitonic peak from 56.49% to 21.03%, while that of the A− increases from 13.66% to 31.73%. This modification of the spectral weight observed in the heterostructure is attributed to the increase in the number of excess electrons in 1L-MoS2 due to the transfer of electrons from CsPbBr3 NCs to 1L-MoS2.
To gain a better insight into the electronic structure and band alignment of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC heterojunction, we further performed Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) analysis, as it is sensitive to the surface work function (ϕ) of materials. The KPFM measurements allows one to find the conduction band offset of 1L-MoS2 and the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC heterojunction. The work function of the Pt/Ir-coated tip for KPFM measurements was calibrated using ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) standard sample. The work function of the tip (ϕtip) was calibrated to be ∼4.5 eV. The contact potential difference (CPD) between the tip and the sample is given by32,62 (5)where ϕsample is the work function of the sample, and e is the elementary charge. The topography profiles of the pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (e), while the corresponding CPD distribution images are shown in Fig. 8(b) and (f), respectively. Fig. 8(c) and (g) shows the height profiles of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 along the line marked in Fig. 8(a) and (e), respectively. Note that the height profile in Fig. 8(c) confirms the formation of 1L-MoS2. Fig. 8(d) and (h) shows the CPD line profiles along the black line marked in Fig. 8(b) and (f), respectively. Considering ϕtip to be constant, the local surface work function of the samples could be measured by the change in CPD values.32 For 1L-MoS2, the CPD was measured as ∼180 mV. Thus, the work function of the 1L-MoS2 layer was obtained as ∼4.32 eV calculated from eqn (5).32 In the case of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, a higher CPD was observed in the heterojunction as compared to the NCs on SiO2, as shown in Fig. 8(h). The work function of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 is calculated to be ∼4.20 eV.32,62 This decrease in work function of the hybrid sample implies that 1L-MoS2 has a higher work function than the CsPbBr3, which leads to the formation of a type-II heterojunction. Note that it is difficult to calculate the exact work function of CsPbBr3 NCs, as it does not form a uniform film on Si/SiO2. However, it is clear from the KPFM measurements that the work function of bare CsPbBr3 NCs is lower than that of pristine 1L-MoS2. Thus, the decrease in work function in the heterostructure confirms the suitable band bending, resulting in the efficient transfer of electrons from perovskite NCs to MoS2.
 Fig. 8  (a and e) AFM surface topography images of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively, on the SiO2 substrate. (b and f) The corresponding spatial maps of the contact potential difference (CPD). (c and g) Height profiles of the pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, respectively. (d and h) CPD profiles of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, respectively. 
The PC response and sustainability of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction PD were measured at different applied biases in the range of 0.1 V to 7 V under the illumination of 405 nm pulsed laser (see Fig. S14, ESI†). Note that the heterojunction PD can detect light even at a very low applied bias, which is attributed to the suitable band alignment and built-in potential across the type-II heterojunction. At 5 V, the PC on/off ratio is estimated to be ∼223. Note that our heterojunction PD is of the vertical type junction, where the bottom 1L-MoS2 and top CsPbBr3 layers are connected with separate Au electrodes. We observed the superior performance of the vertical heterojunction device as compared to the planar structured device, where both the electrodes were connected to the 1L-MoS2 layer.34 For comparison, a planar device structure was also tested. However, the planar device showed nearly symmetrical I–V characteristics under dark and light conditions (see Fig. S15, ESI†), and the dark current of the planar PD device is much higher than the vertical type PD for the same composition. Note that the PC on/off ratio for bare 1L-MoS2 PD was observed to be 28 (see Fig. S16(a), ESI†). Thus, the PC was significantly higher in the hybrid PD as compared to that of pristine 1L-MoS2 PD.
To analyze the quantitative dependence of the PC on the incident light intensity, we measured the PC as a function of the light intensity. Fig. 9(a) shows the intensity-dependent PC for the heterojunction PD under 405 nm (pulsed) laser irradiation. It is clear that with increasing light intensity, the PC increased systematically. The photocurrent on/off ratio is estimated to about 342, which indicates a good photoswitching behavior of the heterojunction device. The variation of PC (I) with incident light intensity (P) is fitted by the power-law given by I = APθ(6)where A is a constant for a given wavelength, and the exponent θ determines the response of the photocurrent-to-light intensity. From the fitting, θ is obtained to be 0.23.63 The sub-linear power dependence of PC is likely to be attributed to the presence of trap states at the interface of CsPbBr3 and 1L-MoS2, which can lead to recombination of photoexcited carriers.27,63 Note that residue of some ligands on the surface of the CsPbBr3 NCs can trap electrons and holes, which lead to the saturation of the generated PC. Since the entire experiment is carried out under ambient conditions, defects are created in the perovskite layer due to its high moisture sensitivity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent as a function of illumination intensity for the heterojunction PD and its fitting with the power law. (b) Dark and photo I–V characteristics of the heterojunction PD under the illumination of 405 nm light of different intensities. (c) Comparison of the spectral responsivity of the heterojunction PD and pristine MoS2 PD in the wavelength 300–800 nm under 5 V bias. The inset shows the responsivity of the PD as a function of the incident light intensity. (d) Temporal response of the growth and decay of PC (symbols) in the heterojunction PD with exponential fits (solid line). 
The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction PD under dark and light (405 nm) conditions are shown in Fig. 9(b). The typical linear and symmetrical plots of dark current versus voltage of the PD indicate that the Au/1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3/Au form low resistance contacts with the gold electrodes. Interestingly, the I–V curve with light exhibits an asymmetric diode like rectifying behavior, as shown in Fig. 9(b), which is attributed to the type-II heterojunction at the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 interface.62,64 Under the reverse bias, the suitable band bending at the heterojunction enables superior charge separation, which leads to a dramatic increase in the PC.11 This is further probed by I–V measurements at different intensities: 1 mW cm−2 and 10 mW cm−2. The increase in PC at 10 mW cm−2 in reverse bias is much higher compared to the PC at forward bias. Note that the PD made on the pristine 1L-MoS2 showed nearly symmetric I–V curves both in the dark and with light (see Fig. S16(b), ESI†). In contrast, the asymmetric diode-like rectifying behavior of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction is responsible for the enhanced performance of the hybrid PD.
The figures of merit, such as photoresponsivity (Rλ), detectivity (D*), and response speed, were further measured to evaluate the performance of the heterojunction PD. Fig. 9(c) shows the comparison of spectral responsivity of the heterojunction PD and pristine 1L-MoS2 PD at 5 V bias in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. The hybrid PD shows a very high responsivity in the wavelength region of 350–550 nm and a relatively lower responsivity in the longer wavelength region, as shown in Fig. 9(c). This is consistent with the higher absorption of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The highest responsivity of 6.7 A W−1 was observed at a wavelength of 400 nm, as shown in Fig. 9(c), whereas the responsivity for bare 1L-MoS2 was found to be 1.47 A W−1 at 400 nm. This value of the responsivity is comparable/higher than the other 2D-based CsPbBr3 PDs.27
We further measured the specific detectivity of the hybrid PD. The peak detectivity of the heterojunction PD is obtained to be 1.08 × 1012 Jones at 400 nm, while for 1L-MoS2 PD, it is observed to be 1.86 × 1011 Jones at 400 nm (see Fig. S16(c), ESI†). Thus, the responsivity and detectivity of the heterojunction PD are significantly better than the bare 1L-MoS2 based PD. The inset of Fig. 9(c) and Fig. S16(c) (ESI†) shows the responsivity and detectivity of heterojunction PD under different intensities of 405 nm excitation. The heterojunction PD shows a very high responsivity of 24.34 A W−1 at an incident intensity of 0.6 mW cm−2. We have also calculated the variation of external quantum efficiency (EQE) of MoS2/CsPbBr3 vertical heterojunction PD with the incident light intensity (at 405 nm and 5 V bias), as shown in Fig. S16(d) (ESI†). The heterojunction PD exhibits an EQE of 7.4 × 103% at an incident light intensity of 0.6 mW cm−2. The Rλ, D*, and EQE are observed to be decreased with the increase in light intensity. The higher probability of scattering and recombination of photoexcited carriers under stronger illumination results in the decrease in Rλ, D*, and EQE values.32 A comparison of performances of our device with other reported CsPbBr3 based PDs is given in Table S2 (ESI†), which demonstrates the comparable/superior performance of our device.27,32
Furthermore, the response time of PD is an important parameter for the practical applications of a high-performance PD. The photoresponse speed of the heterojunction PD and bare 1L-MoS2 are quantified, as shown in Fig. 9(d) and Fig. S17 (ESI†). The experimental data of the rise and decay process are fitted by a single exponential function given by I(t) = I0 + Aexp(−t/τ)(7)where I0 and A are the constants, τ is the time constant. The PC growth and decay time of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction PD were observed to be 5.48 and 24.01 μs, respectively, as shown in Fig. 9(d). This response time is significantly faster than those reported on TMD/perovskite-based PDs.27,29,32,33 However, for bare 1L-MoS2 PC growth and decay time were found to be 68.15 and 403.19 μs, respectively. Thus, the significant improvement in the rise and fall times of the PC is attributed to the efficient charge separation at the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction. Note that in the case of most of the reported MoS2 based PDs, 1L-MoS2 is usually wet transferred on to Si/SiO2, which may result in the poor interface of the devices. However, in our case, the direct CVD grown 1L-MoS2 on Si/SiO2 gives a very fast photoresponse. Moreover, the PC response can be further improved by a suitable approach for trap passivation.
The light soaking behavior and sustainability of the heterojunction PD were studied, as shown in Fig. S18(a) (ESI†). Interestingly, with continuous light irradiation, both the PC and the dark current were slightly increased, which is attributed to the light-induced defect curing and partial removal of trap states.7 Note that ambient stability is one of the major issues of the halide perovskite-based devices. We further measured the storage stability of our heterojunction PD. Fig. S18(b) (ESI†) shows a time-dependent PC of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 PD after storage of 30 days under ambient conditions. The PC is decreased from 110 μA to 83 μA at 5 V of applied bias after 30 days of storage compared to the initial PC. Note that we have measured our device without any encapsulation or protection. Thus, our device shows significantly high ambient stability, which may be due to the CsPbBr3 NCs synthesized using the solid-state method.
3.8 Electronic structure calculation and charge transfer mechanism in a 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction photodetector
To have a profound understanding of the hidden electronic structure of the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid system, we have determined the projected density of states (PDOS), which would reveal the orbital contribution of the consisting elements. Fig. 10(a) shows the minimum energy configuration of the composite system, whereas Fig. 10(b)–(d) show the projected density of states of CsPbBr3 NCs, the MoS2 surface, and the MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid system. From the PDOS of CsPbBr3 NCs, as depicted in Fig. 10(b), we have observed two regimes of Pb-6p contribution in the valence band regime, one is around −3.5 eV, and another is around −8.0 eV. The contribution prevails in the range between 2 eV and 4 eV in the conduction band regime. The substantial contributions of Br-4p and Cs-6s are observed in the Fermi vicinity of the valence band, whereas Cs-6p prevails in the deeper valence states. Fig. 10(c) represents the PDOS of 1L-MoS2, where one can observe the overlap between Mo-5s and S-3p orbitals both in the valence band and conduction band regimes, whereas in the valence band regime the overlap is substantial in the Fermi vicinity. The PDOS of the MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid system is depicted in Fig. 10(d), where we can observe that the contribution of Mo-5s and S-3p is more in the conduction band regime as compared to the other elemental contribution in the Fermi vicinity. Their orbital contributions in the valence band regime mostly prevailed until −7.0 eV, whereas Pb-6p and Cs-6s contributions are seen in the deeper states of the valence band regime. From the total density of states of the hybrid system, it is observed that Br-4p and Cs-6s contribute more to the valence band regime as compared to the other elements near the Fermi level. There is another substantial overlap between Pb-6p and Cs-6s orbitals in the deeper states of the valence band, which has been reflected in the total density of states as well. By comparing the PDOS of all the three systems in Fig. 10(b)–(d), we can infer that substantial charge transfer occurs from CsPbBr3 NCs to the MoS2 layer, which manifests in the additional density of states in the conduction band and some states in deeper energy levels of the valence bands, as is evident from Fig. 10(d). The PDOS also suggests a type-II heterojunction formation between MoS2 and CsPbBr3 NCs, which results in the superior performance of the heterojunction PD. This inference regarding charge transfer has been envisaged from the charge density calculations of the composite, as depicted in Fig. 10(e). The charge density distribution of the composite reveals a substantial charge sharing and, therefore, delocalization between the surface S atoms with the Pb atoms. This synergistic effect of charge delocalization in the MoS2 surface and CsPbBr3 NCs has also been reflected in the total density of states of the composite system. This theoretical inference is in excellent agreement with the experimental signature of the charge transfer between MoS2 and CsPbBr3 systems, which leads to the enhanced performance of the heterojunction PD. A schematic of the band diagram of MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction and the photogenerated electron transfer from CsPbBr3 to MoS2 is shown in Fig. 10(f). Thus, the superior charge transfer results in the enhanced PC in the heterojunction PD.
 Fig. 10  (a) Minimum energy configuration of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid. Projected density of states of (b) CsPbBr3 NCs, (c) 1L-MoS2 surface, (d) 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid; (e) charge density distribution, and (f) schematic of energy band diagram and charge transfer in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, a facile, room-temperature, nearly solvent-free, bulk scale solid-state synthesis process is reported here for highly stable and color-tunable CsPbX3 NCs. A minute amount of surfactant-assisted milling process results in perovskite NCs, which exhibit an incredibly high PL quantum yield and color-tunable PL emission over the entire visible region with excellent ambient stability up to several months. Post-growth annealing results in reduced non-radiative recombination centers and improved PL quantum yield (of up to 95%) in the perovskite NCs. These highly luminescent perovskite NCs were utilized in color-tunable light-emitting devices by employing NC composite films with PMMA on commercial UV LED chips with superior operational stability >100 h. We further integrate the as-synthesized CsPbBr3 NCs with direct CVD grown 1L-MoS2 on Si/SiO2 substrates and fabricate a vertical heterojunction PD by taking advantage of the high absorbance of perovskite NCs and fast carrier transport in 1L-MoS2. Our 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC heterojunction PD can operate at a very low applied bias (0.1 V), while the photo responsivity of the device is obtained to be 24.34 A W−1 at 400 nm, which is about one order of magnitude higher than that of bare 1L-MoS2. The transient response of the PC growth and decay is found to be 5.48 μs and 24.01 μs, respectively, which are the fastest among the reported values in the heterojunction PD. The performance of the heterojunction PD is much superior to that of the pristine 1L-MoS2 based PD. The enhanced performance of the heterojunction PD is attributed to the efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from CsPbBr3 NCs to 1L-MoS2, which is probed by steady-state and time-resolved PL and Raman analyses. Direct evidence for charge transfer in the heterojunction is obtained from the Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) that shows a type-II heterojunction formation and a suitable band bending at the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 interface. These conclusions are supported by DFT calculations showing the distinct change in the density of states in the heterostructure, thus providing clear evidence for charge transfer from perovskite NCs to the MoS2 layer. Thus, our work demonstrates a low-cost synthesis strategy for highly luminescent and color-tunable CsPbX3 NCs and their application in bright LEDs and high-performance photodetection with 1L-MoS2. Our results may stimulate further investigations of 2D materials/perovskite heterojunction devices for different optoelectronics applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from MEITY (Grant No. 5(9)/2012-NANO(VOL-II)) for carrying out part of this work. Central Instruments Facility, IIT Guwahati, is acknowledged for the FETEM and TRPL facilities. We are thankful to Dr H. Sugimoto and Prof. M. Fujii, Kobe University, for the XPS measurements. MGB and SC are thankful to the institute PhD fellowship of IIT Indore and Prof. Tomas Edvinsson for computing time.
References
J. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Wu, D. Yang, Z. Sun, Z. Song, H. Wang and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804394 CrossRef .
S. I. Seok, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1704177 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-D. Lee, H. Kim, H. Cho, W. Cha, Y. Hong, Y.-H. Kim, A. Sadhanala, V. Venugopalan, J. S. Kim, J. W. Choi, C.-L. Lee, D. Kim, H. Yang, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901225 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Kim, J. S. Kim and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
J. Ghosh, R. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14917–14931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahn, M.-H. Park, S.-H. Jeong, Y.-H. Kim, J. Park, S. Kim, H. Kim, H. Cho, C. Wolf, M. Pei, H. Yang and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807535 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Suh, T. Kim, J. W. Choi, C.-L. Lee and J. Park, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 488–496 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Cao, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Ning, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, Y. Yan, S. V. Kershaw, L. Zhang, A. L. Rogach and X. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ghosh, G. Natu and P. K. Giri, Org. Electron., 2019, 71, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ghosh, R. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1551–1562 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shen, X. Li, H. Xu, M. Wang, X. Dai, J. Guo, T. Zhang, S. Li, G. Zou, K.-L. Choy, I. P. Parkin, Z. Guo, H. Liu and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6134–6142 RSC .
D. Ghosh, M. Y. Ali, D. K. Chaudhary and S. Bhattacharyya, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cen, Y. Liu, C. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Fu, G. Yan, Y. Yuan, C. Su, Z. Zhao and W. Mai, Small, 2019, 15, 1902135 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ghosh, M. Hossain and P. K. Giri, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 357–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2082, 050004 CrossRef .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, G. Fang, X. Chen, L. Lei, J. Zhong, Q. Mao, S. Zhou and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8990–8998 RSC .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, H. Gao, J. Shao, H. Zou, D. Yao, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42919–42927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Zhu, Q.-Q. Yang, L.-F. Gao, L. Zhang, A.-Y. Shi, C.-L. Sun, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1610–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. L. Mawlong, K. K. Paul and P. K. Giri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15017–15025 CAS .
B. Chakraborty, A. Bera, D. V. S. Muthu, S. Bhowmick, U. V. Waghmare and A. K. Sood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 161403 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, Z. Yang, D. Peng, J. Xi, P. Lin, Y. Cheng, K. Liu and C. Pan, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, X. Liu, D. Yu, C. Huo, J. Ji, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, A. Xie and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2801–2809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Peng, J.-L. Xu, J.-Y. Zhang, X. Gao and S.-D. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800505 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, S. Shen, M. Li, L. Li, J. Zhang, L. Fan, F. Cheng, C. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Kang, J. Su, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801744 CrossRef .
E. Shi, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, Akriti, A. H. Coffey and L. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6046–6072 RSC .
R. Lin, X. Li, W. Zheng and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2599–2605 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. Si, Z. Zhang, Z. Kang, P. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801219 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Fullon, M. Acerce, C. E. Petoukhoff, J. Yang, C. Chen, S. Du, S. K. Lai, S. P. Lau, D. Voiry, D. O'Carroll, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite, S. Zhang, H. Zhou and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603995 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bai, J. Qi, F. Li, Y. Fang, W. Han, H. Wu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701275 CrossRef .
K. K. Paul, L. P. L. Mawlong and P. K. Giri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42812–42825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Shao, D. Yao, H. Gao, Y. Liu, W. Yu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2239–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, W. Liu, Q. Wang, Q. Han and Q. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 787, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. Parobek, B. J. Roman, Y. Dong, H. Jin, E. Lee, M. Sheldon and D. H. Son, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7376–7380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kaupp, CrystEngComm, 2003, 5, 117–133 RSC .
T. Friščić, I. Halasz, P. J. Beldon, A. M. Belenguer, F. Adams, S. A. J. Kimber, V. Honkimäki and R. E. Dinnebier, Nat. Chem., 2012, 5, 66 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dastidar, C. J. Hawley, A. D. Dillon, A. D. Gutierrez-Perez, J. E. Spanier and A. T. Fafarman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, D. Zhang, C. Kisielowski, L. Dou, N. Kornienko, Y. Bekenstein, A. B. Wong, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7530–7535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ghosh, R. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 681–689 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, J. Li, X. Chen, J. Chen and J. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10059–10067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, L. Wang, T. Zhou, P. Zheng, Y. Li and R.-J. Xie, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21441–21450 RSC .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Ha, R. Su, J. Xing, Q. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2522–2536 RSC .
Y. V. Morozov, S. Zhang, M. C. Brennan, B. Janko and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2514–2515 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hai, H. Li, Y. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. Peng and B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5400–5403 RSC .
Y. Zu, J. Dai, L. Li, F. Yuan, X. Chen, Z. Feng, K. Li, X. Song, F. Yun, Y. Yu, B. Jiao, H. Dong, X. Hou, M. Ju and Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26116–26122 RSC .
F. Zhang, S. Huang, P. Wang, X. Chen, S. Zhao, Y. Dong and H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3793–3799 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shinde, R. Gahlaut and S. Mahamuni, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14872–14878 CAS .
J. Li, X. Yuan, P. Jing, J. Li, M. Wei, J. Hua, J. Zhao and L. Tian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 78311–78316 RSC .
S. Yuan, Z.-K. Wang, M.-P. Zhuo, Q.-S. Tian, Y. Jin and L.-S. Liao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9541–9548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1413–1446 RSC .
X. Lao, X. Li, H. Ågren and G. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Zang, W. Chen, Z. Hu, X. Tang, W. Hu, K. Sun, X. Liu and W. Chen, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 15071–15078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ghosh, J. Ghosh, R. Das, L. P. L. Mawlong, K. K. Paul and P. K. Giri, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 532, 464–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Noh, H. S. Shin, C. Seo, J. Y. Kim, J. Youn, J. Kim, K.-S. Lee and J. Joo, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tongay, J. Suh, C. Ataca, W. Fan, A. Luce, J. S. Kang, J. Liu, C. Ko, R. Raghunathanan, J. Zhou, F. Ogletree, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2657 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Moun, M. Kumar, M. Garg, R. Pathak and R. Singh, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 11799 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Huang, C. Chang, G.-Z. Lu, W.-C. Huang, C.-S. Huang, M.-L. Chen, T.-N. Lin, J.-L. Shen and T.-Y. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 233106 CrossRef .
Z. Lou, L. Zeng, Y. Wang, D. Wu, T. Xu, Z. Shi, Y. Tian, X. Li and Y. H. Tsang, Opt. Lett., 2017, 42, 3335–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc01306dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of: (a) CsPbCl3 NCs, (b) CsPbBr3 NCs and (c) CsPbI3 NCs. HRTEM lattice fringe images of: (d) CsPbCl3 NCs, (e) CsPbBr3 NCs and (f) CsPbI3 NCs. (g and h) HAADF-STEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs. (i) High magnification HAADF-STEM image showing atomic columns in a CsPbBr3 NC. The FFT pattern shown in the right inset confirms the good crystallinity of the NCs. The lower left inset is the IFFT pattern showing the atomic positions in the crystal.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD pattern of all-inorganic halide perovskite NCs (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) with different halide substitution. The peaks marked as ‘*’ correspond to the orthorhombic phase of CsPbI3. (b) Magnified view of the (110) normalized XRD peaks of different samples, which shows the shift in peak positions with changing compositions.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XPS survey scan spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) Pb 4f core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting. (c) Cs 3d core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting. (d) Br 3d core-level XPS spectrum of CsPbBr3 NCs with the Gaussian fitting.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra (stacked) of CsPbX3 NCs with different halide (X = Cl, Br, and I) compositions. (b) Comparison of the normalized PL spectra of different CsPbX3 NCs samples. (c) Comparison of PL quantum yields of different CsPbX3 NCs samples before annealing. (d) Normalized upconversion PL spectra of different CsPbX3 NCs samples using laser excitation of 632 nm. (e) Photographs of the colloidal dispersions of CsPbX3 NCs in toluene under UV light illumination (395 nm).	 

CsPbCl3	416	14	11
CsPbCl2Br	435	22	9
CsPbCl1.5Br1.5	451	25	21
CsPbClBr2	461	22	44
CsPbBr3	503	23	95
CsPbBr2I	537	25	41
CsPbBr1.5I1.5	557	32	13
CsPbBrI2	626	47	29
CsPbI3	690	35	63

 	Fig. 5  (a) Evolution of the PL spectra of a colloidal dispersion of CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene after different storage times under ambient conditions. The inset shows the photograph of CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene under UV light after 7 months of storage. (b) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NC film. (c) Integrated PL intensity of CsPbBr3 NCs as a function of the inverse of temperature and its fitting with the Arrhenius equation. The inset shows the variation of FWHM of the excitonic peak with temperatures and its Boson fit. (d) TRPL decay profiles of CsPbX3 NCs with different halide (X = Cl, Br, and I) compositions.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Digital photographs of the fabricated LEDs using CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) perovskite NCs on a commercial UV chip. (b) The normalized emission spectrum of the fabricated CsPbX3 LED devices. (c) Relative EL emission intensity of CsPbBr3 LED as a function of operation (continuous) time. The inset shows the photographs of the LEDs after 50 hours and 200 hours of operation under ambient conditions.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs vertical heterojunction PD. The inset shows a cross-sectional FESEM image of the heterojunction PD showing the perovskite layer of thickness 80 nm. (b) Comparison of the Kubelka–Munk (K–M) functions of CsPbBr3 NC film, 1L-MoS2, and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NC films on the SiO2 substrate as derived from the respective diffuse reflectance spectrum. (c) Comparison of the PL spectra of CsPbBr3 NC film and 1L-MoS2 on the SiO2 substrate. The inset shows a comparison of the TRPL decay profiles of the two samples. (d) Comparison of the Raman spectra of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs on the SiO2 substrate. The vertical dotted lines show the shift of Raman peaks associated with MoS2. The inset shows the comparison of the PL spectra of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 8  (a and e) AFM surface topography images of 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively, on the SiO2 substrate. (b and f) The corresponding spatial maps of the contact potential difference (CPD). (c and g) Height profiles of the pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, respectively. (d and h) CPD profiles of pristine 1L-MoS2 and 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3, respectively.	 
I = APθ	(6)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent as a function of illumination intensity for the heterojunction PD and its fitting with the power law. (b) Dark and photo I–V characteristics of the heterojunction PD under the illumination of 405 nm light of different intensities. (c) Comparison of the spectral responsivity of the heterojunction PD and pristine MoS2 PD in the wavelength 300–800 nm under 5 V bias. The inset shows the responsivity of the PD as a function of the incident light intensity. (d) Temporal response of the growth and decay of PC (symbols) in the heterojunction PD with exponential fits (solid line).	 
I(t) = I0 + Aexp(−t/τ)	(7)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Minimum energy configuration of 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid. Projected density of states of (b) CsPbBr3 NCs, (c) 1L-MoS2 surface, (d) 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 hybrid; (e) charge density distribution, and (f) schematic of energy band diagram and charge transfer in the 1L-MoS2/CsPbBr3 heterojunction.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc01306d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
