Two-dimensional wide band-gap nitride semiconductor GaN and AlN materials: properties, fabrication and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC04022G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04022G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 17201-17232Two-dimensional wide band-gap nitride semiconductor GaN and AlN materials: properties, fabrication and applications

        
          
            Zhongxin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guodong 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xintong 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shouzhi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tailin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shiying 
            Zhang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiaoxian 
            Yu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Zhao
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Novel Semiconductors, State Key laboratory of Crystal Material, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: guodong9631@sdu.edu.cn; leizhang528@sdu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Processing and Testing Technology of Glass & Functional Ceramics of Shandong Province, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, P. R. China. E-mail: yjx0327@qlu.edu.cn
cSchool of Science, Shandong Jianzhu University, Jinan 250101, P. R. China
dLaboratory of Functional Micro–Nano Materials and Devices, School of Physics and Technology, University of Jinan, Jinan, 250100, P. R. China
Received 
      25th August 2021
    , Accepted 1st November 2021First published on 3rd November 2021AbstractGallium nitride (GaN) and aluminium nitride (AlN), as the representatives of new-generation wide band gap semiconductor materials, have become a hot spot in the semiconductor field due to their excellent characteristics. Benefiting from the unique two-dimensional (2D) layered structure and outstanding properties, 2D materials have proven to be good candidates for electronic and photoelectric devices, energy storage and conversion devices, and wearable devices. In recent years, plenty of research has been conducted for exploring the properties and fabrication of 2D GaN and AlN materials for different application purposes. In this review, the recent progress in 2D GaN and AlN materials, their properties, fabrication methods, and potential applications is summarized. Moreover, the challenges and the development trend of 2D group-III nitride semiconductor materials in the future are prospected.
Zhongxin Wang
Zhongxin Wang is a postgraduate at the Institute of Novel Semiconductors, Shandong University. He received his bachelor's degree in metal materials from Southwest University in 2020. His research interests include GaN materials and related devices.
Lei Zhang
Lei Zhang is currently an associate professor at the State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University. He received his BS and MS degrees in materials science from the Qilu University of Technology in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and his PhD in materials science from Shandong University in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH in Germany during 2016–2018. His research interests include wide bandgap semiconductor materials, perovskite materials and related devices.
1. Introduction
Graphene was first prepared by mechanical stripping in 2004.1 Its success shows that certain layered materials can be manufactured in a way that forms a stable thin layer, just one or a few atoms thick. Since the discovery of graphene, a wave of research on two-dimensional (2D) materials has aroused around the world. So far, dozens of 2D materials have been discovered or prepared.2 The first is the graphene family represented by graphene and h-BN (white graphene), followed by the transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) family,3,4 represented by semiconducting dichalcogenides5 and metallic dichalcogenides,6 and finally 2D oxides, such as layered Cu oxides7 and perovskite-type oxides.8 Compared with traditional three-dimensional (3D) materials, these 2D materials exhibit many unique properties. For example, graphene has high carrier mobility,9 good thermal conductivity10 and high transparency.11 It is an ideal material for transparent conductive nanomembranes, which can enhance the transverse diffusion of injection current.2 Materials in the TMDC family exhibit properties such as semiconducting, superconducting, and half-metallic magnetism.12 These different properties make them have great potential applications in catalysis, energy storage, sensing and beyond.2 Compared with 3D oxides, 2D oxides have a lower dielectric constant and wider band gap.13 These properties of 2D materials enable them to be used in a wider range of fields. It has been reported that 2D materials have a wide range of applications in field-effect transistors (FET), photodetectors (PDs), transparent conductive electrodes, deep ultraviolet light-emitting diodes (DUV-LEDs) and other fields.14–19 As a result, there has been great interest in the exploration of 2D materials.
In the field of semiconductor materials, GaN and AlN are the representatives of new-generation wide band gap semiconductor materials. Because of their excellent physical properties, they have been widely used in the manufacturing of LEDs,20,21 laser diodes (LDs),22,23 PDs,24,25 and solar cells,26,27 playing an important role in solid-state lighting, flat panel displays, solar energy, electronic power and other fields.2 The growth and application of these materials has been developed for many years, however, these efforts just mainly focused on their bulk structures. If group-III nitride semiconductor materials are to be used in smaller devices, they need to be explored at the nanoscale. Compared with the bulk structure, the 2D group-III nitride semiconductor material has a thin atomic structure and a high-activity surface. The combination of these two advantages can make the material exhibit more excellent and interesting properties.28 In terms of GaN, 2D GaN has a larger band gap,29 blue-shifted photoluminescence (PL) emission peak and higher internal quantum efficiency30 compared with bulk GaN. Moreover, due to the decrease of thickness, the lattice structure of 2D GaN is distorted, which will reduce the surface energy and make the crystal structure more stable. At the same time, it will cause the breaking and formation of the bond, resulting in the change of energy band structure, electrical conductivity, carrier mobility and other physical properties.28 So far, research studies have shown that when a group-III nitride semiconductor material is made into a 2D material with a thickness of only a few atoms, an ultra-wide band gap will be generated due to the quantum confinement effect, and under the excitation light with electronic activity, it has more excellent electron mobility and will have greater potential for heterogeneous integration.29,31 At the same time, the ultra-thin thickness of 2D nitride semiconductor materials gives them optical transparency and greater flexibility, and the in-plane covalent bond gives them great mechanical strength. These two characteristics make the nitride semiconductor materials have greater potential for isomerization integration, and are ideal materials for flexible devices.32,33 In addition, the high specific surface area and large lateral size of 2D materials make them highly surface-active and suitable for surface-dependent applications.34–36 Furthermore, 2D materials have the advantages of wide spectral response and low dark current, which are suitable for the construction of high-performance and power devices.28,37,38 Some scientists also predict that 2D nitride semiconductors will have abnormal thermal conductivity and orbital driven ultra-low thermal conductivity.39,40 Therefore, if group-III nitride semiconductor materials can be grown or prepared into a 2D structure in some effective ways, the application fields of group-III nitride semiconductor materials will be expanded significantly. However, group-III nitride semiconductor materials do not have layered structures like graphene. They have inherent strong covalent bonds in 3D space, which makes it very difficult to mechanically peel them layer by layer to convert them to a 2D morphology, and greatly hinders 2D anisotropic growth.41 Therefore, the fabrication of ideal 2D group-III nitride semiconductor materials is still in its infancy.
In this article, we review the latest research progress in 2D GaN and AlN, including nanosheets, nanobelts, monolayers (ML) or bilayers, and quasi-2D (films, nanomembranes) materials. First, some theoretical calculation results of the 2D GaN structure and the fabrication methods of 2D GaN and AlN which appeared in recent years are introduced. Then, we also summarize the latest research progress in 2D GaN and AlN devices, such as FETs, LEDs, Li-ion batteries, and so on. Some properties of 2D GaN and AlN are also introduced. Table 1 summarizes the fabrication methods and applications of 2D GaN and 2D AlN. Finally, insight into the current challenges of the fabrication and applications of 2D GaN and AlN will be offered, and an outlook of this field is provided.
Table 1 Summary of the fabrication methods and applications of 2D GaN and 2D AlN




Materials
Methods
Fabrication
Applications




2D GaN
UV-assisted electroless chemical etching
Section 3.1
—


Electrochemical etching (ECE)
Section 3.2
Field effect transistor (FET)


Nitridation reaction
Ga2O3 template
Section 3.3.1
—


Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Section 3.3.2
Field effect transistor (FET)


Molten salt auxiliary
Section 3.3.3
GaN paste electrode


Graphene assisted growth
Section 3.4
Li-ion battery; light-emitting diode (LED)


2D AlN
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Section 4.1
—


Metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE)
Section 4.2
—


Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
Section 4.3
—


Physical vapor transport (PVT)
Section 4.4
Field effect transistor (FET)


Metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
Section 4.5
Deep ultraviolet light-emitting diode (DUV-LED)




2. Structure and properties
At present, there are few reports about 2D group-III nitride semiconductor materials. As a result, understanding of their 2D properties remains largely superficial. As group-III nitride semiconductor materials change from bulk to just one or several layers, they can be expected to exhibit different properties than bulk. Here, we summarize some properties of 2D group-III nitride semiconductor materials explored by theoretical calculations, focusing on the structure and electronic properties of 2D GaN, hoping to provide some references for the exploration of 2D properties of nitride semiconductor materials.
Single crystal GaN possesses a wurtzite structure, with a C6v-symmetric (100) and a c-elongated hexagon (0001) plane. It is a typical two-dimensional non-layered material. By comparing the geometric structures of ML GaN and bulk GaN, Qin et al. found that when the bulk GaN is transformed into ML GaN, the Ga-N bond along the c-axis in the bulk GaN is destroyed, and the sp3 orbital hybridization in the original GaN4 tetrahedron is completely destroyed, which converts the original buckled structure into a planar structure (Fig. 1a). It forms sp2 hybridization.40 This change causes the lattice constant of ML GaN to increase.42 Planar sp2 hybridization also makes the Ga–N bond in the layer possess strong covalent properties, and the closest neighbor Pz orbital forms a π bond similar to that of graphene.43 The charge density difference of ML GaN also changes (Fig. 1a). The ability of the Ga atoms in ML GaN to lose electrons is reduced, as shown in Fig. 1a(ii) showing the reduction of the green region in the center of the honeycomb lattice. For ML and bulk GaN, the charge transfer of each Ga–N bond is 0.453 e and 0.358 e, respectively. The higher the charge transfer in ML GaN, the stronger the covalent bond polarization, which is consistent with the more localized charge density in Fig. 1a(ii).40
 Fig. 1  (a) The top and side views of (i) ML GaN and (iii) bulk GaN, the top and side views of charge density difference for (ii) ML GaN and (iv) bulk GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Quasiparticle band structures of monolayer and bilayer 2D GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Binding energy calculations of freestanding planar and buckled 2D nitrides (N: nitrogen, M: group-III metal element and H: hydrogen atoms). (d) Band-structure calculations via DFT meta-GGA of freestanding planar and buckled 2D ML GaN. (e) Diagram of bandgap energy versus in-plane lattice parameter for bulk and buckled 2D nitrides. A plot of Eg as a function of a number of atomic buckled layers is included as an inset in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (f) Lattice thermal conductivity (κ) of ML GaN, bulk GaN (both in-plane and out-of-plane), graphene, silicene, and ML BN at 300 K obtained by solving the phonon BTE using the iterative method; the phonon–phonon scattering channels of the FA phonon branch along the Γ–M direction for the four 2D materials of ML GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivities of monolayer h-AlN and graphene calculated using the iterative and RTA methods, respectively; the scattering channels of FA phonon modes along the Γ–M direction for h-AlN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The change of geometric structure and electronic structure has a significant effect on the heat transfer performance of ML GaN. At the same time, due to the large difference in the radius of the Ga and N atoms, the smoothness of ML GaN decreases, which also has some effects on its performance. The uneven distribution of charge density corresponding to the strongly polarized covalent bonds in ML GaN induces additional long-range electrostatic coulomb forces during atomic vibration. As the atoms oscillate near equilibrium, the additional forces put the atoms under greater constraint, which corresponds to a larger nonharmonic coefficient in the Taylor expansion of the system energy relative to atomic displacement. The greater the inconsonance, the stronger the intrinsic phonon–phonon scattering and the lower the lattice thermal conductivity (κ). Therefore, the strongly polarized covalent bond of ML GaN can lead to greater phonon anharmonic, resulting in a lower κ of ML GaN.40 They also solved the κ at 300 K for several substances derived from the phonon Boltzmann transport equation by an iterative method (Fig. 1f). The κ of ML GaN is 14.93 W m−1 K−1, much lower than that of the bulk (325.41 W m−1 K−1). This low κ is very beneficial for thermoelectricity. For ML GaN, isotopic scattering is relatively less important due to strong phonon–phonon scattering, so the effect on the κ is not so great. In ML GaN, FA phonon molecules contribute the most to phonon transport, similar to graphene and ML BN. Due to the reflection symmetry of the planar honeycomb structure, the phonon scattering process with odd phonon modes is largely suppressed, which leads to the low phonon scattering rate (equivalent to the large phonon lifetime), and finally leads to the dominant role of κ.40
Through the analysis of phonon anharmonicity, it is found that in addition to the main scattering channel, ML GaN also contains narrow scattering channels of the odd FA phonon mode (Fig. 1f), such as FA + LA → FO, because the difference in radius and mass between the Ga and N atoms is not very smooth, which leads to a lower symmetry group. The reduction of symmetry breaks the phonon–phonon scattering selection law and the appearance of additional scattering channels.40 In addition, H. M. Wang et al. analyzed the phonon scattering channels of monolayer hexagonal aluminum nitrate (h-AlN), and calculated the κ of monolayer h-AlN and graphene by an iterative method and RTA method, respectively (Fig. 1g).44 It is found that the trichromatic rate of the FA phonon mode of h-AlN is mainly due to the absorption process. Some other exceptionally narrow scattering channels have been found in h-AlN, similar to ML GaN, involving an odd number of FA phonon modes, such as FA + FO → FO. It can be explained by the phonon–phonon scattering selection rule based on symmetry. Due to the large difference in radius and mass between the Al and N atoms, the planar structure of h-AlN is a little rough, which destroys the reflection symmetry of h-AlN to some extent. Therefore, additional scattering channels are not completely prohibited in h-AlN as the reflection symmetry involves odd numbers of the FA phonon mode. As a result, the FA phonon mode has a larger scattering rate in h-AlN, which is equivalent to a smaller relaxation time, leading to a decrease in its thermal conductivity. At 300 K, the κ of a single layer of h-AlN is 73.43 W m−1 K−1. It is on the same order of magnitude as h-GaN and two orders of magnitude lower than single-layer graphene. The slack formula explains that the greater the mass of an atom, the lower the thermal conductivity. In general, the temperature-dependent behavior of two-dimensional materials, such as graphene, follows the 1/T law.39 But h-AlN is an anomaly. The value calculated by RTA is lower than that obtained by the iterative method. The underestimation of the RTA method is due to the fact that it treats the normal process as thermal resistance when in fact the normal process contributes no thermal resistance. However, the differences in the κ of h-AlN calculated by the two methods are much smaller than those obtained for graphene, suggesting that the Umklapp process plays a dominant role in phonon–phonon scattering in the monolayer h-AlN.
Sanders et al. used the first-principles density functional theory to calculate and compare the band structures of bulk and 2D GaN.45Fig. 1b shows the band structure of single-layer GaN and double-layer GaN. The maximum value of the valence band and the minimum value of the conduction band of the two structures appear in the same position, both of which appear at Γ. After calculation, the band gap of single-layer GaN is 2.95 eV, larger than that of the bulk GaN (1.79 eV), which is caused by the quantum restriction. The band gap of the double-layer GaN is 1.32 eV, which is lower than that of the bulk GaN. This is because the band gap in the double-layer GaN is reduced due to the Stark effect of the strong polarization field. The GW gap of single-layer GaN is 6.32 eV and that of double-layer GaN is 4.00 eV. Since the polarization field of the independent 2D GaN is not shielded by the surrounding vacuum, the gap is more strongly affected by the Stark effect of quantum constraints. In a single-layer structure, the electric field is stronger than the double-layer structure, and the small thickness of the plate inhibits the spatial separation of electrons and holes, so the Stark effect on the gap is very small.
By comparing 2D nitrides of planar and buckled structures, Z. Y. Albalushi et al. found that the stability of the buckled structure was improved relative to the plane due to the reduction of binding energy.29 Surface passivation can affect stability. When the unsaturated state is not properly passivated, a planar structure will be obtained. When the two layers of nitrides of the planar structure come into contact, a super van der Waals bonding will occur and a semi-metallic behavior will happen. The structure in the bent form is most stable when the unsaturated state is properly passivated.46 As can be seen from Fig. 1d, compared with the planar structure, the binding energy of the independent buckled structure is more negative. Therefore, regardless of the number of layers, the independent buckled structure is considered as the preferred configuration of the two-dimensional nitride. The change in atomic structure leads to a significant difference in electronic structure. In 2D GaN, due to quantum constraints, the band gap increases significantly (3.42 eV) relative to the bulk GaN.31 In addition, the planar structure shows an indirect band gap of 4.12 eV, while the buckled structure still retains a direct band gap of 5.28 eV (Fig. 1d). Due to the quantum confinement effect, both of them are larger than the direct Eg of wurtzite bulk GaN (3.42 eV). This has a major impact on optoelectronic devices. The buckled structure is the most thermodynamically stable and feasible candidate material for tunable optoelectronic devices (Fig. 1e).
Cai et al. studied m-plane GaN multilayers,47 which are shown in Fig. 2a. It is found that the N and Ga atoms of GaN on the non-polar m-plane and polar c-plane have different locations. On the c-plane, the N and Ga atoms are in different layers. On the m-plane, GaN forms a nonpolar structure, where the N and Ga atoms are equally arranged in each sublayer of the monolayer, forming a buckled hexagonal structure. This difference can lead to a range of structural and electronic properties. The monolayer GaN structure is optimized into a planar regular hexagonal structure, which is the same as the optimized c-plane ML GaN. The monolayer has a bond length of 1.85 Å and a bond angle of 120°. From the bulk GaN to the monolayer structure, the number of bonds between Ga and N decreases from 4 to 3, sp3 hybridization changes to sp2 hybridization, and the structure changes from tetrahedron to planar hexahedron. However, when the number of layers increases, the structure will also change significantly. As shown in Fig. 2a(iv), the three-layer m-plane GaN is composed of three bending hexagonal molecular layers, which is completely different from the c-plane GaN multilayers stacked with planar hexagonal structures, as well as the 8|4 hybrid c-plane GaN layers alternately composed of an octagon and a square.48–50 The coordination number of the Ga or N atoms in each layer is different, which results in the difference of bond lengths and bond angles, and the deviation of the outer bond angles from the body is more obvious than that of the central layer.
 Fig. 2  (a) Side and top views of (i) the pristine m-plane GaN monolayer, (ii) optimized monolayer m-plane GaN, (iii) optimized bilayer m-plane GaN, and (iv) optimized trilayer m-plane GaN (grey: N atom, green: Ga atom). (b) Electronic structure for m-plane GaN at (i) 3 ML, (ii) 4 ML, (iii) 12 ML and orbital projected electronic structure at (iv) 3 ML, (v) 4 ML and (vi) 12 ML. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) CDD isosurfaces and Mulliken charges for the bulk wurtzite phase of GaN and (ii and iii) CDD isosurfaces Mulliken charges for 2 ML GaN, respectively, in the unstable wurtzite phase and the stable Haeckelite phase. Simulated band structures for 3 ML thick GaN in the (d) planar and (e) Hackaelite phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
At the same time, they also investigated the band structure of m-plane GaN with different layers, which is shown in Fig. 2b. As can be seen from Fig. 2b, the position of the conduction band minimum (CBM) of m-plane GaN with different layers does not change, but the position of the valence-band maximum (VBM) will move from Y to Γ with the increase in layers. Both lattice constants and band gaps increase with the increase in the number of layers, indicating that the band gaps increase with the increase of interatomic interactions. It can be seen from the electronic structure diagram of orbital projection that the surface PZ orbital of N1 has a great influence on VBM.47
Kolobov et al. compared the charge density difference (CDD) isosurfaces and Mulliken charge between the bulk wurtzite phase of GaN and a 2 ML GaN.50 This is shown in Fig. 2c. It is found that all the Ga–N bonds in bulk GaN are equivalent, but the interlayer covalent bonds are much weaker than the in-plane bonds in 2 ML GaN. This is a consequence of the 2D nature of the slab only, and it is also a factor leading to the instability of the wurtzite phase in a few-layer limit. By simulating the band structure (Fig. 2d and e), it is found that, different from the direct band gap in the Haeckelite phase, the band gap in the planar phase is indirect. The band gap difference is about 0.3 eV, which is less than the thermal energy of the Haeckelite phase at room temperature, allowing the material to efficiently obtain a direct band gap, making it very attractive for electro-optical applications.
Sarma et al. conducted a simulation study on the mechanical properties of monolayer GaN.51 They studied the mechanical behavior of a monolayer of GaN at different temperatures through molecular dynamics simulations. The crack propagation was observed at 700 K and 1300 K, respectively. The transition from brittleness to ductility was confirmed and it was found that the transition was controlled by dislocation migration. Peng et al. also studied the mechanical properties of monolayers of GaN.52 It was found that a GaN monolayer was harder than a BN monolayer, and its Poisson's ratio was 0.43, about 1.9 times that of a BN monolayer. Moreover, the nonlinear elastic deformation of a GaN monolayer is as high as the ultimate strain, and the deformation failure behavior and ultimate strength are anisotropic.
Peng et al. also calculated the mechanical properties of an AlN monolayer.53 It is found that it is stable under different strain directions and loads. An AlN monolayer can withstand the relatively large uniaxial strain and small biaxial strain before fracture, and similar to a GaN monolayer, its second-order elastic constant (including plane stiffness) increases monotonically with the increase of pressure, while the Poisson's ratio decreases monotonically. The Poisson's ratio of AlN monolayers is about 1.6 times that of BN monolayers, which is smaller than that of GaN monolayers.
3. Preparation methods of 2D GaN
3.1. UV-Assisted electroless chemical etching
In 2014, ElAfandy et al. demonstrated the use of chemical stripping to obtain completely threading dislocation-free (TD-free), ultrathin (20–30 nm), free-standing, tension-free single-crystal GaN nanomembranes for the first time.54 The method uses a HF-based electrolyte (CH3OH + H2O2 + HF) and UV-assisted chemical etching of n-GaN. The success of this method mainly depends on the equilibrium state between the Fermi level on the surface of n-GaN and the electrochemical potential of the HF-based electrolyte, so that the surface charge region (SCR) appears at the interface between them.55 This surface charge region can cause the nearby band to bend upward, as shown in Fig. 3a. Incident ultraviolet light excites electron–hole pairs, and chemical etching begins. To reduce the dislocation density, they used a special method to prepare the GaN template. The GaN template used in this method is used to grow two layers of GaN with different masses by controlling the temperature used in the hydride vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE) method. Under different temperatures, the epitaxial GaN will produce different gallium vacancy densities. Under high temperatures, the epitaxial GaN has a higher mass, while the vacancy density of gallium is lower and vice versa. The upper layer of the template is a low-temperature GaN layer, which has a higher gallium vacancy density and a lower etching rate. In contrast, the high-temperature GaN layer under the template has a higher etching rate, and the screw dislocation will terminate at the junction of the two layers, as shown in Fig. 3a(iii). During the etching process, the etching holes are first formed in the LT-GaN region and extend downward. With the deepening of the holes, a considerable amount of UV photons can reach the HT-GaN region and generate e–h pairs on the domain walls to assist the etching of HT-GaN. Due to the low VGa density in the HT-GaN region, the etching rate is accelerated, resulting in lateral etching.56 The existence of these two etching mechanisms at the same time leads to the formation of undersurface cavity structures, or pore domains.57,58 Subsequently, the domain walls are etched away allowing the coalescence of the pore domains, finally forming suspended GaN nanomembrane on the top of a porous GaN layer (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) The energy band diagrams of GaN in equilibrium with the electrolyte, and the schematic view of the GaN substrate grown under a high temperature (∼1050 °C) followed by GaN grown under a low temperature (∼700 °C). (b) 3D illustration of a typical pore domain and inclined cross-sectional SEM image of NWs. (c) Optical image of an exfoliated nanomembrane while being attached to a 40 μμm wide tungsten probe. (d) TEM image of a GaN nanomembrane after transfer onto a carbon coated copper TEM grid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Membrane under strain to form a curved structure. (f) Schematic structure of back-gate FET made of GaN membrane. (g) Drain current ID–VD measured under gate bias from 20 to 50 V, with a step of 5 V, in the order from bottom to top. (h) ID–VG measure with a bias of 10 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2. Electrochemical etching
In 2014, Han et al. prepared GaN single crystal nanomembranes by the electrochemical etching (ECE) method and successfully transferred the nanomembranes to other substrates for application.59 To prepare GaN single crystal nanomembranes, multi-layered GaN structures having nanomembrane layers on top of heavily-doped GaN sacrificial layers were grown by the MOCVD process on sapphire. A 10 μm × 10 μm square hole was etched with Cl-based inductively coupled plasma (Cl-ICP) on the multilayer GaN structure layer to expose the heavily-doped GaN sacrificial layer at the bottom. The photoresist was used during the Cl-ICP etching to protect the upper surface of the membrane during subsequent ECE processes. In the process of ECE, the area around each square hole gradually combines with the adjacent area. At this time, the nanomembrane is automatically separated from the substrate, and finally, a GaN single crystal nanomembrane with a thickness of 90 nm is obtained, as shown in Fig. 3e. The nanomembrane was fabricated into a device, as shown in Fig. 3f–h. The performance of the device will be described in detail in Section 5.1.1.
3.3. Nitridation reaction

3.3.1. Ga2O3 template. 
In 2017, Liu et al. used a template approach to synthesize GaN nanosheets.60 They first prepared ultrathin metastable γ-Ga2O361 at 5–10 nm by a modified hydrothermal method. Then, the in situ GaN nanosheets were prepared by the nitridation reaction of γ-Ga2O3 and ammonia gas. The whole preparation process is shown in Fig. 4a(ii). The selection of metastable γ-Ga2O3 as a template for the indirect synthesis of GaN nanosheets is inspired by the various nanostructures obtained by the template synthesis method.62,63 Metastable γ-Ga2O3 has a cubic structure, and the lattice constants of the (220) plane are close to the values in the (100) plane of wurtzite-type hexagonal GaN (a = 0.318 nm, c = 0.518 nm), as shown in Fig. 4a(i) and (iii). γ-Ga2O3's unstable structure, symmetry, and close lattice constants enable it to be easily converted into a hexagonal structure during an appropriate nitridation process. In addition, the γ-Ga2O3 framework can be well maintained in the form of nanosheets, which plays an important role in obtaining layered GaN nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 4a(iv). After XRD characterization before and after nitriding, it can be determined that the γ-Ga2O3 phase can be completely transformed into a GaN phase, and pure GaN nanosheets can be obtained. The GaN nanosheets obtained are shown in Fig. 4b. In the synthesized GaN nanosheets, the atoms are still arranged in a stacking sequence of ABAB when it is observed along the [0001] orientation, and the distance of adjacent lattice fringes (0.28 nm) is in good agreement with the (100) plane spacing of wurtzite-type GaN. They also studied the optical emission and band gap of the obtained GaN nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 4b. When γ-Ga2O3 is transformed into GaN nanosheets, the absorption edge shifts to about 370 nm, and the absorption tail extends to 500 nm. The calculated band gap is 3.30 eV, which is much smaller than theoretical predictions. They speculate that it is due to oxygen impurities and dislocations in the GaN host lattice.
 Fig. 4  (a) The preparation process of GaN nanosheets. (b) TEM images of thin GaN nanosheets, typical low-magnification TEM image of GaN nanosheets and high-resolution TEM image of GaN nanosheets; UV-vis spectra of γ-Ga2O3 and GaN nanosheets synthesized at 850 °C with different times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram describing the stepwise procedures for the fabrication of the 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer. (d) Schematic diagram of the atomic model describing the structural transformation of the 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer to the 2D β-Ga2O3 crystal and TEM image of the 2D Ga2O3 crystal obtained through heat treatment at 800 °C for 30 min. (e) Optical image and bright-field TEM image of a centimeter-sized 2D GaN crystal on the SiO2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Li et al. proposed a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) printing strategy, taking advantage of the fact that the Ga metal is a liquid at room temperature and its surface can be passivated/oxidized very quickly in air,64 to obtain a large-sized, highly transferable 2D Ga2O3 thin layer. Moreover, the obtained 2D Ga2O3 layer can be used as an ideal template to transform into a 2D GaN nanomembrane by the nitriding reaction.65

Fig. 4c shows the preparation process of a 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer. First, the Ga metal is heated to melt and then transferred to the tape using a plastic dropper. The liquid Ga on the tape is controllably brushed onto the PDMS substrate. At this point, the liquid Ga is exposed to the atmosphere and can easily form an extremely thin oxide skin on the surface. The adsorption of oxygen on the PDMS substrate also accelerates the oxidation process, which leads to continuous deposition of the 2D Ga2O3 layer. Then, taking advantage of the strong van der Waals force and the liquidity of Ga, a large area and transparent 2D Ga2O3 layer can be directly obtained by wiping. Then, the PDMS substrate is directly inverted on the SiO2 or Si substrate, and the PDMS substrate is removed by heating to complete the 2D Ga2O3 transfer. The 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer can be converted into 2D Ga2O3 crystals after heat treatment at 800 °C for 30 minutes in air (Fig. 4d).
In addition, by nitriding the 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer template in a horizontal tubular furnace, 2D GaN crystals can be obtained. The reaction chamber is first evacuated to eliminate the effects of oxygen. Then, the reaction chamber was heated to 800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1, and NH3 with a flow rate of 50 sccm was added as the reaction gas. The nitriding reaction could be completed after 10 minutes of continuous reaction. Despite the reaction temperature being as high as 800 °C, there is no damage or breakage on the 2D GaN surface (Fig. 4e). Compared with 2D Ga2O3, its thickness is reduced by half due to the partial decomposition of Ga2O3 and the arrangement of the Ga and N atoms. The 2D GaN crystal obtained by the reaction has a regular and clear lattice fringe with a hexagonal configuration. The measured interplanar spacing and included angle between the neighboring planes are 0.28 nm and 60°, respectively.


3.3.2. Liquid metal gallium. 
In 2018, Chen et al. achieved the growth of 2D GaN single crystals by a surface-confined nitridation reaction via CVD.30 They synthesized 2D GaN on liquid metal gallium, which is the easiest material to synthesize 2D GaN, and used urea as the nitrogen source for the synthesis.66–68 The method to successfully obtain 2D GaN is mainly due to the design of a surface tension-induced stratified structure (Ga/Ga-W), using tungsten foil as the substrate, so that the surface-constrained nitridation reaction occurs during the chemical deposition process. The preparation process is roughly as follows: first, the used gallium metal particles, tungsten foil and urea are pretreated to a certain extent, so that the metal gallium particles are decomposed into small droplets in hot ethanol and then frozen into very small gallium spheres. Then, the pretreatment urea was placed in the upstream area (zone1) of the reactor (Fig. 5a) as the precursor, and the gallium spheres were placed on the tungsten foil far away from the central zone2 of the quartz tube furnace. After heating, the gallium droplets would diffuse on the tungsten metal surface to form a Ga/Ga-W structure after reaching a certain temperature. At this point, the quartz tube is moved so that the Ga-W substrate is moved to the central region (zone2). After the surface-confined nitridation reaction, the 2D GaN is formed on the surface of liquid gallium.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the reaction unit; (b) schematic of the SCNR strategy for the growth of 2D GaN single crystals; (c) AFM image of the 2D GaN crystal; a low-magnification TEM image of 2D GaN crystals; HAADF and BF STEM images of the 2D GaN crystal acquired along the [0001] zone axis; (d) characterization of the 2D GaN single crystals: overlay of the SAED spots and intensity profiles extracted from the SAED spots; Raman spectra and PL spectra for the bulk GaN and 2D GaN with a thickness of 5.2 nm. (e) FET performance of the 2D GaN single crystal: schematic and false-colored SEM image of 2D GaN FET; Ids–Vg characteristic curve recorded at Vds = 1 V; gate-dependent Ids–Vds characteristic curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
This method focuses on the design of the hierarchical structure induced by surface tension, namely, the Ga/Ga-W structure, which can ensure that the surface constraint reactions proceed smoothly. The nitride layer on the surface of the gallium is a 2D GaN template, and below is a solid solution of gallium and tungsten. Because tungsten has a stronger nitriding ability than gallium atoms, it can hinder the GaN atoms, thereby hindering the thickening of GaN, realizing 2D GaN on the surface of the molten system, and limiting the growth behavior of nitrides (Fig. 5b). The 2D GaN obtained is 4.1 nm thick and has an ultrathin hexagonal morphology, as shown in Fig. 5c(i) and (ii). The atomic structure of 2D GaN is confirmed by Fig. 5c(iii) and (iv). The Ga and N atoms are arranged in a hexagonal close packing, in which the Ga atoms locate at the tetrahedral sites (point group 3m). Compared with bulk GaN, the lattice constant of 2D GaN increases. As can be seen from Fig. 5d(i) and (ii), the lattice constant increases by 4.17% along the (0001) plane. In addition, the phonon mode of 2D GaN also changes obviously. As can be seen from the Raman spectrum (Fig. 5d-iii), 2D GaN only has a single peak (E2) at 566.2 cm−1 with good symmetry and low intensity, while bulk GaN has three peaks. The symmetry and strength of E2 determine the high crystallinity of 2D GaN. Furthermore, compared with the bulk GaN, the E2 of 2D GaN shows an obvious blue shift, indicating that it is in the state of tensile strain. The disappearance of A1 and E1 peaks in 2D GaN indicates that the Raman polarization selection rule is maintained. The 2D GaN exhibits obvious PL emission at 330 nm with a photon energy of 3.76 eV, indicating that the 2D GaN exhibits obvious light emission at short ultraviolet wavelengths. Moreover, compared with the bulk GaN (3.40 eV), there is a significant blue shift, showing the quantum confinement effect in the 2D limit. The intensity of the 2D GaN is about 48 times stronger than that of the bulk GaN, indicating that the quantum efficiency inside 2D GaN has been greatly improved. Fig. 5e shows the device prepared by using the 2D GaN synthesized by this method and its related characterization. Detailed information will be given in Section 5.1.1.


3.3.3. GaCl3 as the gallium source. 
In 2020, Purwiandono et al. successfully synthesized 2D GaN nanosheets using LiCl as molten salt at relatively low temperatures (600–700 °C) for the first time.69 They used GaCl3 as the gallium source and LiNH2 as the nitrogen source, and made the two substances to be mixed in a certain proportion. After the reaction, the raw materials (GaCl3, LiNH2) and the molten salt (LiCl) are mixed in a graphite crucible in a glove box and preheated for a period of time, and then the nitriding reaction is carried out under a N2 atmosphere at a certain temperature. Finally, by cooling and washing, the 2D GaN powders are obtained. Fig. 6a and c show the 2D GaN synthesized at 650 °C and 600 °C, respectively. The 2D obtained GaN is hexagonal with a thickness of about 58 nm. This method successfully synthesized 2D GaN, mainly because CaCl3 and LiNH2 will form Li3GaN2 at low temperatures (step1), and then Li3GaN2 reacts with Cl2 to form GaN (step 2). 2GaCL3 + 6LiNH2 → 2Li3GaN2 + 3Cl2 + 6H2 + N2(1) 2Li3GaN2 + 3Cl2 → 2GaN + 6LiCl + N2(2)
 Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) GaN crystals synthesized at 650 °C (b) selected area diffraction (SAD) pattern. (c) SEM image of the 2D GaN edge prepared at 600 °C. (d) Current–potential curves of the GaN electrodes under intermittent UV irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
At the same time, Ga atoms are only exposed on the surface of (002), while N atoms mainly occupy the surfaces of (100) and (101) planes. Cl− interact with the Ga cations on the plane (002) in a preferential manner, thus inhibiting the crystal growth in this direction and keeping the growth of GaN in a 2D state.
A 2D GaN paste electrode was prepared and its photochemical properties were investigated. As shown in Fig. 6d. At 1.0 V, the highest anode photocurrent of a hexagonal-shape GaN (HS-GaN) is 0.54 mA cm−2, which is about twice that of a random-shape GaN. More details on its photochemical properties are discussed in Section 5.2.3.

3.4. Graphene assisted growth
The following methods for preparing 2D GaN all involve graphene. In 2010, Chung et al. explored the graphene growth of a GaN thin nanomembrane microstructure for the first time.70 They used high density vertical arrangement of ZnO nanowalls as an intermediate layer to heteroepitaxial transferable GaN thin films on the graphene. Although the film has not reached a nanometer level, this method has laid the foundation for the later use of graphene to prepare 2D GaN.
In 2016, Robinson et al. demonstrated the synthesis of 2D GaN using epitaxial graphene via a migration-enhanced encapsulated growth technique.29 The method was performed in a customized vertical two-flow showerhead cold-wall reactor. They performed in situ hydrogenation on epitaxial graphene, formed by the sublimation of silicon on the surface of SiC, to convert the graphene to quasi-freestanding epitaxial graphene (QFEG).71 The effect of hydrogenation is to passivate the suspended bond between the graphene buffer and the SiC, leaving the graphene as a separate layer,72 creating a lower energy original interface. After 60 cycles of trimethylgallium, the intercalation layer of gallium is formed between QFEG and SiC. After the intercalation layer is formed, it is heated and kept warm, and then ammoniated with ultra-high purity ammonia water. The whole synthesis process, the HAADF-STEM cross-section and the elemental EDX mapping after synthesis are shown in Fig. 7a and b. After cooling, the 2D GaN is obtained (Fig. 7c). During the synthesis process, point defects and wrinkles in graphene act as penetration sites, which facilitate the insertion of Ga atoms (Fig. 7c). Ga atoms accumulate at the defects of graphene, preferably forming GaN nuclei, which provide enough energy for insertion. Therefore, the synthesized 2D GaN tends to be distributed near the graphene wrinkles.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the MEEG process that leads to the formation of 2D GaN. (b) HAADF-STEM cross-section of 2D GaN and elemental EDX mapping of silicon, gallium and nitrogen in 2D GaN. (c) SEM of 2D GaN concentrated near 3D GaN island and networks of graphene wrinkles (left); schematic of the proposed pathways for intercalation through the accumulation and penetration of gallium through point defects in the graphene lattice and through nanoscale tears at the apex of graphene wrinkles (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic process of 2D GaN layers grown on graphene/Si heterostructures. (e) Schematic process of 2D GaN layers grown on graphene/Si heterostructures. (f) Cross-sectional aberration-corrected TEM images for GaN grown with hydrogenation with the assistance of plasma and the element EDX of maps Si, Ga, and C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Schematic diagram of the epitaxy of single-crystalline GaN film on Si(100) without and with single-crystalline-graphene/SiO2 interlayers. (h) AFM image of the GaN film (g-vi), showing a step-flow surface morphology with an RMS of 0.46 nm and XRD omega/2theta scan of the GaN film (g-vi). Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (i) Schematic diagram of the growth model of GaN films on nitrogen-plasma-treated graphene. (j) SEM images of GaN on (top) untreated graphene and (bottom) nitrogen-plasma-treated graphene. (k) PL spectra of InGaN/GaN MQWs grown on SiC and graphene/SiC substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
In 2019, Li et al. used a plasma-enhanced metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (PEMOCVD) method to achieve the epitaxial growth of 2D GaN with a well-controlled lattice structure and band gap on the graphene/Si heterogeneous substrate by controlling the energy and growth temperature of plasma during the reaction.73 This method begins with the preparation of a graphene/Si substrate. They used the CVD method to grow out of graphene on a Cu foil. The graphene–Cu foil is then placed in the FeCl3 copper etchant solution to dissolve the Cu foil. At this time, the graphene remains on the surface of the solution due to surface tension, and can be easily transferred to the 2 inch Si substrate to form the graphene/Si heterostructure. The heterostructures are then annealed in the electron cyclotron resonance PEMOCVD growth chamber, where hydrogen was used under certain conditions to break the C–C bonds in graphene and passivates the dangling bonds between the graphene and Si substrate.29,71 Trimethylgallium (TMGa) and NH3 assisted with plasma are used as precursors of Ga and N, respectively. Ga atoms are deposited directly onto graphene/Si heterostructures by TMGa flows, and N atoms are deposited by NH3 flows. The plasma is generated through electron cyclotron resonance using high-purity nitrogen. The three processes – hydrogenation, intercalation and ammonolysis – are repeated for 10 cycles. The entire process is shown in Fig. 7d and e. Finally, if ultrasonic cleaning is performed in deionized water, the graphene layer will be removed, leaving the 2D GaN layer exposed. It can be seen from Fig. 7f that the lattice structure of 2D GaN obtained is P63MC. Ga and N atoms were also found in the graphene/Si heterostructure (Fig. 7f).
Feng et al. grew single-crystalline GaN thin films on Si by using graphene and SiO2 as interlayers.74 The epitaxial process is shown in Fig. 7g. Unlike the method used by Li et al., they inserted a SiO2 layer between the graphene and Si to further screen the asymmetric surface domains of the substrate. They first transferred the graphene onto a SiO2/Si substrate and then loaded the substrate into a MOCVD system. Nitriding is carried out under NH3 flow. Subsequently, by using trimethylaluminum and ammonia as precursors of aluminum and nitrogen, an AlN nucleation layer with a thickness of about 10 nm was grown to promote the transverse growth of the GaN layer, and then trimethylgallium was used as precursors of gallium to grow GaN thin films. The XRD image of GaN films shows that only the peak corresponding to the wurtzite c-axis GaN is observed (Fig. 7h), indicating that epitaxial GaN obtained by this method has good orientation. In the AFM scanning region of 3 × 3 μm2 (Fig. 7h), the GaN thin film shows a step-flow surface morphology and the root mean square (RMS) roughness is only 0.46 nm, which shows that the epitaxial GaN thin films obtained by this method have good morphology characteristics.
Recently, Yu et al. successfully grew epitaxial GaN films on graphene/SiC substrates by MOCVD.75 They prepared graphene directly on a SiC substrate by thermal decomposition. First, a 4H-SiC substrate is annealed in an Ar atmosphere for a period of time to remove scratches and oxygen on the surface. Then, the surface graphitization is directly realized by heating to 1600–1700 °C for about 2 to 5 hours in an ultra-pure Ar atmosphere. Then, the graphene surface is pretreated with nitrogen-plasma, and the C–N-related dangling bonds are introduced to promote the growth of GaN films (Fig. 7i). The epitaxial growth of GaN films is carried out with TMGa, TMAl and NH3 as precursors of Ga, Al and Ns, respectively, and H2 and N2 as carrier gases. A 40 nm thick low temperature AlN buffer layer (780 °C) is first grown on graphene, and then a 160 nm thick high temperature AlN buffer layer (1080 °C) is grown. Finally, a 2 μm thick undoped GaN layer is grown at 1050 °C. If the graphene is not pretreated by nitrogen-plasma during this process, the lack of dangling bonds on the surface of the graphene is unfavorable to GaN nucleation, resulting in the failure of GaN to form a continuous film. After pretreatment, dangling bonds can be formed on the surface of graphene, which enhances the nucleation ability and forms continuous films (Fig. 7j). They also further grow InGaN/GaN multiple quantum wells (MQWs) on GaN layers. The PL spectra (Fig. 7k) at a low temperature of 10 K showed that the emission wavelength of MQWs is redshifted by 21 nm due to the insertion of graphene, which increased the content of In.
Sun et al. took advantage of the high hydrophilicity of graphene oxide (GO) and the strong affinity of oxygen-containing functional groups to inorganic ions76 to guide the preparation of 2D GaN using GO sheets as templates.77 They first obtained a suspension of GO using a modified Hummer process, and then dissolved the metal Ga into hot sulfuric acid to obtain a solution of Ga2(SO4)3. Then, the GO suspension was stirred and mixed with the Ga2(SO4)3 solution, and after a certain period of time, ammonia (NH3·H2O) was added to react to form gallium hydroxide (GaOOH), and then the composite material (GaOOH/GO) was frozen. Finally, the composites are heated in an ammonia (NH3) atmosphere to form 2D GaN through the nitriding reaction. The whole process is shown in Fig. 8a. As can be seen from Fig. 8b, the obtained GaN nanosheets present a hexagonal shape with a horizontal size of about 1–5 μm. The (100) lattice plane spacing of 2.76 Å also reveals its hexagonal structure (Fig. 8c). Compared with GaN powders, the X-ray diffraction peaks of GaN NSs are puny and broad (Fig. 8e), which is the manifestation of its ultra-thin characteristics, as shown by the AFM image (Fig. 8d) with a thickness of 14.5 nm. Fig. 8f shows the long-term cycling performance of the material as an electrode material. During the cycle, the Coulombic efficiency increases rapidly. And after a certain number of cycles, the specific capacity increases significantly. After the initial cycle stability, it still exhibits high electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis and structure of GaN nanosheets. (b) SEM image of GaN nanosheets. (c) HRTEM image of GaN nanosheets. (d) AFM image and height profile of GaN nanosheets. (e) XRD pattern of GaN NSs and GaN powders. (f) Cycling performance and corresponding Coulombic efficiency at 1.0 A g−1 for 1000 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4. Preparation methods of 2D AlN
4.1. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
In 2007, Zhang et al. synthesized AlN nanosheets by CVD using a Si substrate.78 The gold-plated Si substrate is placed over a quartz crucible containing pure aluminum powder with the gold face facing the crucible. The sample is heated to 900 °C in an Ar atmosphere, and then heated to 1150 °C in an NH3 atmosphere. Under these conditions, AlN in the form of nanoclusters is formed on the substrate. In this process, the first nanosheet acts as a template, providing nucleation sites for the next growth of nanosheet. Repeatedly, the nanosheets stack up, forming a stack pattern.79 The prepared GaN nanosheets were stacked on the whole substrate surface, and presented a rectangle of 4–6 μm in length and 4–5 μm in width (Fig. 9a). In addition, it can be seen from Fig. 9a that the nanosheets are uniformly stacked with flat and smooth steps. The XRD spectra (Fig. 9b) show that all diffraction peaks are in line with the wurtzite AlN structure, and the (110) diffraction peak is obviously the strongest, indicating that the synthesized nanosheets have a preferred orientation.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of single crystalline AlN nanosheets and nanosheets piling up into a stack. (b) XRD pattern of single crystalline AlN nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the shaping of an AlN/GaN nanomembrane into a microtube on Si(111) by etching away the sacrificial Si underneath and SEM image of a rolled-down AlN/GaN microtube on Si(111) and other types of shaped AlN/GaN nanomembranes. (d) CL spectra of an ultrathin AlN/GaN layer in unetched, freestanding, and electro-irradiated areas, measured at 4.2 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
4.2. Metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE)
In 2009, Mei et al. successfully prepared ultra-thin porous AlN/GaN crystal nanomembranes on a Si substrate by a selective silicon etching method, which can self-assemble into various geometric shapes.80 They first etched a Si substrate using a chemical etching process to remove the oxide layer and produce a hydrogen-terminated surface. The treated Si substrate was then exposed to trimethylaluminium (TMAl) for a period of time. At a certain temperature, the AlN layer was grown with a mixture of TMAl and ammonia by the MOVPE method, and then the GaN layer was deposited with TMGa and ammonia. The sample is then subjected to photolithography and SiCl4 gas reactive ion etching to form different patterns on its surface.81 In a certain proportion of HNO3 and HF mixture, the Si sacrificial layer under the AlN/GaN layer is etched away. Finally, a supercritical point dryer was used to avoid the nanomembrane structure collapsing due to the surface tension of the aqueous etchants in order to obtain a complete nanomembrane.
A series of AlN/GaN nanobranes (Fig. 9c) with different shapes were obtained by using this method. In the CL of 4.2 K (Fig. 9d), it is found that the bandgap related emission of GaN occurs in the un-etched area at ∼350 nm (∼3.54 eV). At 500 nm, a relatively wide visible emission band appears due to the defects in nanomembranes produced during etching. Compared with the unirradiated bandgap emission, the bandgap emission is obviously enhanced when the electron is irradiated. They explained that this phenomenon is caused by the desorption of water adsorbed by the ultra-thin porous nanobranes during the wet-chemical etching process, which improves the GaN bandgap CL emission.
4.3. Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
In 2013, Tsipas et al. first reported the epitaxial growth of ultra-thin AlN nanomembranes on single crystal Ag(111) substrates, and studied the structure and physical properties of the prepared 2D AlN.82 They used plasma-assisted MBE to achieve the preparation of 2D AlN. The selected substrate is the cleaned Ag substrate. The cleaning method is to sputter the surface of the Ag substrate with a 1.5 keV Ar ion source under a vacuum. In order to eliminate the damage caused by sputtering, the Ag substrate is annealed at 500 °C for a period of time. The sputter-annealing process is repeated several times to ensure that the surface of the Ag substrate is free of C and O contamination. After the exposure of reactive atomic nitrogen beams from a remote radio frequency plasma source, 2D AlN nanomembranes were deposited by evaporating the Al metal from a cold lip effusion cell using a pyrolytic boron nitride crucible.
In 2019, Borisenko et al. also successfully grew 2D AlN using this method. They chose a graphene/SiO2/Si heterosubstrate for growth.83 First, the required graphene layer was obtained by chemical vapor deposition. Before depositing the graphene layer by chemical vapor deposition, the Cu foil substrate required for deposition is electrochemically polished in phosphoric acid, and then the polished Cu foil is annealed in a chemical vapor deposition equipment for a period of time. Then, using n-decane (C10H22) as the carbon source,84n-decane is transported to a chemical vapor deposition device through a bubbler system to complete the preparation of multi-layer graphene films. At this point, the graphene films are grown on the Cu foil substrate. In order to successfully transfer the graphene films to the amorphous substrate without damaging the crystallinity, they used the wet-chemical room temperature transfer method to transfer the graphene films to the SiO2/Si substrate to form the graphene/SiO2/Si heterostructure. The substrate required for growth is prepared and annealed in a vacuum for a period of time. Then, a 20–30 nm thick AlN layer is grown by PA-MBE in a nitrogen-rich mode. Although this method has been successfully used to grow an AlN nanocrystalline layer, it has not been stripped and applied.
Wang et al. prepared atomically thin hexagonal AlN nanotubes with controllable wall thickness by epitaxial casting and selective thermal evaporating GaN/AlN core/shell nanowires.85 The first step is the epitaxial casting process. GaN nanowires (NWs) and AlN shells are self-assembled on cleaned and nitriding Si substrates by SVT Associates (SVTA) plasma-assisted MBE. First, the growth of GaN NWs is interrupted after growing at 800 °C for a period of time under N-rich conditions. AlN is then deposited at the same temperature, and the thickness of the AlN shell is controlled by the growth time. The second step is selective thermal evaporation. First, GaN/AlN core/shell NWs are stripped in an isopropyl alcohol solution by ultrasound. The mixture is then dropped on the hydrophilic Si substrate treated by oxygen plasma, dried naturally, and baked at 100 °C for 10 min. Then, it is loaded into a UHV-MBE chamber and thermal evaporation is carried out between the decomposition temperature of GaN and AlN. The entire process is shown in Fig. 10a.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic and atomic models of AlN nanotube (NT) fabrication process. (b) TEM image of a bundle of NTs. (c) The bandgap energy of AlN NTs as a function of the wall thickness from 1 ML to infinity (bulk), while the inside diameter is maintained at 1 nm. The insets show the schematics of the AlN NT/bulk (bottom left/right) and the atomic structure with 2 ML wall thickness for calculations (top left). The wall thickness-dependent bandgap energy determined by XPS and EELS is shown in the top right. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
The samples are tubular with a length of 0.8 μm and a diameter of 40–60 nm. The cross-section of the samples is hexagonal, which is consistent with the growth geometry (Fig. 10b). The bandgap energy of the AlN NT is estimated by first-principles calculations (Fig. 10c). The DFT-1/2 calculation predicted a bandgap energy of 8.22 eV in the AlN NT (1 ML wall thickness, 1 nm inner diameter). Compared with the AlN bulk, the one-dimensional (1D) confinement dramatically increases the electronic bandgap energy to be ≈ 2.0 eV for the single wall NT. In addition, the bandgap energy decreases with the increase of wall thickness, which is consistent with the theoretical prediction.85
4.4. Physical vapor transport (PVT)
In 2018, Yang et al. designed a method of PVT to achieve independent control of substrate temperature and source temperature (Fig. 11a), and prepared a large number of layered 2D AlN under high temperature and high supersaturation conditions,86 as shown in Fig. 11b. They put the AlN powder into a tungsten crucible and then put it together in a furnace to heat it. The source temperature is increased to 2100 °C, and the substrate temperature is always 50–100 °C higher than the source temperature during the heating process. After holding for a period of time, the substrate temperature is reduced to 100–150 °C lower than the source temperature. After heat preservation and natural cooling, a large number of 2D AlN can appear on the W substrate. The 2D AlN shows the XRD characteristic peaks (Fig. 11c) of wurtzite AlN and belongs to the hexagonal crystal structure. The TEM image of AlN (Fig. 11d and e) shows the hexagonal lattice of Al and N atoms, with the interspacing of the (100) and (010) planes the same as the theoretical value (0.27 nm). All these indicated that the prepared AlN crystals have a uniform morphology and high crystalline quality.
 Fig. 11  (a) The equipment schematic of growing AlN crystals. (b) A large number of lamellar crystals are clearly observed on the substrate. (c) XRD pattern of the as-prepared AlN crystals. (d) TEM image of an individual AlN crystal. (e) Surface HR-TEM images of the AlN crystal. (f) AFM images of molecular terracing on the DPA crystal surface, and the inset shows the step height analysis of crystalline terrace layers along the line marked from point A to point B (the lower right corner of the inset gives the molecular length of DPA along the a-axis). (g) Schematic structure of the OFET based on AlN and DPA crystals with Au strips as the source and drain electrodes, and the cross-sectional TEM image of a completed OFET device, showing the atomically sharp interface formed between each layer. (h) Representative transfer curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, a 2,6-diphenylanthracene (DPA) molecular crystal is obtained by van der Waals epitaxial strategy. A DPA crystal has the characteristics of high mobility and high luminescence efficiency.87,88 Its growth follows a layer-by-layer growth mode and forms a terraced profile (Fig. 11f). The average distance of each layer is about 1.8 nm, which is the same as the length of the a-axis. Therefore, DPA molecular crystals are tightly packed along the a-axis perpendicular to the AlN surface, and exhibit good field-effect mobility performance. Taking advantage of this, researchers combined AlN dielectric crystals with DPA molecular crystals to create an ideal transistor system (Fig. 11g). The features of this system are described in Section 6.3.
4.5. Metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
In 2018, Wang et al. successfully achieved the epitaxial growth of 2D AlN layers between graphene and silicon substrates using MOCVD.89 The Si substrate is chosen because of the high symmetry of the Si surface,90 which can stably adsorb Al and N atoms. In addition, the lattice mismatch between Si and AlN is about 19%,91 which can generate tensile stress to drive the transformation of 2D AlN from the R3m structure to the P63MC structure.92–94 The whole deposition process is shown in Fig. 12a. The first step is the preparation and transfer of graphene, to prepare a graphene/Si heterostructure. They adopt the plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition method to synthesize a few layers of graphene on copper foil, then spin-coated a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) layer on the graphene layer, and then the Cu foil-carrying graphene is placed in a certain proportion of the mixture solution of CuSO4, HCl and H2O and deionized water for a period of time to dissolve the Cu foil substrate. Then, the remaining graphene layer coated with PMMA is transferred to the Si substrate, and then the PMMA coating on the surface of the graphene layer is removed with acetone. After cleaning, the heterostructure of graphene/Si is prepared, which is used for the subsequent epitaxial growth of 2D AlN. After that, the graphene/Si heterostructure is placed into the MOCVD growth chamber and annealed for a period of time, and then the epitaxial growth of 2D AlN was performed using TMAl and NH3 as precursors of Al and N, respectively. As the 2D AlN layer grows between the graphene and Si substrate, the flow of H2 opens the C–C bonds of the graphene (Fig. 12b-iii). After that, the Al and N atoms in the precursor are deposited on the graphene/Si heterostructure (Fig. 12biv–vi). This process is repeated many times, and finally, a 2D AlN sandwich structure is formed between the graphene layer and the Si substrate (Fig. 12c). Finally, the graphene/2D AlN/Si substrate structure is cleaned with ultrasonic deionized water, and the topmost graphene layers are washed off, exposing the 2D AlN layer (Fig. 12d). The removal of graphene can be confirmed by Raman spectra (Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the growth of 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates. (b) Schematic structures for the formation of 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images for AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates with H2 at high-magnification. (d) Schematic illustration of ultrasonic washing process to remove the graphene from graphene/2D AlN/Si, and a typical photograph for 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates before and after the removal of graphene. (e) Raman spectrum for 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates before and after the removal of graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
In the presence of graphene as a buffer layer, AlN will undergo quasi-van der Waals epitaxial growth on graphene. At this point, the effect of lattice mismatch between AlN and graphene is no longer significant. In addition, the low migration barrier of metal on graphene leads to the easy diffusion of adsorbed atoms, which promotes 2D lateral growth.95 Therefore, using graphene as a buffer layer to grow 2D AlN is an ideal method. However, there are no dangling bonds on the surface of graphene, which can inhibit the nucleation of AlN, limiting the growth of large-area single crystals.
Chen et al. treated graphene with N2 plasma, solved the problem of AlN nucleation on graphene by introducing pyrrolic nitrogen doping, and successfully grew large-area AlN thin films.96 They first grow graphene on sapphire via the CVD method and then treat the graphene/sapphire substrate with N2 plasma for 30 seconds. Finally, high-temperature AlN MOCVD growth with TMAl as a precursor is carried out at 1200 °C. The process is shown in Fig. 13a. The surface of the AlN film is flat and shows an atomic platform in the AFM image (Fig. 13b).95 In addition, a good epitaxial relationship is maintained between AlN and sapphire, and the strain between them is largely relaxed due to the presence of graphene (Fig. 13c). By calculating the internal stress of AlN, it was also found that the internal stress of AlN decreased from 16.0 GPa of AlN/sapphire to 14.9 GPa of AlN/graphene/sapphire (Fig. 13d).95 Therefore, the graphene layer improves the quality of AlN growth by weakening the AlN/sapphire interaction. High-quality AlN is used in the manufacturing of DUV-LED (Fig. 13e), as detailed in Section 6.2.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the nucleation and film growth of the AlN on N2-plasma-treated graphene/sapphire substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) AFM image for the AlN films grown on graphene/sapphire. Inset: XRD phi scan of AlN/graphene/sapphire, showing the good large-scale epitaxial relationship between AlN and sapphire. (c) Raman mappings (5 μm × 5 μm) of the E2 (high) peak of AlN in AlN/graphene/sapphire. (d) Calculated internal stress in AlN without and with the graphene interlayer (16.0 and 14.9 GPa, respectively). Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the DUV-LED structure. (f) Light output power of the as-fabricated DUV-LED with and without graphene interlayer as a function of injection current. (g) The normalized EL spectra of DUV-LEDs on graphene/sapphire with currents ranging from 10 to 80 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
In 2020, Chang et al. also successfully obtained high-quality 2D AlN nanomembranes with low stress and low dislocation density using graphene as a buffer layer on a nanopatterned sapphire substrate (NPSS).97 The cleaned NPSS in a three-zone high temperature furnace is heated for a period of time, using CH4 as a carbon source to grow a graphene buffer layer on the NPSS by an atmospheric-pressure CVD method.98 The obtained graphene/NPSS is exposed to N2 for plasma treatment under optimized conditions, and then it is placed into a MOCVD chamber. Then, N atoms and Al atoms are deposited on the graphene/NPSS with NH3 flow and TMAl flow, respectively, to obtain 2D AlN nanomembranes.
5. Applications of 2D GaN
As one of the representatives of new-generation wide band gap semiconductor materials, GaN has excellent properties such as high carrier concentration, high breakdown field strength and corrosion resistance.99–101 In combination with the special tetrahedral coordination structure of wurtzite GaN, GaN has been used in many optoelectronic applications.102 As for GaN, the change of dimension will lead to the change of its structure and electrons, so that GaN has more different properties and can be used in more fields.102 With the emergence of 2D materials, the atomic configuration and electronic characteristics of 2D GaN have changed greatly, and a lot of research has been conducted on this. The lattice structure of ML GaN transformed into a graphene-like configuration which leads to the increase of its energy gap in the deep-ultraviolet range.29 Moreover, the ML 2D GaN can emit light in the deep ultraviolet range, which makes it promising in the fields of sterilization and water purification.45 The carrier migration in 2D GaN ML is highly anisotropic, which makes it have potential applications in high performance electronic devices.103 The thermal conductivity of ML GaN with a planar honeycomb structure is more than two orders of magnitude lower than that of graphene, which makes it have a broad application prospect in the energy conversion fields such as thermoelectricity.40 In addition, due to the difference in electronegativity between the doping elements and 2D GaN, the atom structure and charge distribution closest to doping elements in 2D GaN will change significantly, and the doping elements can adjust the absorption coefficient and reflectivity of 2D GaN. The discovery of these properties provides a reference for the application of p-type 2D GaN nano-optoelectronic devices in UV.104 The brittleness of 3D GaN limits its application in flexible devices. Compared with 3D GaN, 2D GaN-based flexible devices show stronger mechanical properties105 and can be used in high-performance and strainable RF devices.106 Many studies on the performance of 2D GaN show that 2D GaN has more interesting performance compared with bulk GaN, which can make up for some shortcomings of bulk GaN and make GaN applied in a wider range of fields. The following is an introduction to some of the devices integrated using 2D GaN.
5.1. Electronic devices
2D GaN has been intensively studied for many years since they have extensive applications in high-efficiency electronic and optoelectronic equipment such as FET, HEMT, LED, detector, and so on by theory and experiment, which will be potential channel materials for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.

5.1.1. Field effect transistors (FETs). 
In 2014, Han et al. prepared a GaN nanomembrane (NM) by electrochemical etching and successfully transferred the NM to SiO2/n-Si(001) substrate to prepare GaN NM FET as shown in Fig. 3f.59 The Ga-polar surface of the GaN NM on the surface of SiO2 faces downward. After testing, as shown in Fig. 3g and h, the device exhibits typical current saturation when the knee voltage is about 5 V, and the upmost one is biased at 50 V. According to Fig. 3h, the maximum gm is 0.55 mS mm−1 (0.167 mA V−1) and the maximum drain current density is 12 mA mm−1. By calculation, the on/off ratio is about 105, resulting in a maximum mobility of 154 cm2 V−1 s−1. The threshold voltage variation caused by the memory effect of the gate is also observed during the test, and the same effect has been found in GaN nanowire FETs.107,108 This phenomenon may be related to the traps in SiO2 or at the SiO2/Si or GaN NM/SiO2 interfaces. These traps can form the effect of dynamic discharge, and higher saturation current can be observed at higher test speeds. Although the device is only in the initial stage of fabrication, the device exhibits the same performance as traditional GaN/sapphire structure devices,109 and shows better performance than the other inorganic flexible thin film transistors.110 Therefore, the application of 2D GaN in FETs still has great development potential.
In 2018, Chen et al. also constructed 2D GaN FET devices,30 using mechanically exfoliated graphene films as the contact layer in order to achieve better Ohmic contact (Fig. 5ei and ii).111 The IdS–VG characteristic curve with VDS = 1 V and the gate-dependent IdS–Vds characteristic curves were obtained, as shown in Fig. 5e(iii). Finally, the mobility of 160 cm2 V−1 S−1 and the on/off ratio of about 106 were calculated.


5.1.2. High-electron-mobility transistors (HEMTs). 
Over the last decade, GaN devices have been fundamental and essential elements to meet these requirements for high-power amplification of the radiofrequency (RF) signal in MHz to GHz frequencies and beyond, especially for military applications. Flexible GaN thin films can enable future strainable and conformal devices for transmission of RF signals over large distances for more efficient wireless communication. In 2017, Glavin et al.106 demonstrated strainable high-frequency RF GaN devices first time, with epitaxial growth on 2D boron nitride for chemical-free transfer to a soft, flexible substrate (Fig. 14a and b). The AlGaN/GaN heterostructures transferred to flexible substrates are uniaxially strained up to 0.85% and reveal near state-of-the-art values for electrical performance, with electron mobility exceeding 2000 cm2 V−1 s−1 and sheet carrier density above 1.07 × 1013 cm−2. The influence of strain on the RF performance of flexible GaN HEMT devices is evaluated, demonstrating cutoff frequencies and maximum oscillation frequencies greater than 42 and 74 GHz, respectively, at up to 0.43% strain, as shown in Fig. 14c and d. Flexible, high-performance GaN devices represent a significant advancement toward conformal, highly integrated electronic materials for RF applications.
 Fig. 14  (a) Image of ≈40 flexible GaN devices, with the inset showing a close-up of a flexible HEMT. (b) Optical image of a transferred GaN HEMT device on a flexible substrate. (c) RF performance of the extrinsic current gain (H21) and unilateral power gain (U) and linear extrapolation of fT and fmax. (d) fT (depicted as squares) and fmax (depicted as triangles) values for RF testing as a function of applied external strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 


5.1.3. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs). 
Until the end of the 1990s, all the displays of handheld game consoles and cellular phones were monochrome. With the emergence of blue LEDs, the younger generation can now enjoy full-color handheld game consoles and cellular/smart phones. Today, the applications of blue LEDs are not limited to displays. In combination with phosphors, blue LEDs can act as a white-light source and are also used in general lighting. In 2014, I. Akasaki, H. Amano and S. Nakamura won the Nobel Prize in physics for the invention of an efficient blue LED which has enabled bright and energy-saving white light sources.112 The blue LEDs can contribute to improving the electricity situation, more importantly, which can develop and supply compact lighting systems to the younger generation, especially children in remote areas without access to electricity. Fig. 15a shows an image of the Earth at night provided by NASA, and children can read books and study at night easily. In 1989, Amano et al. obtained p-type GaN for the first time in the world and fabricated p–n junction ultraviolet LEDs using Mg-doped GaN as shown in Fig. 15b. The mechanism of p-type conduction involves the desorption of hydrogen near Mg acceptors.113,114
 Fig. 15  (a) Image of the Earth at night (provided by NASA). (b) Activation of hydrogen-passivated Mg in GaN and the electroluminescence pattern of a GaN LED in which only the area of the “M” was irradiated with an electron beam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and transfer processes for thin-film LEDs grown on graphene-layer substrates, and room-temperature EL spectra of the LED transferred onto a plastic substrate, the inset showing the light emission at different applied current levels of 1.7 to 8.0 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2010, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic image of the designed quasi-2D GaN wells inserted in the Al0.75Ga0.25N matrix (the blue dashed lines represent the quasi-2D GaN layers, namely, 1 ML thick discontinuous GaN layers), and the dependence of output power on e-beam current in the pulse-scan mode and CW pumping mode at RT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Optical micrograph of NM LED transferred onto an Al coated Si substrate with Ni/Au as the p-electrode, blue emission from the NM LED, and EL of the NM LED with driving current from 0.2 mA to 3.5 mA, and PL and EL of the NM LED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In 2010, Chung et al. fabricated transferable GaN thin films and LEDs using graphene-layered sheets.70 Heteroepitaxial nitride thin films were grown on graphene layers by using high-density, vertically aligned zinc oxide nanowalls as an intermediate layer. The obtained GaN films grown on graphene layers are of high crystallinity. Layered graphene substrates also allow the transfer of thin films onto foreign substrates and for graphene layers to serve as electrode materials. Schematic diagrams of the fabrication of GaN thin-film LEDs on graphene layers and their transfer onto foreign substrates are shown in Fig. 15c. The LED light emission images and the EL spectra show an increase in emission intensity with the applied current levels of 5.1, 6.4, and 8.1 mA. In 2012, Kobayashi et al. demonstrated that hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) can form a release layer that enables the mechanical transfer of GaN-based device structures onto foreign substrates.115 They fabricated a LED that emits blue light at room temperature. In the electroluminescence spectra of the transferred LED and conventional LED with currents ranging from 10 to 50 mA, the intensities of the electroluminescence increase with the current. In 2017, Cheng et al. demonstrated simplified transfer to versatile flexible metallic/dielectric membranes by growing an epitaxial GaN LED on a C-rich a-SiC buffer deposited SiO2/Si substrate.116
Single crystalline nanomembranes (NMs) represent a new embodiment of semiconductors having a two-dimensional flexural character with comparable crystalline perfection and optoelectronic efficacy. In 2014, Park et al. demonstrated the preparation of GaN NMs with a freestanding thickness between 90 and 300 nm and fabricated GaN NM-based LEDs using a vertical current injection scheme.117Fig. 15e shows an optical micrograph of the transfer of NM-LEDs to an Al/Si substrate. The NM-based LED turns on at around 4 V, and a clean blue emission can be observed at less than 5 V. The electroluminescence (EL) at the driving current of 0.2–3.5 mA is collected, and a blue shift of 1.5 nm is observed in the emission wavelength of EL, which is due to the quantum-constrained Stark effect and the band filling of localized states by excitons.118 Bright blue light emission from this heterostructure validates the concept of NM-based optoelectronics and points to potentials in flexible applications and heterogeneous integration. In 2016, Rong et al.119 presented a novel structure, i.e., quasi-2D GaN layers inserted in AlGaN matrix, which was used as the active region for high-efficiency e-beam pumped mid-UV light sources (Fig. 15d). These quasi-2D GaN layers are coherently grown in the AlGaN matrix and thus are free of misfit dislocations. An output power of ≈160 mW (≈39 mW) with an emission peak wavelength of 285 nm at RT has been achieved under the e-beam pulse-scan (CW) mode. This work demonstrated that the quasi-2D GaN layers are promising for the fabrication of mid-UV light sources with high output power.


5.1.4. Detectors and sensors. 
Gas-sensing devices are becoming increasingly mandatory for homeland security, medical and environmental monitoring, space exploration, automotive applications, and chemical process control. To meet these demands, the sensing properties (mainly including sensitivity, selectivity, stability, and speed) of gas sensors should be greatly improved, and these have awakened enormous interest in the development and selection of optimal sensing materials. Due to their outstanding electronic properties, GaN nanomaterials are usually good candidates for gas sensors. In 2019, Shafa et al.120 reported the achievement of H2 detection, up to 25 ppm, at room temperature using sulfur-treated, Pt-decorated porous GaN as shown in Fig. 16a. They confirmed the sulfide-treated Pt-porous GaN sensor has higher sensitivity and the adsorption activation energy is 22 meV at 30 ppm H2. Yong et al.121 studied the properties of gas molecules (NO, NH3, and NO2) adsorbed on two-dimensional GaN with a tetragonal structure (T-GaN) using first-principles methods, as shown in Fig. 16b. Taking into consideration various aspects, such as adsorption energies, charge transfer, change of electric conductivity, and recovery time, it is concluded that T-GaN is a promising candidate for highly sensitive magnetic sensors for the detection of NO and NO2. In 2021, Yuan et al.122 studied the sensing properties of Cu-decorated GaN (Cu-GaN) monolayers (Fig. 16c). The Cu-GaN monolayer was proposed as a promising candidate for CO and HCHO detection around dry-type transformers to evaluate the operation status of the power system.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pt-porous GaN sensor for H2-gas detection, the effect of porosity on H2 detection at room temperature versus time and versus the porosity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the 2D tetragonal GaN as molecule sensors for NO and NO2 detection, and spin density of the most stable configurations of NO2 and NO adsorption on the T-GaN with isovalues of ±0.005 e Å−3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Cu decoration process on the GaN monolayer, magnetic properties of the isolated Cu-GaN monolayer, CO system, and HCHO system, and recovery time of the Cu-GaN monolayer upon CO and HCHO desorption. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Schottky barrier heights of the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor under various applied compressive/tensile strains, and schematic configuration of the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor under out-bending and in-bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Meanwhile, the functional sensing devices have led to significant advances in smart health-monitoring systems, wearable human–machine communicative systems, soft robotics, and future versatile intelligent monitoring rooms. In 2020, Puneetha et al.123 used simple graphene transfer and the laser lift-off process for a non-centrosymmetric GaN layer on a flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate, and studied the piezotronic effect by strain-induced current–voltage measurements at the two end points (Fig. 16d). They observed that the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor is sensitive to various applied compressive and tensile strains in the positive/negative bias scans. These results heralded the development of commercially viable large-scale flexible/wearable strain sensors based on the strain-controlled piezotronic effect in future investigations.
Since the discovery of extremely ionising UV radiation, which can trigger many chemical processes, researchers are very well aware of their deleterious impacts on human health and the environment. The demands for sensing UV radiation compels the fabrication of an optoelectronic device that converts the optical signal into electrical impulses, i.e., a photodetector (PD). GaN (with a bandgap of 3.44 eV) is a suitable semiconductor technology material for developing efficient UV photodetection devices because of its high radiation hardness, its inherently visible blind range detection ability that eliminates the use of any other expensive optical filters and also the possibility of functioning in both photovoltaic and photoconductive operational modes. Aggarwal et al. summarized the required physical mechanisms and a background review of the latest approaches for highly responsive GaN-based UV photodetectors and discussed the future perspective for optoelectronic devices. They proposed that the GaN subfield is directed towards integration with 2D materials for futuristic applications.124 Peng et al.125 developed a flexible and self-powered GaN membrane-based UV photoswitch with a high on/off ratio and excellent sensitivity, as shown in Fig. 17a. The asymmetric metal/semiconductor/metal structure was elaborately utilized to enhance the carrier separation and transport for highly sensitive UV photoresponse. Graphene is usually used both as a substrate for GaN epitaxy or as an efficient material for sensing applications. Journot et al.126 combined these two functions to go toward a novel concept of a hybrid UV photodetector based on the direct GaN-on-graphene assembly, as shown in Fig. 17c, which shows the feasibility of making hybrid structures by epitaxy using a 2D material as a substrate. In 2019, Yu et al.127 developed a simple and effective method for preparing porous GaN through high temperature annealing, and fabricated UV PDs based on porous GaN (Fig. 17d). In 2020, Li et al.128 reported high sensitivity UV PDs based on monolayer graphene/nanoporous GaN heterojunctions, as shown in Fig. 17b, and they found that the increase in the porosity can help to improve its optical properties and the PDs presented higher performance with graphene. The device based on the highest-porosity nanoporous GaN demonstrated rapid and linear response to UV photons, with an ultrahigh detectivity of 1.0 × 1017 Jones and a UV-visible rejection ratio of 4.8 × 107 at −1.5 V.
 Fig. 17  (a) Fabrication flowchart of GaN flexible film-based MSM photoswitch, and schematic diagram of a self-powered GaN flexible film-based MSM UV photoswitch device; its self-powered on/off switching response as a function of the UV light power at 0 V bias, and band diagram of the asymmetric Pt/GaN/Ni device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the graphene/nanoporous GaN-based photodetector, photoresponse of the photodetectors and the energy band diagram of the graphene/nanoporous GaN heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the self-assembled GaN-based photodetector, and spectral response of the responsivity of our device near the band gap of the GaN (λ = 360 nm), and schematic diagrams of energy levels showing the graphene and GaN structures before and after contact between the two materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabricated porous GaN photodetector, I–V curves of the porous GaN device under dark conditions and UV-light illumination with a 325 nm laser, and the schematic energy band diagram of the photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.5. Piezoelectric devices. 
GaN is a promising piezoelectric material due to its high mechanical robustness, chemical stability, environmental compatibility, and easy doping control. Moreover, GaN is a nontoxic material with high chemical stability, so it is a strong candidate for an electrical power generator integrated with a device implanted into the human body. In 2013, Yu et al.129 fabricated GaN nanobelt (NB) strain-gated transistors (SGTs). By using the piezoelectric polarization charges created at the metal-GaN NB interface under strain to modulate transport of local charge carriers across the Schottky barrier, the piezotronic effect is utilized to convert the mechanical stimuli applied on the wurtzite-structured GaN NB into electronic controlling signals. By further assembling and integrating GaN NB SGTs, universal logic devices such as NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR, and XOR gates were demonstrated for performing mechanical–electrical coupled piezotronic logic operations, as shown in Fig. 18b. Moreover, basic piezotronic computation such as one-bit binary addition over the input mechanical strains with the corresponding computation results in an electrical domain by half-adder was implemented. The strain-gated piezotronic logic devices may find applications in human–machine interfacing, active flexible/stretchable electronics, MEMS, biomedical diagnosis/therapy, and prosthetics. Meanwhile, the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor was fabricated based on the strain-controlled piezotronic effect, and the piezocatalyst had been studied for direct water splitting to generate H2 fuel with piezopolarization-induced band structure variation and charge-transfer mechanism.123
 Fig. 18  (a) Process flow of separating the GaN membrane and fabricating the TF PNG, and COMSOL-simulated piezoelectric potential of a GaN membrane under shear stress on the TF PNG, and piezoelectric output voltage and current measured from the TF PNG while it was periodically bent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) GaN NB piezotronic transistor; (c) GaN NB piezotronic inverter; (d) GaN NB piezotronic half-adder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
With the extensive use of portable devices and various wireless sensors for the Internet of Things (IoT), harvesting energy from the surrounding environment to power small electronic devices has received a great deal of attention. Among the various energy harvesters, using piezoelectric nanogenerators (PNGs), which convert mechanical energy into their electrical counterparts, is considered as a promising approach for self-powered devices due to the ubiquitous mechanical energy in the environment, such as movements and vibrations. In 2017, Kang et al.130 fabricated a transparent and flexible piezoelectric PNG based on a GaN membrane by an electrochemical lift-off, as shown in Fig. 18a. By bending the PNG, the piezoelectric polarization in the GaN membrane was generated along the c-axis, resulting in piezoelectric output voltage and current values of 4.2 V and 150 nA, respectively. In 2021, Su et al.131 studied the electronic, magnetic, and piezoelectric properties of the GaN monolayer with the adsorption of BF4 superhalogen (BF4@GaN) using first-principles calculations. They found that there is a strong coupling between electric polarization and mechanical strain that leads to out-of-plane piezoelectricity, which proposed a new approach to realize potential spintronic and piezoelectric materials via the adsorption of superatoms.

5.2. Energy storage and conversion

5.2.1. Li- and Na–ion batteries. 
In the preparation of Li- or Na–ion batteries, one of the biggest challenges is to find suitable anode materials. Zhang et al. believed that 2D GaN is a good candidate material.132 As the 2D GaN layer exhibits stable Li/Na adsorption and low theoretical voltage, it can also achieve high storage capacity and extremely fast Li/Na diffusion. The first-principles calculation of 2D GaN ML was carried out to study its feasibility as an electrode material. Through the calculation of three migration paths (Fig. 19a), they found that the diffusion barriers of Li and Na ions in the case of 2D GaN as an anode material are much lower than that of other 2D anode materials. The diffusion barrier of Li is 79 meV, and the diffusion barrier of Na is only 22 meV, as shown in Fig. 19b. These data indicated that there is an extremely fast ion diffusion velocity on the 2D GaN layer. In addition, in their study on Li/Na storage capacity on 2D GaN, through the layer-by-layer calculation of adsorption energy, the average open circuit voltage (OCV) of Li is 0.060 V and that of Na is 0.050 V. The maximum storage capacity of Li and Na is 938 mA h g−1 and 625 mA h g−1, respectively (Fig. 19c and d). At the same time, it is also found that when the 2D GaN is adsorbed by Li and Na atoms, it will show metallization, which ensures the good electrical conductivity as an electrode. These results indicated that 2D GaN is an excellent electrode material with fast ion diffusion and high storage capacity, and will have great potential in the field of battery development.
 Fig. 19  (a) Possible Li/Na ion migration paths on the 2D GaN. (b) Corresponding diffusion barrier profiles for Li and Na. The calculated voltage profiles and storage capacities for (c) Li and (d) Na on the 2D GaN. The maximum Li and Na storage capacities are indicated by stars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


5.2.2. Supercapacitor devices. 
Supercapacitors are high-performance energy storage devices with higher energy density than conventional capacitors and higher power density than lithium–ion batteries. The choice of electrode materials for supercapacitors has an important effect on their performance. In 2016, Wang et al. prepared a single-crystal GaN mesoporous membrane (GaNMM) by a simple method and used them to prepare supercapacitors, as shown in Fig. 20.133 GaNMM was obtained from the electrochemical etching of n-type GaN. Detailed electrochemical characterization showed that the material exhibited a high area-specific capacitance (23.11 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2) and good cycling performance (96% capacitance retention after 50000 cycles with symmetric supercapacitors) (Fig. 20c). The cell also manifested an ultrahigh power density (45 mW cm−2). All these findings indicated the possibility of utilizing the crystal in hybrid electronic devices, especially those that urgently require a large instantaneous power.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of supercapacitor electrode materials. (b) SEM images of GaNMM-20; the inset photographs show the fabricated GaNMM-20 (the grid is 1 mm). (c) Pseudocapacitive behavior in the charging and discharging processes of GaNMM electrodes; cycling performance of the supercapacitor at 10 and 5 mA cm−2; and Ragone plots of the values reported for other SC devices are added for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 


5.2.3. Catalytic performance. 
In technological applications, the reaction requires an appropriate catalytic material. The catalysis can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous. In the latter case, the material is usually a nanoparticulate semiconductor with a band gap suitable for absorption of photons in the visible range of the solar spectrum. Furthermore, the conduction band (CB) or valence band (VB) edges of the catalyst should be aligned appropriately for driving the hydrogen or oxygen evolution reactions (HER or OER) and nitrogen reduction reaction (NNR), respectively.134 These reactions play a crucial role in the implementation of electrochemical energy conversion processes, including fuel cells, water splitting and ammonia synthesis. As a wide direct-gap semiconductor, GaN has emerged as a new-generation material for solar water splitting due to its unique structural, electrical, and optical properties.135–137 To date, a variety of 2D nanomaterials have been identified as promising candidates for photocatalytic or electrocatalytic applications, in association with their novel physical and chemical properties, including robust mechanical properties, high specific surface areas, and abundant active sites.138
In 2020, Li et al.139 systematically examined the prospect of using a single transition-metal (TM)-atom-doped g-GaN monolayer as an electrocatalyst for artificial nitrogen reduction via density functional theory calculations and the computational hydrogen electrode model. The Mo-doped g-GaN (Mo@g-GaN) monolayer is the only electrocatalyst predicted to be feasible for the NRR with a low onset potential of −0.33 V, as shown in Fig. 21a. Purwiandono et al. prepared a GaN paste electrode from 2D hexagonal-shape GaN (HS-GaN) synthesized by a reaction in a molten salt using Ti plate as a substrate, and compared the photo-electro-chemical properties of the electrode with random-shaped GaN electrodes.69 They found that 2D HS-GaN generated higher photocurrent due to its more efficient water oxidation, which was about twice as high as that of random-shaped GaN, and the donor density of the 2D HS-GaN sample is one order of magnitude higher than that of the random-shaped. In 2021, Jing et al.138 systemically investigated the electrocatalytic properties of TM-atom-doped g-GaN monolayers by means of density functional theory. The Ni/g-GaN exhibited the best catalytic performance for both the OER and ORR with small overpotentials (0.26 and 0.38 V, respectively), as shown in Fig. 21b. And the TM atom d-band centers were found to linearly correlate with Gibbs free energies of HO* and HOO* species. A.V. Akimov et al.134 presented the first time-domain theoretical study of the initial steps of photocatalytic water splitting on the GaN surface, which shows that the hole loses its excess energy within 100 fs and localizes primarily on the nitrogen atoms of the GaN surface, initiating a sequence of proton-transfer events from the surface N–H group to the nearby OH groups and bulk water molecules. They constructed a comprehensive kinetic model of the processes taking place during the initial stages of the photoinduced water oxidation reaction on the GaN (10–10) surface (Fig. 21c). The behavior of photoexcited carriers in a GaN photoanode was investigated by using an in situ PL measurement system in an electrolyte (Fig. 21d).140 The near-band-edge (NBE) emission was observed in the electrolyte at around the flat-band potential of −0.47 VRHE. The significant onset of anodic photocurrent found in the I–E curve was at around 1.2 VRHE, and PL emissions at 380–410 nm decreased rapidly with an increase in applied potential at above 1.2 VRHE. Only the relative PL intensity of 565 nm, the YL peak, increased above the significant onset, indicating that the deep levels were partially filled with holes, and the partial occupation of the midgap states is the key to efficient utilization of photoexcited carriers for the water splitting reaction.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction on the Mo@g-GaN monolayer, and Bader charge variation of the three moieties along the distal pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Ni/g-GaN monolayers as electrocatalysts for the OER and ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Kinetic scheme of the hole and proton migration processes involved in the initial stages of photocatalytic water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the behavior of photoexcited carriers in a GaN photoanode, and in situ PL mapping results for the GaN photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
The overdependence of modern society on fossil fuels leads to huge CO2 emissions, which induces adverse climate changes due to its greenhouse effects. Provided the sustainable H2 sources from renewable energies, such as wind or solar, a viable technology by hydrogenating CO2 to hydrocarbons (HCs, e.g., CH4, C2–C4 olefins, and gasoline) and oxygenates (methanol, ethanol, acetic acid, dimethyl ether, etc.) can sustainably convert renewable resources to chemicals and fuels. Thus, considerable efforts have been made for this subject in recent years, and significant advances in the hydrogenation of CO2 to CO, HCs, and oxygenates have been achieved.141 The plasmon-driven photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction was investigated with Au/p-GaN photocathodes, as shown in Fig. 22a. The Au/p-GaN device improved the selectivity of CO2 reduction to CO with a significant reduction in H2 evolution relative to the bare p-GaN surface.142 Zhou et al. fabricated a unique GaN:Sn nanoarchitecture directly on planar silicon for the artificial photosynthesis of formic acid from CO2 using H2O as the only reductant.143 The formic acid was produced at an underpotential of 220 mV (+0.02 V vs. RHE) and an astonishing turnover frequency (TOF) of 107 min−1 was obtained at a low potential of −0.53 V with a 7.5 mA cm−2 current density and high faradaic efficiency of 76.9% under standard one-sun illumination, corresponding to an appreciable productivity of 201 mmol cm−2 h−1. In 2021, Liu et al.144 demonstrated that the wurtzite-structure GaN is active, stable, and selective for the direct hydrogenation of CO2 to dimethyl ether (DME). The transient, operando DRIFTS, and DFT results rigorously revealed that DME is formed as the primary product via the coupling of CH3* and HCOO* (Fig. 22b). Li et al. discovered the thermal catalytic activity of GaN in nonoxidative alkane dehydroaromatization for the first time, as shown in Fig. 22c. GaN powders with a wurtzite crystal structure showed superior stability and reactivity for converting light alkanes, including methane, propane, n-butane, n-hexane and cyclohexane, into benzene at an elevated temperature with high selectivity.145 These results indicated that 2D GaN will have great application prospects in the field of catalysis.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction on plasmonic Au/p-GaN photocathodes, and time-course of gas evolution from the photocathode during controlled potential electrolysis under plasmon excitation (λ > 495 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The mechanism for CO2 to DME catalyzed by GaN, and the representative long-term stability results for the hydrogenation of CO2 over GaN-26.6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (c) The equation of the non-oxidative aromatization of short-chain alkanes (C1–C6) catalyzed by GaN, and reusability of GaN for the methane dehydroaromatization reaction at 450 °C (4 h for each cycle). Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 

6. Applications of 2D AlN
As one of the representatives of ultra-wide bandgap semiconductor materials, AlN has many excellent properties, such as stable performance at high temperatures, low energy loss, good ultraviolet light transmittance, etc., so it has received extensive attention from the world. AlN bulk crystals have broad application prospects in the fields of high-efficiency optoelectronic devices, high-power and high-frequency electronic devices, ultra-high voltage power electronic devices, deep ultraviolet warning and deep UV-LED disinfection lamps.146 In recent years, the structural stability and electronic properties of 2D AlN have aroused great interest and become a research hotspot. In 2D AlN, the chemical bond between the Al atom and N atom is formed by the bonding of Al-Pz and N-Pz orbitals.147 The difference in electronegativity between the Al atoms and N atoms causes electrons to be transferred from Al to N, which leads to some ionic bonds in 2D AlN that are not pure covalent bonds.148 This charge transfer from Al to N gives 2D AlN some unique properties. For example, the Al atoms and N atoms in the 2D AlN are four-coordination and three-fold-coordination with the dangling bond, which are the active sites of gas adsorption and are very helpful for the adsorption of gas molecules.149,150 Therefore, 2D AlN has potential applications in sensors. These characteristics of 2D AlN make it have application potential in more fields. The following is the introduction of 2D AlN application.
6.1. Li- and Na-ion batteries
In 2018, Sengupta used density functional theory to simulate the lithium and sodiation properties of 2D AlN sheets.151 After calculation, the maximum storage capacity of Li and Na adsorbed by 2D AlN is 500.8 mA h g−1 and 385.3 mA h g−1. In most cases, Li atoms have stronger adsorption on 2D AlN (Fig. 23a). The maximum OCV is 1.49 V and 1.86 V, the average is 0.78 V and 0.94 V (Fig. 23b), and the minimum diffusion potential energy for different paths is 0.40 eV and 0.15 eV (Fig. 23c), respectively. These results indicate that 2D AlN can be used as an anode material in Li- or Na-ion batteries, and has a great potential in the application of supercapacitors and ion–air batteries.
 Fig. 23  (a) Calculated adsorption energy per atom and (b) open circuit voltage (OCV) for different degrees of lithiation and sodiation of 2D AlN. (c) The relative energy for different possible paths (namely, A–A, ABA and ACA) calculated with NEB simulations for Na or Li atoms on 2D AlN. (d) Schematic of the AlN zigzag nanoribbon (ZNR) device supercell (armchair nanoribbon (ANR) device not shown here). The calculated transmission spectra for the (b) (3, 0) AlN NR device and (c) (2, 2) AlN NR device for pristine/pure under single adatom doped conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In the process of research, Sengupta also compared the transmission spectra of 2D AlN with and without Li/Na adsorption (Fig. 23d–f), and found that the addition of Li/Na improves the Fermi level of 2D AlN, and the adsorption change of Fermi energy will result in a significant change in the transmission spectrum. Therefore, the change in the transmission spectrum can be used to distinguish whether 2D AlN adsorbs Li or Na atoms. The electrical sensitivity and selectivity of 2D AlN make it useful for chemical/biosensor applications.
6.2. Deep ultraviolet light-emitting diodes (DUV-LEDs)
Chen et al. grew a DUV-LED structure directly on a graphene/sapphire substrate with a continuous smooth surface.96 Through characterization, it is found that the DUV-LED exhibits good rectifier performance. The optical output power (LOP) of LED on the graphene/sapphire substrate is linear to the input voltage with a slope of about 20 μW mA−1 (Fig. 13f). Moreover, due to stress relaxation, the peak position of the DUV-LED did not change (Fig. 13g), further confirming the role of graphene. In addition, the DUV-LED also shows a low turn-on voltage, high output power and excellent reliability.
In 2020, Chang et al. also prepared a 272 nm DUV-LED using a high-quality 2D AlN nanomembrane with low strain and low dislocation density grown on graphene, and carried out a series of EL and FDTD simulation characterization studies of the device.97 It is found that the output power of the LED is increased by about 22% compared with that of the LED prepared by the AlN buffer substrate, and the wavelength shift of the LED under large current is very small, which can be ignored. This work has greatly improved the performance of DUV-LEDs and confirmed the application potential of 2D AlN in DUV-LEDs.
6.3. Field effect transistors (FETs)
Yang et al. successfully grew DPA crystals on AlN, and used the heterostructure to prepare transistors (Fig. 11g).86 The smooth surface of the crystal enables significant, atomically sharp interfaces between the Au/AlN/DPA/Au stack layers (Fig. 11g). The device has a saturation mobility of 6.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, a high on/off current ratio of 108, and a low operating voltage of −5 V. The subthreshold slope (SS) is 104 mV dec−1 (Fig. 11h). It is worth mentioning that this result is one of the best performances of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on the high-k dielectric layer. Then, they quantitatively calculated the defect state density of the semiconductor/medium interface with the subthreshold slope, which was about 2.3 × 1011 cm−2 eV−1. This defect state density is relatively small, reflecting the formation of a high-quality interface between the DPA and AlN crystal. In general, the transistor system exhibits relatively high performance. The combination of DPA and AlN improves the performance of the entire transistor.
6.4. Other applications
Based on first-principles calculations, Zhang studied and compared some properties of fully hydrogenated and semi-hydrogenated AlN nanosheets.152 The results show that the fully hydrogenated single bilayer AlN nanotube is an indirect bandgap semiconductor, while the thicker bilayer AlN nanotube is a ferromagnetic metal. This work reveals that the electronic and magnetic properties of 2D AlN can be controlled by chemical functionalization, enabling applications in the fields of electronics and spintronics.
Wang et al. studied gas adsorption on 2D AlN.153 It is found that in 2D AlN, the Al–N bond is polarized due to the charge transfer from the Al atom to the N atom. Therefore, 2D AlN can adsorb gas molecules through electrostatic and polarization interactions, and has the potential as a gas sensor for CO2, CO, H2, O2 and NO. In addition, when the adsorption energy is greater than 0.50 eV, the gas molecules on the solid surface can be effectively captured.154,155 Only the adsorption energy of CO2 is greater than 0.50 (Fig. 24b), thus 2D AlN can also be used as an adsorption material for separating and capturing CO2 from mixed gases. Fig. 18 shows the charge density difference between several gas molecules and 2D AlN, which helps to understand the adsorption phenomenon.
 Fig. 24  (a) Demonstration of the electrons of CO2/AlN and the charge density difference of AlN. Charge density difference plots for (b) CO2/AlN, (c) H2/AlN, (d) CO/AlN, (e) O2/AlN, and (f) NO/AlN. The red and blue iso-surface with an isovalue of 0.001 e Å−3 corresponds to charge accumulation and depletion, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
7. Summary and outlook
In this review, we introduce the performance of 2D GaN and 2D AlN obtained through theoretical calculations, as well as the latest research progress in the fabrication of 2D nitride materials and devices.
Through simulation and theoretical calculations, the structure of 2D GaN and 2D AlN changes with the thickness change. For example, a single-layer GaN is displayed as a planar hexagonal structure. With the increase in the number of layers, a buckling structure will be formed, and the buckling of the surface layer increases, while the lattice constant decreases and becomes more and more like the bulk structure. This variation in structure also leads to changes in properties, resulting in more excellent properties such as low thermal conductivity, strong UV luminescence and excellent mechanical properties. Based on these theoretical studies, excellent progress has been made in the fabrication of 2D nitride materials and devices. More and more fabrication methods have been developed from the original chemical stripping method, and the ways to obtain 2D GaN and 2D AlN are becoming simpler and more efficient. The improvement of the fabrication method also lays a foundation for the application of various devices. A variety of devices based on 2D GaN and 2D AlN have been fabricated, including FETs, LEDs, sensors, energy storage conversion, etc. In addition, they also have potential applications in catalysis and energy storage.
Looking into the future, although some progress has been made in 2D GaN and 2D AlN research, there are still some limitations:
(1) Due to the structure of 2D GaN and 2D AlN (non-layered structure), it is difficult to obtain the 2D state of GaN and AlN, unlike graphene (layered structure), which can be easily prepared by mechanical stripping. At present, these materials are still obtained by some complex chemical means and are not easy to transfer. The fabrication cost is high, the efficiency is low, and the industrial production standard is not reached. These factors will also limit the exploration of its applications in devices.
(2) Although 2D GaN and 2D AlN have been fabricated in the laboratory, their quality and size are still difficult to control well, which makes their theoretical performance unable to be fully utilized and affects the use of materials.
(3) The exploration on the application of 2D GaN and 2D AlN is still limited. Most of the explorations at present are still theoretical calculations, and there is still a lack of actual device performance support.
Based on these deficiencies, we speculate the development prospects of 2D GaN and 2D AlN:
(1) Explore more distinctive new preparation methods. On the one hand, the method should be as simple and quick as possible to achieve large-scale preparation; on the other hand, this method should be able to improve the quality of 2D materials and facilitate the dimensional control of 2D materials.
(2) The exploration scope of the application of 2D GaN and 2D AlN should be expanded, not only on the existing devices, but also make better use of its characteristics to explore more applications in unknown fields.
(3) With the emergence of better fabrication methods, the synthesis of 2D GaN and 2D AlN will be more convenient, the quality will gradually improve, and the performance of the device will also be further improved. In addition, the characteristics of 2D GaN and 2D AlN will be fully displayed in the device.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51872164), the Key Research and Development Plan of Shandong Province (Grant No. 2019GGX103004), Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (JCYJ20210324141607019), Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2021MF033), International Cooperation Project of Shandong Academy of Sciences (2019GHPY06), the State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University (No. KF1911), and the Shandong Provincial Universities Young Innovative Talent Incubation Program-Inorganic Non-metallic Materials Research and Innovation Team.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Yu, L. Wang, Z. B. Hao, Y. Luo, C. Z. Sun, J. Wang, Y. J. Han, B. Xiong and H. T. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32(15), 1903407 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nanotechnology, 2012, 7, 699–712 CAS .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 768–779 CAS .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1102–1120 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chia, A. Ambrosi, P. Lazar, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(37), 14241–14253 RSC .
M. A. Kastner, R. J. Birgeneau, G. Shirane and Y. Endoh, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1998, 70(3), 897–928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ebina, K. Akatsuka, K. Fukuda and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(21), 4201–4208 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(3), 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Wang, Y. Geng, Q. B. Zheng and J. K. Kim, Carbon, 2010, 48(6), 1815–1823 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Xu, T. Liang, M. M. Shi and H. Z. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(2), 210–228 CrossRef CAS .
T. Georgiou, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, Y. J. Kim, A. Gholinia, S. J. Haigh, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and A. Mishchenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8(2), 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8(7), 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Q. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, C. Y. Wang, M. M. Chen and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(30), 13103–13107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ning, L. Hao, M. H. Jin, X. Y. Qiu, Y. D. Shen, J. X. Liang, X. H. Zhang, B. Wang, X. L. Li and L. J. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(9), 1605028 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6(9), 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Jiang and J. Y. Lin, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2014, 29(8), 084003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakamura, MRS Bull., 2009, 34(2), 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
I. Akasaki, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 300(1), 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Jiang, J. P. Liu, A. Q. Tian, Y. Cheng, Z. C. Li, L. Q. Zhang, S. M. Zhang, D. Y. Li, M. Ikeda and H. Yang, J. Semicond., 2016, 37(11), 111001 CrossRef .
D. G. Zhao, J. Yang, Z. S. Liu, P. Chen, J. J. Zhu, D. S. Jiang, Y. S. Shi, H. Wang, L. H. Duan, L. Q. Zhang and H. Yang, J. Semicond., 2017, 38(5), 051001 CrossRef .
G. Y. Xu, A. Salvador, W. Kim, Z. Fan, C. Lu, H. Tang, H. Morkoc, G. Smith, M. Estes, B. Goldenberg, W. Yang and S. Krishnankutty, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71(15), 2154–2156 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. VanHove, R. Hickman, J. J. Klaassen, P. P. Chow and P. P. Ruden, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70(17), 2282–2284 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dahal, B. Pantha, J. Li, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(6), 063505 CrossRef .
C. Y. Jiang, L. Jing, X. Huang, M. M. Liu, C. H. Du, T. Liu, X. Pu, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(9), 9405–9412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, R. Yang and T. Zhai, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 8, 100051 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Al Balushi, K. Wang, R. K. Ghosh, R. A. Vila, S. M. Eichfeld, J. D. Caldwell, X. Y. Qin, Y. C. Lin, P. A. DeSario, G. Stone, S. Subramanian, D. F. Paul, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15(11), 1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Chen, K. L. Liu, J. X. Liu, T. R. Lv, B. Wei, T. Zhang, M. Q. Zeng, Z. C. Wang and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(48), 16392–16395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80(9), 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(8), 17033 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Chen, Y. Q. Yu, K. Zheng, T. Ding, W. L. Wang, Y. Jiang and Q. Yang, Small, 2015, 11(24), 2848–2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Tang, Z. Guo, X. Wang, S. Mo, X. Huang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(48), 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, L. Mei, J. Liang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, H. Fei, M. Ding, J. Lau, M. Li, C. Wang, X. Xu, G. Hao, B. Papandrea, I. Shakir, B. Dunn, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 356(6338), 599–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, C. Cao, S. Tao, W. Chu, Z. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, Z. Yuan, S. Bai, F. Gao and B. Sun, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 5, 100028 CrossRef .
F. Liu, J. Zhou, C. Zhu and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(19), 1602404 CrossRef .
G. Qin, Z. Qin, H. Wang and M. Hu, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95(19), 195416 CrossRef .
Z. Qin, G. Qin, X. Zuo, Z. Xiong and M. Hu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(12), 4295–4309 RSC .
Y. X. Chen, J. X. Liu, M. Q. Zeng, F. Y. Lu, T. R. Lv, Y. Chang, H. H. Lan, B. Wei, R. Sun, J. F. Gao, Z. C. Wang and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 3979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Mishra, P. C. Schmidt, S. Laubach and K. H. Johnson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76(3), 035127 CrossRef .
Y. W. Mu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(36), 20911–20916 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Wang, L. F. Yu, J. Y. Xu, D. H. Wei, G. Z. Qin, Y. G. Yao and M. Hu, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2021, 162, 106772 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sanders, D. Bayed, G. S. Shi, K. A. Mengle and E. Kioupakis, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(12), 7345–7349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Li and L. W. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72(12), 125325 CrossRef .
X. R. Cai, Y. M. Ma, J. L. Ma, D. W. Xu and X. B. Luo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23(9), 5431–5437 RSC .
A. Onen, D. Kecik, E. Durgun and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93(8), 085431 CrossRef .
D. W. Xu, H. Y. He, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2013, 25(34), 345302 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Kolobov, P. Fons, J. Tominaga, B. Hyot and B. Andre, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(8), 4849–4856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. N. Sarma, R. Chowdhury and R. Jayaganthan, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113(24), 243504 CrossRef .
Q. Peng, C. Liang, J. Wei and D. Suvranu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2013, 113(2), 483–490 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, X. J. Chen, S. Liu and D. Suvranu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(19), 7083–7092 RSC .
R. T. ElAfandy, M. A. Majid, T. K. Ng, L. Zhao, D. Cha and B. S. Ooi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(16), 2305–2311 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Rajeshwar, Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry,  2007, vol. 6 Search PubMed .
H. Föll, S. Langa, J. Carstensen, M. Christophersen and I. M. Tiginyanu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15(3), 183 CrossRef .
B. Erne, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143(1), 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
C. O’Dwyer, D. N. Buckley, D. Sutton, M. Serantoni and S. B. Newcomb, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(2), H78–H85 CrossRef .
K. L. Xiong, S. H. Park, J. Song, G. Yuan, D. T. Chen, B. Leung and J. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(41), 6503–6508 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Liu, W. J. Yang, J. Li, X. L. Zhang, P. J. Niu and X. Jiang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(5), 3195–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Playford, A. C. Hannon, E. R. Barney and R. I. Walton, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19(8), 2803–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Tang, Y. Bando, B. D. Liu and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(24), 3005–3009 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Han, S. S. Fan, Q. Q. Li and Y. D. Hu, Science, 1997, 277, 1287–1289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Amano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(27), 7764–7769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. L. Zhang, B. Yang, C. Zhang, T. T. Xu, L. X. Chen, L. Yang, X. Jin and B. D. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33(12), 4568–4577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, E. L. H. Mayes, C. L. Xu, O. Kavehei, A. P. O’Mullane, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-zadeh and T. Daeneke, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Carey, J. Z. Ou, R. M. Clark, K. J. Berean, A. Zavabeti, A. S. R. Chesman, S. P. Russo, D. W. M. Lau, Z. Q. Xu, Q. Bao, O. Kevehei, B. C. Gibson, M. D. Dickey, R. B. Kaner, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Kim and J. Hone, Nature, 2017, 544, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Purwiandono, K. Manseki and T. Sugiura, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 394, 112499 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chung, C. H. Lee and G. C. Yi, Science, 2010, 330, 655–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Emtsev, A. Bostwick, K. Horn, J. Jobst, G. L. Kellogg, L. Ley, J. L. McChesney, T. Ohta, S. A. Reshanov, J. Rohrl, E. Rotenberg, A. K. Schmid, D. Waldmann, H. B. Weber and T. Seyller, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(3), 203–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Riedl, C. Coletti, T. Iwasaki, A. A. Zakharov and U. Starke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103(24), 246804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. L. Zheng, X. C. Li, L. G. Huang and G. Q. Li, Small, 2019, 15(14), 1802995 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Feng, X. L. Yang, Z. H. Zhang, D. Kong, J. Zhang, K. H. Liu, X. Z. Li, J. F. Shen, F. Liu, T. Wang, P. F. Ji, F. J. Xu, N. Tang, T. J. Yu, X. Q. Wang, D. P. Yu, W. K. Ge and B. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(42), 1905056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, T. Wang, X. F. Chen, L. D. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Niu, J. Q. Yu, H. T. Ma, X. M. Li, F. Liu, G. Q. Deng, Z. F. Shi, B. L. Zhang, X. Q. Wang and Y. T. Zhang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10(1), 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Yeh, K. Raidongia, J. J. Shao, Q. H. Yang and J. X. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7(2), 166–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Sun, M. Z. Yang, T. L. Wang, Y. L. Shao, Y. Z. Wu and X. P. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interface, 2017, 9(32), 26631–26636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Liu and S. Hark, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143(6-7), 317–320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, X. Zhang, L. Qin, E. Zhang, H. Gao and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(43), 21593–21595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Mei, D. J. Thurmer, C. Deneke, S. Kiravittaya, Y. F. Chen, A. Dadgar, F. Bertram, B. Bastek, A. Krost, J. Christen, T. Reindl, M. Stoffel, E. Coric and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(7), 1663–1668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Ramer, J. Brown, K. Zheng, L. F. Lester and S. D. Hersee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68(3), 367–369 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tsipas, S. Kassavetis, D. Tsoutsou, E. Xenogiannopoulou, E. Golias, S. A. Giamini, C. Grazianetti, D. Chiappe, A. Molle, M. Fanciulli and A. Dimoulas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103(25), 251605 CrossRef .
D. P. Borisenko, A. S. Gusev, N. I. Kargin, I. V. Komissarov, N. G. Kovalchuk and V. A. Labunov, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 58, SC1046 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Komissarov, N. G. Kovalchuk, V. A. Labunov, K. V. Girel, O. V. Korolik, M. S. Tivanov, A. Lazauskas, M. Andrulevicius, T. Tamulevicius, V. Grigaliunas, S. Meskinis, S. Tamulevicius and S. L. Prischepa, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2017, 8, 145–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Wang, H. Wang, X. X. Sun, P. Huang, B. W. Sheng, X. Rong, X. T. Zheng, Z. Y. Chen, Y. X. Wang, D. Wang, H. P. Liu, F. Liu, L. Y. Yang, D. Li, L. Chen, X. L. Yang, F. J. Xu, Z. X. Qin, J. J. Shi, T. J. Yu, W. K. Ge, B. Shen and X. Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(36), 1902608 CrossRef .
F. Yang, L. Jin, L. Sun, X. Ren, X. Duan, H. Cheng, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, Z. Lai, W. Chen, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(34), 1801891 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, H. T. Zhang, H. L. Dong, L. Q. Meng, L. F. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. S. Yu, Y. M. Sun, W. P. Hu and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. L. Dong, Z. R. Wang, D. Y. Ji, C. L. Cheng, H. Geng, H. T. Zhang, Y. G. Zhen, L. Jiang, H. B. Fu, Z. S. Bo, W. Chen, Z. G. Shuai and W. P. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(59), 11777–11779 RSC .
W. L. Wang, Y. L. Zheng, X. C. Li, Y. Li, H. Zhao, L. G. Huang, Z. C. Yang, X. N. Zhang and G. Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(2), 1803448 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. D. Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(15), 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Tran, H. Hirayama, N. Maeda, M. Jo, S. Toyoda and N. Kamata, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dadgar, F. Schulze, M. Wienecke, A. Gadanecz, J. Bläsing, P. Veit, T. Hempel, A. Diez, J. Christen and A. Krost, New J. Phys., 2007, 9, 389 CrossRef .

          J. P. Deville and M. Hanbücken, Dislocations and stress relaxation in heteroepitaxial films, Elsevier,  2001, pp. 99–155 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, F. A. Ponce, A. Dadgar and A. Krost, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83(5), 860–862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, Y. Y. Wang, Z. Q. Pang, Z. P. Dou, T. B. Wei, P. Gao, S. S. Zhang, X. Z. Xu, Z. H. Chang, B. Deng, S. L. Chen, Z. L. Chen, H. N. Ci, R. Y. Wang, F. Z. Zhao, J. C. Yan, X. Y. Yi, K. H. Liu, H. L. Peng, Z. Q. Liu, L. M. Tong, J. Zhang, Y. J. Wei, J. M. Li and Z. F. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(38), 11935–11941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Chen, Z. Q. Liu, T. B. Wei, S. Y. Yang, Z. P. Dou, Y. Y. Wang, H. N. Ci, H. L. Chang, Y. Qi, J. C. Yan, J. X. Wang, X. F. Zhang, P. Gao, J. M. Li and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(23), 1807345 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Chang, Z. L. Chen, B. Y. Liu, S. Y. Yang, D. D. Liang, Z. P. Dou, Y. H. Zhang, J. C. Yan, Z. Q. Liu and Z. H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 20012272 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Qi, X. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31(9), 1803639 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Lev, I. O. Maiboroda, M. A. Husanu, E. S. Grichuk, N. K. Chumakov, I. S. Ezubchenko, I. A. Chernykh, X. Wang, B. Tobler, T. Schmitt, M. L. Zanaveskin, V. G. Valeyev and V. N. Strocov, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Von Dollen, S. Pimputkar and J. S. Speck, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(51), 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Hou, Z. Liu, J. H. Teng, T. Palacios and S. J. Chua, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Chen, J. X. Liu, K. L. Liu, J. J. Si, Y. R. Ding, L. Y. Li, T. R. Lv, J. P. Liu and L. Fu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 138, 60–84 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, H. Zeng and G. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23(6), 3771–3778 RSC .
J. Tian, L. Liu and F. F. Lu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44(7), 6058–6067 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gürbüz, S. Cahangirov, E. Durgun and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96(20), 205427 CrossRef .
N. R. Glavin, K. D. Chabak, E. R. Heller, E. A. Moore, T. A. Prusnick, B. Maruyama, D. E. Walker, D. L. Dorsey, Q. Paduano and M. Snure, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(47), 1701838 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Mansfield, K. A. Bertness, P. T. Blanchard, T. E. Harvey, A. W. Sanders and N. A. Sanford, J. Electron. Mater., 2009, 38(4), 495–504 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Blanchard, K. A. Bertness, T. E. Harvey, A. W. Sanders, N. A. Sanford, S. M. George and D. Seghete, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2012, 11(3), 479–482 Search PubMed .
W. Huang, T. Khan and T. P. Chow, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2006, 27(10), 796–798 CAS .
Y. Sun and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19(15), 1897–1916 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Tang, C. T. Nai, L. Li, J. Zheng, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6722–6727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Amano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(27), 7764–7769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Amano, M. Kito, K. Hiramatsu and I. Akasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 28(12), L2112–L2114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Amamo, M. Kitoh, K. Hiramatsu and I. Akasaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137(5), 1639–1641 CrossRef .
Y. Kobayanshi, K. Kumakura, T. Akasaka, H. Yamamoto and T. Makimoto, Nature, 2012, 484(7393), 223–227 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Cheng, T. W. Huang, C. L. Wu, M. K. Chen, C. H. Chu, Y. R. Wu, M. H. Shih, C. K. Lee, H. C. Kuo, D. P. Tsai and G. R. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(3), 607–617 RSC .
S. H. Park, G. Yuan, D. T. Chen, K. L. Xiong, J. Song, B. Leung and J. Han, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(8), 4293–4298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chichibu, T. Azuhata, T. Sota and S. Nakamura, Phys. Lett., 1996, 69(27), 4188–4190 CAS .
X. Rong, X. Q. Wang, S. V. Ivanov, X. H. Jiang, G. Chen, P. Wang, W. Y. Wang, C. G. He, T. Wang, T. Schulz, M. Albrecht, V. N. Jmerik, A. A. Toropov, V. V. Ratnikov, V. I. Kozlovsky, V. P. Martovitsky, P. Jin, F. J. Xu, X. L. Yang, Z. X. Qin, W. K. Ge, J. J. Shi and B. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(36), 7978–7983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shafa, D. Priante, R. T. ElAfandy, M. N. Hedhili, S. T. Mahmoud, T. K. Ng, B. S. Ooi and A. Najar, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(1), 1678–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Yong, X. Y. Su, H. L. Cui, Q. X. Zhou, Y. M. Kuang and X. H. Li, ACS Omega, 2017, 2(12), 8888–8895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yuan, C. Fu, Y. J. Gong, Y. Tong, J. Zhang and Y. Q. Wang, ACS Omega, 2021, 6(29), 19127–19133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Puneetha, S. P. R. Mallem, Y. W. Lee and J. Shim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(32), 36660–36669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aggarwal and G. Gupta, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(36), 12348–12354 RSC .
M. Z. Peng, Y. D. Liu, A. F. Yu, Y. Zhang, C. H. Liu, J. Y. Liu, W. Wu, K. Zhang, X. Q. Shi, J. Z. Kou, J. Y. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(1), 1572–1579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Journot, V. Bouchiat, B. Gayral, J. Dijon and B. Hyot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(22), 18857–18862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. X. Yu, G. D. Wang, Y. L. Shao, Y. Z. Wu, S. Z. Wang, G. Lian, B. G. Zhang, H. X. Hu, L. Liu, L. Zhang and X. P. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(45), 14116–14122 RSC .
J. Li, X. Xi, S. Lin, Z. H. Ma, X. D. Li and L. X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(10), 11965–11971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Yu, W. Z. Wu, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(7), 6403–6409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kang, D. K. Jeong and S. W. Ryu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(12), 10637–10642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Su, J. Wang, C. Huang and E. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(18), 10027–10033 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, L. Jin, X. F. Dai, G. F. Chen and G. D. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(45), 38978–38984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Wang, L. Zhang, C. L. Sun, Y. L. Shao, Y. Z. Wu, J. X. Lv and X. P. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(19), 3768–3776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Akimov, J. T. Muckerman and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(23), 8682–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Hu, B. Chang, X. C. Sun, Q. Huo, B. G. Zhang, Y. L. Li, X. L. Shao, L. Zhang, Y. Z. Wu and X. P. Hao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25(44), 10420–10426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Zhou, X. H. Kong, S. Vanka, S. Chu, P. Ghamari, Y. C. Wang, N. Pant, I. S. Shih, H. Guo and Z. T. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3856 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Kibria, S. Zhao, F. A. Chowdhury, Q. Wang, H. P. T. Nguyen, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jing, D. M. Liang, M. S. Deng, S. H. Cai and X. S. Qi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4(7), 7125–7133 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Li, J. M. P. Martirez and E. A. Carter, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(21), 12841–12857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minegishi, S. Shizumi, O. Ciftci, T. Endo, Y. Imazeki, Y. Pihosh and M. Sugiyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(19), 10493–10499 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. P. Wang, X. B. Ma and J. L. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(7), 3703–3727 RSC .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, W. H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(4), 2545–2550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Zhou, X. H. Kong, S. Vanka, S. B. Cheng, N. Pant, S. Chu, P. Ghamari, Y. C. Wang, G. Botton, H. Cuo and Z. T. Mi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(9), 2842–2848 RSC .
C. Liu, J. C. Kang, Z. Q. Huang, Y. H. Song, Y. S. Xiao, J. Song, J. X. He, C. R. Chang, H. Q. Ge, Y. Wang, Z. T. Liu and Z. W. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 2305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Y. Mu, W. B. Liu, X. H. Kong, S. Z. Fan, Z. T. Mi and C. J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(51), 14106–14109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. X. Yu, G. X. Liu, G. D. Wang, C. M. Chen, M. S. Xu, H. Zhou, T. L. Wang, J. X. Yu, G. Zhao and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9(6), 1852–1873 RSC .
M. Beshkova and R. Yakimova, Vacuum, 2020, 176, 109231 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1968, 176(1), 250–253 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, M. M. Wu, J. Zhou and Q. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(10), 103105 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. Zhou, P. Shen, S. B. Zhang and Z. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(21), 215701 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sengupta, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 451, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Zhang and F. B. Zheng, J. Comput. Chem., 2011, 32(14), 3122–3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Wang, N. H. Song, X. Y. Song, T. J. Zhang, D. P. Yang and M. Li, Vacuum, 2018, 147, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yu, Y. C. Li, J. B. Cheng, Z. B. Liu, Q. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(24), 13707–13713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, W. Zhang, N. Lu, Z. Zhou, X. C. Zeng, X. Wu and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(12), 6912–6917 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Zhongxin Wang
	Zhongxin Wang is a postgraduate at the Institute of Novel Semiconductors, Shandong University. He received his bachelor's degree in metal materials from Southwest University in 2020. His research interests include GaN materials and related devices.

Lei Zhang
	Lei Zhang is currently an associate professor at the State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University. He received his BS and MS degrees in materials science from the Qilu University of Technology in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and his PhD in materials science from Shandong University in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH in Germany during 2016–2018. His research interests include wide bandgap semiconductor materials, perovskite materials and related devices.

2D GaN	UV-assisted electroless chemical etching	Section 3.1	—
Electrochemical etching (ECE)	Section 3.2	Field effect transistor (FET)
Nitridation reaction	Ga2O3 template	Section 3.3.1	—
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)	Section 3.3.2	Field effect transistor (FET)
Molten salt auxiliary	Section 3.3.3	GaN paste electrode
Graphene assisted growth	Section 3.4	Li-ion battery; light-emitting diode (LED)
2D AlN	Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)	Section 4.1	—
Metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE)	Section 4.2	—
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)	Section 4.3	—
Physical vapor transport (PVT)	Section 4.4	Field effect transistor (FET)
Metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)	Section 4.5	Deep ultraviolet light-emitting diode (DUV-LED)

 	Fig. 1  (a) The top and side views of (i) ML GaN and (iii) bulk GaN, the top and side views of charge density difference for (ii) ML GaN and (iv) bulk GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Quasiparticle band structures of monolayer and bilayer 2D GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Binding energy calculations of freestanding planar and buckled 2D nitrides (N: nitrogen, M: group-III metal element and H: hydrogen atoms). (d) Band-structure calculations via DFT meta-GGA of freestanding planar and buckled 2D ML GaN. (e) Diagram of bandgap energy versus in-plane lattice parameter for bulk and buckled 2D nitrides. A plot of Eg as a function of a number of atomic buckled layers is included as an inset in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (f) Lattice thermal conductivity (κ) of ML GaN, bulk GaN (both in-plane and out-of-plane), graphene, silicene, and ML BN at 300 K obtained by solving the phonon BTE using the iterative method; the phonon–phonon scattering channels of the FA phonon branch along the Γ–M direction for the four 2D materials of ML GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Temperature-dependent lattice thermal conductivities of monolayer h-AlN and graphene calculated using the iterative and RTA methods, respectively; the scattering channels of FA phonon modes along the Γ–M direction for h-AlN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Side and top views of (i) the pristine m-plane GaN monolayer, (ii) optimized monolayer m-plane GaN, (iii) optimized bilayer m-plane GaN, and (iv) optimized trilayer m-plane GaN (grey: N atom, green: Ga atom). (b) Electronic structure for m-plane GaN at (i) 3 ML, (ii) 4 ML, (iii) 12 ML and orbital projected electronic structure at (iv) 3 ML, (v) 4 ML and (vi) 12 ML. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) CDD isosurfaces and Mulliken charges for the bulk wurtzite phase of GaN and (ii and iii) CDD isosurfaces Mulliken charges for 2 ML GaN, respectively, in the unstable wurtzite phase and the stable Haeckelite phase. Simulated band structures for 3 ML thick GaN in the (d) planar and (e) Hackaelite phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The energy band diagrams of GaN in equilibrium with the electrolyte, and the schematic view of the GaN substrate grown under a high temperature (∼1050 °C) followed by GaN grown under a low temperature (∼700 °C). (b) 3D illustration of a typical pore domain and inclined cross-sectional SEM image of NWs. (c) Optical image of an exfoliated nanomembrane while being attached to a 40 μμm wide tungsten probe. (d) TEM image of a GaN nanomembrane after transfer onto a carbon coated copper TEM grid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Membrane under strain to form a curved structure. (f) Schematic structure of back-gate FET made of GaN membrane. (g) Drain current ID–VD measured under gate bias from 20 to 50 V, with a step of 5 V, in the order from bottom to top. (h) ID–VG measure with a bias of 10 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The preparation process of GaN nanosheets. (b) TEM images of thin GaN nanosheets, typical low-magnification TEM image of GaN nanosheets and high-resolution TEM image of GaN nanosheets; UV-vis spectra of γ-Ga2O3 and GaN nanosheets synthesized at 850 °C with different times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram describing the stepwise procedures for the fabrication of the 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer. (d) Schematic diagram of the atomic model describing the structural transformation of the 2D Ga2O3 amorphous layer to the 2D β-Ga2O3 crystal and TEM image of the 2D Ga2O3 crystal obtained through heat treatment at 800 °C for 30 min. (e) Optical image and bright-field TEM image of a centimeter-sized 2D GaN crystal on the SiO2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the reaction unit; (b) schematic of the SCNR strategy for the growth of 2D GaN single crystals; (c) AFM image of the 2D GaN crystal; a low-magnification TEM image of 2D GaN crystals; HAADF and BF STEM images of the 2D GaN crystal acquired along the [0001] zone axis; (d) characterization of the 2D GaN single crystals: overlay of the SAED spots and intensity profiles extracted from the SAED spots; Raman spectra and PL spectra for the bulk GaN and 2D GaN with a thickness of 5.2 nm. (e) FET performance of the 2D GaN single crystal: schematic and false-colored SEM image of 2D GaN FET; Ids–Vg characteristic curve recorded at Vds = 1 V; gate-dependent Ids–Vds characteristic curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
2GaCL3 + 6LiNH2 → 2Li3GaN2 + 3Cl2 + 6H2 + N2	(1)
2Li3GaN2 + 3Cl2 → 2GaN + 6LiCl + N2	(2)

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) GaN crystals synthesized at 650 °C (b) selected area diffraction (SAD) pattern. (c) SEM image of the 2D GaN edge prepared at 600 °C. (d) Current–potential curves of the GaN electrodes under intermittent UV irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the MEEG process that leads to the formation of 2D GaN. (b) HAADF-STEM cross-section of 2D GaN and elemental EDX mapping of silicon, gallium and nitrogen in 2D GaN. (c) SEM of 2D GaN concentrated near 3D GaN island and networks of graphene wrinkles (left); schematic of the proposed pathways for intercalation through the accumulation and penetration of gallium through point defects in the graphene lattice and through nanoscale tears at the apex of graphene wrinkles (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic process of 2D GaN layers grown on graphene/Si heterostructures. (e) Schematic process of 2D GaN layers grown on graphene/Si heterostructures. (f) Cross-sectional aberration-corrected TEM images for GaN grown with hydrogenation with the assistance of plasma and the element EDX of maps Si, Ga, and C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Schematic diagram of the epitaxy of single-crystalline GaN film on Si(100) without and with single-crystalline-graphene/SiO2 interlayers. (h) AFM image of the GaN film (g-vi), showing a step-flow surface morphology with an RMS of 0.46 nm and XRD omega/2theta scan of the GaN film (g-vi). Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (i) Schematic diagram of the growth model of GaN films on nitrogen-plasma-treated graphene. (j) SEM images of GaN on (top) untreated graphene and (bottom) nitrogen-plasma-treated graphene. (k) PL spectra of InGaN/GaN MQWs grown on SiC and graphene/SiC substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis and structure of GaN nanosheets. (b) SEM image of GaN nanosheets. (c) HRTEM image of GaN nanosheets. (d) AFM image and height profile of GaN nanosheets. (e) XRD pattern of GaN NSs and GaN powders. (f) Cycling performance and corresponding Coulombic efficiency at 1.0 A g−1 for 1000 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of single crystalline AlN nanosheets and nanosheets piling up into a stack. (b) XRD pattern of single crystalline AlN nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the shaping of an AlN/GaN nanomembrane into a microtube on Si(111) by etching away the sacrificial Si underneath and SEM image of a rolled-down AlN/GaN microtube on Si(111) and other types of shaped AlN/GaN nanomembranes. (d) CL spectra of an ultrathin AlN/GaN layer in unetched, freestanding, and electro-irradiated areas, measured at 4.2 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic and atomic models of AlN nanotube (NT) fabrication process. (b) TEM image of a bundle of NTs. (c) The bandgap energy of AlN NTs as a function of the wall thickness from 1 ML to infinity (bulk), while the inside diameter is maintained at 1 nm. The insets show the schematics of the AlN NT/bulk (bottom left/right) and the atomic structure with 2 ML wall thickness for calculations (top left). The wall thickness-dependent bandgap energy determined by XPS and EELS is shown in the top right. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The equipment schematic of growing AlN crystals. (b) A large number of lamellar crystals are clearly observed on the substrate. (c) XRD pattern of the as-prepared AlN crystals. (d) TEM image of an individual AlN crystal. (e) Surface HR-TEM images of the AlN crystal. (f) AFM images of molecular terracing on the DPA crystal surface, and the inset shows the step height analysis of crystalline terrace layers along the line marked from point A to point B (the lower right corner of the inset gives the molecular length of DPA along the a-axis). (g) Schematic structure of the OFET based on AlN and DPA crystals with Au strips as the source and drain electrodes, and the cross-sectional TEM image of a completed OFET device, showing the atomically sharp interface formed between each layer. (h) Representative transfer curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the growth of 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates. (b) Schematic structures for the formation of 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images for AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates with H2 at high-magnification. (d) Schematic illustration of ultrasonic washing process to remove the graphene from graphene/2D AlN/Si, and a typical photograph for 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates before and after the removal of graphene. (e) Raman spectrum for 2D AlN layers sandwiched between graphene and Si substrates before and after the removal of graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the nucleation and film growth of the AlN on N2-plasma-treated graphene/sapphire substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) AFM image for the AlN films grown on graphene/sapphire. Inset: XRD phi scan of AlN/graphene/sapphire, showing the good large-scale epitaxial relationship between AlN and sapphire. (c) Raman mappings (5 μm × 5 μm) of the E2 (high) peak of AlN in AlN/graphene/sapphire. (d) Calculated internal stress in AlN without and with the graphene interlayer (16.0 and 14.9 GPa, respectively). Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the DUV-LED structure. (f) Light output power of the as-fabricated DUV-LED with and without graphene interlayer as a function of injection current. (g) The normalized EL spectra of DUV-LEDs on graphene/sapphire with currents ranging from 10 to 80 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Image of ≈40 flexible GaN devices, with the inset showing a close-up of a flexible HEMT. (b) Optical image of a transferred GaN HEMT device on a flexible substrate. (c) RF performance of the extrinsic current gain (H21) and unilateral power gain (U) and linear extrapolation of fT and fmax. (d) fT (depicted as squares) and fmax (depicted as triangles) values for RF testing as a function of applied external strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Image of the Earth at night (provided by NASA). (b) Activation of hydrogen-passivated Mg in GaN and the electroluminescence pattern of a GaN LED in which only the area of the “M” was irradiated with an electron beam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and transfer processes for thin-film LEDs grown on graphene-layer substrates, and room-temperature EL spectra of the LED transferred onto a plastic substrate, the inset showing the light emission at different applied current levels of 1.7 to 8.0 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2010, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic image of the designed quasi-2D GaN wells inserted in the Al0.75Ga0.25N matrix (the blue dashed lines represent the quasi-2D GaN layers, namely, 1 ML thick discontinuous GaN layers), and the dependence of output power on e-beam current in the pulse-scan mode and CW pumping mode at RT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Optical micrograph of NM LED transferred onto an Al coated Si substrate with Ni/Au as the p-electrode, blue emission from the NM LED, and EL of the NM LED with driving current from 0.2 mA to 3.5 mA, and PL and EL of the NM LED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pt-porous GaN sensor for H2-gas detection, the effect of porosity on H2 detection at room temperature versus time and versus the porosity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the 2D tetragonal GaN as molecule sensors for NO and NO2 detection, and spin density of the most stable configurations of NO2 and NO adsorption on the T-GaN with isovalues of ±0.005 e Å−3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Cu decoration process on the GaN monolayer, magnetic properties of the isolated Cu-GaN monolayer, CO system, and HCHO system, and recovery time of the Cu-GaN monolayer upon CO and HCHO desorption. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Schottky barrier heights of the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor under various applied compressive/tensile strains, and schematic configuration of the flexible graphene/GaN/PDMS sensor under out-bending and in-bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Fabrication flowchart of GaN flexible film-based MSM photoswitch, and schematic diagram of a self-powered GaN flexible film-based MSM UV photoswitch device; its self-powered on/off switching response as a function of the UV light power at 0 V bias, and band diagram of the asymmetric Pt/GaN/Ni device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the graphene/nanoporous GaN-based photodetector, photoresponse of the photodetectors and the energy band diagram of the graphene/nanoporous GaN heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the self-assembled GaN-based photodetector, and spectral response of the responsivity of our device near the band gap of the GaN (λ = 360 nm), and schematic diagrams of energy levels showing the graphene and GaN structures before and after contact between the two materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the fabricated porous GaN photodetector, I–V curves of the porous GaN device under dark conditions and UV-light illumination with a 325 nm laser, and the schematic energy band diagram of the photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Process flow of separating the GaN membrane and fabricating the TF PNG, and COMSOL-simulated piezoelectric potential of a GaN membrane under shear stress on the TF PNG, and piezoelectric output voltage and current measured from the TF PNG while it was periodically bent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) GaN NB piezotronic transistor; (c) GaN NB piezotronic inverter; (d) GaN NB piezotronic half-adder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Possible Li/Na ion migration paths on the 2D GaN. (b) Corresponding diffusion barrier profiles for Li and Na. The calculated voltage profiles and storage capacities for (c) Li and (d) Na on the 2D GaN. The maximum Li and Na storage capacities are indicated by stars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of supercapacitor electrode materials. (b) SEM images of GaNMM-20; the inset photographs show the fabricated GaNMM-20 (the grid is 1 mm). (c) Pseudocapacitive behavior in the charging and discharging processes of GaNMM electrodes; cycling performance of the supercapacitor at 10 and 5 mA cm−2; and Ragone plots of the values reported for other SC devices are added for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction on the Mo@g-GaN monolayer, and Bader charge variation of the three moieties along the distal pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Ni/g-GaN monolayers as electrocatalysts for the OER and ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Kinetic scheme of the hole and proton migration processes involved in the initial stages of photocatalytic water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the behavior of photoexcited carriers in a GaN photoanode, and in situ PL mapping results for the GaN photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction on plasmonic Au/p-GaN photocathodes, and time-course of gas evolution from the photocathode during controlled potential electrolysis under plasmon excitation (λ > 495 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The mechanism for CO2 to DME catalyzed by GaN, and the representative long-term stability results for the hydrogenation of CO2 over GaN-26.6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (c) The equation of the non-oxidative aromatization of short-chain alkanes (C1–C6) catalyzed by GaN, and reusability of GaN for the methane dehydroaromatization reaction at 450 °C (4 h for each cycle). Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Calculated adsorption energy per atom and (b) open circuit voltage (OCV) for different degrees of lithiation and sodiation of 2D AlN. (c) The relative energy for different possible paths (namely, A–A, ABA and ACA) calculated with NEB simulations for Na or Li atoms on 2D AlN. (d) Schematic of the AlN zigzag nanoribbon (ZNR) device supercell (armchair nanoribbon (ANR) device not shown here). The calculated transmission spectra for the (b) (3, 0) AlN NR device and (c) (2, 2) AlN NR device for pristine/pure under single adatom doped conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Demonstration of the electrons of CO2/AlN and the charge density difference of AlN. Charge density difference plots for (b) CO2/AlN, (c) H2/AlN, (d) CO/AlN, (e) O2/AlN, and (f) NO/AlN. The red and blue iso-surface with an isovalue of 0.001 e Å−3 corresponds to charge accumulation and depletion, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
