A comprehensive review on selected graphene synthesis methods: from electrochemical exfoliation through rapid thermal annealing towards biomass pyroly ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01316E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01316E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6722-6748A comprehensive review on selected graphene synthesis methods: from electrochemical exfoliation through rapid thermal annealing towards biomass pyrolysis

        
          
            Jovana R. 
            Prekodravac
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dejan P. 
            Kepić
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Juan Carlos 
            Colmenares
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dimitrios A 
            Giannakoudakis
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Svetlana P. 
            Jovanović
          
        
      a
aVinča Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of the Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. E-mail: prekodravac@vin.bg.ac.rs
bInstitute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
Received 
      22nd March 2021
    , Accepted 30th April 2021First published on 30th April 2021AbstractThe progressive development of technology and industry in the new millennium emergently requires finding a balance between economic progress and new smart materials. Graphene as a carbon allotrope since the discovery has attracted enormous attention due to several extraordinary properties that originate from its physical and chemical assets. However, the most important obstacle in graphene assembly still is the production of high-quality graphene on a large scale using cost-effective methods. The presented review article aims to give information on a turning point in graphene synthesis, with reference to a detailed analysis of electrochemical exfoliation, rapid thermal annealing and biomass pyrolysis. Selected methods for graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials production were not covered in the literature to their maximum potential, from our point of view. Through an overview of the selected synthesis methods, we explored their prospects and limitations regarding precursor type and reaction conditions. Furthermore, through several important characterization techniques for graphene, we reveal the details of the properties of graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials obtained through selected methods. Finally, a particular potential application depending on nanomaterial properties obtained through selected methods was pointed out.
Introduction
Over the years the research focus on nanoscaled materials with sizes ranging from 1 to 100 nm increased in various fields due to their unique properties originating mostly from their size, morphology and dimensionality.1,2 Carbon in its elemental form is one of the most abundant materials in nature with many allotropes already proven to be extremely useful to mankind. Nanoscaled carbon allotropes can be found in different forms, including graphene, graphane, graphyne, fullerenes, single or multiwalled carbon nanotubes, carbon nanohorns, carbon nanodiamonds, carbon quantum dots and carbon nano-onions, among others.3–9 Because of the physicochemical properties, carbon hybridization, structure and dimensionality, these classes of carbon nanostructures show a variety of applications. The most attractive carbon-based nanomaterials, per dimensionality and hybridization, are summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Different nanoscaled carbon allotropes with appropriate hybridization and dimensionality. 
Since its discovery, graphene as a 2D carbon allotrope has gained significant attention from research and the industrial community due to several extraordinary properties that originate from its physical and chemical assets.10–13 Diverse possible applications of graphene-motivated research on the production of large-scale-high-quality graphene with a focus on using cost-effective methods. The literature space on graphene synthesis is quite crowded with manuscripts focused on resolving issues regarding the minimization of the synthetic route costs and simplicity. Many of them suggested that the production of large-scale materials with high purity and homogeneity is yet to be realized, which does not present a timely and substantial addition to the field. Aside, the implication on a rising concern regarding the possibility of graphene growth on different desired substrates and from different carbon precursors was pointed out as well. As a result, literature overviews in the form of review articles are overwhelmed with several selected methods14–16 frequently applied by researchers giving the impression of setting behind numerous significant synthetic routes for graphene production.17–20
The presented review article aims to give a comprehensive overview of selected synthetic methods for graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials production. The emphasis is given to the reaction conditions, the quality of the obtained graphene nanomaterials and a variety of potential applications closely connected to the nanomaterial properties. The first analyzed synthetic method is electrochemical exfoliation as one of the most exploited methods for graphene sheet production, where we covered in detail all aspects of graphene production, pointing out the method shortcomings, graphene quality and potential applications. Further, the rapid thermal annealing is not yet a fully investigated method for graphene thin film synthesis was analyzed. Here we focused on the possibility of using different carbon-based precursors for graphene production on diverse substrates, implying their effect on the produced graphene thin film size and defectiveness. Finally, we discussed the potential usage of biomass or bio-waste thermal annealing under an inert atmosphere in the presence of activation agents for graphene production. This part revealed the near future potential of graphene-based nanomaterials production from naturally available materials leading to the sustainability and reusability of natural sources reducing production costs. Again, we gave a detailed explanation of the produced nanomaterial properties and suggested a wide range of applications.
The presented review article fills the literature gap, and is beneficial to a broad range of researchers, material scientists and chemical engineers as an authoritative overview of a field through comprehensive literature review. For young developing researchers looking for understanding and learning more about the graphene synthetic methods and great application potential, the presented review article could serve as a tutorial reference material. By focusing on selected synthetic approaches, we were able to expose their huge potential and prospects through many literature reference examples introducing a question where the limit in the selection of the starting material for graphene production lies. From a large-scale production and potential application point of view of graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials, we highlighted the selected method's limits considering produced graphene size, structural disorder and diversity of the starting materials used. The applications of the obtained graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials or thin films were proposed based on a detailed overview of the produced graphene properties depending on the applied method of synthesis.
Graphene fundamental aspects
Graphene represents a single-atom-thick sheet of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb structure. Beside single-layer graphene sheet (SLG)21 with a thickness of 0.34 nm, graphene can also form bi- (BLG),22 few- (FLG)11 and multi-layer graphene sheets (MLG)23 (up to 10) of well-defined stacked graphene layers connected by van der Waals forces.12 Each carbon atom in graphene is connected through strong covalent bonds with three surrounding atoms of carbon. The fourth valent electron, however, does not participate in the formation of a covalent bond, but it is perpendicular to the graphene sheet forming a conducting π band, which gives graphene special chemical and electronic properties.13 The material dimensionality classification, based on the number of dimensions outside the nanoscale (<100 nm) range, categorizes graphene as a 2D nanomaterial. The zero-dimensional (0D) nanomaterials have no dimension larger than 100 nm, while in one-dimensional nanomaterials (1D), one dimension is outside the nanoscale. Comparing 0D, 1D and three-dimensional nanomaterials (3D), which are not confined to the nanoscale in any dimension, graphene as a 2D nanomaterial has two dimensions outside the nanoscale which gives it a plate-like shape allowing it to form a nano-layer/film (Fig. 1).
Graphene is extremely strong nanomaterial with Young's module close to 1 TPa. The optical transmittance of graphene is approximately 97.7% with negligible reflectance (<0.1%). Another interesting property of graphene is the high theoretical specific surface area of 2630 m2 g−1 and intrinsic mobility at Dirac point of 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1.24 Graphene also possesses high thermal conductivity of approximately 5000 W m−1 K−1 and charge carrier mobility at room temperature up to 106 cm2 V−1 s−1 for suspended graphene.25,26 Such arising properties enable wide possibilities of graphene applications from energy storage and conversion, electrochemical catalysis to environmental remediation.27–32 These properties are strongly dependent on the number of graphene layers, the angle of stacking, as well as on the sheet size and quality.33 One of the most attractive assets of graphene is that, unlike most 2D materials, graphene is a semiconductor with valence and conduction bands symmetrically distributed on the two sides of the Fermi level. Therefore, graphene is considered a zero band gap semiconductor.34,35 These extraordinary properties connected to graphene nanomaterial opened the gate to a wide range of possibilities in terms of potential applications. Several promising applications and the most important properties of graphene for those applications are presented in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Possible graphene applications. (Adapted with kind permission from The University of Manchester, pexels.com and freeimages.com). 
Graphene characterization techniques
Detailed characterization of graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials is essential for the determination of precise properties of synthesized nanomaterial. Resolving the number of graphene layers, their size, quality/defectiveness and homogeneity, among others interesting graphene properties through characterization, the full potential of produced graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials can be explored in different fields of application. Here, we will focus on the introduction of several characterization techniques frequently applied, based on the literature survey, for graphene and graphene-based nanomaterial characterization.
As a non-destructive method for the characterization of carbon nanomaterials, researchers mostly focus on Raman spectroscopy analysis, to begin with, to establish the number and quality of formed graphene layers.36 The Raman spectrum of graphene layers shows three predominant bands located at 1350, 1580 and 2700 cm−1 assigned as D, G and 2D bands, respectively. The origin of the G band comes from the sp2 hybridized carbon atoms in-plane vibration mode, while the 2D band arises as a result of two-photon lattice vibration processes in graphene.37–39 Analysis of the shape, intensity and position of these bands provides substantial information regarding the crystallite size by employing the Tuinstra-Koenig relation.37,40 Raman spectroscopy offers a precise determination of the number of formed graphene layers by calculation of the 2D to G peak intensity ratio (I2D/IG) and full width at half the maximum of the 2D band (FWHM (2D)). The single and sharp 2D band with large intensity relative to the G band (I2D/IG > 2) is characteristic for SLG, while with an increase in the number of formed graphene layers, the 2D band is more asymmetric and the 2D to G band intensity ratio decreases (I2D/IG < 2).41 Aside from the existence of G and 2D bands, with an increase in the number of graphene layers, additional bands in the Raman spectrum of graphene arise. These bands are assigned as the 2D′ band located at approximately 3248 cm−1, and weak G* band at approximately 2450 cm−1. The third D band in the Raman spectra is associated with the breathing oscillation of carbon rings that are not allowed in a perfect hexagonal carbon lattice. Consequently, it is not visible in the Raman spectrum of graphene with the perfect hexagonal carbon lattice. Therefore, the presence of the D band indicates the defective nature of graphene structure or the presence of amorphous carbonaceous phases, while the intensity of the D band is directly proportional to the level of defects present. The quality, i.e., defect level of graphene thin films is usually determined through the D to G intensity ratio (ID/IG).20,42
The microscopy techniques, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) are the most used methods for the morphology, size and thickness analysis of formed graphene layers. AFM, as a non-invasive technique enables visualization of the sample surface in three dimensions offering information about the material diameter and height, as well as physical characteristics such as surface morphology, roughness and texture.43 SEM as a non-destructive method also provides enough information in confirmation of the number of layers and the size of the formed graphene sheets based on image contrast. However, due to SLG transparency, there is the possibility of transmission of a high-energy beam, which would result in obtaining information about the morphology of the substrate rather than the sample itself. This is where TEM analysis comes as a very useful technique providing the possibility to observe the morphological features of graphene thin films while giving accurate information on the number of graphene layers.44
Graphene surface chemistry characterization is often performed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS offers information about surface chemical states, elemental composition, empirical formula, and electronic state of the detected elements present. For example, the typical XPS spectrum of defect-free graphene possesses only one sharp band at 284.5 eV from carbon (C).45 The deconvolution of this band revealed that only sp2 hybridized C atoms are present. In the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups, the XPS spectrum will show two bands centered around 284 and 533 eV, where the first stems from C atoms while the second one is characteristic for oxygen (O).46 The analysis of these bands through deconvolution indicates that C atoms are sp2 (CC) and sp3 (C–C, C–O and C–OO) hybridized, while O atoms are located in CO, C–OH/C–O–C, COOH and H2O/O2 groups.47 The presence of heteroatoms in the graphene structure can be detected by XPS as well. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is suitable for analysis of thin-film structures on a nanometre scale allowing an investigation of the in-plane and out-of-plane crystalline structures of thin films. The XRD method is used to analyze structure parameters such as micro-strain, crystallite size and dislocation density.48
Graphene production techniques summary
Though graphene was initially studied in 1947, at the time only theoretical studies were performed with only a few predictions of the electronic structure.49 Afterward, a process for graphene extraction using simple mechanical exfoliation to produce graphene from graphite with Scotch tape was suggested by Ruoff et al.,50 However, this attempt led to the separation of MLG. Geim and Novoselov in 2004, succeeded in the separation and identification of graphene as the “perfect atomic lattice” by the same approach. They were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics (2010) for “groundbreaking experiments regarding the two-dimensional material graphene”.51,52 The upscaling research progress in graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials encouraged research optimists to even say that the research community over the past 20 years has entered the carbon age.
Graphene production over time has been divided into two key categories, top-down and bottom-up, which offered the simplest state-of-the-art technologies for graphene synthesis methods. However, the impact on the large-scale industrial production is closely connected to the development of methods for scalable synthesis of high-quality graphene. The literature survey on the Scopus database (Fig. 3) offers data that show the impact of several methods on graphene synthesis in the past 10 years. Methods such as chemical synthesis or chemical, electrochemical and mechanical exfoliation along with the definite leader in the field, the CVD method, with more than 1090 research papers published over the past 10 years, are the most explored/applied methods for graphene synthesis chosen by the research community.53–57 However, each of the mentioned methods shows several extraordinary advantages in graphene synthesis but also some substantial drawbacks.
 Fig. 3  Overview of graphene synthesis methods: the publication rate over the past 10 years. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database. 
Mechanical exfoliation as a top-down, low cost and simple method for graphene synthesis has been acknowledged from the beginning by the carbon community for the explosive growth of interest in graphene synthesis.58 A method for the simple separation of graphene layers from bulk graphite through multiple exfoliation steps using Scotch tape is based on overcoming the van der Waals forces between adjacent layers of graphene.59 Separated SLG or MLG, afterward can be deposited on different substrates such as silicon wafers. Although a simple and low-cost method, mechanical exfoliation shows restrictions in the precise control of the size and quality of stacked graphene layers. The diameter of several microns, as well as the irregular shape and low-quality of produced graphene sheets, rise as a result of the residues left on the graphene surface after the Scotch tape removal.60 Consequently, the technology of graphene separation through chemical exfoliation was discovered as a good start for upcoming technologies/methods with fewer limitations. Epitaxial growth of graphene thin films on different substrates was found to be a smart alternative for graphene synthesis.61 Substantial progress in this direction has been achieved using silicon carbide (SiC) and close-packed metals as substrates. The mechanism was based on thermal decomposition of SiC in ultra-high vacuum and temperatures between 1000 and 1500 °C, causing Si sublimation, and leaving a carbon-rich surface. The method provided successful production of wafer-scale graphene thin films with potential applications in the micro-electronics industry.62,63 In comparison to the epitaxial growth with the carbon precursor on the substrate surface, for CVD growth of graphene thin films, the carbon precursor was delivered into the chamber in a gaseous form using metal as a catalyst and/or substrate.64 The CVD method holds a unique advantage compared to other available methods in terms of the high-quality and uniformity of the large-scale synthesis of graphene thin films. The CVD enables the application of different substrates, such as nickel (Ni) or copper (Cu) heated at high temperature (usually around 1000 °C), while hydrocarbons (methane mostly) were introduced as carbon sources for graphene growth. All of the mentioned qualities of the CVD method pushed it to the top of the scale in applied methods over the years. However, aside from many advantages, CVD also shows some disadvantages. The restrictions on the type of substrate or precursor used for graphene synthesis due to operations at elevated temperatures are one of them for sure. However, the demand for the carbon precursor to be volatile at room temperature, aside from being quite costly, toxic, explosive or corrosive, or even producing some hazardous by-products are the main setbacks in the application of the CVD method. The reduction of graphene oxide (GO) through thermal, chemical or electrochemical treatment is another method recognized for graphene sheet production.65 GO reduction by thermal treatment implies rapid heating, usually over 200 °C min−1, to exfoliate graphite oxide and to achieve graphene through the expansion of carbon monoxide (CO) or carbon dioxide (CO2) gases in-between graphene sheets. GO reduction by chemical reagents is based on chemical reactions at room temperature or by moderate heating. Finally, the electrochemical reduction of GO sheets or films was carried out in an electrochemical cell at room temperature by the electron exchange between GO and electrodes, without a special chemical agent. In addition to many benefits of graphene production from GO, such as ease of processing, versatility, cost-effectiveness and scalable mass production, the full reduction of GO to graphene is still hard to accomplish.66,67
Rising attention in the past 20 years over a plethora of detailed investigations of different methods for graphene synthesis pointed out several crucial issues preventing wider applications.68 Graphene synthesis efforts were made on resolving minimization issues of the synthetic route costs and simplicity, while enabling the production of large-scale materials with high purity and homogeneity.69 To do so, the focus on selected synthesis methods overwhelmed the literature data while several other known methods for graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials were neglected without exploration of their full potential.
Graphene synthesis through electrochemical exfoliation method
The exfoliating methods for graphene production became an interesting research topic in correlation with the high demand for graphene intended for various applications. One of the advantages of this method is the possibility of mass production of high-quality graphene material at a relatively low cost. According to the Scopus database, keyword search involving phrases “electrochemical exfoliation” and “graphene” shows a rising trend of published articles and conference papers in the period from 2015 to 2020 (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis through the electrochemical exfoliation method. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database. 
The high number of published research articles and conference papers points out the high exploitation of the electrochemical exfoliation method in graphene synthesis compared to several other synthetic methods (Fig. 3). Bellow, the emphasis will be on the electrochemically exfoliated graphene as a highly ranked method among the most commonly used synthesis methods for graphene production with a high quantitative percentage of the obtained graphene layers. The critical review will be made on the synthesis mechanism, size and quality of the exfoliated graphene sheets followed by the available applications based on the properties of the specific material.
Mechanism of graphene synthesis from electrochemical exfoliation
The electrochemical exfoliation process of graphene production implies the immersion of electrodes in an electrolyte solution with the application of electrical current between the electrodes.70 The process can be conducted by employing either two-71,72 or three-electrodes systems73,74 in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes.75,76 In this kind of system, one of the electrodes has a role as a graphene source, typically consisting of a graphite rod,77,78 graphite foil,79,80 graphite slices,81 pencil core,82 graphitic paper,83,84 or highly-oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).85 After completing the process, the obtained material has to be purified from the electrolyte residuals and large un-exfoliated graphite particles through several steps involving predominantly sonication, centrifugation, and/or filtration.
Graphene exfoliation takes place in two consecutive steps: intercalation and expansion. By applying the electrical current, the electrolyte ions intercalate between the graphene sheets in graphite, causing the sheets expansion and finally, exfoliation of the graphene layers.86 Depending on the charge at a working electrode that acts as a graphene source, the exfoliation can be either cathodic or anodic.87 Understanding the mechanism of graphene exfoliation paves the way for process optimization by defining the ideal conditions for both intercalation and the expansion step. According to Parvez et al. electrolysis of water gives hydroxyl ions, which act as strong nucleophiles88 attacking edges, defect sites, and exposed grain boundaries of graphene while introducing oxygen-containing functional groups in graphene structure. The introduction of functional groups, leads to the expansion of graphene layers, allowing the intercalation of electrolyte anions between layers.89 The anion reduction caused by the electrical current produced gas bubbles by applying force on the graphene layers. Consequently, the high demand for applied suitable reduction potential allows electrolyte anions to generate gas molecules under applied conditions. To fulfill this request, one of the most commonly used anions for electrochemical exfoliation experiments was sulfate ion (SO42−). After the bubbles created enough force to exceed the weak van der Waals forces between layers, separation/exfoliation of the individual graphene layers were allowed. This mechanism was later confirmed by Huang et al.90 However, Rao et al. proposed the mechanism that implied the polymerization of hydrogen sulfate (HSO4−) and SO42− anions into dimmers, trimmers, and clusters.91 The authors suggested that after the cluster reached a certain size, it was reduced to a neutral molecule, which eventually leads to the formation of large gas bubbles of sulfur dioxide (SO2). The evolution of these gas bubbles facilitated further exfoliation. Several papers reported the application of different electrode potentials for the intercalation and expansion processes. Hsieh et al. conducted electrochemical exfoliation under constant voltage and current conditions through the application of two-step direct current (DC) bias on the electrode.92 The processes of surface wetting and ionic intercalation occurred at low voltage or low current, while the exfoliation occurred at high voltage or high current. The separation of the overall process into two steps made it possible to produce high-quality graphene. Sahoo et al. initially applied negative potential at the working electrode, which was later switched to positive potential.93 A short period of cathodic treatment served for the intercalation of hydronium ions (H3O+) between graphene layers, which underwent electrochemical reactions and produced hydrogen gas bubbles. Although hydrogen gas bubbles encouraged the weakening of van der Waals forces, due to its small volume it was not sufficient to complete the exfoliation. In this phase, the surface of the electrode was cleaned from any physically adsorbed impurities. Switching to the anodic potential enabled the intercalation of electrolyte anions, which further lead to graphene exfoliation. During the anodic treatment, an introduction of various oxygen-containing groups to the graphene sheets was successfully achieved.
The electrochemical exfoliation of graphene was additionally performed in non-aqueous media. Liu et al. conducted the exfoliation in the solution of lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) in propylene carbonate initially applying negative potential followed by positive potential.84 At the first stage, after the application of the negative potential, Li+ ions along with propylene carbonate molecules intercalated graphite distorting layered structure. Once the electrode potential was switched to positive, perchlorate anions intercalated the distorted graphite with simultaneous de-intercalation of Li+ ions. The third stage pointed toward the immersion of the electrode in water for intercalated perchlorate anions to hydrolyze and release oxygen gas bubbles. At this stage, the formation of hydroxyl and carbonyl groups, in smaller amounts, on the graphene surface occurred additionally. Graphene was successfully electrochemically exfoliated in an ionic liquid electrolyte.94,95 Lei et al. performed the exfoliation of graphene from graphite paper in the mixture of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([EMIm]Cl) and aluminum chloride (AlCl3) and proposed the mechanism for this approach.96 According to the authors, under constant voltage, anions tetrachloroaluminate (AlCl4−) and heptachlorodialuminate (Al2Cl7−) among others, adsorbed and intercalated into the graphite electrode, which resulted in the exfoliation of MLG nanoplates.
Quality of the exfoliated graphene
The quality of exfoliated graphene is generally characterized by the number of graphene layers in the final product, graphene oxidation degree (the C/O ratio), number of defects, or in some cases average lateral dimensions of graphene sheets. The oxidation or homolytic fusion of water molecules under an anodic exfoliation process generates hydroxyl and other oxygen radicals. The formed radical species react rapidly with graphene sheets introducing oxygen-containing functional groups into the graphene structure, making it partially oxidized.88 The level of graphene oxidation is usually monitored through analysis of the C/O ratio from elemental analysis techniques such as XPS. For certain applications of exfoliated graphene, such as the preparation of anode material for lithium-ion batteries,97,98 it is important to minimize the effect of radicals on the graphene structure. This can be achieved either during the process of the exfoliation or as a separate post-synthetic step. One way of radical effect improvement is the introduction of reducing agent additives. This way generated radical species preferably react with the additive molecule rather than graphene sheet. The introduction of the additives such as (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl piperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO),99 ethylene glycol or melamine,100 resulted in decrease in the oxygen content in the exfoliated graphene product. Some transition metal cations, such as cobalt (Co2+) and iron (Fe3+), as reported by Ejigu et al., showed similar effective nature in the protection of graphene surface and production of low oxygen content and defect density material.101 The usage of the Co2+ salt during exfoliation led to the formation of graphene with 80% less oxygen compared to graphene exfoliated in the absence of Co2+ salt. Likewise, the use of sodium chloride (NaCl) as an electrolyte additive prevented the oxidation of the graphene sheets and lead to an overall C/O ratio of approximately 0.02–0.03.102 One of the important factors for graphene formation with low oxygen content and low defect density is the electrolyte medium temperature. The exfoliation at lower temperatures lessens the number of generated hydroxyl radicals giving graphene with lower oxygen content103,104 providing graphene with better quality in terms of the decreased number of broken layers and fragments as well.105
The number of graphene layers produced remains an important parameter with a strong influence on the graphene electronic properties. This may be one of the most important disadvantages of the electrochemical exfoliation process since graphene obtained by this method is usually classified as an MLG (Fig. 5). The low-quality of produced graphene is frequently connected with the presence of overlapped layers, wrinkles, and/or folded edges. Modification of the electrochemical procedure, through the formation of an intermediate graphite intercalation compound, opens the possibility for the preparation of FLG106,107 or even BLG.108,109 However, SLG production by the electrochemical exfoliation method remains a research challenge.
 Fig. 5  Optical images of graphene sheets: (a) RGB image, (b) grey-scaled image, (c) contrast map with a different number of layers, (d) RGB image of TLG, (e) G-channel image and (f) contrast map. (Reproduced with Permission.110 Copyright Mater. Chem. Phys. (2018)). 
The average lateral dimension of exfoliated graphene sheets usually goes from several hundreds of nanometers and expands to a micrometer scale. The literature summary of lateral sizes of graphene sheets obtained by electrochemical exfoliation from different carbon sources applying different reaction conditions is listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the average sizes of exfoliated graphene sheets




Graphene lateral size
Graphene source
Electrolyte
Power supply
Ref.





a Li bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB)/dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP).
b Hex(4-carboxylphenoxy)cyclotriphosphazene (HCPCP).





∼10 μm
Graphite foil
(NH4)2SO4, thiourea
+6 V

111



0.5–5 μm2
Graphite rod
NaOH, NH4Cl
+5 V

112



2–12 μm
HOPG
(NH4)2S2O8
+12 V

113



2 μm
Graphite flakes
Different electrolytes
+5, +10 V

114



<1 μm for graphite rod, ∼10 μm for HOPG
Graphite rod/HOPG
(NH4)2SO4



115



>5 μm
Graphite foil
(NH4)2SO4
+10 V

116



600–850 nm
Graphite rod
(NH4)2SO4
+8 V

117



∼11 μm
Graphite foil
(LiBOB)/(DMMP)a
+10 V

118



Several μm
Graphite paper
(NH4)2SO4
+10 V

119



Several μm
Graphite slice
(HCPCP)b
+10 V

120



5–20 μm
Graphite foil
Phytic acid
+10 V

121





Applications of the electrochemically exfoliated graphene
Applications of electrochemically exfoliated graphene, based on research papers published in the past 5 years, are predominantly as an electrode material for supercapacitors, batteries or in the form of a conducting film. Among these, electrochemically exfoliated graphene found potential applications in the development of sensors, catalysts, hybrid membranes, anticorrosion coatings, fire hazard suppression materials, or as a component for the preparation of new composite materials (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of potential applications for electrochemically exfoliated graphene. 
The growing market for portable electronics and electric vehicles reveals a high demand for energy storage devices and rechargeable batteries. Due to the large capacitance (up to 550 F g−1)122 and excellent electrical conductivity (up to 104–105 S m−1)123 graphene found effective applications for fabrication of the supercapacitor electrode material, electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and in batteries. The electrical conductivity of graphene and its flexibility serve as bases for the development of conducting thin-film technology for flexible and foldable electronic devices. Thin films prepared either by vacuum filtration,17 drop-casting, spin-coating124 or printing125,126 can be supported on a substrate or free-standing.127,128Table 2 presents the major literature overview of implementing electrochemically exfoliated graphene for the achievements of the aforementioned applications.
Table 2 Literature summary of the major application achievements for the electrochemically exfoliated graphene




Application
Conditions
Properties
Ref.




Graphene-based supercapacitors
Exfoliated graphene-low oxygen content
Specific capacitance ∼120 F g−1 at a Current density 0.1 A g−1

102



Graphite/GO/PPy hybrid electrode
Areal capacitance 1320 mF cm−2

129



Graphene/PANI
Specific capacitance 453.75 F g−1

130





Current density of 1.5 A g−1


Graphene/nickel hydroxide
Areal capacitance 5.2 F cm−2

131





Current density 2 mA cm−2


Graphene/MoO2 composite
Specific capacitance 265 F g−1

132





Current density 2.5 A g−1


Graphene/MnO2 composite
Specific capacitance 320 F g−1

133



Graphene/S composite
Specific capacitance 186.3 F g−1

111





Scan rate 1 mV s−1


Graphene/N,S co-doped
Specific capacitances 341 and 200 F g−1

134





Current densities 0.1 and 10 A g−1


Lithium-ion batteries
Graphene/MoS2
Gravimetric capacity 750 mA h g−1

135





Current density 50 mA g−1




Volumetric capacity 1200 mA h cm−3




Capacitive current density 0.1 mA cm−2


Graphene/MoS2/N,S co-doped
Gravimetric capacity 1012 mA h g−1

136





Current density 0.5 A g−1


Graphene/B doped
Gravimetric capacity 1018 mA h g−1

137





Capacity retention of 838 mA h g−1


Sodium-ion batteries
Graphene/needle-like PANI composite
Rate capacities 64 mA h g−1

138





Current densities 100 mA g−1


Graphene/phosphorene hybrid
Specific capacity 2311 mA h g−1

139





Current density 0.1 A g−1


MoS2/N,S co-doped graphene
Reversible capacity 320.9 mA h g−1

140





Current density 0.5 A g−1


Aluminum-ion batteries
Flexible film cathode composed of FLG
Capacity 173 mA h g−1

76





Current density 1 A g−1




Electrochemically exfoliated graphene combined with suitable materials was used for the development of an amperometric sensor for dopamine,141 extraction and determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,142,143 selective detection of oxalic acid,144 voltammetric detection of sunset yellow,145 CO gas sensing,146 and catechol detection.147 Recent progress in replacing platinum, in Pt-based catalysts due to its high price, resulted in the application of new generation catalysts based on electrochemically exfoliated graphene. Graphene can overcome drawbacks of Pt-based catalysts such as deactivation by CO and methanol crossover effect.148 Graphene doped with heteroatoms, such as N-doped graphene148–150 and S-doped graphene151 showed great potential as electrocatalysts in oxygen reduction reaction. Various forms of electrochemically exfoliated graphene found additional applications in the improvement of the electro-catalytic performance in the hydrogen evolution reaction.152,153 Incorporation of electrochemically exfoliated graphene into polymeric matrix leads to the fabrication of hybrid membranes with improved separation performance, new fire hazard suppression materials, and corrosion-resistant coatings. The literature summary of composite materials obtained with electrochemically exfoliated graphene and various polymers is presented in Table 3.
Table 3 The use of electrochemically exfoliated graphene as a filler to obtain composite materials




Application
Material
Ref.




Hybrid membranes for the removal of phenol from water
Polydimethylsiloxane graphene/polyethersulfone

154



Hybrid membranes for the removal of methyl orange from water
Graphene supported on a polycarbonate membrane via vacuum filtration

155



New fire hazard suppression materials
Ferric phytate functionalized graphene incorporated into polylactic acid

156



Graphene functionalized using hex(4-carboxylphenoxy)cyclotriphosphazene added to thermoplastic polyurethane

120



New fire hazard suppression materials
Graphene nanosheets incorporated into polystyrene

157



Polyacrylonitrile composite fibers with ferric diethylenetriaminepentakis (methylphosphonic acid) functionalized graphene nanosheets

158



Corrosion resistance materials
SLG functionalized with hydrolyzed styrene–maleic anhydride copolymer

159



1 wt% of FLG added to epoxy resin

160





Among various methods explored for the production of graphene, electrochemical exfoliation is considered one of the most efficient pathways. The increasing number of published papers on the electrochemical exfoliation of graphene reflects its prominence and high demand for countless applications from energy storage, sensors, catalysts, conducting films, anticorrosion and flame protection, hybrid membranes, to new composite materials. Compared to frequently employed methods, electrochemical exfoliation benefits in a practical sense as cost-effective, environmentally friendly, less time consuming, and graphene production scale-up. Despite significant progress in this area, there are remaining issues that need to be addressed, such as the production of preferably SLG, effective and tunable control of the oxidation level, and the production of electrochemically exfoliated graphene at a large industrial scale. All of the above-mentioned concerns still represent a challenge and motivation for future investigations in this field.
Graphene synthesis through the rapid thermal annealing method
As a subset of rapid thermal processing, RTA synthesis is an often-used process in semiconductor device fabrication. The RTA method through the substrate or material heating promotes film growth, dopant activation, improvement of the film quality, interface change or affection on the electrical properties through density and charge state of the deposited films. The limited number of research papers published in the past 5 years according to the Scopus database using keywords such as “rapid thermal annealing” and “graphene”, indicates that this method is still not fully exploited to the limits, but research interest has decreased over the years (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis through the RTA method. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database. 
Literature research on the RTA reaction conditions for graphene thin film synthesis shows diverse possibilities for graphene production on different substrates and from different carbon precursors. Precise control of the annealing temperature and time, as well as the type of chosen substrate and carbon precursor for graphene thin film synthesis by the RTA method effect, was found to be beneficial in the production of graphene thin films with the desired number of layers, size and quality. The small number of published research articles and none review article on the RTA method for graphene thin film synthesis points out the little method exploitation compared to several other synthetic methods (Fig. 3). Bellow, the main focus will be on the RTA synthesis mechanism as a bottom-up method for graphene synthesis. A critical review will be made on the applied reaction condition's effect on the grown graphene thin films. Finally, the available applications based on the properties of the specific material will be categorized.
The mechanism of graphene synthesis by the RTA method
The difference between RTA and classical furnace lies in the time-consuming progression of the furnace-annealing process. Due to classical furnace capabilities and large size, occasionally a longer annealing time of 30 min to even several hours, is necessary for the furnace to reach the anticipated temperature and keep it constant during the annealing period.161 However, in the RTA process, the desired temperature can be reached in only a few minutes and maintained constant for the preferred time. Therefore, the RTA method offers possibilities for precise control of the whole annealing and cooling processes in a short time with additional advantages in setting temperature ramps.162 These advantages were found to be especially significant for the synthesis and modification of graphene-based materials as well as for the improvement of structural and consequently electrical properties of the fabricated film. Hence, the RTA process allows working with a fine combination of different parameters. Such reaction parameters of working in short periods, under low or high temperatures and different atmospheres while using different substrates and carbon precursors all together affect the final product's nature, size and quality.163 All of the above-mentioned benefits of the RTA method were found to be very useful to the carbon research community for the synthesis of graphene thin films on the desired substrates.
The effect of the substrate chosen for graphene growth is mostly dependent on the desired applications of the synthesized graphene thin films. Based on the literature findings, substrates, such as Si or/and SiO2 wafers,164,165 SiC,166 Cu foil20 or graphite18,19 are often used as supports during the RTA graphene synthesis, with or without the presence of metallic catalysts.164 Among different catalysts, Ni, Cu, Co and Ni–Cu alloy167–170 are typically used as catalysts for graphene synthesis by the RTA method for several reasons. One is the affordable price compared to other appropriate metals for the same purpose, while the other addresses the solubility of carbon in these metals. In fact, due to the high solubility of carbon in Ni, carbon atoms can segregate and diffuse through Ni during annealing at high temperatures and precipitate on its surface during cooling to form graphene.171,172 Oppositely, Cu demonstrates low carbon solubility and high thermal stability, which allows Cu foil to be used mostly as a support for graphene synthesis or as a boundary layer during graphene growth, preventing the diffusion of dissolved carbon back to the substrate. Therefore, besides Si or SiO2 wafers, Cu foil was found to be an interesting substrate in graphene synthesis by the RTA method as well. The graphene synthesis through the RTA method includes several basic steps. The first step is the pretreatment of the substrate surface to remove impurities and/or to decrease surface roughness, which will allow the growth of the fine graphene thin films avoiding defects in the form of folded layers or vacancies. The second step involves the deposition of carbon and metal sources on the substrate surface, which could be done through a chemical or electrochemical pathway or by metal sputtering and so forth. The final step implies the actual growth of graphene thin films under rapid thermal annealing and cooling.
The literature survey shows several research papers exploring the effect of different parameters on graphene thin film synthesis by the RTA method. For example, Zhang et al. investigated the possibility of graphene synthesis on the surface of different transition metals in the presence of pyrolytic carbon (99.99% purity). For this purpose, the carbon precursor was deposited on the surface of transition metals in the vacuum chamber using short-pulse laser-produced plasma deposition techniques. To explore the effect of annealing temperature on graphene thin film synthesis and quality, prepared samples were annealed at high temperatures such as 1100, 1200 and 1300 °C.173 Another research investigated the effect of silicon wafer type on the synthesis of graphene layers. This research performed by Bleu et al. showed a comparison of the nature and quality of the obtained layers in the presence of Ni catalyst on crystalized (Si) and amorphous (SiO2) substrates. Prior to the deposition of carbon precursor, Si and SiO2 substrates were cleaned ultrasonically to remove any surface impurities after which the pulsed laser deposition was applied for the deposition of solid carbon source (high purity microcrystalline graphite) on defined substrates. Prepared samples were submitted to RTA under a low vacuum (10−4 Pa) at a temperature range of 600 °C to 1000 °C.174,175 The graphene synthesis from a solid precursor in the absence of metal catalysts leads to higher defect density compared to synthesis in the presence of a metal catalyst.176,177 Another similar experiment was performed on Si support in the presence of Ni as catalysts by annealing samples at 1000 °C in a vacuum.178 The application of graphene quantum dots (GQDs), fullerol or amorphous carbon in this research as a carbon precursor showed that not only the support type and annealing conditions but additionally the carbon precursor type affected significantly the graphene synthesis. However, the amorphous carbon precursor due to a disordered structure gave no prospects in the synthesis of fine monoatomic graphene layers. Nevertheless, GQD and fullerol even at a very low concentration such as 0.06 mg ml−1 resulted in the successful synthesis of nonhomogeneous, though SLG thin films.178
The effect of the origin of the carbon precursor, concentration and annealing temperature and time on the graphene growth by applying the RTA process is meaningful.18–20,178 Aside from pulsed laser deposition, the electroless deposition of Ni thin film from batch water solution with dissolved carbon precursor is one of the most effective ways for the metal catalyst deposition on the desired substrate. Prekodravac et al. performed the synthesis of graphene thin layers on Cu foil by the RTA method under vacuum at 600 °C.20 Prior to Cu surface plating, the authors performed pretreatment of Cu foil surface to avoid the presence of impurities, wrinkles or other types of defects introduced in the synthesized graphene layers (Fig. 8). The pre-treatment of Cu foil surface implied chemical treatment for the removal of the surface impurities (mostly oxides), after which the thermal treatment was performed to reduce the surface roughness and/or increase of the grain boundary size for the grown graphene.179–181
 Fig. 8  AFM images of Cu foil surface before (a) and after (b) the thermal treatment. (Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright Mater. Des. (2020)). 
After the pre-treatment, the authors performed electroless deposition of a Ni/carbon precursor (GQDs or fullerol) thin layer with different precursor concentrations (0.25 to 1 mg ml−1) on the Cu surface. Subsequently, annealing at 600 °C for 30 min led to the successful synthesis under set conditions. As a result, the concentration and type of precursor affected the number of formed graphene layers, their quality and size. Once again, it was established that the physical properties of the formed graphene layers depended on the carbon source type. The thin and flat GQDs with hydrophobic sp2 hybridized graphene plane as a core and hydrophilic functional groups on the edges led to the formation of graphene layers with better quality compared to layers produced from fullerol as a precursor under the same conditions.20 Prekodravac et al. concluded that most of the defects present probably originated from surface impurities and residual PMMA (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  SEM images with white arrows pointing the transferred SLG (a) and BLG (b) thin films synthesized from GQD; and SLG (c) and BLG (d) synthesized from fullerol. (Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright Mater. Res. Bull. (2017)). 
The disadvantages of using metal catalysts are generally connected with the full possible application of graphene in functional devices requiring deposition of large-scale high-quality graphene sheets on dielectric supports. Therefore, the synthesis of graphene on Cu foil or in the presence of Ni catalyst would imply a necessary transfer of the synthesized graphene through a delamination process or etching of the metal support with strong acid which would substantially lead to the introduction of wrinkles, impurities or other defects into the graphene sheet. The use of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a polymer medium showed to be a good protector for the one atom thick graphene layers during the transfer process.183,184 This method was found to be less invasive for graphene transfer compared to the strong acid effect needed for etching the metal substrate. Even though PMMA was considered a soft technique, it introduced impurities in thin graphene layers, caused wrinkling of graphene sheets during the transfer process and consequently affected the quality of the formed graphene layer. Aside from a capping agent role, PMMA was used over the years as a carbon precursor for the synthesis of graphene layers on the SiO2 surface as well. For this purpose, PMMA was dissolved in toluene in different concentrations and deposited on the SiO2 surface by spin coating. However, after annealing even at a temperature as low as 250 °C the evaporation of PMMA was observed, which is why a thin layer of Ni was capped over PMMA. After annealing at 350 °C and 500 °C for 60 min, the formed graphene layers were separated through wet chemical etching.185 To improve the clarity of the presented research, Table 4 summarizes information regarding substrate type, carbon precursor and reaction conditions applied for graphene synthesis by the RTA method.
Table 4 The reaction conditions for graphene synthesis through the RTA method




Support
Carbon precursor
Temperature (°C)
Number of graphene layers
Ref.




Si
GQD, Fullerol, Graphitic carbon, Amorphous carbon
600, 700, 800, 900, 1000
SLG to MLG

178



SiO2
Graphitic carbon PMMA
600, 700, 800, 900, 1000
BLG and TLG

186



Cu
GQD, Fullerol
600, 700, 800, 900
SLG and BLG

20



Graphite
Graphite electrode
600, 700, 800, 900
SLG or MLG

18





Due to its unique electronic properties, as mentioned before, graphene was recognized as potential material for electronic devices. However, acknowledging the methods for graphene synthesis as it was presented so far, it can introduce defects and impurities at the exfoliated/synthesized graphene layers with a significant reflection on its quality, and therefore on its properties. The arisen idea for applying the RTA method under low temperatures to remove impurities and improve graphene quality mostly resulted in the elimination of residual impurities with no significant effect on graphene quality improvement regarding defects.187–189 Then, again, annealing under higher temperatures leads to amorphization of the formed graphene. One of the research investigations was focused on the removal of PMMA residue left on graphene surfaces after the transfer process.190 After synthesis of SLG through the CVD method on Cu foil, graphene samples were transferred on a SiO2 (300 nm) substrate by chemical etching of Cu foil using PMMA as a protection layer. The PMMA was then removed with acetone, leaving graphene/SiO2/Si with residual polymer on the surface. Samples were afterward annealed under diverse ambient conditions (Ar, H2, Ar/H2 and under vacuum) in the temperature range of 100–600 °C and temperature ramp 25 °C min−1 for 120 min. Variations in atomic percentage with RTA annealing temperature indicated that under different atmospheres there are no significant changes registered up to 400 °C. However, above 400 °C depolymerization of PMMA was followed by simultaneous destruction of pendant functional groups. These functional groups were almost or completely vanished under vacuum, H2 or Ar/H2 mixture, while polymer backbone bonds were still present in reduced percentages. Although the complete removal of the polymer was not achieved, the backbone bond-breaking was observed in the temperature range of 300 to 400 °C, which led to the reduction of polymer residues on the graphene surface. Annealing ambiance under Ar was proven to not only be adequate for PMMA residue removal but also the prevention of amorphous carbon formation and preservation of quality graphene structure.191–193
The electronic and chemical properties tuning is essential for diverse graphene applications, which can be accomplished by graphene chemical doping. The overall approach towards the synthesis of N-doped graphene, such as CVD performed in gas phases, requires transition metal catalysts, which could contaminate the products and affect their properties. Sheng et al. proposed a facile catalyst-free thermal annealing approach for the large-scale synthesis of N-doped graphene using low-cost materials such as melamine as the nitrogen source.194 As a starting material, they used GO obtained by Hummers' method and melamine in mass ratio 1:5. Under annealing from 700 to 1000 °C in Ar atmosphere for 1 hour, melamine was adsorbed on the GO surface and transformed/condensed to graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4). At such a high temperature, the oxygen-containing groups of GO undergo decomposition, allowing the nitrogen atoms to attach to the formed active sites in the graphene framework. The incorporated nitrogen content measured by XPS in graphene layers was between 5.6 and 10.1%. Different nitrogen content (in at%) was achieved by controlling the mass ratio of GO and melamine, annealing temperature and time, with the maximum, reported to be 10.1 at% under 700 °C with a 0.2 mass ratio of GO to melamine.
Quality of the RTA synthesized graphene
The quality of graphene thin films synthesized by the RTA method is usually monitored through several spectroscopic and microscopic techniques such as Raman spectroscopy, AFM, SEM and TEM among others. These techniques offer valuable information on graphene layer number and their defect level as well as the size of synthesized graphene thin films as one of the most important graphene properties for diverse possible applications.
Detailed analysis of synthesized graphene thin films from different carbon precursors, on different substrate types and reaction conditions, shows a significant effect of all the mentioned parameters on the size and quality of the obtained graphene thin layers. Zhang et al. confirmed the formation of highly defected nonhomogeneous MLG sheets from pyrolytic carbon, with an average length of graphene thin films of 1 to 3 μm and a width of 200 to 350 nm. The obtained results revealed the high impact of annealing temperature on the quality of the synthesized graphene thin films.195 Through Raman spectroscopy and surface Raman mapping, Bleu et al. investigated homogeneity, crystallite size, defects and the number of layers in the synthesized graphene materials.175,196 After annealing at different temperatures ranging from 600 to 1000 °C, the authors concluded that the type of substrate affects the quality and nature of the synthesized graphene layers significantly. The temperature increase induced the growth of defects in Si-supported samples with ID/IG from 0.297 to 0.468, resulting in a decrease in the mean crystallite size and consequently the formation of homogeneous multilayered graphene samples. However, graphene sheets grown on SiO2 supports were predominantly BLG and FLG with increased crystallite size and lower defect level (0.293 to 0.140) under the same annealing temperature. The synthesis of graphene thin layers on Si support in the presence of Ni as a catalyst at 1000 °C in vacuum178 by Prekodravac et al. showed similar results for the GQD carbon precursor compared to high purity microcrystalline graphite. The defect levels for obtained graphene thin films were calculated to be 0.4 for the GQD precursor, while for the fullerol precursor the calculated ID/IG ratio was higher (0.9) as a result of different structures of used carbon precursors. The approximate sizes of the obtained graphene thin films were 900 nm and 600 nm, for the GQD and fullerol precursor, respectively. The fullerol source, due to the presence of five rings and buckyball shape, was generally harder to transform than GQD, which already possesses six ring honeycomb structures.178 The graphene thin films synthesis from GQD and fullerol as a precursor in a concentration range of 0.25 to 1 mg ml−1, on Cu foil as a substrate at lower annealing temperature (600 °C for 30 min) was also investigated through Raman analysis. Obtained results led to the conclusion that the concentration and type of precursor used affected the number of formed graphene layers, their quality and size. Through the I2D/IG ratio authors determined the growth of SLG at lower precursor concentrations, while at higher concentrations formation of BLG was observed. Additional bands in the Raman spectrum designed as D' (∼1620 cm−1) and D + G (∼2940 cm−1) confirmed the expected results showing that the quality of graphene layers decreased with the increase in NGL.20
The use of PMMA as a precursor for graphene growth, at higher concentrations, leads to the formation of a thicker PMMA layer (above 15 nm), which consequently, during annealing, resulted in the formation of graphene thin films only from the PMMA layers close or directly in contact with Ni. On the contrary, PMMA layers closer to the substrate (SiO2) led to the formation of lower quality graphene. Thus, the present research showed the vital influence of the PMMA concentration and the presence of the Ni layer on the quality of the synthesized graphene.186 RTA was proven to be a successful method for doping graphene layers with transition metals as well. One of these studies confirmed the formation of compact and stacked N-doped SLG thin films with highly defective structures formed upon exfoliation or N-doping.197
The application of the RTA synthesized graphene thin films
As it was mentioned earlier, one of the advantages of RTA-produced graphene is the ability to perform synthesis on different substrates as well as the possibility of performing delamination and transfer of synthesized graphene thin films on diverse substrates depending on the desired application. MLG thin films obtained through the RTA method were potentially investigated as an H2 gas sensor. Gas detection by graphene materials was generally based on the conductance changes upon the adsorption of sensing species. Several groups have studied the sensing performance of graphene with sensors capable of detecting a variety of gases such as NO2, NH3 and CO2. The performances of these sensors were influenced by several factors, such as temperature, rate of target gas and the length-to-width ratio of the graphene sheet.198
Growing markets for flexible transparent conductors such as touch screens, flexible displays, printable electronics and thin-film photovoltaics for renewable energy applications have established demands for exploring new transparent conductors for optoelectronic applications. For over four decades, indium tin oxide (ITO) has been the most widely used transparent conductor in optoelectronic applications. Nevertheless, material cost, exacerbation due to ion diffusion or brittleness limits the further utilization of ITO for future flexible devices. On the other hand, graphene is optically transparent, flexible and has high oxidation resistance, making it a candidate for transparent conducting films (TCFs). Chu et al. performed RTA synthesis and obtained graphene thin films with thickness of less than <2 nm. SLG thin films had low sheet resistance of approximately 0.9 kΩ sq−1, with optical transparency of nearly 94%, making them useful for applications as flexible transparent conductors.199 However, for wider applications, the conductance of graphene sheets remains below that of commercial ITO films.200
The high carrier mobility, optical transparency, mechanical strength and atomic thickness of graphene layers makes it particularly convenient for flexible field-effect transistor (FET) applications. The key prospects for graphene use in both high-performance and low-power applications stem from the atomic thinness of graphene-based devices, leading to almost perfect control of the channel potential. Graphene sheets processing into nanoribbons can open up a band gap large enough for a room-temperature transistor. Therefore, graphene with a width below 10 nm represents one of the most commonly used conducting materials for graphene field-effect transistor (GFETs). The GFET as an attractive replacement for silicon-based transistors consists of a thin graphene channel placed between the source and drain metal electrodes. In comparison to silicon-based devices, GFET allows equivalent conduction of electrons and holes. Due to ambipolar performance, the GFET device shows holes carrier conduction in the channel region under negative bias, while positive bias outcomes in electron carrier conduction. Superior electrical and thermal conductivities of graphene result in low resistance losses and better heat distribution compared to those in silicon, consequently, leading to the enhancement of device efficiency. Due to SLG thickness, the graphene channel located on the surface is in direct contact with the environment enabling high sensitivity operations at the terahertz frequencies. The precursor type and concentration used for the RTA production of the graphene thin film as well as the annealing temperature and time affect the diameter and number of obtained graphene layers, while the selection of the substrate for graphene thin film growth shows a strong effect on their quality. Subsequently, by the adjustment of all of the above-mentioned parameters, good quality SLG with the desired size can be produced, consequently improving the performance of the GFET device. Wang et al. demonstrated that the on/off ratio of GFET growth with the drop in the width of graphene nanoribbon at room temperature, with on/off ratio and carrier mobility of up to approximately 1 × 106 and 200 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.201 Metal or metal oxide as a conventional electrode for FETs expressed limited applications. The disadvantages such as large contact resistance between the metal electrode and the active layer of FETs, among others, limit their applications. Graphene as an electrode can effectively overcome several disadvantages of the metal electrode for FETs, which is why graphene transparent thin films were widely used as an electrode material for GFETs.202,203
Several recent reports demonstrated that N-doped graphene shows excellent electrocatalytic activity concerning the oxygen reduction reaction. These observations revealed the possibility of replacing expensive Pt-based catalysts with N-doped carbon nanomaterials inspiring the research community to search for highly efficient metal-free catalysts toward oxygen reduction reaction in fuel cells.204,205 Making the comparison on bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE) and graphene/GCE or N-doped graphene/GCE for reduction of O2 in 0.1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) aqueous solution, several conclusions were made. First, graphene/GCE had a more positive onset and larger reduction current for the oxygen reduction reaction due to faster electron transfer kinetics for oxygen reduction reaction on graphene compared to the GCE alone. At the same time, N-doped graphene/GCE showed both the positive shift of onset potential and the enhanced reduction current for oxygen reduction reaction compared to graphene. Results demonstrate that the N-doped material possesses a much higher electrocatalytic activity toward the oxygen reduction reaction, probably due to fast reaction kinetics and a higher number of transferred electrons per oxygen molecule.
Among various bottom-up methods based on the literature search, the RTA method offers precise control of the reaction conditions for controllable graphene synthesis, enabling their synthesis on different substrates and from different carbon sources deposited through chemical, physical or electrochemical approaches. Control of the annealing temperature and time, as well as the selection of the carbon precursor type and concentration, provides the possibility of synthesizing graphene thin films with the desired number of layers. The quality of the RTA obtained films is closely connected to the substrate and precursor type or on some occasions with the transfer process conditions. Therefore, the RTA method can be considered as a cost-effective, environmentally friendly and less time-consuming efficient pathway for graphene production, enabling the production of SLG with low defect level. In addition to the many benefits that this method provides, one of the biggest disadvantages is a lack of scale-up synthesis since graphene thin films were predominantly from several hundred nanometers to few micrometers in diameter, which can restrict their wider application. All of the above-mentioned pros and cons still represent a challenge and motivation for future studies in this field.
Graphene synthesis from biomass
Opposite to the methods usually applied for graphene synthesis, graphene synthesis from biomass and bio-waste materials does not demand the use of commercially available chemicals. Quite the contrary, the starting materials for graphene synthesis are natural materials that open the gate to the development of the conscience towards sustainability and reusability of natural sources.206–208 By using keywords such as “biomass precursors” and “graphene” in the Scopus database, results show an increasing number of published research papers over the past several years in different research areas (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between years 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis from biomass and bio-waste. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database. 
The first mention of graphene synthesis through carbonization of biomass and bio-waste materials was made in 2011 by Professor James Tour's group, who were able to produce highly-crystalline low-defect graphene from food, insects, and wastewater.208 Afterward, the literature survey on this topic showed progress in graphene-based nanomaterials production from various biomass sources.209,210 The use of biomass for graphene synthesis as a relatively new and productive procedure will be presented in detail from the aspect of procedure complexity and reusability of natural sources leading to the reduction of production costs. The quality and properties of the produced graphene and graphene-based nanomaterials and their possible applications will be further introduced.
The mechanism of graphene synthesis from biomass
The basic principle of biomass-derived graphene is based on the pyrolysis of different starting feedstocks as the carbon source under an inert atmosphere. The predominant biomass precursors, from the literature overview, for graphene-based nanomaterial production are natural sources such as plants or wood parts, agricultural waste, fruits, vegetables, biopolymers, or even insect parts, among many others (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Potential natural sources for graphene synthesis from biomass. (Adapted with free permission from freeimage.com). 
Depending on the experimental protocol and used chemicals, the most explored pyrolysis graphene synthetic processes are pyrolysis on Cu support, salt-based pyrolysis, template-based synthesis, and hydrothermal carbonization which is followed by pyrolysis. For salt-based pyrolysis, the selection of salt with a low melting point and high temperature of decomposition is beneficial due to the formation of a deep eutectic mixture. During the pyrolysis, salts melt, providing a liquid environment for chemical reactions to occur between carbon intermediaries to produce graphene. These carbon intermediaries are formed as a consequence of the non-carbon atom component loss in the form of volatile compounds under thermal treatment. Salt's ability to act as an activation agent enabled the induction of etching, pore formation and exfoliation process, with KOH as the often used activation agent. The K atoms from KOH, react with graphite microcrystals producing a charge transfer complex the K+[graphene-H]− followed by the removal of H atoms and the formation of sp2 atoms.211 The reaction of KOH with carbon-based nanomaterials leads to the release of CO(g) and CO2(g) and consequently to graphene layer separation and formation of the interlayered species/pores.
The first biomass-derived high-quality graphene sample on one side of the Cu foil was obtained through a thermal treatment of different feedstocks, such as cookies, chocolate, grass, plastics, roaches, and dog feces. The key factor in obtaining high-quality graphene was the inability of all starting material components, besides carbon atoms, to dissolve in metal and migrate to the other side of the Cu foil.208 The experiment was performed by introducing a carbon source (10 mg) on Cu foil, followed by thermal treatment at 1050 °C under low-pressure H2/Ar (flow rate 100 and 500 cm3 min−1) for 15 min. Depending on the formed intermediates aside from the volatility and humidity of the precursor, using grass or dog feces, the moisture was removed by heating for 10 h under vacuum. Formed H2(g) acted as a reducing agent and as a carrier gas. Taking into consideration the starting material's high carbon percentage and thermodynamic stability of graphene, graphene itself was the singular material obtained on the Cu surface. Coconut coir dust, as a side product in the process of long coconut fiber fabrication, was another natural material successfully used for graphene synthesis. Experiments were performed under annealing for 2 h in the temperature range of 500 to 1500 °C in N2 atmosphere.212 Very attractive biomolecules such as starch, abundant natural availability, low price and renewability are composed of linear amylose and branched amylopectin. These amylose layers were successfully used by Sayali et al. as a starting material for graphene synthesis.213 The agricultural waste, rice husk (RH), with the chemical composition of 15% carbon, 18% ash and 67% volatile matter as highly abundant material has a global annual production of approximately 120 million tons per year.214 So far, it was recycled only for low-value products and use, however recently, this natural material was successfully applied for graphene synthesis.215,216 The first suggestion for the RH bio-waste use as a starting material for value-added and high-demand materials such as graphene was made by Muramatsu et al.217 The study resulted in large-scale graphene production through heating at 850 °C in the presence of KOH as the activation agent. The first step of graphene production involved the controlled combustion of dried RH to obtain ash/charcoal RH (RHA).218 The following step involved the chemical activation by mixing RHA (5 g) with KOH (25 g) under shield conditions to prevent oxidation against air at high temperatures. Finally, samples were washed thoroughly with water and filtered until neutral medium and dried at 100 °C for 24 h. KOH activation was also used to produce graphene from natural reed membranes,219 bamboo (Phyllostachys viridis),220 cellulose pulp,221 spruce (Picea abies),222 Populus wood biomass (PWB),223 peat moss,224 peanut dregs225 and coal tar.226 Synthetic approaches from mentioned sources were based on mixing the cleaned and grounded starting material with KOH in different mass ratios followed by activation in the temperature range of 400 to 1400 °C. In the final stage, the materials were washed with acid and water to remove the remaining activation agent. For example, the natural reed membrane exhibits a layer-stacking morphology and surfaces without pores and holes as presented in Fig. 12A. After carbonization, reed membranes (Fig. 12B) displayed a flat surface sheet structure. Due to the possibility of KOH etching the carbon framework, the formation of the porous structure was observed. This porous layer-stacking active carbon (RHC) had a particular framework and textures coupled with porous architectures (Fig. 12C). The distribution of interconnected pores on both sides of the RHC surfaces was confirmed by SEM analysis (Fig. 12D).
 Fig. 12  SEM images of natural reed membrane (A), carbonized reed membrane (B), and RHC (C, D). (Produced with permission.227 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2019)). 
Graphene production from cucumber-derived material offered a green synthesis approach. This increased synthesis biocompatibility and control, while enabling production from economically favorable carbon sources and avoidance of the usage of chemicals such as KOH, NaOH or CaO.228 The cucumber – Cucumis sativus biomass/waste material was heated in an autoclave for 12 h at a temperature of 180 °C without any solvent, followed by washing with water, and carbonization in a temperature range from 800 to 1000 °C under an Ar atmosphere. A similar procedure, by avoiding the use of the activation agent, was applied in the production of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) from Sengo wood.229 Small pieces of wood were heated in an autoclave for 16 h at 200 °C to remove lignin. After carbonization under microwave for 25 min (800 W), produced material was used in Hummers' method for GO reduction by heating at 700, 800, and 900 °C under an inert atmosphere. A comparable procedure of GO fabrication was performed from a rice straw.230 After washing and drying, the straw was crushed and carbonized to biochar by heating at 450 °C in the N2 atmosphere for 45 min. The produced biochar was used as a starting material in the Hummers' method. In the literature survey, graphene was also successfully synthesized from cane stalk,47 spruce tree sawdust,231 colloidal silica232 and olive stones233,234 among other natural carbon sources.
Even though 2D graphene-based nanomaterials have been proven favorable in many different electrochemical applications, proficient use of graphene's extraordinarily large specific surface area and physical–chemical properties remains a challenge. The integration of graphene into macroscopic 3D porous networks has attracted significant attention due to the derived unique properties as a result of a synergistic effect. An example of the synergistic action of the temperature and activation agent was the preparation of porous graphene-based nanomaterial from flower Plumeria rubra as precursor.235 The experiment was performed through gas exfoliation (H2, CO2, CO) in the presence of KOH as an activation agent, wherein the raw material-released gases caused the exfoliation. These events lead to the formation of both graphene and pores in the graphene-based nanostructure. Porous 3D graphene-based nanomaterial was also successfully formed from black liquor precursor,236 as a side product in the Kraft process during the cellulose conversion into paper, containing lignin, hemicellulose, and inorganic chemicals.237 Lignin is the toxic by-product of both the cellulose-ethanol industry and one of the most emerging pollutants of inland water in China.238 Lignin, isolated from alkaline pulp black liquor, was used for the synthesis of 3D graphene-based nanomaterials by rapid freeze-drying technique, where heat treatments led to carbonization and graphitization. The authors suggested that the decomposition of aromatic groups and alkaline fragments in lignin during pyrolysis. Benzene rings were involved in the building of graphene sheets, while free sp3 carbon atoms were chemically bonded to graphene sheets along with lignin polymeric chains. Due to the formation of these bonds, self-supported and self-constructed 3D graphene-based nanomaterial was successfully formed. Graphene with a 3D porous structure was also prepared from alga,239 through high-temperature metallic catalysis and chemical activation or directly from a plant – Salvia splendens as a precursor240 using NaCl as a template. Various 3D porous graphene-based nanomaterials were formed from wood products, cellulose-based medium-density fiberboard (MDF),241Bougainvillea spectabilis flowers242 and vine shoots243 using different metal-salts catalysts. Pristine materials here were impregnated with metal salts and carbonized in an N2 atmosphere at a temperature range of 300 to 1000 °C. A further approach for the fabrication of functional carbonaceous nanomaterials from biomass using pyrolytic gases and waste heat was reported recently.244 Biomass components, such as lignin, cellulose, wheat straw and sawdust when pyrolyzed in the CVD tube furnace at 800 °C prompted biomass decomposition into volatiles and carbon residual material.
Heteroatom doped graphene-based nanomaterials offer advantages in the development of advanced catalysts. With this in mind, aside from porous 3D graphene-based structures, porous and hetero-doped 3D graphene/carbon-based nanomaterials obtained from biomass were successfully fabricated by several authors. One of the examples was the synthesis from soybeans milk precursor,245 which contained a high share of N and O atoms originating from the high protein content. The synthesis was achieved by using soluble salts as hard templates (NaCl, Na2CO3, ZnCl2 and Mg5(OH)2(CO3)4). Milk with added salts was quickly frozen with liquid N2 and dry-frizzed at 55 °C under vacuum, followed by carbonization at 700 °C and 950 °C for 2 h in the N2 atmosphere. The S, N co-doped graphene-based structures were successfully synthesized from keratin as a starting material,246 with pre-carbonization of the biomass at 300 °C for 30 min in N2 to encourage precursor decomposition to carbon, CO2 and H2O. The produced CO2 and H2O were removed under continuous N2 flow, while the residual carbon was mixed with KOH in the mass ratio of 1:2, and heated in the N2 atmosphere for 2 h at 600 °C, followed by acid/H2O washing. The final step in graphene production involved the graphitization for 15 min at 1000 °C with NH3. Graphene and N-doped or B-doped graphene was also successfully produced from chitosan through pyrolysis at 900 °C in two stages.247,248 The first stage implied annealing with a sequence at 200 °C for 2 h, followed by lowering to room temperature and consequently heating to 900 °C. In the next stage, the obtained graphitic-based materials were exfoliated with an ultrasound source at 400 W (2 h). After 24 h of settling down, the dispersion was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 30 min.249 The production of the 2D N-doped graphene nanomaterial from pine nutshell was performed at 600 °C for 1 h in an inert atmosphere followed by mixing with KOH and melamine at different mass ratios (1:3:0, 1:3:0.5; 1:3:1; 1:3:2).250 The activation was achieved at 800 °C for 2 h followed by KOH removal with HCl and water. N-Doped graphene was also produced from glucose, fructose, and 5-hydroxymethyl furfural as easily available and financially advantageous biomass sources by heating at 600 °C and 900 °C for 1 h under Ar atmosphere.251 Finally, powders were dispersed in water, sonicated for 1 h and dried at 60 °C. Other bio-precursors with high potential as a carbon source for the production of N-doped graphene nanomaterial were ginger root and chitosan.252,253 Before synthesis, ginger was peeled and cut into small portions, washed with water and dried at 240 °C. The carbonization was achieved at 600, 800, 900 °C, for 1 h, under an Ar atmosphere. The N-doped graphene nanomaterial synthesis from chitosan was performed by dissolving chitosan in (NH4)3BO3 solution, filtration and deposition onto a quartz surface followed by pyrolysis at 900 °C for 2 h under Ar flow. The soybean dregs, as a carbon source, also showed great potential in the production of N-doped carbon nanomaterial.254 For this purpose, dregs were first dried, grounded and mixed with asalt mixture (NaCl/ZnCl2, 80 to 20% ratios), after which the oxidizing agent NaNO3 in different amounts was added. The mixture was ball milled at 600 rpm for 6 h, followed by heating at 900 °C under inert gas for 1 h. Table 5 summarizes information in terms of different biomass and bio-waste materials applied as carbon sources for graphene-based nanomaterial synthesis.
Table 5 The biomass and bio-waste pretreatment phases and applied conditions for graphene-based nanomaterial synthesis




Precursor
Pretreatment protocol
Conditions
Ref.




Cookies, chocolate, grass, plastics, roaches, dog feces
Drying of grass, feces
Raw material placed on Cu foil; 1050 °C, 15 minutes, low-pressure H2 and Ar,

208



Coconut coir dust
Autoclave 250 °C, 4 h, filtration
Pyrolysis 500 to 1500 °C, 2 h, N2

212



Chitosan films
Dissolving in acetic acid; screen printing deposition, 80 °C, 1 h
Pyrolysis 900 °C, 2 h, Ar

255



Soybeans dregs
Sift through 80 mesh sieve, NaCl/ZnCl2 and NaNO3; ball milling 600 rpm, 6 h
Pyrolysis 900 °C, 1 h, inert gas

256




Plumeria rubra

Heating 500 °C, 2 h in N2 and 850 °C, 1 h; impregnated with KOH solution
Pyrolysis 500 °C, 1 h, N2; 800, 900, 1000, and 1100 °C, 30 minutes

257



Oil from brown macroalga
Fresh seaweed pyrolysis in N2
Dissolving in water, autoclave 170 °C, 4 h, centrifugation

258



Black liquor
Heating 250 °C, 1 h; carbonization 450 °C, 2 h
Graphitization at 1200 °C, 2 h; annealing 1200 °C, N2

259



Fir
10 wt% HCl, 16 h, ball milling fir and catalyst
1590 °C, N2, Fe2O3 catalyst; the Hummer oxidation

260




Ulva fasciata

Washing, drying; anhydrous FeCl3, 150 °C
Pyrolysis 800 °C, inert gas

261




Salvia splendens

Washing, drying, sieving; immersion in saturated NaCl solution, frizzing in N2, dry-freeze 24 h
Pyrolysis 700 to 900 °C, N2; washing with HCl and water.

262



Starch
Mixing with glycerol and water, stirring 90 °C, 30 min; stirring 2 h, drying 50 °C, 24 h
Heating 320 °C (rate 1.0 °C min−1), holding 1 h, temperature increase 600, 700, 800, 900 and 1000 °C (rate 3.0 °C min−1), holding 1 minute. Flakes mixing H2O/KOH, sonication 80 °C, 3 h, heating 50 °C, 24 h; vacuum filtration

263



RH
850 °C, 2 h, Air
RH mixed with KOH; 850 °C, 2 h, air

218 and 264



Cane stalk
300 °C, 1 h; 600 °C, 2 h; washing with acid
Mixed with Fe(NO3)3 · 9H2O, and KOH, dried, 300 °C, 1 h, N2 and 800 °C, 2 h

47



Spruce tree sawdust
Grounding, drying; heating 1000 °C, Ar
400, 500, 550, and 600 °C, static atmosphere

265



Guanine
SiO2/guanine; sonication, stirring
Carbonization 1000 °C, 4 h, N2; etching HF (10%)

266



Olive stones
800 °C, 2 h, N2.
Activation with KOH, HCl washing carbonization 600 °C, 2 h; activation 900 °C, 8 h, CO2 flow

267





Purity of produced graphene-based materials
The Tour's group's pioneering results on the synthesized graphene nanomaterial through Raman spectroscopy showed the presence of G and 2D peaks with the I2D/IG ratio higher than 1.8 and FWHM values of 14.1 to 16.3 cm−1 and 32.0 to 35.1 cm−1, respectively.208 The absence of a disordered D peak from the sample and the ID/IG ratio below 0.1 pointed to the formation of high-quality graphene. These results undoubtedly prove the formation of high-quality SLG nanomaterial. Further analysis by XPS showed only a sharp band at 284.5 eV assigned to the sp2 graphitic band, while the UV-Vis analysis showed a band at 268 nm characteristic of π–π* transitions of aromatics as well as the absorption at 550 nm from SLG. The measured graphene sheet resistivity was in the range from 1.5 to 3 kΩ cm−2.
Graphene obtained from coconut coir dust showed a highly disordered graphene structure,212 compared to graphene synthesized by Tour's group.208 Raman spectra showed changes in both D and G peaks shape and intensity with the temperature increase from 500 to 1500 °C due to the formation of graphite crystallites. XRD analysis confirmed the presence of the band at 22° in the hydrothermally treated samples at 500 °C originating from amorphous carbon, while samples treated at 1000 °C showed a broad peak at around 43° assigned to the (001) plane of the graphite. Samples annealed at 1500 °C showed a band around 26.5° assigned to the (002) plane of graphite and peaks at 43° and 45° designated to (100) and (001) planes, respectively, from graphite. These results prove that the graphene synthesis occurs only above 1000 °C for hydrothermally treated samples. The measured distance between basal planes was 3.4 Å, while for the ideal graphite layerdistance is 3.3 Å. Examples of Raman and XPS spectra of graphene produced from different starting materials are displayed in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Raman spectra of graphene produced from cookie (A) and chocolate (B) (reproduced with permission).208 Copyright ACS Nano (2011), Thalia dealbata (C) (reproduced with permission.268 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2018)), reed membrane (D) (reproduced with permission.227 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2019)); the XPS survey of graphene obtained from Plumeria rubra (E) (reproduced with permission.257 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2018)) and chitosan (F(1)) including the narrow scans of C1s (F(2)) and N1s (F(3)) (adapted with permission.269 Copyright Nano Energy. (2015)). 

Fig. 13A reveals the presence of only G and 2D bands in the defects-free SLG, while the increase in defect density resulted in a small rise in the intensity of the D band (Fig. 13B). In the case of highly defective graphene structure (Fig. 13C and D), with the complete absence of 2D band intensity, the D band intensity increased significantly affecting the ID/IG ratio. The examples of XPS spectra of graphene and N-doped graphene-based materials are presented in Fig. 13E and F. Sharp band at 285 eV detected in both XPS spectra stems from graphitic C atoms, while the band, such as the one observed at 400 eV was assigned to N atoms. The band deconvolution revealed the nature of bonds, as it is shown in the inset of Fig. 13E and F. The graphene-based nanomaterials obtained from different biomass and bio-waste materials analyzed with several commonly used characterization techniques are listed in Table 6.
Table 6 Characterization of selected graphene samples




Precursor
Raman ID/IG ratio
XRD 2θ (°)
Chemical composition (at% or wt%)

S
BET (m2 g−1) Porosity (cm3 g−1)
Ref.




Chitosan
1.15
25°
C: 84.7 at%
No data

249





46°
N: 7.8 at%








H: 0.6 at%








S: 0.2 at%








O: <7 at%




Soybeans dregs
1
23°
C: 85 at%
1341 m2 g−1

256





43°
N: 5 at%
1.379 cm3 g−1






O: 10 at%





Plumeria rubra

0.77
26°
C: 98.06 at%
1581 m2 g−1

257





43°
O: 1.96 at%
0.916 cm3 g−1


Black liquor
1
25.5°
C: 93.3 at%
1011 m2 g−1

259





43.5°
O: 6.3 at%




Fir
0.95
26.5°
C: 62.2 wt%
No data

270







O: 37.8 wt%




Seaweed
0.96
25°
C: 42 to 45 wt%
320 m2 g−1

271





9° to 10°
H: 2 wt%
0.141 cm3 g−1






N: 2 wt%








S: 5 to 9 wt%




Salvia petals
1.13
No data
C: 87.4 at%
1051 m2 g−1

262







N: 2.3 at%








O: 10.3 at%




Amylose
0.76
23°
No data
1070 to 1164 m2 g−1

272





43°






RH
0.85
No data
C: 86.5 at%
2200 cm2 g−1

218







O: 8.3 at%








Si: 4.5 at%








Ca: 0.7 at%




Cane stalk
2.33
26°
No data
Micro/mesopores 0.5 to 0.65 nm

47





43°












2 to 2.75 nm


Olive stones
No data
26°
No data
760 and 1185 m2 g−1

267





52°






Pine nutshells
>1
24°
No data
1167 to 2093 cm2 g−1

273





43°






Potato starch
0.83–0.90
broad peaks
No data
809 m2 g−1

274



Guanine
2
25.7°
C: 90 at%
387 m2 g−1

266





43.4°
N: 6 at%








O: 4 at%




Reed membrane
0.78
23.5°
C: 62.3 at%
1288.7 m2 g−1

227





43.3°
N: 4.4 at%








O: 26.8 at%






All graphene-based nanomaterials produced from biomass had higher structural disorder based on the ID/IG ratio calculated from Raman spectra (Table 6). These values were in the range of 0.5275 to 2.33.47 The chemical compositions were very diverse going from only C atoms present208 to both C and O,257,276–278 or N-doped structures with C, O and N atoms.262,275,279–285 Several examples for S-doped graphene nanomaterials showed the presence of S or S and N for co-doped graphene-based nanomaterials.286 The N-doped graphene samples resulting from the presence of pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N forms in graphene structure showed good wettability and pseudocapacitance. Thus, materials with a higher fraction of N groups showed promising effects for supercapacitors. The values of SBET analysis varied from sample to sample: 324 m2 g−1,287 63 m2 g−1,288 746 m2 g−1,281 391 m2 g−1,275 405 m2 g−1,289 2385 m2 g−1,290 2887 m2 g−1,284 1735 m2 g−1,277 1197 m2 g−1,291 1799 m2 g−1286 and 2261 m2 g−1.292 Depending on the starting material the nature of the produced graphene-based nanomaterial porosity was also shifted (Table 6). The electrochemical analysis showed that the specific capacitance was very diverse for different samples: 390 F g−1 at 1 A g−1,287 402 F g−1 in a three-electrode system at 1 A g−1,262 239 F g−1 at 1 A g−1,290 313 F g−1 at 0.05 A g−1,284 278 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1293 and 233 F g−1 at 1.6 A g−1.291 One more parameter, very important for the future possible application of graphene nanomaterial is electrical conductivity or resistance, where graphene in the form of the 3D porous network showed outstanding electrical conductivities of 25.2 S m−1278 while N-doped porous graphene produced from chitosan showed the resistivity of 10 kΩ sq−1.280
The application of graphene-based nanomaterials obtained from biomass and bio-waste
The produced graphene-based nanomaterials, among other possible applications, were mostly investigated for energy storage, as sorbents for water and air cleaning or as catalysts. As it was stated previously, the first graphene produced from biomass was obtained in the form of a one-atom-thick layer on Cu support, with graphene size limited by the size of the furnace tube and Cu support. Produced graphene as a defect-free material was transferred using PMMA on different supports and used in electronic devices or solar cells.208 Other graphene-based nanomaterials produced from biomass were mostly highly defective, with a large surface area, high porosity, often doped with N or other heteroatoms, which made them suitable for energy storage applications.256,272,273,282–284,292,294–296 For example, graphene produced from alga showed electrochemical capacitance of 90 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1, indicating a possible application as supercapacitors. Similarly, graphene flakes produced by annealing and carbonization of amylose had SBET of 1163 m2 g−1 and capacitance of 261 F g−1, which is comparable or even higher than that of nowadays materials used for electrodes in supercapacitors.272 N-Doped graphene-based nanomaterials from Pune nutshells showed outstanding supercapacitor electrochemical performances with a specific capacitance of 324 F g−1 at 0.05 A g−1.273 Graphene produced from cucumbers showed excellent supercapacitor performance for the produced material similar to graphene from potato starch and GO (capacitance of 301 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 with capability rate of 81% at 50 A g−1, the energy density of 8.2 W h kg−1 at a power density of 125 W kg−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte, or 62.5 W h kg−1 in 1 M TEABF4/AN electrolyte).274,295 Graphene produced from spruce bark, reed membranes, and ginger root among others showed exceptional supercapacitor properties as well.282–284,287,290,292,294,296
The porous graphene-like structure showed an efficient ability to store Li-ions due to the synergistic effects of both hierarchical porous structure and N, O co-doping.47 Another graphene-based nanomaterial produced from wood significantly increased the capacity of SIB to store Na+.297 Porous 3D graphene produced from black liquor, seaweed, and cellulose showed a high capacity as an adsorbent in applications for heavy metal ions in water purification, organic dye molecules, and organic solvents (benzene, xylene or toluene).259,271,278,298,299 Graphene produced from GO and sugarcane powder showed a great promise as a sorbent for the removal of both organic solvents and oil,300 with the capacity to absorb oils between 25 and 50 g of oil per 1 g of material. For indoor air cleaning, carbon-based nanomaterials produced from an olive stone could absorb NO2 gas (10.67 mg g−1 after 90 min of gas loading) or CO2 (7.2 mmol g−1).267,277 Porous graphene nanomaterials produce from the flower – Plumeria rubra and functionalized with Cu nanoparticles showed remarkable photostability and photolytic activity.257 Graphene-based nanomaterials produced from biomass were also investigated in catalysis; as supports for noble free Fe/N/C catalysts289 with electron transfer numbers of 3.92 and the potential to replace the expensive Pt/C cathode; for the reaction of epoxidation of styrene,301 in the reaction of O2 reduction in alkaline media286 and the decomposition of methane gas.288 Excellent properties of the produced graphene materials were also applicable for the detection of catechin from green tea leaves in an electrochemical cell with a detection limit of 0.67 μM and cancer biomarker 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) with a sensitivity of approximately 1 nM.291,302
Graphene produced from biomass as natural sources open the possibility for graphene production in a cost-effective large-scale manner. Graphene-based nanomaterials produced from natural sources have a large free surface area and frequently a good specific capacitance. These graphene-based nanomaterials show great potential applications in energy storage, and sorbents, while other potential applications were not yet been fully explored. Considering that graphene surface often shows antibacterial activity, the produced graphene-based nanomaterials showed potential for this application as well.303–305 The best quality graphene was produced by the pyrolysis of biomass in the atmosphere of H2 and Ar, otherwise, the produced graphene-based nanomaterials from natural sources were usually highly disordered. Considering issues with graphene transfer, the security issues and the high price of the safety equipment needed for additional detection systems or work with H2, the graphene mass production through this approach may not be largely exploited in the future. Although the quality of the produced graphene-based nanomaterials was low, these materials were easily produced on a large scale with potential applications in energy storage or as a sorbent due to its high specific surface area, conductivity, and a large number of active sites.
Summary and prospects
Based on the literature overview, among various methods for top-down productions of graphene nanomaterial, electrochemical exfoliation was considered one of the most efficient pathways. The increasing number of published papers on the electrochemical exfoliation of graphene in the past 5 years reflects its prominence and high demand for countless applications ranging from energy storage, sensors, catalysts, conducting films, anticorrosion and flame protection, hybrid membranes, to new composite materials. However, the inability of SLG production with controllable oxidation level yet remains a challenge and motivation for the research community, focusing on the wider range of applications. On the other hand, the RTA method of graphene synthesis as a bottom-up method represents a low-cost approach with diversity in the possible usage of substrates and precursors for graphene growth. The RTA method offers the ability of easy control of the reaction conditions including applied temperature, reaction time, type of substrate or carbon precursor type and concentration. However, the RTA graphene thin-film production showed limitations in producing good quality SLG on a large scale. Nevertheless, from the literature overview, the impression arises that the mentioned method was not explored to its full potential aside from the many advantages and challenges that it offers. Finally, research progress in graphene-based nanomaterial production from biomass provides the opportunity of exploring natural sources for eco-friendly transformation of bio-waste to graphene with emphasis on sustainability and reusability of organic matter in nature. So far, the explored natural sources and reaction conditions have resulted in the formation of highly disordered graphene-based nanomaterials with a large free surface area and good specific capacitance. These methods offer the possibility of converting low-price agricultural side products such as husk into high-quality devices like high-capacity Li-battery anodes. Most of these methods are economical, simple and appropriate for the transfer to large-scale production. Chemicals involved in the synthesis are inexpensive, non-reactive and low toxicity, such as KOH or Fe2O3. The only technological demand for graphene production is the use of the furnace at temperatures from 600 to 1000 °C or higher, under an inert atmosphere. A few methods involved the use of H2 gas in the synthesis process. After the synthesis, the cleaning phase usually involved the use of diluted acids and water, while the number of produced graphene-based nanomaterials in one step was limited by the size of the furnace. Although graphene produced from biomass is a highly defective structure, it is appropriate for devices such as batteries or sorbents. Additionally, further development of the production approach will possibly lead to the improvement of graphene structure and expand its applications. Due to the risk and price of the safety equipment needed, such as additional detection systems to work with H2, it provides the research community an opportunity to further explore the possibilities for mass production. The summary of several highlighted benefits and challenges of graphene synthesis methods chosen in the presented review article is given in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  Benefits and challenges of electrochemical exfoliation, the RTA and graphene synthesis from biomass. 
Even though graphene obtained by elaborate methods exhibits different properties, it has a broad spectrum of applications ranging from energy storage, sensors, catalysts, flexible electronics, anticorrosion and flame protection, hybrid membranes, sorbents for water and air purification, to new composite materials. The differences in properties of graphene prepared by different methods are mainly caused by the quality of the obtained material in terms of the number of layers, dimensions of sheets, and the presence of defects. These properties are strongly conditioned by the selected method for graphene production, synthesis conditions and the selected precursor type as the most important parameters among others. While the RTA method shows better controllability and allows the preparation of graphene with the desired number of layers, electrochemical exfoliation and graphene production from biomass mostly result in a few-layer highly defective graphene on a large scale.
Author contributions
J. R. Prekodravac took the lead in planning, conceptualization and writing the presented paper along with editing and visualization. D. P Kepić performed investigation, writing and editing of the final version. J. C. Colmenares and D. A. Giannakoudakis contributed editing, validation and visualization of the manuscript. S. P. Jovanović was involved in the writing and supervision of the project.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Presented work was financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Grant No. 451-03-9/2021-14/200017). J. Prekodravac would like to express her gratitude for the support from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia in providing postdoctoral research scholarship for J. Prekodravac (Grant No. 451-03-763/2019-14) under the supervision of Professor J. C. Colmenares who is very grateful to the National Science Centre in Poland through the partial support with the project Sonata Bis 5 (Project No. 2015/18/E/ST5/00306).
Notes and references
Y. Manawi, K. Ihsanullah, A. Samara, T. Al-Ansari and M. Atieh, Materials, 2018, 11, 822 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Terrones, A. Jorio, M. Endo, A. M. Rao, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, H. Terrones, J.-C. Charlier, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 30–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mauter and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5843–5859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Notarianni, J. Liu, K. Vernon and N. Motta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 149–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prekodravac, B. Vasiljević, Z. Marković, D. Jovanović, D. Kleut, Z. Špitalský, M. Mičušik, M. Danko, D. Bajuk–Bogdanović and B. Todorović–Marković, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(14), 17006–17013 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tosic, Z. Markovic, S. Jovanovic, J. Prekodravac, M. Budimir, D. Kepic, I. Holclajtner-Antunovic, M. Dramicanin and B. Todorovic-Markovic, Synth. Met., 2016, 218, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kepić, Z. Marković, D. Tošić, I. H. Antunović, B. Adnadjević, J. Prekodravac, D. Kleut, M. Dramićanin and B. Todorović Marković, Phys. Scr., 2013, T157, 014040 CrossRef .
S. P. Jovanović, Z. Syrgiannis, Z. M. Marković, A. Bonasera, D. P. Kepić, M. D. Budimir, D. D. Milivojević, V. D. Spasojević, M. D. Dramićanin, V. B. Pavlović and B. M. Todorović Marković, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25865–25874 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cabana, X. Ke, D. Kepić, J. Oro-Solé, E. Tobías-Rossell, G. Van Tendeloo and G. Tobias, Carbon N. Y., 2015, 93, 1059–1067 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Ni, L. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Cong, T. Yu, X. Wang, D. Shen and Z. Shen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4074–4080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 176404 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cui, K. Yip, A. Hassan, G. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Sun and T. Filleter, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zheng, X. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Du, G. Yu, Y. Jia and Y. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, 138, 50474 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Shudin, M. Azizir, R. Mukri, M. Aziz, M. H. D. Othman, M. Tanemura and M. Z. Mohd Yusop, Synth. Met., 2021, 274, 116735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, B. Deng, F. Dong, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Chen, Small Methods, 2021, 2001213 CrossRef .
Z. M. Marković, M. D. Budimir, D. P. Kepić, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, M. T. Marinović-Cincović, M. D. Dramićanin, V. D. Spasojević, D. B. Peruško, Z. Špitalský, M. Mičušik, V. B. Pavlović and B. M. Todorović-Marković, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39275–39283 RSC .
J. Prekodravac, Z. Marković, S. Jovanović, M. Budimir, D. Peruško, I. Holclajtner-Antunović, V. Pavlović, Z. Syrgiannis, A. Bonasera and B. Todorović-Marković, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 461–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prekodravac, Z. Marković, S. Jovanović, I. Holclajtner-Antunović, V. Pavlović and B. Todorović-Marković, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2016, 48, 115 CrossRef .
J. R. Prekodravac, Z. M. Marković, S. P. Jovanović, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, D. P. Kepić, M. D. Budimir and B. M. Todorović-Marković, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 88, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang and R. S. Ruoff, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 800–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Ni, L. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Cong, T. Yu, X. Wang, D. Shen and Z. Shen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4074–4080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang and R. S. Ruoff, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 800–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. A. Bhuyan, M. N. Uddin, M. M. Islam, F. A. Bipasha and S. S. Hossain, Int. Nano Lett., 2016, 6, 65–83 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Zhou, H. Bi, M. Yang, J. Wang, Q. Liu and F. Huang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 113, 100665 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. K. Sood, I. Lund, Y. R. Puri, H. Efstathiadis, P. Haldar, N. K. Dhar, J. Lewis, M. Dubey, E. Zakar, P. Wijewarnasuriya, D. L. Polla and M. Fritze, Graphene - New Trends and Developments, InTech,  2015 Search PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Markovic, L. M. Harhaji-Trajkovic, B. M. Todorovic-Markovic, D. P. Kepić, K. M. Arsikin, S. P. Jovanović, A. C. Pantovic, M. D. Dramićanin and V. S. Trajkovic, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Marković, D. P. Kepić, D. M. Matijašević, V. B. Pavlović, S. P. Jovanović, N. K. Stanković, D. D. Milivojević, Z. Spitalsky, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, D. V. Bajuk-Bogdanović, M. P. Nikšić and B. M. Todorović Marković, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 36081–36092 RSC .
D. P. Kepić, Z. M. Marković, S. P. Jovanović, D. B. Peruško, M. D. Budimir, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, V. B. Pavlović and B. M. Todorović Marković, Synth. Met., 2014, 198, 150–154 CrossRef .
D. P. Kepić, I. S. Ristić, M. T. Marinović-Cincović, D. B. Peruško, Z. Špitálsky, V. B. Pavlović, M. D. Budimir, P. Šiffalovič, M. D. Dramićanin, M. Mičušík, A. Kleinová, I. Janigová, Z. M. Marković and B. M. Todorović Marković, Polym. Int., 2018, 67, 1118–1127 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Sui, J. Li, H. Kang, S. Wang, S. Zhao, X. Gao, S. Peng, Z. Jin, X. Liu, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Carbon N. Y., 2021, 172, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gui, J. Li and J. Zhong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 075435 CrossRef .
S. Sahu and G. C. Rout, Int. Nano Lett., 2017, 7, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, E. Lidorikis, H. Qian, H. Harutyunyan, T. Gokus, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2711–2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Graf, F. Molitor, K. Ensslin, C. Stampfer, A. Jungen, C. Hierold and L. Wirtz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 238–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, G. Chen, P. Joshi, S. Tadigadapa and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2667–2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Cançado, K. Takai, T. Enoki, M. Endo, Y. A. Kim, H. Mizusaki, A. Jorio, L. N. Coelho, R. Magalhães-Paniago and M. A. Pimenta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 163106 CrossRef .
K. Yan, H. Peng, Y. Zhou, H. Li and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1106–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kepić, Z. Marković, S. Jovanović, I. Holclajtner Antunović, D. Kleut and B. Todorović Marković, Phys. Scr., 2014, T162, 014024 CrossRef .
B. Subramanian, S. Jayakumar, M. Jayachandran and S. Jayakrishnan, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. R. Rao, U. Maitra and H. S. S. R. Matte, Graphene, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2012, pp. 1–47 Search PubMed .
G. Ruan, Z. Sun, Z. Peng and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7601–7607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, K. Han, J. Qi, J. Li, Z. Teng and M. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 14085–14101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, K. Han, J. Qi, J. Li, Z. Teng and M. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 14085–14101 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bushroa, R. G. Rahbari, H. H. Masjuki and M. R. Muhamad, Vacuum, 2012, 86, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 622–634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, M. Yu, H. Huang and R. S. Ruoff, Nanotechnology, 1999, 10, 269–272 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, D. Thorpe, D. H. Adamson and H. C. Schniepp, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24992 RSC .

          A. Reina and J. Kong, Graphene Nanoelectronics, Springer, US, Boston, MA,  2012, pp. 167–203 Search PubMed .
N. Mishra, J. Boeckl, N. Motta and F. Iacopi, Phys. Status Solidi, 2016, 213, 2277–2289 CrossRef CAS .
E. Andrijanto, S. Shoelarta, G. Subiyanto and S. Rifki, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1725, 020003 CrossRef .
L. Dong, J. Yang, M. Chhowalla and K. P. Loh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7306–7316 RSC .
J.-Y. Moon, M. Kim, S.-I. Kim, S. Xu, J.-H. Choi, D. Whang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. S. Park, J. Seo, S. H. Cho, S.-K. Son and J.-H. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabc6601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Sinclair, J. L. Suter and P. V. Coveney, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 5716–5722 RSC .
P. Avouris and C. Dimitrakopoulos, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 86–97 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mishra, J. Boeckl, N. Motta and F. Iacopi, Phys. Status Solidi, 2016, 213, 2277–2289 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Science, 2006, 313, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tetlow, J. Posthuma de Boer, I. J. Ford, D. D. Vvedensky, J. Coraux and L. Kantorovich, Phys. Rep., 2014, 542, 195–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shams, R. Zhang and J. Zhu, Mater. Sci., 2015, 33, 566–578 CAS .
S. Y. Toh, K. S. Loh, S. K. Kamarudin and W. R. W. Daud, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 251, 422–434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon N. Y., 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ciriminna, N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, F. Meneguzzo, Y.-J. Xu and M. Pagliaro, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7090–7095 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, S. R. C. Vivekchand, K. Biswas and A. Govindaraj, Dalton Trans., 2007, 3728 RSC .
E. Bourelle, B. Claude-montigny and A. Metrot, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1998, 310, 321–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Munuera, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Castro-Muñiz, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 11, 246–254 CrossRef .
N. Komba, Q. Wei, G. Zhang, F. Rosei and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, C. Zhu, T. Kou, M. A. Worsley, F. Qian, C. Condes, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini and Y. Li, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 635–641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gómez-Mingot, A. C. Anbalagan, H. Randriamahazaka and J. Ghilane, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 598–603 CrossRef .
A. M. Abdelkader, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1632–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, F. Zhou, P. Lu, X. Li, P. Das, X. Feng, K. Müllen and Z.-S. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 396–404 CrossRef .
A. A. B. Hamra, H. N. Lim, W. K. Chee and N. M. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hossain and R. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Li, Z. Qi, W. Zhang, W. Ye and Y. Fang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 105602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, D.-Y. Feng, T.-Y. Liu, Y. Li and X.-X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3581–3587 RSC .
W. Cai, X. Feng, B. Wang, W. Hu, B. Yuan, N. Hong and Y. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 316, 514–524 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, D. Xue and S. Komarneni, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 487, 156–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, F. Zhou, P. Lu, X. Li, P. Das, X. Feng, K. Müllen and Z.-S. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 396–404 CrossRef .
T. Liu, C. Zhu, T. Kou, M. A. Worsley, F. Qian, C. Condes, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini and Y. Li, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 635–641 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yakimchuk, R. Soots, I. Kotin and I. Antonova, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1655–1661 CrossRef .
K. Parvez, Z.-S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nagyte, D. J. Kelly, A. Felten, G. Picardi, Y. Shin, A. Alieva, R. E. Worsley, K. Parvez, S. Dehm, R. Krupke, S. J. Haigh, A. Oikonomou, A. J. Pollard and C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3411–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z.-S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, R. Li, S. R. Puniredd, Y. Hernandez, F. Hinkel, S. Wang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3598–3606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Li, Z. Qi, W. Zhang, W. Ye and Y. Fang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 105602 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Rao, J. Sentilnathan, H.-W. Cho, J.-J. Wu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh and J.-H. Hsueh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64826–64831 RSC .
S. K. Sahoo, S. Ratha, C. S. Rout and A. Mallik, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 3415–3428 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei, J. Tu, Z. Yu and S. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36702–36707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gómez-Mingot, A. C. Anbalagan, H. Randriamahazaka and J. Ghilane, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 598–603 CrossRef .
H. Lei, J. Tu, Z. Yu and S. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36702–36707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, A. Varzi, V. Pellegrini, D. A. Dinh, R. Raccichini, A. E. Del Rio-Castillo, M. Prato, M. Colombo, R. Cingolani, B. Scrosati, S. Passerini and F. Bonaccorso, Solid State Commun., 2017, 251, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, A. E. Del Rio Castillo, S. Monaco, A. Capasso, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, D. A. Dinh, V. Pellegrini, B. Scrosati, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6886–6895 RSC .
S. Yang, S. Brüller, Z.-S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, R. Dong, F. Richard, P. Samorì, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13927–13932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chen, S.-W. Yang, M.-C. Chuang, W.-Y. Woon and C.-Y. Su, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15362–15373 RSC .
A. Ejigu, K. Fujisawa, B. F. Spencer, B. Wang, M. Terrones, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804357 CrossRef .
J. M. Munuera, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Castro-Muñiz, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 11, 246–254 CrossRef .
S. T. Hossain and R. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Wang, M. Cao, H. Qiu, Z. Yang, L. Xu and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 1484–1492 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh and J.-H. Hsueh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64826–64831 RSC .
A. Mir and A. Shukla, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 443, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mir, D. K. Singh and A. Shukla, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 220, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mir and A. Shukla, Mater. Des., 2018, 156, 62–70 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia, G. Maccaferri, C. Zanardi, M. Christian, L. Ortolani, V. Morandi, V. Bellani, A. Kovtun, S. Dell’Elce, A. Candini, A. Liscio and V. Palermo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15122–15130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mir, D. K. Singh and A. Shukla, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 220, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Wang, M. Cao, H. Qiu, Z. Yang, L. Xu and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 1484–1492 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jing, T. Wu, Y. Zhou, X. Li and Y. Liu, Front. Chem., 2020 DOI:10.3389/fchem.2020.00428 .
Z. M. Marković, M. D. Budimir, D. P. Kepić, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, M. T. Marinović-Cincović, M. D. Dramićanin, V. D. Spasojević, D. B. Peruško, Z. Špitalský, M. Mičušik, V. B. Pavlović and B. M. Todorović-Marković, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39275–39283 RSC .
E. Aawani, H. Rezagholipour Dizaji and N. Memarian, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2018, 50, 129 CrossRef .
F. D. Vasilieva, A. N. Kapitonov, E. A. Yakimchuk, S. A. Smagulova, I. V. Antonova and I. A. Kotin, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065608 CrossRef .
D.-L. Vu, Y. J. Kwon, S. C. Lee, J. U. Lee and J.-W. Lee, Carbon Lett., 2019, 29, 81–87 CrossRef .
F. Miao, W. Cong, R. Miao, N. Wang, W. Wu, Y. Zang, C. Shi, L. Zhu, B. Tao and P. K. Chu, Ionics, 2019, 25, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shi, Y. Wang, X. Liang, Y. Sun, S. Cheng, C. Chen and H. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9661–9670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chao, Y. Qin, Y. Liu, Y. Kong and F. Chu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 1287–1295 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, X. Feng, B. Wang, W. Hu, B. Yuan, N. Hong and Y. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 316, 514–524 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, X. Wang, W. Cai, S. Qiu, Y. Hu and K. M. Liew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25552–25562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fang, J. Zhang, X. Chen and G. J. Weng, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Aawani, H. Rezagholipour Dizaji and N. Memarian, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2018, 50, 129 CrossRef .
E. Yakimchuk, R. Soots, I. Kotin and I. Antonova, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1655–1661 CrossRef .
F. D. Vasilieva, A. N. Kapitonov, E. A. Yakimchuk, S. A. Smagulova, I. V. Antonova and I. A. Kotin, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 065608 CrossRef .
Y. Gong, Y. Ping, D. Li, C. Luo, X. Ruan, Q. Fu and C. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 397, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sadak, A. K. Sundramoorthy and S. Gunasekaran, Carbon N. Y., 2018, 138, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Raj, R. Manikandan, W.-G. Lee, W.-J. Cho, K. H. Yu and B. C. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1543–1550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alimoradi, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 095602 CrossRef .
S. Shahrokhian, R. Mohammadi and M. K. Amini, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, M. Xue, X. Zhang, L. Chen, G. P. Knowles, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702794 CrossRef .
M. N. Dang, T. H. Nguyen, T. Van Nguyen, T. V. Thu, H. Le, M. Akabori, N. Ito, H. Y. Nguyen, T. L. Le, T. H. Nguyen, V. T. Nguyen and N. H. Phan, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 345401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Qiu, X. Liu, Y. Liu and L.-Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8750–8756 RSC .
Y. Deng, L. Ding, Q. Liu, L. Zhan, Y. Wang and S. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 437, 384–389 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Yan, L. Cui, S. Sun, Y. Qu and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 47–59 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shi, Y. Wang, X. Liang, Y. Sun, S. Cheng, C. Chen and H. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9661–9670 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Jiao, D. Han, F. Wang, P. Zhang, H. Li and L. Niu, Mater. Des., 2020, 188, 108440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shuai, P. Ge, W. Hong, S. Li, J. Hu, H. Hou, G. Zou and X. Ji, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800328 CrossRef .
G. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Yan, L. Cui, S. Sun, Y. Qu and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 47–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Xu, T. Sheng, D. Zhao, H. Yuan, F. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhu, L. Zhang and J. Lu, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 324 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Razmi and S. Manafi Khoshmanesh, J. Sep. Sci., 2019, 42, 1364–1373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zakerian and S. Bahar, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Nagarajan and A. K. Sundramoorthy, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 301, 127132 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pogacean, M. Coros, V. Mirel, L. Magerusan, L. Barbu-Tudoran, A. Vulpoi, R.-I. Stefan-van Staden and S. Pruneanu, Microchem. J., 2019, 147, 112–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bandi, V. Hastak, D. R. Peshwe and A. K. Srivastav, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2018, 41, 115 CrossRef .
M. Coroş, F. Pogăcean, L. Măgeruşan, M.-C. Roşu, A. S. Porav, C. Socaci, A. Bende, R.-I. Stefan-van Staden and S. Pruneanu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 256, 665–673 CrossRef .
L. Chao, Y. Qin, Y. Liu, Y. Kong and F. Chu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 1287–1295 CrossRef CAS .
N. Komba, G. Zhang, Q. Wei, X. Yang, J. Prakash, R. Chenitz, F. Rosei and S. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 18103–18114 CrossRef CAS .
N. Komba, Q. Wei, G. Zhang, F. Rosei and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Noh, N. D. Pham and J. H. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, X. Wang, M. Zaheer Afzal, S. Wang and X. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 10077–10084 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kurys, O. O. Pariiska, D. O. Mazur, K. S. Gavrilenko, V. G. Koshechko and V. D. Pokhodenko, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2020, 56, 271–284 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khodadadi Dizaji, H. R. Mortaheb, B. Mokhtarani and S. Rahmani, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2017, 124, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. L. Campéon, M. Akada, M. S. Ahmad, Y. Nishikawa, K. Gotoh and Y. Nishina, Carbon N. Y., 2020, 158, 356–363 CrossRef .
X. Feng, X. Wang, W. Cai, S. Qiu, Y. Hu and K. M. Liew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25552–25562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, W. Cai, Z. Xu, X. Mu, X. Ren, B. Zou, Z. Gui and Y. Hu, Composites, Part B, 2020, 181, 107544 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Li, M. Liu and S. Fu, Polym. Compos., 2020, 41, 1561–1573 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, H. Lu, Y. Chen, Z. Tao and M. Shao, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2017, 295, 1951–1959 CrossRef CAS .
S. Daradmare, S. Raj, A. R. Bhattacharyya and S. Parida, Composites, Part B, 2018, 155, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Z. Massoud, Rapid Thermal Processing, Elsevier,  1993, pp. 45–77 Search PubMed .
B. Rau, T. Weber, B. Gorka, P. Dogan, F. Fenske, K. Y. Lee, S. Gall and B. Rech, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 159–160, 329–332 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. C. Lie, J. H. Song, M.-A. Nicolet and N. D. Theodore, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 592–594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bleu, F. Bourquard, A. S. Loir, V. Barnier, F. Garrelie and C. Donnet, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2019, 1–12 Search PubMed .
K.-S. Kim and G.-S. Chung, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2014, 21, 1450050 CrossRef .
S. Chaudhari, A. R. Graves, M. V. Cain and C. D. Stinespring, MRS Proc., 2015, 1786, 65–70 CrossRef .
A. Reina, S. Thiele, X. Jia, S. Bhaviripudi, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. A. Schaefer and J. Kong, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. M. Abd Elhamid, M. A. Hafez, A. M. Aboulfotouh and I. M. Azzouz, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 025303 CrossRef .
P. Tyagi, Z. R. Robinson, A. Munson, C. W. Magnuson, S. Chen, J. D. McNeilan, R. L. Moore, R. D. Piner, R. S. Ruoff and C. A. Ventrice, Surf. Sci., 2015, 634, 16–24 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Orofeo, H. Ago, B. Hu and M. Tsuji, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 531–540 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Seah, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Carbon N. Y., 2014, 70, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. X. Feng, Carbon N. Y., 2010, 48, 359–364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bleu, F. Bourquard, V. Gartiser, A.-S. Loir, B. Caja-Munoz, J. Avila, V. Barnier, F. Garrelie and C. Donnet, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 238, 121905 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Gong, T. Wang, W.-L. Chan and J. Wu, Carbon N. Y., 2016, 96, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Barbosa, F. Ptak, C. D. Mendoza, M. E. H. Maia da Costa and F. L. Freire Jr, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2019, 95, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Prekodravac, S. P. Jovanović, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, D. B. Peruško, V. B. Pavlović, D. D. Tošić, B. M. Todorović-Marković and Z. M. Marković, Monolayer graphene films through nickel catalyzed transformation of fullerol and graphene quantum dots: A Raman spectroscopy study,  2014, vol. T162 Search PubMed .
M. Alimoradi, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 095602 CrossRef .
S. Shahrokhian, R. Mohammadi and M. K. Amini, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Dang, T. H. Nguyen, T. Van Nguyen, T. V. Thu, H. Le, M. Akabori, N. Ito, H. Y. Nguyen, T. L. Le, T. H. Nguyen, V. T. Nguyen and N. H. Phan, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 345401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, P. Zhang, H. He and B. Shi, Mater. Des., 2020, 187, 108373 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uwanno, Y. Hattori, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and K. Nagashio, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 041002 CrossRef .
G. Borin Barin, Y. Song, I. de Fátima Gimenez, A. G. Souza Filho, L. S. Barreto and J. Kong, Carbon N. Y., 2015, 84, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kathalingam, H. M. S. Ajmal, S. Ramesh, H. S. Kim, S.-D. Kim, S. H. Choi, W. Yang, K. K. Kim and H.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 3752–3763 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kathalingam, H. M. S. Ajmal, S. Ramesh, H. S. Kim, S.-D. Kim, S. H. Choi, W. Yang, K. K. Kim and H.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 3752–3763 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Jang, J. H. Kim, J. M. Kim, D. H. Shin, S. Kim and S.-H. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 405301 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pirkle, J. Chan, A. Venugopal, D. Hinojos, C. W. Magnuson, S. McDonnell, L. Colombo, E. M. Vogel, R. S. Ruoff and R. M. Wallace, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 122108 CrossRef .
A. Nourbakhsh, M. Cantoro, A. Klekachev, F. Clemente, B. Sorée, M. H. van der Veen, T. Vosch, A. Stesmans, B. Sels and S. De Gendt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6894–6900 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ahn, J. Kim, S. Ganorkar, Y.-H. Kim and S.-I. Kim, Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Hedhili, B. V. Yakshinskiy, R. Wasielewski, A. Ciszewski and T. E. Madey, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 174704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gross, A. Lippitz, W. E. S. Unger, C. Wöll, G. Hähner and W. Braun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1993, 68, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ahn, J. Kim, S. Ganorkar, Y.-H. Kim and S.-I. Kim, Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Sheng, L. Shao, J.-J. Chen, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. X. Feng, Carbon N. Y., 2010, 48, 359–364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bleu, F. Bourquard, V. Gartiser, A.-S. Loir, B. Caja-Munoz, J. Avila, V. Barnier, F. Garrelie and C. Donnet, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 238, 121905 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Sheng, L. Shao, J.-J. Chen, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10078 RSC .
J. H. Chu, J. Kwak, T.-Y. Kwon, S.-D. Park, H. Go, S. Y. Kim, K. Park, S. Kang and S.-Y. Kwon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1777–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Nayak, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1215–1223 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Ouyang, X. Li, H. Wang, J. Guo and H. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 206803 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, W. Fang, R. Brenes and J. Kong, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 681–700 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, B. L. Jackson, J. Zhu, C.-Q. Miao, C.-H. Chung, Y.-J. Park, K. Sun, J. Woo and Y.-H. Xie, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Li and D. Mitlin, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 332–337 CrossRef .
L. Sun, C. Tian, M. Li, X. Meng, L. Wang, R. Wang, J. Yin and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6462 RSC .
G. Ruan, Z. Sun, Z. Peng and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7601–7607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Haghighat, M. H. Saghi, I. Anastopoulos, A. Javid, A. Roudbari, S. S. Talebi, S. K. Ghadiri, D. A. Giannakoudakis and M. Shams, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 313, 113523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bonyadi, F. Noghani, A. Dehghan, J. P. van der Hoek, D. A. Giannakoudakis, S. K. Ghadiri, I. Anastopoulos, M. Sarkhosh, J. C. Colmenares and M. Shams, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 125791 Search PubMed .
G. B. Barin, Y. H. Santos, J. A. Rocha, L. Pereira da Costa, A. G. Souza Filho, I. de Fátima Gimenez and L. S. Barreto, MRS Proc., 2013, 1505, mrsf12-1505-w10-24 CrossRef .
G. B. Barin, Y. H. Santos, J. A. Rocha, L. Pereira da Costa, A. G. Souza Filho, I. de Fátima Gimenez and L. S. Barreto, MRS Proc., 2013, 1505, mrsf12-1505-w10-24 CrossRef .
N. E. S. Sazali, M. Deraman, R. Omar, M. A. R. Othman, M. Suleman, S. A. Shamsudin, N. S. M. Tajuddin, M. F. Y. M. Hanappi, E. Hamdan, N. S. M. Nor and N. H. Basri, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1784, 040009 CrossRef .
M. S. Ismail, N. Yusof, M. Z. Mohd Yusop, A. F. Ismail, J. Jaafar, F. Aziz and Z. Abdul Karim, Malaysian J. Fundam. Appl. Sci., 2019, 15, 516–521 CrossRef .
R. Pode, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 1468–1485 CrossRef .
J. S. Lim, Z. Abdul Manan, S. R. Wan Alwi and H. Hashim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3084–3094 CrossRef CAS .
H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, K.-S. Yang, R. Cruz-Silva, I. Toda, T. Yamada, M. Terrones, M. Endo, T. Hayashi and H. Saitoh, Small, 2014, 10, 2766–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, K.-S. Yang, R. Cruz-Silva, I. Toda, T. Yamada, M. Terrones, M. Endo, T. Hayashi and H. Saitoh, Small, 2014, 10, 2766–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Ban, Z. Xu, D. Wang, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10742–10750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, K. Zhang, M. Si, H. Yu, L. Chai and Y. Shi, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3949–3958 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, L. Bai, J. Yeo, T. Wei, W. Chen and Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27499–27507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, M. Zheng, H. Hu, H. Dong, Y. Liang, Y. Xiao, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ekhlasi, H. Younesi, A. Rashidi and N. Bahramifar, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2018, 113, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, Z. Xu, B. Zahiri, X. Tan, E. M. Lotfabad, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11004–11015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yuan, H. Li, H. Hu, Y. Xie, Y. Xiao, H. Dong, Y. Liang, Y. Liu and M. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 326, 134974 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, H. Bi, S. Jiao and X. He, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2020, 36, 1903043 Search PubMed .
C.-L. Ban, Z. Xu, D. Wang, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10742–10750 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan and S. Badhulika, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 68, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sudarsono, W. Y. Wong, K. S. Loh, E. H. Majlan, N. Syarif, K. Kok, R. M. Yunus and K. L. Lim, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 1761–1774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goswami, P. Banerjee, S. Datta, A. Mukhopadhayay and P. Das, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 106, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ozbay and A. S. Yargic, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47185 CrossRef .
B. Huang, M. Xia, J. Qiu and Z. Xie, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bader, U. Sager, U. Schneiderwind and A. Ouederni, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103005 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rodríguez, A. Lama, R. Rodríguez, A. Jiménez, R. Guillén and J. Fernández-Bolaños, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 5261–5269 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Song, P. Zhang, T. Huang, T. Wang, T. Wang and H. Zeng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11536–11546 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-S. Du, D.-P. Li, S.-Y. Long, P.-D. Tang, F.-L. Du, H.-L. Huang, J. Dai, N.-Z. Xie, Q.-Y. Wang and R.-B. Huang, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2018, 90, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Luque and J. G. Speight, Gasification for Synthetic Fuel Production, Elsevier,  2015, pp. 3–27 Search PubMed .
D. Szczerbowski, A. P. Pitarelo, A. Zandoná Filho and L. P. Ramos, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 114, 95–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sun, B. Li, J. Ran, X. Shen and H. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 171, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, M. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Liu, D. Yang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomez-Martin, J. Martinez-Fernandez, M. Ruttert, M. Winter, T. Placke and J. Ramirez-Rico, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 21446–21458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Veeramani, M. Sivakumar, S.-M. Chen, R. Madhu, H. R. Alamri, Z. A. Alothman, M. S. A. Hossain, C.-K. Chen, Y. Yamauchi, N. Miyamoto and K. C.-W. Wu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45668–45675 RSC .
M. Azuara, N. Latorre, J. I. Villacampa, V. Sebastian, F. Cazaña, E. Romeo and A. Monzón, Front. Energy Res., 2019, 7 DOI:10.3389/fenrg.2019.00034 .
S. Zhang, S.-F. Jiang, B.-C. Huang, X.-C. Shen, W.-J. Chen, T.-P. Zhou, H.-Y. Cheng, B.-H. Cheng, C.-Z. Wu, W.-W. Li, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 753–760 CrossRef .
P. Yan, H. Ye, Y. Han, J. Wang, F. Zheng, W. Xiong, H. Yang, J. Zhang, A. Yuan and X. Wu, ChemistryOpen, 2020, 9, 582–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Zhou, X. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Peng, J. Yang, Y. Huang and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15870–15879 RSC .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo, P. Atienzar, A. Forneli and H. García, Small, 2015, 11, 970–975 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Primo, E. Sánchez, J. M. Delgado and H. García, Carbon N. Y., 2014, 68, 777–783 CrossRef CAS .
A. Primo, E. Sánchez, J. M. Delgado and H. García, Carbon N. Y., 2014, 68, 777–783 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guan, L. Pan, T. Peng, C. Gao, W. Zhao, Z. Yang, H. Hu and M. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8405–8412 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wen, Q. Gu, Y. Liu, R. Schlögl, C. Wang, Z. Tian and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16898–16902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gopalakrishnan, C. Y. Kong and S. Badhulika, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1186–1194 RSC .
I. Esteve-Adell, J. He, F. Ramiro, P. Atienzar, A. Primo and H. García, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4391–4397 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Wang, S. Ji, B. G. Pollet and R. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 104, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo, P. Atienzar, A. Forneli and H. García, Small, 2015, 11, 970–975 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Wang, S. Ji, B. G. Pollet and R. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 104, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Song, P. Zhang, T. Huang, T. Wang, T. Wang and H. Zeng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11536–11546 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sankaranarayanan, P. Vishnukumar, M. Hariram, S. Vivekanandhan, C. Camus, A. H. Buschmann and R. Navia, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 3269–3275 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-S. Du, D.-P. Li, S.-Y. Long, P.-D. Tang, F.-L. Du, H.-L. Huang, J. Dai, N.-Z. Xie, Q.-Y. Wang and R.-B. Huang, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2018, 90, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, T. Shi and Y. Chen, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2015, 23, 961–967 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahto, A. Kumar, J. P. Chaudhary, M. Bhatt, A. K. Sharma, P. Paul, S. K. Nataraj and R. Meena, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 353, 190–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Liu, D. Yang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. Fan, N. Qu, H. Yang, M. Wang, A. Liu and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8588–8596 RSC .
S. Sankar, H. Lee, H. Jung, A. Kim, A. T. A. Ahmed, A. I. Inamdar, H. Kim, S. Lee, H. Im and D. Young Kim, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 13792–13797 RSC .
N. Ozbay and A. S. Yargic, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47185 CrossRef .
B. Huang, M. Xia, J. Qiu and Z. Xie, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bader, U. Sager, U. Schneiderwind and A. Ouederni, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103005 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, J. Zhang, P. Shi, Y. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, R. He, T. Duan and W. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 17152–17159 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hao, Z. Zhao, Y. Leng, J. Tian, Y. Sang, R. I. Boughton, C. P. Wong, H. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, T. Shi and Y. Chen, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2015, 23, 961–967 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahto, A. Kumar, J. P. Chaudhary, M. Bhatt, A. K. Sharma, P. Paul, S. K. Nataraj and R. Meena, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 353, 190–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. S. Sazali, M. Deraman, R. Omar, M. A. R. Othman, M. Suleman, S. A. Shamsudin, N. S. M. Tajuddin, M. F. Y. M. Hanappi, E. Hamdan, N. S. M. Nor and N. H. Basri, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1784, 040009 CrossRef .
L. Guan, L. Pan, T. Peng, C. Gao, W. Zhao, Z. Yang, H. Hu and M. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8405–8412 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. Fan, N. Qu, H. Yang, M. Wang, A. Liu and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8588–8596 RSC .
A. Gomez-Martin, J. Martinez-Fernandez, M. Ruttert, M. Winter, T. Placke and J. Ramirez-Rico, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 21446–21458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Luque and J. G. Speight, Gasification for Synthetic Fuel Production, Elsevier,  2015, pp. 3–27 Search PubMed .
L. Ekhlasi, H. Younesi, A. Rashidi and N. Bahramifar, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2018, 113, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S.-F. Jiang, B.-C. Huang, X.-C. Shen, W.-J. Chen, T.-P. Zhou, H.-Y. Cheng, B.-H. Cheng, C.-Z. Wu, W.-W. Li, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 753–760 CrossRef .
S. Gharehkhani, S. F. Seyed Shirazi, S. Pilban Jahromi, M. Sookhakian, S. Baradaran, H. Yarmand, A. Ataollahi Oshkour, S. N. Kazi and W. J. Basirun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40505–40513 RSC .
I. Esteve-Adell, J. He, F. Ramiro, P. Atienzar, A. Primo and H. García, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4391–4397 RSC .
P. Yan, H. Ye, Y. Han, J. Wang, F. Zheng, W. Xiong, H. Yang, J. Zhang, A. Yuan and X. Wu, ChemistryOpen, 2020, 9, 582–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, Z. Xu, B. Zahiri, X. Tan, E. M. Lotfabad, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11004–11015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yuan, H. Li, H. Hu, Y. Xie, Y. Xiao, H. Dong, Y. Liang, Y. Liu and M. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 326, 134974 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, H. Bi, S. Jiao and X. He, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2020, 36, 1903043 Search PubMed .
F. Shahzad, S. A. Zaidi and C. M. Koo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Zhou, X. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Peng, J. Yang, Y. Huang and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15870–15879 RSC .
A. Gopalakrishnan, C. Y. Kong and S. Badhulika, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1186–1194 RSC .
M. Azuara, N. Latorre, J. I. Villacampa, V. Sebastian, F. Cazaña, E. Romeo and A. Monzón, Front. Energy Res., 2019 DOI:10.3389/fenrg.2019.00034 .
W. Sudarsono, W. Y. Wong, K. S. Loh, E. H. Majlan, N. Syarif, K. Kok, R. M. Yunus and K. L. Lim, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 1761–1774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, M. Zheng, H. Hu, H. Dong, Y. Liang, Y. Xiao, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .
V. Veeramani, M. Sivakumar, S.-M. Chen, R. Madhu, H. R. Alamri, Z. A. Alothman, M. S. A. Hossain, C.-K. Chen, Y. Yamauchi, N. Miyamoto and K. C.-W. Wu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45668–45675 RSC .
S. Gharehkhani, S. F. Seyed Shirazi, S. Pilban Jahromi, M. Sookhakian, S. Baradaran, H. Yarmand, A. Ataollahi Oshkour, S. N. Kazi and W. J. Basirun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40505–40513 RSC .
V. C. Hoang, L. H. Nguyen and V. G. Gomes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 832, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, K. Zhang, M. Si, H. Yu, L. Chai and Y. Shi, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3949–3958 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan and S. Badhulika, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 68, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Hoang, L. H. Nguyen and V. G. Gomes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 832, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, L. Bai, J. Yeo, T. Wei, W. Chen and Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27499–27507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Wang, L. Zheng and H. Liu, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 41, 68–75 CrossRef .
S. Goswami, P. Banerjee, S. Datta, A. Mukhopadhayay and P. Das, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 106, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kulal, R. V. Khose, D. A. Pethsangave, P. H. Wadekar and S. Some, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 4568–4574 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wen, Q. Gu, Y. Liu, R. Schlögl, C. Wang, Z. Tian and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16898–16902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, S. A. Zaidi and C. M. Koo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jovanović, I. Holclajtner-Antunović, S. Uskoković-Marković, D. Bajuk-Bogdanović, V. Pavlović, D. Tošić, M. Milenković and B. Todorović Marković, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 213, 157–167 CrossRef .
Z. M. Marković, D. M. Matijašević, V. B. Pavlović, S. P. Jovanović, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunović, Z. Špitalský, M. Mičušik, M. D. Dramićanin, D. D. Milivojević, M. P. Nikšić and B. M. Todorović Marković, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 500, 30–43 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. M. Marković, S. P. Jovanović, P. Z. Mašković, M. Danko, M. Mičušík, V. B. Pavlović, D. D. Milivojević, A. Kleinová, Z. Špitalský and B. M. Todorović Marković, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 31337–31347 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Different nanoscaled carbon allotropes with appropriate hybridization and dimensionality.	 

 	Fig. 2  Possible graphene applications. (Adapted with kind permission from The University of Manchester, pexels.com and freeimages.com).	 

 	Fig. 3  Overview of graphene synthesis methods: the publication rate over the past 10 years. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database.	 

 	Fig. 4  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis through the electrochemical exfoliation method. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optical images of graphene sheets: (a) RGB image, (b) grey-scaled image, (c) contrast map with a different number of layers, (d) RGB image of TLG, (e) G-channel image and (f) contrast map. (Reproduced with Permission.110 Copyright Mater. Chem. Phys. (2018)).	 


∼10 μm	Graphite foil	(NH4)2SO4, thiourea	+6 V	
111

0.5–5 μm2	Graphite rod	NaOH, NH4Cl	+5 V	
112

2–12 μm	HOPG	(NH4)2S2O8	+12 V	
113

2 μm	Graphite flakes	Different electrolytes	+5, +10 V	
114

<1 μm for graphite rod, ∼10 μm for HOPG	Graphite rod/HOPG	(NH4)2SO4	
	
115

>5 μm	Graphite foil	(NH4)2SO4	+10 V	
116

600–850 nm	Graphite rod	(NH4)2SO4	+8 V	
117

∼11 μm	Graphite foil	(LiBOB)/(DMMP)a	+10 V	
118

Several μm	Graphite paper	(NH4)2SO4	+10 V	
119

Several μm	Graphite slice	(HCPCP)b	+10 V	
120

5–20 μm	Graphite foil	Phytic acid	+10 V	
121


 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of potential applications for electrochemically exfoliated graphene.	 

Graphene-based supercapacitors	Exfoliated graphene-low oxygen content	Specific capacitance ∼120 F g−1 at a Current density 0.1 A g−1	
102

Graphite/GO/PPy hybrid electrode	Areal capacitance 1320 mF cm−2	
129

Graphene/PANI	Specific capacitance 453.75 F g−1	
130


	Current density of 1.5 A g−1
Graphene/nickel hydroxide	Areal capacitance 5.2 F cm−2	
131


	Current density 2 mA cm−2
Graphene/MoO2 composite	Specific capacitance 265 F g−1	
132


	Current density 2.5 A g−1
Graphene/MnO2 composite	Specific capacitance 320 F g−1	
133

Graphene/S composite	Specific capacitance 186.3 F g−1	
111


	Scan rate 1 mV s−1
Graphene/N,S co-doped	Specific capacitances 341 and 200 F g−1	
134


	Current densities 0.1 and 10 A g−1
Lithium-ion batteries	Graphene/MoS2	Gravimetric capacity 750 mA h g−1	
135


	Current density 50 mA g−1

	Volumetric capacity 1200 mA h cm−3

	Capacitive current density 0.1 mA cm−2
Graphene/MoS2/N,S co-doped	Gravimetric capacity 1012 mA h g−1	
136


	Current density 0.5 A g−1
Graphene/B doped	Gravimetric capacity 1018 mA h g−1	
137


	Capacity retention of 838 mA h g−1
Sodium-ion batteries	Graphene/needle-like PANI composite	Rate capacities 64 mA h g−1	
138


	Current densities 100 mA g−1
Graphene/phosphorene hybrid	Specific capacity 2311 mA h g−1	
139


	Current density 0.1 A g−1
MoS2/N,S co-doped graphene	Reversible capacity 320.9 mA h g−1	
140


	Current density 0.5 A g−1
Aluminum-ion batteries	Flexible film cathode composed of FLG	Capacity 173 mA h g−1	
76


	Current density 1 A g−1

Hybrid membranes for the removal of phenol from water	Polydimethylsiloxane graphene/polyethersulfone	
154

Hybrid membranes for the removal of methyl orange from water	Graphene supported on a polycarbonate membrane via vacuum filtration	
155

New fire hazard suppression materials	Ferric phytate functionalized graphene incorporated into polylactic acid	
156

Graphene functionalized using hex(4-carboxylphenoxy)cyclotriphosphazene added to thermoplastic polyurethane	
120

New fire hazard suppression materials	Graphene nanosheets incorporated into polystyrene	
157

Polyacrylonitrile composite fibers with ferric diethylenetriaminepentakis (methylphosphonic acid) functionalized graphene nanosheets	
158

Corrosion resistance materials	SLG functionalized with hydrolyzed styrene–maleic anhydride copolymer	
159

1 wt% of FLG added to epoxy resin	
160


 	Fig. 7  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis through the RTA method. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database.	 

 	Fig. 8  AFM images of Cu foil surface before (a) and after (b) the thermal treatment. (Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright Mater. Des. (2020)).	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images with white arrows pointing the transferred SLG (a) and BLG (b) thin films synthesized from GQD; and SLG (c) and BLG (d) synthesized from fullerol. (Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright Mater. Res. Bull. (2017)).	 

Si	GQD, Fullerol, Graphitic carbon, Amorphous carbon	600, 700, 800, 900, 1000	SLG to MLG	
178

SiO2	Graphitic carbon PMMA	600, 700, 800, 900, 1000	BLG and TLG	
186

Cu	GQD, Fullerol	600, 700, 800, 900	SLG and BLG	
20

Graphite	Graphite electrode	600, 700, 800, 900	SLG or MLG	
18


 	Fig. 10  Graphical representation of the number of articles published per subject area (A) and year (B) between years 2015 and 2020 for graphene synthesis from biomass and bio-waste. Data collected in October 2020 from the Scopus database.	 

 	Fig. 11  Potential natural sources for graphene synthesis from biomass. (Adapted with free permission from freeimage.com).	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of natural reed membrane (A), carbonized reed membrane (B), and RHC (C, D). (Produced with permission.227 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2019)).	 

Cookies, chocolate, grass, plastics, roaches, dog feces	Drying of grass, feces	Raw material placed on Cu foil; 1050 °C, 15 minutes, low-pressure H2 and Ar,	
208

Coconut coir dust	Autoclave 250 °C, 4 h, filtration	Pyrolysis 500 to 1500 °C, 2 h, N2	
212

Chitosan films	Dissolving in acetic acid; screen printing deposition, 80 °C, 1 h	Pyrolysis 900 °C, 2 h, Ar	
255

Soybeans dregs	Sift through 80 mesh sieve, NaCl/ZnCl2 and NaNO3; ball milling 600 rpm, 6 h	Pyrolysis 900 °C, 1 h, inert gas	
256


Plumeria rubra
	Heating 500 °C, 2 h in N2 and 850 °C, 1 h; impregnated with KOH solution	Pyrolysis 500 °C, 1 h, N2; 800, 900, 1000, and 1100 °C, 30 minutes	
257

Oil from brown macroalga	Fresh seaweed pyrolysis in N2	Dissolving in water, autoclave 170 °C, 4 h, centrifugation	
258

Black liquor	Heating 250 °C, 1 h; carbonization 450 °C, 2 h	Graphitization at 1200 °C, 2 h; annealing 1200 °C, N2	
259

Fir	10 wt% HCl, 16 h, ball milling fir and catalyst	1590 °C, N2, Fe2O3 catalyst; the Hummer oxidation	
260


Ulva fasciata
	Washing, drying; anhydrous FeCl3, 150 °C	Pyrolysis 800 °C, inert gas	
261


Salvia splendens
	Washing, drying, sieving; immersion in saturated NaCl solution, frizzing in N2, dry-freeze 24 h	Pyrolysis 700 to 900 °C, N2; washing with HCl and water.	
262

Starch	Mixing with glycerol and water, stirring 90 °C, 30 min; stirring 2 h, drying 50 °C, 24 h	Heating 320 °C (rate 1.0 °C min−1), holding 1 h, temperature increase 600, 700, 800, 900 and 1000 °C (rate 3.0 °C min−1), holding 1 minute. Flakes mixing H2O/KOH, sonication 80 °C, 3 h, heating 50 °C, 24 h; vacuum filtration	
263

RH	850 °C, 2 h, Air	RH mixed with KOH; 850 °C, 2 h, air	
218 and 264

Cane stalk	300 °C, 1 h; 600 °C, 2 h; washing with acid	Mixed with Fe(NO3)3 · 9H2O, and KOH, dried, 300 °C, 1 h, N2 and 800 °C, 2 h	
47

Spruce tree sawdust	Grounding, drying; heating 1000 °C, Ar	400, 500, 550, and 600 °C, static atmosphere	
265

Guanine	SiO2/guanine; sonication, stirring	Carbonization 1000 °C, 4 h, N2; etching HF (10%)	
266

Olive stones	800 °C, 2 h, N2.	Activation with KOH, HCl washing carbonization 600 °C, 2 h; activation 900 °C, 8 h, CO2 flow	
267


 	Fig. 13  Raman spectra of graphene produced from cookie (A) and chocolate (B) (reproduced with permission).208 Copyright ACS Nano (2011), Thalia dealbata (C) (reproduced with permission.268 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2018)), reed membrane (D) (reproduced with permission.227 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2019)); the XPS survey of graphene obtained from Plumeria rubra (E) (reproduced with permission.257 Copyright ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2018)) and chitosan (F(1)) including the narrow scans of C1s (F(2)) and N1s (F(3)) (adapted with permission.269 Copyright Nano Energy. (2015)).	 

Chitosan	1.15	25°	C: 84.7 at%	No data	
249


	46°	N: 7.8 at%	


	
	H: 0.6 at%	


	
	S: 0.2 at%	


	
	O: <7 at%	

Soybeans dregs	1	23°	C: 85 at%	1341 m2 g−1	
256


	43°	N: 5 at%	1.379 cm3 g−1

	
	O: 10 at%	


Plumeria rubra
	0.77	26°	C: 98.06 at%	1581 m2 g−1	
257


	43°	O: 1.96 at%	0.916 cm3 g−1
Black liquor	1	25.5°	C: 93.3 at%	1011 m2 g−1	
259


	43.5°	O: 6.3 at%	

Fir	0.95	26.5°	C: 62.2 wt%	No data	
270


	
	O: 37.8 wt%	

Seaweed	0.96	25°	C: 42 to 45 wt%	320 m2 g−1	
271


	9° to 10°	H: 2 wt%	0.141 cm3 g−1

	
	N: 2 wt%	


	
	S: 5 to 9 wt%	

Salvia petals	1.13	No data	C: 87.4 at%	1051 m2 g−1	
262


	
	N: 2.3 at%	


	
	O: 10.3 at%	

Amylose	0.76	23°	No data	1070 to 1164 m2 g−1	
272


	43°	
	

RH	0.85	No data	C: 86.5 at%	2200 cm2 g−1	
218


	
	O: 8.3 at%	


	
	Si: 4.5 at%	


	
	Ca: 0.7 at%	

Cane stalk	2.33	26°	No data	Micro/mesopores 0.5 to 0.65 nm	
47


	43°	
	


	
	
	2 to 2.75 nm
Olive stones	No data	26°	No data	760 and 1185 m2 g−1	
267


	52°	
	

Pine nutshells	>1	24°	No data	1167 to 2093 cm2 g−1	
273


	43°	
	

Potato starch	0.83–0.90	broad peaks	No data	809 m2 g−1	
274

Guanine	2	25.7°	C: 90 at%	387 m2 g−1	
266


	43.4°	N: 6 at%	


	
	O: 4 at%	

Reed membrane	0.78	23.5°	C: 62.3 at%	1288.7 m2 g−1	
227


	43.3°	N: 4.4 at%	


	
	O: 26.8 at%	


 	Fig. 14  Benefits and challenges of electrochemical exfoliation, the RTA and graphene synthesis from biomass.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
